perils of war, none of those who have run away accuses himself; he
accuses his general, his neighbour--any one but himself; and yet, I
suppose, all who have run away have helped to cause the defeat. He who
now blames the rest might have stood fast; and if every one had done
so, the victory would have been theirs. {18} And so now, if a
particular speaker's advice is not the best, let another rise and make
a proposal, instead of blaming him; and if some other has better advice
to give, carry it out, and good fortune be with you. What? Is the
advice disagreeable? That is no longer the speaker's fault--unless, of
course, he leaves out the prayer that you expect of him. There is no
difficulty in the prayer, men of Athens; a man need only compress all
his desires into a short sentence. But to make his choice, when the
question for discussion is one of practical policy, is by no means
equally easy. _Then_ a man is bound to choose what is best, instead of
what is pleasant, if both are not possible at once. {19} But suppose
that some one is able, without touching the Festival Fund, to suggest
other sources of supply for military purposes--is not he the better
adviser? Certainly, men of Athens--if such a thing _is_ possible. But I
should be surprised if it ever has happened or ever should happen to
any one to find, after spending what he has upon wrong objects, that
what he has _not_ is wealth enough to enable him to effect right ones.
Such arguments as these find, I think, their great support in each
man's personal desire, and, for that reason, nothing is easier than to
deceive oneself; what a man desires, he actually fancies to be true.
{20} But the reality often follows no such principle. Consider the
matter, therefore, men of Athens, after this fashion; consider in what
way our objects can be realized under the circumstances, and in what
way you will be able to make the expedition and to receive your pay.
Surely it is not like sober or high-minded men to submit
light-heartedly to the reproach which must follow upon any shortcomings
in the operations of the war through want of funds--to seize your
weapons and march against Corinthians and Megareans,[n] and then to
allow Philip to enslave Hellenic cities, because you cannot find
rations for your troops.

{21} These words do not spring from a wanton determination to court the
ill-will of any party among you. I am neither so foolish nor so
unfortunate as to desire unpopularity when I do not believe that I am
doing any good. But a loyal citizen ought, in my judgement, to care
more for the safety of his country's fortunes than for the popularity
of his utterances. Such, I have heard, and perhaps you have heard it
also, was the principle which the orators of our forefather's time
habitually followed in public life--those orators who are praised by
all who rise to address you, though they are far from imitating
them--the great Aristides, and Nicias, and my own namesake, and
Pericles. {22} But ever since these speakers have appeared who are
always asking you, 'what would you like?' 'what may I propose for you?'
'what can I do to please you?' the interests of the city have been
wantonly given away for the sake of the pleasure and gratification of
the moment; and we see the consequences--the fortunes of the speakers
prosper, while your own are in a shameful plight. {23} And yet
consider, men of Athens, the main characteristics of the achievements
of your forefathers' time, and those of your own. The description will
be brief and familiar to you; for you need not have recourse to the
history of others, when your own will furnish examples, by following
which you may achieve prosperity. {24} Our forefathers, who were not
courted and caressed by their politicians as you are by these persons
to-day, were leaders of the Hellenes, with their goodwill, for
forty-five years;[n] they brought up into the Acropolis more than
10,000 talents; the king[n] who then ruled Macedonia obeyed them as a
foreigner ought to obey a Hellenic people; serving in person, they set
up many glorious trophies for victories by land and sea; and alone of
all mankind they left behind them, as the crown of their exploits, a
fame that is beyond the reach of envy. {25} Such was the part they
played in the Hellenic world: and now contemplate the manner of men
they were in the city, both in public and in private life. As public
men, they gave us buildings and objects of such beauty and grandeur, in
the temples which they built and the offerings which they dedicated in
them, that no room has been left for any of those that come after to
surpass them: while in private life they were so modest, {26} so
intensely loyal to the spirit of the constitution, that if any one
actually knows what the house of Aristides, or Miltiades, or any other
of the glorious men of that day, is like, he can see that it is no more
imposing than those of their neighbours. For it was not to win a
fortune that they undertook affairs of State; but each thought it his
duty to add to the common weal. And thus, acting in a spirit of good
faith towards the Hellenes, of piety towards the gods, and of equality
towards one another, they naturally attained great prosperity. {27}
Such was the national life of those times, when those whom I have
mentioned were the foremost men in the State. How do matters stand
to-day, thanks to these worthy persons? Is there any likeness, any
resemblance, to old times? Thanks to them (and though I might say much,
I pass over all but this), when we had the field, as you see,
completely open to us--when the Spartans had been ruined,[n] and the
Thebans had their hands full,[n] and no other power could seriously
dispute the supremacy with us on the field of battle--when we could
have retained our own possessions in safety, and have stood as umpires
of the rights of others--we have been deprived of our own territory;
{28} we have spent more than 1,500 talents to no good purpose; the
allies whom we had gained in the war,[n] these persons have lost in
time of peace; and we have trained Philip to be the powerful enemy to
us that he is. Let any one rise and tell me how Philip has grown so
strong, if we ourselves are not the source of his strength. {29} 'But,
my good Sir,' you say, 'if we are badly off in these respects, we are
at any rate better off at home.' And where is the proof of this? Is it
in the whitewashing of the battlements, the mending of the roads, the
fountains, and all such trumperies? Look then at the men whose policy
gives you these things. Some of them who were poor have become rich;
others, who were unknown to fame, have risen to honour; some of them
have provided themselves with private houses more imposing than our
public buildings; and the lower the fortunes of the city have fallen,
the higher theirs have risen.

{30} What is the cause of all these things? Why is it that all was well
then, and all is amiss to-day? It is because then the people itself
dared to act and to serve in the army; and so the people was master of
its politicians; all patronage was in its own hands; any separate
individual was content to receive from the people his share of honour
or office or other emolument. The reverse is now the case. {31} All
patronage is in the hands of the politicians, while you, the people,
emasculated, stripped of money and allies, have been reduced to the
position of servile supernumeraries, content if they give you
distributions of festival-money, or organize a procession at the
Boedromia;[n] and to crown all this bravery, you are expected also to
thank them for giving you what is your own. They pen you up closely in
the city; they entice you to these delights; they tame you till you
come to their hand. {32} But a high and generous spirit can never, I
believe, be acquired by men whose actions are mean and poor; for such
as a man's practice is, such must his spirit be. And in all solemnity I
should not be surprised if I suffered greater harm at your hands for
telling you the things that I have told you, than the men who have
brought them to pass. Even freedom of speech is not possible on all
subjects in this place, and I wonder that it has been granted me to-day.

{33} If, even now, you will rid yourselves of these habits, if you will
resolve to join the forces and to act worthily of yourselves,
converting the superfluities which you enjoy at home into resources to
secure our advantage abroad, then it may be, men of Athens, it may be,
that you will gain some great and final good, and will be rid of these
your perquisites, which are like the diet that a physician gives a sick
man--diet which neither puts strength into him nor lets him die. For
these sums which you now share among yourselves are neither large
enough to give you any adequate assistance, nor small enough to let you
renounce them and go about your business; but these it is that[2]
increase the indolence of every individual among you. {34} 'Is it,
then, paid service that you suggest?'[n] some one will ask. I do, men
of Athens; and a system for immediate enforcement which will embrace
all alike; so that each, while receiving his share of the public funds
may supply whatever service the State requires of him.[3] If we can
remain at peace, then he will do better to stay at home, free from the
necessity of doing anything discreditable through poverty. But if a
situation like the present occurs, then supported by these same sums,
he will serve loyally in person, in defence of his country. If a man is
outside the military age, then let him take, in his place among the
rest, that which he now receives irregularly and without doing any
service, and let him act as an overseer and manager of business that
must be done. {35} In short, without adding or subtracting anything,[n]
beyond a small sum, and only removing the want of system, my plan
reduces the State to order, making your receipt of payment, your
service in the army or the courts, and your performance of any duty
which the age of each of you allows, and the occasion requires, all
part of one and the same system. But it has been no part of my proposal
that we should assign the due of those who act to those who do nothing;
that we should be idle ourselves and enjoy our leisure helplessly,
listening to tales of victories won by somebody's mercenaries;[n] for
this is what happens now. {36} Not that I blame one who is doing some
part of your duty for you; but I require you to do for yourselves the
things for which you honour others, and not to abandon the position
which your fathers won through many a glorious peril, and bequeathed to
you.

I think I have told you all that, in my belief, your interest demands.
May you choose the course which will be for the good of the city and of
you all!


FOOTNOTES

[1] See notes to Speech on the Peace, Sec. 5. Some date the Euboean
expedition and the sending of the cavalry one or two years earlier, and
the whole chronology is much disputed; but there are strong arguments
for the date (348) given in the text.

[2] [Greek: esti tauta ta].

[3] [Greek: touto parechae].




ON THE PEACE (OR. V)


[_Introduction_. After the fall of Olynthus in 348, the Athenians, on
the proposal of Eubulus, sent embassies to the Greek States in the
Peloponnese and elsewhere, to invite them to join in a coalition
against Philip. Aeschines went for this purpose to Megalopolis, and did
his best to counteract Philip's influence in Arcadia. When the
embassies proved unsuccessful, it became clear that peace must be made
on such terms as were possible. Philip himself was anxious for peace,
since he wished to cross the Pass of Thermopylae without such
opposition from Athens as he had encountered in 352, and to be free
from the attacks of hostile ships upon his ports. Even before the fall
of Olynthus, informal communications passed between himself and Athens
(see Speech on Embassy, Secs. 12, 94, 315); and in consequence of these,
Philocrates proposed and the Assembly passed a decree, under which ten
ambassadors were appointed to go to Philip and invite him to send
plenipotentiaries to Athens to conclude a peace. Demosthenes (who had
strongly supported Philocrates) was among the ten, as well as Aeschines
and Philocrates himself. Delighted with Philip's reception of them, and
greatly attracted by his personality, the ambassadors returned with a
letter from him, promising in general terms to confer great benefits
upon Athens, if he were granted alliance as well as peace: in the
meantime he undertook not to interfere with the towns allied to Athens
in the Chersonese. Demosthenes proposed (in the Council, of which he
was a member in the year 347-346) the usual complimentary resolution in
honour of the ambassadors, and on his motion it was resolved to hold
two meetings of the Assembly, on the 18th and 19th of the month
Elaphebolion (i.e. probably just after the middle of April 346), when
Philip's envoys would have arrived, to discuss the terms of peace. The
envoys--Antipater, Parmenio, and Eurylochus--reached Athens shortly
after this; and before the first of the two meetings was held, the
Synod of the allies of Athens, now assembled in the city, agreed to
peace on such terms as the Athenian people should decide, but added a
proposal that it should be permitted to any Greek State to become a
party to the Peace within three months. They said nothing of alliance.
Of the two meetings of the Assembly, in view of the conflicting
statements of Demosthenes and Aeschines, only a probable account can be
given. At the first, Philocrates proposed that alliance as well as
peace should be made by Athens and her allies with Philip and his
allies, on the understanding that both parties should keep what they
_de facto_ possessed--a provision entailing the renunciation by Athens
of Amphipolis and Poteidaea; but that the Phocians and the people of
Halus should be excluded. Aeschines opposed this strongly; and both he
and Demosthenes claim to have supported the resolution of the allies,
which would have given the excluded peoples a chance of sharing the
advantage of the Peace. The feeling of the Assembly was with them,
although the Phocians had recently insulted the Athenians by declining
to give up to Proxenus (the Athenian admiral) the towns guarding the
approaches to Thermopylae, which they had themselves offered to place
in the hands of Athens. But Philocrates obtained the postponement of
the decision till the next day. On the next day, if not before, it
became plain that Philip's envoys would not consent to forgo the
exclusion of the Phocians and Halus; but in order that the Assembly
might be induced to pass the resolution, the clause expressly excluding
them was dropped, and peace and alliance were made between Athens and
Philip, each with their allies.[n] Even this was not secured before
Aeschines and his friends had deprecated rash attempts to imitate the
exploits of antiquity by continuing the war, and had explained that
Philip could not openly accept the Phocians as allies, but that when
the Peace was concluded, he would satisfy all the wishes of the
Athenians in every way; while Eubulus threatened the people with
immediate war, involving personal service and heavy taxation, unless
they accepted Philocrates' decree. A few days afterwards the Athenians
and the representatives of the allies took the oath to observe the
Peace: nothing was said about the Phocians and Halus: Cersobleptes'
representative was probably not permitted to swear with the rest. The
same ten ambassadors as before were instructed to receive Philip's
oath, and the oaths of his allies, to arrange for the ransom of
prisoners, and generally to treat with Philip in the interests of
Athens. Demosthenes urged his colleagues (and obtained an instruction
from the Council to this effect) to sail at once, in order that Philip,
who was now in Thrace, might not make conquests at the expense of
Athens before ratifying the Peace; but they delayed at Oreus, went by
land, instead of under the escort of Proxenus by sea, and only reached
Pella (the Macedonian capital) twenty-three days after leaving Athens.
Philip did not arrive for twenty-seven days more. By this time he had
taken Cersobleptes prisoner, and captured Serrhium, Doriscus, and other
Thracian towns, which were held by Athenian troops sent to assist
Cersobleptes. Demosthenes was now openly at variance with his
colleagues. He had no doubt realized the necessity of peace, but
probably regarded the exclusion of the Phocians as unwarrantable, and
thought that the policy of his colleagues must end in Philip's conquest
of all Greece. At Pella he occupied himself in negotiations for the
ransom of prisoners. After taking the oath, Philip kept the ambassadors
with him until he had made all preparations for his march southward,
and during this time he played with them and with the envoys from the
other Greek States who were present at the same time. His intention of
marching to Thermopylae was clear; but he seems to have led all alike
to suppose that he would fulfil their particular wishes when he had
crossed the Pass. The ambassadors accompanied him to Pherae, where the
oath was taken by the representatives of Philip's allies; the Phocians,
Halus, and Cersobleptes were excluded from the Peace. (Halus was taken
by Philip's army shortly afterwards.) The ambassadors of Athens then
returned homewards, bearing a letter from Philip, but did not arrive at
Athens before Philip had reached Thermopylae. On their return
Demosthenes denounced them before the Council, which refused them the
customary compliments, and (on Demosthenes' motion) determined to
propose to the people that Proxenus with his squadron should be ordered
to go to the aid of the Phocians and to prevent Philip from crossing
the Pass. When the Assembly met on the 16th of Scirophorion (shortly
before the middle of July), Aeschines rose first, and announced in
glowing terms the intention of Philip to turn round upon Thebes and to
re-establish Thespiae and Plataeae; and hinted at the restoration to
Athens of Euboea and Oropus. Then Philip's letter was read, containing
no promises, but excusing the delay of the ambassadors as due to his
own request. The Assembly was elated at the promises announced by
Aeschines; Demosthenes' attempt to contradict the announcement failed;
and on Philocrates' motion, it was resolved to extend the Peace and
alliance with Philip to posterity, and to declare that if the Phocians
refused to surrender the Temple of Delphi to the Amphictyons, Athens
would take steps against those responsible for the refusal. Demosthenes
refused to serve on the Embassy appointed to convey this resolution to
Philip: Aeschines was appointed, but was too ill to start. The
ambassadors set out, but within a few days returned with the news that
the Phocian army had surrendered to Philip (its leader, Phalaecus, and
his troops being allowed to depart to the Peloponnese). The surrender
had perhaps been accelerated by the news of the Athenian resolution.
The Assembly, in alarm lest Philip should march southwards, now
resolved to take measures of precaution and defence, and to send the
same ambassadors to Philip, to do what they could. They went, Aeschines
among them, and arrived in the midst of the festivities with which
Philip was celebrating the success of his plans. The invitation which
Philip sent to Athens--to send a force to join his own, and to assist
in settling the affairs of Phocis--was (on Demosthenes' advice)
declined by the Assembly; and soon afterwards another letter from
Philip expressed surprise at the unfriendly attitude taken up by the
Athenians towards him. Philip next summoned the Amphictyonic Council
(the legitimate guardians of the Delphian Temple, on whose behalf the
Thebans and Thessalians, aided by Philip, were now at war with the
Phocians): and the Council, in the absence of many of its members,
resolved to transfer the votes of the Phocians in the Council-meeting
to Philip, to break up the Phocian towns into villages, disarming their
inhabitants and taking away their horses, to require them to repay the
stolen treasure to the temple by instalments, and to pronounce a curse
upon those actually guilty of sacrilege, which would render them liable
to arrest anywhere. The destructive part of the sentence was rigorously
executed by the Thebans. In order to punish the former supporters of
the Phocians, the right to precedence in consulting the oracle was
transferred from Athens to Philip, by order of the Council, and the
Spartans were excluded from the temple: Orchomenus and Coroneia were
destroyed and their inhabitants enslaved; and Thebes became absolute
mistress of all Boeotia. The Pythian games (at Delphi) in September 346
were celebrated under Philip's presidency; but both Sparta and Athens
refused to send the customary deputation to them, and Philip
accordingly sent envoys to Athens, along with representatives of the
Amphictyons, to demand recognition for himself as an Amphictyonic
power. Aeschines supported the demand, his argument being apparently to
the effect that Philip had been forced to act as he had done by the
Thebans and Thessalians; but the Assembly was very angry at the results
(as they seemed to be) of Aeschines' diplomacy and the calamities of
the Phocians; and it was only when Demosthenes, in the Speech on the
Peace, advised compliance, that they were persuaded to give way. To
have refused would have brought the united forces of the Amphictyonic
States against Athens: and these she could not have resisted. It was
therefore prudent to keep the Peace, though Demosthenes evidently
regarded it only as an armistice.]


{1} I see, men of Athens, that our present situation is one of great
perplexity and confusion, for not only have many of our interests been
sacrificed, so that it is of no use to make eloquent speeches about
them; but even as regards what still remains to us, there is no general
agreement in any single point as to what is expedient: some hold one
view, and some another. {2} Perplexing, moreover, and difficult as
deliberation naturally is, men of Athens, you have made it far more
difficult. For while all the rest of mankind are in the habit of
resorting to deliberation before the event, you do not do so until
afterwards: and consequently, during the whole time that falls within
my memory, however high a reputation for eloquence one who upbraids you
for all your errors may enjoy, the desired results and the objects of
your deliberation pass out of your grasp. {3} And yet I believe--and it
is because I have convinced myself of this that I have risen--that if
you resolve to abandon all clamour and contention, as becomes men who
are deliberating on behalf of their country upon so great an issue, I
shall be able to describe and recommend measures to you, by which the
situation may be improved, and what we have sacrificed, recovered.

{4} Now although I know perfectly well, men of Athens, that to speak to
you about one's own earlier speeches, and about oneself, is a practice
which is always extremely repaying, I feel the vulgarity and
offensiveness of it so strongly, that I shrink from it even when I see
that it is necessary. I think, however, that you will form a better
judgement on the subject on which I am about to speak, if I remind you
of some few of the things which I have said on certain previous
occasions. {5} In the first place, men of Athens, when at the time of
the disturbances in Euboea[n] you were being urged to assist
Plutarchus, and to undertake an inglorious and costly campaign, I came
forward first and unsupported to oppose this action, and was almost
torn in pieces by those who for the sake of their own petty profits had
induced you to commit many grave errors: and when only a short time had
elapsed, along with the shame which you incurred and the treatment
which you received--treatment such as no people in the world ever
before experienced at the hands of those whom they went to
assist--there came the recognition by all of you of the baseness of
those who had urged you to this course, and of the excellence of my own
advice. {6} Again, men of Athens, I observed that Neoptolemus[n] the
actor, who was allowed freedom of movement everywhere on the ground of
his profession, and was doing the city the greatest mischief, was
managing and directing your communications with Philip in Philip's own
interest: and I came forward and informed you; and that, not to gratify
any private dislike or desire to misrepresent him, as subsequent events
have made plain. {7} And in this case I shall not, as before, throw the
blame on any speakers or defenders of Neoptolemus--indeed, he had no
defenders; it is yourselves that I blame. For had you been watching
rival tragedies in the theatre, instead of discussing the vital
interests of a whole State, you could not have listened with more
partiality towards him, or more prejudice against me. {8} And yet, I
