
"Is before thee. This traitor, with whom thou boldest intercourse, who
vowed to thee to render up Granada, and who was found the very next
morning, fighting with the Moors, with the blood of a Spanish martyr red
upon his hands, did he not confess that his fathers were of that hateful
race? did he not bargain with thee to elevate his brethren to the rank
of Christians? and has he not left with thee, upon false pretences, a
harlot of his faith, who, by sorcery and the help of the Evil One, hath
seduced into frantic passion the heart of the heir of the most Christian
king?"

"Ha! thus does that libertine boy ever scandalise us!" said the king,
bitterly.

"Well," pursued the Dominican, not heeding the interruption, "have you
not here excuse enough to wring from the whole race the purchase of
their existence? Note the glaring proof of this conspiracy of hell. The
outcasts of the earth employed this crafty agent to contract with
thee for power; and, to consummate their guilty designs, the arts that
seduced Solomon are employed against thy son. The beauty of the strange
woman captivates his senses; so that, through the future sovereign
of Spain the counsels of Jewish craft may establish the domination
of Jewish ambition. How knowest thou," he added as he observed that
Ferdinand listened to him with earnest attention--"how knowest thou but
what the next step might have been thy secret assassination, so that the
victim of witchcraft, the minion of the Jewess, might reign in the stead
of the mighty and unconquerable Ferdinand?"

"Go on, father," said the king, thoughtfully; "I see, at least, enough
to justify an impost upon these servitors of Mammon."

"But, though common sense suggests to us," continued Torquemada, "that
this disguised Israelite could not have acted on so vast a design
without the instigation of his brethren, not only in Granada, but
throughout all Andalusia,--would it not be right to obtain from him his
confession, and that of the maiden, within the camp, so that we may have
broad and undeniable evidence, whereon to act, and to still all cavil,
that may come not only from the godless, but even from the too tender
scruples of the righteous? Even the queen--whom the saints ever
guard!--hath ever too soft a heart for these infidels; and--"

"Right!" cried the king, again breaking upon Torquemada; "Isabel, the
queen of Castile, must be satisfied of the justice of all our actions."

"And, should it be proved that thy throne or life were endangered, and
that magic was exercised to entrap her royal son into a passion for a
Jewish maiden, which the Church holds a crime worthy of excommunication
itself, surely, instead of counteracting, she would assist our schemes."

"Holy friend," said Ferdinand, with energy, "ever a comforter, both for
this world and the next, to thee, and to the new powers intrusted to
thee, we commit this charge; see to it at once; time presses--Granada is
obstinate--the treasury waxes low."

"Son, thou hast said enough," replied the Dominican, closing his eyes,
and muttering a short thanksgiving. "Now then to my task."

"Yet stay," said the king, with an altered visage; "follow me to my
oratory within: my heart is heavy, and I would fain seek the solace of
the confessional."

The monk obeyed: and while Ferdinand, whose wonderful abilities were
mingled with the weakest superstition, who persecuted from policy, yet
believed, in his own heart, that he punished but from piety,--confessed
with penitent tears the grave offences of aves forgotten, and
beads untold; and while the Dominican admonished, rebuked, or
soothed,--neither prince nor monk ever dreamt that there was an error to
confess in, or a penance to be adjudged to, the cruelty that tortured a
fellow-being, or the avarice that sought pretences for the extortion of
a whole people.




CHAPTER VII. THE TRIBUNAL AND THE MIRACLE

It was the dead of night--the army was hushed in sleep--when four
soldiers belonging to the Holy Brotherhood, bearing with them one whose
manacles proclaimed him a prisoner, passed in steady silence to a huge
tent in the neighbourhood of the royal pavilion. A deep dyke, formidable
barricadoes, and sentries stationed at frequent intervals, testified the
estimation in which the safety of this segment of the camp was held. The
tent to which the soldiers approached was, in extent, larger than even
the king's pavilion itself--a mansion of canvas, surrounded by a wide
wall of massive stones; and from its summit gloomed, in the clear and
shining starlight, a small black pennant, on which was wrought a white
broad-pointed cross. The soldiers halted at the gate in the wall,
resigned their charge, with a whispered watchword, to two gaunt
sentries; and then (relieving the sentries who proceeded on with the
prisoner) remained, mute and motionless, at the post: for stern silence
and Spartan discipline were the attributes of the brotherhood of St.
Hermandad.

The prisoner, as he now neared the tent, halted a moment, looked round
steadily, as if to fix the spot in his remembrance, and then, with an
impatient though stately gesture, followed his guards. He passed two
divisions of the tent, dimly lighted, and apparently deserted. A
man, clad in long black robes, with a white cross on his breast, now
appeared; there was an interchange of signals in dumb-show-and in
another moment Almamen, the Hebrew, stood within a large chamber (if so
that division of the tent might be called) hung with black serge. At the
upper part of the space was an estrado, or platform, on which, by a long
table, sat three men; while at the head of the board was seen the calm
and rigid countenance of Tomas de Torquemada. The threshold of the tent
was guarded by two men, in garments similar in hue and fashion to
those of the figure who had ushered Almamen into the presence of the
inquisitor, each bearing a long lance, and with a long two-edged sword
by his side. This made all the inhabitants of that melancholy and
ominous apartment.

The Israelite looked round with a pale brow, but a flashing and scornful
eye; and, when he met the gaze of the Dominican, it almost seemed as if
those two men, each so raised above his fellows, by the sternness of his
nature and the energy of his passions, sought by a look alone to assert
his own supremacy and crush his foe. Yet, in truth, neither did justice
to the other; and the indignant disdain of Almamen was retorted by the
cold and icy contempt of the Dominican.

"Prisoner," said Torquemada (the first to withdraw his gaze), "a less
haughty and stubborn demeanour might have better suited thy condition:
but no matter; our Church is meek and humble. We have sent for thee in a
charitable and paternal hope; for although, as spy and traitor, thy
life is already forfeited, yet would we fain redeem and spare it to
repentance. That hope mayst thou not forego, for the nature of all of us
is weak and clings to life--that straw of the drowning seaman."

"Priest, if such thou art," replied the Hebrew, "I have already, when
first brought to this camp, explained the causes of my detention amongst
the troops of the Moor. It was my zeal for the king of Spain that
brought me into that peril. Escaping from that peril, incurred in his
behalf, is the king of Spain to be my accuser and my judge? If,
however, my life now be sought as the grateful return for the proffer
of inestimable service, I stand here to yield it. Do thy worst; and tell
thy master, that he loses more by my death than he can win by the lives
of thirty thousand warriors."

"Cease this idle babble," said the monk-inquisitor, contemptuously,
"nor think thou couldst ever deceive, with thy empty words, the mighty
intellect of Ferdinand of Spain. Thou hast now to defend thyself against
still graver charges than those of treachery to the king whom thou didst
profess to serve. Yea, misbeliever as thou art, it is thine to vindicate
thyself from blasphemy against the God thou shouldst adore. Confess the
truth: thou art of the tribe and faith of Israel?"

The Hebrew frowned darkly. "Man," said he, solemnly, "is a judge of the
deeds of men, but not of their opinions. I will not answer thee."

"Pause! We have means at hand that the strongest nerves and the stoutest
hearts have failed to encounter. Pause--confess!"

"Thy threat awes me not," said the Hebrew; "but I am human; and since
thou wouldst know the truth, thou mayst learn it without the torture. I
am of the same race as the apostles of thy Church--I am a Jew."

"He confesses--write down the words. Prisoner, thou hast done wisely;
and we pray the Lord that, acting thus, thou mayst escape both the
torture and the death. And in that faith thy daughter was reared?
Answer."

"My daughter! there is no charge against her! By the God of Sinai and
Horeb, you dare not touch a hair of that innocent head!"

"Answer," repeated the inquisitor, coldly.

"I do answer. She was brought up no renegade to her father's faith."

"Write down the confession. Prisoner," resumed the Dominican, after a
pause, "but few more questions remain; answer them truly, and thy life
is saved. In thy conspiracy to raise thy brotherhood of Andalusia to
power and influence--or, as thou didst craftily term it, to equal laws
with the followers of our blessed Lord; in thy conspiracy (by what dark
arts I seek not now to know _protege nos, beate Domine_!) to entangle
in wanton affections to thy daughter the heart of the Infant of
Spain-silence, I say--be still! in this conspiracy, thou wert aided,
abetted, or instigated by certain Jews of Andalusia--"

"Hold, priest!" cried Almamen, impetuously, "thou didst name my child.
Do I hear aright? Placed under the sacred charge of a king, and a belted
knight, has she--oh! answer me, I implore thee--been insulted by the
licentious addresses of one of that king's own lineage? Answer! I am a
Jew--but I am a father and a man."

"This pretended passion deceives us not," said the Dominican, who,
himself cut off from the ties of life, knew nothing of their power.
"Reply to the question put to thee: name thy accomplices."

"I have told thee all. Thou hast refused to answer one. I scorn and defy
thee: my lips are closed."

The Grand Inquisitor glanced to his brethren, and raised his hand.
His assistants whispered each other; one of them rose, and disappeared
behind the canvas at the back of the tent. Presently the hangings
were withdrawn; and the prisoner beheld an interior chamber, hung with
various instruments the nature of which was betrayed by their very
shape; while by the rack, placed in the centre of that dreary chamber,
stood a tall and grisly figure, his arms bare, his eyes bent, as by an
instinct, on the prisoner.

Almamen gazed at these dread preparations with an unflinching aspect.
The guards at the entrance of the tent approached: they struck off the
fetters from his feet and hands; they led him towards the appointed
place of torture.

Suddenly the Israelite paused.

"Priest," said he, in a more humble accent than he had yet assumed, "the
tidings that thou didst communicate to me respecting the sole daughter
of my house and love bewildered and confused me for the moment. Suffer
me but for a single moment to recollect my senses, and I will answer
without compulsion all thou mayst ask. Permit thy questions to be
repeated."

The Dominican, whose cruelty to others seemed to himself sanctioned by
his own insensibility to fear, and contempt for bodily pain, smiled with
bitter scorn at the apparent vacillation and weakness of the prisoner:
but, as he delighted not in torture merely for torture's sake, he
motioned to the guards to release the Israelite; and replied in a voice
unnaturally mild and kindly, considering the circumstances of the scene,

"Prisoner, could we save thee from pain, even by the anguish of our own
flesh and sinews, Heaven is our judge that we would willingly undergo
the torture which, with grief and sorrow, we ordained to thee.
Pause--take breath--collect thyself. Three minutes shalt thou have
to consider what course to adopt ere we repeat the question. But then
beware how thou triflest with our indulgence."

"It suffices--I thank thee," said the Hebrew, with a touch of gratitude
in his voice. As he spoke he bent his face within his bosom, which he
covered, as in profound meditation, with the folds of his long robe.
Scarcely half the brief time allowed him had expired, when he again
lifted his countenance and, as he did so, flung back his garment.
The Dominican uttered a loud cry; the guards started back in awe. A
wonderful change had come over the intended victim; he seemed to stand
amongst them literally--wrapt in fire; flames burst from his lip, and
played with his long locks, as, catching the glowing hue, they curled
over his shoulders like serpents of burning light: blood-red were his
breast and limbs, his haughty crest, and his outstretched arm; and
as for a single moment, he met the shuddering eyes of his judges, he
seemed, indeed, to verify all the superstitions of the time--no longer
the trembling captive but the mighty demon or the terrible magician.

The Dominican was the first to recover his self-possession. "Seize the
enchanter!" he exclaimed; but no man stirred. Ere yet the exclamation
had died on his lip, Almamen took from his breast a phial, and dashed
it on the ground--it broke into a thousand shivers: a mist rose over the
apartment--it spread, thickened, darkened, as a sudden night; the lamps
could not pierce it. The luminous form of the Hebrew grew dull and dim,
until it vanished in the shade. On every eye blindness seemed to fall.
There was a dead silence, broken by a cry and a groan; and when, after
some minutes, the darkness gradually dispersed, Almamen was gone. One,
of the guards lay bathed in blood upon the ground; they raised him: he
had attempted to seize the prisoner, and had been stricken with a mortal
wound. He died as he faltered forth the explanation. In the confusion
and dismay of the scene none noticed, till long afterwards, that the
prisoner had paused long enough to strip the dying guard of his long
mantle; a proof that he feared his more secret arts might not suffice to
bear him safe through the camp, without the aid of worldly stratagem.

"The fiend hath been amongst us!" said the Dominican, solemnly falling
on his knees,--"let us pray!"




BOOK III.




CHAPTER I. ISABEL AND THE JEWISH MAIDEN.

While this scene took place before the tribunal of Torquemada, Leila had
been summoned from the indulgence of fears, which her gentle nature and
her luxurious nurturing had ill-fitted her to contend against, to the
presence of the queen. That gifted and high-spirited princess, whose
virtues were her own, whose faults were of her age, was not, it is true,
without the superstition and something of the intolerant spirit of her
royal spouse: but, even where her faith assented to persecution, her
heart ever inclined to mercy; and it was her voice alone that ever
counteracted the fiery zeal of Torquemada, and mitigated the sufferings
of the unhappy ones who fell under the suspicion of heresy. She had,
happily, too, within her a strong sense of justice, as well as the
sentiment of compassion; and often, when she could not save the accused,
she prevented the consequences of his imputed crime falling upon the
innocent members of his house or tribe.

In the interval between his conversation with Ferdinand and the
examination of Almamen, the Dominican had sought the queen; and had
placed before her, in glowing colours, not only the treason of Almamen,
but the consequences of the impious passion her son had conceived for
Leila. In that day, any connection between a Christian knight and a
Jewess was deemed a sin, scarce expiable; and Isabel conceived all that
horror of her son's offence which was natural in a pious mother and a
haughty queen. But, despite all the arguments of the friar, she
could not be prevailed upon to render up Leila to the tribunal of the
Inquisition; and that dread court, but newly established, did not dare,
without her consent, to seize upon one under the immediate protection of
the queen.

"Fear not, father," said Isabel, with quiet firmness, "I will take upon
myself to examine the maiden; and, at least, I will see her removed from
all chance of tempting or being tempted by this graceless boy. But she
was placed under the charge of the king and myself as a hostage and a
trust; we accepted the charge, and our royal honor is pledged to the
safety of the maiden. Heaven forbid that I should deny the existence
of sorcery, assured as we are of its emanation from the Evil One; but
I fear, in this fancy of Juan's, that the maiden is more sinned against
than sinning: and yet my son is, doubtless, not aware of the unhappy
faith of the Jewess; the knowledge of which alone will suffice to cure
him of his error. You shake your head, father; but, I repeat, I will act
in this affair so as to merit the confidence I demand. Go, good Tomas.
We have not reigned so long without belief in our power to control and
deal with a simple maiden."

The queen extended her hand to the monk, with a smile so sweet in its
dignity, that it softened even that rugged heart; and, with a reluctant
sigh, and a murmured prayer that her counsels might be guided for the
best, Torquemada left the royal presence.

"The poor child!" thought Isabel, "those tender limbs, and that fragile
form, are ill fitted for yon monk's stern tutelage. She seems gentle:
and her face has in it all the yielding softness of our sex; doubtless
by mild means, she may be persuaded to abjure her wretched creed; and
the shade of some holy convent may hide her alike from the licentious
gaze of my son and the iron zeal of the Inquisitor. I will see her."

When Leila entered the queen's pavilion, Isabel, who was alone, marked
her trembling step with a compassionate eye; and, as Leila, in obedience
to the queen's request, threw up her veil, the paleness of her cheek and
the traces of recent tears appealed to Isabel's heart with more success
than had attended all the pious invectives of Torquemada.

"Maiden," said Isabel, encouragingly, "I fear thou hast been strangely
harassed by the thoughtless caprice of the young prince. Think of it no
more. But, if thou art what I have ventured to believe, and to assert
thee to be, cheerfully subscribe to the means I will suggest for
preventing the continuance of addresses which cannot but injure thy fair
name."

"Ah, madam!" said Leila, as she fell on one knee beside the queen,
"most joyfully, most gratefully, will I accept any asylum which proffers
solitude and peace."
