

     A moment gazed adown the dale,
     A moment snuffed the tainted gale,
     A moment listened to the cry,
     That thickened as the chase drew nigh;
     Then, as the headmost foe appeared,
     With one brave bound the copse he cleared,
     And, stretching forward free and far,
     Sought the wild heaths of Uam-Var.
                               --_Lady of the Lake._

The party under Captain Lawton had watched the retiring foe to his boats
with the most unremitting vigilance, without finding any fit opening for
a charge. The experienced successor of Colonel Wellmere knew too well
the power of his enemy to leave the uneven surface of the heights, until
compelled to descend to the level of the water. Before he attempted this
hazardous movement, he threw his men into a compact square, with its
outer edges bristling with bayonets. In this position, the impatient
trooper well understood that brave men could never be assailed by
cavalry with success, and he was reluctantly obliged to hover near them,
without seeing any opportunity of stopping their slow but steady march
to the beach. A small schooner, which had been their convoy from the
city, lay with her guns bearing on the place of embarkation. Against
this combination of force and discipline, Lawton had sufficient prudence
to see it would be folly to contend, and the English were suffered to
embark without molestation. The dragoons lingered on the shore till the
last moment, and then they reluctantly commenced their own retreat back
to the main body of the corps.

The gathering mists of the evening had begun to darken the valley, as
the detachment of Lawton made its reappearance, at its southern
extremity. The march of the troops was slow, and their line extended for
the benefit of ease. In the front rode the captain, side by side with
his senior subaltern, apparently engaged in close conference, while the
rear was brought up by a young cornet, humming an air, and thinking of
the sweets of a straw bed after the fatigues of a hard day's duty.

"Then it struck you too?" said the captain. "The instant I placed my
eyes on her I remembered the face; it is one not easily forgotten. By my
faith, Tom, the girl does no discredit to the major's taste."

"She would do honor to the corps," replied the lieutenant, with some
warmth. "Those blue eyes might easily win a man to gentler employments
than this trade of ours. In sober truth, I can easily imagine such a
girl might tempt even me to quit the broadsword and saddle, for a
darning-needle and pillion."

"Mutiny, sir, mutiny," cried the other, laughing. "What, you, Tom Mason,
dare to rival the gay, admired, and withal rich, Major Dunwoodie in his
love! You, a lieutenant of cavalry, with but one horse, and he none of
the best! whose captain is as tough as a pepperidge log, and has as many
lives as a cat!"

"Faith," said the subaltern, smiling in his turn, "the log may yet be
split, and grimalkin lose his lives, if you often charge as madly as you
did this morning. What think you of many raps from such a beetle as laid
you on your back to-day?"

"Ah! don't mention it, my good Tom; the thought makes my head ache,"
replied the other, shrugging up his shoulders. "It is what I call
forestalling night."

"The night of death?"

"No, sir, the night that follows day. I saw myriads of stars, things
which should hide their faces in the presence of the lordly sun. I do
think nothing but this thick cap saved me for your comfort a little
longer, mauger the cat's lives."

"I have much reason to be obliged to the cap," said Mason dryly. "That
or the skull must have had a reasonable portion of thickness, I admit."

"Come, come, Tom, you are a licensed joker, so I'll not feign anger with
you," returned the captain, good-humoredly. "But Singleton's lieutenant,
I am fearful, will fare better than yourself for this day's service."

"I believe both of us will be spared the pain of receiving promotion
purchased by the death of a comrade and friend," observed Mason kindly.
"It was reported that Sitgreaves said he would live."

"From my soul I hope so," exclaimed Lawton. "For a beardless face, that
boy carries the stoutest heart I have ever met with. It surprises me,
however, that as we both fell at the same instant, the men behaved
so well."

"For the compliment, I might thank you," cried the lieutenant with a
laugh; "but modesty forbids. I did my best to stop them, but
without success."

"Stop them!" roared the captain. "Would you stop men in the middle of a
charge?"

"I thought they were going the wrong way," answered the subaltern.

"Ah! our fall drove them to the right about?"

"It was either your fall, or apprehensions of their own; until the major
rallied us, we were in admirable disorder."

"Dunwoodie! the major was on the crupper of the Dutchman."

"Ah! but he managed to get off the crupper of the Dutchman. He came in,
at half speed, with the other two troops, and riding between us and the
enemy, with that imperative way he has when roused, brought us in line
in the twinkling of an eye. Then it was," added the lieutenant, with
animation, "that we sent John Bull to the bushes. Oh! it was a sweet
charge--heads and tails, until we were upon them."

"The devil! What a sight I missed!"

"You slept through it all."

"Yes," returned the other, with a sigh; "it was all lost to me and poor
George Singleton. But, Tom, what will George's sister say to this
fair-haired maiden, in yonder white building?"

"Hang herself in her garters," said the subaltern. "I owe a proper
respect to my superiors, but two such angels are more than justly falls
to the share of one man, unless he be a Turk or a Hindoo."

"Yes, yes," said the captain, quickly, "the major is ever preaching
morality to the youngsters, but he is a sly fellow in the main. Do you
observe how fond he is of the cross roads above this valley? Now, if I
were to halt the troops twice in the same place, you would all swear
there was a petticoat in the wind."

"You are well known to the corps."

"Well, Tom, a slanderous propensity is incurable--but," stretching
forward his body in the direction he was gazing, as if to aid him in
distinguishing objects through the darkness, "what animal is moving
through the field on our right?"

"'Tis a man," said Mason, looking intently at the suspicious object.

"By his hump 'tis a dromedary!" added the captain, eying it keenly.
Wheeling his horse suddenly from the highway he exclaimed, "Harvey
Birch!--take him, dead or alive!"

Mason and a few of the leading dragoons only understood the sudden cry,
but it was heard throughout the line. A dozen of the men, with the
lieutenant at their head, followed the impetuous Lawton, and their speed
threatened the pursued with a sudden termination of the race.

Birch prudently kept his position on the rock, where he had been seen by
the passing glance of Henry Wharton, until evening had begun to shroud
the surrounding objects in darkness. From this height he had seen all
the events of the day, as they occurred. He had watched with a beating
heart the departure of the troops under Dunwoodie, and with difficulty
had curbed his impatience until the obscurity of night should render his
moving free from danger. He had not, however, completed a fourth of his
way to his own residence, when his quick ear distinguished the tread of
the approaching horse. Trusting to the increasing darkness, he
determined to persevere. By crouching and moving quickly along the
surface of the ground, he hoped yet to escape unseen. Captain Lawton was
too much engrossed with the foregoing conversation to suffer his eyes to
indulge in their usual wandering; and the peddler, perceiving by the
voices that the enemy he most feared had passed, yielded to his
impatience, and stood erect, in order to make greater progress. The
moment his body arose above the shadow of the ground, it was seen, and
the chase commenced. For a single instant, Birch was helpless, his blood
curdling in his veins at the imminence of the danger, and his legs
refusing their natural and necessary office. But it was only for a
moment. Casting his pack where he stood, and instinctively tightening
the belt he wore, the peddler betook himself to flight. He knew that by
bringing himself in a line with his pursuers and the wood, his form
would be lost to sight. This he soon effected, and he was straining
every nerve to gain the wood itself, when several horsemen rode by him
but a short distance on his left, and cut him off from this place of
refuge. The peddler threw himself on the ground as they came near him,
and was passed unseen. But delay now became too dangerous for him to
remain in that position. He accordingly rose, and still keeping in the
shadow of the wood, along the skirts of which he heard voices crying to
each other to be watchful, he ran with incredible speed in a parallel
line, but in an opposite direction, to the march of the dragoons.

The confusion of the chase had been heard by the whole of the men,
though none distinctly understood the order of Lawton but those who
followed. The remainder were lost in doubt as to the duty that was
required of them; and the aforesaid cornet was making eager inquiries
of the trooper near him on the subject, when a man, at a short distance
in his rear, crossed the road at a single bound. At the same instant,
the stentorian voice of Lawton rang through the valley, shouting,--

"Harvey Birch--take him, dead or alive!"

Fifty pistols lighted the scene, and the bullets whistled in every
direction round the head of the devoted peddler. A feeling of despair
seized his heart, and in the bitterness of that moment he exclaimed,--

"Hunted like a beast of the forest!"

He felt life and its accompaniments to be a burden, and was about to
yield himself to his enemies. Nature, however, prevailed. If taken,
there was great reason to apprehend that he would not be honored with
the forms of a trial, but that most probably the morning sun would
witness his ignominious execution; for he had already been condemned to
death, and had only escaped that fate by stratagem. These
considerations, with the approaching footsteps of his pursuers, roused
him to new exertions. He again fled before them. A fragment of a wall,
that had withstood the ravages made by war in the adjoining fences of
wood, fortunately crossed his path. He hardly had time to throw his
exhausted limbs over this barrier, before twenty of his enemies reached
its opposite side. Their horses refused to take the leap in the dark,
and amid the confusion of the rearing chargers, and the execrations of
their riders, Birch was enabled to gain a sight of the base of the hill,
on whose summit was a place of perfect security. The heart of the
peddler now beat high with hope, when the voice of Captain Lawton again
rang in his ears, shouting to his men to make room. The order was
obeyed, and the fearless trooper rode at the wall at the top of his
horse's speed, plunged the rowels in his charger, and flew over the
obstacle in safety. The triumphant hurrahs of the men, and the
thundering tread of the horse, too plainly assured the peddler of the
emergency of his danger. He was nearly exhausted, and his fate no
longer seemed doubtful.

"Stop, or die!" was uttered above his head, and in fearful proximity to
his ears.

Harvey stole a glance over his shoulder, and saw, within a bound of him,
the man he most dreaded. By the light of the stars he beheld the
uplifted arm and the threatening saber. Fear, exhaustion, and despair
seized his heart, and the intended victim fell at the feet of the
dragoon. The horse of Lawton struck the prostrate peddler, and both
steed and rider came violently to the earth.

As quick as thought, Birch was on his feet again, with the sword of the
discomfited dragoon in his hand. Vengeance seems but too natural to
human passions. There are few who have not felt the seductive pleasure
of making our injuries recoil on their authors; and yet there are some
who know how much sweeter it is to return good for evil.

All the wrongs of the peddler shone on his brain with a dazzling
brightness. For a moment the demon within him prevailed, and Birch
brandished the powerful weapon in the air; in the next, it fell harmless
on the reviving but helpless trooper. The peddler vanished up the side
of the friendly rock.

"Help Captain Lawton, there!" cried Mason, as he rode up, followed by a
dozen of his men; "and some of you dismount with me, and search these
rocks; the villain lies here concealed."

"Hold!" roared the discomfited captain, raising himself with difficulty
on his feet. "If one of you dismount, he dies. Tom, my good fellow, you
will help me to straddle Roanoke again."

The astonished subaltern complied in silence, while the wondering
dragoons remained as fixed in their saddles, as if they composed part of
the animals they rode.

"You are much hurt, I fear," said Mason, with something of condolence in
his manner, as they reentered the highway, biting off the end of a
cigar for the want of a better quality of tobacco.

"Something so, I do believe," replied the captain, catching his breath,
and speaking with difficulty. "I wish our bonesetter was at hand, to
examine into the state of my ribs."

"Sitgreaves is left in attendance on Captain Singleton, at the house of
Mr. Wharton."

"Then there I halt for the night, Tom. These rude times must abridge
ceremony; besides, you may remember the old gentleman professed a
kinsman's regard for the corps. I can never think of passing so good a
friend without a halt."

"And I will lead the troop to the Four Corners; if we all halt there, we
shall breed a famine in the land."

"A condition I never desire to be placed in. The idea of that graceful
spinster's cakes is no bad solace for twenty-four hours in the
hospital."

"Oh! you won't die if you can think of eating," said Mason, with a
laugh.

"I should surely die if I could not," observed the captain, gravely.

"Captain Lawton," said the orderly of his troop, riding to the side of
his commanding officer, "we are now passing the house of the peddler
spy; is it your pleasure that we burn it?"

"No!" roared the captain, in a voice that startled the disappointed
sergeant. "Are you an incendiary? Would you burn a house in cold blood?
Let but a spark approach, and the hand that carries it will never
light another."

"Zounds!" muttered the sleepy cornet in the rear, as he was nodding on
his horse, "there is life in the captain, notwithstanding his tumble."

Lawton and Mason rode on in silence, the latter ruminating on the
wonderful change produced in his commander by his fall, when they
arrived opposite to the gate before the residence of Mr. Wharton. The
troop continued its march; but the captain and his lieutenant
dismounted, and, followed by the servant of the former, they proceeded
slowly to the door of the cottage.

Colonel Wellmere had already sought a retreat in his own room; Mr.
Wharton and his son were closeted by themselves; and the ladies were
administering the refreshments of the tea table to the surgeon of the
dragoons, who had seen one of his patients in his bed, and the other
happily enjoying the comforts of a sweet sleep. A few natural inquiries
from Miss Peyton had opened the soul of the doctor, who knew every
individual of her extensive family connection in Virginia, and who even
thought it possible that he had seen the lady herself. The amiable
spinster smiled as she felt it to be improbable that she should ever
have met her new acquaintance before, and not remember his
singularities. It however greatly relieved the embarrassment of their
situation, and something like a discourse was maintained between them;
the nieces were only listeners, nor could the aunt be said to be
much more.

"As I was observing, Miss Peyton, it was merely the noxious vapors of
the lowlands that rendered the plantation of your brother an unfit
residence for man; but quadrupeds were--"

"Bless me, what's that?" said Miss Peyton, turning pale at the report of
the pistols fired at Birch.

"It sounds prodigiously like the concussion on the atmosphere made by
the explosion of firearms," said the surgeon, sipping his tea with great
indifference. "I should imagine it to be the troop of Captain Lawton
returning, did I not know the captain never uses the pistol, and that he
dreadfully abuses the saber."

"Merciful providence!" exclaimed the agitated maiden, "he would not
injure one with it, certainly."

"Injure!" repeated the other quickly. "It is certain death, madam; the
most random blows imaginable; all that I can say to him will have no
effect."

"But Captain Lawton is the officer we saw this morning, and is surely
your friend," said Frances, hastily, observing her aunt to be seriously
alarmed.

"I find no fault with his want of friendship; the man is well enough if
he would learn to cut scientifically. All trades, madam, ought to be
allowed to live; but what is to become of a surgeon, if his patients are
dead before he sees them!"

The doctor continued haranguing on the probability and improbability of
its being the returning troop, until a loud knock at the door gave new
alarm to the ladies. Instinctively laying his hand on a small saw, that
had been his companion for the whole day, in the vain expectation of an
amputation, the surgeon, coolly assuring the ladies that he would stand
between them and danger, proceeded in person to answer the summons.

"Captain Lawton!" exclaimed the surgeon, as he beheld the trooper
leaning on the arm of his subaltern, and with difficulty crossing the
threshold.

"Ah! my dear bonesetter, is it you? You are here very fortunately to
inspect my carcass; but do lay aside that rascally saw!"

A few words from Mason explained the nature and manner of his captain's
hurts, and Miss Peyton cheerfully accorded the required accommodations.
While the room intended for the trooper was getting ready, and the
doctor was giving certain portentous orders, the captain was invited to
rest himself in the parlor. On the table was a dish of more substantial
food than ordinarily adorned the afternoon's repast, and it soon caught
the attention of the dragoons. Miss Peyton, recollecting that they had
probably made their only meal that day at her own table, kindly invited
them to close it with another. The offer required no pressing, and in a
few minutes the two were comfortably seated, and engaged in an
employment that was only interrupted by an occasional wry face from the
captain, who moved his body in evident pain. These interruptions,
however, interfered but little with the principal business in hand; and
the captain had got happily through with this important duty, before the
surgeon returned to announce all things ready for his accommodation in
the room above stairs.

"Eating!" cried the astonished physician. "Captain Lawton, do you wish
to die?"

"I have no particular ambition that way," said the trooper, rising, and
bowing good night to the ladies, "and, therefore, have been providing
materials necessary to preserve life."

The surgeon muttered his dissatisfaction, while he followed Mason and
the captain from the apartment.

Every house in America had, at that day, what was emphatically called
its best room, and this had been allotted, by the unseen influence of
Sarah, to Colonel Wellmere. The down counterpane, which a clear frosty
night would render extremely grateful over bruised limbs, decked the
English officer's bed. A massive silver tankard, richly embossed with
the Wharton arms, held the beverage he was to drink during the night;
while beautiful vessels of china performed the same office for the two
American captains. Sarah was certainly unconscious of the silent
preference she had been giving to the English officer; and it is equally
certain, that but for his hurts, bed, tankard, and everything but the
beverage would have been matters of indifference to Captain Lawton, half
of whose nights were spent in his clothes, and not a few of them in the
saddle. After taking possession, however, of a small but very
comfortable room, Doctor Sitgreaves proceeded to inquire into the state
of his injuries. He had begun to pass his hand over the body of his
patient, when the latter cried impatiently,--

"Sitgreaves, do me the favor to lay that rascally saw aside, or I shall
have recourse to my saber in self-defense; the sight of it makes my
blood cold."

"Captain Lawton, for a man who has so often exposed life and limb, you
are unaccountably afraid of a very useful instrument."

"Heaven keep me from its use," said the trooper, with a shrug.

"You would not despise the lights of science, nor refuse surgical aid,
because this saw might be necessary?"

"I would."

"You would!"

"Yes; you shall never joint me like a quarter of beef, while I have life
to defend myself," cried the resolute dragoon. "But I grow sleepy; are
any of my ribs broken?"

"No."

"Any of my bones?"

"No."

"Tom, I'll thank you for that pitcher." As he ended his draft, he very
deliberately turned his back on his companions, and good-naturedly
cried, "Good night, Mason; good night, Galen."

Captain Lawton entertained a profound respect for the surgical abilities
of his comrade, but he was very skeptical on the subject of
administering internally for the ailings of the human frame. With a full
stomach, a stout heart, and a clear conscience, he often maintained that
a man might bid defiance to the world and its vicissitudes. Nature
provided him with the second, and, to say the truth, he strove manfully
himself to keep up the other two requisites in his creed. It was a
favorite maxim with him, that the last thing death assailed was the
eyes, and next to the last, the jaws. This he interpreted to be a clear
expression of the intention of nature, that every man might regulate, by
his own volition, whatever was to be admitted into the sanctuary of his
mouth; consequently, if the guest proved unpalatable, he had no one to
blame but himself. The surgeon, who was well acquainted with these views
of his patient, beheld him, as he cavalierly turned his back on Mason
and himself, with a commiserating contempt, replaced in their leathern
repository the phials he had exhibited, with a species of care that was
allied to veneration, gave the saw, as he concluded, a whirl of triumph,
and departed, without condescending to notice the compliment of the
trooper. Mason, finding, by the breathing of the captain, that his own
good night would be unheard, hastened to pay his respects to the
ladies--after which he mounted and followed the troop at the top of his
horse's speed.




CHAPTER X


     On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
     Some pious drops the closing eye requires,
     E'en from the tomb the voice of nature cries,
     E'en in our ashes live their wonted fires.
                                                --GRAY.

The possessions of Mr. Wharton extended to some distance on each side of
the house in which he dwelt, and most of his land was unoccupied. A few
scattered dwellings were to be seen in different parts of his domains,
but they were fast falling to decay, and were untenanted. The proximity
of the country to the contending armies had nearly banished the pursuits
of agriculture from the land. It was useless for the husbandman to
devote his time and the labor of his hands, to obtain overflowing
garners, that the first foraging party would empty. None tilled the
earth with any other view than to provide the scanty means of
subsistence, except those who were placed so near to one of the adverse
parties as to be safe from the inroads of the light troops of the other.
To these the war offered a golden harvest, more especially to such as
enjoyed the benefits of an access to the royal army. Mr. Wharton did not
require the use of his lands for the purposes of subsistence; and he
willingly adopted the guarded practice of the day, limiting his
attention to such articles as were soon to be consumed within his own
walls, or could be easily secreted from the prying eyes of the
foragers. In consequence, the ground on which the action was fought had
not a single inhabited building, besides the one belonging to the father
of Harvey Birch. This house stood between the place where the cavalry
had met, and that where the charge had been made on the party
of Wellmere.

To Katy Haynes it had been a day fruitful of incidents. The prudent
housekeeper had kept her political feelings in a state of rigid
neutrality; her own friends had espoused the cause of the country, but
the maiden herself never lost sight of that important moment, when, like
females of more illustrious hopes, she might be required to sacrifice
her love of country on the altar of domestic harmony. And yet,
notwithstanding all her sagacity, there were moments when the good woman
had grievous doubts into which scale she ought to throw the weight of
her eloquence, in order to be certain of supporting the cause favored by
the peddler. There was so much that was equivocal in his movements and
manner, that often, when, in the privacy of their household, she was
about to offer a philippic on Washington and his followers, discretion
sealed her mouth, and distrust beset her mind. In short, the whole
conduct of the mysterious being she studied was of a character to
distract the opinions of one who took a more enlarged view of men and
life than came within the competency of his housekeeper.

The battle of the Plains had taught the cautious Washington the
advantages his enemy possessed in organization, arms, and discipline.
These were difficulties to be mastered by his own vigilance and care.
Drawing off his troops to the heights, in the northern part of the
county, he had bidden defiance to the attacks of the royal army, and Sir
William Howe fell back to the enjoyment of his barren conquest--a
deserted city. Never afterwards did the opposing armies make the trial
of strength within the limits of Westchester; yet hardly a day passed,
that the partisans did not make their inroads; or a sun rise, that the
inhabitants were spared the relation of excesses which the preceding
darkness had served to conceal. Most of the movements of the peddler
were made at the hours which others allotted to repose. The evening sun
would frequently leave him at one extremity of the county, and the
morning find him at the other. His pack was his never-failing companion;
and there were those who closely studied him, in his moments of traffic,
and thought his only purpose was the accumulation of gold. He would be
often seen near the Highlands, with a body bending under its load; and
again near the Harlem River, traveling with lighter steps, with his face
towards the setting sun. But these glances at him were uncertain and
fleeting. The intermediate time no eye could penetrate. For months he
disappeared, and no traces of his course were ever known.

Strong parties held the heights of Harlem, and the northern end of
Manhattan Island was bristling with the bayonets of the English
sentinels, yet the peddler glided among them unnoticed and uninjured.
His approaches to the American lines were also frequent; but generally
so conducted as to baffle pursuit. Many a sentinel, placed in the gorges
of the mountains, spoke of a strange figure that had been seen gliding
by them in the mists of the evening. These stories reached the ears of
the officers, and, as we have related, in two instances the trader had
fallen into the hands of the Americans. The first time he had escaped
from Lawton, shortly after his arrest; but the second he was condemned
to die. On the morning of his intended execution, the cage was opened,
but the bird had flown. This extraordinary escape had been made from the
custody of a favorite officer of Washington, and sentinels who had been
thought worthy to guard the person of the commander in chief. Bribery
and treason could not be imputed to men so well esteemed, and the
opinion gained ground among the common soldiery, that the peddler had
dealings with the dark one. Katy, however, always repelled this opinion
with indignation; for within the recesses of her own bosom, the
housekeeper, in ruminating on the events, concluded that the evil
spirit did not pay in gold. Nor, continued the wary spinster in her
cogitations, does Washington; paper and promises were all that the
leader of the American troops could dispense to his servants. After the
alliance with France, when silver became more abundant in the country,
although the scrutinizing eyes of Katy never let any opportunity of
examining into the deerskin purse pass unimproved, she was never able to
detect the image of Louis intruding into the presence of the well-known
countenance of George III. In short, the secret hoard of Harvey
sufficiently showed in its contents that all its contributions had been
received from the British.

The house of Birch had been watched at different times by the Americans,
with a view to his arrest, but never with success; the reputed spy
possessing a secret means of intelligence, that invariably defeated
their schemes. Once, when a strong body of the continental army held the
Four Corners for a whole summer, orders had been received from
Washington himself, never to leave the door of Harvey Birch unwatched.
The command was rigidly obeyed, and during this long period the peddler
was unseen; the detachment was withdrawn, and the following night Birch
reentered his dwelling. The father of Harvey had been greatly molested,
in consequence of the suspicious character of the son. But,
notwithstanding the most minute scrutiny into the conduct of the old
man, no fact could be substantiated against him to his injury, and his
