explanation that Agrippa had ordered it. He had inherited most of the
deceased's property, among the articles of which was the Hellespontine
Chersonese, which had come I know not how into the possession of Agrippa.
The emperor felt his loss for a very long time and therefore caused the
populace to hold him in honor. A posthumous son born to him he called
Agrippa. However, he did not allow any of the citizens to omit any of
the ancestral customs (although none of the more prominent men wished to
present himself for the festivals) and he personally superintended the
gladiatorial combats. They were often given, too, in his absence.--This
demise of Agrippa was not only a private loss to his own household, but
a public loss to all the Romans, as was shown by the fact that portents
occurred on this occasion as great as were usually seen before the
most tremendous disasters. Owls gathered in the capital and a bolt of
lightning descended upon the house at Albanum, where the consuls reside
during the sacrifices.[11] The star called comet stood for several days
over the City and was finally dissolved into flashes of light. Many
buildings in the City were destroyed by fire, among them the tent of
Romulus, which was set ablaze by crows dropping upon it burning meat from
some altar.--These were the matters of interest connected with Agrippa.

[-30-] After this Augustus was chosen supervisor and corrector of morals
for another five years,--this also he received for a limited period as he
had the monarchy,--and he ordered the senators to burn incense as often
as they had a sitting, and not to come to his residence: the first, that
they might show reverence to the gods, and the second, that they might
have no difficulty in convening. Inasmuch as very few became candidates
for the tribuneship on account of its power having been abolished, he
made a law that magistrates should each nominate one of the knights who
possessed not less than twenty-five myriads; the people should then
choose from these the number lacking, and if the men desired to be
senators afterward, well and good; otherwise they should return again to
the rank of knights.

The province of Asia also stood very greatly in need of some assistance
on account of earthquakes, and he therefore paid into the public treasury
from his own resources their annual tribute and assigned them a governor
for two years chosen by lot and not arbitrarily selected.

Apuleius and Maecenas were at one time bitterly reviled in some court of
adultery, not because they had themselves behaved wantonly but because
they had actively aided the man on trial; thereupon Augustus entered the
courtroom and sat in the praetor's chair: he did nothing violent, but
simply forbade the accuser to insult his relatives or friends, and then
rose and left the place. For this action and others the senators honored
him with statues, paid for by private subscription, and by giving
bachelors and spinsters the right to behold spectacles with other people
and to attend banquets on his birthday. Neither of these privileges was
previously permitted them.

[-31-] When now Agrippa, whom he loved for his excellence and not
through any compulsion, had died, the emperor found that he needed an
assistant in the public business, one who would far surpass the rest in
both honor and power, who might manage everything opportunely and be free
from envy and plots. Therefore he reluctantly chose Tiberius, for his own
grandsons were at this time still minors. He caused him also to divorce
his wife, though she was a daughter of Agrippa by another marriage and
had one child an infant and was soon to give birth to another; and having
betrothed Julia to him he sent him out against the Pannonians. This
people had for a time been quiet, fearing Agrippa, but now after his
death they revolted. Tiberius subdued them, having ravaged considerable
of their territory and done much injury to its inhabitants; he had as
enthusiastic allies the Scordisci, who were neighbors of theirs and
similarly equipped. He took away their arms and sold for export most of
the male population that was of age. For these achievements the senate
voted him a triumph, but Augustus did not allow him to hold it, granting
him instead the triumphal honors.

[-32-] Drusus had this same experience. The Sugambri and their allies,
owing to the absence of Augustus and the fact that the Gauls were restive
under the yoke of slavery, had become hostile, and he therefore occupied
the subject territory before them, sending for the foremost men on the
pretext of the festival which they celebrate even now about the altar of
Augustus at Lugdunum. Also he observed the Celtae crossing the Rhine
and drove them back. Next he crossed over to the land of the Usipetes
opposite the very island of the Batavi, and from there marched along the
river to the Sugambri country, devastating vast stretches. He sailed
along the Rhine to the ocean, conciliated the Frisii, and traversing the
lake invaded Chaucis, where he ran in danger, as his boats were left high
and dry at the ebb-tide of the ocean. He was saved at this time by the
Frisii (who joined his expedition with infantry), and withdrew, for it
was now winter.

[B.C. 11(_a. u._ 743)]

Coming to Rome he was made aedile[12]in the consulship of Quintus Aelius
and Paulus Fabius, though he had already praetor's honors.

[-33-] At the opening of the spring he set out again to the war, crossed
the Rhine, and subjugated the Usipetes. He bridged the Lupia, invaded the
country of the Sugambri and advanced through it into Cheruscis, as far as
the Visurgis. He was able to do this because the Sugambri in anger at the
Chatti, the only tribe among their neighbors that had refused to join
their alliance, had made a campaign of the whole population against them.
Drusus took this opportunity to traverse their country unnoticed. And he
would nave crossed also the Visurgis, had not provisions grown scarce and
the their country, and though beaten at first vanquished them in turn and
ravaged both that land and the territory of adjacent tribes which had
taken part in the uprising. Immediately he reduced all of them to
subjugation, gaining control of some with their consent, terrifying
others into reluctant submission, and engaging in pitched battles with
others. Later, when some of them rebelled, he again enslaved them. And
for this thanksgivings and triumphal honors were accorded him.

[-35-] While these events were occurring Augustus took a census,
reckoning in all the property that belonged to him, as an individual
might do, and also making a list of the senate. As he saw that many were
not always present at the meetings he ordered that even less than four
hundred might constitute a quorum for passing decrees. Previously that
had been the minimum number for ratifying any measure. The senate and the
people again contributed money to be spent on images of himself, but he
would erect no such likeness, and only set up representations of the
Public Health, of Concord, and of Peace. The citizens were always
collecting money for statues to him, on the slightest excuse; and at last
they ceased paying it privately, as before, but would come to him on the
first day of the year and give, some more, some less. He, after adding as
much or more again, would return it, not only to the senators but to
all the rest. I have also heard the story that on one day of the year,
following some oracle or dream, he would assume the guise of a beggar and
would accept money from those who passed. This, whether trustworthy or
not, is a prevailing tradition.

That year he gave Julia in marriage to Tiberius, and his sister Octavia
dying, he caused her body to lie in state in the hero-shrine of Julius;
on this occasion, too, he had a curtain over the corpse. He himself
delivered there the funeral speech and Drusus, having changed his
senatorial dress, had a place on the platform, for the mourning was a
public affair. Her body was carried in procession by her sons-in-law: not
all the honors voted to her were accepted by Augustus.

At this same time the first priest of Jupiter since [-36-] Merula was
appointed; and the quaestors were ordered to pay careful heed to the
decrees passed from time to time, because the tribunes and the aediles,
who had previously been entrusted with this business, transacted it
through their assistants, and as a result some mistakes and confusion
took place.

It was voted, moreover, that the temple of Janus Geminus, which was open,
should be closed, on the assumption that wars had ceased.

[B.C. 10 (_a. u._ 744)]

It was not closed, however, for the Dacians crossing the Ister on the ice
took the crops of Pannonia as booty, and the Dalmatians revolted at the
imposition of taxes. Against the latter Tiberius was sent from Gaul,
whither he had gone in company with Augustus, and he restored order. The
nations of the Celtae, and especially the Chatti, were partly weakened
and partly subdued by Drusus; the tribe mentioned had gone to join the
Sugambri, having abandoned their own country, which the Romans had given
them to dwell in. The emperor delayed in Lugdunis, where he could keep a
sharp watch on affairs, as it was so near the Celtae. The victors returned
to Rome with Augustus, assumed whatever dignities had been voted them by
the senate, and performed such other duties as belonged to them.--These
events took place in the consulship of Iullus and Fabius Maximus.


[Footnote 1: Pliny (Natural History VI, 181) calls him _Publius_.]

[Footnote 2: Readings and punctuation from Dindorf.]

[Footnote 3: Augustus returned to Rome October twelfth, and the temple in
question was consecrated December fifteenth.]

[Footnote 4: Boissevain here amends to [Greek: 'epelpisas]]

[Footnote 5: In the matter of the spelling of this name the weight of
authority prefers _Licinus_. Dio's form is less correct.]

[Footnote 6: I. e., the _lacus Venetus_.]

[Footnote 7: This eminence with its villa appropriately bore the Greek
title _Pausilypon_ (Grief's Surcease), a compound word like our modern
names _Heartsease_, _Sans Souci_, etc. It is the modern "Hill of
Posilipo."]

[Footnote 8: English, _Twenty Men_; their regular title.]

[Footnote 9: Latin, _Viginti Sex Viri_.]

[Footnote 10: The words "certain honors" are supplied on the suggestion
of Boissevain. Boissee and others, who surmise that the text here
contains a lacuna]

[Footnote 11: I. e., at the time of the Feriae.]

[Footnote 12: The reading [Greek: agoranomos] is generally preferred here
to [Greek: asotunmos]]



DIO'S

ROMAN HISTORY

55

The following is contained in the Fifty-fifth of Dio's Rome:

How Drusus died (chapters 1, 2).

How the Precinct of Livia was consecrated (chapter 8)

How the Campus Agrippae was consecrated (chapter 8)

How the Diribitorium was consecrated (chapter 8).

How Tiberius retired to Rome (chapter 11).

How the Forum of Augustus was consecrated (chapter 12).

How the Temple of Mars therein was consecrated (chapter 12).

How Lucius Caesar and Gaius Caesar died (chapters 11, 12).

How Augustus adopted Tiberius (chapter 13).

How Livia urged Augustus to rule more mercifully (chapters 14-22).

About the legions and how men were appointed to manage the military fund
(chapters 23-25).

How the night-watchmen[1] were appointed (chapter 26).

How Tiberius fought against the Dalmatians and Pannonians (chapters
28-34).

Duration of time, 17 years, in which there were the following magistrates
here enumerated:

Nero Claudius Tib. F. Drusus, T. Quinctius T. F. Crispinus. (B.C. 9 = a.
u. 745.)

C. Marcius L. F. Censorinus, C. Asinius C. F. Gallus. (B.C. 8 = a. u.
746.)

Tib. Claudius Tib. F. Nero (II), Cn. Calpurnius Cn. F. Piso. (B.C. 7 = a.
u. 747.)

Decimus Laelius Decimi F. Balbus, C. Antistius C. F. Veter. (B.C. 6 = a.
u. 748.)

Augustus (XII), L. Cornelius P. F. Sulla. (B.C. 5 = a. u. 749.)

C. Calvisius C. F. Sabinus (II), L. Passienus Rufus (B.C. 4 = a. u. 750.)

L. Cornelius L. F. Lentulus, M. Valerius M. F. Messalla [or] Messalinus.
(B.C. 3 = a. u. 751.)

Augustus (XIII), M. Plautius M. F. Silvanus. (B.C. 2 = a. u. 752.)

Cossus Cornelius Cn. F. Lentulus, L. Calpurnius Cn. F. Piso (B.C. 1 = a.
u. 753.)

C. Caesar Augusti F., L. AEmilius L. F. Paulus. (A.D. 1 = a. u. 754.)

P. Vinicius [or Minucius] M. F., P. Alfenus [or Alfenius] P.F. Varus.
(A.D. 2 = a. u. 755.)

L. AElius L. F. Lamia, M. Servilius M.F. (A.D. 3 = a. u. 756.)

Sextus AElius Q. F. Catus, C. Sentius C.F. Saturninus. (A.D. 4 = a. u.
757.)

L. Valerius Potiti F. Messala Valesus, Cn. Cornelius L. F. Cinna Magnus.
(A.D. 5 = a. u. 758.)

M. AEmilius L.F. Lepidus, L Arruntius L.F. (A.D. 6 = a. u. 759)

Aul. Licinius Aul. F. Nerva Silianus, Q. Caecilius Q.F. Metellus Creticus.
(A.D. 7 = a. u. 760.)

M. Furius M. F. Camillus, Sex. Nonius L.F. Quintilianus. (A.D. 8 = a. u.
761.)


_(BOOK 55, BOISSEVAIN.)_

[B.C. 9 (_a. u._ 745)]

[-1-] The following year Drusus became consul with Titus Crispinus,
and omens occurred that were not favorable to him. Many buildings were
destroyed by storm and thunderbolts, among them many temples: even that
of Jupiter Capitolinus and the temple annexed to it were injured. He,
however, paid no attention to this and invaded the country of the Chatti,
advancing as far as Suebia, conquering the territory traversed not
without hardship and vanquishing the troops that assailed him not without
bloodshed. From there he marched to Cheruscis and crossing the Visurgis
proceeded as far as the Albis, pillaging the entire district. This Albis
rises in the Vandaliscan mountains and empties in a great flood into the
ocean this side of the Arctic Sea. Drusus undertook to cross it, but
failing in the attempt set up trophies and withdrew. For a woman taller
than mankind confronted him and said: "Whither are thou hastening,
insatiable Drusus? It is not fated that thou shalt see all this region.
Depart. For thee the end of labor and of life is already at hand." It is
strange to think that any such voice should have come to a person's ears
from the apparition, yet I can not discredit the tale, for he at once
retired. And as he was returning in haste he died on the way of some
disease, before he reached the Rhine. Proof of the story seems to me to
lie in the fact that at the time of his death wolves prowled and yelped
about the camp and two youths were seen riding through the middle of the
ramparts. A kind of lamentation in a woman's voice was also heard, and
there were shooting stars in the sky. These are the noteworthy points.
[-2-] Augustus, soon learning that he was sick (for he was not far off),
sent Tiberius to him with speed. The latter found him still breathing
and on his death carried his body to Rome, causing the centurions and
military tribunes to convey him over the first stage,--as far as the
winter quarters of the army,--and from there the foremost men of each
city. When the deceased was laid in state in the Forum a double funeral
oration was delivered. Tiberius eulogized him there and Augustus in the
Flaminian hippodrome. Since the latter had been abroad on a campaign it
was impious for him to do otherwise than perform the fitting rites in
honor of the exploits of Drusus at the very entrance of the pomerium. The
body was carried to the Campus Martius by the knights, both those who
belonged strictly to the equestrian order and those, as well, who were
of senatorial family.[2] Then, after being given to the flames, it was
deposited in the monument of Augustus. He and his children received the
title of Germanicus and honors in the way of both images and an arch,
besides obtaining a cenotaph close to the Rhine itself.

Tiberius, while Drusus was still alive, had overcome the Dalmatians and
Pannonians, who were again a little restless, had celebrated a triumph on
horseback, and had banqueted the people, a part on the Capitol and a
part in many other places. At this time also Livia and Julia together
entertained the women. Same festivities were being made ready for Drusus
The Feriae were to be held a second time on this account so that he might
celebrate his triumph on the same occasion, but his untimely death upset
the plans. As a consolation to Livia images were awarded her and she was
enrolled among the mothers of three children. For upon such men or women
as are not granted so many offspring by Heaven, or at least upon some of
them, a law emanating formerly from the senate but now from the emperor
bestows the dignities belonging to parents of three children. In this way
they are not subject to the reproaches for childlessness and may receive
all but a few of the prizes for fecundity. Not only men but gods enjoy
the privilege, to the end that, if any one dying leaves them anything,
they may take possession of it. These are the facts of the matter.

[-3-] Augustus ordered that the sittings of the senate should be held on
specified days. Previously there had been no real system about them, and
some members on that account were often late; therefore he appointed two
regular monthly councils, so that those whom the law summoned should be
under compulsion to attend; and in order that no other excuse for their
absence should be within their power he commanded that no court or other
meeting which required their attention should be held at that time. He
made provision with respect to the number necessary for ratifying decrees
under each separate category, to put it briefly; and he increased the
fines imposed upon those who without good excuse were not present at the
gatherings. Inasmuch as many such offences had generally gone unpunished
owing to the large number of those who had incurred penalties, he
commanded that if many should do this, they should draw lots, and every
fifth one to draw a lot should be held liable to punishment.--The names
of all the senators he had recorded on a white tablet and conspicuously
posted. From the beginning made by him this is now annually done. _His_
intention in doing it was to make it absolutely necessary for them to
come together. Sometimes, by some accident, not so many might assemble as
a special case demanded. This would be known, because except on such days
as the emperor himself might be present the number of those in attendance
was both at this time and later carefully ascertained, and with a great
degree of accuracy. Under these circumstances they would deliberate and
their decision would be recorded, but it was not final, was not ratified:
instead, _auctoritas_ was declared, in order that their _will_ might be
evident,--for such is the force of this word. To translate the term into
Greek by a single expression is not possible. This same custom prevailed
in case they ever assembled through haste in an irregular place, or on a
day that was not fitting, or without a legal summons, or if because
of the opposition of tribunes a decree could not be passed, but their
opinion was not to be concealed. Later, ratification was granted
according to ancestral precedent to the resolution in question, and the
latter obtained the name of _senatus consultum_. This method, strictly
observed for an extremely long period by the men of old time, has in a
already become null and void,--as also the prerogative of the praetors.
For the latter were indignant that they might bring no proposition before
the senate although they ranked above the tribunes in dignity and they
received from Augustus the right of doing so, but in the course of time
it was taken away from them again.

[-4-] These and other laws which he at this time enacted he inscribed on
white tablets and submitted to the senate before taking any final action
with regard to them; and he allowed the senators to read, each one, the
