"And where may Shoreditch be?"

"Whur be Zhoreditch?" gaped the workman, vacantly. "Whoy--whoy, zummers
over there a bit yon, zure"; and he waved his hand about in a way that
pointed to nowhere at all.

"When will he be back?" asked Nick, desperately.

"Be ba-ack?" drawled the workman, slowly taking up his saw again; "back
whur?--here? Whoy, a wun't pla-ay here no mo-ore avore next Martlemas."

Martinmas? That was almost mid-November. It was now but middle May.

Nick got up and went out at the wicket-gate. He was beginning to feel
sick and a little faint. The rush in the street made him dizzy, and the
sullen roar that came down on the wind from the town, mingled with the
tramping of feet, the splash of oars, the bumping of boats along the
wharves, and the shouts and cries of a thousand voices, stupefied him.

He was standing there motionless in the narrow way, as if dazed by a
heavy fall, when Gaston Carew came running up from the river-front, with
the bandy-legged man at his heels.




CHAPTER XXI


"THE CHILDREN OF PAUL'S"

An old gray rat came out of its hole, ran swiftly across the floor, and,
sitting up, crouched there, peering at Nick. He thought its bare, scaly
tail was not a pleasant thing to see; yet he looked at it, with his
elbows on his knees, and his chin in his hands.

He had been locked in for two days now. They had put in plenty of food,
and he had eaten it all; for if he starved to death he would certainly
never get home.

It was quite warm, and the boards had been taken from the window, so
that there was plenty of light. The window faced the north, and in the
night, wakened by some outcry in the street below, Nick had leaned his
log-pillow against the wainscot, and, climbing up, looked out into the
sky. It was clear, for a wonder, and the stars were very bright. The
moon, like a smoky golden platter, rose behind the eastern towers of the
town, and in the north hung the Great Wain pointing at the polar star.

Somewhere underneath those stars was Stratford. The throstles would be
singing in the orchard there now, when the sun was low and the cool
wind came up from the river with a little whispering in the lane. The
purple-gray doves, too, would be cooing softly in the elms over the
cottage gable. In fancy he heard the whistle of their wings as they
flew. But all the sound that came in over the roofs of London town was a
hollow murmur as from a kennel of surly hounds.

"Nick!--oh, Nick!"

Cicely Carew was calling at the door. The rat scurried off to its hole
in the wall.

"What there, Nick! Art thou within?" Cicely called again; but Nick made
no reply.

"Nick, _dear_ Nick, art crying?"

"No," said he; "I'm not."

There was a short silence.

"Nick, I say, wilt thou be good if I open the door?"

"No."

"Then I will open it anyway; thou durstn't be bad to me!"

The bolts thumped, and then the heavy door swung slowly back.

"Why, where art thou?"

He was sitting in the corner behind the door.

"Here," said he.

She came in, but he did not look up.

"Nick," she asked earnestly, "why wilt thou be so bad, and try to run
away from my father?"

"I hate thy father!" said he, and brought his fist down upon his knee.

"Hate him? Oh, Nick! Why?"

"If thou be asking whys," said Nick, bitterly, "why did he steal me away
from my mother?"

"Oh, surely, Nick, that cannot be true--no, no, it cannot be true. Thou
hast forgotten, or thou hast slept too hard and had bad dreams. My
father would not steal a pin. It was a nightmare. Doth thine head hurt
thee?" She came over and stroked his forehead with her cool hand. She
was a graceful child, and gentle in all her ways. "I am sorry thou dost
not feel well, Nick. But my father will come presently, and he will heal
thee soon. Don't cry any more."

"I'm not crying," said Nick, stoutly, though as he spoke a tear ran down
his cheek, and fell upon his hand.

"Then it is the roof leaks," she said, looking up as if she had not seen
his tear-blinded eyes. "But cheer up, Nick, and be a good boy--wilt thou
not? 'Tis dinner-time, and thy new clothes have come; and thou art to
come down now and try them on."

When Nick came out of the tiring-room and found the master-player come,
he knew not what to say or do. "Oh, brave, brave, brave!" cried Cicely,
and danced around him, clapping her hands. "Why, it is a very prince--a
king! Oh, Nick, thou art most beautiful to see!"

And Master Carew's own eyes sparkled; for truly it was a pleasant sight
to see a fair young lad like Nick in such attire.

There was a fine white shirt of Holland linen, and long hose of grayish
blue, with puffed and slashed trunks of velvet so blue as to be almost
black. The sleeveless jerkin was of the same dark color, trellised with
roses embroidered in silk, and loose from breast to broad lace collar so
that the waistcoat of dull gold silk beneath it might show. A cloak of
damask with a silver clasp, a buff-leather belt with a chubby purse hung
to it by a chain, tan-colored slippers, and a jaunty velvet cap with a
short white plume, completed the array. Everything, too, had been laid
down with perfume, so that from head to foot he smelt as sweet and clean
as a drift of rose-mallows.

"My soul!" cried Carew, stepping back and snapping his fingers with
delight. "Thou art the bravest skylark that ever broke a shell! Fine
feathers--fine bird--my soul, how ye do set each other off!" He took
Nick by the shoulders, twirled him around, and, standing off again,
stared at him like a man who has found two pound sterling in a
cast-off coat.

"I can na pay for them, sir," said Nick, slowly.

"There's nought to pay--it is a gift."

Nick hung his head, much troubled. What could he say; what could he
think? This man had stolen him from home,--ay, made him tremble for his
very life a dozen times,--and with his whole heart he knew he hated
him--yet here, a gift!

"Yes, Nick, it is a gift--and all because I love thee, lad."

"Love me?"

"Why, surely! Who could see thee without liking, or hear thy voice and
not love thee? Love thee, Nick? Why, on my word and honour, lad, I love
thee with all my heart."

"Thou hast chosen strange ways to show it, Master Carew," said Nick, and
looked straight up into the master player's eyes.

Carew turned upon his heel and ordered the dinner.

It was a good dinner: fat roast capon stuffed with spiced carrots;
asparagus, biscuit, barley-cakes, and honey; and to end with, a flaky
pie, and Spanish cordial sprinkled with burnt sugar. With such fare and
a keen appetite, a marvelous brand-new suit of clothes, and Cicely
chattering gaily by his side, Nick could not be sulky or doleful long.
He was soon laughing; and Carew's spirits seemed to rise with the boy's.

"Here, here!" he cried, as Nick was served the third time to the pie;
"art hollow to thy very toes? Why, thou'lt eat us out of house and
home--hey, Cicely? Marry come up, I think I'd best take Ned Alleyn's
five shillings for thine hire, after all! What! Five shillings? Set me
in earth and bowl me to death with boiled turnips!--do they think to
play bob-fool with me? Five shillings! A fico for their five
shillings--and this for them!" and he squeezed the end of his thumb
between his fingers. "Cicely, what dost think?--Phil Henslowe had the
face to match Jem Bristow with our Nick!"

"Why, daddy, Jem hath a face like a halibut!"

"And a voice like a husky crow. Why, Nick's mere shadow on the stage is
worth a ton of Jemmy Bristows. 'Twas casting pearls before swine, Nick,
to offer thee to Henslowe and Alleyn; but we've found a better trough
than theirs--hey, Cicely Goldenheart, haven't we? Thou art to be one of
Paul's boys."

"Paul who?"

Carew lay back in his chair and laughed. "Paul who? Why, Saint Paul,
Nick,--'tis Paul's Cathedral boys I mean. Marry, what dost say to that?"

"I'd like another barley-cake."

"You'd _what_?" cried the master-player, letting the front legs of his
chair come down on the floor with a thump.

"I'd like another barley-cake," said Nick, quietly, helping himself to
the honey.

"Upon my word, and on the remnant of mine honour!" ejaculated Carew.
"Tell a man his fortune's made, and he calls for barley-cakes! Why,
thou'dst say 'Pooh!' to a cannon-ball! My faith, boy, dost understand
what this doth mean?"

"Ay," said Nick; "that I be hungry."

"But, Nick, upon my soul, thou art to sing with the Children of Paul's;
to play with the cathedral company; to be a bright particular star in
the sweetest galaxy that ever shone in English sky! Dost take me yet?"

"Ay," said Nick, and sopped the honey with his cake.

Carew played with his glass uneasily, and tapped his heel upon the
floor. "And is that all thou hast to say--hast turned oyster? There's no
R in May--nobody will eat thee! Come, don't make a mouth as though the
honey of the world were all turned gall upon thy tongue. 'Tis the
flood-tide of thy fortune, boy! Thou art to sing before the school
to-morrow, so that Master Nathaniel Gyles may take thy range and worth.
Now, truly, thou wilt do thy very best?"

The bandy-legged man had brought water in a ewer, and poured some in a
basin for Nick to wash his hands. There was a green ribbon in his ear,
and the towel hung across his arm. Nick wiped his hands in silence.

"Come," said Master Carew, with an ugly sharpness in his voice, "thou'lt
sing thy very best?"

"There's nothing else to do," replied Nick, doggedly.




CHAPTER XXII


THE SKYLARK'S SONG

Master Nathaniel Gyles, Precentor of St. Paul's, had pipe-stem legs, and
a face like an old parchment put in a box to keep. His sandy hair was
thin and straggling, and his fine cloth hose wrinkled around his
shrunken shanks; but his eye was sharp, and he wore about his neck a
broad gold chain that marked him as no common man.

For Master Nathaniel Gyles was head of the Cathedral schools of acting
and of music, and he stood upon his dignity.

"My duty is laid down," said he, "in most specific terms, sir,--_lex
cathedralis_,--that is to say, by the laws of the cathedral; and has
been, sir, since the reign of Richard the Third. _Primus Magister
Scholarum, Custos Morum, Quartus Custos Rotulorum_,--so the title
stands, sir; and I know my place."

He pushed Nick into the anteroom, and turned to Carew with an irritated
air.

"I likewise know, sir, what is what. In plain words, Master Gaston
Carew, ye have grossly misrepresented this boy to me, to the waste of
much good time. Why, sir, he does not dance a step, and cannot act
at all."

"Soft, Master Gyles--be not so fast!" said Carew, haughtily, drawing
himself up, with his hand on his poniard; "dost mean to tell me that I
have lied to thee? Marry, sir, thy tongue will run thee into a blind
alley! I told thee that the boy could sing, but not that he could act
or dance."

"Pouf, sir,--words! I know my place: one peg below the dean, sir,
nothing less: '_Magister, et cetera'_--'tis so set down. And I tell
thee, sir, he has no training, not a bit; can't tell a pricksong from a
bottle of hay; doesn't know a canon from a crocodile, or a fugue from a
hole in the ground!"

"Oh, fol-de-riddle de fol-de-rol! What has that to do with it? I tell
thee, sir, the boy can sing."

"And, sir, I say I know my place. Music does not grow like weeds."

"And fa-la-las don't make a voice."

"What! How? Wilt thou teach me?" The master's voice rose angrily. "Teach
me, who learned descant and counterpoint in the Gallo-Belgic schools,
sir; the best in all the world! Thou, who knowest not a staccato from a
stick of liquorice!"

Carew shrugged his shoulders impatiently. "Come, Master Gyles, this is
fool play. I told thee that the boy could sing, and thou hast not yet
heard him try. Thou knowest right well I am no such simple gull as to
mistake a jay for a nightingale; and I tell thee, sir, upon my word,
and on the remnant of mine honour, he has the voice that thou dost need
if thou wouldst win the favor of the Queen. He has the voice, and thou
the thingumbobs to make the most of it. Don't be a fool, now; hear him
sing. That's all I ask. Just hear him once. Thou'lt pawn thine ears to
hear him twice."

The music-school stood within the old cathedral grounds. Through the
windows came up distantly the murmur of the throng in Paul's Yard. It
was mid-afternoon, quite warm; blundering flies buzzed up and down the
lozenged panes, and through the dark hall crept the humming sound of
childish voices reciting eagerly, with now and then a sharp, small cry
as some one faltered in his lines and had his fingers rapped. Somewhere
else there were boyish voices running scales, now up, now down, without
a stop, and other voices singing harmonies, two parts and three
together, here and there a little flat from weariness.

The stairs were very dark, Nick thought, as they went up to another
floor; but the long hall they came into there was quite bright with
the sun.

At one end was a little stage, like the one at the Rose play-house, with
a small gallery for musicians above it; but everything here was painted
white and gold, and was most scrupulously clean. The rush-strewn floor
was filled with oaken benches, and there were paintings hanging upon the
wall, portraits of old head-masters and precentors. Some of them were so
dark with time that Nick wondered if they had been blackamoors.

Master Gyles closed the great door and pulled a cord that hung by the
stage. A bell jangled faintly somewhere in the wall. Nick heard the
muffled voices hush, and then a shuffling tramp of slippered feet came
up the outer stair.

"Pouf!" said the precentor, crustily. "_Tempus fugit_--that is to say,
we have no time to waste. So, marry, boy, _venite, exultemus_--in other
words, if thou canst sing, be up and at it. Come, _cantate_--sing, I bid
thee, and that instanter--if thou canst sing at all."

The under-masters and monitors were pushing the boys into their seats.
Carew pointed to the stage. "Thou'lt do thy level best!" he said in a
low, hard tone, and something clashed beneath his cloak like steel
on steel.

Nick went up the steps behind the screen. It seemed cold in the room; he
had not noticed it before. Yet there were sweat-drops upon his forehead.
He felt as if he were a jackanapes he had seen once at the Stratford
fair, which wore a crimson jerkin and a cap. The man who had the
jackanapes played upon a pipe and a tabor; and when he said, "Dance!"
the jackanapes danced, for it was sorely afraid of the man. Yet when
Nick looked around and did not see the master-player anywhere in the
hall, he felt exceedingly lonely all at once without him, though he both
feared and hated him.

There still was a shuffling of feet and a low talking; but soon it
became very quiet, and they all seemed to be waiting for him to begin.
He did not care, but supposed he might as well: what else could he do?

There was a clock somewhere ticking quickly with its sharp, metallic
ring. As he listened, lonely, his heart cried out for home. In his
fancy the wind seemed rippling over the Avon, and the elm-leaves rustled
like rain upon the roof above his bed. There were red and white
wild-roses in the hedge, and in the air a smell of clover and of
new-mown hay. The mowers would be working in the clover in the
moonlight. He could almost see the sweep of the shining scythes, and
hear the chink-a-chank, chink-a-chank of the whetstone on the long,
curving blades. Chink-a-chank, chink-a-chank--'twas but the clock, and
he in London town.

Carew, sitting there behind the carven prompter's-screen, put down his
head between his hands and listened. There were murmurings a little
while, then silence. Would the boy never begin? He pressed his knuckles
into his temples and waited. Bow Bells rang out the hour; but the room
was as still as a deep sleep. Would the boy never begin?

The precentor sniffed. It was a contemptuous, incredulous sniff. Carew
looked up--his lips white, a fierce red spot in each cheek. He was
talking to himself. "By the whistle of the Lord High Admiral!" he
said--but there he stopped and held his breath. Nick was singing.

Only the old madrigal, with its half-forgotten words that other
generations sang before they fell asleep. How queer it sounded there! It
was a very simple tune, too; yet, as he sang, the old precentor started
from his chair and pressed his wrinkled hands together against his
breast. He quite forgot the sneer upon his face, and it went fading out
like breath from a frosty pane.

He had twelve boys who could sing a hundred songs at sight from
unfamiliar notes; who kept the beat and marked the time as if their
throats were pendulums; could syncopate and floriate as readily as
breathe. And this was only a common country song.

But--"That voice, that voice!" he panted to himself: for old Nat Gyles
was music-mad; melody to him was like the very breath of life. And the
boy's high, young voice, soft as a flute and silver clear, throbbed in
the air as if his very heart were singing out of his body in the sound.
And then, like the skylark rising, up, up it went, and up, up, up, till
the older choristers held their breath and feared that the vibrant tone
would break, so slender, film-like was the trembling thread of the boy's
wild skylark song. But no; it trembled there, high, sweet, and clear, a
moment in the air; and then came running, rippling, floating down, as
though some one had set a song on fire in the sky, and dropped it
quivering and bright into a shadow world. Then suddenly it was gone, and
the long hall was still.

The old precentor stepped beyond the screen.

Gaston Carew's face was in his hands, and his shoulders shook
convulsively. "I'll leave thee go, lad,_--ma foi_, I'll leave thee go.
But, nay, I dare not leave thee go!"

Some one came and tapped him on the shoulder. It was the sub-precentor.
"Master Gyles would speak with thee, sir," said he, in a low tone, as if
half afraid of the sound of his own voice in the quiet that was in
the hall.

Carew drew his hand hastily over his face, as if to take the old one off
and put a new one on, then arose and followed the man.

[Illustration: "'THAT VOICE, THAT VOICE,' NAT GYLES PANTED TO
HIMSELF."]

The old precentor stood with his hands still clasped against his
breast. "_Mirabile_!" he was saying with bated breath. "It is
impossible, and I have dreamed! Yet _credo_--I believe--_quia
impossibile est_--because it is impossible. Tell me, Carew, do I wake or
dream--or, stay, was it a soul I heard? Ay, Carew, 'twas a soul: the
lad's own white, young soul. My faith, I said he was of no account!
_Satis verborum_--say no more. _Humanum est errare_--I am a poor old
fool; and there's a sour bug flown in mine eye that makes it water so!"
He wiped his eyes, for the tears were running down his cheeks.

"Thou'lt take him, then?" asked Carew.

"Take him?" cried the old precentor, catching the master-player by the
hand. "Marry, that will I; a voice like that grows not on every bush.
Take him? Pouf! I know my place--he shall be entered on the rolls
at once."

"Good!" said Carew. "I shall have him learn to dance, and teach him how
to act myself. He stays with me, ye understand; thy school fare is
miserly. I'll dress him, too; for these students' robes are shabby
stuff. But for the rest--"

"Trust me," said Master Gyles; "he shall be the first singer of them
all. He shall be taught--but who can teach the lark its song, and not do
horrid murder on it? Faith, Carew, I'll teach the lad myself; ay, all I
know. I studied in the best schools in the world."

"And, hark 'e, Master Gyles," said Carew, sternly all at once; "thou'lt
come no royal placard and seizure on me--ye have sworn. The boy is mine
to have and to hold with all that he earns, in spite of thy
prerogatives."

For the kings of old had given the masters of this school the right to
take for St. Paul's choir whatever voices pleased them, wherever they
might be found, by force if not by favor, barring only the royal singers
at Windsor; and when men have such privileges it is best to be wary how
one puts temptation in their way.

"Thou hadst mine oath before I even saw the boy," said the precentor,
haughtily. "Dost think me perjured--_Primus Magister Scholarum, Custos
