becoming excited by what the orator uttered, Sir Jocelyn, apprehensive
that mischief might ensue, thought it right to interfere, and
accordingly, leaning forward from the casement, he made himself known
to the group below.

On seeing him, and learning who he was, the 'prentices began to shout
and declaim vehemently against the Spanish ambassador; and instigated by
Dick Taverner, who refused to listen either to the entreaties or
commands of the young knight, the whole party seized their cudgels, and
dispersing themselves in different directions, vociferated as they
went--"Clubs! clubs!"

It was now as vain to arrest them as it would have been to stop the
course of a conflagration; and Sir Jocelyn was deploring the damage
which must necessarily be done to his cause by these injudicious
friends, when Dick Taverner, with a look of exultation, and brandishing
his cudgel, burst into the room, crying--"We have heard all from Madame
Bonaventure. We have heard of De Gondomar's perfidy, and his Majesty's
injustice. We will set you right. The bold London 'prentices have taken
your cause in hand, and will avenge you. They will hang the treacherous
Spaniard, and burn his house."

"Hark ye, my good friend, Dick Taverner," said Sir Jocelyn, "this must
not be. Because I have been unjustly treated, and may perchance find it
difficult, if not impossible, to obtain redress, it does not follow that
you and your fellow 'prentices are to violate the law. These riotous
proceedings will prejudice my cause rather than aid it; and if you have
any regard for me you will use your influence with your comrades to
check them ere mischief ensue."

"Impossible!" exclaimed Dick. "The matter has gone too far to be stopped
now. You might as well attempt to turn back a mill-dam that has burst
its bounds, as the headstrong London 'prentices when they have taken up
their cudgels. Go through with the business they will. This is not the
only quarrel we have with De Gondomar. We hate him for his insolence and
arrogance, which have been often displayed towards us; We hate him
because he is the sworn enemy of our religion, and would subvert it if
he could. As regards myself, I have my own particular reasons for hating
him. Do not you meddle with the affair, but leave its arrangement to
us."

"But I _must_ interfere," cried Sir Jocelyn; "if you act thus, in spite
of all my remonstrances. I must regard you in the light of enemies
rather than friends, and shall lend my help to quell the disturbance you
will occasion. Be ruled by me, good Dickon, and desist from it. Call in
your comrades, who are raging about like savage dogs broken loose."

"If they be dogs," rejoined Dick, with a laugh, "the Spanish ambassador
is likely enough to become acquainted with their teeth. But I might
whistle loudly enough to them before the staunch hounds would come back
to me; and, in good sooth, I have no inclination to obey your commands
in his instance, Sir Jocelyn."

So saying, and fearing he might be detained altogether if he waited
longer, he darted out of the room, and presently afterwards was heard
shouting along the wharf with the loudest of his riotous companions--"No
Papists! No Spanish spies! Clubs!--clubs!"

Sir Jocelyn saw that a storm was roused which it would be very difficult
to allay; but an effort must be made to do so, even if he were compelled
to act against his friends; and he was about to follow the apprentice
into the street, when he was prevented by the sudden entrance of a tall
personage, wrapped in a black cloak, and masked, whom he at once
recognised as the individual who had given him the token to De Gondomar.

"I am glad to have found you, Sir Jocelyn," said this personage. "I have
been on the look-out for you to give you a warning. Avoid any place you
have been in the habit of frequenting; and, above all, go not near
Aveline's dwelling. The officers of the Star-Chamber are on the watch
for you; and if found, your arrest is certain."

"I can place little reliance on aught you tell me, Sir," rejoined Sir
Jocelyn, "after the trick you played me in causing me to deliver that
ring to the Conde de Gondomar. Nothing you can say shall hinder me from
going forth as I am accustomed to do; and it is my purpose to proceed
ere long to the dwelling you specially caution me to avoid."

"You will repent your rashness, young Sir," said the other; "but I pray
you not to go forth till you have heard certain disclosures which I have
to make to you, and which I am well assured will induce you to alter
your opinion of me."

"I can put no faith in the statements of a hireling, base enough to play
the spy for an enemy of his country," rejoined Sir Jocelyn, scornfully.
"Stand aside, Sir. Your employer, De Gondomar, is in danger from these
hot-headed apprentices; and if you owe him any gratitude for past
favours, you may find occasion for its display now."

"What! are you about to take part with your enemy and against your
friends? These apprentices are about to redress your wrongs--in a
lawless manner it is true--but the circumstances justify their conduct."

"No circumstances can justify outrage, and violation of the law," said
Sir Jocelyn; "and if injury be attempted against De Gondomar, I must
defend him."

"This is mere madness," cried the other. "Stay and hear what I have to
say to you. It imports you much to know it."

"Not now," replied Sir Jocelyn, pushing past him. "On some other
occasion."

"You are throwing life and liberty away, Sir Jocelyn, and to no
purpose," cried the other. "He heeds me not," he added, in a tone of
deep disappointment. "Imprudent that he is! he will thwart all the plans
I have formed for his benefit, and at the very moment they have arrived
at maturity. I must follow and protect him."

And he too rushed down the stairs, and made all the haste he could
across the Vintry wharf after Sir Jocelyn, who was hurrying up a narrow
thoroughfare communicating with Thames Street.

Here a numerous body of 'prentices were already collected, holding a
consultation as to their plan of attack. After listening to a brief but
stirring harangue from Dick Taverner, who got upon a horse-block for the
purpose of addressing them, and recommended them to proceed to Ely
House, in Holborn, the residence of the offending Ambassador, and there
await his return from Whitehall; they approved of his proposal, and
unanimously electing Dick as their leader, set forth on their
expedition, gathering strength as they went along.

By the time they reached Blackfriars they numbered many hundreds. Little
or no interruption was offered them on their route; and the slight
hindrance they encountered from a detachment of the city-watch was
speedily overborne. Skirting Bridewell, they traversed Shoe Lane, and
ascending Holborn Hill, found themselves in the vicinity of Ely House,
where they came to a halt, and arranged their forces.




CHAPTER XIX.

A Noble Revenge.


Nothing could be pleasanter than the situation of the Spanish
ambassador's residence, surrounded as it was by noble gardens; but its
beauties seemed now likely to be devastated by the blind fury of the
apprentices. Much mischief would indeed have been done in a very short
time if it had not been for their leader. He authoritatively commanded
them to refrain from the work of demolition till they had settled
accounts with the ambassador himself, who might be expected each moment,
as they had ascertained that he was on his way home from the palace. The
information they had received proved to be correct; and ere many minutes
elapsed, a magnificent litter, borne by eight stout varlets, and
attended by several gentlemen and pages, in the well-known liveries of
De Gondomar, was seen to pass through Holborn Bars and advance towards
them.

Very soon, however, the bearers of the litter halted, surprised and
alarmed at the sight of the crowd investing Ely House; but De Gondomar,
who had no apprehension, commanded them to proceed, and they reluctantly
obeyed. The 'prentices allowed the litter to come on till they could
surround it, when they set up a loud shout, making it evident that
mischief was intended.

On this the gentlemen and pages in attendance upon the ambassador drew
their swords and put themselves into a posture of defence, endeavouring
to keep off the crowd. But their resistance was of little avail. The
'prentices' clubs quickly shivered their weapons, and drove them back.

When he became aware of the jeopardy in which he stood, De Gondomar,
anxious to gain time, in the hope that assistance might arrive, demanded
of the leader of the furious-looking crew who had drawn aside the
curtains of his litter, and ordered him in insolent tones to come forth,
why they molested him. The individual appealed to replied that, having
heard of his infamous usage of Sir Jocelyn Mounchensey, and of the false
accusation he had brought against him to the King, they were determined
to inflict upon his Excellency the punishment due to public and
notorious slanderers.

"And by what right do you constitute yourselves my judges?" cried De
Gondomar. "Take heed what you do--you may bring yourselves within reach
of a halter."

"You hear what he says, brother 'prentices?" cried Dick Taverner. "He
threatens to hang us, and no doubt if he could carry out his schemes,
and bring back the Pope's authority, he would burn us in Smithfield, as
they did the holy martyrs in Mary's days. He has charged a true and
loyal subject of his Majesty with being a spy. In return we tell _him_
he is the worst of spies--a spy employed by the Pope; and we will teach
him the danger of his employment."

"Hands off, base varlets!" exclaimed De Gondomar, endeavouring to shake
himself free from the rude grasp imposed upon him.

But, in spite of his resistance, he was dragged from the litter, while a
shower of blows from the 'prentices cudgels fell upon his shoulders; and
it is probable he would have experienced much severer treatment, if
indeed he had escaped with life, if at this moment Sir Jocelyn
Mounchensey, sword in hand and followed by Clement Lanyere, had not
burst through the throng.

"Ha! as I suspected," cried De Gondomar. "You, Mounchensey, are the
author and instigator of this outrage, and are come to see that your
tools do their work properly."

"It is false," cried Dick Taverner. "Your Excellency judges of others by
yourself. Sir Jocelyn would have checked us if he could."

"I cannot be expected to believe such an assertion as this," cried De
Gondomar incredulously.

"Let my actions speak for me," cried Mounchensey. "Friends," he called
out, "it is undoubtedly true that I have good ground of complaint
against the Conde de Gondomar--that he has deeply injured me--and that I
will compel him to make me reparation in due season--but I cannot permit
outrage to be offered him; and if aught further be attempted, my arm
will be raised in his defence."

"How! can this be possible!" exclaimed De Gondomar in surprise.

"Why, we are fighting Sir Jocelyn's battles, and he turns round upon
us!" cried a burly 'prentice, while loud murmurs arose from the others,
and the cudgels were again brandished menacingly.

"Leave him to us, Sir Jocelyn," said Dick Taverner.

"Ay, he had better not interfere, of he will come in for his share of
the blows," roared several voices.

"I care not what befals me," shouted Mounchensey. "You shall not injure
a hair of his Excellency's head while I stand by."

And as he spoke he warded off several blows aimed at the ambassador.

"I am with you, Sir Jocelyn," said Clement Lanyere, clearing a space
around them with his long rapier, but avoiding, so far as possible,
doing injury to the 'prentices.

At this critical juncture, and when it seemed likely that, owing to his
chivalrous interference, Sir Jocelyn would share the ambassador's fate,
he being fairly resolved, as he showed, to defend him with his life, a
cry was raised that a body of the royal guards were approaching; and as
the trampling of horse, accompanied by the clatter of swords, left no
doubt of the fact, and as, moreover, the bold 'prentices felt no
disposition to encounter regular soldiery, they instantly abandoned
their prey and took to their beels, the chief part of them leaping the
hedge which then grew along the north side of Holborn, and scouring off
through the fields in every direction. Some half dozen were made
prisoners by the guard; and amongst these, we regret to state, was the
leader of the riotous assembly, Dick Taverner.

"Thou art likely to make acquaintance with the pillory and the cart's
tail, if not with the hangman, friend," said the soldier who secured
him, with a laugh.

"So I begin to fear," replied Dick. "Alack! and well-a-day! what will
become of Gillian!"

"An that be thy mistress's name, friend, you should have thought of her
before you engaged in this disturbance. You are likely now to part
company with her for ever."

While Dick lamented the predicament in which he had placed himself, the
Conde de Gondomar, freed from all apprehension, turned towards his
deliverer, and proffering him his hand, said--"You have nobly revenged
yourself, Sir Jocelyn. I trust we may be friends once more. I will make
you ample reparation for the wrong I have done you."

But the young knight, folding his arms upon his breast, sternly
replied--"When reparation is made, Count, I may accept your hand, but
not till then."

"At least enter my house," urged the ambassador, "where you will be
protected from arrest."

"Do not hesitate, Sir Jocelyn," subjoined Lanyere. "You are in great
peril."

But the young knight haughtily refused.

"I will not owe an asylum to you, Count," he said, "till my name be
cleared from reproach." And, with a proud salutation, he departed.

The Spanish ambassador shrugged his shoulders, and looked after him with
mingled admiration and contempt. He then turned to the promoter, and
said, "Come in with me, Lanyere. I have somewhat to say to you."

"I must pray your Excellency to excuse me just now," replied the other.
"I have business on hand."

And bowing with nearly as much haughtiness as Sir Jocelyn, he followed
in the course taken by the young knight.




CHAPTER XX.

A Place of Refuge.


After quitting De Gondomar, as before related, Sir Jocelyn hurried along
Holborn with the intention of proceeding to Aveline's cottage, which was
at no great distance from Ely House, though in a secluded situation,
withdrawn from the road; and he was just about to strike into the narrow
lane leading to it, when he was arrested by the voice of Clement
Lanyere, who had followed him, unobserved.

"Stay, Sir Jocelyn, I beg of you," cried the promoter, coming quickly up
to him; "you are rushing on certain destruction. You must not go nigh
that cottage to-day; no, nor for several days to come. Foes are lying in
ambush round it; and the only spectacle you will afford her you love
will be that of your arrest."

There was an earnestness in the speaker's manner that could not fail to
carry conviction of his sincerity to the breast of his hearer.

"By my soul, I speak the truth," said Lanyere, perceiving the impression
he had made, "as you will find if you go many steps further. Place
yourself in my hands, and I will save you."

"What motive can you have for acting thus?" demanded Sir Jocelyn. "What
interest do you take in me?"

"Do not question me now: you shall have full explanation hereafter. Be
satisfied I am a friend,--perchance your best friend. Come with me, and
I will take you to a place of safety."

"But what is to happen to Aveline?" cried the young knight, in deep
anxiety.

"I will endeavour to watch over her," replied the promoter; "and I trust
no harm will befall her. At all events, you will deprive yourself of the
power of rendering her any protection, if you are rash enough to go
forward now."

Struck by the force of these remarks, our young knight felt he had no
alternative but to submit to circumstances, and he accordingly agreed to
accept the aid proffered him by his mysterious friend. But it was not
without feelings of intense anguish that he turned away from the path
leading to the little secluded cottage containing all he held dear, and
followed his conductor, who seemed resolved to allow him no time for
further hesitation, but proceeding at a rapid pace towards the west till
he reached Broad Saint Giles's--then a rural village--and entered a
small tavern, bearing the sign of "The Rose and Crown," the landlord of
which appeared to have an understanding with the promoter, for at a sign
from him, he immediately ushered his guests into a chamber up-stairs,
and without saying a word, left them alone together.

"Here you will be secure and undisturbed," said Lanyere; "and all your
wants will be cared for by my trusty ally, Barnabas Boteler; but, for
your own sake, you must consent to remain a close prisoner, till I bring
you word that you may go forth with safety. I must now leave you, having
much to do, and must defer the explanations I design to give you to a
more convenient season. Be not uneasy if you should not see me for a few
days, as circumstances may prevent my coming to you. When I next appear,
I trust it may be to bring you good tidings. Till then, farewell."

And without waiting for any reply from Sir Jocelyn, he hastily departed.

Left alone, our young knight did the best he could to reconcile himself
to the strange situation in which he was placed. He was naturally full
of anxiety, both on his own account, and on that of Aveline; yet, on
calm reflection, he felt satisfied he had acted for the best, and that,
in accepting the protection of the mysterious individual who seemed bent
upon directing his fortunes, he had followed the dictates of prudence.
Barnabas Boteler attended him in person, and suffered no one else to
come near him; but though the worthy host seemed anxious to anticipate
his wants in every particular, his manner was reserved, and, in Sir
Jocelyn's opinion, he had something of the look of a jailor, and this
notion was strengthened when he found himself locked in his room.
Probably this was only done as a precautionary measure by the host; and
as the window was at no great height from the ground, and he could
descend from it when he chose, he gave himself no great concern about
the matter.

In this way three days passed by without anything occurring to break the
monotony of his wearisome confinement,--not even a visit from Clement
Lanyere. To Sir Jocelyn's inquiries concerning him, the host professed
utter inability to give a precise answer, but said that he might arrive
at any moment. As he did not appear, however, on the fourth day, Sir
Jocelyn's patience got quite worn out, and his uneasiness respecting
Aveline having become insupportable, he determined, at all hazards, on
visiting her cottage. Without acquainting the host with his intention,
or asking to have the door unfastened, he opened the window which looked
into a garden at the back of the house, and sprang from it. His furtive
departure did not appear to be noticed, and he soon gained the road, and
took the direction of Aveline's dwelling.




CHAPTER XXI.

The Arrest.


