within her breast. And often through her lovely lips it strove for
utterance; but no sound came forth; till at last she spoke with guileful
words; for the bold Loves were pressing her hard:

"Chalciope, my heart is all trembling for thy sons, lest my father
forthwith destroy them together with the strangers. Slumbering just now
in a short-lived sleep such a ghastly dream did I see--may some god
forbid its fulfilment and never mayst thou win for thyself bitter care
on thy sons' account."

She spake, making trial of her sister to see if she first would entreat
help for her sons. And utterly unbearable grief surged over Chalciope's
soul for fear at what she heard; and then she replied: "Yea, I myself
too have come to thee in eager furtherance of this purpose, if thou
wouldst haply devise with me and prepare some help. But swear by Earth
and Heaven that thou wilt keep secret in thy heart what I shall tell
thee, and be fellow-worker with me. I implore thee by the blessed gods,
by thyself and by thy parents, not to see them destroyed by an evil doom
piteously; or else may I die with my dear sons and come back hereafter
from Hades an avenging Fury to haunt thee."

Thus she spake, and straightway a torrent of tears gushed forth, and low
down she clasped her sister's knees with both hands and let her head
sink on to her breast. Then they both made piteous lamentation over each
other, and through the halls rose the faint sound of women weeping in
anguish. Medea, sore troubled, first addressed her sister:

"God help thee, what healing can I bring thee for what thou speakest of,
horrible curses and Furies? Would that it were firmly in my power to
save thy sons! Be witness that mighty oath of the Colchians by which
thou urgest me to swear, the great Heaven, and Earth beneath, mother of
the gods, that as far as strength lies in me, never shalt thou fail of
help, if only thy prayers can be accomplished."

She spake, and Chalciope thus replied: "Couldst thou not then, for the
stranger--who himself craves thy aid--devise some trick or some wise
thought to win the contest, for the sake of my sons? And from him has
come Argus urging me to try to win thy help; I left him in the palace
meantime while I came hither."

Thus she spake, and Medea's heart bounded with joy within her, and at
once her fair cheeks flushed, and a mist swam before her melting eyes,
and she spake as follows: "Chalciope, as is dear and delightful to thee
and thy sons, even so will I do. Never may the dawn appear again to my
eyes, never mayst thou see me living any longer, if I should take
thought for anything before thy life or thy sons' lives, for they are my
brothers, my dear kinsmen and youthful companions. So do I declare
myself to be thy sister, and thy daughter too, for thou didst lift me to
thy breast when an infant equally with them, as I ever heard from my
mother in past days. But go, bury my kindness in silence, so that I may
carry out my promise unknown to my parents; and at dawn I will bring to
Hecate's temple charms to cast a spell upon the bulls."

Thus Chalciope went back from the chamber, and made known to her sons
the help given by her sister. And again did shame and hateful fear seize
Medea thus left alone, that she should devise such deeds for a man in
her father's despite.

Then did night draw darkness over the earth; and on the sea sailors from
their ships looked towards the Bear and the stars of Orion; and now the
wayfarer and the warder longed for sleep, and the pall of slumber
wrapped round the mother whose children were dead; nor was there any
more the barking of dogs through the city, nor sound of men's voices;
but silence held the blackening gloom. But not indeed upon Medea came
sweet sleep. For in her love for Aeson's son many cares kept her
wakeful, and she dreaded the mighty strength of the bulls, beneath whose
fury he was like to perish by an unseemly fate in the field of Ares. And
fast did her heart throb within her breast, as a sunbeam quivers upon
the walls of a house when flung up from water, which is just poured
forth in a caldron or a pail may be; and hither and thither on the swift
eddy does it dart and dance along; even so the maiden's heart quivered
in her breast. And the tear of pity flowed from her eyes, and ever
within anguish tortured her, a smouldering fire through her frame, and
about her fine nerves and deep down beneath the nape of the neck where
the pain enters keenest, whenever the unwearied Loves direct against the
heart their shafts of agony. And she thought now that she would give him
the charms to cast a spell on the bulls, now that she would not, and
that she herself would perish; and again that she would not perish and
would not give the charms, but just as she was would endure her fate in
silence. Then sitting down she wavered in mind and said:

"Poor wretch, must I toss hither and thither in woe? On every side my
heart is in despair; nor is there any help for my pain; but it burneth
ever thus. Would that I had been slain by the swift shafts of Artemis
before I had set eyes on him, before Chalciope's sons reached the
Achaean land. Some god or some Fury brought them hither for our grief, a
cause of many tears. Let him perish in the contest if it be his lot to
die in the field. For how could I prepare the charms without my parents'
knowledge? What story can I tell them? What trick, what cunning device
for aid can I find? If I see him alone, apart from his comrades, shall I
greet him? Ill-starred that I am! I cannot hope that I should rest from
my sorrows even though he perished; then will evil come to me when he is
bereft of life. Perish all shame, perish all glory; may he, saved by my
effort, go scatheless wherever his heart desires. But as for me, on the
day when he bides the contest in triumph, may I die either straining my
neck in the noose from the roof-tree or tasting drugs destructive of
life. But even so, when I am dead, they will fling out taunts against
me; and every city far away will ring with my doom, and the Colchian
women, tossing my name on their lips hither and thither, will revile me
with unseemly mocking--the maid who cared so much for a stranger that
she died, the maid who disgraced her home and her parents, yielding to a
mad passion. And what disgrace will not be mine? Alas for my
infatuation! Far better would it be for me to forsake life this very
night in my chamber by some mysterious fate, escaping all slanderous
reproach, before I complete such nameless dishonour."

She spake, and brought a casket wherein lay many drugs, some for
healing, others for killing, and placing it upon her knees she wept. And
she drenched her bosom with ceaseless tears, which flowed in torrents as
she sat, bitterly bewailing her own fate. And she longed to choose a
murderous drug to taste it, and now she was loosening the bands of the
casket eager to take it forth, unhappy maid! But suddenly a deadly fear
of hateful Hades came upon her heart. And long she held back in
speechless horror, and all around her thronged visions of the pleasing
cares of life. She thought of all the delightful things that are among
the living, she thought of her joyous playmates, as a maiden will; and
the sun grew sweeter than ever to behold, seeing that in truth her soul
yearned for all. And she put the casket again from off her knees, all
changed by the prompting of Hera, and no more did she waver in purpose;
but longed for the rising dawn to appear quickly, that she might give
him the charms to work the spell as she had promised, and meet him face
to face. And often did she loosen the bolts of her door, to watch for
the faint gleam: and welcome to her did the dayspring shed its light,
and folk began to stir throughout the city.

Then Argus bade his brothers remain there to learn the maiden's mind and
plans, but himself turned back and went to the ship.

Now soon as ever the maiden saw the light of dawn, with her hands she
gathered up her golden tresses which were floating round her shoulders
in careless disarray, and bathed her tear-stained cheeks, and made her
skin shine with ointment sweet as nectar; and she donned a beautiful
robe, fitted with well-bent clasps, and above on her head, divinely
fair, she threw a veil gleaming like silver. And there, moving to and
fro in the palace, she trod the ground forgetful of the heaven-sent woes
thronging round her and of others that were destined to follow. And she
called to her maids. Twelve they were, who lay during the night in the
vestibule of her fragrant chamber, young as herself, not yet sharing the
bridal couch, and she bade them hastily yoke the mules to the chariot to
bear her to the beauteous shrine of Hecate. Thereupon the handmaids were
making ready the chariot; and Medea meanwhile took from the hollow
casket a charm which men say is called the charm of Prometheus. If a man
should anoint his body therewithal, having first appeased the Maiden,
the only-begotten, with sacrifice by night, surely that man could not be
wounded by the stroke of bronze nor would he flinch from blazing fire;
but for that day he would prove superior both in prowess and in might.
It shot up first-born when the ravening eagle on the rugged flanks of
Caucasus let drip to the earth the blood-like ichor[1] of tortured
Prometheus. And its flower appeared a cubit above ground in colour like
the Corycian crocus, rising on twin stalks; but in the earth the root
was like newly-cut flesh. The dark juice of it, like the sap of a
mountain-oak, she had gathered in a Caspian shell to make the charm
withal, when she had first bathed in seven ever-flowing streams, and had
called seven times on Brimo, nurse of youth, night-wandering Brimo, of
the underworld, queen among the dead,--in the gloom of night, clad in
dusky garments. And beneath, the dark earth shook and bellowed when the
Titanian root was cut; and the son of Iapetus himself groaned, his soul
distraught with pain. And she brought the charm forth and placed it in
the fragrant band which engirdled her, just beneath her bosom, divinely
fair. And going forth she mounted the swift chariot, and with her went
two handmaidens on each side. And she herself took the reins and in her
right hand the well-fashioned whip, and drove through the city; and the
rest, the handmaids, laid their hands on the chariot behind and ran
along the broad highway; and they kilted up their light robes above
their white knees. And even as by the mild waters of Parthenius, or
after bathing in the river Amnisus, Leto's daughter stands upon her
golden chariot and courses over the hills with her swift-footed roes, to
greet from afar some richly-steaming hecatomb; and with her come the
nymphs in attendance, gathering, some at the spring of Amnisus itself,
others by the glens and many-fountained peaks; and round her whine and
fawn the beasts cowering as she moves along: thus they sped through the
city; and on both sides the people gave way shunning the eyes of the
royal maiden. But when she had left the city's well paved streets, and
was approaching the shrine as she drove over the plains, then she
alighted eagerly from the smooth-running chariot and spake as follows
among her maidens:

[Footnote 1: i.e. the liquid that flows in the veins of gods.]

"Friends, verily have I sinned greatly and took no heed not to go among
the stranger-folk[1] who roam over our land. The whole city is smitten
with dismay; wherefore no one of the women who formerly gathered here
day by day has now come hither. But since we have come and no one else
draws near, come, let us satisfy our souls without stint with soothing
song, and when we have plucked the fair flowers amid the tender grass,
that very hour will we return. And with many a gift shall ye reach home
this very day, if ye will gladden me with this desire of mine. For Argus
pleads with me, also Chalciope herself; but this that ye hear from me
keep silently in your hearts, lest the tale reach my father's ears. As
for yon stranger who took on him the task with the oxen, they bid me
receive his gifts and rescue him from the deadly contest. And I approved
their counsel, and I have summoned him to come to my presence apart from
his comrades, so that we may divide the gifts among ourselves if he
bring them in his hands, and in return may give him a baleful charm. But
when he comes, do ye stand aloof."

[Footnote 1: Or, reading [Greek: menim], "took no heed of the cause of
wrath with the stranger-folk"]

So she spake, and the crafty counsel pleased them all. And straightway
Argus drew Aeson's son apart from his comrades as soon as he heard from
his brothers that Medea had gone at daybreak to the holy shrine of
Hecate, and led him over the plain; and with them went Mopsus, son of
Ampycus, skilled to utter oracles from the appearance of birds, and
skilled to give good counsel to those who set out on a journey.

Never yet had there been such a man in the days of old, neither of all
the heroes of the lineage of Zeus himself, nor of those who sprung from
the blood of the other gods, as on that day the bride of Zeus made
Jason, both to look upon and to hold converse with. Even his comrades
wondered as they gazed upon him, radiant with manifold graces; and the
son of Ampycus rejoiced in their journey, already foreboding how all
would end.

Now by the path along the plain there stands near the shrine a poplar
with its crown of countless leaves, whereon often chattering crows would
roost. One of them meantime as she clapped her wings aloft in the
brandies uttered the counsels of Hera:

"What a pitiful seer is this, that has not the wit to conceive even what
children know, how that no maiden will say a word of sweetness or love
to a youth when strangers be near. Begone, sorry prophet, witless one;
on thee neither Cypris nor the gentle Loves breathe in their kindness."

She spake chiding, and Mopsus smiled to hear the god-sent voice of the
bird, and thus addressed them: "Do thou, son of Aeson, pass on to the
temple, where thou wilt find the maiden; and very kind will her greeting
be to thee through the prompting of Cypris, who will be thy helpmate in
the contest, even as Phineus, Agenor's son, foretold. But we two, Argus
and I, will await thy return, apart in this very spot do thou all alone
be a suppliant and win her over with prudent words."

He spake wisely, and both at once gave approval. Nor was Medea's heart
turned to other thoughts, for all her singing, and never a song that she
essayed pleased her long in her sport. But in confusion she ever
faltered, nor did she keep her eyes resting quietly upon the throng of
her handmaids; but to the paths far off she strained her gaze, turning
her face aside. Oft did her heart sink fainting within Tier bosom
whenever she fancied she heard passing by the sound of a footfall or of
the wind. But soon he appeared to her longing eyes, striding along
loftily, like Sirius coming from ocean, which rises fair and clear to
see, but brings unspeakable mischief to flocks; thus then did Aeson's
son come to her, fair to see, but the sight of him brought love-sick
care. Her heart fell from out her bosom, and a dark mist came over her
eyes, and a hot blush covered her cheeks. And she had no strength to
lift her knees backwards or forwards, but her feet beneath were rooted
to the ground; and meantime all her handmaidens had drawn aside. So they
two stood face to face without a word, without a sound, like oaks or
lofty pines, which stand quietly side by side on the mountains when the
wind is still; then again, when stirred by the breath of the wind, they
murmur ceaselessly; so they two were destined to tell out all their
tale, stirred by the breath of Love. And Aeson's son saw that she had
fallen into some heaven-sent calamity, and with soothing words thus
addressed her:

"Why, pray, maiden, dost thou fear me so much, all alone as I am? Never
was I one of these idle boasters such as other men are--not even
aforetime, when I dwelt in my own country. Wherefore, maiden, be not too
much abashed before me, either to enquire whatever thou wilt or to speak
thy mind. But since we have met one another with friendly hearts, in a
hallowed spot, where it is wrong to sin, speak openly and ask questions,
and beguile me not with pleasing words, for at the first thou didst
promise thy sister to give me the charms my heart desires. I implore
thee by Hecate herself, by thy parents, and by Zeus who holds his
guardian hand over strangers and suppliants; I come here to thee both a
suppliant and a stranger, bending the knee in my sore need. For without
thee and thy sister never shall I prevail in the grievous contest. And
to thee will I render thanks hereafter for thy aid, as is right and
fitting for men who dwell far off, making glorious thy name and fame;
and the rest of the heroes, returning to Hellas, will spread thy renown
and so will the heroes' wives and mothers, who now perhaps are sitting
on the shore and making moan for us; their painful affliction thou
mightest scatter to the winds. In days past the maiden Ariadne, daughter
of Minos, with kindly intent rescued Theseus from grim contests--the
maiden whom Pasiphae daughter of Helios bare. But she, when Minos had
lulled his wrath to rest, went aboard the ship with him and left her
fatherland; and her even the immortal gods loved, and, as a sign in
mid-sky, a crown of stars, which men call Ariadne's crown, rolls along
all night among the heavenly constellations. So to thee too shall be
thanks from the gods, if thou wilt save so mighty an array of
chieftains. For surely from thy lovely form thou art like to excel in
gentle courtesy."

Thus he spake, honouring her; and she cast her eyes down with a smile
divinely sweet; and her soul melted within her, uplifted by his praise,
and she gazed upon him face to face; nor did she know what word to utter
first, but was eager to pour out everything at once. And forth from her
fragrant girdle ungrudgingly she brought out the charm; and he at once
received it in his hands with joy. And she would even have drawn out all
her soul from her breast and given it to him, exulting in his desire; so
wonderfully did love flash forth a sweet flame from the golden head of
Aeson's son; and he captivated her gleaming eyes; and her heart within
grew warm, melting away as the dew melts away round roses when warmed by
the morning's light. And now both were fixing their eyes on the ground
abashed, and again were throwing glances at each other, smiling with the
light of love beneath their radiant brows. And at last and scarcely then
did the maiden greet him:

"Take heed now, that I may devise help for thee. When at thy coming my
father has given thee the deadly teeth from the dragon's jaws for
sowing, then watch for the time when the night is parted in twain, then
bathe in the stream of the tireless river, and alone, apart from others,
clad in dusky raiment, dig a rounded pit; and therein slay a ewe, and
sacrifice it whole, heaping high the pyre on the very edge of the pit.
And propitiate only-begotten Hecate, daughter of Perses, pouring from a
goblet the hive-stored labour of bees. And then, when thou hast
heedfully sought the grace of the goddess, retreat from the pyre; and
let neither the sound of feet drive thee to turn back, nor the baying of
hounds, lest haply thou shouldst maim all the rites and thyself fail to
return duly to thy comrades. And at dawn steep this charm in water,
strip, and anoint thy body therewith as with oil; and in it there will
be boundless prowess and mighty strength, and thou wilt deem thyself a
match not for men but for the immortal gods. And besides, let thy spear
and shield and sword be sprinkled. Thereupon the spear-heads of the
earthborn men shall not pierce thee, nor the flame of the deadly bulls
as it rushes forth resistless. But such thou shalt be not for long, but
for that one day; still never flinch from the contest. And I will tell
thee besides of yet another help. As soon as thou hast yoked the strong
oxen, and with thy might and thy prowess hast ploughed all the stubborn
fallow, and now along the furrows the Giants are springing up, when the
serpent's teeth are sown on the dusky clods, if thou markest them
uprising in throngs from the fallow, cast unseen among them a massy
stone; and they over it, like ravening hounds over their food, will slay
one another; and do thou thyself hasten to rush to the battle-strife,
and the fleece thereupon thou shalt bear far away from Aea;
nevertheless, depart wherever thou wilt, or thy pleasure takes thee,
when thou hast gone hence."

Thus she spake, and cast her eyes to her feet in silence, and her cheek,
divinely fair, was wet with warm tears as she sorrowed for that he was
about to wander far from her side over the wide sea: and once again she
addressed him face to face with mournful words, and took his right hand;
for now shame had left her eyes:

"Remember, if haply thou returnest to thy home, Medea's name; and so
will I remember thine, though thou be far away. And of thy kindness tell
me this, where is thy home, whither wilt thou sail hence in thy ship
over the sea; wilt thou come near wealthy Orchomenus, or near the Aeaean
isle? And tell me of the maiden, whosoever she be that thou hast named,
the far-renowned daughter of Pasiphae, who is kinswoman to my father."

Thus she spake; and over him too, at the tears of the maiden, stole Love
the destroyer, and he thus answered her:

"All too surely do I deem that never by night and never by day will I
forget thee if I escape death and indeed make my way in safety to the
Achaean land, and Aeetes set not before us some other contest worse than
this. And if it pleases thee to know about my fatherland, I will tell it
out; for indeed my own heart bids me do that. There is a land encircled
by lofty mountains, rich in sheep and in pasture, where Prometheus, son
of Iapetus, begat goodly Deucalion, who first founded cities and reared
temples to the immortal gods, and first ruled Over men. This land the
neighbours who dwell around call Haemonia. And in it stands Iolcus, my
city, and in it many others, where they have not so much as heard the
name of the Aeaean isle; yet there is a story that Minyas starting
thence, Minyas son of Aeolus, built long ago the city of Orchomenus that
borders on the Cadmeians. But why do I tell thee all this vain talk, of
our home and of Minos' daughter, far-famed Ariadne, by which glorious
name they called that lovely maiden of whom thou askest me? Would that,
as Minos then was well inclined to Theseus for her sake, so may thy
father be joined to us in friendship!"

Thus he spake, soothing her with gentle converse. But pangs most bitter
stirred her heart and in grief did she address him with vehement words:

"In Hellas, I ween, this is fair--to pay heed to covenants; but Aeetes
is not such a man among men as thou sayest was Pasiphae's husband,
Minos; nor can I liken myself to Ariadne; wherefore speak not of
guest-love. But only do thou, when thou hast reached Iolcus, remember
me, and thee even in my parents' despite, will I remember. And from far
off may a rumour come to me or some messenger-bird, when thou forgettest
me; or me, even me, may swift blasts catch up and bear over the sea
hence to Iolcus, that so I may cast reproaches in thy face and remind
thee that it was by my good will thou didst escape. May I then be seated
in thy halls, an unexpected guest!"

Thus she spake with piteous tears falling down her cheeks, and to her
Jason replied: "Let the empty blasts wander at will, lady, and the
messenger-bird, for vain is thy talk. But if thou comest to those abodes
and to the land of Hellas, honoured and reverenced shalt thou be by
women and men; and they shall worship thee even as a goddess, for that
by thy counsel their sons came home again, their brothers and kinsmen,
and stalwart husbands were saved from calamity. And in our bridal
chamber shalt thou prepare our couch; and nothing shall come between our
