story-hooks of young nobles marrying village maidens in spite of
parental opposition. I dare say you will get nobody's consent to the
marriage but mine, Richard."

"I dare say not," he replied, rather blankly.

"That is, if she should not turn out to be somebody's daughter," pursued
Dorothy; "somebody, I mean, quite as great as the heir of Middleton,
which I make no doubt she will."

"I hope she may," replied Richard.

"Why, you don't mean to say you wouldn't marry her if she didn't!" cried
Dorothy. "I'm ashamed of you, Richard."

"It would remove all opposition, at all events," said her brother.

"So it would," said Dorothy; "and now I'll tell you another notion of
mine, Richard. Somehow or other, it has come into my head that Alizon is
the daughter of--whom do you think?"

"Whom!" he cried.

"Guess," she rejoined.

"I can't," he exclaimed, impatiently.

"Well, then, I'll tell you without more ado," she answered. "Mind, it's
only my notion, and I've no precise grounds for it. But, in my opinion,
she's the daughter of the lady who has just left the room."

"Of Mistress Nutter!" ejaculated Richard, starting. "What makes you
think so?"

"The extraordinary and otherwise unaccountable interest she takes in
her," replied Dorothy. "And, if you recollect, Mistress Nutter had an
infant daughter who was lost in a strange manner."

"I thought the child died," replied Richard; "but it may be as you say.
I hope it is so."

"Time will show," said Dorothy; "but I have made up my mind about the
matter."

At this moment Nicholas Assheton came up to them, looking grave and
uneasy.

"What has happened?" asked Richard, anxiously.

"I have just received some very unpleasant intelligence," replied
Nicholas. "I told you of a menace uttered by that confounded Potts, on
quitting me after his ducking. He has now spoken out plainly, and
declares he overheard part of a conversation between Mistress Nutter and
Elizabeth Device, which took place in the ruins of the convent church
this morning, and he is satisfied that--"

"Well!" cried Richard, breathlessly.

"That Mistress Nutter is a witch, and in league with witches," continued
Nicholas.

"Ha!" exclaimed Richard, turning deathly pale.

"I suspect the rascal has invented the charge," said Nicholas; "but he
is quite unscrupulous enough to make it; and, if made, it will be fatal
to our relative's reputation, if not to her life."

"It is false, I am sure of it," cried Richard, torn by conflicting
emotions.

"Would I could think so!" cried Dorothy, suddenly recollecting Mistress
Nutter's strange demeanour in the little chapel, and the unaccountable
influence she seemed to exercise over the old crone. "But something has
occurred to-day that leads me to a contrary conviction."

"What is it? Speak!" cried Richard.

"Not now--not now," replied Dorothy.

"Whatever suspicions you may entertain, keep silence, or you will
destroy Mistress Nutter," said Nicholas.

"Fear me not," rejoined Dorothy. "Oh, Alizon!" she murmured, "that this
unhappy question should arise at such a moment."

"Do you indeed believe the charge, Dorothy?" asked Richard, in a low
voice.

"I do," she answered in the same tone. "If Alizon be her daughter, she
can never be your wife."

"How?" cried Richard.

"Never--never!" repeated Dorothy, emphatically. "The daughter of a
witch, be that witch named Elizabeth Device or Alice Nutter, is no mate
for you."

"You prejudge Mistress Nutter, Dorothy," he cried.

"Alas! Richard. I have too good reason for what I say," she answered,
sadly.

Richard uttered an exclamation of despair. And on the instant the lively
sounds of tabor and pipe, mixed with the jingling of bells, arose from
the court-yard, and presently afterwards an attendant entered to
announce that the May-day revellers were without, and directions were
given by Sir Ralph that they should be shown into the great
banqueting-hall below the gallery, which had been prepared for their
reception.




CHAPTER VIII.--THE REVELATION.


On quitting the long gallery, Mistress Nutter and Alizon ascended a wide
staircase, and, traversing a corridor, came to an antique, tapestried
chamber, richly but cumbrously furnished, having a carved oak bedstead
with sombre hangings, a few high-backed chairs of the same material, and
a massive wardrobe, with shrine-work atop, and two finely sculptured
figures, of the size of life, in the habits of Cistertian monks, placed
as supporters at either extremity. At one side of the bed the tapestry
was drawn aside, showing the entrance to a closet or inner room, and
opposite it there was a great yawning fireplace, with a lofty
mantelpiece and chimney projecting beyond the walls. The windows were
narrow, and darkened by heavy transom bars and small diamond panes while
the view without, looking upon Whalley Nab, was obstructed by the
contiguity of a tall cypress, whose funereal branches added to the
general gloom. The room was one of those formerly allotted to their
guests by the hospitable abbots, and had undergone little change since
their time, except in regard to furniture; and even that appeared old
and faded now. What with the gloomy arras, the shrouded bedstead, and
the Gothic wardrobe with its mysterious figures, the chamber had a grim,
ghostly air, and so the young girl thought on entering it.

"I have brought you hither, Alizon," said Mistress Nutter, motioning her
to a seat, "that we may converse without chance of interruption, for I
have much to say. On first seeing you to-day, your appearance, so
superior to the rest of the May-day mummers, struck me forcibly, and I
resolved to question Elizabeth Device about you. Accordingly I bade her
join me in the Abbey gardens. She did so, and had not long left me when
I accidentally met you and the others in the Lacy Chapel. When
questioned, Elizabeth affected great surprise, and denied positively
that there was any foundation for the idea that you were other than her
child; but, notwithstanding her asseverations, I could see from her
confused manner that there was more in the notion than she chose to
admit, and I determined to have recourse to other means of arriving at
the truth, little expecting my suspicions would be so soon confirmed by
Mother Chattox. To my interrogation of that old woman, you were yourself
a party, and I am now rejoiced that you interfered to prevent me from
prosecuting my inquiries to the utmost. There was one present from whom
the secret of your birth must be strictly kept--at least, for
awhile--and my impatience carried me too far."

"I only obeyed a natural impulse, madam," said Alizon; "but I am at a
loss to conceive what claim I can possibly have to the consideration you
show me."

"Listen to me, and you shall learn," replied Mistress Nutter. "It is a
sad tale, and its recital will tear open old wounds, but it must not be
withheld on that account. I do not ask you to bury the secrets I am
about to impart in the recesses of your bosom. You will do so when you
learn them, without my telling you. When little more than your age I was
wedded; but not to him I would have chosen if choice had been permitted
me. The union I need scarcely say was unhappy--most unhappy--though my
discomforts were scrupulously concealed, and I was looked upon as a
devoted wife, and my husband as a model of conjugal affection. But this
was merely the surface--internally all was strife and misery. Erelong my
dislike of my husband increased to absolute hate, while on his part,
though he still regarded me with as much passion as heretofore, he
became frantically jealous--and above all of Edward Braddyll of
Portfield, who, as his bosom friend, and my distant relative, was a
frequent visiter at the house. To relate the numerous exhibitions of
jealousy that occurred would answer little purpose, and it will be
enough to say that not a word or look passed between Edward and myself
but was misconstrued. I took care never to be alone with our guest--nor
to give any just ground for suspicion--but my caution availed nothing.
An easy remedy would have been to forbid Edward the house, but this my
husband's pride rejected. He preferred to endure the jealous torment
occasioned by the presence of his wife's fancied lover, and inflict
needless anguish on her, rather than brook the jeers of a few
indifferent acquaintances. The same feeling made him desire to keep up
an apparent good understanding with me; and so far I seconded his views,
for I shared in his pride, if in nothing else. Our quarrels were all in
private, when no eye could see us--no ear listen."

"Yours is a melancholy history, madam," remarked Alizon, in a tone of
profound interest.

"You will think so ere I have done," returned the lady, sadly. "The only
person in my confidence, and aware of my secret sorrows, was Elizabeth
Device, who with her husband, John Device, then lived at Rough Lee.
Serving me in the quality of tire-woman and personal attendant, she
could not be kept in ignorance of what took place, and the poor soul
offered me all the sympathy in her power. Much was it needed, for I had
no other sympathy. After awhile, I know not from what cause, unless from
some imprudence on the part of Edward Braddyll, who was wild and
reckless, my husband conceived worse suspicions than ever of me, and
began to treat me with such harshness and cruelty, that, unable longer
to endure his violence, I appealed to my father. But he was of a stern
and arbitrary nature, and, having forced me into the match, would not
listen to my complaints, but bade me submit. 'It was my duty to do so,'
he said, and he added some cutting expressions to the effect that I
deserved the treatment I experienced, and dismissed me. Driven to
desperation, I sought counsel and assistance from one I should most have
avoided--from Edward Braddyll--and he proposed flight from my husband's
roof--flight with him."

"But you were saved, madam?" cried Alizon, greatly shocked by the
narration. "You were saved?"

"Hear me out," rejoined Mistress Nutter. "Outraged as my feelings were,
and loathsome as my husband was to me, I spurned the base proposal, and
instantly quitted my false friend. Nor would I have seen him more, if
permitted; but that secret interview with him was my first and
last;--for it had been witnessed by my husband."

"Ha!" exclaimed Alizon.

"Concealed behind the arras, Richard Nutter heard enough to confirm his
worst suspicions," pursued the lady; "but he did not hear my
justification. He saw Edward Braddyll at my feet--he heard him urge me
to fly--but he did not wait to learn if I consented, and, looking upon
me as guilty, left his hiding-place to take measures for frustrating the
plan, he supposed concerted between us. That night I was made prisoner
in my room, and endured treatment the most inhuman. But a proposal was
made by my husband, that promised some alleviation of my suffering.
Henceforth we were to meet only in public, when a semblance of affection
was to be maintained on both sides. This was done, he said, to save my
character, and preserve his own name unspotted in the eyes of others,
however tarnished it might be in his own. I willingly consented to the
arrangement; and thus for a brief space I became tranquil, if not happy.
But another and severer trial awaited me."

"Alas, madam!" exclaimed Alizon, sympathisingly.

"My cup of sorrow, I thought, was full," pursued Mistress Nutter; "but
the drop was wanting to make it overflow. It came soon enough. Amidst my
griefs I expected to be a mother, and with that thought how many fond
and cheering anticipations mingled! In my child I hoped to find a balm
for my woes: in its smiles and innocent endearments a compensation for
the harshness and injustice I had experienced. How little did I foresee
that it was to be a new instrument of torture to me; and that I should
be cruelly robbed of the only blessing ever vouchsafed me!"

"Did the child die, madam?" asked Alizon.

"You shall hear," replied Mistress Nutter. "A daughter was born to me. I
was made happy by its birth. A new existence, bright and unclouded,
seemed dawning upon me; but it was like a sunburst on a stormy day. Some
two months before this event Elizabeth Device had given birth to a
daughter, and she now took my child under her fostering care; for
weakness prevented me from affording it the support it is a mother's
blessed privilege to bestow. She seemed as fond of it as myself; and
never was babe more calculated to win love than my little Millicent. Oh!
how shall I go on? The retrospect I am compelled to take is frightful,
but I cannot shun it. The foul and false suspicions entertained by my
husband began to settle on the child. He would not believe it to be his
own. With violent oaths and threats he first announced his odious
suspicions to Elizabeth Device, and she, full of terror, communicated
them to me. The tidings filled me with inexpressible alarm; for I knew,
if the dread idea had once taken possession of him, it would never be
removed, while what he threatened would be executed. I would have fled
at once with my poor babe if I had known where to go; but I had no place
of shelter. It would be in vain to seek refuge with my father; and I had
no other relative or friend whom I could trust. Where then should I fly?
At last I bethought me of a retreat, and arranged a plan of escape with
Elizabeth Device. Vain were my precautions. On that very night, I was
startled from slumber by a sudden cry from the nurse, who was seated by
the fire, with the child on her knees. It was long past midnight, and
all the household were at rest. Two persons had entered the room. One
was my ruthless husband, Richard Nutter; the other was John Device, a
powerful ruffianly fellow, who planted himself near the door.

"Marching quickly towards Elizabeth, who had arisen on seeing him, my
husband snatched the child from her before I could seize it, and with a
violent blow on the chest felled me to the ground, where I lay helpless,
speechless. With reeling senses I heard Elizabeth cry out that it was
her own child, and call upon her husband to save it. Richard Nutter
paused, but re-assured by a laugh of disbelief from his ruffianly
follower, he told Elizabeth the pitiful excuse would not avail to save
the brat. And then I saw a weapon gleam--there was a feeble piteous
cry--a cry that might have moved a demon--but it did not move _him_.
With wicked words and blood-imbrued hands he cast the body on the fire.
The horrid sight was too much for me, and I became senseless."

"A dreadful tale, indeed, madam!" cried Alizon, frozen with horror.

"The crime was hidden--hidden from the eyes of men, but mark the
retribution that followed," said Mistress Nutter; her eyes sparkling
with vindictive joy. "Of the two murderers both perished miserably. John
Device was drowned in a moss-pool. Richard Nutter's end was terrible,
sharpened by the pangs of remorse, and marked by frightful suffering.
But another dark event preceded his death, which may have laid a crime
the more on his already heavily-burdened soul. Edward Braddyll, the
object of his jealousy and hate, suddenly sickened of a malady so
strange and fearful, that all who saw him affirmed it the result of
witchcraft. None thought of my husband's agency in the dark affair
except myself; but knowing he had held many secret conferences about the
time with Mother Chattox, I more than suspected him. The sick man died;
and from that hour Richard Nutter knew no rest. Ever on horseback, or
fiercely carousing, he sought in vain to stifle remorse. Visions scared
him by night, and vague fears pursued him by day. He would start at
shadows, and talk wildly. To me his whole demeanour was altered; and he
strove by every means in his power to win my love. But he could not give
me back the treasure he had taken. He could not bring to life my
murdered babe. Like his victim, he fell ill on a sudden, and of a
strange and terrible sickness. I saw he could not recover, and therefore
tended him carefully. He died; and I shed no tear."

"Alas!" exclaimed Alizon, "though guilty, I cannot but compassionate
him."

"You are right to do so, Alizon," said Mistress Nutter, rising, while
the young girl rose too; "for he was your father."

"My father!" she exclaimed, in amazement. "Then you are my mother?"

"I am--I am," replied Mistress Nutter, straining her to her bosom. "Oh,
my child!--my dear child!" she cried. "The voice of nature from the
first pleaded eloquently in your behalf, and I should have been deaf to
all impulses of affection if I had not listened to the call. I now trace
in every feature the lineaments of the babe I thought lost for ever. All
is clear to me. The exclamation of Elizabeth Device, which, like my
ruthless husband, I looked upon as an artifice to save the infant's
life, I now find to be the truth. Her child perished instead of mine.
How or why she exchanged the infants on that night remains to be
explained, but that she did so is certain; while that she should
afterwards conceal the circumstance is easily comprehended, from a
natural dread of her own husband as well as of mine. It is possible that
from some cause she may still deny the truth, but I can make it her
interest to speak plainly. The main difficulty will lie in my public
acknowledgment of you. But, at whatever cost, it shall be made."

"Oh! consider it well;" said Alizon, "I will be your daughter in
love--in duty--in all but name. But sully not my poor father's honour,
which even at the peril of his soul he sought to maintain! How can I be
owned as your daughter without involving the discovery of this tragic
history?"

"You are right, Alizon," rejoined Mistress Nutter, thoughtfully. "It
will bring the dark deed to light. But you shall never return to
Elizabeth Device. You shall go with me to Rough Lee, and take up your
abode in the house where I was once so wretched--but where I shall now
be full of happiness with you. You shall see the dark spots on the
hearth, which I took to be your blood."

"If not mine, it was blood spilt by my father," said Alizon, with a
shudder.

Was it fancy, or did a low groan break upon her ear? It must be
imaginary, for Mistress Nutter seemed unconscious of the dismal sound.
It was now growing rapidly dark, and the more distant objects in the
room were wrapped in obscurity; but Alizon's gaze rested on the two
monkish figures supporting the wardrobe.

"Look there, mother," she said to Mistress Nutter.

"Where?" cried the lady, turning round quickly, "Ah! I see. You alarm
yourself needlessly, my child. Those are only carved figures of two
brethren of the Abbey. They are said, I know not with what truth--to be
statues of John Paslew and Borlace Alvetham."

"I thought they stirred," said Alizon.

"It was mere fancy," replied Mistress Nutter. "Calm yourself, sweet
child. Let us think of other things--of our newly discovered
relationship. Henceforth, to me you are Millicent Nutter; though to
others you must still be Alizon Device. My sweet Millicent," she cried,
embracing her again and again. "Ah, little--little did I think to see
you more!"

Alizon's fears were speedily chased away.

"Forgive me, dear mother," she cried, "if I have failed to express the
full delight I experience in my restitution to you. The shock of your
sad tale at first deadened my joy, while the suddenness of the
information respecting myself so overwhelmed me, that like one chancing
upon a hidden treasure, and gazing at it confounded, I was unable to
credit my own good fortune. Even now I am quite bewildered; and no
wonder, for many thoughts, each of different import, throng upon me.
Independently of the pleasure and natural pride I must feel in being
acknowledged by you as a daughter, it is a source of the deepest
satisfaction to me to know that I am not, in any way, connected with
Elizabeth Device--not from her humble station--for poverty weighs little
with me in comparison with virtue and goodness--but from her sinfulness.
You know the dark offence laid to her charge?"

"I do," replied Mistress Nutter, in a low deep tone, "but I do not
believe it."

"Nor I," returned Alizon. "Still, she acts as if she were the wicked
thing she is called; avoids all religious offices; shuns all places of
worship; and derides the Holy Scriptures. Oh, mother! you will
comprehend the frequent conflict of feelings I must have endured. You
will understand my horror when I have sometimes thought myself the
daughter of a witch."

"Why did you not leave her if you thought so?" said Mistress Nutter,
frowning.

"I could not leave her," replied Alizon, "for I then thought her my
mother."

Mistress Nutter fell upon her daughter's neck, and wept aloud. "You have
an excellent heart, my child," she said at length, checking her emotion.

"I have nothing to complain of in Elizabeth Device, dear mother," she
replied. "What she denied herself, she did not refuse me; and though I
have necessarily many and great deficiencies, you will find in me, I
trust, no evil principles. And, oh! shall we not strive to rescue that
poor benighted creature from the pit? We may yet save her."

"It is too late," replied Mistress Nutter in a sombre tone.

"It cannot be too late," said Alizon, confidently. "She cannot be beyond
redemption. But even if she should prove intractable, poor little Jennet
may be preserved. She is yet a child, with some good--though, alas! much
evil, also--in her nature. Let our united efforts be exerted in this
good work, and we must succeed. The weeds extirpated, the flowers will
spring up freely, and bloom in beauty."

"I can have nothing to do with her," said Mistress Nutter, in a freezing
tone--"nor must you."

"Oh! say not so, mother," cried Alizon. "You rob me of half the
happiness I feel in being restored to you. When I was Jennets sister, I
devoted myself to the task of reclaiming her. I hoped to be her guardian
angel--to step between her and the assaults of evil--and I cannot, will
not, now abandon her. If no longer my sister, she is still dear to me.
And recollect that I owe a deep debt of gratitude to her mother--a debt
I can never pay."

"How so?" cried Mistress Nutter. "You owe her nothing--but the
contrary."

"I owe her a life," said Alizon. "Was not her infant's blood poured out
for mine! And shall I not save the child left her, if I can?"

"I shall not oppose your inclinations," replied Mistress Nutter, with
reluctant assent; "but Elizabeth, I suspect, will thank you little for
your interference."

"Not now, perhaps," returned Alizon; "but a time will come when she will
do so."

While this conversation took place, it had been rapidly growing dark,
and the gloom at length increased so much, that the speakers could
scarcely see each other's faces. The sudden and portentous darkness was
accounted for by a vivid flash of lightning, followed by a low growl of
thunder rumbling over Whalley Nab. The mother and daughter drew close
together, and Mistress Nutter passed her arm round Alizon's neck.

The storm came quickly on, with forked and dangerous lightning, and
loud claps of thunder threatening mischief. Presently, all its fury
seemed collected over the Abbey. The red flashes hissed, and the peals
of thunder rolled overhead. But other terrors were added to Alizon's
natural dread of the elemental warfare. Again she fancied the two
monkish figures, which had before excited her alarm, moved, and even
shook their arms menacingly at her. At first she attributed this wild
idea to her overwrought imagination, and strove to convince herself of
its fallacy by keeping her eyes steadily fixed upon them. But each
succeeding flash only served to confirm her superstitious apprehensions.

Another circumstance contributed to heighten her alarm. Scared most
probably by the storm, a large white owl fluttered down the chimney, and
after wheeling twice or thrice round the chamber, settled upon the bed,
hooting, puffing, ruffling its feathers, and glaring at her with eyes
that glowed like fiery coals.

Mistress Nutter seemed little moved by the storm, though she kept a
profound silence, but when Alizon gazed in her face, she was frightened
by its expression, which reminded her of the terrible aspect she had
worn at the interview with Mother Chattox.

All at once Mistress Nutter arose, and, rapid as the lightning playing
around her and revealing her movements, made several passes, with
extended hands, over her daughter; and on this the latter instantly fell
back, as if fainting, though still retaining her consciousness; and,
what was stranger still, though her eyes were closed, her power of sight
remained.

In this condition she fancied invisible forms were moving about her.
Strange sounds seemed to salute her ears, like the gibbering of ghosts,
and she thought she felt the flapping of unseen wings around her.

All at once her attention was drawn--she knew not why--towards the
closet, and from out it she fancied she saw issue the tall dark figure
of a man. She was sure she saw him; for her imagination could not body
forth features charged with such a fiendish expression, or eyes of such
unearthly lustre. He was clothed in black, but the fashion of his
raiments was unlike aught she had ever seen. His stature was gigantic,
and a pale phosphoric light enshrouded him. As he advanced, forked
lightnings shot into the room, and the thunder split overhead. The owl
hooted fearfully, quitted its perch, and flew off by the way it had
entered the chamber.

The Dark Shape came on. It stood beside Mistress Nutter, and she
prostrated herself before it. The gestures of the figure were angry and
imperious--those of Mistress Nutter supplicating. Their converse was
drowned by the rattling of the storm. At last the figure pointed to
Alizon, and the word "midnight" broke in tones louder than the thunder
from its lips. All consciousness then forsook her.

How long she continued in this state she knew not, but the touch of a
finger applied to her brow seemed to recall her suddenly to animation.
She heaved a deep sigh, and looked around. A wondrous change had
occurred. The storm had passed off, and the moon was shining brightly
over the top of the cypress-tree, flooding the chamber with its gentle
radiance, while her mother was bending over her with looks of tenderest
affection.

"You are better now, sweet child," said Mistress Nutter. "You were
overcome by the storm. It was sudden and terrible."

"Terrible, indeed!" replied Alizon, imperfectly recalling what had
passed. "But it was not alone the storm that frightened me. This chamber
has been invaded by evil beings. Methought I beheld a dark figure come
from out yon closet, and stand before you."

"You have been thrown into a state of stupor by the influence of the
electric fluid," replied Mistress Nutter, "and while in that condition
visions have passed through your brain. That is all, my child."

"Oh! I hope so," said Alizon.

"Such ecstasies are of frequent occurrence," replied Mistress Nutter.
"But, since you are quite recovered, we will descend to Lady Assheton,
who may wonder at our absence. You will share this room with me
to-night, my child; for, as I have already said, you cannot return to
Elizabeth Device. I will make all needful explanations to Lady Assheton,
and will see Elizabeth in the morning--perhaps to-night. Reassure
yourself, sweet child. There is nothing to fear."

"I trust not, mother," replied Alizon. "But it would ease my mind to
look into that closet."

"Do so, then, by all means," replied Mistress Nutter with a forced
smile.

Alizon peeped timorously into the little room, which was lighted up by
the moon's rays. There was a faded white habit, like the robe of a
Cistertian monk, hanging in one corner, and beneath it an old chest.
Alizon would fain have opened the chest, but Mistress Nutter called out
to her impatiently, "You will discover nothing, I am sure. Come, let us
go down-stairs."

And they quitted the room together.




CHAPTER IX.--THE TWO PORTRAITS IN THE BANQUETING-HALL.


The banqueting-hall lay immediately under the long gallery,
corresponding with it in all but height; and though in this respect it
fell somewhat short of the magnificent upper room, it was quite lofty
enough to admit of a gallery of its own for spectators and minstrels.
Great pains had been taken in decorating the hall for the occasion.
Between the forest of stags' horns that branched from the gallery rails
were hung rich carpets, intermixed with garlands of flowers, and banners
painted with the arms of the Assheton family, were suspended from the
corners. Over the fireplace, where, despite the advanced season, a pile
of turf and wood was burning, were hung two panoplies of arms, and above
them, on a bracket, was set a complete suit of mail, once belonging to
Richard Assheton, the first possessor of the mansion. On the opposite
wall hung two remarkable portraits--the one representing a religious
votaress in a loose robe of black, with wide sleeves, holding a rosary
and missal in her hand, and having her brow and neck entirely concealed
by the wimple, in which her head and shoulders were enveloped. Such of
her features as could be seen were of extraordinary loveliness, though
of a voluptuous character, the eyes being dark and languishing, and
shaded by long lashes, and the lips carnation-hued and full. This was
the fair votaress, Isole de Heton, who brought such scandal on the Abbey
in the reign of Henry VI. The other portrait was that of an abbot, in
the white gown and scapulary of the Cistertian order. The countenance
was proud and stern, but tinctured with melancholy. In a small shield at
one corner the arms were blazoned--argent, a fess between three mullets,
sable, pierced of the field, a crescent for difference--proving it to be
the portrait of John Paslew. Both pictures had been found in the abbot's
lodgings, when taken possession of by Richard Assheton, but they owed
their present position to his descendant, Sir Ralph, who discovering
them in an out-of-the-way closet, where they had been cast aside, and
struck with their extraordinary merit, hung them up as above stated.

The long oaken table, usually standing in the middle of the hall, had
been removed to one side, to allow free scope for dancing and other
pastimes, but it was still devoted to hospitable uses, being covered
with trenchers and drinking-cups, and spread for a substantial repast.
Near it stood two carvers, with aprons round their waists, brandishing
long knives, while other yeomen of the kitchen and cellar were at hand
to keep the trenchers well supplied, and the cups filled with strong
ale, or bragget, as might suit the taste of the guests. Nor were these
the only festive preparations. The upper part of the hall was reserved
for Sir Ralph's immediate friends, and here, on a slightly raised
elevation, stood a cross table, spread for a goodly supper, the snowy
napery being ornamented with wreaths and ropes of flowers, and shining
with costly vessels. At the lower end of the room, beneath the gallery,
which it served to support, was a Gothic screen, embellishing an open
armoury, which made a grand display of silver plates and flagons.
Through one of the doorways contrived in this screen, the May-day
revellers were ushered into the hall by old Adam Whitworth, the
white-headed steward.

"I pray you be seated, good masters, and you, too, comely dames," said
Adam, leading them to the table, and assigning each a place with his
wand. "Fall to, and spare not, for it is my honoured master's desire you
should sup well. You will find that venison pasty worth a trial, and the
baked red deer in the centre of the table is a noble dish. The fellow to
it was served at Sir Ralph's own table at dinner, and was pronounced
excellent. I pray you try it, masters.--Here, Ned Scargill, mind your
office, good fellow, and break me that deer. And you, Paul Pimlot,
exercise your craft on the venison pasty."

And as trencher after trencher was rapidly filled by the two carvers,
who demeaned themselves in their task like men acquainted with the
powers of rustic appetite, the old steward addressed himself to the
dames.

"What can I do for you, fair mistresses?" he said. "Here be sack
possets, junkets and cream, for such as like them--French puffs and
Italian puddings, right good, I warrant you, and especially admired by
my honourable good lady. Indeed, I am not sure she hath not lent a hand
herself in their preparation. Then here be fritters in the court
fashion, made with curds of sack posset, eggs and ale, and seasoned with
nutmeg and pepper. You will taste them, I am sure, for they are
favourites with our sovereign lady, the queen. Here, Gregory,
Dickon--bestir yourselves, knaves, and pour forth a cup of sack for each
of these dames. As you drink, mistresses, neglect not the health of our
honourable good master Sir Ralph, and his lady. It is well--it is well.
I will convey to them both your dutiful good wishes. But I must see all
your wants supplied. Good Dame Openshaw, you have nought before you. Be
prevailed upon to taste these dropt raisins or a fond pudding. And you,
too, sweet Dame Tetlow. Squire Nicholas gave me special caution to take
care of you, but the injunction was unneeded, as I should have done so
without it.--Another cup of canary to Dame Tetlow, Gregory. Fill to the
brim, knave--to the very brim. To the health of Squire Nicholas," he
added in a low tone, as he handed the brimming goblet to the blushing
dame; "and be sure and tell him, if he questions you, that I obeyed his
behests to the best of my ability. I pray you taste this pippin jelly,
dame. It is as red as rubies, but not so red as your lips, or some leach
of almonds, which, lily-white though it be, is not to be compared with
the teeth that shall touch it."

"Odd's heart! mester steward, yo mun ha' larnt that protty speech fro'
th' squoire himself," replied Dame Tetlow, laughing.

"It may be the recollection of something said to me by him, brought to
mind by your presence," replied Adam Whitworth, gallantly. "If I can
serve you in aught else, sign to me, dame.--Now, knaves, fill the
cups--ale or bragget, at your pleasure, masters. Drink and stint not,
and you will the better please your liberal entertainer and my honoured
master."

Thus exhorted, the guests set seriously to work to fulfil the
hospitable intentions of the provider of the feast. Cups flowed fast and
freely, and erelong little was left of the venison pasty but the outer
crust, and nothing more than a few fragments of the baked red deer. The
lighter articles then came in for a share of attention, and salmon from
the Ribble, jack, trout, and eels from the Hodder and Calder, boiled,
broiled, stewed, and pickled, and of delicious flavour, were discussed
with infinite relish. Puddings and pastry were left to more delicate
stomachs--the solids only being in request with the men. Hitherto, the
demolition of the viands had given sufficient employment, but now the
edge of appetite beginning to be dulled, tongues were unloosed, and much
merriment prevailed. More than eighty in number, the guests were
dispersed without any regard to order, and thus the chief actors in the
revel were scattered promiscuously about the table, diversifying it with
their gay costumes. Robin Hood sat between two pretty female
morris-dancers, whose partners had got to the other end of the table;
while Ned Huddlestone, the representative of Friar Tuck, was equally
fortunate, having a buxom dame on either side of him, towards whom he
distributed his favours with singular impartiality. As porter to the
Abbey, Ned made himself at home; and, next to Adam Whitworth, was
perhaps the most important personage present, continually roaring for
ale, and pledging the damsels around him. From the way he went on, it
seemed highly probable he would be under the table before supper was
over; but Ned Huddlestone, like the burly priest whose gown he wore, had
a stout bullet head, proof against all assaults of liquor; and the
copious draughts he swallowed, instead of subduing him, only tended to
make him more uproarious. Blessed also with lusty lungs, his shouts of
laughter made the roof ring again. But if the strong liquor failed to
make due impression upon him, the like cannot be said of Jack Roby, who,
it will be remembered, took the part of the Fool, and who, having drunk
overmuch, mistook the hobby-horse for a real steed, and in an effort to
bestride it, fell head-foremost on the floor, and, being found incapable
of rising, was carried out to an adjoining room, and laid on a bench.
This, however, was the only case of excess; for though the Sherwood
foresters emptied their cups often enough to heighten their mirth, none
of them seemed the worse for what they drank. Lawrence Blackrod, Mr.
Parker's keeper, had fortunately got next to his old flame, Sukey
Worseley; while Phil Rawson, the forester, who enacted Will Scarlet, and
Nancy Holt, between whom an equally tender feeling subsisted, had
likewise got together. A little beyond them sat the gentleman usher and
parish clerk, Sampson Harrop, who, piquing himself on his good manners,
drank very sparingly, and was content to sup on sweetmeats and a bowl of
fleetings, as curds separated from whey are termed in this district. Tom
the piper, and his companion the taborer, ate for the next week, but
were somewhat more sparing in the matter of drink, their services as
minstrels being required later on. Thus the various guests enjoyed
themselves according to their bent, and universal hilarity prevailed. It
would be strange indeed if it had been otherwise; for what with the good
cheer, and the bright eyes around them, the rustics had attained a point
of felicity not likely to be surpassed. Of the numerous assemblage more
than half were of the fairer sex; and of these the greater portion were
young and good-looking, while in the case of the morris-dancers, their
natural charms were heightened by their fanciful attire.

Before supper was half over, it became so dark that it was found
necessary to illuminate the great lamp suspended from the centre of the
roof, while other lights were set on the board, and two flaming torches
placed in sockets on either side of the chimney-piece. Scarcely was this
accomplished when the storm came on, much to the surprise of the
weatherwise, who had not calculated upon such an occurrence, not having
seen any indications whatever of it in the heavens. But all were too
comfortably sheltered, and too well employed, to pay much attention to
what was going on without; and, unless when a flash of lightning more
than usually vivid dazzled the gaze, or a peal of thunder more appalling
than the rest broke overhead, no alarm was expressed, even by the women.
To be sure, a little pretty trepidation was now and then evinced by the
younger damsels; but even this was only done with the view of exacting
attention on the part of their swains, and never failed in effect. The
thunder-storm, therefore, instead of putting a stop to the general
enjoyment, only tended to increase it. However the last peal was loud
enough to silence the most uproarious. The women turned pale, and the
men looked at each other anxiously, listening to hear if any damage had
been done. But, as nothing transpired, their spirits revived. A few
minutes afterwards word was brought that the Conventual Church had been
struck by a thunderbolt, but this was not regarded as a very serious
disaster. The bearer of the intelligence was little Jennet, who said she
had been caught in the ruins by the storm, and after being dreadfully
frightened by the lightning, had seen a bolt strike the steeple, and
heard some stones rattle down, after which she ran away. No one thought
of inquiring what she had been doing there at the time, but room was
made for her at the supper-table next to Sampson Harrop, while the good
steward, patting her on the head, filled her a cup of canary with his
own hand, and gave her some cates to eat.

"Ey dunna see Alizon" observed the little girl, looking round the table,
after she had drunk the wine.

"Your sister is not here, Jennet," replied Adam Whitworth, with a smile.
"She is too great a lady for us now. Since she came up with her ladyship
from the green she has been treated quite like one of the guests, and
has been walking about the garden and ruins all the afternoon with young
Mistress Dorothy, who has taken quite a fancy to her. Indeed, for the
matter of that, all the ladies seem to have taken a fancy to her, and
she is now closeted with Mistress Nutter in her own room."

This was gall and wormwood to Jennet.

"She'll be hard to please when she goes home again, after playing the
fine dame here," pursued the steward.

"Then ey hope she'll never come home again," rejoined Jennet;
spitefully, "fo' we dunna want fine dames i' our poor cottage."

"For my part I do not wonder Alizon pleases the gentle folks," observed
Sampson Harrop, "since such pains have been taken with her manners and
education; and I must say she does great credit to her instructor, who,
for reasons unnecessary to mention, shall be nameless. I wish I could
say the same for you, Jennet; but though you're not deficient in
ability, you've no perseverance or pleasure in study."

"Ey knoa os much os ey care to knoa," replied Jennet, "an more than yo
con teach me, Mester Harrop. Why is Alizon always to be thrown i' my
teeth?"

"Because she's the best model you can have," rejoined Sampson. "Ah! if
I'd my own way wi' ye, lass, I'd mend your temper and manners. But you
come of an ill stock, ye saucy hussy."

"Ey come fro' th' same stock as Alizon, onny how," said Jennet.

"Unluckily that cannot be denied," replied Sampson; "but you're as
different from her as light from darkness."

Jennet eyed him bitterly, and then rose from the table.

"Ey'n go," she said.

"No--no; sit down," interposed the good-natured steward. "The dancing
and pastimes will begin presently, and you will see your sister. She
will come down with the ladies."

"That's the very reason she wishes to go," said Sampson Harrop. "The
spiteful little creature cannot bear to see her sister better treated
than herself. Go your ways, then. It is the best thing you can do.
Alizon would blush to see you here."

"Then ey'n een stay an vex her," replied Jennet, sharply; "boh ey winna
sit near yo onny longer, Mester Sampson Harrop, who ca' yersel gentleman
usher, boh who are nah gentleman at aw, nor owt like it, boh merely
parish clerk an schoolmester, an a poor schoolmester to boot. Eyn go an
sit by Sukey Worseley an Nancy Holt, whom ey see yonder."

"You've found your match, Master Harrop," said the steward, laughing, as
the little girl walked away.

"I should account it a disgrace to bandy words with the like of her,
Adam," rejoined the clerk, angrily; "but I'm greatly out in my
reckoning, if she does not make a second Mother Demdike, and worse could
not well befall her."

Jennet's society could have been very well dispensed with by her two
friends, but she would not be shaken off. On the contrary, finding
herself in the way, she only determined the more pertinaciously to
remain, and began to exercise all her powers of teasing, which have been
described as considerable, and which on this occasion proved eminently
successful. And the worst of it was, there was no crushing the plaguy
little insect; any effort made to catch her only resulting in an escape
on her part, and a new charge on some undefended quarter, with sharper
stinging and more intolerable buzzing than ever.

Out of all patience, Sukey Worseley at length exclaimed, "Ey should
loike to see ye swum, crosswise, i' th' Calder, Jennet, as Nance
Redferne war this efternoon."

"May be ye would, Sukey," replied the little girl, "boh eym nah so
likely to be tried that way as yourself, lass; an if ey war swum ey
should sink, while yo, wi' your broad back and shouthers, would be sure
to float, an then yo'd be counted a witch."

"Heed her not, Sukey," said Blackrod, unable to resist a laugh, though
the poor girl was greatly discomfited by this personal allusion; "ye may
ha' a broad back o' our own, an the broader the better to my mind, boh
mey word on't ye'll never be ta'en fo a witch. Yo're far too comely."

This assurance was a balm to poor Sukey's wounded spirit, and she
replied with a well-pleased smile, "Ey hope ey dunna look like one,
Lorry."

"Not a bit, lass," said Blackrod, lifting a huge ale-cup to his lips.
"Your health, sweetheart."

"What think ye then o' Nance Redferne?" observed Jennet. "Is she neaw
comely?--ay, comelier far than fat, fubsy Sukey here--or than Nancy
Holt, wi' her yallo hure an frecklet feace--an yet ye ca' her a witch."

"Ey ca' thee one, theaw feaw little whean--an the dowter--an grandowter
o' one--an that's more," cried Nancy. "Freckles i' your own feace, ye
mismannert minx."

"Ne'er heed her, Nance," said Phil Rawson, putting his arm round the
angry damsel's waist, and drawing her gently down. "Every one to his
taste, an freckles an yellow hure are so to mine. So dunna fret about
it, an spoil your protty lips wi' pouting. Better ha' freckles o' your
feace than spots o' your heart, loike that ill-favort little hussy."

"Dunna offend her, Phil," said Nancy Holt, noticing with alarm the
malignant look fixed upon her lover by Jennet. "She's dawngerous."

"Firrups tak her!" replied Phil Eawson. "Boh who the dole's that? Ey
didna notice him efore, an he's neaw one o' our party."

The latter observation was occasioned by the entrance of a tall
personage, in the garb of a Cistertian monk, who issued from one of the
doorways in the screen, and glided towards the upper table, attracting
general attention and misgiving as he proceeded. His countenance was
cadaverous, his lips livid, and his eyes black and deep sunken in their
sockets, with a bistre-coloured circle around them. His frame was meagre
and bony. What remained of hair on his head was raven black, but either
he was bald on the crown, or carried his attention to costume so far as
to adopt the priestly tonsure. His forehead was lofty and sallow, and
seemed stamped, like his features, with profound gloom. His garments
were faded and mouldering, and materially contributed to his ghostly
appearance.

"Who is it?" cried Sukey and Nance together.

But no one could answer the question.

"He dusna look loike a bein' o' this warld," observed Blackrod, gaping
with alarm, for the stout keeper was easily assailable on the side of
superstition; "an there is a mowdy air about him, that gies one the
shivers to see. Ey've often heer'd say the Abbey is haanted; an that
pale-feaced chap looks like one o' th' owd monks risen fro' his grave to
join our revel."

"An see, he looks this way," cried Phil Rawson.

"What flaming een! they mey the very flesh crawl o' one's booans."
