to accompany her always; and the poor devil thus appointed, who was
somewhat of the fattest, and who, after having twice performed the
journey to Ione's house, now saw himself condemned to a third excursion
(whither the gods only knew), hastened after her, deploring his fate,
and solemnly assuring Castor and Pollux that he believed the blind girl
had the talaria of Mercury as well as the infirmity of Cupid.

Nydia, however, required but little of his assistance to find her way to
the popular temple of Isis: the space before it was now deserted, and
she won without obstacle to the sacred rail.

'There is no one here,' said the fat slave.  'What dost thou want, or
whom Knowest thou not that the priests do not live in the temple?'

'Call out,' said she, impatiently; 'night and day there is always one
flamen, at least, watching in the shrine of Isis.'

The slave called--no one appeared.

'Seest thou no one?'

'No one.'

'Thou mistakest; I hear a sigh: look again.'

The slave, wondering and grumbling, cast round his heavy eyes, and
before one of the altars, whose remains still crowd the narrow space, he
beheld a form bending as in meditation.

'I see a figure, said he; 'and by the white garments, it is a priest.'

'O flamen of Isis!' cried Nydia; 'servant of the Most Ancient, hear me!'

'Who calls?' said a low and melancholy voice.

'One who has no common tidings to impart to a member of your body: I
come to declare and not to ask oracles.'

'With whom wouldst thou confer?  This is no hour for thy conference;
depart, disturb me not; the night is sacred to the gods, the day to
men.'

'Methinks I know thy voice? thou art he whom I seek; yet I have heard
thee speak but once before.  Art thou not the priest Apaecides?'

'I am that man,' replied the priest, emerging from the altar, and
approaching the rail.

'Thou art! the gods be praised!' Waving her hand to the slave, she bade
him withdraw to a distance; and he, who naturally imagined some
superstition connected, perhaps, with the safety of Ione, could alone
lead her to the temple, obeyed, and seated himself on the ground, at a
little distance. 'Hush!' said she, speaking quick and low; 'art thou
indeed Apaecides?'

'If thou knowest me, canst thou not recall my features?'

'I am blind,' answered Nydia; 'my eyes are in my ear, and that
recognizes thee: yet swear that thou art he.'

'By the gods I swear it, by my right hand, and by the moon!'

'Hush! speak low--bend near--give me thy hand; knowest thou Arbaces?
Hast thou laid flowers at the feet of the dead?  Ah! thy hand is
cold--hark yet!--hast thou taken the awful vow?'

'Who art thou, whence comest thou, pale maiden?' said Apaecides,
fearfully: 'I know thee not; thine is not the breast on which this head
hath lain; I have never seen thee before.'

'But thou hast heard my voice: no matter, those recollections it should
shame us both to recall.  Listen, thou hast a sister.'

'Speak! speak! what of her?'

'Thou knowest the banquets of the dead, stranger--it pleases thee,
perhaps, to share them--would it please thee to have thy sister a
partaker?  Would it please thee that Arbaces was her host?'

'O gods, he dare not!  Girl, if thou mockest me, tremble!  I will tear
thee limb from limb!'

'I speak the truth; and while I speak, Ione is in the halls of
Arbaces--for the first time his guest.  Thou knowest if there be peril
in that first time!  Farewell!  I have fulfilled my charge.'

'Stay! stay!' cried the priest, passing his wan hand over his brow.  'If
this be true, what--what can be done to save her?  They may not admit
me.  I know not all the mazes of that intricate mansion.  O Nemesis!
justly am I punished!'

'I will dismiss yon slave, be thou my guide and comrade; I will lead
thee to the private door of the house: I will whisper to thee the word
which admits. Take some weapon: it may be needful!'

'Wait an instant,' said Apaecides, retiring into one of the cells that
flank the temple, and reappearing in a few moments wrapped in a large
cloak, which was then much worn by all classes, and which concealed his
sacred dress. 'Now,' he said, grinding his teeth, 'if Arbaces hath dared
to--but he dare not! he dare not!  Why should I suspect him?  Is he so
base a villain?  I will not think it--yet, sophist! dark bewilderer that
he is!  O gods protect--hush! are there gods?  Yes, there is one
goddess, at least, whose voice I can command; and that is--Vengeance!'

Muttering these disconnected thoughts, Apaecides, followed by his silent
and sightless companion, hastened through the most solitary paths to the
house of the Egyptian.

The slave, abruptly dismissed by Nydia, shrugged his shoulders, muttered
an adjuration, and, nothing loath, rolled off to his cubiculum.



Chapter VIII

THE SOLITUDE AND SOLILOQUY OF THE EGYPTIAN.  HIS CHARACTER ANALYSED.

WE must go back a few hours in the progress of our story.  At the first
grey dawn of the day, which Glaucus had already marked with white, the
Egyptian was seated, sleepless and alone, on the summit of the lofty and
pyramidal tower which flanked his house.  A tall parapet around it
served as a wall, and conspired, with the height of the edifice and the
gloomy trees that girded the mansion, to defy the prying eyes of
curiosity or observation.  A table, on which lay a scroll, filled with
mystic figures, was before him. On high, the stars waxed dim and faint,
and the shades of night melted from the sterile mountain-tops; only
above Vesuvius there rested a deep and massy cloud, which for several
days past had gathered darker and more solid over its summit.  The
struggle of night and day was more visible over the broad ocean, which
stretched calm, like a gigantic lake, bounded by the circling shores
that, covered with vines and foliage, and gleaming here and there with
the white walls of sleeping cities, sloped to the scarce rippling waves.

It was the hour above all others most sacred to the daring science of
the Egyptian--the science which would read our changeful destinies in
the stars.

He had filled his scroll, he had noted the moment and the sign; and,
leaning upon his hand, he had surrendered himself to the thoughts which
his calculation excited.

'Again do the stars forewarn me!  Some danger, then, assuredly awaits
me!' said he, slowly; 'some danger, violent and sudden in its nature.
The stars wear for me the same mocking menace which, if our chronicles
do not err, they once wore for Pyrrhus--for him, doomed to strive for
all things, to enjoy none--all attacking, nothing gaining--battles
without fruit, laurels without triumph, fame without success; at last
made craven by his own superstitions, and slain like a dog by a tile
from the hand of an old woman! Verily, the stars flatter when they give
me a type in this fool of war--when they promise to the ardour of my
wisdom the same results as to the madness of his ambition--perpetual
exercise--no certain goal!--the Sisyphus task, the mountain and the
stone!--the stone, a gloomy image!--it reminds me that I am threatened
with somewhat of the same death as the Epirote.  Let me look again.
"Beware," say the shining prophets, "how thou passest under ancient
roofs, or besieged walls, or overhanging cliffs--a stone hurled from
above, is charged by the curses of destiny against thee!" And, at no
distant date from this, comes the peril: but I cannot, of a certainty,
read the day and hour.  Well! if my glass runs low, the sands shall
sparkle to the last. Yet, if I escape this peril--ay, if I
escape--bright and clear as the moonlight track along the waters glows
the rest of my existence.  I see honors, happiness, success, shining
upon every billow of the dark gulf beneath which I must sink at last.
What, then, with such destinies beyond the peril, shall I succumb to the
peril?  My soul whispers hope, it sweeps exultingly beyond the boding
hour, it revels in the future--its own courage is its fittest omen.  If
I were to perish so suddenly and so soon, the shadow of death would
darken over me, and I should feel the icy presentiment of my doom.  My
soul would express, in sadness and in gloom, its forecast of the dreary
Orcus.  But it smiles--it assures me of deliverance.'

As he thus concluded his soliloquy, the Egyptian involuntarily rose.  He
paced rapidly the narrow space of that star-roofed floor, and, pausing
at the parapet, looked again upon the grey and melancholy heavens.  The
chills of the faint dawn came refreshingly upon his brow, and gradually
his mind resumed its natural and collected calm.  He withdrew his gaze
from the stars, as, one after one, they receded into the depths of
heaven; and his eyes fell over the broad expanse below.  Dim in the
silenced port of the city rose the masts of the galleys; along that mart
of luxury and of labor was stilled the mighty hum.  No lights, save here
and there from before the columns of a temple, or in the porticoes of
the voiceless forum, broke the wan and fluctuating light of the
struggling morn.  From the heart of the torpid city, so soon to vibrate
with a thousand passions, there came no sound: the streams of life
circulated not; they lay locked under the ice of sleep.  From the huge
space of the amphitheatre, with its stony seats rising one above the
other--coiled and round as some slumbering monster--rose a thin and
ghastly mist, which gathered darker, and more dark, over the scattered
foliage that gloomed in its vicinity.  The city seemed as, after the
awful change of seventeen ages, it seems now to the traveler,--a City of
the Dead.'

The ocean itself--that serene and tideless sea--lay scarce less hushed,
save that from its deep bosom came, softened by the distance, a faint
and regular murmur, like the breathing of its sleep; and curving far, as
with outstretched arms, into the green and beautiful land, it seemed
unconsciously to clasp to its breast the cities sloping to its
margin--Stabiae, and Herculaneum, and Pompeii--those children and
darlings of the deep.  'Ye slumber,' said the Egyptian, as he scowled
over the cities, the boast and flower of Campania; 'ye slumber!--would
it were the eternal repose of death! As ye now--jewels in the crown of
empire--so once were the cities of the Nile!  Their greatness hath
perished from them, they sleep amidst ruins, their palaces and their
shrines are tombs, the serpent coils in the grass of their streets, the
lizard basks in their solitary halls.  By that mysterious law of Nature,
which humbles one to exalt the other, ye have thriven upon their ruins;
thou, haughty Rome, hast usurped the glories of Sesostris and
Semiramis--thou art a robber, clothing thyself with their spoils!  And
these--slaves in thy triumph--that I (the last son of forgotten
monarchs) survey below, reservoirs of thine all-pervading power and
luxury, I curse as I behold! The time shall come when Egypt shall be
avenged! when the barbarian's steed shall make his manger in the Golden
House of Nero! and thou that hast sown the wind with conquest shalt reap
the harvest in the whirlwind of desolation!'

As the Egyptian uttered a prediction which fate so fearfully fulfilled,
a more solemn and boding image of ill omen never occurred to the dreams
of painter or of poet.  The morning light, which can pale so wanly even
the young cheek of beauty, gave his majestic and stately features almost
the colors of the grave, with the dark hair falling massively around
them, and the dark robes flowing long and loose, and the arm
outstretched from that lofty eminence, and the glittering eyes, fierce
with a savage gladness--half prophet and half fiend!

He turned his gaze from the city and the ocean; before him lay the
vineyards and meadows of the rich Campania.  The gate and walls--ancient,
half Pelasgic--of the city, seemed not to bound its extent. Villas and
villages stretched on every side up the ascent of Vesuvius, not nearly
then so steep or so lofty as at present.  For, as Rome itself is built
on an exhausted volcano, so in similar security the inhabitants of the
South tenanted the green and vine-clad places around a volcano whose
fires they believed at rest for ever.  From the gate stretched the long
street of tombs, various in size and architecture, by which, on that
side, the city is as yet approached. Above all, rode the cloud-capped
summit of the Dread Mountain, with the shadows, now dark, now light,
betraying the mossy caverns and ashy rocks, which testified the past
conflagrations, and might have prophesied--but man is blind--that which
was to come!

Difficult was it then and there to guess the causes why the tradition of
the place wore so gloomy and stern a hue; why, in those smiling plains,
for miles around--to Baiae and Misenum--the poets had imagined the
entrance and thresholds of their hell--their Acheron, and their fabled
Styx: why, in those Phlegrae, now laughing with the vine, they placed
the battles of the gods, and supposed the daring Titans to have sought
the victory of heaven--save, indeed, that yet, in yon seared and blasted
summit, fancy might think to read the characters of the Olympian
thunderbolt.

But it was neither the rugged height of the still volcano, nor the
fertility of the sloping fields, nor the melancholy avenue of tombs, nor
the glittering villas of a polished and luxurious people, that now
arrested the eye of the Egyptian.  On one part of the landscape, the
mountain of Vesuvius descended to the plain in a narrow and uncultivated
ridge, broken here and there by jagged crags and copses of wild foliage.
At the base of this lay a marshy and unwholesome pool; and the intent
gaze of Arbaces caught the outline of some living form moving by the
marshes, and stooping ever and anon as if to pluck its rank produce.

'Ho!' said he, aloud, 'I have then, another companion in these unworldly
night--watches.  The witch of Vesuvius is abroad.  What! doth she, too,
as the credulous imagine--doth she, too, learn the lore of the great
stars? Hath she been uttering foul magic to the moon, or culling (as her
pauses betoken) foul herbs from the venomous marsh? Well, I must see
this fellow-laborer.  Whoever strives to know learns that no human lore
is despicable.  Despicable only you--ye fat and bloated things--slaves
of luxury--sluggards in thought--who, cultivating nothing but the barren
sense, dream that its poor soil can produce alike the myrtle and the
laurel.  No, the wise only can enjoy--to us only true luxury is given,
when mind, brain, invention, experience, thought, learning, imagination,
all contribute like rivers to swell the seas of SENSE!--Ione!'

As Arbaces uttered that last and charmed word, his thoughts sunk at once
into a more deep and profound channel.  His steps paused; he took not
his eyes from the ground; once or twice he smiled joyously, and then, as
he turned from his place of vigil, and sought his couch, he muttered,
'If death frowns so near, I will say at least that I have lived--Ione
shall be mine!'

The character of Arbaces was one of those intricate and varied webs, in
which even the mind that sat within it was sometimes confused and
perplexed. In him, the son of a fallen dynasty, the outcast of a sunken
people, was that spirit of discontented pride, which ever rankles in one
of a sterner mould, who feels himself inexorably shut from the sphere in
which his fathers shone, and to which Nature as well as birth no less
entitles himself.  This sentiment hath no benevolence; it wars with
society, it sees enemies in mankind.  But with this sentiment did not go
its common companion, poverty. Arbaces possessed wealth which equalled
that of most of the Roman nobles; and this enabled him to gratify to the
utmost the passions which had no outlet in business or ambition.
Travelling from clime to clime, and beholding still Rome everywhere, he
increased both his hatred of society and his passion for pleasure.  He
was in a vast prison, which, however, he could fill with the ministers
of luxury.  He could not escape from the prison, and his only object,
therefore, was to give it the character of the palace.  The Egyptians,
from the earliest time, were devoted to the joys of sense; Arbaces
inherited both their appetite for sensuality and the glow of imagination
which struck light from its rottenness.  But still, unsocial in his
pleasures as in his graver pursuits, and brooking neither superior nor
equal, he admitted few to his companionship, save the willing slaves of
his profligacy.  He was the solitary lord of a crowded harem; but, with
all, he felt condemned to that satiety which is the constant curse of
men whose intellect is above their pursuits, and that which once had
been the impulse of passion froze down to the ordinance of custom.
From the disappointments of sense he sought to raise himself by the
cultivation of knowledge; but as it was not his object to serve mankind,
so he despised that knowledge which is practical and useful.  His dark
imagination loved to exercise itself in those more visionary and obscure
researches which are ever the most delightful to a wayward and solitary
mind, and to which he himself was invited by the daring pride of his
disposition and the mysterious traditions of his clime. Dismissing faith
in the confused creeds of the heathen world, he reposed the greatest
faith in the power of human wisdom. He did not know (perhaps no one in
that age distinctly did) the limits which Nature imposes upon our
discoveries.  Seeing that the higher we mount in knowledge the more
wonders we behold, he imagined that Nature not only worked miracles in
her ordinary course, but that she might, by the cabala of some master
soul, be diverted from that course itself.  Thus he pursued science,
across her appointed boundaries, into the land of perplexity and shadow.
From the truths of astronomy he wandered into astrological fallacy; from
the secrets of chemistry he passed into the spectral labyrinth of magic;
and he who could be sceptical as to the power of the gods, was
credulously superstitious as to the power of man.

The cultivation of magic, carried at that day to a singular height among
the would-be wise, was especially Eastern in its origin; it was alien to
the early philosophy of the Greeks; nor had it been received by them
with favor until Ostanes, who accompanied the army of Xerxes,
introduced, amongst the simple credulities of Hellas, the solemn
superstitions of Zoroaster.  Under the Roman emperors it had become,
however, naturalized at Rome (a meet subject for Juvenal's fiery wit).
Intimately connected with magic was the worship of Isis, and the
Egyptian religion was the means by which was extended the devotion to
Egyptian sorcery.  The theurgic, or benevolent magic--the goetic, or
dark and evil necromancy--were alike in pre-eminent repute during the
first century of the Christian era; and the marvels of Faustus are not
comparable to those of Apollonius.  Kings, courtiers, and sages, all
trembled before the professors of the dread science.  And not the least
remarkable of his tribe was the most formidable and profound Arbaces.
His fame and his discoveries were known to all the cultivators of magic;
they even survived himself.  But it was not by his real name that he was
honored by the sorcerer and the sage: his real name, indeed, was unknown
in Italy, for 'Arbaces' was not a genuinely Egyptian but a Median
appellation, which, in the admixture and unsettlement of the ancient
races, had become common in the country of the Nile; and there were
various reasons, not only of pride, but of policy (for in youth he had
conspired against the majesty of Rome), which induced him to conceal his
true name and rank.  But neither by the name he had borrowed from the
Mede, nor by that which in the colleges of Egypt would have attested his
origin from kings, did the cultivators of magic acknowledge the potent
master.  He received from their homage a more mystic appellation, and
was long remembered in Magna Graecia and the Eastern plain by the name
of 'Hermes, the Lord of the Flaming Belt'. His subtle speculations and
boasted attributes of wisdom, recorded in various volumes, were among
those tokens 'of the curious arts' which the Christian converts most
joyfully, yet most fearfully, burnt at Ephesus, depriving posterity of
the proofs of the cunning of the fiend.

The conscience of Arbaces was solely of the intellect--it was awed by no
moral laws.  If man imposed these checks upon the herd, so he believed
that man, by superior wisdom, could raise himself above them. 'If (he
reasoned) I have the genius to impose laws, have I not the right to
command my own creations?  Still more, have I not the right to
control--to evade--to scorn--the fabrications of yet meaner intellects
than my own?' Thus, if he were a villain, he justified his villainy by
what ought to have made him virtuous--namely, the elevation of his
capacities.

Most men have more or less the passion for power; in Arbaces that
passion corresponded exactly to his character.  It was not the passion
for an external and brute authority.  He desired not the purple and the
fasces, the insignia of vulgar command.  His youthful ambition once
foiled and defeated, scorn had supplied its place--his pride, his
contempt for Rome--Rome, which had become the synonym of the world
(Rome, whose haughty name he regarded with the same disdain as that
which Rome herself lavished upon the barbarian), did not permit him to
aspire to sway over others, for that would render him at once the tool
or creature of the emperor.  He, the Son of the Great Race of
Rameses--he execute the orders of, and receive his power from,
another!--the mere notion filled him with rage.  But in rejecting an
ambition that coveted nominal distinctions, he but indulged the more in
the ambition to rule the heart.  Honoring mental power as the greatest
of earthly gifts, he loved to feel that power palpably in himself, by
extending it over all whom he encountered.  Thus had he ever sought the
young--thus had he ever fascinated and controlled them.  He loved to
find subjects in men's souls--to rule over an invisible and immaterial
empire!--had he been less sensual and less wealthy, he might have sought
to become the founder of a new religion. As it was, his energies were
checked by his pleasures. Besides, however, the vague love of this moral
sway (vanity so dear to sages!) he was influenced by a singular and
dreamlike devotion to all that belonged to the mystic Land his ancestors
had swayed. Although he disbelieved in her deities, he believed in the
allegories they represented (or rather he interpreted those allegories
anew).  He loved to keep alive the worship of Egypt, because he thus
maintained the shadow and the recollection of her power.  He loaded,
therefore, the altars of Osiris and of Isis with regal donations, and
was ever anxious to dignify their priesthood by new and wealthy
converts.  The vow taken--the priesthood embraced--he usually chose the
comrades of his pleasures from those whom he made his victims, partly
because he thus secured to himself their secrecy--partly because he thus
yet more confirmed to himself his peculiar power. Hence the motives of
his conduct to Apaecides, strengthened as these were, in that instance,
by his passion for Ione.

He had seldom lived long in one place; but as he grew older, he grew
more wearied of the excitement of new scenes, and he had sojourned among
the delightful cities of Campania for a period which surprised even
himself.  In fact, his pride somewhat crippled his choice of residence.
His unsuccessful conspiracy excluded him from those burning climes which
he deemed of right his own hereditary possession, and which now cowered,
supine and sunken, under the wings of the Roman eagle.  Rome herself was
hateful to his indignant soul; nor did he love to find his riches
rivalled by the minions of the court, and cast into comparative poverty
by the mighty magnificence of the court itself.  The Campanian cities
proffered to him all that his nature craved--the luxuries of an
unequalled climate--the imaginative refinements of a voluptuous
civilization.  He was removed from the sight of a superior wealth; he
was without rivals to his riches; he was free from the spies of a
jealous court.  As long as he was rich, none pried into his conduct.  He
pursued the dark tenour of his way undisturbed and secure.

It is the curse of sensualists never to love till the pleasures of sense
begin to pall; their ardent youth is frittered away in countless
desires--their hearts are exhausted.  So, ever chasing love, and taught
by a restless imagination to exaggerate, perhaps, its charms, the
Egyptian had spent all the glory of his years without attaining the
object of his desires.  The beauty of to-morrow succeeded the beauty of
to-day, and the shadows bewildered him in his pursuit of the substance.
When, two years before the present date, he beheld Ione, he saw, for the
first time, one whom he imagined he could love.  He stood, then, upon
that bridge of life, from which man sees before him distinctly a wasted
youth on the one side, and the darkness of approaching age upon the
other: a time in which we are more than ever anxious, perhaps, to secure
to ourselves, ere it be yet too late, whatever we have been taught to
consider necessary to the enjoyment of a life of which the brighter half
is gone.

With an earnestness and a patience which he had never before commanded
for his pleasures, Arbaces had devoted himself to win the heart of Ione.
It did not content him to love, he desired to be loved. In this hope he
had watched the expanding youth of the beautiful Neapolitan; and,
knowing the influence that the mind possesses over those who are taught
to cultivate the mind, he had contributed willingly to form the genius
and enlighten the intellect of Ione, in the hope that she would be thus
able to appreciate what he felt would be his best claim to her
affection: viz, a character which, however criminal and perverted, was
rich in its original elements of strength and grandeur.  When he felt
that character to be acknowledged, he willingly allowed, nay, encouraged
her, to mix among the idle votaries of pleasure, in the belief that her
soul, fitted for higher commune, would miss the companionship of his
own, and that, in comparison with others, she would learn to love
herself.  He had forgot, that as the sunflower to the sun, so youth
turns to youth, until his jealousy of Glaucus suddenly apprised him of
his error.  From that moment, though, as we have seen, he knew not the
extent of his danger, a fiercer and more tumultuous direction was given
to a passion long controlled.  Nothing kindles the fire of love like the
sprinkling of the anxieties of jealousy; it takes then a wilder, a more
resistless flame; it forgets its softness; it ceases to be tender; it
assumes something of the intensity--of the ferocity--of hate.

Arbaces resolved to lose no further time upon cautious and perilous
preparations: he resolved to place an irrevocable barrier between
himself and his rivals: he resolved to possess himself of the person of
Ione: not that in his present love, so long nursed and fed by hopes
purer than those of passion alone, he would have been contented with
that mere possession. He desired the heart, the soul, no less than the
beauty, of Ione; but he imagined that once separated by a daring crime
from the rest of mankind--once bound to Ione by a tie that memory could
not break, she would be driven to concentrate her thoughts in him--that
his arts would complete his conquest, and that, according to the true
moral of the Roman and the Sabine, the empire obtained by force would be
cemented by gentler means. This resolution was yet more confirmed in him
by his belief in the prophecies of the stars: they had long foretold to
him this year, and even the present month, as the epoch of some dread
disaster, menacing life itself.  He was driven to a certain and limited
date. He resolved to crowd, monarch-like, on his funeral pyre all that
his soul held most dear.  In his own words, if he were to die, he
resolved to feel that he had lived, and that Ione should be his own.


Chapter IX

WHAT BECOMES OF IONE IN THE HOUSE OF ARBACES. THE FIRST SIGNAL OF THE
WRATH OF THE DREAD FOE.

WHEN Ione entered the spacious hall of the Egyptian, the same awe which
had crept over her brother impressed itself also upon her: there seemed
to her as to him something ominous and warning in the still and mournful
faces of those dread Theban monsters, whose majestic and passionless
features the marble so well portrayed:

  Their look, with the reach of past ages, was wise,
  And the soul of eternity thought in their eyes.
The tall AEthiopian slave grinned as he admitted her, and motioned to
her to proceed.  Half-way up the hall she was met by Arbaces himself, in
festive robes, which glittered with jewels.  Although it was broad day
without, the mansion, according to the practice of the luxurious, was
artificially darkened, and the lamps cast their still and odor-giving
light over the rich floors and ivory roofs.

'Beautiful Ione,' said Arbaces, as he bent to touch her hand, 'it is you
that have eclipsed the day--it is your eyes that light up the halls--it
is your breath which fills them with perfumes.'

'You must not talk to me thus,' said Ione, smiling, 'you forget that
your lore has sufficiently instructed my mind to render these graceful
flatteries to my person unwelcome.  It was you who taught me to disdain
adulation: will you unteach your pupil?'

There was something so frank and charming in the manner of Ione, as she
thus spoke, that the Egyptian was more than ever enamoured, and more
than ever disposed to renew the offence he had committed; he, however,
answered quickly and gaily, and hastened to renew the conversation.

He led her through the various chambers of a house, which seemed to
contain to her eyes, inexperienced to other splendor than the minute
elegance of Campanian cities, the treasures of the world.

In the walls were set pictures of inestimable art, the lights shone over
statues of the noblest age of Greece.  Cabinets of gems, each cabinet
itself a gem, filled up the interstices of the columns; the most
precious woods lined the thresholds and composed the doors; gold and
jewels seemed lavished all around.  Sometimes they were alone in these
rooms--sometimes they passed through silent rows of slaves, who,
kneeling as she passed, proffered to her offerings of bracelets, of
chains, of gems, which the Egyptian vainly entreated her to receive.

'I have often heard,' said she, wonderingly, 'that you were rich; but I
never dreamed of the amount of your wealth.'

'Would I could coin it all,' replied the Egyptian, 'into one crown,
which I might place upon that snowy brow!'

'Alas! the weight would crush me; I should be a second Tarpeia,'
answered Ione, laughingly.

'But thou dost not disdain riches, O Ione! they know not what life is
capable of who are not wealthy.  Gold is the great magician of earth--it
realizes our dreams--it gives them the power of a god--there is a
grandeur, a sublimity, in its possession; it is the mightiest, yet the
most obedient of our slaves.'

The artful Arbaces sought to dazzle the young Neapolitan by his
treasures and his eloquence; he sought to awaken in her the desire to be
mistress of what she surveyed: he hoped that she would confound the
owner with the possessions, and that the charms of his wealth would be
reflected on himself.  Meanwhile, Ione was secretly somewhat uneasy at
the gallantries which escaped from those lips, which, till lately, had
seemed to disdain the common homage we pay to beauty; and with that
delicate subtlety, which woman alone possesses, she sought to ward off
shafts deliberately aimed, and to laugh or to talk away the meaning from
his warming language.  Nothing in the world is more pretty than that
same species of defence; it is the charm of the African necromancer who
professed with a feather to turn aside the winds.

The Egyptian was intoxicated and subdued by her grace even more than by
her beauty: it was with difficulty that he suppressed his emotions;
alas! the feather was only powerful against the summer breezes--it would
be the sport of the storm.

Suddenly, as they stood in one hall, which was surrounded by draperies
of silver and white, the Egyptian clapped his hands, and, as if by
enchantment, a banquet rose from the floor--a couch or throne, with a
crimson canopy, ascended simultaneously at the feet of Ione--and at the
same instant from behind the curtains swelled the invisible and softest
music.

Arbaces placed himself at the feet of Ione--and children, young and
beautiful as Loves, ministered to the feast.

The feast was over, the music sank into a low and subdued strain, and
Arbaces thus addressed his beautiful guest:

'Hast thou never in this dark and uncertain world--hast thou never
aspired, my pupil, to look beyond--hast thou never wished to put aside
the veil of futurity, and to behold on the shores of Fate the shadowy
images of things to be?  For it is not the past alone that has its
ghosts: each event to come has also its spectrum--its shade; when the
hour arrives, life enters it, the shadow becomes corporeal, and walks
the world.  Thus, in the land beyond the grave, are ever two impalpable
and spiritual hosts--the things to be, the things that have been! If by
our wisdom we can penetrate that land, we see the one as the other, and
learn, as I have learned, not alone the mysteries of the dead, but also
the destiny of the living.'

