
"And now I have my bit of news to tell you, Matteo. Signor Polani has
most generously offered me a position in his house, and I am to sail
tomorrow in one of his ships for the East."

"I congratulate you, Francisco, for I know, from what you have often
said, that you would like this much better than going back to England.
But it seems very sudden. You did not know anything about it yesterday,
and now you are going to start at once. Why, when can it have been
settled? Polani has been absent since daybreak, engaged in this matter
of the girls, and has been occupied ever since with the council."

"I have seen him since he returned," Francis replied; "and though it
was only absolutely settled this morning, he has had several interviews
with my father on the subject. I believe he and my father thought that
it was better to get me away as soon as possible, as Ruggiero's friends
may put down the disgrace which has befallen him to my interference in
his first attempt to carry off the girls."

"Well, I think you are a lucky fellow anyhow, Francisco, and I hope
that I may be soon doing something also. I shall speak to my father
about it, and ask him to get Polani to let me take some voyages in his
vessels, so that I may be fit to become an officer in one of the state
galleys, as soon as I am of age. Where are you going now?"

"I am going round to the School of Arms, to say goodbye to our
comrades. After that I am going to Signor Polani's to pay my respects
to the signoras. Then I shall be at home with my father till it is time
to go on board. He will have left here before I return from my voyage,
as he is going to wind up his affairs at once and return to England."

"Well, I will accompany you to the school and to my cousin's," Matteo
said. "I shall miss you terribly here, and shall certainly do all I can
to follow your example, and get afloat. You may have all sorts of
adventures, for we shall certainly be at war with Genoa before many
weeks are over, and you will have to keep a sharp lookout for their war
galleys. Polani's ships are prizes worth taking, and you may have the
chance of seeing the inside of a Genoese prison before you return."

After a visit to the School of Arms, the two friends were rowed to
Signor Polani's. The merchant himself was out, but they were at once
shown up to the room where the girls were sitting.

"My dear cousins," Matteo said as he entered, "I am delighted to see
you back safe and well. All Venice is talking of your return. You are
the heroines of the day. You do not know what an excitement there has
been over your adventure."

"The sooner people get to talk about something else the better,
Matteo," Maria said, "for we shall have to be prisoners all day till
something else occupies their attention. We have not the least desire
to be pointed at, whenever we go out, as the maidens who were carried
away. If the Venetians were so interested in us, they had much better
have set about discovering where we were hidden away before."

"But everyone did try, I can assure you, Maria. Every place has been
ransacked, high and low. Every gondolier has been questioned and cross
questioned as to his doings on that day. Every fishing village has been
visited. Never was such a search, I do believe. But who could have
thought of your being hidden away all the time at San Nicolo! As for
me, I have spent most of my time in a gondola, going out and staring up
at every house I passed, in hopes of seeing a handkerchief waved from a
casement. And so has Francisco; he has been just as busy in the search
as anyone, I can assure you."

"Francisco is different," Maria said, not observing the signs Francis
was making for her to be silent. "Francisco has got eyes in his head,
and a brain in his skull, which is more, it seems, than any of the
Venetians have; and had he not brought father to our hiding place,
there we should have remained until Ruggiero Mocenigo came and carried
us away."

"Francisco brought your father the news!" Matteo exclaimed in
astonishment. "Why, was it he who found you out, after all?"

"Did you not know that, Matteo? Of course it was Francisco! As I told
you, he has got brains; and if it had not been for him, we should
certainly never have been rescued. Giulia and I owe him
everything--don't we, Giulia?"

"Forgive me for not telling you, Matteo," Francis said to his
astonished friend; "but Signor Polani, and my father, both impressed
upon me so strongly that I should keep silent as to my share in the
business, that I thought it better not even to mention it to you at
present. It was purely the result of an accident."

"It was nothing of the sort," Maria said. "It was the result of your
keeping your eyes open and knowing how to put two and two together. I
did not know, Francisco, that it was a secret. We have not seen our
father since we have returned, and I suppose he thought we should see
nobody until he saw us again, and so did not tell us that we were not
to mention your name in the affair; but we will be careful in future."

"But how was it, Francisco?" Matteo asked. "Now I know so much as this,
I suppose I can be told the rest. I can understand well enough why it
was to be kept a secret, and why my cousin is anxious to get you out of
Venice at once."

Francis related the manner in which he first became acquainted with the
existence of the hut on the island, and the fact of its being
frequented by Ruggiero Mocenigo; and how, on catching sight of the
gouvernante in a gondola, and seeing her make out across the lagoons,
the idea struck him that the girls were confined in the hut.

"It is all very simple, you see, Matteo," he concluded.

"I will never say anything against learning to row a gondola in
future," Matteo said, "for it seems to lead to all sorts of adventures;
and unless you could have rowed well, you would never have got back to
tell the story. But it is certain that it is a good thing you are
leaving Venice for a time, for Ruggiero's friends may find out the
share you had in it from some of my cousin's servants. You may be sure
that they will do their best to discover how he came to be informed of
the hiding place, and he is quite right to send you off at once."

"What! are you going away, Francisco?" the two girls exclaimed
together.

"I am sailing tomorrow in one of your father's ships, signoras."

"And you are not coming back again?" Maria exclaimed.

"I hope to have the pleasure of seeing you again before very long,
signora. I am entering your father's service for good, and shall be
backwards and forwards to Venice as the ship comes and goes. My father
is returning to England, and Signor Polani has most kindly requested me
to make my home with him whenever I am in port."

"That is better," Maria said. "We should have a pretty quarrel with
papa if he had let you go away altogether, after what you have done for
us--

"Shouldn't we, Giulia?"

But Giulia had walked away to the window, and did not seem to hear the
question.

"That will be very pleasant," Maria went on; "for you will be back
every two or three months, and I shall take good care that papa does
not send the ship off in a hurry again. It will be almost as good as
having a brother; and I look upon you almost as a brother now,
Francisco--and a very good brother, too. I don't think that man will
molest us any more. If I thought there was any chance of it, I should
ask papa to keep you for a time, because I should feel confident that
you would manage to protect us somehow."

"I do not think there is the slightest chance of more trouble from
him," Francis said. "He is sure of a long term of imprisonment for
carrying you off."

"That is the least they can do to him, I should think," Maria said
indignantly. "I certainly shall not feel comfortable while he is at
large."

After half an hour's talk Francis and his friend took their leave.

"You certainly were born with a silver spoon in your mouth," Matteo
said as they took their seats in the gondola, "and my cousin does well
to get you out of Venice at once, for I can tell you there are scores
of young fellows who would feel jealous at your position with my
cousins."

"Nonsense!" Francis said, colouring. "How can you talk so absurdly,
Matteo? I am only a boy, and it will be years before I could think of
marriage. Besides, your cousins are said to be the richest heiresses in
Venice; and it is not because I have been able to be of some slight
service to them, that I should venture to think of either of them in
that way."

"We shall see," Matteo laughed. "Maria is a little too old for you, I
grant, but Giulia will do very well; and as you have already come, as
Maria says, to be looked upon by them as a brother and protector, there
is no saying as to how she may regard you in another two or three
years."

"The thing is absurd, Matteo," Francis said impatiently. "Do not talk
such nonsense any more."

Matteo lay back in his seat and whistled.

"I will say no more about it at present, Francisco," he said, after a
pause; "but I must own that I should be well content to stand as high
in the good graces of my pretty cousins as you do."

The next morning Francis spent some time with his father talking over
future arrangements.

"I have no doubt that I shall see you sometimes, Francis; for Polani
will be sure to give you an opportunity of making a trip to England,
from time to time, in one of his ships trading thither. Unless anything
unexpected happens, your future appears assured. Polani tells me he
shall always regard you in the light of a son; and I have no fear of
your doing anything to cause him to forfeit his good opinion of you. Do
not be over adventurous, for even in a merchant ship there are many
perils to be met with. Pirates swarm in the Mediterranean, in spite of
the efforts of Venice to suppress them; and when war is going on, both
Venice and Genoa send out numbers of ships whose doings savour strongly
of piracy. Remember that the first duty of the captain of a merchant
ship is to save his vessel and cargo, and that he should not think of
fighting unless he sees no other method of escape open to him.

"It is possible that, after a time, I may send one of your brothers out
here, but that will depend upon what I find of their disposition when I
get home; for it will be worse than useless to send a lad of a
headstrong disposition out to the care of one but a few years older
than himself. But this we can talk about when you come over to England,
and we see what position you are occupying here.

"I fear that Venice is about to enter upon a period of great difficulty
and danger. There can be little doubt that Genoa, Padua, and Hungary
are leagued against her; and powerful as she is, and great as are her
resources, they will be taxed to the utmost to carry her through the
dangers that threaten her. However, I have faith in her future, and
believe that she will weather the storm, as she has done many that have
preceded it.

"Venice has the rare virtue of endurance--the greatest dangers, the
most disastrous defeats, fail to shake her courage, and only arouse her
to greater efforts. In this respect she is in the greatest contrast to
her rival, Genoa, who always loses heart the moment the tide turns
against her. No doubt this is due, in no slight extent, to her
oligarchic form of government. The people see the nobles, who rule
them, calm and self possessed, however great the danger, and remain
confident and tranquil; while in Genoa each misfortune is the signal
for a struggle between contending factions. The occasion is seized to
throw blame and contumely upon those in power, and the people give way
to alternate outbursts of rage and depression.

"I do not say there are no faults in the government of Venice, but
taking her altogether there is no government in Europe to compare with
it. During the last three hundred years, the history of every other
city in Italy, I may say of every other nation in Europe, is one long
record of intestine struggle and bloodshed, while in Venice there has
not been a single popular tumult worthy of the name. It is to the
strength, the firmness, and the moderation of her government that
Venice owes her advancement, the respect in which she is held among
nations, as much as to the commercial industry of her people.

"She alone among nations could for years have withstood the interdict
of the pope, or the misfortunes that have sometimes befallen her. She
alone has never felt the foot of the invader, or bent her neck beneath
a foreign yoke to preserve her existence. Here, save only in matters of
government, all opinions are free, strangers of all nationalities are
welcome. It is a grand city and a grand people, Francis, and though I
shall be glad to return to England I cannot but feel regret at leaving
it.

"And now, my boy, it is time to be going off to your ship. Polani said
she would sail at ten o'clock. It is now nine, and it will take you
half an hour to get there. I am glad to hear that Giuseppi is going
with you. The lad is faithful and attached to you, and may be of
service. Your trunk has already been sent on board, so let us be
going."

On arriving at the ship, which was lying in the port of Malamocco, they
found that she was just ready for sailing. The last bales of goods were
being hoisted on board, and the sailors were preparing to loosen the
sails.

The Bonito was a large vessel, built for stowage rather than speed. She
carried two masts with large square sails, and before the wind would
probably proceed at a fair rate; but the art of sailing close hauled
was then unknown, and in the event of the wind being unfavourable she
would be forced either to anchor or to depend upon her oars, of which
she rowed fifteen on either side. As they mounted on to the deck they
were greeted by Polani himself.

"I have come off to see the last of your son, Messer Hammond, and to
make sure that my orders for his comfort have been carried out.

"Captain Corpadio, this is the young gentleman of whom I have spoken to
you, and who is to be treated in all respects as if he were my son. You
will instruct him in all matters connected with the navigation of the
ship, as well as in the mercantile portion of the business, the best
methods of buying and selling, the prices of goods, and the methods of
payment.

"This is your cabin, Francisco."

He opened the door of a roomy cabin in the poop of the ship. It was
fitted up with every luxury.

"Thank you very much indeed, Signor Polani," Francis said. "The only
fault is that it is too comfortable. I would as lief have roughed it as
other aspirants have to do."

"There was no occasion, Francisco. When there is rough work to be done,
you will, I have no doubt, do it; but as you are going to be a trader,
and not a sailor, there is no occasion that you should do so more than
is necessary. You will learn to command a ship just as well as if you
began by dipping your hands in tar. And it is well that you should
learn to do this, for unless a man can sail a vessel himself, he is not
well qualified to judge of the merits of men he appoints to be
captains; but you must remember that you are going as a representative
of my house, and must, therefore, travel in accordance with that
condition.

"You will be sorry to hear that bad news has just been received from
the mainland. The state galley sent to fetch Ruggiero Mocenigo has
arrived with the news that, on the previous night, a strong party of
men who are believed to have come from Padua, fell upon the guard and
carried off Ruggiero. My sailors came up and fought stoutly, but they
were overpowered, and several of them were killed; so Ruggiero is again
at large.

"This is a great disappointment to me. Though the villain is not likely
to show his face in the Venetian territory again, I shall be anxious
until Maria is safely married, and shall lose no time in choosing a
husband for her. Unless I am mistaken, her liking is turned in the
direction of Rufino, brother of your friend Matteo Giustiniani, and as
I like none better among the suitors for her hand, methinks that by the
time you return you will find that they are betrothed.

"And now I hear the sailors are heaving the anchor, and therefore,
Messer Hammond, it is time we took to our boats."

There was a parting embrace between Francis and his father. Then the
merchants descended into their gondolas, and lay waiting alongside
until the anchor was up, the great sails shaken out, and the Bonito
began to move slowly through the water towards the entrance of the
port. Then, with a final wave of the hand, the gondolas rowed off and
Francis turned to look at his surroundings. The first object that met
his eye was Giuseppi, who was standing near him waving his cap to his
father.

"Well, Giuseppi, what do you think of this?"

"I don't know what to think yet, Messer Francisco. It all seems so big
and solid one does not feel as if one was on the water. It's more like
living in a house. It does not seem as if anything could move her."

"You will find the waves can move her about when we get fairly to sea,
Giuseppi, and the time will come when you will think our fast gondola
was a steady craft in comparison. How long have you been on board?"

"I came off three hours ago, signor, with the boat that brought the
furniture for your cabin. I have been putting that to rights since. A
supply of the best wine has been sent off, and extra stores of all
sorts, so you need not be afraid of being starved on the voyage."

"I wish he hadn't sent so much," Francis said. "It makes one feel like
a milksop. Whose cabin is it I have got?"

"I believe that it is the cabin usually used by the supercargo, who is
in charge of the goods and does the trading, but the men say the
captain of this ship has been a great many years in Polani's
employment, and often sails without a supercargo, being able to manage
the trading perfectly well by himself. But the usual cabin is only half
the size of yours, and two have been thrown into one to make it light
and airy."

"And where do you sleep, Giuseppi?"

"I am going to sleep in the passage outside your door, Messer
Francisco."

"Oh, but I sha'n't like that!" Francis said. "You ought to have a
better place than that."

Giuseppi laughed.

"Why, Messer Francisco, considering that half my time I slept in the
gondola, and the other half on some straw in our kitchen, I shall do
capitally. Of course I could sleep in the fo'castle with the crew if I
liked, but I should find it hot and stifling there. I chose the place
myself, and asked the captain if I could sleep there, and he has given
me leave."

In an hour the Bonito had passed through the Malamocco Channel, and was
out on the broad sea. The wind was very light, and but just sufficient
to keep the great sails bellied out. The sailors were all at work,
coiling down ropes, washing the decks, and making everything clean and
tidy.

"This is a good start, Messer Hammond," the captain said, coming up to
him. "If this wind holds, we shall be able to make our course round the
southern point of Greece, and then on to Candia, which is our first
port. I always like a light breeze when I first go out of port, it
gives time for everyone to get at home and have things shipshape before
we begin to get lively."

"She does not look as if she would ever get lively," Francis said,
looking at the heavy vessel.

"She is lively enough in a storm, I can tell you," the captain said,
laughing. "When she once begins to roll she does it in earnest, but she
is a fine sea boat, and I have no fear of gales. I wish I could say as
much of pirates. However, she has always been fortunate, and as we
carry a stout crew she could give a good account of herself against any
of the small piratical vessels that swarm among the islands, although,
of course, if she fell in with two or three of them together it would
be awkward."

"How many men do you carry altogether, captain?"

"Just seventy. You see she rows thirty oars, and in case of need we put
two men to each oar, and though she doesn't look fast she can get along
at a fine rate when the oars are double banked. We have shown them our
heels many a time. Our orders are strict. We are never to fight if we
can get away by running."

"But I suppose you have to fight sometimes?" Francis asked.

"Yes, I have been in some tough fights several times, though not in the
Bonito, which was only built last year. Once in the Lion we were
attacked by three pirates. We were at anchor in a bay, and the wind was
blowing on the shore, when they suddenly came round the headland, so
there was no chance of running, and we had to fight it out. We fought
for five hours before they sheered off, pretty well crippled, and one
of them in flames, for we carried Greek fire.

"Three or four times they nearly got a footing on deck, but we managed
to beat them off somehow. We lost a third of our crew. I don't think
there was a man escaped without a wound. I was laid up for three
months, after I got home, with a slash on the shoulder, which pretty
nigh took off my left arm. However, we saved the ship and the cargo,
which was a valuable one, and Messer Polani saw that no one was the
worse for his share in the business. There's no more liberal-hearted
man in the trade than he is, and whatever may be the scarcity of hands
in the port, there is never any difficulty in getting a good crew
together for his vessels.

"Of course there are the roughs with the smooths. Some years ago I was
in prison for six months, with all my crew, in Azoff. It was the work
of those rascally Genoese, who are always doing us a bad turn when they
have the chance, even when we are at peace with them. They set the mind
of the native khan--that is the prince of the country--against us by
some lying stories that we had been engaged in smuggling goods in at
another port. And suddenly, in the middle of the night, in marched his
soldiers on board my ship, and two other Venetian craft lying in the
harbour, and took possession of them, and shut us all up in prison.
There we were till Messer Polani got news, and sent out another ship to
pay the fine demanded. That was no joke, I can tell you, for the prison
was so hot and crowded, and the food so bad, that we got fever, and
pretty near half of us died before our ransom came. Then at
Constantinople the Genoese stirred the people up against us once or
twice, and all the sailors ashore had to fight for their lives. Those
