fountain of Eden. Among the rocks they found creeping vines with rather
tasteless, bright red berries, in the woods little evergreen herbs with
leaves like laurel and scarlet spicy berries, dark green mossy vines
with white berries--but no spice-trees. The forest in fact was rather
like Norway, according to Ralph Erlandsson, who was a native of
Stavanger. Sebastian, who was ahead, presently came upon signs of human
life. A sapling, bent down and held by a rude contrivance of deerhide
thong and stakes, was attached to a noose so ingeniously hidden that the
young leader nearly stepped into it. He took it off the tree and looked
about him. A minute later, from one side and to the rear, a startled
exclamation came from Robert Thorne of Bristol, who had stepped on a
similar snare and been jerked off his feet. This was quite enough. The
party retreated to the ship. On the way back they saw trees that had
been cut not very long since, and Sebastian picked up a wooden needle
such as fishermen used in making nets, yet not like any English tool of
that sort.

[Illustration: "A SAPLING, BENT DOWN, WAS ATTACHED TO A NOOSE
INGENIOUSLY HIDDEN."--_Page_ 87]

They saw nothing more of the kind, although they sailed some three
hundred leagues along the coast, nor did they see any sort of tilled
land. This certainly could not be Cipangu or Cathay with their seaports
and gilded temples. Whatever else it was, it was a land of wild people,
savage hunters. John Cabot left on a bold headland where it could not
fail to be seen, a great cross, with the flag of England and the
Venetian banner bearing the lion of Saint Mark.

There was wild excitement in Bristol when it was known that the little
_Matthew_ had come safely into port, after three months' voyaging in
unknown seas. August of that year found the two Cabots at Westminster
with their story and their handful of forest trophies, and the excited
and suspicious Spanish Ambassador was framing a protest to the King and
a letter to Ferdinand and Isabella.

Henry VII. fingered the wooden needle, pulled the rawhide thong
meditatively through his fingers, and ate a little handful of the
wintergreen berries and young leaves. Their pungent flavor wrinkled his
long nose. This was certainly not any spice that came from the Indies.

"This country you found," he remarked at last, "is not much like New
Spain."

"Nay, Sire," answered John Cabot simply.

"And I understand,"--the King put the collection of curiosities back
into the wallet that had held them, "that this represents one fifth at
least of the gains of the voyage."

Cabot bowed. As a matter of fact there had been no profits.

"My lord,"--the King handed the wallet over to the uneasy Ambassador,
who had been invited to the conference, "you have heard what our good
Captain says. If, as you say, Spain claims this landfall, we willingly
make over to you our--ahem!--share of the emolument." And the Spaniard,
looking rather foolish, saw nothing better to do than to bow his thanks
and retire from the presence.

The King turned again to the Cabots.

"Nevertheless," he went on meditatively, "we will not be neglectful of
you. In another year, if it is still your desire to engage in this work,
you may have--" a pause--"ten ships armed as you see fit, and manned
with whatever prisoners are not confined for--high treason. Fish, I
think you said, abound in those waters? Bacalao--er--that is cod, is it
not? Now it seems to me that our men of Bristol can go a-fishing on
those banks without interference from the Hanse merchants, and we shall
be less dependent on--foreign aid, for the victualing of our tables. And
there may be some way to Asia through these Northern seas--in which case
our brother of Spain may not be so nice in his scruples about trespass.
The Spice Islands are not his but Portugal's. And for your present
reward,--" the King reached for his lean purse and waggled his gaunt
foot in its loose worn red shoe "this, and the title of Admiral of your
new-found land."

He dropped some gold pieces into the hand of John Cabot. In the accounts
of his treasurer for that year may be seen this item:

"10th August, donation of L10 to him that found the new isle."

In May of the next year another voyage was undertaken by Sebastian, John
Cabot having died. This time there was a small fleet from Bristol with
some three hundred men. Sebastian sailed so far north as to be stopped
by seas full of icebergs, then turning southward discovered the island
of Newfoundland, landed further south on the mainland, and went as far
toward the Spanish possessions as the great bay called Chesapeake.
Meanwhile shoals of little fishing boats, from Bristol, Brittany,
Lisbon, Rye, and the Vizcayan ports on the north of Spain, crept across
the gray seas to fish for cod. They held no patent and carried no guns,
but they made a floating city off the Grand Banks for a brief season,
settling their own disputes. The people at home found salt fish good
cheap and wholesome. When Sebastian told the Bristol folk that the fish
were so thick in these new seas that he could hardly get his ships
through, they would not believe it. But when Robert Thorne and a dozen
others had seen the little caplin, the fish which the cod feeds upon,
swimming inshore by the acre, crowded by the cod behind them, and by
seal, shark and dogfish hunting the cod, when cod were caught and salted
down and shown in Bristol, four and five feet long, then Bristol
swallowed both story and cargo and blessed the name of Cabot.

Sebastian Cabot shook the dust of Bristol off his restless feet more
than once in the years that followed. Within five years after his voyage
to the Arctic regions he was cruising about the Caribbean. In 1517 he
was at the entrance of the great bay on the north coast of Labrador. In
1524 he was in the service of Spain, and coasting along the eastern
shores of South America ascended the great river which De Solis had
named Rio de la Plata, came within sight of the mountains of Peru. But
for orders from Spain, where Pizarro had secured the governorship of
that land, Cabot might have been its conqueror. In 1548, after some
years spent in Spain as pilot major, he came back to England, where he
was appointed to the position of superintendent of naval affairs. It was
his work to examine and license pilots, and make charts and maps, and
some ten years later he died, having founded the company of Merchant
Adventurers in 1553. This company was entitled to build and send out
ships for discovery and trade in parts unknown. By uniting merchant
traders in one body, governed by definite rules, and backed by their
combined capital, it broke the monopoly of the Hanseatic League and
finally drove the Hanse merchants out of England. Sebastian Cabot was
its first governor, holding the office until he died, and has rightly
been called the father of free trade. He had unlocked the harbors of the
world to his adopted country, England.


NOTE

The rules drawn up by Cabot for the merchant adventurers, to be read
publicly on board ship once a week, are interesting as showing the
character of the man and the great advance made in welding English trade
into a company to be guided by the best traditions. For the first time
captains were required to keep a log, and this one thing, by putting on
record everything seen and noted by those who sailed strange waters,
made an increasing fund of knowledge at the service of each navigator.
Some of the points in the instructions are as follows:

7. "That the merchants and other skilful persons, in writing, shall
daily write, describe and put in memorie the navigation of each day and
night, with the points and observations of the lands, tides, elements,
altitude of the sunne, course of the moon and starres, and the same so
noted by the order of the master and pilot of every ship to be put in
writing; the captain-general assembling the masters together once every
weeke (if winde and weather shall serve) to conferre all the
observations and notes of the said ships, to the intent it may appeare
wherein the notes do agree and wherein they dissent, and upon good
debatement, deliberation and conclusion determined to put the same into
a common ledger, to remain of record for the companie; the like order to
be kept in proportioning of the cardes, astrolabes, and other
instruments prepared for the voyage, at the charge of the companie.

12. "That no blaspheming of God, or detestable swearing, be used in any
ship, or communication of ribaldrie, filthy tales, or ungodly talk to be
suffered in the company of any ship, neither dicing, tabling, nor other
divelish games to be permitted, whereby ensueth not only povertie to the
players, but also strife, variance, brauling, fighting and oftentimes
murther.

26. "Every nation and region to be considered advisedly, and not to
provoke them by any distance, laughing, contempt, or such like; but to
use them with prudent circumspection, with all gentleness and
courtesie."

These and other instructions form an ideal far beyond anything found in
the merchant shipping of any other land at that time, and the wisdom
which inspired them undoubtedly laid the foundation of the fine and
noble tradition which formed the best officers of the navy not yet born.
There was no British navy in the modern sense until a hundred years
after Cabot's day. In time of war the King impressed all suitable ships
into his service, if they were not freely offered by private owners. In
time of peace the monarch was a ship-owner like any other, and such a
thing as a standing navy was not thought of. Hence the brave, generous,
and courteous merchant adventurer, when such a man was abroad, was the
upholder of the honor of his country as well as the upbuilder of her
commerce.




GRAY SAILS


    Gray sails that fill with the winds of the morning,
      Out upon the Channel or the bleak North sea,
    Neither cross nor fleur-de-lis goes to your adorning,--
      Arctic frost and southern gale your tirewomen shall be.
    Yet when you come home again--home again--home again,
      Gray sails turn to silver when the keel runs free.

    Gray sails of Plymouth, 'ware the wild Orcades,
      Gray sails of Lisbon, 'ware the guns of Dieppe.
    Cross-bows of Genoa, 'ware the wharves of Gades,--
      You that sail the Spanish Seas may neither trust nor sleep.
    Yet when you come home again--home again--home again,
      You shall make the covenant for Kings to keep!

    Gray sails are crowding where the sea-fog sleeping
      Masks the faces of the folk that throng and traffic there.
    When the winds are free again and the cod are leaping,
      All the tongues of Pentecost wake the laughing air.
    And when they come home again--home again--home again,
      They shall bring their freedom for the world to share!




VII

LITTLE VENICE


"Translators," observed Amerigo Vespucci, "are frequently traitors. Now
who is to be surety that yonder interpreter does not change your words
in repeating them?"

Alonso de Ojeda touched the hilt of his poniard. "This," he said.
"Toledo steel speaks all languages."

The Florentine's black eyebrows lifted a little, but he did not pursue
the subject. Ojeda was not the sort of man likely to be convinced of
anything he did not believe already, and Vespucci was having too good a
time to waste it in argument.

This middle-aged, shrewd-looking individual had for half his life been
chained to the desk, for he had been many years a clerk in the great
merchant houses of the Medici. Until he was forty years old he had
hardly gone outside his native city. In the latter half of the fifteenth
century each Italian city was a little world in itself, with its own
standards, customs and traditions. The fact that Vespucci spent most of
his leisure and all of his spare ducats in the collection and study of
maps and globes and works on geography, was regarded as a proof of mild
insanity. When he paid one hundred and thirty gold pieces for a
particularly fine map made by Valsequa in 1439, even his intimate friend
Soderini called him a fool. Vespucci was himself an expert mapmaker.
This may have been a reason why, about 1490, the Medici sent him to
Barcelona to look after their interests in Spain. In Seville he secured
a position as manager in the house of Juanoto Berardi, who fitted out
ships for Atlantic voyages. In 1497 he himself sailed for the newly
discovered islands of the West, and spent more than a year in
exploration. This taste of travel seemed to have whetted his appetite
for more, for he was now acting as astronomer and geographer in the
expedition which Ojeda had organized and Juan de la Cosa fitted out, to
the coast which Colon had discovered and called Tierre Firme. In the
seven years since the first voyage of the great Admiral it had become
the custom to have on board, for expeditions of discovery, a person who
understood astronomy, the use of the astrolabe and navigation in
general, and the making of charts and maps. Vespucci was exactly that
sort of man. However queer it might seem to the young Ojeda to find in a
clerk forty years old such a fresh and youthful delight in travel, both
he and La Cosa knew that they had in him a valuable assistant. It was
generally understood that he meant to write a book about it all.

Vespucci was in fact thinking of his future book when he made that
speech about translators. He was planning to write the book not in
Latin, as was usual, but in Italian, making if necessary another copy in
Latin.

The party had sailed from Puerto Santa Maria on May 20, 1499, taking
with them a chart which Bishop Fonseca, head of the Department of the
Indies, furnished. It had been the understanding when Colon received the
title of Admiral of the Indies that no expedition should be sent out
without his authority. This understanding Fonseca succeeded in
persuading the King and Queen to take back, and another order was
issued, to the effect that no independent expedition was to go out
without the royal permission. This, practically, meant Fonseca's leave.
The Bishop signed the permit for Ojeda's undertaking with double
satisfaction. He was doing a favor for his friend, Bishop Ojeda, cousin
to this young man, and he was aiming a blow at the hated Genoese
Admiral, whose very chart he was turning over to the young explorer. All
sorts of stories had been set afloat about the unfitness of the Admiral
to hold such an important office. Fonseca had managed to influence the
Queen so far against him that one Bobadilla had been sent to Hispaniola
with power to depose Colon and treat him as a criminal,--so cunningly
were his instructions framed. When the great discoverer was actually
thrown into prison and sent to Spain manacled like a felon, it might
have added a few drops of bitterness to his reflections if he had known
what Ojeda was doing. This youth, whom he had trusted and liked, was now
looking forward to the conquest of the very region which the Admiral had
discovered, and using what was supposed to be the Admiral's private
chart to guide him.

It is not likely, however, that the fiery and impatient Ojeda gave any
thought to the feelings of the older man. Juan de la Cosa was a leader
in the expedition, many sailors were enlisted, who had served in former
voyages of discovery, and above all, Fonseca approved. Ojeda would never
have dreamed of setting up any personal opinion contrary to the views of
the Church.

In twenty-four days the fleet arrived upon a coast which no one on board
had ever seen. It was in fact two hundred leagues further to the south
than Paria, where the Admiral had touched. The people were taller and
more vigorous than the Arawaks of Hispaniola, and expert with the bow,
the lance and the shield. Their bell-shaped houses were of tree-trunks
thatched with palm leaves, some of them very large. The people wore
ornaments made of fish-bones, and strings of white and green beads, and
feather headdresses of the most gorgeous colors. The interpreter told
Ojeda that the Spaniards' desire of gold and pearls was very puzzling to
these simple folk, who had never considered them of any especial value.
In a harbor called Maracapana the fleet was unloaded and careened for
cleaning. Under the direction of Ojeda and La Cosa a small brigantine
was built. The people brought venison, fish, cassava bread and other
provisions willingly, and seemed to think the Spaniards angels. At
least, that was the version of their talk which reached Ojeda. It was
here that Amerigo Vespucci made that remark about translators. He had
not studied accounts of Atlantic voyages for the last few years without
drawing a few conclusions regarding the nature of savages. When it was
explained that the natives had neighbors who were cannibals, and that
they would greatly value the strangers' assistance in fighting them,
Vespucci came very near making a suggestion. He finally made it to Juan
de la Cosa instead of to Ojeda. The old pilot chuckled wisely.

"I've got past warning my young gentleman of danger ahead," he said
good-naturedly. "He can do without fighting just as well as a fish can
do without water. If I die trying to get him out of some scrape he has
plunged into head-first, it will be no more than I expect."

Ojeda was, in fact, spoiling for adventure, and joyfully set sail in the
direction of the Carib Islands. Seven coast natives were on board as
guides, and pointed out the island inhabited by their especial enemies.
The shore was lined with fierce-faced savages, painted and feathered,
