hand well accustomed to its use.  Old Ralph was uttering under his
breath ecstatic exclamations: "Ha!  Well struck!  A rare foil--a
perfect hit--Have a care--Ah! there comes my old blow--That is
right--Old Sir Henry's master-stroke-- There--one of your new French
backstrokes--but it told--Oh! have a care--The Saints
guard--Ay--There--Follow it up!  Hurrah for Lynwood!" as Fulk tottered,
slipped, sank on one knee, and receiving a severe blow on the head with
the back of the sword, measured his length on the ground.

"Hurrah for Lynwood!" re-echoed through the hall, but Eustace cut short
the clamour at once, by saying, "Peace, my friends, and thanks! Sir
Fulk de Clarenham," he added, as his fallen foe moved, and began to
raise himself, "you have received a lesson, by which I hope you will
profit.  Leave the house, whose mourning you have insulted, and thank
your relationship that I forbear to bring this outrage to the notice of
the King."

While Eustace spoke, Fulk had, by the assistance of two of his
retainers, recovered his feet; but though unwounded, he was so dizzied
with the blow as to be passive in their hands, and to allow himself to
be led into the court, and placed on his horse. Before riding out of
the gates, he turned round, and clenching his fist, glanced malignantly
at Eustace, and muttered, "You shall aby it."

Another shout of "Down with the false Clarenham!  Hurrah for the Lances
of Lynwood, and the brave young Knight!" was raised in the court by the
peasantry, among whom Fulk was so much hated, that not even regard for
their future welfare could prevent them from indulging in this triumph.
Probably, too, they expected the satisfaction of drinking the health of
the victor, for there were many disappointed countenances when he spoke
from the steps of the porch:--"Thanks for your good-will, my friends.
Fare ye well, depart in peace, and remember your young Lord."  Then
turning to the parish Priest, he added, in a low voice, "See that they
leave the Castle as soon as possible.  The gates must be secured as
soon as may be."

He turned back into the hall, and at the door was met by little Arthur,
who caught hold of his hand, exclaiming, "So you have won me, and shall
keep me forever, Uncle Eustace; but come in, for here is poor old Sir
Philip, who was thrown down under the table in the scuffle, bemoaning
himself most lamentably."

"Sir Philip hurt?" said Eustace, who, vexed as he was by Sir Philip's
behaviour, preserved a certain neighbourly hereditary respect for him;
"I trust not seriously," and he advanced towards the arm-chair, where
Sir Philip Ashton was sitting, attended by Father Cyril and a
man-at-arms, and groaning and complaining of his bruises, while at the
same time he ordered the horses to be brought out as speedily as
possible.

"Surely," said Eustace, "you should not be in such haste, Sir Philip. I
grieve that you should have met with this mishap.  But you had better
remain here, and try what rest will do for you."

"Remain here!" said Sir Philip, almost shuddering.  "Nay, nay, my young
Sir, I would not have you to remain here, nor any of us, for longer
space than the saddling of a horse.  Alas! alas! my young friend, I
grieve for you.  I loved your father well.--Look from the window,
Leonard.  Are the horses led forth?"

"But why this haste?" asked Sir Eustace.  "You are heavily
bruised--best let Father Cyril look to your hurts."

"Thanks, Sir Eustace; but--Ah! my back!--but I would not remain under
this roof for more than you could give me.  I should but endanger
myself without benefiting you.  Alas! alas! that I should have fallen
upon such a fray!  I am sorry for you, my brave youth!"

"I thank you, Sir Philip, but I know not what I have done to deserve
your concern."

"Hot blood! wilful blood!" said Sir Philip, shaking his head.  "Are the
horses come?  Here! your hand, Leonard, help me to rise--Ah! ah! not so
fast--Oh! I shall never get over it!  There--mind you, I did all to
prevent this unhappy business--I am clear of it!  Fare you well, Sir
Eustace--take an old man's advice, give up the boy, and leave the
country before worse comes of it."

"What is likely to come of it?" said Eustace; "Clarenham made an
uncalled-for, unjust, shameless attempt to seize the person of my ward.
I repelled him by force of arms, and I think he would scarce like to
call the attention of justice to his own share in the matter."

"Ah! well, you speak boldly, but before you have reached my years, you
will have learnt what it is to have for your foe the most mighty man of
the county--nay, of the court; for your foe, Lord de Clarenham, is in
close friendship with the Earl of Pembroke.  Beware, my young friend,
beware!"

When the hall was clear of guests, a council was held between the
Knight, the Priest, and the two Esquires.  Its result was, that
Arthur's person, as the most important point, should be secured, by his
uncle carrying him at once to the Prince's protection at Bordeaux; but
it was only with difficulty that Eustace was prevailed on to fly, as he
said, from his accusers.  The good Father had to say, with a smile,
that after all there was as much need for patience and submission under
the helm as under the cowl, before Eustace at length consented.  Cyril
meanwhile was to lay the case before the Chancellor, William of
Wykeham, and Eustace gave him letters to the Duke of Lancaster and to
Sir Richard Ferrars, in the hopes of their recommending his suit.

Eustace then received from the hands of the Priest a bag of gold coins,
his portion as a younger son, part of which he gave to be distributed
in alms, part he still confided to Father Cyril's keeping, and the rest
he was to take away for present needs--and they parted for the last
night of his brief stay at Lynwood Keep.




CHAPTER X


In the early morning, Sir Eustace and his few followers were in their
saddles, little Arthur riding between his uncle and Gaston. The chief
part of the day was spent on the journey.  They dined, to Arthur's
glee, on provisions they had brought with them, seated on a green bank
near a stream, and at evening found themselves at the door of a large
hostel, its open porch covered by a vine.

The host and his attendants ran out at first to meet them with
alacrity, but, on seeing them, appeared disappointed.  And as the
Knight, dismounting, ordered supper and bed, the host replied that he
could indeed engage to find food, and to accommodate their steeds, but
that the whole of the inn had been secured on behalf of two noble
ladies and their train, who were each moment expected.

"Be it so," said Eustace; "a truss of hay beside our horses, or a
settle by the fire, is all we need.  Here is a taste already of a
warrior's life for you, Arthur."

The boy was delighted, certain that to sleep beside his pony was far
more delightful, as well as more manly, than to rest in his bed, like a
lady at home.

As this was arranged, a sound of horses' feet approached, and a band of
men-at-arms rode up to the door.  Arthur started and seized his uncle's
hand as he recognized the Clarenham colours and badge, uttering an
exclamation of dismay.  "Never fear, Arthur," said Eustace, "they come
from the way opposite to ours. It is not pursuit.  See, it is an
escort--there are ladies among them."

"Four!" said Arthur.  "Uncle, that tall dame in black must be the Lady
Muriel.  And surely the white veil tied with rose-colour belongs to
kind Cousin Agnes."

"True!  These are no Clarenhams to guard against," said Eustace to his
Squire, who looked ready for action.  "Lady Muriel, the step-mother of
the Baron and his sister, is my godmother, and, by birth, a Lynwood."

Then stepping forward, he assisted the elder lady to dismount; she
returned his courtesy by a slight inclination, as to a stranger, but
her companion, who had lightly sprung to the ground, no sooner
perceived him than she exclaimed, "Eustace!" then laying her hand on
Lady Muriel's arm, "Mother, it is Sir Eustace Lynwood."

"Ha! my gallant godson!" said the Baroness, greeting him cordially.
"Well met, brave youth!  No wonder in that knightly figure I did not
know my kinswoman's little page.  How does my gentle niece, Eleanor?"

"Alack! then you have not heard the tidings?" said Eustace.

"We heard long since she was sick with grief," said Lady Muriel, much
alarmed.  "What mean you?  Is she worse?  You weep--surely she still
lives!"

"Ah! honoured dame, we come even now from laying her in her grave. Here
is her orphan boy."

Young Agnes could not restrain a cry of grief and horror, and trying to
repress her weeping till it should be without so many witnesses, Lady
Muriel and her bower-woman led her to their apartments in the inn.
Eustace was greatly affected by her grief.  She had often accompanied
her step-mother on visits to Lynwood Keep in the peaceful days of their
childhood; she had loved no sport better than to sit listening to his
romantic discourses of chivalry, and had found in the shy, delicate,
dreamy boy, something congenial to her own quiet nature; and, in short,
when Eustace indulged in a vision, Agnes was ever the lady of it, the
pale slight Agnes, with no beauty save her large soft brown eyes, that
seemed to follow and take in every fancy or thought of his.  Agnes was
looked down on,--her father thought she would do him little
honour,--her brother cared not for her; save for her step-mother she
would have met with little fostering attention, and when Eustace saw
her set aside and disregarded, his heart had bounded with the thought
that when he should lay his trophies at her feet, Agnes would be
honoured for his sake.  But Eustace's honours had been barren, and he
could only look back with a sad heart to the fancies of his youth, when
he had deemed Knight-errantry might win the lady of his love.

Eleanor had been one of the few who had known and loved the damsel of
Clarenham, and had encouraged her to lay aside her timidity. Agnes wept
for her as a sister, and still could hardly restrain her sobs, when
Eustace and his nephew were invited to the presence of the ladies to
narrate their melancholy tale.

Many tears were shed, and caresses lavished upon the orphan.  The
ladies asked his destination, and on hearing that he was to be taken to
the Prince's court at Bordeaux, Agnes said, "We, too, are bound to the
Prince's court.  I am to journey thither with Fulk. Were it not better
for Arthur to travel with us?  Most carefully would we guard him.  It
would spare him many a hardship, for which he is scarce old enough; and
his company would be a solace, almost a protection to me.  My pretty
playfellow, will you be my travelling companion?"

"I would go with you, Cousin Agnes, for you are kind and gentle, and I
love you well; but a brave Knight's son must learn to rough it; and
besides, I would not go with Sir Fulk, your brother, for he is a false
and cruel Knight, who persecuted my blessed mother to the very death."

"Can this be?  O speak, Eustace!" said Agnes.  "What means the boy?
Hath Fulk shown himself other than a loving kinsman?"

The Baroness, who understood her step-son's character better than did
his young sister, and who was informed of the old enmity between the
two houses, felt considerable anxiety as to what they were now to hear;
when Eustace, beginning, "Ah, Lady, I grieve twice in the day to sadden
your heart; yet since so much has been said, it were best to relate the
whole truth," proceeded to tell what had passed respecting the wardship
of young Arthur.  Agnes's eyes filled with burning tears of
indignation.  "O dear Lady Mother!" cried she, "take me back to our
Convent!  How can I meet my brother!  How conceal my anger and my
shame!"

"This is far worse than even I feared," said Lady Muriel.  "I knew Fulk
to be unscrupulous and grasping, but I did not think him capable of
such foul oppression.  For you, my sweet Agnes--would that I  could
prevail on him to leave you in the safe arms of the cloister--but,
alas!  I have no right to detain you from a brother's guardianship."

"I dreaded this journey much before," said Agnes; "but now, even my
trust in Fulk is gone; I shall see round me no one in whom to place
confidence.  Alas! alas!"

"Nay, fair Agnes," said Eustace, "he will surely be a kind brother to
thee--he cannot be otherwise."

"How love and trust when there is no esteem?  Oh, Mother, Mother! this
is loneliness indeed!  In that strange, courtly throng, who will
protect and shelter me?"

"There is an Arm--" began the Baroness.

"Yes, noble Lady, there is one arm," eagerly exclaimed Eustace, "that
would only deem itself too much honoured if it could be raised in your
service."

"I spoke of no arm of flesh," said Lady Muriel, reprovingly--and
Eustace hung his head abashed.  "I spake of the Guardian who will never
be wanting to the orphan."

There was a silence, first broken by Eustace.  "One thing there is,
that I would fain ask of your goodness," said he: "many a false tale,
many a foul slander, will be spoken of me, and many may give heed to
them; but let that be as it will, they shall not render my heart heavy
while I can still believe that you give no ear to them."

"Sir Eustace," said the Lady of Clarenham, "I have known you from
childhood, and it would go hard with me to believe aught dishonourable
of the pupil of Sir Reginald and of Eleanor."

"Yes, Sir Eustace," added Agnes, "it would break my heart to distrust
you; for then I must needs believe that faith, truth, and honour had
left the world."

"And now," said Lady Muriel, who thought the conversation had been
sufficiently tender to fulfil all the requirements of the connection of
families, and of their old companionship, "now, Agnes, we must take
leave of our kind kinsman, since, doubtless, he will desire to renew
his journey early to-morrow."

Eustace took the hint, and bent his knee to kiss the hands which were
extended to him by the two ladies; then left the room, feeling, among
all the clouds which darkened his path, one clear bright ray to warm
and gladden his heart.  Agnes trusted his truth, Agnes would be at
Bordeaux,--he might see her, and she would hear of his deeds.

Agnes, while she wept over her kinswoman's death and her brother's
faults, rejoiced in having met her old playfellow, and found him as
noble a Knight as her fancy had often pictured him; and in the
meanwhile, the good old Lady Muriel sighed to herself, and shook her
head at the thought of the sorrows which an attachment would surely
cause to these two young creatures.

It was early in the morning that Eustace summoned his nephew from the
couch which one of the Clarenham retainers had yielded him, and,
mounting their horses, they renewed their journey towards the coast.

Without further adventure, the Lances of Lynwood, as Arthur still chose
to call their little party, safely arrived at Rennes, the capital of
Brittany, where Jean de Montford held his court.  Here they met the
tidings that Charles V. had summoned the Prince of Wales to appear at
his court, to answer an appeal made against him to the sovereign by the
vassals of the Duchy of Aquitaine. Edward's answer was, that he would
appear indeed, but that it should be in full armour, with ten thousand
Knights and Squires at his back; and the war had already been renewed.

The intelligence added to Eustace's desire to be at Bordeaux, but he
could not venture through the enemy's country without exposing himself
to death or captivity; and even within the confines of Brittany itself,
Duke John, though bound by gratitude and affection to the alliance of
the King, who had won for him his ducal coronet, was unable to control
the enmity which his subjects bore to the English, and assured the
Knight that a safe-conduct from him would only occasion his being
robbed and murdered in secret, instead of being taken a prisoner in
fair fight and put to ransom.

If Eustace had been alone with his staunch followers, he would have
trusted to their good swords and swift steeds; but to place Arthur in
such perils would be but to justify Fulk's accusations; and there was
no alternative but to accept the offer made to him by Jean de Montford,
for the sake of his Duchess, a daughter of Edward III., to remain a
guest at his court until the arrival of a sufficient party of English
Knights, who were sure to be attracted by the news of the war.

No less than two months was he obliged to wait, during which both he
and Gaston chafed grievously under their forced captivity; but at
length he learnt that a band of Free Companions had arrived at Rennes,
on their way to offer their service to the Prince of Wales; accordingly
he set forth, and after some interval found himself once more in the
domains of the house of Plantagenet.

It was late in the evening when he rode through the gates of Bordeaux,
and sought the abode of the good old Gascon merchant, where he had
always lodged.  He met with a ready welcome, and inquiring into the
most recent news of the town, learnt that the Prince was considered to
be slightly improved in health; but that no word was spoken of the army
taking the field, and the war was chiefly carried on by the siege of
Castles.  He asked for Sir John Chandos, and was told that high words
had passed between him and the Prince respecting a hearth-tax, and that
since he had returned to his government, and seldom or never appeared
at the council board.  It was the Earl of Pembroke who was all-powerful
there.  And here the old Gascon wandered into lamentable complaints of
the aforesaid hearth-tax, from which Eustace could scarcely recall him
