sweetest smiles how a favourite kinswoman of hers wedded in secret with
a faithful follower of hers, of the clan Hepburn.  Oh, I assure you it
might have been a ballad sung by a harper for its sadness.  Well, this
fellow ventured too far in her service, and had to flee to France to
become an archer of the guard, while the wife remained and died at
Lochleven Castle, having given birth to our Cis, whom the Queen in due
time despatched to her father, he being minded to have her bred up in a
French nunnery, sending her to Dunbar to be there embarked in the Bride
of Dunbar."

"And the father?"

"Oh, forsooth, the father!  It cost her as little to dispose of him as
of the mother.  He was killed in some brawl with the Huguenots; so that
the poor child is altogether an orphan, beholden to our care, for which
she thanked me with tears in her eyes, that were more true than mayhap
the poor woman could help."

"Poor lady," said Susan.  "Yet can it not be sooth indeed?"

"Nay, dame, that may not be.  The cipher is not one that would be used
in simply sending a letter to the father."

"Might not the occasion have been used for corresponding in secret with
French friends?"

"I tell thee, wife, if I read one word of that letter, I read that the
child was her own, and confided to the Abbess of Soissons!  I will read
it to thee once more ere I yield it up, that is if I ever do.
Wherefore cannot the woman speak truth to me?  I would be true and
faithful were I trusted, but to be thus put off with lies makes a man
ready at once to ride off with the whole to the Queen in council."

"Think, but think, dear sir," pleaded Susan, "how the poor lady is
pressed, and how much she has to fear on all sides."

"Ay, because lies have been meat and drink to her, till she cannot
speak a soothfast word nor know an honest man when she sees him."

"What would she have?"

"That Cis should remain with us as before, and still pass for our
daughter, till such time as these negotiations are over, and she
recover her kingdom.  That is--so far as I see--like not to be till
latter Lammas--but meantime what sayest thou, Susan?  Ah!  I knew,
anything to keep the child with thee!  Well, be it so--though if I had
known the web we were to be wound into, I'd have sailed for the Indies
with Humfrey long ago!"




CHAPTER XV.

MOTHER AND CHILD.


Cicely was well enough the next day to leave her room and come out on
the summer's evening to enjoy the novel spectacle of Trowle Madame, in
which she burned to participate, so soon as her shoulder should be
well.  It was with a foreboding heart that her adopted mother fell with
her into the rear of the suite who were attending Queen Mary, as she
went downstairs to walk on the lawn, and sit under a canopy whence she
could watch either that game, or the shooting at the butts which was
being carried on a little farther off.

"So, our bonnie maiden," said Mary, brightening as she caught sight of
the young girl, "thou art come forth once more to rejoice mine eyes, a
sight for sair een, as they say in Scotland," and she kissed the fresh
cheeks with a tenderness that gave Susan a strange pang. Then she asked
kindly after the hurt, and bade Cis sit at her feet, while she watched
a match in archery between some of the younger attendants, now and then
laying a caressing hand upon the slender figure.

"Little one," she said, "I would fain have thee to share my pillow. I
have had no young bed-fellow since Bess Pierrepoint left us.  Wilt thou
stoop to come and cheer the poor old caged bird?"

"Oh, madam, how gladly will I do so if I may!" cried Cicely, delighted.

"We will take good care of her, Mistress Talbot," said Mary, "and
deliver her up to you whole and sain in the morning," and there was a
quivering playfulness in her voice.

"Your Grace is the mistress," answered Susan, with a sadness not quite
controlled.

"Ah! you mock me, madam.  Would that I were!" returned the Queen. "It
is my Lord's consent that we must ask.  How say you, my Lord, may I
have this maiden for my warder at night?"

Lord Shrewsbury was far from seeing any objection, and the promise was
given that Cis should repair to the Queen's chamber for at least that
night.  She was full of excitement at the prospect.

"Why look you so sadly at me, sweet mother?" she cried, as Susan made
ready her hair, and assisted her in all the arrangements for which her
shoulder was still too stiff; "you do not fear that they will hurt my
arm?"

"No, truly, my child.  They have tender and skilful hands."

"May be they will tell me the story of my parents," said Cis; "but you
need never doubt me, mother.  Though I were to prove to be ever so
great a lady, no one could ever be mine own mother like you!"

"Scarcely in love, my child," said Susan, as she wrapped the little
figure in a loose gown, and gave her such a kiss as parents seldom
permitted themselves, in the fear of "cockering" their children, which
was considered to be a most reprehensible practice.  Nor could she
refrain from closely pressing Cicely's hand as they passed through the
corridor to the Queen's apartments, gave the word to the two yeomen who
were on guard for the night at the head of the stairs, and tapped at
the outmost door of the royal suite of rooms.  It was opened by a
French valet; but Mrs. Kennedy instantly advanced, took the maiden by
the hand, and with a significant smile said: "Gramercy, madam, we will
take unco gude tent of the lassie.  A fair gude nicht to ye."  And Mrs.
Talbot felt, as she put the little hand into that of the nurse, and saw
the door shut on them, as if she had virtually given up her daughter,
and, oh! was it for her good?

Cis was led into the bedchamber, bright with wax tapers, though the sky
was not yet dark.  She heard a sound as of closing and locking double
doors, while some one drew back a crimson, gold-edged velvet curtain,
which she had seen several times, and which it was whispered concealed
the shrine where Queen Mary performed her devotions.  She had just
risen from before it, at the sound of Cis's entrance, and two of her
ladies, Mary Seaton and Marie de Courcelles, seemed to have been
kneeling with her.  She was made ready for bed, with a dark-blue velvet
gown corded round her, and her hair, now very gray, braided beneath a
little round cap, but a square of soft cambric drapery had been thrown
over her head, so as to form a perfectly graceful veil, and shelter the
features that were aging.  Indeed, when Queen Mary wore the exquisite
smile that now lit up her face as she held out her arms, no one ever
paused to think what those lineaments really were.  She held out her
arms as Cis advanced bashfully, and said: "Welcome, my sweet
bed-fellow, my little Scot--one more loyal subject come to me in my
bondage."

Cis's impulse was to put a knee to the ground and kiss the hands that
received her.  "Thou art our patient," continued Mary.  "I will see
thee in bed ere I settle myself there."  The bed was a tall, large,
carved erection, with sweeping green and silver curtains, and a huge
bank of lace-bordered pillows.  A flight of low steps facilitated the
ascent; and Cis, passive in this new scene, was made to throw off her
dressing-gown and climb up.

"And now," said the Queen, "let me see the poor little shoulder that
hath suffered so much."

"My arm is still bound, madam," said Cis.  But she was not listened to;
and Mrs. Kennedy, much to her discomfiture, turned back her
under-garment.  The marks were, in fact, so placed as to be entirely
out of her own view, and Mrs. Susan had kept them from the knowledge or
remark of any one.  They were also high enough up to be quite clear
from the bandages, and thus she was amazed to hear the exclamation,
"There! sooth enough."

"Monsieur Gorion could swear to them instantly."

"What is it?  Oh, what is it, madam?" cried Cis, affrighted; "is there
anything on my back?  No plague spot, I hope;" and her eyes grew round
with terror.

The Queen laughed.  "No plague spot, sweet one, save, perhaps, in the
eyes of you Protestants, but to me they are a gladsome sight--a token I
never hoped to see."

And the bewildered girl felt a pair of soft lips kiss each mark in
turn, and then the covering was quickly and caressingly restored, and
Mary added, "Lie down, my child, and now to bed, to bed, my maids.
Patent the lights."  Then, making the sign of the cross, as Cis had
seen poor Antony Babington do, the Queen, just as all the lights save
one were extinguished, was divested of her wrapper and veil, and took
her place beside Cis on the pillows.  The two Maries left the chamber,
and Jean Kennedy disposed herself on a pallet at the foot of the bed.

"And so," said the Queen, in a low voice, tender, but with a sort of
banter, "she thought she had the plague spot on her little white
shoulders.  Didst thou really not know what marks thou bearest, little
one?"

"No, madam," said Cis.  "Is it what I have felt with my fingers?"

"Listen, child," said Mary.  "Art thou at thine ease; thy poor shoulder
resting well?  There, then, give me thine hand, and I will tell thee a
tale.  There was a lonely castle in a lake, grim, cold, and northerly;
and thither there was brought by angry men a captive woman.  They had
dealt with her strangely and subtilly; they had laid on her the guilt
of the crimes themselves had wrought; and when she clung to the one man
whom at least she thought honest, they had forced and driven her into
wedding him, only that all the world might cry out upon her, forsake
her, and deliver her up into those cruel hands."

There was something irresistibly pathetic in Mary's voice, and the
maiden lay gazing at her with swimming eyes.

"Thou dost pity that poor lady, sweet one?  There was little pity for
her then!  She had looked her last on her lad--bairn; ay, and they had
said she had striven to poison him, and they were breeding him up to
loathe the very name of his mother; yea, and to hate and persecute the
Church of his father and his mother both.  And so it was, that the lady
vowed that if another babe was granted to her, sprung of that last
strange miserable wedlock, these foes of hers should have no part in
it, nor knowledge of its very existence, but that it should be bred up
beyond their ken--safe out of their reach.  Ah! child; good Nurse
Kennedy can best tell thee how the jealous eyes and ears were
disconcerted, and in secrecy and sorrow that birth took place."

Cis's heart was beating too fast for speech, but there was a tight
close pressure of the hand that Mary had placed within hers.

"The poor mother," went on the Queen in a low trembling voice, "durst
have scarce one hour's joy of her first and only daughter, ere the
trusty Gorion took the little one from her, to be nursed in a hut on
the other side of the lake.  There," continued Mary, forgetting the
third person, "I hoped to have joined her, so soon as I was afoot
again.  The faithful lavender lent me her garments, and I was already
in the boat, but the men-at-arms were rude and would have pulled down
my muffler; I raised my hand to protect myself, and it was all too
white.  They had not let me stain it, because the dye would not befit a
washerwoman.  So there was I dragged back to ward again, and all our
plans overthrown.  And it seemed safer and meeter to put my little one
out of reach of all my foes, even if it were far away from her mother's
aching heart.  Not one more embrace could I be granted, but my good
chaplain Ross--whom the saints rest--baptized her in secret, and Gorion
had set two marks on the soft flesh, which he said could never be
blotted out in after years, and then her father's clanswoman, Alison
Hepburn, undertook to carry her to France, with a letter of mine bound
up in her swathing clothes, committing her to the charge of my good
aunt, the Abbess of Soissons, in utter secrecy, until better days
should come.  Alas! I thought them not so far off. I deemed that were I
once beyond the clutches of Morton, Ruthven, and the rest, the loyal
would rally once more round my standard, and my crown would be mine
own, mine enemies and those of my Church beneath my feet.  Little did I
guess that my escape would only be to see them slain and routed, and
that when I threw myself on the hospitality of my cousin, her tender
mercies would prove such as I have found them. 'Libera me, Dominie,
libera me.'"

Cis began dimly to understand, but she was still too much awed to make
any demonstration, save a convulsive pressure of the Queen's hand, and
the murmuring of the Latin prayer distressed her.

Presently Mary resumed.  "Long, long did I hope my little one was
safely sheltered from all my troubles in the dear old cloisters of
Soissons, and that it was caution in my good aunt the abbess that
prevented my hearing of her; but through my faithful servants, my Lord
Flemyng, who had been charged to speed her from Scotland, at length let
me know that the ship in which she sailed, the Bride of Dunbar, had
been never heard of more, and was thought to have been cast away in a
tempest that raged two days after she quitted Dunbar. And I--I shed
some tears, but I could well believe that the innocent babe had been
safely welcomed among the saints, and I could not grieve that she was,
as I thought, spared from the doom that rests upon the race of Stewart.
Till one week back, I gave thanks for that child of sorrow as cradled
in Paradise."

Then followed a pause, and then Cis said in a low trembling voice, "And
it was from the wreck of the Bride of Dunbar that I was taken?"

"Thou hast said it, child!  My bairn, my bonnie bairn!" and the girl
was absorbed in a passionate embrace and strained convulsively to a
bosom which heaved with the sobs of tempestuous emotion, and the
caresses were redoubled upon her again and again with increasing
fervour that almost frightened her.

"Speak to me!  Speak to me!  Let me hear my child's voice."

"Oh, madam--"

"Call me mother!  Never have I heard that sound from my child's lips. I
have borne two children, two living children, only to be stripped of
both.  Speak, child--let me hear thee."

Cis contrived to say "Mother, my mother," but scarcely with effusion.
It was all so strange, and she could not help feeling as if Susan were
the mother she knew and was at ease with.  All this was much too like a
dream, from which she longed to awake.  And there was Mrs. Kennedy too,
rising up and crying quite indignantly--"Mother indeed! Is that all
thou hast to say, as though it were a task under the rod, when thou art
owned for her own bairn by the fairest and most ill-used queen in
Christendom?  Out on thee!  Have the Southron loons chilled thine heart
and made thee no leal to thine ain mother that hath hungered for thee?"

The angry tones, and her sense of her own shortcomings, could only make
Cis burst into tears.

"Hush, hush, nurse! thou shalt not chide my new-found bairn.  She will
learn to ken us better in time if they will leave her with us," said
Mary.  "There, there; greet not so sair, mine ain.  I ask thee not to
share my sorrows and my woes.  That Heaven forefend.  I ask thee but to
come from time to time and cheer my nights, and lie on my weary bosom
to still its ache and yearning, and let me feel that I have indeed a
child."

"Oh, mother, mother!" Cis cried again in a stifled voice, as one who
could not utter her feelings, but not in the cold dry tone that had
called forth Mrs. Kennedy's wrath.  "Pardon me, I know not--I cannot
say what I would.  But oh! I would do anything for--for your Grace."

"All that I would ask of thee is to hold thy peace and keep our
counsel.  Be Cicely Talbot by day as ever.  Only at night be mine--my
child, my Bride, for so wast thou named after our Scottish patroness.
It was a relic of her sandals that was hung about thy neck, and her
ship in which thou didst sail; and lo, she heard and guarded thee, and
not merely saved thee from death, but provided thee a happy joyous home
and well-nurtured childhood.  We must render her our thanks, my child.
Beata Brigitta, ora pro nobis."

"It was the good God Almighty who saved me, madam," said Cis bluntly.

"Alack!  I forgot that yonder good lady could not fail to rear thee in
the outer darkness of her heresy; but thou wilt come back to us, my ain
wee thing!  Heaven forbid that I should deny Whose Hand it was that
saved thee, but it was at the blessed Bride's intercession.  No doubt
she reserved for me, who had turned to her in my distress, this
precious consolation!  But I will not vex thy little heart with debate
this first night.  To be mother and child is enough for us. What art
thou pondering?"

"Only, madam, who was it that told your Grace that I was a stranger?"

"The marks, bairnie, the marks," said Mary.  "They told their own tale
to good Nurse Jeanie; ay, and to Gorion, whom we blamed for his cruelty
in branding my poor little lammie."

"Ah! but," said Cicely, "did not yonder woman with the beads and
bracelets bid him look?"

If it had been lighter, Cicely would have seen that the Queen was not
pleased at the inquiry, but she only heard the answer from Jean's bed,
"Hout no, I wad she knew nought of thae brands.  How should she?"

"Nay," said Cicely, "she--no, it was Tibbott the huckster-woman told me
long ago that I was not what I seemed, and that I came from the
north--I cannot understand!  Were they the same?"

"The bairn kens too much," said Jean.  "Dinna ye deave her Grace with
your speirings, my lammie.  Ye'll have to learn to keep a quiet sough,
and to see mickle ye canna understand here."

"Silence her not, good nurse," said the Queen, "it imports us to know
this matter.  What saidst thou of Tibbott?"

"She was the woman who got Antony Babington into trouble," explained
Cicely.  "I deemed her a witch, for she would hint strange things
concerning me, but my father always believed she was a kinsman of his,
who was concerned in the Rising of the North, and who, he said, had
seen me brought in to Hull from the wreck."

"Ay?" said the Queen, as a sign to her to continue.

"And meseemed," added Cicely timidly, "that the strange woman at
Tideswell who talked of beads and bracelets minded me of Tibbott,
though she was younger, and had not her grizzled brows; but father says
that cannot be, for Master Cuthbert Langston is beyond seas at Paris."

"Soh! that is well," returned Mary, in a tone of relief.  "See, child.
That Langston of whom you speak was a true friend of mine. He has done
much for me under many disguises, and at the time of thy birth he lived
as a merchant at Hull, trading with Scotland.  Thus it may have become
known to him that the babe he had seen rescued from the wreck was one
who had been embarked at Dunbar.  But no more doth he know.  The secret
of thy birth, my poor bairn, was entrusted to none save a few of those
about me, and all of those who are still living thou hast already seen.
Lord Flemyng, who put thee on board, believed thee the child of James
Hepburn of Lillieburn, the archer, and of my poor Mary Stewart, a
kinswoman of mine ain; and it was in that belief doubtless that he, or
Tibbott, as thou call'st him, would have spoken with thee."

"But the woman at Tideswell," said Cis, who was getting
bewildered--"Diccon said that she spake to Master Gorion."

"That did she, and pointed thee out to him.  It is true.  She is
another faithful friend of mine, and no doubt she had the secret from
him.  But no more questions, child.  Enough that we sleep in each
other's arms."

It was a strange night.  Cis was more conscious of wonder, excitement,
and a certain exultation, than of actual affection.  She had not been
bred up so as to hunger and crave for love.  Indeed she had been
treated with more tenderness and indulgence than was usual with
people's own daughters, and her adopted parents had absorbed her
undoubting love and respect.

Queen Mary's fervent caresses were at least as embarrassing as they
were gratifying, because she did not know what response to make, and
the novelty and wonder of the situation were absolutely distressing.

They would have been more so but for the Queen's tact.  She soon saw
that she was overwhelming the girl, and that time must be given for her
to become accustomed to the idea.  So, saying tenderly something about
rest, she lay quietly, leaving Cis, as she supposed, to sleep. This,
however, was impossible to the girl, except in snatches which made her
have to prove to herself again and again that it was not all a dream.
The last of these wakenings was by daylight, as full as the heavy
curtains would admit, and she looked up into a face that was watching
her with such tender wistfulness that it drew from her perforce the
word "Mother."

"Ah! that is the tone with the true ring in it.  I thank thee and I
bless thee, my bairn," said Mary, making over her the sign of the
cross, at which the maiden winced as at an incantation.  Then she
added, "My little maid, we must be up and stirring.  Mind, no word of
all this.  Thou art Cicely Talbot by day, as ever, and only my child,
my Bride, mine ain wee thing, my princess by night.  Canst keep
counsel?"

"Surely, madam," said Cis, "I have known for five years that I was a
foundling on the wreck, and I never uttered a word."

Mary smiled.  "This is either a very simple child or a very canny one,"
she said to Jean Kennedy.  "Either she sees no boast in being of royal
blood, or she deems that to have the mother she has found is worse than
the being the nameless foundling."

"Oh! madam, mother, not so!  I meant but that I had held my tongue when
I had something to tell!"

"Let thy secrecy stand thee in good stead, child," said the Queen.
"Remember that did the bruit once get abroad, thou wouldest assuredly
be torn from me, to be mewed up where the English Queen could hinder
thee from ever wedding living man.  Ay, and it might bring the head of
thy foster-father to the block, if he were thought to have concealed
the matter.  I fear me thou art too young for such a weighty secret."

"I am seventeen years old, madam," returned Cis, with dignity; "I have
kept the other secret since I was twelve."

"Then thou wilt, I trust, have the wisdom not to take the princess on
thee, nor to give any suspicion that we are more to one another than
the caged bird and the bright linnet that comes to sing on the bars of
her cage.  Only, child, thou must get from Master Talbot these tokens
that I hear of.  Hast seen them?"

"Never, madam; indeed I knew not of them."

"I need them not to know thee for mine own, but it is not well that
they should be in stranger hands.  Thou canst say--But hush, we must be
mum for the present."

For it became necessary to admit the Queen's morning draught of spiced
milk, borne in by one of her suite who had to remain uninitiated; and
from that moment no more confidences could be exchanged, until the time
that Cis had to leave the Queen's chamber to join the rest of the
household in the daily prayers offered in the chapel.  Her dress and
hair had, according to promise, been carefully attended to, but she was
only finished and completed just in time to join her adopted parents on
the way down the stairs.  She knelt in the hall for their blessing--an
action as regular and as mechanical as the morning kiss and greeting
now are between parent and child; but there was something in her face
that made Susan say to herself, "She knows all."

They could not speak to one another till not only matins but breakfast
were ended, and then--after the somewhat solid meal--the ladies had to
put on their out-of-door gear to attend Queen Mary in her daily
exercise.  The dress was not much, high summer as it was, only a loose
veil over the stiff cap, and a fan in the gloved hand to act as
parasol.  However the retirement gave Cicely an interval in which to
say, "O mother, she has told me," and as Susan sat holding out her
arms, the adopted child threw herself on her knees, hiding her face on
that bosom where she had found comfort all her life, and where, her
emotion at last finding full outlet, she sobbed without knowing why for
some moments, till she started nervously at the entrance of Richard,
saying, "The Queen is asking for you both.  But how now?  Is all told?"

"Ay," whispered his wife.

"So!  And why these tears?  Tell me, my maid, was not she good to thee?
Doth she seek to take thee into her own keeping?"

"Oh no, sir, no," said Cis, still kneeling against the motherly knee
and struggling with her sobs.  "No one is to guess.  I am to be Cicely
Talbot all the same, till better days come to her."

"The safer and the happier for thee, child.  Here are two honest hearts
that will not cast thee off, even if, as I suspect, yonder lady would
fain be quit of thee."

"Oh no!" burst from Cicely, then, shocked at having committed the
offence of interrupting him, she added, "Dear sir, I crave your pardon,
but, indeed, she is all fondness and love."

"Then what means this passion?" he asked, looking from one to the other.

"It means only that the child's senses and spirits are overcome," said
Susan, "and that she scarce knows how to take this discovery. Is it not
so, sweetheart?"

"Oh, sweet mother, yes in sooth.  You will ever be mother to me indeed!"

"Well said, little maid!" said Richard.  "Thou mightest search the
world over and never hap upon such another."

"But she oweth duty to the true mother," said Susan, with her hand on
the girl's neck.

"We wot well of that," answered her husband, "and I trow the first is
to be secret."

"Yea, sir," said Cis, recovering herself, "none save the very few who
tended her, the Queen at Lochleven, know who I verily am.  Such as were
aware of the babe being put on board ship at Dunbar, thought me the
daughter of a Scottish archer, a Hepburn, and she, the Queen my mother,
would, have me pass as such to those who needs must know I am not
myself."

"Trust her for making a double web when a single one would do,"
muttered Richard, but so that the girl could not hear.

"There is no need for any to know at present," said Susan hastily,
moved perhaps by the same dislike to deception; "but ah, there's that
fortune-telling woman."

Cis, proud of her secret information, here explained that Tibbott was
indeed Cuthbert Langston, but not the person whose password was "beads
and bracelets," and that both alike could know no more than the story
of the Scottish archer and his young wife, but they were here
interrupted by the appearance of Diccon, who had been sent by my Lord
himself to hasten them at the instance of the Queen.  Master Richard
sent the boy on with his mother, saying he would wait and bring Cis, as
she had still to compose her hair and coif, which had become somewhat
disordered.

"My maiden," he said, gravely, "I have somewhat to say unto thee. Thou
art in a stranger case than any woman of thy years between the four
seas; nay, it may be in Christendom.  It is woeful hard for thee not to
be a traitor through mere lapse of tongue to thine own mother, or else
to thy Queen.  So I tell thee this once for all.  See as little, hear
as little, and, above all, say as little as thou canst."

"Not to mother?" asked Cis.

"No, not to her, above all not to me, and, my girl, pray God daily to
keep thee true and loyal, and guard thee and the rest of us from
snares.  Now have with thee.  We may tarry no longer!"

All went as usual for the rest of the day, so that the last night was
like a dream, until it became plain that Cicely was again to share the
royal apartment.

"Ah, I have thirsted for this hour!" said Mary, holding out her arms
and drawing her daughter to her bosom.  "Thou art a canny lassie, mine
ain wee thing.  None could have guessed from thy bearing that there was
aught betwixt us."

"In sooth, madam," said the girl, "it seems that I am two maidens in
one--Cis Talbot by day, and Bride of Scotland by night."

"That is well!  Be all Cis Talbot by day.  When there is need to
dissemble, believe in thine own feigning.  'Tis for want of that art
that these clumsy Southrons make themselves but a laughing-stock
whenever they have a secret."

Cis did not understand the maxim, and submitted in silence to some
caresses before she said, "My father will give your Grace the tokens
when we return."

"Thy father, child?"

"I crave your pardon, madam, it comes too trippingly to my tongue thus
to term Master Talbot."

"So much the better.  Thy tongue must not lose the trick.  I did but
feel a moment's fear lest thou hadst not been guarded enough with
yonder sailor man, and had let him infer over much."

"O, surely, madam, you never meant me to withhold the truth from father
and mother," cried Cis, in astonishment and dismay.

"Tush! silly maid!" said the Queen, really angered.  "Father and
mother, forsooth!  Now shall we have a fresh coil!  I should have known
better than to have trusted thy word."

"Never would I have given my word to deceive them," cried Cis, hotly.

"Lassie!" exclaimed Jean Kennedy, "ye forget to whom ye speak."

"Nay," said Mary, recovering herself, or rather seeing how best to
punish, "'tis the poor bairn who will be the sufferer.  Our state
cannot be worse than it is already, save that I shall lose her
presence, but it pities me to think of her."

"The secret is safe with them," repeated Cis. "O madam, none are to be
trusted like them."

"Tell me not," said the Queen.  "The sailor's blundering loyalty will
not suffer him to hold his tongue.  I would lay my two lost crowns that
he is down on his honest knees before my Lord craving pardon for having
unwittingly fostered one of the viper brood.  Then, via! off goes a
post--boots and spurs are no doubt already on--and by and by comes
Knollys, or Garey, or Walsingham, to bear off the perilous maiden to
walk in Queen Bess's train, and have her ears boxed when her Majesty is
out of humour, or when she gets weary of dressing St. Katherine's hair,
and weds the man of her choice, she begins to taste of prison walls,
and is a captive for the rest of her days."

Cis was reduced to tears, and assurances that if the Queen would only
broach the subject to Master Richard, she would perceive that he
regarded as sacred, secrets that were not his own; and to show that he
meant no betrayal, she repeated his advice as to seeing, hearing, and
saying as little as possible.

"Wholesome counsel!" said Mary.  "Cheer thee, lassie mine, I will
credit whatever thou wilt of this foster-father of thine until I see it
disproved; and for the good lady his wife, she hath more inward, if
less outward, grace than any dame of the mastiff brood which guards our
prison court!  I should have warned thee that they were not excepted
from those who may deem thee my poor Mary's child."

Cicely did not bethink herself that, in point of fact, she had not
communicated her royal birth to her adopted parents, but that it had
been assumed between them, as, indeed, they had not mentioned their
previous knowledge.   Mary presently proceeded--"After all, we may not
have to lay too heavy a burden on their discretion.  Better days are
coming.  One day shall our faithful lieges open the way to freedom and
