visit. I shall be much gratified indeed if you can render Woodbourne as
pleasant to Miss Bertram as Ellangowan was to me when I first came as a
wanderer into this country.'

The young lady courtesied acquiescence, and took her new friend's hand.
Mannering now turned his eye upon the Dominie, who had made bows since
his entrance into the room, sprawling out his leg, and bending his back
like an automaton, which continues to repeat the same movement until
the motion is stopt by the artist. 'My good friend, Mr. Sampson,' said
Mannering, introducing him to his daughter, and darting at the same
time a reproving glance at the damsel, notwithstanding he had himself
some disposition to join her too obvious inclination to risibility;
'this gentleman, Julia, is to put my books in order when they arrive,
and I expect to derive great advantage from his extensive learning.'

'I am sure we are obliged to the gentleman, papa, and, to borrow a
ministerial mode of giving thanks, I shall never forget the
extraordinary countenance he has been pleased to show us. But, Miss
Bertram,' continued she hastily, for her father's brows began to
darken, 'we have travelled a good way; will you permit me to retire
before dinner?'

This intimation dispersed all the company save the Dominie, who, having
no idea of dressing but when he was to rise, or of undressing but when
he meant to go to bed, remained by himself, chewing the cud of a
mathematical demonstration, until the company again assembled in the
drawing-room, and from thence adjourned to the dining-parlour.

When the day was concluded, Mannering took an opportunity to hold a
minute's conversation with his daughter in private.

'How do you like your guests, Julia?'

'O, Miss Bertram of all things; but this is a most original parson;
why, dear sir, no human being will be able to look at him without
laughing.'

'While he is under my roof, Julia, every one must learn to do so.'

'Lord, papa, the very footmen could not keep their gravity!'

'Then let them strip off my livery,' said the Colonel, 'and laugh at
their leisure. Mr. Sampson is a man whom I esteem for his simplicity
and benevolence of character.'

'O, I am convinced of his generosity too,' said this lively lady; 'he
cannot lift a spoonful of soup to his mouth without bestowing a share
on everything round.'

'Julia, you are incorrigible; but remember I expect your mirth on this
subject to be under such restraint that it shall neither offend this
worthy man's feelings nor those of Miss Bertram, who may be more apt to
feel upon his account than he on his own. And so, goodnight, my dear;
and recollect that, though Mr. Sampson has certainly not sacrificed to
the graces, there are many things in this world more truly deserving of
ridicule than either awkwardness of manners or simplicity of character.'

In a day or two Mr. and Mrs. Mac-Morlan left Woodbourne, after taking
an affectionate farewell of their late guest. The household were now
settled in their new quarters. The young ladies followed their studies
and amusements together. Colonel Mannering was agreeably surprised to
find that Miss Bertram was well skilled in French and Italian, thanks
to the assiduity of Dominie Sampson, whose labour had silently made him
acquainted with most modern as well as ancient languages. Of music she
knew little or nothing, but her new friend undertook to give her
lessons, in exchange for which she was to learn from Lucy the habit of
walking, and the art of riding, and the courage necessary to defy the
season. Mannering was careful to substitute for their amusement in the
evening such books as might convey some solid instruction with
entertainment, and, as he read aloud with great skill and taste, the
winter nights passed pleasantly away.

Society was quickly formed where there were so many inducements. Most
of the families of the neighbourhood visited Colonel Mannering, and he
was soon able to select from among them such as best suited his taste
and habits. Charles Hazlewood held a distinguished place in his favour,
and was a frequent visitor, not without the consent and approbation of
his parents; for there was no knowing, they thought, what assiduous
attention might produce, and the beautiful Miss Mannering, of high
family, with an Indian fortune, was a prize worth looking after.
Dazzled with such a prospect, they never considered the risk which had
once been some object of their apprehension, that his boyish and
inconsiderate fancy might form an attachment to the penniless Lucy
Bertram, who had nothing on earth to recommend her but a pretty face,
good birth, and a most amiable disposition. Mannering was more prudent.
He considered himself acting as Miss Bertram's guardian, and, while he
did not think it incumbent upon him altogether to check her intercourse
with a young gentleman for whom, excepting in wealth, she was a match
in every respect, he laid it under such insensible restraints as might
prevent any engagement or ECLAIRCISSEMENT taking place until the young
man should have seen a little more of life and of the world, and have
attained that age when he might be considered as entitled to judge for
himself in the matter in which his happiness was chiefly interested.

While these matters engaged the attention of the other members of the
Woodbourne family, Dominie Sampson was occupied, body and soul, in the
arrangement of the late bishop's library, which had been sent from
Liverpool by sea, and conveyed by thirty or forty carts from the
sea-port at which it was landed. Sampson's joy at beholding the
ponderous contents of these chests arranged upon the floor of the large
apartment, from whence he was to transfer them to the shelves, baffles
all description. He grinned like an ogre, swung his arms like the sails
of a wind-mill, shouted 'Prodigious' till the roof rung to his
raptures. 'He had never,' he said, 'seen so many books together, except
in the College Library'; and now his dignity and delight in being
superintendent of the collection raised him, in his own opinion, almost
to the rank of the academical librarian, whom he had always regarded as
the greatest and happiest man on earth. Neither were his transports
diminished upon a hasty examination of the contents of these volumes.
Some, indeed, of BELLES LETTRES, poems, plays, or memoirs he tossed
indignantly aside, with the implied censure of'psha,'or 'frivolous';
but the greater and bulkier part of the collection bore a very
different character. The deceased prelate, a divine of the old and
deeply-learned cast, had loaded his shelves with volumes which
displayed the antique and venerable attributes so happily described by
a modern poet:--

     That weight of wood, with leathern coat o'erlaid,
     Those ample clasps of solid metal made,
     The close-press'd leaves unoped for many an age,
     The dull red edging of the well-fill'd page,
     On the broad back the stubborn ridges roll'd,
     Where yet the title stands in tarnish'd gold.

Books of theology and controversial divinity, commentaries, and
polyglots, sets of the Fathers, and sermons which might each furnish
forth ten brief discourses of modern date, books of science, ancient
and modern, classical authors in their best and rarest forms--such
formed the late bishop's venerable library, and over such the eye of
Dominie Sampson gloated with rapture. He entered them in the catalogue
in his best running hand, forming each letter with the accuracy of a
lover writing a valentine, and placed each individually on the destined
shelf with all the reverence which I have seen a lady pay to a jar of
old china. With all this zeal his labours advanced slowly. He often
opened a volume when halfway up the library steps, fell upon some
interesting passage, and, without shifting his inconvenient posture,
continued immersed in the fascinating perusal until the servant pulled
him by the skirts to assure him that dinner waited. He then repaired to
the parlour, bolted his food down his capacious throat in squares of
three inches, answered ay and no at random to whatever question was
asked at him, and again hurried back to the library, as soon as his
napkin was removed, and sometimes with it hanging round his neck like a
pinafore;--

     How happily the days Of Thalaba went by!

And, having thus left the principal characters of our tale in a
situation which, being sufficiently comfortable to themselves, is, of
course, utterly uninteresting to the reader, we take up the history of
a person who has as yet only been named, and who has all the interest
that uncertainty and misfortune can give.




CHAPTER XXI

     What say'st thou, Wise One? that all powerful Love
     Can fortune's strong impediments remove,
     Nor is it strange that worth should wed to worth,
     The pride of genius with the pride of birth.

          CRABBE.


V. Brown--I will not give at full length his thrice unhappy name--had
been from infancy a ball for fortune to spurn at; but nature had given
him that elasticity of mind which rises higher from the rebound. His
form was tall, manly, and active, and his features corresponded with
his person; for, although far from regular, they had an expression of
intelligence and good-humour, and when he spoke, or was particularly
animated, might be decidedly pronounced interesting. His manner
indicated the military profession, which had been his choice, and in
which he had now attained the rank of captain, the person who succeeded
Colonel Mannering in his command having laboured to repair the
injustice which Brown had sustained by that gentleman's prejudice
against him. But this, as well as his liberation from captivity, had
taken place after Mannering left India. Brown followed at no distant
period, his regiment being recalled home. His first inquiry was after
the family of Mannering, and, easily learning their route northward, he
followed it with the purpose of resuming his addresses to Julia. With
her father he deemed he had no measures to keep; for, ignorant of the
more venomous belief which had been instilled into the Colonel's mind,
he regarded him as an oppressive aristocrat, who had used his power as
a commanding officer to deprive him of the preferment due to his
behaviour, and who had forced upon him a personal quarrel without any
better reason than his attentions to a pretty young woman, agreeable to
herself, and permitted and countenanced by her mother. He was
determined, therefore, to take no rejection unless from the young lady
herself, believing that the heavy misfortunes of his painful wound and
imprisonment were direct injuries received from the father, which might
dispense with his using much ceremony towards him. How far his scheme
had succeeded when his nocturnal visit was discovered by Mr. Mervyn,
our readers are already informed.

Upon this unpleasant occurrence Captain Brown absented himself from the
inn in which he had resided under the name of Dawson, so that Colonel
Mannering's attempts to discover and trace him were unavailing. He
resolved, however, that no difficulties should prevent his continuing
his enterprise while Julia left him a ray of hope. The interest he had
secured in her bosom was such as she had been unable to conceal from
him, and with all the courage of romantic gallantry he determined upon
perseverance. But we believe the reader will be as well pleased to
learn his mode of thinking and intention from his own communication to
his special friend and confidant, Captain Delaserre, a Swiss gentleman
who had a company in his regiment.

EXTRACT

'Let me hear from you soon, dear Delaserre. Remember, I can learn
nothing about regimental affairs but through your friendly medium, and
I long to know what has become of Ayre's court-martial, and whether
Elliot gets the majority; also how recruiting comes on, and how the
young officers like the mess. Of our kind friend the Lieutenant-Colonel
I need ask nothing; I saw him as I passed through Nottingham, happy in
the bosom of his family. What a happiness it is, Philip, for us poor
devils, that we have a little resting-place between the camp and the
grave, if we can manage to escape disease, and steel, and lead, and the
effects of hard living. A retired old soldier is always a graceful and
respected character. He grumbles a little now and then, but then his is
licensed murmuring; were a lawyer, or a physician, or a clergyman to
breathe a complaint of hard luck or want of preferment, a hundred
tongues would blame his own incapacity as the cause. But the most
stupid veteran that ever faltered out the thrice-told tale of a siege
and a battle, and a cock and a bottle, is listened to with sympathy and
reverence when he shakes his thin locks and talks with indignation of
the boys that are put over his head. And you and I, Delaserre,
foreigners both--for what am I the better that I was originally a
Scotchman, since, could I prove my descent, the English would hardly
acknowledge me a countryman?--we may boast that we have fought out our
preferment, and gained that by the sword which we had not money to
compass otherwise. The English are a wise people. While they praise
themselves, and affect to undervalue all other nations, they leave us,
luckily, trap-doors and back-doors open, by which we strangers, less
favoured by nature, may arrive at a share of their advantages. And thus
they are in some respects like a boastful landlord, who exalts the
value and flavour of his six-years-old mutton, while he is delighted to
dispense a share of it to all the company. In short, you, whose proud
family, and I, whose hard fate, made us soldiers of fortune, have the
pleasant recollection that in the British service, stop where we may
upon our career, it is only for want of money to pay the turnpike, and
not from our being prohibited to travel the road. If, therefore, you
can persuade little Weischel to come into OURS, for God's sake let him
buy the ensigncy, live prudently, mind his duty, and trust to the fates
for promotion.

'And now, I hope you are expiring with curiosity to learn the end of my
romance. I told you I had deemed it convenient to make a few days' tour
on foot among the mountains of Westmoreland with Dudley, a young
English artist with whom I have formed some acquaintance. A fine fellow
this, you must know, Delaserre: he paints tolerably, draws beautifully,
converses well, and plays charmingly on the flute; and, though thus
well entitled to be a coxcomb of talent, is, in fact, a modest
unpretending young man. On our return from our little tour I learned
that the enemy had been reconnoitring. Mr. Mervyn's barge had crossed
the lake, I was informed by my landlord, with the squire himself and a
visitor.

'"What sort of person, landlord?"

'"Why, he was a dark officer-looking mon, at they called Colonel.
Squoire Mervyn questioned me as close as I had been at 'sizes. I had
guess, Mr. Dawson" (I told you that was my feigned name), "but I tould
him nought of your vagaries, and going out a-laking in the mere
a-noights, not I; an I can make no sport, I'se spoil none; and Squoire
Mervyn's as cross as poy-crust too, mon; he's aye maundering an my
guests but land beneath his house, though it be marked for the fourth
station in the survey. Noa, noa, e'en let un smell things out o'
themselves for Joe Hodges."

'You will allow there was nothing for it after this but paying honest
Joe Hodges's bill and departing, unless I had preferred making him my
confidant, for which I felt in no way inclined. Besides, I learned that
our ci-devant Colonel was on full retreat for Scotland, carrying off
poor Julia along with him. I understand from those who conduct the
heavy baggage that he takes his winter quarters at a place called
Woodbourne, in ---shire in Scotland. He will be all on the alert just
now, so I must let him enter his entrenchments without any new alarm.
And then, my good Colonel, to whom I owe so many grateful thanks, pray
look to your defence.

'I protest to you, Delaserre, I often think there is a little
contradiction enters into the ardour of my pursuit. I think I would
rather bring this haughty insulting man to the necessity of calling his
daughter Mrs. Brown than I would wed her with his full consent, and
with the King's permission to change my name for the style and arms of
Mannering, though his whole fortune went with them. There is only one
circumstance that chills me a little: Julia is young and romantic. I
would not willingly hurry her into a step which her riper years might
disapprove; no--nor would I like to have her upbraid me, were it but
with a glance of her eye, with having ruined her fortunes, far less
give her reason to say, as some have not been slow to tell their lords,
that, had I left her time for consideration, she would have been wiser
and done better. No, Delaserre, this must not be. The picture presses
close upon me, because I am aware a girl in Julia's situation has no
distinct and precise idea of the value of the sacrifice she makes. She
knows difficulties only by name; and, if she thinks of love and a farm,
it is a ferme ornee, such as is only to be found in poetic description
or in the park of a gentleman of twelve thousand a year. She would be
ill prepared for the privations of that real Swiss cottage we have so
often talked of, and for the difficulties which must necessarily
surround us even before we attained that haven. This must be a point
clearly ascertained. Although Julia's beauty and playful tenderness
have made an impression on my heart never to be erased, I must be
satisfied that she perfectly understands the advantages she foregoes
before she sacrifices them for my sake.

'Am I too proud, Delaserre, when I trust that even this trial may
terminate favourably to my wishes? Am I too vain when I suppose that
the few personal qualities which I possess, with means of competence,
however moderate, and the determination of consecrating my life to her
happiness, may make amends for all I must call upon her to forego? Or
will a difference of dress, of attendance, of style, as it is called,
of the power of shifting at pleasure the scenes in which she seeks
amusement--will these outweigh in her estimation the prospect of
domestic happiness and the interchange of unabating affection? I say
nothing of her father: his good and evil qualities are so strangely
mingled that the former are neutralised by the latter; and that which
she must regret as a daughter is so much blended with what she would
gladly escape from, that I place the separation of the father and child
as a circumstance which weighs little in her remarkable case. Meantime
I keep up my spirits as I may. I have incurred too many hardships and
difficulties to be presumptuous or confident in success, and I have
been too often and too wonderfully extricated from them to be
despondent.

'I wish you saw this country. I think the scenery would delight you. At
least it often brings to my recollection your glowing descriptions of
your native country. To me it has in a great measure the charm of
novelty. Of the Scottish hills, though born among them, as I have
always been assured, I have but an indistinct recollection. Indeed, my
memory rather dwells upon the blank which my youthful mind experienced
in gazing on the levels of the isle of Zealand, than on anything which
preceded that feeling; but I am confident, from that sensation as well
as from the recollections which preceded it, that hills and rocks have
been familiar to me at an early period, and that, though now only
remembered by contrast, and by the blank which I felt while gazing
around for them in vain, they must have made an indelible impression on
my infant imagination. I remember, when we first mounted that
celebrated pass in the Mysore country, while most of the others felt
only awe and astonishment at the height and grandeur of the scenery, I
rather shared your feelings and those of Cameron, whose admiration of
such wild rocks was blended with familiar love, derived from early
association. Despite my Dutch education, a blue hill to me is as a
friend, and a roaring torrent like the sound of a domestic song that
hath soothed my infancy. I never felt the impulse so strongly as in
this land of lakes and mountains, and nothing grieves me so much as
that duty prevents your being with me in my numerous excursions among
recesses. Some drawings I have attempted, but I succeed vilely. Dudley,
on the contrary, draws delightfully, with that rapid touch which seems
like magic; while I labour and botch, and make this too heavy and that
too light, and produce at last a base caricature. I must stick to the
flageolet, for music is the only one of the fine arts which deigns to
acknowledge me.

'Did you know that Colonel Mannering was a draughtsman? I believe not,
for he scorned to display his accomplishments to the view of a
subaltern. He draws beautifully, however. Since he and Julia left
Mervyn Hall, Dudley was sent for there. The squire, it seems, wanted a
set of drawings made up, of which Mannering had done the first four,
but was interrupted by his hasty departure in his purpose of completing
them. Dudley says he has seldom seen anything so masterly, though
slight; and each had attached to it a short poetical description. Is
Saul, you will say, among the prophets? Colonel Mannering write poetry!
Why, surely this man must have taken all the pains to conceal his
accomplishments that others do to display theirs. How reserved and
unsociable he appeared among us! how little disposed to enter into any
conversation which could become generally interesting! And then his
attachment to that unworthy Archer, so much below him in every respect;
and all this because he was the brother of Viscount Archerfield, a poor
Scottish peer! I think, if Archer had longer survived the wounds in the
affair of Cuddyboram, he would have told something that might have
thrown light upon the inconsistencies of this singular man's character.
He repeated to me more than once, "I have that to say which will alter
your hard opinion of our late Colonel." But death pressed him too hard;
and if he owed me any atonement, which some of his expressions seemed
to imply, he died before it could be made.

'I propose to make a further excursion through this country while this
fine frosty weather serves, and Dudley, almost as good a walker as
myself, goes with me for some part of the way. We part on the borders
of Cumberland, when he must return to his lodgings in Marybone, up
three pair of stairs, and labour at what he calls the commercial part
of his profession. There cannot, he says, be such a difference betwixt
any two portions of existence as between that in which the artist, if
an enthusiast, collects the subjects of his drawings and that which
must necessarily be dedicated to turning over his portfolio and
exhibiting them to the provoking indifference, or more provoking
criticism, of fashionable amateurs. "During the summer of my year,"
says Dudley, "I am as free as a wild Indian, enjoying myself at liberty
amid the grandest scenes of nature; while during my winters and springs
I am not only cabined, cribbed, and confined in a miserable garret, but
condemned to as intolerable subservience to the humour of others, and
to as indifferent company, as if I were a literal galley slave." I have
promised him your acquaintance, Delaserre; you will be delighted with
his specimens of art, and he with your Swiss fanaticism for mountains
and torrents.

'When I lose Dudley's company, I am informed that I can easily enter
Scotland by stretching across a wild country in the upper part of
Cumberland; and that route I shall follow, to give the Colonel time to
pitch his camp ere I reconnoitre his position. Adieu! Delaserre. I
shall hardly find another opportunity of writing till I reach Scotland.'




CHAPTER XXII

     Jog on, jog on, the footpath way,
     And merrily bend the stile-a,
     A merry heart goes all the day,
     A sad one tires in a mile-a.

          --Winter's Tale.


Let the reader conceive to himself a clear frosty November morning, the
scene an open heath, having for the background that huge chain of
mountains in which Skiddaw and Saddleback are preeminent; let him look
along that BLIND ROAD, by which I mean the track so slightly marked by
the passengers' footsteps that it can but be traced by a slight shade
of verdure from the darker heath around it, and, being only visible to
the eye when at some distance, ceases to be distinguished while the
foot is actually treading it; along this faintly-traced path advances
the object of our present narrative. His firm step, his erect and free
carriage, have a military air which corresponds well with his
well-proportioned limbs and stature of six feet high. His dress is so
plain and simple that it indicates nothing as to rank; it may be that
of a gentleman who travels in this manner for his pleasure, or of an
inferior person of whom it is the proper and usual garb. Nothing can be
on a more reduced scale than his travelling equipment. A volume of
Shakspeare in each pocket, a small bundle with a change of linen slung
across his shoulders, an oaken cudgel in his hand, complete our
pedestrian's accommodations, and in this equipage we present him to our
readers.

Brown had parted that morning from his friend Dudley, and begun his
solitary walk towards Scotland.

The first two or three miles were rather melancholy, from want of the
society to which he had of late been accustomed. But this unusual mood
of mind soon gave way to the influence of his natural good spirits,
excited by the exercise and the bracing effects of the frosty air. He
whistled as he went along, not 'from want of thought,' but to give vent
to those buoyant feelings which he had no other mode of expressing. For
each peasant whom he chanced to meet he had a kind greeting or a
good-humoured jest; the hardy Cumbrians grinned as they passed, and
said, 'That's a kind heart, God bless un!' and the market-girl looked
more than once over her shoulder at the athletic form, which
corresponded so well with the frank and blythe address of the stranger.
A rough terrier dog, his constant companion, who rivalled his master in
glee, scampered at large in a thousand wheels round the heath, and came
back to jump up on him and assure him that he participated in the
pleasure of the journey. Dr. Johnson thought life had few things better
than the excitation produced by being whirled rapidly along in a
post-chaise; but he who has in youth experienced the confident and
independent feeling of a stout pedestrian in an interesting country,
and during fine weather, will hold the taste of the great moralist
cheap in comparison.

Part of Brown's view in choosing that unusual track which leads through
the eastern wilds of Cumberland into Scotland, had been a desire to
view the remains of the celebrated Roman Wall, which are more visible
in that direction than in any other part of its extent. His education
had been imperfect and desultory; but neither the busy scenes in which
he had been engaged, nor the pleasures of youth, nor the precarious
state of his own circumstances, had diverted him from the task of
mental improvement. 'And this then is the Roman Wall,' he said,
scrambling up to a height which commanded the course of that celebrated
work of antiquity. 'What a people! whose labours, even at this
extremity of their empire, comprehended such space, and were executed
upon a scale of such grandeur! In future ages, when the science of war
shall have changed, how few traces will exist of the labours of Vauban
and Coehorn, while this wonderful people's remains will even then
continue to interest and astonish posterity! Their fortifications,
their aqueducts, their theatres, their fountains, all their public
works, bear the grave, solid, and majestic character of their language;
while our modern labours, like our modern tongues, seem but constructed
out of their fragments.' Having thus moralised, he remembered that he
was hungry, and pursued his walk to a small public-house, at which he
proposed to get some refreshment.

The alehouse, for it was no better, was situated in the bottom of a
little dell, through which trilled a small rivulet. It was shaded by a
large ash tree, against which the clay-built shed that served the
purpose of a stable was erected, and upon which it seemed partly to
recline. In this shed stood a saddled horse, employed in eating his
corn. The cottages in this part of Cumberland partake of the rudeness
which characterises those of Scotland. The outside of the house
promised little for the interior, notwithstanding the vaunt of a sign,
where a tankard of ale voluntarily decanted itself into a tumbler, and
a hieroglyphical scrawl below attempted to express a promise of 'good
entertainment for man and horse.' Brown was no fastidious traveller: he
stopped and entered the cabaret. [Footnote: See Note 2.]

The first object which caught his eye in the kitchen was a tall, stout,
country-looking man in a large jockey great-coat, the owner of the
horse which stood in the shed, who was busy discussing huge slices of
cold boiled beef, and casting from time to time an eye through the
window to see how his steed sped with his provender. A large tankard of
ale flanked his plate of victuals, to which he applied himself by
intervals. The good woman of the house was employed in baking. The
fire, as is usual in that country, was on a stone hearth, in the midst
of an immensely large chimney, which had two seats extended beneath the
vent. On one of these sat a remarkably tall woman, in a red cloak and
slouched bonnet, having the appearance of a tinker or beggar. She was
busily engaged with a short black tobacco-pipe.

At the request of Brown for some food, the landlady wiped with her
mealy apron one corner of the deal table, placed a wooden trencher and
knife and fork before the traveller, pointed to the round of beef,
recommended Mr. Dinmont's good example, and finally filled a brown
pitcher with her home-brewed. Brown lost no time in doing ample credit
to both. For a while his opposite neighbour and he were too busy to
take much notice of each other, except by a good-humoured nod as each
in turn raised the tankard to his head. At length, when our pedestrian
began to supply the wants of little Wasp, the Scotch store-farmer, for
such was Mr. Dinmont, found himself at leisure to enter into
conversation.

'A bonny terrier that, sir, and a fell chield at the vermin, I warrant
him; that is, if he's been weel entered, for it a' lies in that.'

'Really, sir,' said Brown, 'his education has been somewhat neglected,
and his chief property is being a pleasant companion.'

'Ay, sir? that's a pity, begging your pardon, it's a great pity that;
beast or body, education should aye be minded. I have six terriers at
hame, forbye twa couple of slow-hunds, five grews, and a wheen other
dogs. There's auld Pepper and auld Mustard, and young Pepper and young
Mustard, and little Pepper and little Mustard. I had them a' regularly
entered, first wi' rottens, then wi' stots or weasels, and then wi' the
tods and brocks, and now they fear naething that ever cam wi' a hairy
skin on't.'

'I have no doubt, sir, they are thoroughbred; but, to have so many
dogs, you seem to have a very limited variety of names for them?'

'O, that's a fancy of my ain to mark the breed, sir. The Deuke himsell
has sent as far as Charlie's Hope to get ane o' Dandy Dinmont's Pepper
and Mustard terriers. Lord, man, he sent Tam Hudson [Footnote: The real
name of this veteran sportsman is now restored.] the keeper, and sicken
a day as we had wi' the foumarts and the tods, and sicken a blythe
gae-down as we had again e'en! Faith, that was a night!'

'I suppose game is very plenty with you?'

'Plenty, man! I believe there's mair hares than sheep on my farm; and
for the moor-fowl or the grey-fowl, they lie as thick as doos in a
dookit. Did ye ever shoot a blackcock, man?'

'Really I had never even the pleasure to see one, except in the museum
at Keswick.'

'There now! I could guess that by your Southland tongue. It's very odd
of these English folk that come here, how few of them has seen a
blackcock! I'll tell you what--ye seem to be an honest lad, and if
you'll call on me, on Dandy Dinmont, at Charlie's Hope, ye shall see a
blackcock, and shoot a blackcock, and eat a blackcock too, man.'

'Why, the proof of the matter is the eating, to be sure, sir; and I
shall be happy if I can find time to accept your invitation.'

'Time, man? what ails ye to gae hame wi' me the now? How d' ye travel?'

'On foot, sir; and if that handsome pony be yours, I should find it
impossible to keep up with you.'

'No, unless ye can walk up to fourteen mile an hour. But ye can come
ower the night as far as Riccarton, where there is a public; or if ye
like to stop at Jockey Grieve's at the Heuch, they would be blythe to
see ye, and I am just gaun to stop and drink a dram at the door wi'
him, and I would tell him you're coming up. Or stay--gudewife, could ye
lend this gentleman the gudeman's galloway, and I'll send it ower the
Waste in the morning wi' the callant?'

The galloway was turned out upon the fell, and was swear to
catch.--'Aweel, aweel, there's nae help for't, but come up the morn at
ony rate. And now, gudewife, I maun ride, to get to the Liddel or it be
dark, for your Waste has but a kittle character, ye ken yoursell.'

'Hout fie, Mr. Dinmont, that's no like you, to gie the country an ill
name. I wot, there has been nane stirred in the Waste since Sawney
Culloch, the travelling-merchant, that Rowley Overdees and Jock Penny
suffered for at Carlisle twa years since. There's no ane in Bewcastle
would do the like o' that now; we be a' true folk now.'

'Ay, Tib, that will be when the deil's blind; and his een's no sair
yet. But hear ye, gudewife, I have been through maist feck o' Galloway
and Dumfries-shire, and I have been round by Carlisle, and I was at the
Staneshiebank Fair the day, and I would like ill to be rubbit sae near
hame, so I'll take the gate.'

'Hae ye been in Dumfries and Galloway?' said the old dame who sate
smoking by the fireside, and who had not yet spoken a word.

'Troth have I, gudewife, and a weary round I've had o't.'

'Then ye'll maybe ken a place they ca' Ellangowan?'

'Ellangowan, that was Mr. Bertram's? I ken the place weel eneugh. The
Laird died about a fortnight since, as I heard.'

'Died!' said the old woman, dropping her pipe, and rising and coming
forward upon the floor--'died? are you sure of that?'

'Troth, am I,' said Dinmont, 'for it made nae sma' noise in the
country-side. He died just at the roup of the stocking and furniture;
it stoppit the roup, and mony folk were disappointed. They said he was
the last of an auld family too, and mony were sorry; for gude blude's
scarcer in Scotland than it has been.'

'Dead!' replied the old woman, whom our readers have already recognised
as their acquaintance Meg Merrilies--'dead! that quits a' scores. And
did ye say he died without an heir?'

'Ay did he, gudewife, and the estate's sell'd by the same token; for
they said they couldna have sell'd it if there had been an heir-male.'

'Sell'd!' echoed the gipsy, with something like a scream; 'and wha
durst buy Ellangowan that was not of Bertram's blude? and wha could
tell whether the bonny knave-bairn may not come back to claim his ain?
wha durst buy the estate and the castle of Ellangowan?'

'Troth, gudewife, just ane o' thae writer chields that buys a' thing;
they ca' him Glossin, I think.'

'Glossin! Gibbie Glossin! that I have carried in my creels a hundred
times, for his mother wasna muckle better than mysell--he to presume to
buy the barony of Ellangowan! Gude be wi' us; it is an awfu' warld! I
wished him ill; but no sic a downfa' as a' that neither. Wae's me!
wae's me to think o't!' She remained a moment silent but still opposing
with her hand the farmer's retreat, who betwixt every question was
about to turn his back, but good-humouredly stopped on observing the
deep interest his answers appeared to excite.

'It will be seen and heard of--earth and sea will not hold their peace
langer! Can ye say if the same man be now the sheriff of the county
that has been sae for some years past?'

'Na, he's got some other birth in Edinburgh, they say; but gude day,
gudewife, I maun ride.' She followed him to his horse, and, while he
drew the girths of his saddle, adjusted the walise, and put on the
bridle, still plied him with questions concerning Mr. Bertram's death
and the fate of his daughter; on which, however, she could obtain
little information from the honest farmer.
