apron, and seated on the edge of a casting, read it eagerly.

"I told him to send it," went on Martin, "and, by St. Peter, I think he
will, and then if he doesn't have old Don Diaz after him with a pistol
in one hand and a stiletto in the other, my name isn't Martin Roos."

"Of course, of course," gasped Foy, kicking his legs into the air
with delight, "why, they call the old fellow 'Singe jaloux.' Oh! it's
capital, and I only hope that he opens the lady's letters."

Thus did Foy, the commonplace and practical, make a mock of the poetic
efforts of the high-souled and sentimental Adrian.

Meanwhile Adrian, feeling that he required air after his literary
labours, fetched his peregrine from its perch--for he was fond of
hawking--and, setting it on his wrist, started out to find a quarry on
the marshes near the town.

Before he was halfway down the street he had forgotten all about the
sonnet and the lovely Isabella. His was a curious temperament, and this
sentimentality, born of vainness and idle hours, by no means expressed
it all. That he was what we should nowadays call a prig we know, and
also that he possessed his father's, Montalvo's, readiness of speech
without his father's sense of humour. In him, as Martin had hinted, the
strain of the sire predominated, for in all essentials Adrian was as
Spanish in mind as in appearance.

For instance, the sudden and violent passions into which he was apt to
fall if thwarted or overlooked were purely Spanish; there seemed to be
nothing of the patient, phlegmatic Netherlander about this side of him.
Indeed it was this temper of his perhaps more than any other desire or
tendency that made him so dangerous, for, whereas the impulses of his
heart were often good enough, they were always liable to be perverted by
some access of suddenly provoked rage.

From his birth up Adrian had mixed little with Spaniards, and every
influence about him, especially that of his mother, the being whom he
most loved on earth, had been anti-Spanish, yet were he an hidalgo
fresh from the Court at the Escurial, he could scarcely have been
more Castilian. Thus he had been brought up in what might be called
a Republican atmosphere, yet he was without sympathy for the love of
liberty which animated the people of Holland. The sturdy independence
of the Netherlanders, their perpetual criticism of kings and established
rules, their vulgar and unheard-of assumption that the good things of
the world were free to all honest and hard-working citizens, and not
merely the birthright of blue blood, did not appeal to Adrian. Also from
childhood he had been a member of the dissenting Church, one of the
New Religion. Yet, at heart, he rejected this faith with its humble
professors and pastors, its simple, and sometimes squalid rites; its
long and earnest prayers offered to the Almighty in the damp of a cellar
or the reek of a cowhouse.

Like thousands of his Spanish fellow-countrymen, he was constitutionally
unable to appreciate the fact that true religion and true faith are the
natural fruits of penitence and effort, and that individual repentance
and striving are the only sacrifices required of man.

For safety's sake, like most politic Netherlanders, Adrian was called
upon from time to time to attend worship in the Catholic churches. He
did not find the obligation irksome. In fact, the forms and rites of
that stately ceremonial, the moving picture of the Mass in those
dim aisles, the pealing of the music and the sweet voices of hidden
choristers--all these things unsealed a fountain in his bosom and at
whiles moved him well nigh to tears. The system appealed to him also,
and he could understand that in it were joy and comfort. For here was
to be found forgiveness of sins, not far off in the heavens, but at hand
upon the earth; forgiveness to all who bent the head and paid the fee.
Here, ready made by that prince of armourers, a Church that claimed to
be directly inspired, was a harness of proof which, after the death he
dreaded (for he was full of spiritual fears and superstitions), would
suffice to turn the shafts of Satan from his poor shivering soul,
however steeped in crime. Was not this a more serviceable and practical
faith than that of these loud-voiced, rude-handed Lutherans among whom
he lived; men who elected to cast aside this armour and trust instead to
a buckler forged by their faith and prayers--yes, and to give up their
evil ways and subdue their own desires that they might forge it better?

Such were the thoughts of Adrian's secret heart, but as yet he had never
acted on them, since, however much he might wish to do so, he had not
found the courage to break away from the influence of his surroundings.
His surroundings--ah! how he hated them! How he hated them! For very
shame's sake, indeed, he could not live in complete idleness among
folk who were always busy, therefore he acted as accountant in his
stepfather's business, keeping the books of the foundry in a scanty and
inefficient fashion, or writing letters to distant customers, for he was
a skilled clerk, to order the raw materials necessary to the craft. But
of this occupation he was weary, for he had the true Spanish dislike and
contempt of trade. In his heart he held that war was the only occupation
worthy of a man, successful war, of course, against foes worth
plundering, such as Cortes and Pizarro had waged upon the poor Indians
of New Spain.

Adrian had read a chronicle of the adventures of these heroes, and
bitterly regretted that he had come into the world too late to share
them. The tale of heathen foemen slaughtered by thousands, and of the
incalculable golden treasures divided among their conquerors, fired his
imagination--especially the treasures. At times he would see them in his
sleep, baskets full of gems, heaps of barbaric gold and guerdon of
fair women slaves, all given by heaven to the true soldier whom it had
charged with the sacred work of Christianising unbelievers by means of
massacre and the rack.

Oh! how deeply did he desire such wealth and the power which it would
bring with it; he who was dependent upon others that looked down upon
him as a lazy dreamer, who had never a guilder to spare in his pouch,
who had nothing indeed but more debts than he cared to remember. But it
never occurred to him to set to work and grow rich like his neighbours
by honest toil and commerce. No, that was the task of slaves, like these
low Hollander fellows among whom his lot was cast.

Such were the main characteristics of Adrian, surnamed van Goorl; Adrian
the superstitious but unspiritual dreamer, the vain Sybarite, the dull
poet, the chopper of false logic, the weak and passionate self-seeker,
whose best and deepest cravings, such as his love for his mother and
another love that shall be told of, were really little more than a
reflection of his own pride and lusts, or at least could be subordinated
to their fulfilment. Not that he was altogether bad; somewhere in him
there was a better part. Thus: he was capable of good purposes and of
bitter remorse; under certain circumstances even he might become capable
also of a certain spurious spiritual exaltation. But if this was to
bloom in his heart, it must be in a prison strong enough to protect from
the blows of temptation. Adrian tempted would always be Adrian overcome.
He was fashioned by nature to be the tool of others or of his own
desires.

It may be asked what part had his mother in him; where in his weak
ignoble nature was the trace of her pure and noble character? It seems
hard to find. Was this want to be accounted for by the circumstances
connected with his birth, in which she had been so unwilling an agent?
Had she given him something of her body but naught of that which was
within her own control--her spirit? Who can say? This at least is true,
that from his mother's stock he had derived nothing beyond a certain
Dutch doggedness of purpose which, when added to his other qualities,
might in some events make him formidable--a thing to fear and flee from.



Adrian reached the Witte Poort, and paused on this side of the moat to
reflect about things in general. Like most young men of his time and
blood, as has been said, he had military leanings, and was convinced
that, given the opportunity, he might become one of the foremost
generals of his age. Now he was engaged in imagining himself besieging
Leyden at the head of a great army, and in fancy disposing his forces
after such fashion as would bring about its fall in the shortest
possible time. Little did he guess that within some few years this very
question was to exercise the brain of Valdez and other great Spanish
captains.

Whilst he was thus occupied suddenly a rude voice called,

"Wake up, Spaniard," and a hard object--it was a green apple--struck
him on his flat cap nearly knocking out the feather. Adrian leaped
round with an oath, to catch sight of two lads, louts of about fifteen,
projecting their tongues and jeering at him from behind the angles of
the gate-house. Now Adrian was not popular with the youth of Leyden,
and he knew it well. So, thinking it wisest to take no notice of this
affront, he was about to continue on his way when one of the youths,
made bold by impunity, stepped from his corner and bowed before him till
the ragged cap in his hand touched the dust, saying, in a mocking voice,

"Hans, why do you disturb the noble hidalgo? Cannot you see that the
noble hidalgo is going for a walk in the country to look for his most
high father, the honourable duke of the Golden Fleece, to whom he is
taking a cockolly bird as a present?"

Adrian heard and winced at the sting of the insult, as a high-bred horse
winces beneath the lash. Of a sudden rage boiled in his veins like a
fountain of fire, and drawing the dagger from his girdle, he rushed at
the boys, dragging the hooded hawk, which had become dislodged from his
wrist, fluttering through the air after him. At that moment, indeed, he
would have been capable of killing one or both of them if he could have
caught them, but, fortunately for himself and them, being prepared
for an onslaught, they vanished this way and that up the narrow lanes.
Presently he stopped, and, still shaking with wrath, replaced the hawk
on his wrist and walked across the bridge.

"They shall pay for it," he muttered. "Oh! I will not forget, I will not
forget."

Here it may be explained that of the story of his birth Adrian had heard
something, but not all. He knew, for instance, that his father's name
was Montalvo, that the marriage with his mother for some reason was
declared to be illegal, and that this Montalvo had left the Netherlands
under a cloud to find his death, so he had been told, abroad. More than
this Adrian did not know for certain, since everybody showed a singular
reticence in speaking to him of the matter. Twice he had plucked up
courage to question his mother on the subject, and on each occasion her
face had turned cold and hard as stone, and she answered almost in the
same words:

"Son, I beg you to be silent. When I am dead you will find all the story
of your birth written down, but if you are wise you will not read."

Once he had asked the same question of his stepfather, Dirk van Goorl,
whereupon Dirk looked ill at ease and answered:

"Take my advice, lad, and be content to know that you are here and
alive with friends to take care of you. Remember that those who dig in
churchyards find bones."

"Indeed," replied Adrian haughtily; "at least I trust that there is
nothing against my mother's reputation."

At these words, to his surprise, Dirk suddenly turned pale as a sheet
and stepped towards him as though he were about to fly at his throat.

"You dare to doubt your mother," he began, "that angel out of Heaven--"
then ceased and added presently, "Go! I beg your pardon; I should have
remembered that you at least are innocent, and it is but natural that
the matter weighs upon your mind."

So Adrian went, also that proverb about churchyards and bones made such
an impression on him that he did no more digging. In other words he
ceased to ask questions, trying to console his mind with the knowledge
that, however his father might have behaved to his mother, at least he
was a man of ancient rank and ancient blood, which blood was his to-day.
The rest would be forgotten, although enough of it was still remembered
to permit of his being taunted by those street louts, and when it was
forgotten the blood, that precious blue blood of an hidalgo of Spain,
must still remain his heritage.



CHAPTER XI

ADRIAN RESCUES BEAUTY IN DISTRESS

All that long evening Adrian wandered about the causeways which pierced
the meadowlands and marshes, pondering these things and picturing
himself as having attained to the dignity of a grandee of Spain, perhaps
even--who could tell--to the proud rank of a Knight of the Golden Fleece
entitled to stand covered in the presence of his Sovereign. More than
one snipe and other bird such as he had come to hawk rose at his feet,
but so preoccupied was he that they were out of flight before he
could unhood his falcon. At length, after he had passed the church of
Weddinvliet, and, following the left bank of the Old Vliet, was opposite
to the wood named Boshhuyen after the half-ruined castle that stood in
it, he caught sight of a heron winging its homeward way to the heronry,
and cast off his peregrine out of the hood. She saw the quarry at once
and dashed towards it, whereon the heron, becoming aware of the approach
of its enemy, began to make play, rising high into the air in narrow
circles. Swiftly the falcon climbed after it in wider rings till at
length she hovered high above and stooped, but in vain. With a quick
turn of the wings the heron avoided her, and before the falcon could
find her pitch again, was far on its path towards the wood.

Once more the peregrine climbed and stooped with a like result. A
third time she soared upwards in great circles, and a third time rushed
downwards, now striking the quarry full and binding to it. Adrian, who
was following their flight as fast as he could run, leaping some of the
dykes in his path and splashing through others, saw and paused to watch
the end. For a moment hawk and quarry hung in the air two hundred feet
above the tallest tree beneath them, for at the instant of its taking
the heron had begun to descend to the grove for refuge, a struggling
black dot against the glow of sunset. Then, still bound together, they
rushed downward headlong, for their spread and fluttering wings did not
serve to stay their fall, and vanished among the tree-tops.

"Now my good hawk will be killed in the boughs--oh! what a fool was I
to fly so near the wood," thought Adrian to himself as again he started
forward.

Pushing on at his best pace, soon he was wandering about among the trees
as near to that spot where he had seen the birds fall as he could guess
it, calling to the falcon and searching for her with his eyes. But here,
in the dense grove, the fading light grew faint, so that at length he
was obliged to abandon the quest in despair, and turned to find his way
to the Leyden road. When within twenty paces of it, suddenly he came
upon hawk and heron. The heron was stone dead, and the brave falcon so
injured that it seemed hopeless to try to save her, for as he feared,
they had crashed through the boughs of a tree in their fall. Adrian
looked at her in dismay, for he loved this bird, which was the best of
its kind in the city, having trained her himself from a nestling. Indeed
there had always been a curious sympathy between himself and this fierce
creature of which he made a companion as another man might of a dog.
Even now he noted with a sort of pride that broken-winged and shattered
though she was, her talons remained fixed in the back of the quarry, and
her beak through the neck.

He stroked the falcon's head, whereon the bird, recognising him, loosed
her grip of the heron and tried to flutter to her accustomed perch upon
his wrist, only to fall to the ground, where she lay watching him with
her bright eyes. Then, because there was no help for it, although he
choked with grief at the deed, Adrian struck her on the head with his
staff until she died.

"Goodbye, friend," he muttered; "at least that is the best way to go
hence, dying with a dead foe beneath," and, picking up the peregrine, he
smoothed her ruffled feathers and placed her tenderly in his satchel.

Then it was, just as Adrian rose to his feet, standing beneath the
shadow of the big oak upon which the birds had fallen, that coming from
the road, which was separated from him by a little belt of undergrowth,
he heard the sound of men's voices growling and threatening, and with
them a woman's cry for help. At any other time he would have hesitated
and reconnoitred, or, perhaps, have retreated at once, for he knew well
the dangers of mixing himself up in the quarrels of wayfarers in those
rough days. But the loss of the hawk had exasperated his nerves, making
any excitement or adventure welcome to him. Therefore, without pausing
to think, Adrian pushed forward through the brushwood to find himself in
the midst of a curious scene.

Before him ran the grassy road or woodland lane. In the midst of it,
sprawling on his back, for he had been pulled from his horse, lay
a stout burgher, whose pockets were being rifled by a heavy-browed
footpad, who from time to time, doubtless to keep him quiet, threatened
his victim with a knife. On the pillion of the burgher's thickset
Flemish horse, which was peacefully cropping at the grass, sat a
middle-aged female, who seemed to be stricken dumb with terror, while a
few paces away a second ruffian and a tall, bony woman were engaged in
dragging a girl from the back of a mule.

Acting on the impulse of the moment, Adrian shouted,

"Come on, friends, here are the thieves," whereon the robber woman took
to flight and the man wheeled round, as he turned snatching a naked
knife from his girdle. But before he could lift it Adrian's heavy staff
crashed down upon the point of his shoulder, causing him to drop the
dagger with a howl of pain. Again the staff rose and fell, this time
upon his head, staggering him and knocking off his cap, so that the
light, such as it was, shone upon his villainous fat face, the fringe of
sandy-coloured whisker running from throat to temples, and the bald
head above, which Adrian knew at once for that of Hague Simon, or the
Butcher. Fortunately for him, however, the Butcher was too surprised,
or too much confused by the blow which he had received upon his head,
to recognise his assailant. Nor, having lost his knife, and believing
doubtless that Adrian was only the first of a troop of rescuers, did he
seem inclined to continue the combat, but, calling to his companion
to follow him, he began to run after the woman with a swiftness almost
incredible in a man of his build and weight, turning presently into the
brushwood, where he and his two fellow thieves vanished away.

Adrian dropped the point of his stick and looked round him, for the
whole affair had been so sudden, and the rout of the enemy so complete,
that he was tempted to believe he must be dreaming. Not eighty seconds
ago he was hiding the dead falcon in his satchel, and now behold! he was
a gallant knight who, unarmed, except for a dagger, which he forgot to
draw, had conquered two sturdy knaves and a female accomplice, bristling
with weapons, rescuing from their clutches Beauty (for doubtless the
maiden was beautiful), and, incidentally, her wealthy relatives. Just
then the lady, who had been dragged from the mule to the ground, where
she still lay, struggled to her knees and looked up, thereby causing the
hood of her travelling cloak to fall back from her head.

Thus it was, softened and illuminated by the last pale glow of this
summer evening, that Adrian first saw the face of Elsa Brant, the woman
upon whom, in the name of love, he was destined to bring so much sorrow.

The hero Adrian, overthrower of robbers, looked at the kneeling Elsa,
and knew that she was lovely, as, under the circumstances, was right and
fitting, and the rescued Elsa, gazing at the hero Adrian, admitted to
herself that he was handsome, also that his appearance on the scene had
been opportune, not to say providential.

Elsa Brant, the only child of that Hendrik Brant, the friend and cousin
of Dirk van Goorl, who was already figured in this history, was
just nineteen. Her eyes, and her hair which curled, were brown, her
complexion was pale, suggesting delicacy of constitution, her mouth
small, with a turn of humour about it, and her chin rather large and
firm. She was of middle height, if anything somewhat under it, with an
exquisitely rounded and graceful figure and perfect hands. Lacking the
stateliness of a Spanish beauty, and the coarse fulness of outline which
has always been admired in the Netherlands, Elsa was still without doubt
a beautiful woman, though how much of her charm was owing to her bodily
attractions, and how much to her vivacious mien and to a certain stamp
of spirituality that was set upon her face in repose, and looked out of
her clear large eyes when she was thoughtful, it would not be easy to
determine. At any rate, her charms were sufficient to make a powerful
impression upon Adrian, who, forgetting all about the Marchioness
d'Ovanda, inspirer of sonnets, became enamoured of her then and there;
partly for her own sake and partly because it was the right kind of
thing for a deliverer to do.

But it cannot be said, however deep her feelings of gratitude, that Elsa
became enamoured of Adrian. Undoubtedly, as she had recognised, he was
handsome, and she much admired the readiness and force with which he had
smitten that singularly loathsome-looking individual who had dragged her
from the mule. But as it chanced, standing where he did, the shadow of
his face lay on the grass beside her. It was a faint shadow, for the
light faded, still it was there, and it fascinated her, for seen thus
the fine features became sinister and cruel, and their smile of courtesy
and admiration was transformed into a most unpleasant sneer. A trivial
accident of light, no doubt, and foolish enough that Elsa should notice
it under such circumstances. But notice it she did, and what is more,
so quickly are the minds of women turned this way or that, and so
illogically do they draw a right conclusion from some pure freak of
chance, it raised her prejudice against him.

"Oh! Senor," said Elsa, clasping her hands, "how can I thank you
enough?"

This speech was short and not original. Yet there were two things about
it that Adrian noted with satisfaction; first, that it was uttered in a
soft and most attractive voice, and secondly, that the speaker supposed
him to be a Spaniard of noble birth.

"Do not thank me at all, gracious lady," he replied, making his lowest
bow. "To put to flight two robber rogues and a woman was no great feat,
although I had but this staff for weapon," he added, perhaps with a view
to impressing upon the maiden's mind that her assailants had been armed
while he, the deliverer, was not.

"Ah!" she answered, "I daresay that a brave knight like you thinks
nothing of fighting several men at once, but when that wretch with the
big hands and the flat face caught hold of me I nearly died of fright.
At the best of times I am a dreadful coward, and--no, I thank you,
Senor, I can stand now and alone. See, here comes the Heer van
Broekhoven under whose escort I am travelling, and look, he is bleeding.
Oh! worthy friend, are you hurt?"

"Not much, Elsa," gasped the Heer, for he was still breathless with
fright and exhaustion, "but that ruffian--may the hangman have him--gave
me a dig in the shoulder with his knife as he rose to run. However,"
he added with satisfaction, "he got nothing from me, for I am an old
traveller, and he never thought to look in my hat."

"I wonder why they attacked us," said Elsa.

The Heer van Broekhoven rubbed his head thoughtfully. "To rob us, I
suppose, for I heard the woman say, 'Here they are; look for the letter
on the girl, Butcher.'"

As he spoke Elsa's face turned grave, and Adrian saw her glance at the
animal she had been riding and slip her arm through its rein.

"Worthy sir," went on Van Broekhoven, "tell us whom we have to thank."

"I am Adrian, called Van Goorl," Adrian replied with dignity.

"Van Goorl!" said the Heer. "Well, this is strange; Providence could not
have arranged it better. Listen, wife," he went on, addressing the stout
lady, who all this while had sat still upon the horse, so alarmed and
bewildered that she could not speak, "here is a son of Dirk van Goorl,
to whom we are charged to deliver Elsa."

"Indeed," answered the good woman, recovering herself somewhat, "I
thought from the look of him that he was a Spanish nobleman. But whoever
he is I am sure that we are all very much obliged to him, and if he
could show us the way out of this dreadful wood, which doubtless is full
of robbers, to the house of our kinsfolk, the Broekhovens of Leyden, I
should be still more grateful."

"Madam, you have only to accept my escort, and I assure you that you
need fear no more robbers. Might I in turn ask this lady's name?"

"Certainly, young sir, she is Elsa Brant, the only child of Hendrik
Brant, the famous goldsmith of The Hague, but doubtless now that you
know her name you know all that also, for she must be some kind of
cousin to you. Husband, help Elsa on to her mule."

"Let that be my duty," said Adrian, and, springing forward, he lifted
Elsa to the saddle gracefully enough. Then, taking her mule by the
bridle, he walked onwards through the wood praying in his heart that the
Butcher and his companions would not find courage to attack them again
before they were out of its depths.

"Tell me, sir, are you Foy?" asked Elsa in a puzzled voice.

"No," answered Adrian, shortly, "I am his brother."

"Ah! that explains it. You see I was perplexed, for I remember Foy when
I was quite little; a beautiful boy, with blue eyes and yellow hair, who
was always very kind to me. Once he stopped at my father's house at The
Hague with his father."

"Indeed," said Adrian, "I am glad to hear that Foy was ever beautiful.
I can only remember that he was very stupid, for I used to try to teach
him. At any rate, I am afraid you will not think him beautiful now--that
is, unless you admire young men who are almost as broad as they are
long."

"Oh! Heer Adrian," she answered, laughing, "I am afraid that fault
can be found with most of us North Holland folk, and myself among
the number. You see it is given to very few of us to be tall and
noble-looking like high-born Spaniards--not that I should wish to
resemble any Spaniard, however lovely she might be," Elsa added, with a
slight hardening of her voice and face. "But," she went on hurriedly,
as though sorry that the remark had escaped her, "you, sir, and Foy are
strangely unlike to be brothers; is it not so?"

"We are half-brothers," said Adrian looking straight before him; "we
have the same mother only; but please do not call me 'sir,' call me
'cousin.'"

"No, I cannot do that," she replied gaily, "for Foy's mother is no
relation of mine. I think that I must call you 'Sir Prince,' for, you
see, you appeared at exactly the right time; just like the Prince in the
fairy-tales, you know."

Here was an opening not to be neglected by a young man of Adrian's
stamp.

"Ah!" he said in a tender voice, and looking up at the lady with his
dark eyes, "that is a happy name indeed. I would ask no better lot
than to be your Prince, now and always charged to defend you from every
danger." (Here, it may be explained, that, however exaggerated his
language, Adrian honestly meant what he said, seeing that already he was
convinced that to be the husband of the beautiful heiress of one of the
wealthiest men in the Netherlands would be a very satisfactory walk in
life for a young man in his position.)

"Oh! Sir Prince," broke in Elsa hurriedly, for her cavalier's ardour was
somewhat embarrassing, "you are telling the story wrong; the tale I mean
did not go on like that at all. Don't you remember? The hero rescued the
lady and handed her over--to--to--her father."

"Of whom I think he came to claim her afterwards," replied Adrian with
another languishing glance, and a smile of conscious vanity at the
neatness of his answer. Their glances met, and suddenly Adrian became
aware that Elsa's face had undergone a complete change. The piquante,
half-amused smile had passed out of it; it was strained and hard and the
eyes were frightened.

"Oh! now I understand the shadow--how strange," she exclaimed in a new
voice.

"What is the matter? What is strange?" he asked.

"Oh!--only that your face reminded me so much of a man of whom I am
terrified. No, no, I am foolish, it is nothing, those footpads have
upset me. Praise be to God that we are out of that dreadful wood! Look,
neighbour Broekhoven, here is Leyden before us. Are not those red roofs
pretty in the twilight, and how big the churches seem. See, too, there
is water all round the walls; it must be a very strong town. I should
think that even the Spaniards could not take it, and oh! I am sure that
it would be a good thing if we might find a city which we were quite,
quite certain the Spaniards could never take--all, all of us," and she
sighed heavily.

"If I were a Spanish general with a proper army," began Adrian
pompously, "I would take Leyden easily enough. Only this afternoon I
studied its weak spots, and made a plan of attack which could scarcely
fail, seeing that the place would only be defended by a mob of
untrained, half-armed burghers."

Again that curious look returned into Elsa's eyes.

"If you were a Spanish general," she said slowly. "How can you jest
about such a thing as the sacking of a town by Spaniards? Do you know
what it means? That is how they talk; I have heard them," and she
shuddered, then went on: "You are not a Spaniard, are you, sir, that you
can speak like that?" And without waiting for an answer Elsa urged her
mule forward, leaving him a little behind.

Presently as they passed through the Witte Poort, he was at her side
again and chatting to her, but although she replied courteously enough,
he felt that an invisible barrier had arisen between them. Yes, she
had read his secret heart; it was as though she had been a party to his
thoughts when he stood by the bridge this afternoon designing plans
for the taking of Leyden, and half wishing that he might share in its
capture. She mistrusted him, and was half afraid of him, and Adrian knew
that it was so.

Ten minutes' ride through the quiet town, for in those days of terror
and suspicion unless business took them abroad people did not frequent
the streets much after sundown, brought the party to the van Goorl's
house in the Bree Straat. Here Adrian dismounted and tried to open
the door, only to find that it was locked and barred. This seemed to
exasperate a temper already somewhat excited by the various events and
experiences of the day, and more especially by the change in Elsa's
manner; at any rate he used the knocker with unnecessary energy. After
a while, with much turning of keys and drawing of bolts, the door was
opened, revealing Dirk, his stepfather, standing in the passage, candle
in hand, while behind, as though to be ready for any emergency, loomed
the great stooping shape of Red Martin.

"Is that you, Adrian?" asked Dirk in a voice at once testy and relieved.
"Then why did you not come to the side entrance instead of forcing us to
unbar here?"

"Because I bring you a guest," replied Adrian pointing to Elsa and her
companions. "It did not occur to me that you would wish guests to be
smuggled in by a back door as though--as though they were ministers of
our New Religion."

The bow had been drawn at a venture but the shaft went home, for Dirk
