you should have refused my personal hospitality at my own board, on the
very day on which you honoured me by entering into my service as vassal
for the principality of Antioch."

"Antioch is not yet conquered," said Sir Bohemond; "and conscience,
dread sovereign, must always have its exceptions, in whatever temporal
contracts we may engage."

"Come, gentle Count," said the Emperor, who obviously regarded
Bohemond's inhospitable humour as something arising more from suspicion
than devotion, "we invite, though it is not our custom, our children,
our noble guests, and our principal officers here present, to a general
carouse. Fill the cups called the Nine Muses! let them be brimful of
the wine which is said to be sacred to the Imperial lips!"

At the Emperor's command the cups were filled; they were of pure gold,
and there was richly engraved upon each the effigy of the Muse to whom
it was dedicated.

"You at least," said the Emperor, "my gentle Count Robert, you and your
lovely lady, will not have any scruple to pledge your Imperial host?"

"If that scruple is to imply suspicion of the provisions with which we
are here served, I disdain to nourish such," said Count Robert. "If it
is a sin which I commit by tasting wine to-night, it is a venial one;
nor shall I greatly augment my load by carrying it, with the rest of my
trespasses, to the next confessional."

"Will you then, Prince Bohemond, not be ruled by the conduct of your
friend?" said the Emperor.

"Methinks," replied the Norman-Italian, "my friend might have done
better to have been, ruled by mine; but be it as his wisdom pleases.
The flavour of such exquisite wine is sufficient for me."

"So saying, he emptied the wine into another goblet, and seemed
alternately to admire the carving of the cup, and the flavour of what
it had lately contained.

"You are right, Sir Bohemond," said the Emperor; "the fabric of that
cup is beautiful; it was done by one of the ancient gravers of Greece.
The boasted cup of Nestor, which Homer has handed down to us, was a
good deal larger perhaps, but neither equalled these in the value of
the material, nor the exquisite beauty of the workmanship. Let each
one, therefore, of my stranger guests, accept of the cup which he
either has or might have drunk out of, as a recollection of me; and may
the expedition against the infidels be as propitious as their
confidence and courage deserve!"

"If I accept your gift, mighty Emperor," said Bohemond, "it is only to
atone for the apparent discourtesy, when my devotion, compels me to
decline your Imperial pledge, and to show you that we part on the most
intimate terms of friendship."

So saying, he bowed deeply to the Emperor, who answered him with a
smile, into which was thrown, a considerable portion of sarcastic
expression.

"And I," said the Count of Paris, "having taken upon my conscience the
fault of meeting your Imperial pledge, may stand excused from incurring
the blame of aiding to dismantle your table of these curious drinking
cups. We empty them to your health, and we cannot in any other respect
profit by them."

"But Prince Bohemond can," said the Emperor; "to whose quarters they
shall be carried, sanctioned by your generous use. And we have still a
set for you, and for your lovely Countess, equal to that of the Graces,
though no longer matching in number the nymphs of Parnassus.--The
evening bell rings, and calls us to remember the hour of rest, that we
may be ready to meet the labours of to-morrow."

The party then broke up for the evening. Bohemond left the palace that
night, not forgetting the Muses, of whom he was not in general a
devotee. The result was, as the wily Greek had intended, that he had
established between Bohemond and the Count, not indeed a quarrel, but a
kind of difference of opinion; Bohemond feeling that the fiery Count of
Paris must think his conduct sordid and avaricious, while Count Robert
was far less inclined than before to rely on him as a counsellor.




CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH.


The Count of Paris and his lady were that night lodged in the Imperial
Palace of the Blacquernal. Their apartments were contiguous, but the
communication between them was cut off for the night by the mutual door
being locked and barred. They marvelled somewhat at this precaution.
The observance, however, of the festival of the Church, was pleaded as
an admissible, and not unnatural excuse for this extraordinary
circumstance. Neither the Count nor his lady entertained, it may be
believed, the slightest personal fear for any thing which could happen
to them. Their attendants, Marcian and Agatha, having assisted their
master and mistress in the performance of their usual offices, left
them, in order to seek the places of repose assigned to them among
persons of their degree.

The preceding day had been one of excitation, and of much bustle and
interest; perhaps, also, the wine, sacred to the Imperial lips, of
which Count Robert had taken a single, indeed, but a deep draught, was
more potent than the delicate and high-flavoured juice of the Gascogne
grape, to which he was accustomed; at any rate, it seemed to him that,
from the time he felt that he had slept, daylight ought to have been
broad in his chamber when he awaked, and yet it was still darkness
almost palpable. Somewhat surprised, he gazed eagerly around, but could
discern nothing, except two balls of red light which shone from among
the darkness with a self-emitted brilliancy, like the eyes of a wild
animal while it glares upon its prey. The Count started from bed to put
on his armour, a necessary precaution if what he saw should really be a
wild creature and at liberty; but the instant he stirred, a deep growl
was uttered, such as the Count had never heard, but which might be
compared to the sound of a thousand monsters at once; and, as the
symphony, was heard the clash of iron chains, and the springing of a
monstrous creature towards the bedside, which appeared, however, to be
withheld by some fastening from attaining the end of its bound. The
roars which it uttered now ran thick on each other. They were most
tremendous, and must have been heard throughout the whole palace. The
creature seemed to gather itself many yards nearer to the bed than by
its glaring eyeballs it appeared at first to be stationed, and how much
nearer, or what degree of motion, might place him within the monster's
reach, the Count was totally uncertain. Its breathing was even heard,
and Count Robert thought he felt the heat of its respiration, while his
defenceless limbs might not be two yards distant from the fangs which
he heard grinding against each other, and the claws which tore up
fragments of wood from the oaken floor. The Count of Paris was one of
the bravest men who lived in a time when bravery was the universal
property of all who claimed a drop of noble blood, and the knight was a
descendant of Charlemagne. He was, however, a man, and therefore cannot
be said to have endured unappalled a sense of danger so unexpected and
so extraordinary. But his was not a sudden alarm or panic, it was a
calm sense of extreme peril, qualified by a resolution to exert his
faculties to the uttermost, to save his life if it were possible. He
withdrew himself within the bed, no longer a place of rest, being thus
a few feet further from the two glaring eyeballs which remained so
closely fixed upon him, that, in spite of his courage, nature painfully
suggested the bitter imagination of his limbs being mangled, torn, and
churned with their life-blood, in the jaws of some monstrous beast of
prey. One saving thought alone presented itself--this might be a trial,
an experiment of the philosopher Agelastes, or of the Emperor his
master, for the purpose of proving the courage of which the Christians
vaunted so highly, and punishing the thoughtless insult which the Count
had been misadvised enough to put upon the Emperor the preceding day.

"Well is it said," he reflected in his agony, "beard not the lion in
his den! Perhaps even, now some base slave deliberates whether I have
yet tasted enough of the preliminary agonies of death, and whether he
shall yet slip the chain which keeps the savage from doing his work.
But come death when it will, it shall never be said that Count Robert
was heard to receive it with prayers for compassion, or with cries of
pain or terror." He turned his face to the wall, and waited, with a
strong mental exertion, the death which he conceived to be fast
approaching.

His first feelings had been unavoidably of a selfish nature. The danger
was too instant, and of a description too horrible, to admit of any
which involved a more comprehensive view of his calamity; and other
reflections of a more distant kind, were at first swallowed up in the
all-engrossing thought of immediate death. But as his ideas became
clearer, the safety of his Countess rushed upon his mind--what might
she now be suffering! and, while he was subjected to a trial so
extraordinary, for what were her weaker frame and female courage
reserved? Was she still within a few yards of him, as when he lay down
the last night? or had the barbarians, who had devised for him a scene
so cruel, availed themselves of his and his lady's incautious
confidence to inflict upon her some villany of the same kind, or even
yet more perfidious? Did she sleep or wake, or could she sleep within
the close hearing of that horrible cry, which shook all around? He
resolved to utter her name, warning her, if possible, to be upon her
guard, and to answer without venturing rashly into the apartment which
contained a guest so horribly perilous.

He uttered, therefore, his wife's name, but in trembling accents, as if
he had been afraid of the savage beast overhearing him.

"Brenhilda! Brenhilda!--there is danger-awake, and speak to me, but do
not arise." There was no answer.--"What am I become," he said to
himself, "that I call upon Brenhilda of Aspramonte, like a child on its
sleeping nurse, and all because there is a wild-cat in the same room
with me? Shame on thee, Count of Paris! Let thy arms be rent, and thy
spurs be hacked from thy heels!--What ho!" he cried aloud, but still
with a tremulous voice, "Brenhilda, we are beset, the foe are upon us!
--Answer me, but stir not."

A deep growl from the monster which garrisoned his apartment was the
only answer. The sound seemed to say, "Thou hast no hope!" and it ran
to the knight's bosom as the genuine expression of despair.

"Perhaps, however, I am still too cold in making my misery known. What
ho! my love! Brenhilda!"

A voice, hollow and disconsolate as that which might have served an
inhabitant of the grave, answered as if from a distance. "What
disconsolate wretch art thou, who expectest that the living can answer
thee from the habitations of the dead?"

"I am a Christian man, a free noble of the kingdom of France," answered
the Count. "Yesterday the captain of five hundred men, the bravest in
France--the bravest, that is, who breathe mortal air--and I am here
without a glimpse of light, to direct me how to avoid the corner in
which lies a wild tiger-cat, prompt to spring upon and to devour me."

"Thou art an example," replied the voice, "and wilt not long be the
last, of the changes of fortune. I, who am now suffering in my third
year, was that mighty Ursel, who rivalled Alexius Comnenus for the
Crown of Greece, was betrayed by my confederates, and being deprived of
that eyesight which is the chief blessing of humanity, I inhabit these
vaults, no distant neighbour of the wild animals by whom they are
sometimes occupied, and whose cries of joy I hear when unfortunate
victims like thyself are delivered up to their fury."

"Didst thou not then hear," said Count Robert, in return, "a warlike
guest and his bride conducted hither last night, with sounds as it
might seem, of bridal music?--O, Brenhilda! hast thou, so young--so
beautiful--been so treacherously done to death by means so unutterably
horrible!"

"Think not," answered Ursel, as the voice had called its owner, "that
the Greeks pamper their wild beasts on such lordly fare. For their
enemies, which term includes not only all that are really such, but all
those whom they fear or hate, they have dungeons whose locks never
revolve; hot instruments of steel, to sear the eyeballs in the head;
lions and tigers, when it pleases them to make a speedy end of their
captives--but these are only for the male prisoners. While for the
women--if they be young and beautiful, the princes of the land have
places in their bed and bower; nor are they employed like the captives
of Agamemnon's host, to draw water from an Argive spring, but are
admired and adored by those whom fate has made the lords of their
destiny."

"Such shall never be the doom of Brenhilda!" exclaimed Count Robert;
"her husband still lives to assist her, and should he die, she knows
well how to follow him without leaving a blot in the epitaph of either."

The captive did not immediately reply, and a short pause ensued, which
was broken by Ursel's voice. "Stranger," he said, "what noise is that I
hear?"

"Nay, I hear nothing," said Count Robert.

"But I do," said Ursel. "The cruel deprivation of my eyesight renders
my other senses more acute."

"Disquiet not thyself about the matter, fellow-prisoner," answered the
Count, "but wait the event in silence."

Suddenly a light arose in the apartment, lurid, red, and smoky. The
knight had bethought him of a flint and match which he usually carried
about him, and with as little noise as possible had lighted the torch
by the bedside; this he instantly applied to the curtains of the bed,
which, being of thin muslin, were in a moment in flames. The knight
sprung, at the same instant, from his bed. The tiger, for such it was,
terrified at the flame, leaped backwards as far as his chain would
permit, heedless of any thing save this new object of terror. Count
Robert upon this seized on a massive wooden stool, which was the only
offensive weapon on which he could lay his hand, and, marking at those
eyes which now reflected the blaze of fire, and which had recently
seemed so appalling, he discharged against them this fragment of
ponderous oak, with a force which less resembled human strength than
the impetus with which an engine hurls a stone. He had employed his
instant of time so well, and his aim was so true, that the missile went
right to the mark and with incredible force. The skull of the tiger,
which might be, perhaps, somewhat exaggerated if described as being of
the very largest size, was fractured by the blow, and with the
assistance of his dagger, which had fortunately been left with him, the
French Count despatched the monster, and had the satisfaction to see
him grin his last, and roll, in the agony of death, those eyes which
were lately so formidable.

Looking around him, he discovered, by the light of the fire which he
had raised, that the apartment in which he now lay was different from
that in which he had gone to bed overnight; nor could there be a
stronger contrast between the furniture of both, than the flickering
half-burnt remains of the thin muslin curtains, and the strong, bare,
dungeon-looking walls of the room itself, or the very serviceable
wooden stool, of which he had made such good use.

The knight had no leisure to form conclusions upon such a subject. He
hastily extinguished the fire, which had, indeed, nothing that it could
lay hold of, and proceeded, by the light of the flambeau, to examine
the apartment, and its means of entrance. It is scarce necessary to
say, that he saw no communication with the room of Brenhilda, which
convinced him that they had been separated the evening before under
pretence of devotional scruples, in order to accomplish some most
villanous design upon one or both of them. His own part of the night's
adventure we have already seen, and success, so far, over so formidable
a danger, gave him a trembling hope that Brenhilda, by her own worth
and valour, would be able to defend herself against all attacks of
fraud or force, until he could find his way to her rescue. "I should
have paid more regard," he said, "to Bohemond's caution last night,
who, I think, intimated to me as plainly as if he had spoke it in
direct terms, that that same cup of wine was a drugged potion. But
then, fie upon him for an avaricious hound! How was it possible I
should think he suspected any such thing, when he spoke not out like a
man, but, for sheer coldness of heart, or base self-interest, suffered
me to run the risk of being poisoned by the wily despot?"

Here he heard a voice from the same quarter as before. "Ho, there! Ho,
stranger! Do you live, or have you been murdered? What means this
stifling smell of smoke? For God's sake, answer him who can receive no
information from eyes, closed, alas, for ever!"

"I am at liberty," said the Count, "and the monster destined to devour
me has groaned its last. I would, my friend Ursel, since such is thy
name, thou hadst the advantage of thine eyes, to have borne witness to
yonder combat; it had been worth thy while, though thou shouldst have
lost them a minute afterwards, and it would have greatly advantaged
whoever shall have the task of compiling my history."

While he gave a thought to that vanity which strongly ruled him, he
lost no time in seeking some mode of escape from the dungeon, for by
that means only might he hope to recover his Countess. At last he found
an entrance in the wall, but it was strongly locked and bolted. "I have
found the passage,"--he called out; "and its direction is the same in
which thy voice is heard--But how shall I undo the door?"

"I'll teach thee that secret," said Ursel. "I would I could as easily
unlock each bolt that withholds us from the open air; but, as for thy
seclusion within the dungeon, heave up the door by main strength, and
thou shalt lift the locks to a place where, pushing then the door from
thee, the fastenings will find a grooved passage in the wall, and the
door itself will open. Would that I could indeed see thee, not only
because, being a gallant man, thou must be a goodly sight, but also
because I should thereby know that I was not caverned in darkness for
ever."

While he spoke thus, the Count made a bundle of his armour, from which
he missed nothing except his sword, Tranchefer, and then proceeded to
try what efforts he could make, according to the blind man's
instructions, to open the door of his prison-house. Pushing in a direct
line was, he soon found, attended with no effect; but when he applied
his gigantic strength, and raised the door as high as it would go, he
had the satisfaction to find that the bolts yielded, though
reluctantly. A space had been cut so as to allow them to move out of
the socket into which they had been forced; and without the turn of a
key, but by a powerful thrust forwards, a small passage was left open.
The knight entered, bearing his armour in his hand.

"I hear thee," said Ursel, "O stranger! and am aware thou art come into
my place of captivity. For three years have I been employed in cutting
these grooves, corresponding to the sockets which hold these iron
bolts, and preserving the knowledge of the secret from the
prison-keepers. Twenty such bolts, perhaps, must be sawn through, ere
my steps shall approach the upper air. What prospect is there that I
shall have strength of mind sufficient to continue the task? Yet,
credit me, noble stranger, I rejoice in having been thus far aiding to
thy deliverance; for if Heaven blesses not, in any farther degree, our
aspirations after freedom, we may still be a comfort to each other,
while tyranny permits our mutual life."

Count Robert looked around, and shuddered that a human being should
talk of any thing approaching to comfort, connected with his residence
in what seemed a living tomb. Ursel's dungeon was not above twelve feet
square, vaulted in the roof, and strongly built in the walls by stones
which the chisel had morticed closely together. A bed, a coarse
footstool, like that which Robert had just launched at the head of the
tiger, and a table of equally massive materials, were its only articles
of furniture. On a long stone, above the bed, were these few, but
terrible words:--Zedekias Ursel, imprisoned here on the Ides of March,
A.D.----. Died and interred on the spot"--A blank was left for filling
up the period. The figure of the captive could hardly be discerned amid
the wildness of his dress and dishabille. The hair of his head, uncut
and uncombed, descended in elf-locks, and mingled with a beard of
extravagant length.

"Look on me," said the captive, "and rejoice that thou canst yet see
the wretched condition to which iron-hearted tyranny can reduce a
fellow-creature, both in mortal existence and in future hope."

"Was it thou," said Count Robert, whose blood ran cold in his veins,
"that hadst the heart to spend thy time in sawing through the blocks of
stone by which these bolts are secured?"

"Alas!" said Ursel, "what could a blind man do? Busy I must be, if I
would preserve my senses. Great as the labour was, it was to me the
task of three years; nor can you wonder that I should have devoted to
it my whole time, when I had no other means of occupying it. Perhaps,
and most likely, my dungeon does not admit the distinction of day and
night; but a distant cathedral clock told me how hour after hour fled
away, and found me expending them in rubbing one stone against another.
But when the door gave way, I found I had only cut an access into a
prison more strong than that which held me. I rejoice, nevertheless,
since it has brought us together, given thee an entrance to my dungeon,
and me a companion in my misery."

"Think better than that," said Count Robert, "think of liberty--think
of revenge! I cannot believe such unjust treachery will end
successfully, else needs must I say, the heavens are less just than
priests tell us of. How art thou supplied with food in this dungeon of
thine?"

"A warder," said Ursel, "and who, I think, understands not the Greek
language--at least he never either answers or addresses me--brings a
loaf and a pitcher of water, enough to supply my miserable life till
two days are past. I must, therefore, pray that you will retire for a
space into the next prison, so that the warder may have no means of
knowing that we can hold correspondence together."

"I see not," said Count Robert, "by what access the barbarian, if he is
one, can enter my dungeon without passing through yours; but no matter,
I will retire into the inner or outer room, whichever it happens to be,
and be thou then well aware that the warder will have some one to
grapple with ere he leaves his prison-work to-day. Meanwhile, think
thyself dumb as thou art blind, and be assured that the offer of
freedom itself would not induce me to desert the cause of a companion
in adversity."

"Alas," said the old man, "I listen to thy promises as I should to
those of the morning gale, which tells me that the sun is about to
rise, although I know that I at least shall never behold it. Thou art
one of those wild and undespairing knights, whom for so many years the
west of Europe hath sent forth to attempt impossibilities, and from
thee, therefore, I can only hope for such a fabric of relief as an idle
boy would blow out of soap bubbles."

"Think better of us, old man," said Count Robert, retiring; "at least
let me die with my blood warm, and believing it possible for me to be
once more united to my beloved Brenhilda."

So saying, he retired into his own cell, and replaced the door, so that
the operations of Ursel, which indeed were only such as three years'
solitude could have achieved, should escape observation when again
visited by the Warder. "It is ill luck," said he, when once more within
his own prison--for that in which the tiger had been secured, he
instinctively concluded to be destined for him--"It is ill luck that I
had not found a young and able fellow-captive, instead of one decrepit
by imprisonment, blind, and broken down past exertion. But God's will
be done! I will not leave behind me the poor wretch whom I have found
in such a condition, though he is perfectly unable to assist me in
accomplishing my escape, and is rather more likely to retard it.
Meantime, before we put out the torch, let us see, if, by close
examination, we can discover any door in the wall save that to the
blind man's dungeon. If not, I much suspect that my descent has been
made through the roof. That cup of wine--that Muse, as they called it,
had a taste more like medicine than merry companions' pledge."

He began accordingly a strict survey of the walls, which he resolved to
conclude by extinguishing the torch, that he might take the person who
should enter his dungeon darkling and by surprise, For a similar
reason, he dragged into the darkest corner the carcass of the tiger,
and covered it with the remains of the bed-clothes, swearing at the
same time, that a half tiger should be his crest in future, if he had
the fortune, which his bold heart would not suffer him to doubt, of
getting through the present danger. "But," he added, "if these
necromantic vassals of hell shall raise the devil upon, me, what shall
I do then? And so great is the chance, that methinks I would fain
dispense with extinguishing the flambeau. Yet it is childish for one
dubbed in the chapel of Our Lady of the Broken Lances, to make much
difference between a light room and a dark one. Let them come, as many
fiends as the cell can hold, and we shall see if we receive them not as
becomes a Christian knight; and surely, Our Lady, to whom I was ever a
true votary, will hold it an acceptable sacrifice that I tore myself
from my Brenhilda, even for a single moment, in honour of her advent,
and thus led the way for our woful separation. Fiends! I defy ye in the
body as in the spirit, and I retain the remains of this flambeau until
some more convenient opportunity." He dashed it against the wall as he
spoke, and then quietly sat down in a corner, to watch what should next
happen.

Thought after thought chased each other through his mind. His
confidence in his wife's fidelity, and his trust in her uncommon
strength and activity, were the greatest comforts which he had; nor
could her danger present itself to him in any shape so terrible, but
that he found consolation in these reflections: "She is pure," he said,
"as the dew of heaven, and heaven will not abandon its own."




CHAPTER THE SIXTEENTH.

      Strange ape of man! who loathes thee while he scorns thee.
      Half a reproach to us and half a jest.
      What fancies can be ours ere we have pleasure
      In viewing our own form, our pride and passions,
      Reflected in a shape grotesque as thine!
                                             ANONYMOUS.


Count Robert of Paris having ensconced himself behind the ruins of the
bed, so that he could not well be observed, unless a strong light was
at once flung upon the place of his retreat, waited with anxiety how
and in what manner the warder of the dungeon, charged with the task of
bringing food to the prisoners, should make himself visible; nor was it
long ere symptoms of his approach began to be heard and observed.

A light was partially seen, as from a trap-door opening in the roof,
and a voice was heard to utter these words in Anglo-Saxon, "Leap,
sirrah; come, no delay; leap, my good Sylvan, show your honour's
activity." A strange chuckling hoarse voice, in a language totally
unintelligible to Count Robert, was heard to respond, as if disputing
the orders which were received.

"What, sir," said his companion, "you must contest the point, must you?
Nay, if thou art so lazy, I must give your honour a ladder, and perhaps
a kick to hasten your journey." Something then, of very great size, in
the form of a human being, jumped down from the trap-door, though the
height might be above fourteen feet. This figure was gigantic, being
upwards of seven feet high. In its left hand it held a torch, and in
its right a skein of fine silk, which unwinding itself as it descended,
remained unbroken, though it was easy to conceive it could not have
afforded a creature so large any support in his descent from the roof.
He alighted with perfect safety and activity upon his feet, and, as if
rebounding from the floor, he sprung upwards again, so as almost to
touch the roof. In this last gambaud the torch which he bore was
extinguished; but this extraordinary warder whirled it round his head
with infinite velocity, so that it again ignited. The bearer, who
appeared to intend the accomplishment of this object, endeavoured to
satisfy himself that it was really attained by approaching, as if
cautiously, its left hand to the flame of the torch. This practical
experiment seemed attended with consequences which the creature had not
expected, for it howled with pain, shaking the burnt hand, and
chattering as if bemoaning itself.

"Take heed there, Sylvanus!" said the same voice in Anglo-Saxon, and in
a tone of rebuke. "Ho, there! mind thy duty, Sylvan! Carry food to the
blind man, and stand not there to play thyself, lest I trust thee not
again alone on such an errand!"

The creature--for it would have been rash to have termed it a
man--turning its eye upwards to the place from whence the voice came,
answered with a dreadful grin and shaking of its fist, yet presently
began to undo a parcel, and rummage in the pockets of a sort of jerkin
and pantaloons which it wore, seeking, it appeared, a bunch of keys,
which at length it produced, while it took from the pocket a loaf of
bread. Heating the stone of the wall, it affixed the torch to it by a
piece of wax, and then cautiously looked out for the entrance to the
old man's dungeon, which it opened with a key selected from the bunch.
Within the passage it seemed to look for and discover the handle of a
pump, at which it filled a pitcher that it bore, and bringing back the
fragments of the former loaf, and remains of the pitcher of water, it
ate a little, as if it were in sport, and very soon making a frightful
grimace, flung the fragments away. The Count of Paris, in the
meanwhile, watched anxiously the proceedings of this unknown animal.
His first thought was, that the creature, whose limbs were so much
larger than humanity, whose grimaces were so frightful, and whose
activity seemed supernatural, could be no other than the Devil himself,
or some of his imps, whose situation and office in those gloomy regions
seemed by no means hard to conjecture. The human voice, however, which
he had heard, was less that of a necromancer conjuring a fiend than
that of a person giving commands to a wild animal, over whom he had, by
training, obtained a great superiority.

"A shame on it," said the Count, "if I suffer a common jackanapes,--for
such I take this devil-seeming beast to be, although twice as large as
any of its fellows whom I have ever seen,--to throw an obstacle in the
way of my obtaining daylight and freedom! Let us but watch, and the
chance is that we make that furry gentleman our guide to the upper
regions."

Meantime the creature, which rummaged about everywhere, at length.
discovered the body of the tiger,--touched it, stirred it, with many
strange motions, and seemed to lament and wonder at its death. At once
it seemed struck with the idea that some one must have slain it, and
Count Robert had the mortification to see it once more select the key,
and spring towards the door of Ursel's prison with such alacrity, that
had its intention been to strangle him, it would have accomplished its
purpose before the interference of Count Robert could have prevented
its revenge taking place. Apparently, however, it reflected, that for
reasons which seemed satisfactory, the death of the tiger could not be
caused by the unfortunate Ursel, but had been accomplished by some one
concealed within the outer prison.

Slowly grumbling, therefore, and chattering to itself, and peeping
anxiously into every corner, the tremendous creature, so like yet so
very unlike to the human form, came stealing along the walls, moving
whatever he thought could seclude a man from his observation. Its
extended legs and arms were protruded forward with great strides, and
its sharp eyes, on the watch to discover the object of its search, kept
prying, with the assistance of the torch, into every corner.

Considering the vicinity of Alexius's collection of animals, the
reader, by this time, can have little doubt that the creature in
question, whose appearance seemed to the Count of Paris so very
problematical, was a specimen of that gigantic species of ape--if it is
not indeed some animal more nearly allied to ourselves--to which, I
believe, naturalists have given the name of the Ourang Outang. This
creature differs from the rest of its fraternity, in being
comparatively more docile and serviceable: and though possessing the
power of imitation which is common to the whole race, yet making use of
it less in mere mockery, than in the desire of improvement and
instruction perfectly unknown to his brethren. The aptitude which it
possesses of acquiring information, is surprisingly great, and
probably, if placed in a favourable situation, it might admit of being
domesticated in a considerable degree; but such advantages the ardour
of scientific curiosity has never afforded this creature. The last we
have heard of was seen, we believe, in the Island of Sumatra--it was of
great size and strength, and upwards of seven feet high. It died
defending desperately its innocent life against a party of Europeans,
who, we cannot help thinking, might have better employed the
superiority which their knowledge gave them over the poor native of the
forest. It was probably this creature, seldom seen, but when once seen
never forgotten, which occasioned the ancient belief in the god Pan,
with his sylvans and satyrs. Nay, but for the gift of speech, which we
cannot suppose any of the family to have attained, we should have
believed the satyr seen by St. Anthony in the desert to have belonged
to this tribe.

We can, therefore, the more easily credit the annals which attest that
the collection of natural history belonging to Alexius Comnenus,
preserved an animal of this kind, which had been domesticated and
reclaimed to a surprising extent, and showed a degree of intelligence
never perhaps to be attained in any other case. These explanations
being premised, we return to the thread of our story.

The animal advanced with long noiseless steps; its shadow on the wall,
when it held the torch so as to make it visible to the Frank, forming
another fiend-resembling mimicry of its own large figure and
extravagant-looking members. Count Robert remained in his lurking hole,
in no hurry to begin a strife, of which it was impossible to foretell
the end. In the meantime, the man of the woods came nigh, and every
step by which he approached, caused the Count's heart to vibrate almost
audibly, at the idea of meeting danger of a nature so strange and new.
At length the creature approached the bed--his hideous eyes were fixed
on those of the Count; and, as much surprised at seeing him as Robert
was at the meeting, he skipped about fifteen paces backwards at one
spring, with a cry of instinctive terror, and then advanced on tiptoe,
holding his torch as far forward as he could, between him and the
object of his fears, as if to examine him at the safest possible
distance. Count Robert caught up a fragment of the bedstead, large
enough to form a sort of club, with which he menaced the native of the
wilds.

Apparently this poor creature's education, like education of most
kinds, had not been acquired without blows, of which the recollection
was as fresh as that of the lessons which they enforced. Sir Robert of
Paris was a man at once to discover and to avail himself of the
advantage obtained by finding that he possessed a degree of ascendancy
over his enemy, which he had not suspected. He erected his warlike
figure, assumed a step as if triumphant in the lists, and advanced
threatening his enemy with his club, as he would have menaced his
antagonist with the redoutable Tranchefer. The man of the woods, on the
other hand, obviously gave way, and converted his cautious advance into
a retreat no less cautious. Yet apparently the creature had not
renounced some plan of resistance; he chattered in an angry and hostile
tone, held out his torch in opposition, and seemed about to strike the
crusader with it. Count Robert, however, determined to take his
opponent at advantage, while his fears influenced him, and for this
purpose resolved, if possible, to deprive him of his natural
superiority in strength and agility, which his singular form showed he
could not but possess over the human species. A master of his weapon,
therefore, the Count menaced his savage antagonist with a stroke on the
right side of his head, but suddenly averting the blow, struck him with
his whole force on the left temple, and in an instant was kneeling
above him, when, drawing his dagger, he was about to deprive him of
life.

The Ourang Outang, ignorant of the nature of this new weapon with which
he was threatened, attempted at one and the same moment, to rise from
the ground, overthrow his antagonist, and wrench the dagger from his
grasp. In the first attempt, he would probably have succeeded; and as
it was, he gained his knees, and seemed likely to prevail in the
struggle, when he became sensible that the knight, drawing his poniard
sharply through his grasp, had cut his paw severely, and seeing him aim
the trenchant weapon at his throat, became probably aware that his
enemy had his life at command. He suffered himself to be borne
backwards without further resistance, with a deep wailing and
melancholy cry, having in it something human, which excited compassion.
He covered his eyes with the unwounded hand, as if he would have hid
from his own sight the death which seemed approaching him.

Count Robert, notwithstanding his military frenzy, was, in ordinary
matters, a calm-tempered and mild man, and particularly benevolent to
the lower classes of creation. The thought rushed through his mind,
"Why take from this unfortunate monster the breath which is in its
nostrils, after which it cannot know another existence? And then, may
it not be some prince or knight changed to this grotesque shape, that
it may help to guard these vaults, and the wonderful adventures that
attach to them? Should I not, then, be guilty of a crime by slaying
him, when he has rendered himself, rescue or no rescue, which he has
done as completely as his transformed figure permits; and if he be
actually a bestial creature, may he not have some touch of gratitude? I
have heard the minstrels sing the lay of Androcles and the Lion. I will
be on my guard with him."'

So saying, he rose from above the man of the woods, and permitted him.
also to arise. The creature seemed sensible of the clemency, for he
muttered in a low and supplicating tone, which seemed at once to crave
for mercy, and to return thanks for what he had already experienced. He
wept too, as he saw the blood dropping from his wound, and with an
anxious countenance, which had more of the human now that it was
composed into an expression of pain and melancholy, seemed to await in
terror the doom of a being more powerful than himself.

The pocket which the knight wore under his armour, capable of
containing but few things, had, however, some vulnerary balsam, for
which its owner had often occasion, a little lint, and a small roll of
linen; these the knight took out, and motioned to the animal to hold
forth his wounded hand. The man of the woods obeyed with hesitation and
reluctance, and Count Robert applied the balsam and the dressings,
acquainting his patient, at the same time, in a severe tone of voice,
that perhaps he did wrong in putting to his use a balsam compounded for
the service of the noblest knights; but that, if he saw the least sign
of his making an ungrateful use of the benefit he had conferred, he
would bury the dagger, of which he had felt the efficacy, to the very
handle, in his body.

The Sylvan looked fixedly upon Count Robert, almost as if he understood
the language used to him, and, making one of its native murmurs, it
stooped to the earth, kissed the feet of the knight, and embracing his
knees, seemed to swear to him eternal gratitude and fidelity.
Accordingly, when the Count retired to the bed and assumed his armour,
to await the re-opening of the trap-door, the animal sat down by his
side, directing its eyes in the line with his, and seemed quietly to
wait till the door should open. After waiting about an hour, a slight
noise was heard in the upper chamber, and the wild man plucked the
Frank by the cloak, as if to call his attention to what was about to
happen. The same voice which had before spoken, was, after a whistle or
two, heard to call, "Sylvan, Sylvan! where loiterest thou? Come
instantly, or, by the rood, thou shalt abye thy sloth!"

The poor monster, as Trinculo might have called him, seemed perfectly
aware of the meaning of this threat, and showed his sense of it by
pressing close to the side of Count Robert, making at the same time a
kind of whining, entreating, it would seem, the knight's protection.
Forgetting the great improbability there was, even in his own opinion,
that the creature could understand him, Count Robert said, "Why, my
friend, thou hast already learned the principal court prayer of this
country, by which men. entreat permission, to speak and live. Fear
nothing, poor creature--I am thy protector."

"Sylvan! what, ho!" said the voice again; "whom hast thou got for a
companion?--some of the fiends, or ghosts of murdered men, who they say
are frequent in these dungeons? or dost thou converse with the old
blind rebel Grecian?--or, finally, is it true what men say of thee,
that thou canst talk intelligibly when thou wilt, and only gibberest
and chatterest for fear thou art sent to work? Come, thou lazy rascal!
thou shalt have the advantage of the ladder to ascend by, though thou
needest it no more than a daw to ascend the steeple of the Cathedral of
St. Sophia. [Footnote: Now the chief mosque of the Ottoman capital.]
Come along then," he said, putting a ladder down the trap-door, "and
put me not to the trouble of descending to fetch thee, else, by St.
Swithin, it shall be the worse for thee. Come along, therefore, like a
good fellow, and for once I shall spare the whip."

The animal, apparently, was moved by this rhetoric, for, with a doleful
look, which Count Robert saw by means of the nearly extinguished torch,
he seemed to bid him farewell, and to creep away towards the ladder
with the same excellent good-will wherewith a condemned criminal
performs the like evolution. But no sooner did the Count look angry,
and shake the formidable dagger, than the intelligent animal seemed at
once to take his resolution, and clenching his hands firmly together in
the fashion of one who has made up his mind, he returned from the
ladder's foot, and drew up behind Count Robert,--with the air, however,
of a deserter, who feels himself but little at home when called into
the field against his ancient commander.

In a short time the warder's patience was exhausted, and despairing of
the Sylvan's voluntary return, he resolved to descend in quest of him.
Down the ladder he came, a bundle of keys in one hand, the other
assisting his descent, and a sort of dark lantern, whose bottom was so
fashioned that he could wear it upon his head like a hat. He had scarce
stept on the floor, when he was surrounded by the nervous arms of the
Count of Paris. At first the warder's idea was, that he was seized by
the recusant Sylvan.

"How now, villain!" he said; "let me go, or thou shalt die the death."

"Thou diest thyself," said the Count, who, between the surprise and his
own skill in wrestling, felt fully his advantage in the struggle.

"Treason! treason!" cried the warder, hearing by the voice that a
stranger had mingled in the contest; "help, ho! above there! help,
Hereward--Varangian!--Anglo-Saxon, or whatever accursed name thou
callest thyself!"

While he spoke thus, the irresistible grasp of Count Robert seized his
throat, and choked his utterance. They fell heavily, the jailor
undermost, upon the floor of the dungeon, and Robert of Paris, the
necessity of whose case excused the action, plunged his dagger in the
throat of the unfortunate. Just as he did so, a noise of armour was
heard, and, rattling down the ladder, our acquaintance Hereward stood
on the floor of the dungeon. The light, which had rolled from the head
of the warder, continued to show him streaming with blood, and in the
death-grasp of a stranger. Hereward hesitated not to fly to his
assistance, and, seizing upon the Count of Paris at the same advantage
which that knight had gained over his own adversary a moment before,
held him forcibly down with his face to the earth. Count Robert was one
of the strongest men of that military age; but then so was the
Varangian; and save that the latter had obtained a decided advantage by
having his antagonist beneath him, it could not certainly have been
conjectured which way the combat was to go.

"Yield, as your own jargon goes, rescue or no rescue," said the
Varangian, "or die on the point of my dagger!"

"A French Count never yields," answered Robert, who began to conjecture
with what sort of person he was engaged, "above all to a vagabond slave
like thee!" With this he made an effort to rise, so sudden, so strong,
so powerful, that he had almost freed himself from the Varangian's
grasp, had not Hereward, by a violent exertion of his great strength,
preserved the advantage he had gained, and raised his poniard to end
the strife for ever; but a loud chuckling laugh of an unearthly sound
was at this instant heard. The Varangian's extended arm was seized with
vigour, while a rough arm embracing his throat, turned him over on his
back, and gave the French Count an opportunity of springing up.

"Death to thee, wretch!" said the Varangian, scarce knowing whom he
threatened; but the man of the woods apparently had an awful
recollection of the prowess of human beings. He fled, therefore,
swiftly up the ladder, and left Hereward and his deliverer to fight it
out with what success chance might determine between them.

The circumstances seemed to argue a desperate combat; both were tall,
strong, and courageous, both had defensive armour, and the fatal and
desperate poniard was their only offensive weapon. They paused facing
each other, and examined eagerly into their respective means of defence
before hazarding a blow, which, if it missed, its attaint would
certainly be fatally requited. During this deadly pause, a gleam shone
from the trapdoor above, as the wild and alarmed visage of the man of
the woods was seen peering down by the light of a newly kindled torch
which he held as low into the dungeon as he well could.

"Fight bravely, comrade," said Count Robert of Paris, "for we no longer
battle in private; this respectable person, having chosen to constitute
himself judge of the field."

Hazardous as his situation was, the Varangian looked up, and was so
struck with the wild and terrified expression which the creature had
assumed, and the strife between curiosity and terror which its
grotesque features exhibited, that he could not help bursting into a
fit of laughter.

"Sylvan is among those," said Hereward, "who would rather hold the
candle to a dance so formidable than join in it himself."

"Is there then," said Count Robert, "any absolute necessity that thou
and I perform this dance at all?"

"None but our own pleasure," answered Hereward; "for I suspect there is
not between us any legitimate cause of quarrel demanding to be fought
out in such a place, and before such a spectator. Thou art, if I
mistake not, the bold Frank, who was yesternight imprisoned in this
place with, a tiger, chained within no distant spring of his bed?"

"I am," answered the Count.

"And where is the animal who was opposed to thee?"

"He lies yonder," answered the Count, "never again to be the object of
more terror than the deer whom he may have preyed on in his day." He
pointed to the body of the tiger, which Hereward examined by the light
of the dark lantern already mentioned.

"And this, then, was thy handiwork?" said the wondering Anglo-Saxon.

"Sooth to say it was," answered the Count, with indifference.

"And thou hast slain my comrade of this strange watch?" said the
Varangian.

"Mortally wounded him at the least," said Count Robert.

"With your patience, I will be beholden to you for a moment's truce,
while I examine his wound," said Hereward.

"Assuredly," answered the Count; "blighted be the arm which strikes a
foul blow at an open antagonist!"

Without demanding further security, the Varangian quitted his posture
of defence and precaution, and set himself, by the assistance of the
dark lantern, to examine the wound of the first warder who appeared on
the field, who seemed, by his Roman military dress, to be a soldier of
the bands called Immortals. Pie found him in the death-agony, but still
able to speak.

"So, Varangian, thou art come at last,--and is it to thy sloth or
treachery that I am to impute my fate?--Nay, answer me not!--The
stranger struck me over the collar-bone--had we lived long together, or
met often, I had done the like by thee, to wipe out the memory of
certain transactions at the Golden Gate.--I know the use of the knife
too well to doubt the effect of a blow aimed over the collar-bone by so
strong a hand--I feel it coming. The Immortal, so called, becomes now,
if priests say true, an immortal indeed, and Sebastes of Mytilene's bow
is broken ere his quiver is half emptied."

The robber Greek sunk back in Hereward's arms, and closed his life with
a groan, which was the last sound he uttered. The Varangian laid the
body at length on the dungeon floor.

"This is a perplexed matter," he said; "I am certainly not called upon
to put to death a brave man, although my national enemy, because he
hath killed a miscreant who was privately meditating my own murder.
Neither is this a place or a light by which to fight as becomes the
champions of two nations. Let that quarrel be still for the
present.--How say you then, noble sir, if we adjourn the present
dispute till we effect your deliverance from the dungeons of the
Blacquernal, and your restoration to your own friends and followers? If
a poor Varangian should be of service to you in this matter, would you,
when it was settled, refuse to meet him in fair fight, with your
national weapons or his own?"

"If," said Count Robert, "whether friend or enemy, thou wilt extend thy
assistance to my wife, who is also imprisoned somewhere in this
inhospitable palace, be assured, that whatever be thy rank, whatever be
thy country, whatever be thy condition, Robert of Paris will, at thy
choice, proffer thee his right hand in friendship, or raise it against
thee in fair and manly battle--a strife not of hatred, but of honour
and esteem; and this I vow by the soul of Charlemagne, my ancestor, and
by the shrine of my patroness, Our Lady of the Broken Lances."

"Enough said," replied Hereward. "I am as much bound to the assistance
of your Lady Countess, being a poor exile, as if I were the first in
the ranks of chivalry; for if any thing can make the cause of worth and
bravery yet more obligatory, it must be its being united with that of a
helpless and suffering female."

"I ought," said Count Robert, "to be here silent, without loading thy
generosity with farther requests; yet thou art a man, whom, if fortune
has not smiled at thy birth, by ordaining thee to be born within the
ranks of noblesse and knighthood, yet Providence hath done thee more
justice by giving thee a more gallant heart than is always possessed, I
fear, by those who are inwoven in the gayest wreath of chivalry. There
lingers here in these dungeons, for I cannot say he lives--a blind old
man, to whom for three years every thing beyond his prison has been a
universal blot. His food is bread and water, his intercourse limited to
the conversation of a sullen warder, and if death can ever come as a
deliverer, it must be to this dark old man. What sayst thou? Shall he,
so unutterably miserable, not profit by perhaps the only opportunity of
freedom that may ever occur to him?"

"By St. Dunstan," answered the Varangian, "thou keepest over truly the
oath thou hast taken as a redresser of wrongs! Thine own case is
well-nigh desperate, and thou art willing to make it utterly so by
uniting with it that of every unhappy person whom fate throws in thy
way!"

"The more of human misery we attempt to relieve," said Robert of Paris,
"the more we shall carry with us the blessing of our merciful saints,
and Our Lady of the Broken Lances, who views with so much pain every
species of human suffering or misfortune, save that which occurs within
the enclosure of the lists. But come, valiant Anglo-Saxon, resolve me
on my request as speedily as thou canst. There is something in thy face
of candour as well as sense, and it is with no small confidence that I
desire to see us set forth in quest of my beloved Countess, who, when
her deliverance is once achieved, will be a powerful aid to us in
recovering that of others."

