encamped with his army.  Before giving the King's forces battle here, the
Earl addressed his soldiers, and said that King Henry the Third had
broken so many oaths, that he had become the enemy of God, and therefore
they would wear white crosses on their breasts, as if they were arrayed,
not against a fellow-Christian, but against a Turk.  White-crossed
accordingly, they rushed into the fight.  They would have lost the
day--the King having on his side all the foreigners in England: and, from
Scotland, JOHN COMYN, JOHN BALIOL, and ROBERT BRUCE, with all their
men--but for the impatience of PRINCE EDWARD, who, in his hot desire to
have vengeance on the people of London, threw the whole of his father's
army into confusion.  He was taken Prisoner; so was the King; so was the
King's brother the King of the Romans; and five thousand Englishmen were
left dead upon the bloody grass.

For this success, the Pope excommunicated the Earl of Leicester: which
neither the Earl nor the people cared at all about.  The people loved him
and supported him, and he became the real King; having all the power of
the government in his own hands, though he was outwardly respectful to
King Henry the Third, whom he took with him wherever he went, like a poor
old limp court-card.  He summoned a Parliament (in the year one thousand
two hundred and sixty-five) which was the first Parliament in England
that the people had any real share in electing; and he grew more and more
in favour with the people every day, and they stood by him in whatever he
did.

Many of the other Barons, and particularly the Earl of Gloucester, who
had become by this time as proud as his father, grew jealous of this
powerful and popular Earl, who was proud too, and began to conspire
against him.  Since the battle of Lewes, Prince Edward had been kept as a
hostage, and, though he was otherwise treated like a Prince, had never
been allowed to go out without attendants appointed by the Earl of
Leicester, who watched him.  The conspiring Lords found means to propose
to him, in secret, that they should assist him to escape, and should make
him their leader; to which he very heartily consented.

So, on a day that was agreed upon, he said to his attendants after dinner
(being then at Hereford), 'I should like to ride on horseback, this fine
afternoon, a little way into the country.'  As they, too, thought it
would be very pleasant to have a canter in the sunshine, they all rode
out of the town together in a gay little troop.  When they came to a fine
level piece of turf, the Prince fell to comparing their horses one with
another, and offering bets that one was faster than another; and the
attendants, suspecting no harm, rode galloping matches until their horses
were quite tired.  The Prince rode no matches himself, but looked on from
his saddle, and staked his money.  Thus they passed the whole merry
afternoon.  Now, the sun was setting, and they were all going slowly up a
hill, the Prince's horse very fresh and all the other horses very weary,
when a strange rider mounted on a grey steed appeared at the top of the
hill, and waved his hat.  'What does the fellow mean?' said the
attendants one to another.  The Prince answered on the instant by setting
spurs to his horse, dashing away at his utmost speed, joining the man,
riding into the midst of a little crowd of horsemen who were then seen
waiting under some trees, and who closed around him; and so he departed
in a cloud of dust, leaving the road empty of all but the baffled
attendants, who sat looking at one another, while their horses drooped
their ears and panted.

The Prince joined the Earl of Gloucester at Ludlow.  The Earl of
Leicester, with a part of the army and the stupid old King, was at
Hereford.  One of the Earl of Leicester's sons, Simon de Montfort, with
another part of the army, was in Sussex.  To prevent these two parts from
uniting was the Prince's first object.  He attacked Simon de Montfort by
night, defeated him, seized his banners and treasure, and forced him into
Kenilworth Castle in Warwickshire, which belonged to his family.

His father, the Earl of Leicester, in the meanwhile, not knowing what had
happened, marched out of Hereford, with his part of the army and the
King, to meet him.  He came, on a bright morning in August, to Evesham,
which is watered by the pleasant river Avon.  Looking rather anxiously
across the prospect towards Kenilworth, he saw his own banners advancing;
and his face brightened with joy.  But, it clouded darkly when he
presently perceived that the banners were captured, and in the enemy's
hands; and he said, 'It is over.  The Lord have mercy on our souls, for
our bodies are Prince Edward's!'

He fought like a true Knight, nevertheless.  When his horse was killed
under him, he fought on foot.  It was a fierce battle, and the dead lay
in heaps everywhere.  The old King, stuck up in a suit of armour on a big
war-horse, which didn't mind him at all, and which carried him into all
sorts of places where he didn't want to go, got into everybody's way, and
very nearly got knocked on the head by one of his son's men.  But he
managed to pipe out, 'I am Harry of Winchester!' and the Prince, who
heard him, seized his bridle, and took him out of peril.  The Earl of
Leicester still fought bravely, until his best son Henry was killed, and
the bodies of his best friends choked his path; and then he fell, still
fighting, sword in hand.  They mangled his body, and sent it as a present
to a noble lady--but a very unpleasant lady, I should think--who was the
wife of his worst enemy.  They could not mangle his memory in the minds
of the faithful people, though.  Many years afterwards, they loved him
more than ever, and regarded him as a Saint, and always spoke of him as
'Sir Simon the Righteous.'

And even though he was dead, the cause for which he had fought still
lived, and was strong, and forced itself upon the King in the very hour
of victory.  Henry found himself obliged to respect the Great Charter,
however much he hated it, and to make laws similar to the laws of the
Great Earl of Leicester, and to be moderate and forgiving towards the
people at last--even towards the people of London, who had so long
opposed him.  There were more risings before all this was done, but they
were set at rest by these means, and Prince Edward did his best in all
things to restore peace.  One Sir Adam de Gourdon was the last
dissatisfied knight in arms; but, the Prince vanquished him in single
combat, in a wood, and nobly gave him his life, and became his friend,
instead of slaying him.  Sir Adam was not ungrateful.  He ever afterwards
remained devoted to his generous conqueror.

When the troubles of the Kingdom were thus calmed, Prince Edward and his
cousin Henry took the Cross, and went away to the Holy Land, with many
English Lords and Knights.  Four years afterwards the King of the Romans
died, and, next year (one thousand two hundred and seventy-two), his
brother the weak King of England died.  He was sixty-eight years old
then, and had reigned fifty-six years.  He was as much of a King in
death, as he had ever been in life.  He was the mere pale shadow of a
King at all times.




CHAPTER XVI--ENGLAND UNDER EDWARD THE FIRST, CALLED LONGSHANKS


It was now the year of our Lord one thousand two hundred and seventy-two;
and Prince Edward, the heir to the throne, being away in the Holy Land,
knew nothing of his father's death.  The Barons, however, proclaimed him
King, immediately after the Royal funeral; and the people very willingly
consented, since most men knew too well by this time what the horrors of
a contest for the crown were.  So King Edward the First, called, in a not
very complimentary manner, LONGSHANKS, because of the slenderness of his
legs, was peacefully accepted by the English Nation.

His legs had need to be strong, however long and thin they were; for they
had to support him through many difficulties on the fiery sands of Asia,
where his small force of soldiers fainted, died, deserted, and seemed to
melt away.  But his prowess made light of it, and he said, 'I will go on,
if I go on with no other follower than my groom!'

A Prince of this spirit gave the Turks a deal of trouble.  He stormed
Nazareth, at which place, of all places on earth, I am sorry to relate,
he made a frightful slaughter of innocent people; and then he went to
Acre, where he got a truce of ten years from the Sultan.  He had very
nearly lost his life in Acre, through the treachery of a Saracen Noble,
called the Emir of Jaffa, who, making the pretence that he had some idea
of turning Christian and wanted to know all about that religion, sent a
trusty messenger to Edward very often--with a dagger in his sleeve.  At
last, one Friday in Whitsun week, when it was very hot, and all the sandy
prospect lay beneath the blazing sun, burnt up like a great overdone
biscuit, and Edward was lying on a couch, dressed for coolness in only a
loose robe, the messenger, with his chocolate-coloured face and his
bright dark eyes and white teeth, came creeping in with a letter, and
kneeled down like a tame tiger.  But, the moment Edward stretched out his
hand to take the letter, the tiger made a spring at his heart.  He was
quick, but Edward was quick too.  He seized the traitor by his chocolate
throat, threw him to the ground, and slew him with the very dagger he had
drawn.  The weapon had struck Edward in the arm, and although the wound
itself was slight, it threatened to be mortal, for the blade of the
dagger had been smeared with poison.  Thanks, however, to a better
surgeon than was often to be found in those times, and to some wholesome
herbs, and above all, to his faithful wife, ELEANOR, who devotedly nursed
him, and is said by some to have sucked the poison from the wound with
her own red lips (which I am very willing to believe), Edward soon
recovered and was sound again.

As the King his father had sent entreaties to him to return home, he now
began the journey.  He had got as far as Italy, when he met messengers
who brought him intelligence of the King's death.  Hearing that all was
quiet at home, he made no haste to return to his own dominions, but paid
a visit to the Pope, and went in state through various Italian Towns,
where he was welcomed with acclamations as a mighty champion of the Cross
from the Holy Land, and where he received presents of purple mantles and
prancing horses, and went along in great triumph.  The shouting people
little knew that he was the last English monarch who would ever embark in
a crusade, or that within twenty years every conquest which the
Christians had made in the Holy Land at the cost of so much blood, would
be won back by the Turks.  But all this came to pass.

There was, and there is, an old town standing in a plain in France,
called Chalons.  When the King was coming towards this place on his way
to England, a wily French Lord, called the Count of Chalons, sent him a
polite challenge to come with his knights and hold a fair tournament with
the Count and _his_ knights, and make a day of it with sword and lance.
It was represented to the King that the Count of Chalons was not to be
trusted, and that, instead of a holiday fight for mere show and in good
humour, he secretly meant a real battle, in which the English should be
defeated by superior force.

The King, however, nothing afraid, went to the appointed place on the
appointed day with a thousand followers.  When the Count came with two
thousand and attacked the English in earnest, the English rushed at them
with such valour that the Count's men and the Count's horses soon began
to be tumbled down all over the field.  The Count himself seized the King
round the neck, but the King tumbled _him_ out of his saddle in return
for the compliment, and, jumping from his own horse, and standing over
him, beat away at his iron armour like a blacksmith hammering on his
anvil.  Even when the Count owned himself defeated and offered his sword,
the King would not do him the honour to take it, but made him yield it up
to a common soldier.  There had been such fury shown in this fight, that
it was afterwards called the little Battle of Chalons.

The English were very well disposed to be proud of their King after these
adventures; so, when he landed at Dover in the year one thousand two
hundred and seventy-four (being then thirty-six years old), and went on
to Westminster where he and his good Queen were crowned with great
magnificence, splendid rejoicings took place.  For the coronation-feast
there were provided, among other eatables, four hundred oxen, four
hundred sheep, four hundred and fifty pigs, eighteen wild boars, three
hundred flitches of bacon, and twenty thousand fowls.  The fountains and
conduits in the street flowed with red and white wine instead of water;
the rich citizens hung silks and cloths of the brightest colours out of
their windows to increase the beauty of the show, and threw out gold and
silver by whole handfuls to make scrambles for the crowd.  In short,
there was such eating and drinking, such music and capering, such a
ringing of bells and tossing of caps, such a shouting, and singing, and
revelling, as the narrow overhanging streets of old London City had not
witnessed for many a long day.  All the people were merry except the poor
Jews, who, trembling within their houses, and scarcely daring to peep
out, began to foresee that they would have to find the money for this
joviality sooner or later.

To dismiss this sad subject of the Jews for the present, I am sorry to
add that in this reign they were most unmercifully pillaged.  They were
hanged in great numbers, on accusations of having clipped the King's
coin--which all kinds of people had done.  They were heavily taxed; they
were disgracefully badged; they were, on one day, thirteen years after
the coronation, taken up with their wives and children and thrown into
beastly prisons, until they purchased their release by paying to the King
twelve thousand pounds.  Finally, every kind of property belonging to
them was seized by the King, except so little as would defray the charge
of their taking themselves away into foreign countries.  Many years
elapsed before the hope of gain induced any of their race to return to
England, where they had been treated so heartlessly and had suffered so
much.

If King Edward the First had been as bad a king to Christians as he was
to Jews, he would have been bad indeed.  But he was, in general, a wise
and great monarch, under whom the country much improved.  He had no love
for the Great Charter--few Kings had, through many, many years--but he
had high qualities.  The first bold object which he conceived when he
came home, was, to unite under one Sovereign England, Scotland, and
Wales; the two last of which countries had each a little king of its own,
about whom the people were always quarrelling and fighting, and making a
prodigious disturbance--a great deal more than he was worth.  In the
course of King Edward's reign he was engaged, besides, in a war with
France.  To make these quarrels clearer, we will separate their histories
and take them thus.  Wales, first.  France, second.  Scotland, third.

* * * * *

LLEWELLYN was the Prince of Wales.  He had been on the side of the Barons
in the reign of the stupid old King, but had afterwards sworn allegiance
to him.  When King Edward came to the throne, Llewellyn was required to
swear allegiance to him also; which he refused to do.  The King, being
crowned and in his own dominions, three times more required Llewellyn to
come and do homage; and three times more Llewellyn said he would rather
not.  He was going to be married to ELEANOR DE MONTFORT, a young lady of
the family mentioned in the last reign; and it chanced that this young
lady, coming from France with her youngest brother, EMERIC, was taken by
an English ship, and was ordered by the English King to be detained.  Upon
this, the quarrel came to a head.  The King went, with his fleet, to the
coast of Wales, where, so encompassing Llewellyn, that he could only take
refuge in the bleak mountain region of Snowdon in which no provisions
could reach him, he was soon starved into an apology, and into a treaty
of peace, and into paying the expenses of the war.  The King, however,
forgave him some of the hardest conditions of the treaty, and consented
to his marriage.  And he now thought he had reduced Wales to obedience.

But the Welsh, although they were naturally a gentle, quiet, pleasant
people, who liked to receive strangers in their cottages among the
mountains, and to set before them with free hospitality whatever they had
to eat and drink, and to play to them on their harps, and sing their
native ballads to them, were a people of great spirit when their blood
was up.  Englishmen, after this affair, began to be insolent in Wales,
and to assume the air of masters; and the Welsh pride could not bear it.
Moreover, they believed in that unlucky old Merlin, some of whose unlucky
old prophecies somebody always seemed doomed to remember when there was a
chance of its doing harm; and just at this time some blind old gentleman
with a harp and a long white beard, who was an excellent person, but had
become of an unknown age and tedious, burst out with a declaration that
Merlin had predicted that when English money had become round, a Prince
of Wales would be crowned in London.  Now, King Edward had recently
forbidden the English penny to be cut into halves and quarters for
halfpence and farthings, and had actually introduced a round coin;
therefore, the Welsh people said this was the time Merlin meant, and rose
accordingly.

King Edward had bought over PRINCE DAVID, Llewellyn's brother, by heaping
favours upon him; but he was the first to revolt, being perhaps troubled
in his conscience.  One stormy night, he surprised the Castle of
Hawarden, in possession of which an English nobleman had been left;
killed the whole garrison, and carried off the nobleman a prisoner to
Snowdon.  Upon this, the Welsh people rose like one man.  King Edward,
with his army, marching from Worcester to the Menai Strait, crossed
it--near to where the wonderful tubular iron bridge now, in days so
different, makes a passage for railway trains--by a bridge of boats that
enabled forty men to march abreast.  He subdued the Island of Anglesea,
and sent his men forward to observe the enemy.  The sudden appearance of
the Welsh created a panic among them, and they fell back to the bridge.
The tide had in the meantime risen and separated the boats; the Welsh
pursuing them, they were driven into the sea, and there they sunk, in
their heavy iron armour, by thousands.  After this victory Llewellyn,
helped by the severe winter-weather of Wales, gained another battle; but
the King ordering a portion of his English army to advance through South
Wales, and catch him between two foes, and Llewellyn bravely turning to
meet this new enemy, he was surprised and killed--very meanly, for he was
unarmed and defenceless.  His head was struck off and sent to London,
where it was fixed upon the Tower, encircled with a wreath, some say of
ivy, some say of willow, some say of silver, to make it look like a
ghastly coin in ridicule of the prediction.

David, however, still held out for six months, though eagerly sought
after by the King, and hunted by his own countrymen.  One of them finally
betrayed him with his wife and children.  He was sentenced to be hanged,
drawn, and quartered; and from that time this became the established
punishment of Traitors in England--a punishment wholly without excuse, as
being revolting, vile, and cruel, after its object is dead; and which has
no sense in it, as its only real degradation (and that nothing can blot
out) is to the country that permits on any consideration such abominable
barbarity.

Wales was now subdued.  The Queen giving birth to a young prince in the
Castle of Carnarvon, the King showed him to the Welsh people as their
countryman, and called him Prince of Wales; a title that has ever since
been borne by the heir-apparent to the English throne--which that little
Prince soon became, by the death of his elder brother.  The King did
better things for the Welsh than that, by improving their laws and
encouraging their trade.  Disturbances still took place, chiefly
occasioned by the avarice and pride of the English Lords, on whom Welsh
lands and castles had been bestowed; but they were subdued, and the
country never rose again.  There is a legend that to prevent the people
from being incited to rebellion by the songs of their bards and harpers,
Edward had them all put to death.  Some of them may have fallen among
other men who held out against the King; but this general slaughter is, I
think, a fancy of the harpers themselves, who, I dare say, made a song
about it many years afterwards, and sang it by the Welsh firesides until
it came to be believed.

The foreign war of the reign of Edward the First arose in this way.  The
crews of two vessels, one a Norman ship, and the other an English ship,
happened to go to the same place in their boats to fill their casks with
fresh water.  Being rough angry fellows, they began to quarrel, and then
to fight--the English with their fists; the Normans with their
knives--and, in the fight, a Norman was killed.  The Norman crew, instead
of revenging themselves upon those English sailors with whom they had
quarrelled (who were too strong for them, I suspect), took to their ship
again in a great rage, attacked the first English ship they met, laid
hold of an unoffending merchant who happened to be on board, and brutally
hanged him in the rigging of their own vessel with a dog at his feet.
This so enraged the English sailors that there was no restraining them;
and whenever, and wherever, English sailors met Norman sailors, they fell
upon each other tooth and nail.  The Irish and Dutch sailors took part
with the English; the French and Genoese sailors helped the Normans; and
thus the greater part of the mariners sailing over the sea became, in
their way, as violent and raging as the sea itself when it is disturbed.

King Edward's fame had been so high abroad that he had been chosen to
decide a difference between France and another foreign power, and had
lived upon the Continent three years.  At first, neither he nor the
French King PHILIP (the good Louis had been dead some time) interfered in
these quarrels; but when a fleet of eighty English ships engaged and
utterly defeated a Norman fleet of two hundred, in a pitched battle
fought round a ship at anchor, in which no quarter was given, the matter
became too serious to be passed over.  King Edward, as Duke of Guienne,
was summoned to present himself before the King of France, at Paris, and
answer for the damage done by his sailor subjects.  At first, he sent the
Bishop of London as his representative, and then his brother EDMUND, who
was married to the French Queen's mother.  I am afraid Edmund was an easy
man, and allowed himself to be talked over by his charming relations, the
French court ladies; at all events, he was induced to give up his
brother's dukedom for forty days--as a mere form, the French King said,
to satisfy his honour--and he was so very much astonished, when the time
was out, to find that the French King had no idea of giving it up again,
that I should not wonder if it hastened his death: which soon took place.

King Edward was a King to win his foreign dukedom back again, if it could
be won by energy and valour.  He raised a large army, renounced his
allegiance as Duke of Guienne, and crossed the sea to carry war into
France.  Before any important battle was fought, however, a truce was
agreed upon for two years; and in the course of that time, the Pope
effected a reconciliation.  King Edward, who was now a widower, having
lost his affectionate and good wife, Eleanor, married the French King's
sister, MARGARET; and the Prince of Wales was contracted to the French
King's daughter ISABELLA.

Out of bad things, good things sometimes arise.  Out of this hanging of
the innocent merchant, and the bloodshed and strife it caused, there came
to be established one of the greatest powers that the English people now
possess.  The preparations for the war being very expensive, and King
Edward greatly wanting money, and being very arbitrary in his ways of
raising it, some of the Barons began firmly to oppose him.  Two of them,
in particular, HUMPHREY BOHUN, Earl of Hereford, and ROGER BIGOD, Earl of
Norfolk, were so stout against him, that they maintained he had no right
to command them to head his forces in Guienne, and flatly refused to go
there.  'By Heaven, Sir Earl,' said the King to the Earl of Hereford, in
a great passion, 'you shall either go or be hanged!'  'By Heaven, Sir
King,' replied the Earl, 'I will neither go nor yet will I be hanged!'
and both he and the other Earl sturdily left the court, attended by many
Lords.  The King tried every means of raising money.  He taxed the
clergy, in spite of all the Pope said to the contrary; and when they
refused to pay, reduced them to submission, by saying Very well, then
they had no claim upon the government for protection, and any man might
plunder them who would--which a good many men were very ready to do, and
very readily did, and which the clergy found too losing a game to be
played at long.  He seized all the wool and leather in the hands of the
merchants, promising to pay for it some fine day; and he set a tax upon
the exportation of wool, which was so unpopular among the traders that it
was called 'The evil toll.'  But all would not do.  The Barons, led by
those two great Earls, declared any taxes imposed without the consent of
Parliament, unlawful; and the Parliament refused to impose taxes, until
the King should confirm afresh the two Great Charters, and should
solemnly declare in writing, that there was no power in the country to
raise money from the people, evermore, but the power of Parliament
representing all ranks of the people.  The King was very unwilling to
diminish his own power by allowing this great privilege in the
Parliament; but there was no help for it, and he at last complied.  We
shall come to another King by-and-by, who might have saved his head from
rolling off, if he had profited by this example.

The people gained other benefits in Parliament from the good sense and
wisdom of this King.  Many of the laws were much improved; provision was
made for the greater safety of travellers, and the apprehension of
thieves and murderers; the priests were prevented from holding too much
land, and so becoming too powerful; and Justices of the Peace were first
appointed (though not at first under that name) in various parts of the
country.

* * * * *

And now we come to Scotland, which was the great and lasting trouble of
the reign of King Edward the First.

About thirteen years after King Edward's coronation, Alexander the Third,
the King of Scotland, died of a fall from his horse.  He had been married
to Margaret, King Edward's sister.  All their children being dead, the
Scottish crown became the right of a young Princess only eight years old,
the daughter of ERIC, King of Norway, who had married a daughter of the
deceased sovereign.  King Edward proposed, that the Maiden of Norway, as
this Princess was called, should be engaged to be married to his eldest
son; but, unfortunately, as she was coming over to England she fell sick,
and landing on one of the Orkney Islands, died there.  A great commotion
immediately began in Scotland, where as many as thirteen noisy claimants
to the vacant throne started up and made a general confusion.

King Edward being much renowned for his sagacity and justice, it seems to
have been agreed to refer the dispute to him.  He accepted the trust, and
went, with an army, to the Border-land where England and Scotland joined.
There, he called upon the Scottish gentlemen to meet him at the Castle of
Norham, on the English side of the river Tweed; and to that Castle they
came.  But, before he would take any step in the business, he required
those Scottish gentlemen, one and all, to do homage to him as their
superior Lord; and when they hesitated, he said, 'By holy Edward, whose
crown I wear, I will have my rights, or I will die in maintaining them!'
The Scottish gentlemen, who had not expected this, were disconcerted, and
asked for three weeks to think about it.

At the end of the three weeks, another meeting took place, on a green
plain on the Scottish side of the river.  Of all the competitors for the
Scottish throne, there were only two who had any real claim, in right of
their near kindred to the Royal Family.  These were JOHN BALIOL and
ROBERT BRUCE: and the right was, I have no doubt, on the side of John
Baliol.  At this particular meeting John Baliol was not present, but
Robert Bruce was; and on Robert Bruce being formally asked whether he
acknowledged the King of England for his superior lord, he answered,
plainly and distinctly, Yes, he did.  Next day, John Baliol appeared, and
said the same.  This point settled, some arrangements were made for
inquiring into their titles.

The inquiry occupied a pretty long time--more than a year.  While it was
going on, King Edward took the opportunity of making a journey through
Scotland, and calling upon the Scottish people of all degrees to
acknowledge themselves his vassals, or be imprisoned until they did.  In
the meanwhile, Commissioners were appointed to conduct the inquiry, a
Parliament was held at Berwick about it, the two claimants were heard at
full length, and there was a vast amount of talking.  At last, in the
great hall of the Castle of Berwick, the King gave judgment in favour of
John Baliol: who, consenting to receive his crown by the King of
England's favour and permission, was crowned at Scone, in an old stone
chair which had been used for ages in the abbey there, at the coronations
of Scottish Kings.  Then, King Edward caused the great seal of Scotland,
used since the late King's death, to be broken in four pieces, and placed
in the English Treasury; and considered that he now had Scotland
(according to the common saying) under his thumb.

Scotland had a strong will of its own yet, however.  King Edward,
determined that the Scottish King should not forget he was his vassal,
summoned him repeatedly to come and defend himself and his judges before
the English Parliament when appeals from the decisions of Scottish courts
of justice were being heard.  At length, John Baliol, who had no great
heart of his own, had so much heart put into him by the brave spirit of
the Scottish people, who took this as a national insult, that he refused
to come any more.  Thereupon, the King further required him to help him
in his war abroad (which was then in progress), and to give up, as
security for his good behaviour in future, the three strong Scottish
Castles of Jedburgh, Roxburgh, and Berwick.  Nothing of this being done;
on the contrary, the Scottish people concealing their King among their
mountains in the Highlands and showing a determination to resist; Edward
marched to Berwick with an army of thirty thousand foot, and four
thousand horse; took the Castle, and slew its whole garrison, and the
inhabitants of the town as well--men, women, and children.  LORD
