years of the Dark Ages. It was not an easy task to civilise the rough
frontiersmen who had spent most of their time fighting Mohammedans and
Huns and Norsemen. Often they were guilty of backsliding, and having
vowed all sorts of oaths about mercy and charity in the morning, they
would murder all their prisoners before evening. But progress is
ever the result of slow and ceaseless labour, and finally the most
unscrupulous of knights was forced to obey the rules of his "class" or
suffer the consequences.

These rules were different in the various parts of Europe, but they all
made much of "service" and "loyalty to duty." The Middle Ages regarded
service as something very noble and beautiful. It was no disgrace to be
a servant, provided you were a good servant and did not slacken on the
job. As for loyalty, at a time when life depended upon the faithful
per-formance of many unpleasant duties, it was the chief virtue of the
fighting man.

A young knight therefore was asked to swear that he would be faithful as
a servant to God and as a servant to his King. Furthermore, he promised
to be generous to those whose need was greater than his own. He pledged
his word that he would be humble in his personal behaviour and would
never boast of his own accomplishments and that he would be a friend of
all those who suffered, (with the exception of the Mohammedans, whom he
was expected to kill on sight).

Around these vows, which were merely the Ten Commandments expressed
in terms which the people of the Middle Ages could understand, there
developed a complicated system of manners and outward behaviour. The
knights tried to model their own lives after the example of those heroes
of Arthur's Round Table and Charlemagne's court of whom the Troubadours
had told them and of whom you may read in many delightful books which
are enumerated at the end of this volume. They hoped that they might
prove as brave as Lancelot and as faithful as Roland. They carried
themselves with dignity and they spoke careful and gracious words that
they might be known as True Knights, however humble the cut of their
coat or the size of their purse.

In this way the order of Knighthood became a school of those good
manners which are the oil of the social machinery. Chivalry came to mean
courtesy and the feudal castle showed the rest of the world what clothes
to wear, how to eat, how to ask a lady for a dance and the thousand
and one little things of every-day behaviour which help to make life
interesting and agreeable.

Like all human institutions, Knighthood was doomed to perish as soon as
it had outlived its usefulness.

The crusades, about which one of the next chapters tells, were followed
by a great revival of trade. Cities grew overnight. The townspeople
became rich, hired good school teachers and soon were the equals of
the knights. The invention of gun-powder deprived the heavily armed
"Chevalier" of his former advantage and the use of mercenaries made it
impossible to conduct a battle with the delicate niceties of a chess
tournament. The knight became superfluous. Soon he became a ridiculous
figure, with his devotion to ideals that had no longer any practical
value. It was said that the noble Don Quixote de la Mancha had been the
last of the true knights. After his death, his trusted sword and his
armour were sold to pay his debts.

But somehow or other that sword seems to have fallen into the hands of a
number of men. Washington carried it during the hopeless days of Valley
Forge. It was the only defence of Gordon, when he had refused to desert
the people who had been entrusted to his care, and stayed to meet his
death in the besieged fortress of Khartoum.

And I am not quite sure but that it proved of invaluable strength in
winning the Great War.




POPE vs. EMPEROR

THE STRANGE DOUBLE LOYALTY OF THE PEOPLE OF THE MIDDLE AGES AND HOW IT
LED TO ENDLESS QUARRELS BETWEEN THE POPES AND THE HOLY ROMAN EMPERORS


IT is very difficult to understand the people of by-gone ages. Your own
grandfather, whom you see every day, is a mysterious being who lives in
a different world of ideas and clothes and manners. I am now telling you
the story of some of your grandfathers who are twenty-five generations
removed, and I do not expect you to catch the meaning of what I write
without re-reading this chapter a number of times.

The average man of the Middle Ages lived a very simple and uneventful
life. Even if he was a free citizen, able to come and go at will, he
rarely left his own neighbourhood. There were no printed books and only
a few manuscripts. Here and there, a small band of industrious monks
taught reading and writing and some arithmetic. But science and history
and geography lay buried beneath the ruins of Greece and Rome.

Whatever people knew about the past they had learned by listening to
stories and legends. Such information, which goes from father to son, is
often slightly incorrect in details, but it will preserve the main
facts of history with astonishing accuracy. After more than two thousand
years, the mothers of India still frighten their naughty children by
telling them that "Iskander will get them," and Iskander is none other
than Alexander the Great, who visited India in the year 330 before the
birth of Christ, but whose story has lived through all these ages.

The people of the early Middle Ages never saw a textbook of Roman
history. They were ignorant of many things which every school-boy to-day
knows before he has entered the third grade. But the Roman Empire, which
is merely a name to you, was to them something very much alive. They
felt it. They willingly recognised the Pope as their spiritual
leader because he lived in Rome and represented the idea of the Roman
super-power. And they were profoundly grateful when Charlemagne, and
afterwards Otto the Great, revived the idea of a world-empire and
created the Holy Roman Empire, that the world might again be as it
always had been.

But the fact that there were two different heirs to the Roman tradition
placed the faithful burghers of the Middle Ages in a difficult position.
The theory behind the mediaeval political system was both sound and
simple. While the worldly master (the emperor) looked after the physical
well-being of his subjects, the spiritual master (the Pope) guarded
their souls.

In practice, however, the system worked very badly. The Emperor
invariably tried to interfere with the affairs of the church and the
Pope retaliated and told the Emperor how he should rule his domains.
Then they told each other to mind their own business in very
unceremonious language and the inevitable end was war.

Under those circumstances, what were the people to do, A good Christian
obeyed both the Pope and his King. But the Pope and the Emperor were
enemies. Which side should a dutiful subject and an equally dutiful
Christian take?

It was never easy to give the correct answer. When the Emperor happened
to be a man of energy and was sufficiently well provided with money to
organise an army, he was very apt to cross the Alps and march on Rome,
besiege the Pope in his own palace if need be, and force His Holiness to
obey the imperial instructions or suffer the consequences.

But more frequently the Pope was the stronger. Then the Emperor or the
King together with all his subjects was excommunicated. This meant that
all churches were closed, that no one could be baptised, that no dying
man could be given absolution--in short, that half of the functions of
mediaeval government came to an end.

More than that, the people were absolved from their oath of loyalty to
their sovereign and were urged to rebel against their master. But if
they followed this advice of the distant Pope and were caught, they were
hanged by their near-by Lege Lord and that too was very unpleasant.

Indeed, the poor fellows were in a difficult position and none fared
worse than those who lived during the latter half of the eleventh
century, when the Emperor Henry IV of Germany and Pope Gregory VII
fought a two-round battle which decided nothing and upset the peace of
Europe for almost fifty years.

In the middle of the eleventh century there had been a strong movement
for reform in the church. The election of the Popes, thus far, had
been a most irregular affair. It was to the advantage of the Holy Roman
Emperors to have a well-disposed priest elected to the Holy See. They
frequently came to Rome at the time of election and used their influence
for the benefit of one of their friends.

In the year 1059 this had been changed. By a decree of Pope Nicholas
II the principal priests and deacons of the churches in and around
Rome were organised into the so-called College of Cardinals, and this
gathering of prominent churchmen (the word "Cardinal" meant principal)
was given the exclusive power of electing the future Popes.

In the year 1073 the College of Cardinals elected a priest by the name
of Hildebrand, the son of very simple parents in Tuscany, as Pope, and
he took the name of Gregory VII. His energy was unbounded. His belief in
the supreme powers of his Holy Office was built upon a granite rock of
conviction and courage. In the mind of Gregory, the Pope was not only
the absolute head of the Christian church, but also the highest Court of
Appeal in all worldly matters. The Pope who had elevated simple German
princes to the dignity of Emperor could depose them at will. He could
veto any law passed by duke or king or emperor, but whosoever should
question a papal decree, let him beware, for the punishment would be
swift and merciless.

Gregory sent ambassadors to all the European courts to inform the
potentates of Europe of his new laws and asked them to take due notice
of their contents. William the Conqueror promised to be good, but Henry
IV, who since the age of six had been fighting with his subjects, had no
intention of submitting to the Papal will. He called together a college
of German bishops, accused Gregory of every crime under the sun and then
had him deposed by the council of Worms.

The Pope answered with excommunication and a demand that the German
princes rid themselves of their unworthy ruler. The German princes, only
too happy to be rid of Henry, asked the Pope to come to Augsburg and
help them elect a new Emperor.

Gregory left Rome and travelled northward. Henry, who was no fool,
appreciated the danger of his position. At all costs he must make peace
with the Pope, and he must do it at once. In the midst of winter he
crossed the Alps and hastened to Canossa where the Pope had stopped for
a short rest. Three long days, from the 25th to the 28th of January of
the year 1077, Henry, dressed as a penitent pilgrim (but with a warm
sweater underneath his monkish garb), waited outside the gates of the
castle of Canossa. Then he was allowed to enter and was pardoned for
his sins. But the repentance did not last long. As soon as Henry
had returned to Germany, he behaved exactly as before. Again he was
excommunicated. For the second time a council of German bishops deposed
Gregory, but this time, when Henry crossed the Alps he was at the head
of a large army, besieged Rome and forced Gregory to retire to Salerno,
where he died in exile. This first violent outbreak decided nothing. As
soon as Henry was back in Germany, the struggle between Pope and Emperor
was continued.

The Hohenstaufen family which got hold of the Imperial German Throne
shortly afterwards, were even more independent than their predecessors.
Gregory had claimed that the Popes were superior to all kings because
they (the Popes) at the Day of Judgement would be responsible for the
behaviour of all the sheep of their flock, and in the eyes of God, a
king was one of that faithful herd.

Frederick of Hohenstaufen, commonly known as Barbarossa or Red Beard,
set up the counter-claim that the Empire had been bestowed upon his
predecessor "by God himself" and as the Empire included Italy and Rome,
he began a campaign which was to add these "lost provinces" to the
northern country. Barbarossa was accidentally drowned in Asia Minor
during the second Crusade, but his son Frederick II, a brilliant
young man who in his youth had been exposed to the civilisation of
the Mohammedans of Sicily, continued the war. The Popes accused him of
heresy. It is true that Frederick seems to have felt a deep and serious
contempt for the rough Christian world of the North, for the boorish
German Knights and the intriguing Italian priests. But he held his
tongue, went on a Crusade and took Jerusalem from the infidel and was
duly crowned as King of the Holy City. Even this act did not placate
the Popes. They deposed Frederick and gave his Italian possessions to
Charles of Anjou, the brother of that King Louis of France who became
famous as Saint Louis. This led to more warfare. Conrad V, the son
of Conrad IV, and the last of the Hohenstaufens, tried to regain the
kingdom, and was defeated and decapitated at Naples. But twenty years
later, the French who had made themselves thoroughly unpopular in Sicily
were all murdered during the so-called Sicilian Vespers, and so it went.

The quarrel between the Popes and the Emperors was never settled, but
after a while the two enemies learned to leave each other alone.

In the year 1278, Rudolph of Hapsburg was elected Emperor. He did not
take the trouble to go to Rome to be crowned. The Popes did not object
and in turn they kept away from Germany. This meant peace but two
entire centuries which might have been used for the purpose of internal
organisation had been wasted in useless warfare.

It is an ill wind however that bloweth no good to some one. The little
cities of Italy, by a process of careful balancing, had managed to
increase their power and their independence at the expense of both
Emperors and Popes. When the rush for the Holy Land began, they were
able to handle the transportation problem of the thousands of eager
pilgrims who were clamoring for passage, and at the end of the Crusades
they had built themselves such strong defences of brick and of gold that
they could defy Pope and Emperor with equal indifference.

Church and State fought each other and a third party--the mediaeval
city--ran away with the spoils.




THE CRUSADES

BUT ALL THESE DIFFERENT QUARRELS WERE FORGOTTEN WHEN THE TURKS TOOK THE
HOLY LAND, DESECRATED THE HOLY PLACES AND INTERFERED SERIOUSLY WITH THE
TRADE FROM EAST TO WEST. EUROPE WENT CRUSADING


DURING three centuries there had been peace between Christians and
Moslems except in Spain and in the eastern Roman Empire, the two states
defending the gateways of Europe. The Mohammedans having conquered Syria
in the seventh century were in possession of the Holy Land. But
they regarded Jesus as a great prophet (though not quite as great as
Mohammed), and they did not interfere with the pilgrims who wished
to pray in the church which Saint Helena, the mother of the Emperor
Constantine, had built on the spot of the Holy Grave. But early in the
eleventh century, a Tartar tribe from the wilds of Asia, called the
Seljuks or Turks, became masters of the Mohammedan state in western Asia
and then the period of tolerance came to an end. The Turks took all of
Asia Minor away from the eastern Roman Emperors and they made an end to
the trade between east and west.

Alexis, the Emperor, who rarely saw anything of his Christian neighbours
of the west, appealed for help and pointed to the danger which
threatened Europe should the Turks take Constantinople.

The Italian cities which had established colonies along the coast
of Asia Minor and Palestine, in fear for their possessions, reported
terrible stories of Turkish atrocities and Christian suffering. All
Europe got excited.

Pope Urban II, a Frenchman from Reims, who had been educated at the same
famous cloister of Cluny which had trained Gregory VII, thought that
the time had come for action. The general state of Europe was far from
satisfactory. The primitive agricultural methods of that day (unchanged
since Roman times) caused a constant scarcity of food. There was
unemployment and hunger and these are apt to lead to discontent and
riots. Western Asia in older days had fed millions. It was an excellent
field for the purpose of immigration.

Therefore at the council of Clermont in France in the year 1095 the Pope
arose, described the terrible horrors which the infidels had inflicted
upon the Holy Land, gave a glowing description of this country which
ever since the days of Moses had been overflowing with milk and honey,
and exhorted the knights of France and the people of Europe in general
to leave wife and child and deliver Palestine from the Turks.

A wave of religious hysteria swept across the continent. All reason
stopped. Men would drop their hammer and saw, walk out of their shop and
take the nearest road to the east to go and kill Turks. Children would
leave their homes to "go to Palestine" and bring the terrible Turks
to their knees by the mere appeal of their youthful zeal and Christian
piety. Fully ninety percent of those enthusiasts never got within sight
of the Holy Land. They had no money. They were forced to beg or steal to
keep alive. They became a danger to the safety of the highroads and they
were killed by the angry country people.

The first Crusade, a wild mob of honest Christians, defaulting
bankrupts, penniless noblemen and fugitives from justice, following the
lead of half-crazy Peter the Hermit and Walter-without-a-Cent, began
their campaign against the Infidels by murdering all the Jews whom
they met by the way. They got as far as Hungary and then they were all
killed.

This experience taught the Church a lesson. Enthusiasm alone would not
set the Holy Land free. Organisation was as necessary as good-will and
courage. A year was spent in training and equipping an army of 200,000
men. They were placed under command of Godfrey of Bouillon, Robert, duke
of Normandy, Robert, count of Flanders, and a number of other noblemen,
all experienced in the art of war.

In the year 1096 this second crusade started upon its long voyage. At
Constantinople the knights did homage to the Emperor. (For as I have
told you, traditions die hard, and a Roman Emperor, however poor and
powerless, was still held in great respect). Then they crossed into
Asia, killed all the Moslems who fell into their hands, stormed
Jerusalem, massacred the Mohammedan population, and marched to the Holy
Sepulchre to give praise and thanks amidst tears of piety and gratitude.
But soon the Turks were strengthened by the arrival of fresh troops.
Then they retook Jerusalem and in turn killed the faithful followers of
the Cross.

During the next two centuries, seven other crusades took place.
Gradually the Crusaders learned the technique of the trip. The land
voyage was too tedious and too dangerous. They preferred to cross the
Alps and go to Genoa or Venice where they took ship for the east.
The Genoese and the Venetians made this trans-Mediterranean passenger
service a very profitable business. They charged exorbitant rates, and
when the Crusaders (most of whom had very little money) could not pay
the price, these Italian "profiteers" kindly allowed them to "work their
way across." In return for a fare from Venice to Acre, the Crusader
undertook to do a stated amount of fighting for the owners of his
vessel. In this way Venice greatly increased her territory along the
coast of the Adriatic and in Greece, where Athens became a Venetian
colony, and in the islands of Cyprus and Crete and Rhodes.

All this, however, helped little in settling the question of the Holy
Land. After the first enthusiasm had worn off, a short crusading trip
became part of the liberal education of every well-bred young man, and
there never was any lack of candidates for service in Palestine. But the
old zeal was gone. The Crusaders, who had begun their warfare with deep
hatred for the Mohammedans and great love for the Christian people of
the eastern Roman Empire and Armenia, suffered a complete change of
heart. They came to despise the Greeks of Byzantium, who cheated them
and frequently betrayed the cause of the Cross, and the Armenians and
all the other Levantine races, and they began to appreciate the virtues
of their enemies who proved to be generous and fair opponents.

Of course, it would never do to say this openly. But when the Crusader
returned home, he was likely to imitate the manners which he had learned
from his heathenish foe, compared to whom the average western knight was
still a good deal of a country bumpkin. He also brought with him several
new food-stuffs, such as peaches and spinach which he planted in his
garden and grew for his own benefit. He gave up the barbarous custom of
wearing a load of heavy armour and appeared in the flowing robes of
silk or cotton which were the traditional habit of the followers of
the Prophet and were originally worn by the Turks. Indeed the Crusades,
which had begun as a punitive expedition against the Heathen, became
a course of general instruction in civilisation for millions of young
Europeans.

From a military and political point of view the Crusades were a failure.
Jerusalem and a number of cities were taken and lost. A dozen little
kingdoms were established in Syria and Palestine and Asia Minor, but
they were re-conquered by the Turks and after the year 1244 (when
Jerusalem became definitely Turkish) the status of the Holy Land was the
same as it had been before 1095.

But Europe had undergone a great change. The people of the west had been
allowed a glimpse of the light and the sunshine and the beauty of the
east. Their dreary castles no longer satisfied them. They wanted a
broader life. Neither Church nor State could give this to them.

They found it in the cities.




THE MEDIAEVAL CITY

WHY THE PEOPLE OF THE MIDDLE AGES SAID THAT "CITY AIR IS FREE AIR"


THE early part of the Middle Ages had been an era of pioneering and of
settlement. A new people, who thus far had lived outside the wild range
of forest, mountains and marshes which protected the north-eastern
frontier of the Roman Empire, had forced its way into the plains of
western Europe and had taken possession of most of the land. They were
restless, as all pioneers have been since the beginning of time. They
liked to be "on the go." They cut down the forests and they cut each
other's throats with equal energy. Few of them wanted to live in cities.
They insisted upon being "free," they loved to feel the fresh air of
the hillsides fill their lungs while they drove their herds across the
wind-swept pastures. When they no longer liked their old homes, they
pulled up stakes and went away in search of fresh adventures.

The weaker ones died. The hardy fighters and the courageous women who
had followed their men into the wilderness survived. In this way they
developed a strong race of men. They cared little for the graces of
life. They were too busy to play the fiddle or write pieces of poetry.
They had little love for discussions. The priest, "the learned man" of
the village (and before the middle of the thirteenth century, a layman
who could read and write was regarded as a "sissy") was supposed to
settle all questions which had no direct practical value. Meanwhile the
German chieftain, the Frankish Baron, the Northman Duke (or whatever
their names and titles) occupied their share of the territory which
once had been part of the great Roman Empire and among the ruins of past
glory, they built a world of their own which pleased them mightily and
which they considered quite perfect.

They managed the affairs of their castle and the surrounding country to
the best of their ability. They were as faithful to the commandments of
the Church as any weak mortal could hope to be. They were sufficiently
loyal to their king or emperor to keep on good terms with those distant
but always dangerous potentates. In short, they tried to do right and
to be fair to their neighbours without being exactly unfair to their own
interests.

It was not an ideal world in which they found themselves. The greater
part of the people were serfs or "villains," farm-hands who were as much
a part of the soil upon which they lived as the cows and sheep whose
stables they shared. Their fate was not particularly happy nor was it
particularly unhappy. But what was one to do? The good Lord who ruled
the world of the Middle Ages had undoubtedly ordered everything for the
best. If He, in his wisdom, had decided that there must be both knights
and serfs, it was not the duty of these faithful sons of the church to
question the arrangement. The serfs therefore did not complain but when
