
"Hereward will have need of his magic head-piece, if he tries that
adventure," quoth another.

"Ay," retorted the first speaker; "but the helmet may stand the rap well
enough, and yet the brains inside be the worse."

"Not a doubt. I knew a man once, who was so strong, that he would shake
a nut till the kernel went to powder, and yet never break the shell."

"That is a lie!" quoth Hereward. And so it was, and told purposely to
make him expose himself.

Whereon high words followed, which Torfrida tried in vain to stop.
Hereward was flushed with ire and scorn.

"Magic armor, forsooth!" cried he at last. "What care I for armor or for
magic? I will wager to you"--"my armor," he was on the point of saying,
but he checked himself in time--"any horse in my stable, that I go in my
shirt to Scaldmariland, and bring back that mare single-handed."

"Hark to the Englishman. He has turned Berserk at last, like his
forefathers. You will surely start in a pair of hose as well, or the
ladies will be shamed."

And so forth, till Torfrida was purple with shame, and wished herself
fathoms deep; and Adela of France called sternly from the head of the
table to ask what the wrangling meant.

"It is only the English Berserker, the Lady Torfrida's champion," said
some one, in his most courteous tone, "who is not yet as well acquainted
with the customs of knighthood as that fair lady hopes to make him
hereafter."

"Torfrida's champion?" asked Adela, in a tone of surprise, if not scorn.

"If any knight quarrels with my Hereward, he quarrels with Robert
himself!" thundered Count Robert. "Silence!"

And so the matter was hushed up.

The banquet ended; and they walked out into the garden to cool their
heads, and play at games, and dance.

Torfrida avoided Hereward: but he, with the foolish pertinacity of a man
who knows he has had too much wine, and yet pretends to himself that he
has not, would follow her, and speak to her.

She turned away more than once. At last she was forced to speak to him.

"So! You have made me a laughing-stock to these knights. You have
scorned at my gifts. You have said--and before these men, too--that you
need neither helm nor hauberk. Give me them back, then, Berserker as you
are, and go sleep off your wine."

"That will I," laughed Hereward boisterously.

"You are tipsy," said she, "and do not know what you say."

"You are angry, and do not know what you say. Hearken, proud lass. I will
take care of one thing, and that is, that you shall speak the truth."

"Did I not say that you were tipsy?"

"Pish! You said that I was a Berserker. And truth you shall speak; for
baresark I go to-morrow to the war, and baresark I win that mare or
die."

"That will be very fit for you."

And the two turned haughtily from each other.

Ere Torfrida went to bed that night, there was a violent knocking. Angry
as she was, she was yet anxious enough to hurry out of her chamber, and
open the door herself.

Martin Lightfoot stood there with a large leather case, which he flung
at her feet somewhat unceremoniously.

"There is some gear of yours," said he, as it clanged and rattled on the
floor.

"What do you mean, man?"

"Only that my master bid me say that he cares as little for his own life
as you do." And he turned away.

She caught him by the arm:--

"What is the meaning of this? What is in this mail?"

"You should know best. If young folks cannot be content when they are
well off, they will go farther and fare worse," says Martin Lightfoot.
And he slipt from her grasp and fled into the night.

She took the mail to her room and opened it. It contained the magic
armor.

All her anger was melted away. She cried; she blamed herself. He would
be killed; his blood would be on her head. She would have carried it
back to him with her own hands; she would have entreated him on her
knees to take it back. But how face the courtiers? and how find him?
Very probably, too, he was by that time hopelessly drunk. And at that
thought she drew herself into herself, and trying to harden her heart
again, went to bed, but not to sleep; and bitterly she cried as she
thought over the old hag's croon:--

   "Quick joy, long pain,
    You will take your gift again."

It might have been five o'clock the next morning when the clarion rang
down the street. She sprang up and drest herself quickly; but never more
carefully or gayly. She heard the tramp of horse-hoofs. He was moving
a-field early, indeed. Should she go to the window to bid him farewell?
Should she hide herself in just anger?

She looked out stealthily through the blind of the little window in the
gable. There rode down the street Robert le Frison in full armor, and
behind him, knight after knight, a wall of shining steel. But by his
side rode one bare-headed, his long yellow curls floating over his
shoulders. His boots had golden spurs, a gilt belt held up his sword;
but his only dress was a silk shirt and silk hose. He laughed and sang,
and made his horse caracol, and tossed his lance in the air, and caught
it by the point, like Taillefer at Hastings, as he passed under the
window.

She threw open the blind, careless of all appearances. She would have
called to him: but the words choked her; and what should she say?

He looked up boldly, and smiled.

"Farewell, fair lady mine. Drunk I was last night: but not so drunk as
to forget a promise."

And he rode on, while Torfrida rushed away and broke into wild weeping.




CHAPTER XIII.

HOW HEREWARD WON MARE SWALLOW.


On a bench at the door of his high-roofed wooden house sat Dirk
Hammerhand, the richest man in Walcheren. From within the house
sounded the pleasant noise of slave-women, grinding and chatting at the
handquern; from without, the pleasant noise of geese and fowls without
number. And as he sat and drank his ale, and watched the herd of horses
in the fen, he thought himself a happy man, and thanked his Odin and
Thor that owing to his princely supplies of horses to Countess Gertrude,
Robert the Frison and his Christian Franks had not harried him to the
bare walls, as they would probably do ere all was over.

As he looked at the horses, some half-mile off, he saw a strange stir
among them. They began whinnying and pawing round a four-footed thing
in the midst, which might be a badger, or a wolf,--though both were very
uncommon in that pleasant isle of Walcheren; but which plainly had no
business there. Whereon he took up a mighty staff, and strode over the
fen to see.

He found neither wolf nor badger; but to his exceeding surprise, a long
lean man, clothed in ragged horse-skins, whinnying and neighing exactly
like a horse, and then stooping to eat grass like one. He advanced to do
the first thing which came into his head, namely to break the man's back
with his staff, and ask him afterwards who he might be. But ere he could
strike, the man or horse kicked up with his hind legs in his face, and
then springing on to the said hind legs ran away with extraordinary
swiftness some fifty yards; and then went down on all-fours and began
grazing again.

"Beest thou man or devil?" cried Dirk, somewhat frightened.

The thing looked up. The face at least was human.

"Art thou a Christian man?" asked it in bad Frisian, intermixed with
snorts and neighs.

"What's that to thee?" growled Dirk; and began to wish a little that he
was one, having heard that the sign of the cross was of great virtue in
driving away fiends.

"Thou art not Christian. Thou believest in Thor and Odin? Then there is
hope."

"Hope of what?" Dirk was growing more and more frightened.

"Of her, my sister! Ah, my sister, can it be that I shall find thee at
last, after ten thousand miles, and thirty years of woeful wandering?"

"I have no man's sister here. At least, my wife's brother was killed--"

"I speak not of a sister in a woman's shape. Mine, alas!--O woeful
prince, O more woeful princess!--eats the herb of the field somewhere in
the shape of a mare, as ugly as she was once beautiful, but swifter than
the swallow on the wing."

"I've none such here," quoth Dirk, thoroughly frightened, and glancing
uneasily at mare Swallow.

"You have not? Alas, wretched me! It was prophesied to me, by the witch,
that I should find her in the field of one who worshipped the old gods;
for had she come across a holy priest, she had been a woman again,
long ago. Whither must I wander afresh!" And the thing began weeping
bitterly, and then ate more grass.

"I--that is--thou poor miserable creature," said Dirk, half pitying,
half wishing to turn the subject, "leave off making a beast of thyself
awhile, and tell me who thou art."

"I have made no beast of myself, most noble Earl of the Frisians, for so
you doubtless are. I was made a beast of,--a horse of, by an enchanter
of a certain land, and my sister a mare."

"Thou dost not say so!" quoth Dirk, who considered such an event quite
possible.

"I was a prince of the county of Alboronia, which lies between Cathay
and the Mountains of the Moon, as fair once as I am foul now, and only
less fair than my lost sister; and, by the enchantments of a cruel
magician, we became what we are."

"But thou art not a horse, at all events?"

"Am I not? Thou knowest, then, more of me than I do of myself,"--and it
ate more grass. "But hear the rest of my story. My hapless sister was
sold away, with me, to a merchant; but I, breaking loose from him, fled
until I bathed in a magic fountain. At once I recovered my man's shape,
and was rejoicing therein, when out of the fountain rose a fairy more
beautiful than an elf, and smiled upon me with love.

"She asked me my story, and I told it. And when it was told, 'Wretch!'
she cried, 'and coward, who hast deserted thy sister in her need. I
would have loved thee, and made thee immortal as myself; but now thou
shalt wander, ugly, and eating grass, clothed in the horse-hide which
has just dropped from thy limbs, till thou shalt find thy sister, and
bring her to bathe, like thee, in this magic well.'"

"All good spirits help us! And you are really a prince?"

"As surely," cried the thing, with a voice of sudden rapture, "as that
mare is my sister"; and he rushed at mare Swallow. "I see, I see, my
mother's eyes, my father's nose--"

"He must have been a chuckle-headed king that, then," grinned Dirk to
himself. "The mare's nose is as big as a buck-basket. But how can she be
a princess, man,--prince, I mean? she has a foal running by her here."

"A foal?" said the thing, solemnly. "Let me behold it. Alas, alas, my
sister! Thy tyrant's threat has come true, that thou shouldst be his
bride whether thou wouldst or not. I see, I see in the features of thy
son his hated lineaments."

"Why he must be as like a horse, then, as your father. But this will not
do, Master Horse-man; I know that foal's pedigree better than I do my
own."

"Man, man, simple, though honest! Hast thou never heard of the skill
of the enchanter of the East? How they transform their victims at night
back again into human shape, and by day into the shape of beasts again?"

"Yes--well--I know that--"

"And do you not see how you are deluded? Every night, doubt not, that
mare and foal take their human shape again; and every night, perhaps,
that foul enchanter visits in your fen, perhaps in your very stable, his
wretched and perhaps unwilling bride."

"An enchanter in my stable? That is an ugly guest. But no. I've been
into the stables fifty times, to see if that mare was safe. Mare was
mare, and colt was colt, Mr. Prince, if I have eyes to see."

"And what are eyes against enchantments? The moment you opened the door,
the spell was cast over them again. You ought to thank your stars that
no worse has happened yet; that the enchanter, in fleeing, has not wrung
your neck as he went out, or cast a spell on you, which will fire
your barns, lame your geese, give your fowls the pip, your horses the
glanders, your cattle the murrain, your children the St. Vitus' dance,
your wife the creeping palsy, and yourself the chalk-stones in all your
fingers."

"The Lord have mercy on me! If the half of this be true, I will turn
Christian. I will send for a priest, and be baptized to-morrow!"

"O my sister, my sister! Dost thou not know me? Dost thou answer my
caresses with kicks? Or is thy heart, as well as thy body, so enchained
by that cruel necromancer, that thou preferest to be his, and scornest
thine own salvation, leaving me to eat grass till I die?"

"I say, Prince,--I say,--What would you have a man to do? I bought the
mare honestly, and I have kept her well. She can't say aught against
me on that score. And whether she be princess or not, I'm loath to part
with her."

"Keep her then, and keep with her the curse of all the saints and
angels. Look down, ye holy saints" (and the thing poured out a long
string of saints' names), "and avenge this catholic princess, kept in
bestial durance by an unbaptized heathen! May his--"

"Don't! don't!" roared Dirk. "And don't look at me like that" (for he
feared the evil eye), "or I'll brain you with my staff!"

"Fool, if I have lost a horse's figure, I have not lost his swiftness.
Ere thou couldst strike, I should have run a mile and back, to curse
thee afresh." And the thing ran round him, and fell on all-fours again,
and ate grass.

"Mercy, mercy! And that is more than I ever asked yet of man. But it is
hard," growled he, "that a man should lose his money, because a rogue
sells him a princess in disguise."

"Then sell her again; sell her, as thou valuest thy life, to the first
Christian man thou meetest. And yet no. What matters? Ere a month be
over, the seven years' enchantment will have passed, and she will return
to her own shape, with her son, and vanish from thy farm, leaving thee
to vain repentance, and so thou wilt both lose thy money and get her
curse. Farewell, and my malison abide with thee!"

And the thing, without another word, ran right away, neighing as it
went, leaving Dirk in a state of abject terror.

He went home. He cursed the mare, he cursed the man who sold her, he
cursed the day he saw her, he cursed the day he was born. He told his
story with exaggerations and confusions in plenty to all in the house;
and terror fell on them likewise. No one, that evening, dare go down
into the fen to drive the horses up; and Dirk got very drunk, went to
bed, and trembled there all night (as did the rest of the household),
expecting the enchanter to enter on a flaming fire-drake, at every howl
of the wind.

The next morning, as Dirk was going about his business with a doleful
face, casting stealthy glances at the fen, to see if the mysterious mare
was still there, and a chance of his money still left, a man rode up to
the door.

He was poorly clothed, with a long rusty sword by his side. A broad felt
hat, long boots, and a haversack behind his saddle, showed him to be a
traveller, seemingly a horse-dealer; for there followed him, tied head
and tail, a brace of sorry nags.

"Heaven save all here," quoth he, making the sign of the cross. "Can any
good Christian give me a drink of milk?"

"Ale, if thou wilt," said Dirk. "But what art thou, and whence?"

On any other day, he would have tried to coax his guest into trying a
buffet with him for his horse and clothes; but this morning his heart
was heavy with the thought of the enchanted mare, and he welcomed the
chance of selling her to the stranger.

"We are not very fond of strangers about here, since these Flemings
have been harrying our borders. If thou art a spy, it will be worse for
thee."

"I am neither spy nor Fleming; but a poor servant of the Lord Bishop
of Utrecht's, buying a garron or two for his lordship's priests. As for
these Flemings, may St. John Baptist save from them both me and you. Do
you know of any man who has horses to sell hereabouts?"

"There are horses in the fen yonder," quoth Dirk, who knew that
churchmen were likely to give a liberal price, and pay in good silver.

"I saw them as I rode up. And a fine lot they are; but of too good a
stamp for my short purse, or for my holy master's riding,--a fat priest
likes a quiet nag, my master."

"Humph. Well, if quietness is what you need, there is a mare down there,
a child might ride her with a thread of wool. But as for price,--and she
has a colt, too, running by her."

"Ah?" quoth the horseman. "Well, your Walcheren folk make good milk,
that's certain. A colt by her? That's awkward. My Lord does not like
young horses; and it would be troublesome, too, to take the thing along
with me."

The less anxious the dealer seemed to buy, the more anxious grew Dirk
to sell; but he concealed his anxiety, and let the stranger turn away,
thanking him for his drink.

"I say!" he called after him. "You might look at her as you ride past
the herd."

The stranger assented, and they went down into the fen, and looked over
the precious mare, whose feats were afterwards sung by many an English
fireside, or in the forest, beneath the hollins green, by such as Robin
Hood and his merry men. The ugliest, as well as the swiftest, of mares,
she was, say the old chroniclers; and it was not till the stranger
had looked twice at her, that he forgot her great chuckle head,
greyhound-flanks, and drooping hind-quarters, and began to see the great
length of those same quarters,--the thighs let down into the hocks, the
arched loin, the extraordinary girth through the saddle, the sloping
shoulder, the long arms, the flat knees, the large, well-set hoofs, and
all the other points which showed her strength and speed, and justified
her fame.

"She might carry a big man like you through the mud," said he,
carelessly, "but as for pace, one cannot expect that with such a chuckle
head. And if one rode her through a town, the boys would call after one,
'All head and no tail.' Why, I can't see her tail for her quarters, it
is so ill set on."

"Ill set on, or none," said Dirk, testily; "don't go to speak against
her pace till you have seen it. Here, lass!"

Dirk was, in his heart, rather afraid of the princess; but he was
comforted when she came up to him like a dog.

"She's as sensible as a woman," said he; and then grumbled to himself,
"may be she knows I mean to part with her."

"Lend me your saddle," said he to the stranger.

The stranger did so; and Dirk mounting galloped her in a ring. There was
no doubt of her powers, as soon as she began to move.

"I hope you won't remember this against me, madam," said Dirk, as soon
as he got out of the stranger's hearing. "I can't do less than sell you
to a Christian. And certainly I have been as good a master to you as if
I'd known who you were; but if you wish to stay with me you've only to
kick me off, and say so, and I'm yours to command."

"Well, she can gallop a bit," said the stranger, as Dirk pulled her up
and dismounted; "but an ugly brute she is nevertheless, and such a
one as I should not care to ride, for I am a gay man among the ladies.
However, what is your price?"

Dirk named twice as much as he would have taken.

"Half that, you mean." And the usual haggle began.

"Tell thee what," said Dirk at last, "I am a man who has his fancies;
and this shall be her price; half thy bid, and a box on the ear."

The demon of covetousness had entered Dirk's heart. What if he got the
money, brained or at least disabled the stranger, and so had a chance of
selling the mare a second time to some fresh comer?

"Thou art a strange fellow," quoth the horse-dealer. "But so be it."

Dirk chuckled. "He does not know," thought he, "that he has to do with
Dirk Hammerhand," and he clenched his fist in anticipation of his rough
joke.

"There," quoth the stranger, counting out the money carefully, "is thy
coin. And there--is thy box on the ear."

And with a blow which rattled over the fen, he felled Dirk Hammerhand to
the ground.

He lay senseless for a moment, and then looked wildly round. His jaw was
broken.

"Villain!" groaned he. "It was I who was to give the buffet, not thou!"

"Art mad?" asked the stranger, as he coolly picked up the coins, which
Dirk had scattered in his fall. "It is the seller's business to take,
and the buyer's to give."

And while Dirk roared for help in vain he leapt on mare Swallow and rode
off shouting,

"Aha! Dirk Hammerhand! So you thought to knock a hole in my skull, as
you have done to many a better man than yourself. He is a lucky man who
never meets his match, Dirk. I shall give your love to the Enchanted
Prince, my faithful serving-man, whom they call Martin Lightfoot."

Dirk cursed the day he was born. Instead of the mare and colt, he had
got the two wretched garrons which the stranger had left, and a face
which made him so tender of his own teeth, that he never again offered
to try a buffet with a stranger.




CHAPTER XIV.

HOW HEREWARD RODE INTO BRUGES LIKE A BEGGARMAN.


The spring and summer had passed, and the autumn was almost over,
when great news came to the Court of Bruges, where Torfrida was now a
bower-maiden.

The Hollanders had been beaten till they submitted; at least for the
present. There was peace, at least for the present, through all the
isles of Scheldt; and more than all, the lovely Countess Gertrude
had resolved to reward her champion by giving him her hand, and the
guardianship of her lands and the infant son.

And Hereward?

From him, or of him, there was no word. That he was alive and fighting,
was all the messenger could say.

Then Robert came back to Bruges, with a gallant retinue, leading home
his bride. And there met him his father and mother, and his brother of
Mons, and Richilda the beautiful and terrible sorceress,--who had not
yet stained her soul with those fearful crimes which she had expiated by
fearful penances in after years, when young Arnoul, the son for whom
she had sold her soul, lay dead through the very crimes by which she had
meant to make him a mighty prince. And Torfrida went out with them to
meet Count Robert, and looked for Hereward, till her eyes were ready to
fall out of her head. But Hereward was not with them.

"He must be left behind, commanding the army," thought she. "But he
might have sent one word!"

There was a great feast that day, of course; and Torfrida sat thereat:
but she could not eat. Nevertheless she was too proud to let the knights
know what was in her heart; so she chatted and laughed as gayly as the
rest, watching always for any word of Hereward. But none mentioned his
name.

The feast was long; the ladies did not rise till nigh bedtime; and then
the men drank on.

They went up to the Queen-Countess's chamber; where a solemn undressing
of that royal lady usually took place.

The etiquette was this. The Queen-Countess sat in her chair of state in
the midst, till her shoes were taken off, and her hair dressed for the
night. Right and left of her, according to their degrees, sat the other
great ladies; and behind each of them, where they could find places, the
maidens.

It was Torfrida's turn to take off the royal shoes; and she advanced
into the middle of the semicircle, slippers in hand.

"Stop there!" said the Countess-Queen.

Whereat Torfrida stopped, very much frightened.

"Countesses and ladies," said the mistress. "There are, in Provence and
the South, what I wish there were here in Flanders,--Courts of Love, at
which all offenders against the sacred laws of Venus and Cupid are tried
by an assembly of their peers, and punished according to their deserts."

Torfrida turned scarlet.

"I know not why we, countesses and ladies, should have less knowledge
of the laws of love than those gayer dames of the South, whose blood
runs--to judge by her dark hair--in the veins of yon fair maid."

There was a silence. Torfrida was the most beautiful woman in the room;
more beautiful than even Richilda the terrible: and therefore there were
few but were glad to see her--as it seemed--in trouble.

Torfrida's mother began whimpering, and praying to six or seven saints
at once. But nobody marked her,--possibly not even the saints; being
preoccupied with Torfrida.

"I hear, fair maid,--for that you are that I will do you the justice to
confess,--that you are old enough to be married this four years since."

Torfrida stood like a stone, frightened out of her wits, plentiful as
they were.

"Why are you not married?"

There was, of course, no answer.

"I hear that knights have fought for you; lost their lives for you."

"I did not bid them," gasped Torfrida, longing that the floor would
open, and swallow up the Queen-Countess and all her kin and followers,
as it did for the enemies of the blessed Saint Dunstan, while he was
arguing with them in an upper room at Calne.

"And that the knight of St. Valeri, to whom you gave your favor, now
lies languishing of wounds got in your cause."

"I--I did not bid him fight," gasped Torfrida, now wishing that the
floor would open and swallow up herself.

"And that he who overthrew the knight of St. Valeri,--to whom you gave
that favor, and more--"

"I gave him nothing a maiden might not give," cried Torfrida, so
fiercely that the Queen-Countess recoiled somewhat.

"I never said that you did, girl. Your love you gave him. Can you deny
that?"

Torfrida laughed bitterly: her Southern blood was rising.

"I put my love out to nurse, instead of weaning it, as many a maiden has
done before me. When my love cried for hunger and cold, I took it back
again to my own bosom: and whether it has lived or died there, is no
one's matter but my own."

"Hunger and cold? I hear that him to whom you gave your love you drove
out to the cold, bidding him go fight in his bare shirt, if he wished to
win your love."

"I did not. He angered me--he--" and Torfrida found herself in the act
of accusing Hereward.

She stopped instantly.

"What more, Majesty? If this be true, what more may not be true of such
a one as I? I submit myself to your royal grace."

"She has confessed. What punishment, ladies, does she deserve? Or,
rather, what punishment would her cousins of Provence inflict, did we
send her southward, to be judged by their Courts of Love?"

One lady said one thing, one another. Some spoke cruelly, some worse
than cruelly; for they were coarse ages, the ages of faith; and ladies
said things then in open company which gentlemen would be ashamed to say
in private now.

"Marry her to a fool," said Richilda, at last, bitterly.

"That is too common a misfortune," answered the lady of France. "If we
did no more to her, she might grow as proud as her betters."

Adela knew that her daughter-in-law considered her husband a fool; and
was somewhat of the same opinion, though she hated Richilda.

"No," said she; "we will do more. We will marry her to the first man who
enters the castle."

Torfrida looked at her mistress to see if she were mad. But the
Countess-Queen was serene and sane. Then Torfrida's southern heat and
northern courage burst forth.

"You--marry--me--to--" said she, slowly, with eyes so fierce, and lips
so vivid, that Richilda herself quailed.

There was a noise of shouting and laughing in the court below, which
made all turn and listen.

The next moment a serving-man came in, puzzled and inclined to laugh.

"May it please your Majesty, here is the strangest adventure. There is
ridden into the castle-yard a beggar-man, with scarce a shirt to his
back, on a great ugly mare, with a foal running by her, and a fool
behind him, carrying lance and shield. And he says that he is come to
fight any knight of the Court, ragged as he stands, for the fairest
lady in the Court, be she who she may, if she have not a wedded husband
already."

"And what says my Lord Marquis?"

"That it is a fair challenge, and a good adventure; and that fight he
shall, if any man will answer his defiance."

"And I say, tell my Lord the Marquis, that fight he shall not: for he
shall have the fairest maiden in this Court for the trouble of carrying
her away; and that I, Adela of France, will give her to him. So let that
beggar dismount, and be brought up hither to me."

There was silence again. Torfrida looked round her once more, to see
whether or not she was dreaming, and whether there was one human being
to whom she could appeal. Her mother sat praying and weeping in a
corner. Torfrida looked at her with one glance of scorn, which she
confessed and repented, with bitter tears, many a year after, in a
foreign land; and then turned to bay with the spirit of her old Paladin
ancestor, who choked the Emir at Mont Majeur.

Married to a beggar! It was a strange accident; and an ugly one; and a
great cruelty and wrong. But it was not impossible, hardly improbable,
in days when the caprice of the strong created accidents, and when
