
"You can do no good by going back--other lives will be lost if you try
to do it. Try to calm yourself for the sake of the living. It may be
that your husband will be picked up somewhere by one of the fishing
boats."

The woman who pleaded to go back, according to Mrs. Vera Dick, of
Calgary, Canada, later tried to throw herself from the life-boat. Mrs.
Dick, describing the scenes in the life-boats, said there were half
a dozen women in that one boat who tried to commit suicide when they
realized that the Titanic had gone down.

"Even in Canada, where we have such clear nights," said Mrs. Dick, "I
have never seen such a clear sky. The stars were very bright and we
could see the Titanic plainly, like a great hotel on the water. Floor
after floor of the lights went out as we watched. It was horrible,
horrible. I can't bear to think about it. From the distance, as we rowed
away, we could hear the band playing 'Nearer, My God to Thee.'

"Among the life-boats themselves, however, there were scenes just as
terrible, perhaps, but to me nothing could outdo the tragic grandeur
with which the Titanic went to its death. To realize it, you would
have to see the Titanic as I saw it the day we set sail--with the
flags flying and the bands playing. Everybody on board was laughing and
talking about the Titanic being the biggest and most luxurious boat on
the ocean and being unsinkable. To think of it then and to think of it
standing out there in the night, wounded to death and gasping for life,
is almost too big for the imagination.


SCANTILY CLAD WOMEN IN LIFE-BOATS

"The women on our boat were in nightgowns and bare feet--some of
them--and the wealthiest women mingled with the poorest immigrants. One
immigrant woman kept shouting: 'My God, my poor father! He put me in
this boat and would not save himself. Oh, why didn't I die, why didn't I
die? Why can't I die now?'

"We had to restrain her, else she would have jumped over-board. It was
simply awful. Some of the men apparently had said they could row just to
get into the boats. We paid no attention to cowardice, however. We were
all busy with our own troubles. My heart simply bled for the women who
were separated from their husbands.

"The night was frightfully cold, although clear. We had to huddle
together to keep warm. Everybody drank sparingly of the water and
ate sparingly of the bread. We did not know when we would be saved.
Everybody tried to remain cool, except the poor creatures who could
think of nothing but their own great loss. Those with the most brains
seemed to control themselves best."


PHILADELPHIA WOMEN HEROINES

How Mrs. George D. Widener, whose husband and son perished after kissing
her good-bye and helping her into one of the boats, rowed when exhausted
seamen were on the verge of collapse, was told by Emily Geiger, maid of
Mrs. Widener, who was saved with her.

The girl said Mrs. Widener bravely toiled throughout the night and
consoled other women who had broken down under the strain.

Mrs. William E. Carter and Mrs. John B. Thayer were in the same
life-boat and worked heroically to keep it free from the icy menace.
Although Mrs. Thayer's husband remained aboard the Titanic and sank with
it, and although she had no knowledge of the safety of her son until
they met, hours later, aboard the Carpathia, Mrs. Thayer bravely labored
at the oars throughout the night.

In telling of her experience Mrs. Carter said:

"When I went over the side with my children and got in the boat there
were no seamen in it. Then came a few men, but there were oars with no
one to use them. The boat had been filled with passengers, and there was
nothing else for me to do but to take an oar.

"We could see now that the time of the ship had come. She was sinking,
and we were warned by cries from the men above to pull away from
the ship quickly. Mrs. Thayer, wife of the vice-president of the
Pennsylvania Railroad, was in my boat, and she, too, took an oar.

"It was cold and we had no time to clothe ourselves with warm overcoats.
The rowing warmed me. We started to pull away from the ship. We could
see the dim outlines of the decks above, but we could not recognize
anybody."


MANY WOMEN ROWING

Mrs. William R. Bucknell's account of the part women played in the
rowing is as follows:

"There were thirty-five persons in the boat in which the captain placed
me. Three of these were ordinary seamen, supposed to manage the boat,
and a steward.

"One of these men seemed to think that we should not start away from
the sinking ship until it could be learned whether the other boats would
accommodate the rest of the women. He seemed to think that; more could
be crowded into ours, if necessary.

"'I would rather go back and go down with the ship than leave under
these circumstances.' he cried.

"The captain shouted to him to obey orders and to pull for a little
light that could just be discerned miles in the distance. I do not know
what this little light was. It may have been a passing fishing vessel,
which, of course could not know our predicament. Anyway, we never
reached it.

"We rowed all night, I took an oar and sat beside the Countess de
Rothes. Her maid had an our and so did mine. The air was freezing cold,
and it was not long before the only man that appeared to know anything
about rowing commenced to complain that his hands were freezing: A woman
back of him handed him a shawl from about her shoulders.

"As we rowed we looked back at the lights of the Titanic. There was
not a sound from her, only the lights began to get lower and lower,
and finally she sank. Then we heard a muffled explosion and a dull roar
caused by the great suction of water.

"There was not a drop of water on our boat. The last minute before our
boat was launched Captain Smith threw aboard a bag of bread. I took
the precaution of taking a good drink of water before we started, so I
suffered no inconvenience from thirst."

Mrs. Lucien Smith, whose young husband perished, was another heroine. It
is related by survivors that she took turns at the oars, and then, when
the boat was in danger of sinking, stood ready to plug a hole with her
finger if the cork stopper became loose.

In another boat Mrs. Cornell and her sister, who had a slight knowledge
of rowing, took turns at the oars, as did other women.

The boat in which Mrs. J. J. Brown, of Denver, Col., was saved contained
only three men in all, and only one rowed. He was a half-frozen seaman
who was tumbled into the boat at the last minute. The woman wrapped him
in blankets and set him at an oar to start his blood. The second man was
too old to be of any use. The third was a coward.

Strange to say, there was room in this boat for ten other people. Ten
brave men would have received the warmest welcome of their lives if they
had been there. The coward, being a quartermaster and the assigned head
of the boat, sat in the stern and steered. He was terrified, and the
women had to fight against his pessimism while they tugged at the oars.

The women sat two at each oar. One held the oar in place, the other did
the pulling. Mrs. Brown coached them and cheered them on. She told them
that the exercise would keep the chill out of their veins, and she spoke
hopefully of the likelihood that some vessel would answer the wireless
calls. Over the frightful danger of the situation the spirit of this
woman soared.


THE PESSIMIST

And the coward sat in his stern seat, terrified, his tongue loosened
with fright. He assured them there was no chance in the world. He had
had fourteen years' experience, and he knew. First, they would have
to row one and a half miles at least to get out of the sphere of the
suction, if they did not want to go down. They would be lost, and nobody
would ever find them.

"Oh, we shall be picked up sooner or later," said some of the braver
ones. No, said the man, there was no bread in the boat, no water; they
would starve--all that big boatload wandering the high seas with nothing
to eat, perhaps for days.

"Don't," cried Mrs. Brown. "Keep that to yourself, if you feel that way.
For the sake of these women and chil-dren, be a man. We have a smooth
sea and a fighting chance. Be a man."

But the coward only knew that there was no compass and no chart aboard.
They sighted what they thought was a fishing smack on the horizon,
showing dimly in the early dawn. The man at the rudder steered toward
it, and the women bent to their oars again. They covered several miles
in this way--but the smack faded into the distance. They could not see
it any longer. And the coward said that everything was over.

They rowed back nine weary miles. Then the coward thought they must stop
rowing, and lie in the trough of the waves until the Carpathia should
appear. The women tried it for a few moments, and felt the cold creeping
into their bodies. Though exhausted from the hard physical labor they
thought work was better than freezing.

"Row again!" commanded Mrs. Brown.

"No, no, don't," said the coward.

"We shall freeze," cried several of the women together. "We must row. We
have rowed all this time. We must keep on or freeze."

When the coward still demurred, they told him plainly and once for all
that if he persisted in wanting them to stop rowing, they were going to
throw him overboard and be done with him for good. Something about the
look in the eye of that Mississippi-bred oarswoman, who seemed such a
force among her fellows, told him that he had better capitulate. And he
did.

COUNTESS ROTHES AN EXPERT OARSWOMAN

Miss Alice Farnam Leader, a New York physician, escaped from the Titanic
on the same boat which carried the Countess Rothes. "The countess is an
expert oarswoman," said Doctor Leader, "and thoroughly at home on the
water. She practically took command of our boat when it was found that
the seaman who had been placed at the oars could not row skilfully.
Several of the women took their place with the countess at the oars and
rowed in turns, while the weak and unskilled stewards sat quietly in one
end of the boat."



MEN COULD NOT ROW

"With nothing on but a nightgown I helped row one of the boats for three
hours," said Mrs. Florence Ware, of Bristol, England.

"In our boat there were a lot of women, a steward and a fireman. None of
the men knew anything about managing a small boat, so some of the women
who were used to boats took charge.

"It was cold and I worked as hard as I could at an oar until we were
picked up. There was nothing to eat or drink on our boat."


DEATHS ON THE LIFE-BOATS

"The temperature must have been below freezing," testified another
survivor, "and neither men nor women in my boat were warmly clothed.
Several of them died. The officer in charge of the life-boat decided it
was better to bury the


{illust. caption = SURVIVORS OF THE GREAT MARINE DISASTER

The first authentic photograph,...}


{illust. caption = Copyright by Campbell Studio. N. Y.

COLONEL AND MRS. JOHN JACOB ASTOR

Mrs. Astor, nee Miss Madeline Force, was rescued. Colonel Astor who
bravely refused to take a place in the life-boats, went down with the
Titanic.}


bodies. Soon they were weighted so they would sink and were put
overboard. We could also see similar burials taking place from other
life-boats that were all around us."


GAMBLERS WERE POLITE

In one boat were two card sharps. With the same cleverness that enabled
them to win money on board they obtained places in the boats with the
women.

In the boat with the gamblers were women in their night-gowns and women
in evening dress. None of the boats were properly equipped with food,
but all had enough bread and water to keep the rescued from starving
until the expected arrival of help.

To the credit of the gamblers who managed to escape, it should be said
that they were polite and showed the women every courtesy. All they
wanted was to be sure of getting in a boat. That once accomplished, they
reverted to their habitual practice of politeness and suavity. They were
even willing; to do a little manual labor, refusing to let women do any
rowing.

The people on that particular boat were a sad group. Fathers had kissed
their daughters good-bye and husbands had parted from their wives. The
card sharps, however philosophized wonderfully about the will of the
Almighty and how strange His ways. They said that one must be prepared
for anything; that good always came from evil, and that every cloud had
a silvery lining{.}

"Who knows?" said one. "It may be that everybody on board will be
saved." Another added: "Our duty is to the living. You women owe it to
your relatives and friends not to allow this thing to wreck your reason
or undermine your health." And they took pains to see that all the women
who were on the life-boat had plenty of covering to keep them from the
icy blasts of the night.


HELP IN SIGHT

The survivors were in the life-boats until about 5.30 A. M. About 3 A.
M. faint lights appeared in the sky and all rejoiced to see what was
supposed to be the coming dawn, but after watching for half an hour
and seeing no change in the intensity of the light, the disappointed
sufferers realized it was the Northern Lights. Presently low down on
the horizon they saw a light which slowly resolved itself into a double
light, and they watched eagerly to see if the two lights would separate
and so prove to be only two of the boats, or whether these lights would
remain together, in which case they should expect them to be the lights
of a rescuing steamer.

To the inexpressible joy of all, they moved as one! Immediately the
boats were swung around and headed for the lights. Someone shouted:
"Now, boys, sing!" and everyone not too weak broke into song with "Row
for the shore, boys." Tears came to the eyes of all as they realized
that safety was at hand. The song was sung, but it was a very poor
imitation of the real thing, for quavering voices make poor songs. A
cheer was given next, and that was better--you can keep in tune for a
cheer.

THE "LUCKY THIRTEEN"

"Our rescuer showed up rapidly, and as she swung round we saw her cabins
all alight, and knew she must be a large steamer. She was now motionless
and we had to row to her. Just then day broke, a beautiful quiet dawn
with faint pink clouds just above the horizon, and a new moon whose
crescent just touched the horizon. 'Turn your money over, boys,' said
our cheery steersman, 'that is, if you have any with you,' he added.

"We laughed at him for his superstition at such a time, but he countered
very neatly by adding: 'Well, I shall never say again that 13 is an
unlucky number; boat 13 has been the best friend we ever had.' Certainly
the 13 superstition is killed forever in the minds of those who escaped
from the Titanic in boat 13.

"As we neared the Carpathia we saw in the dawning light what we thought
was a full-rigged schooner standing up near her, and presently behind
her another, all sails set, and we said: 'They are fisher boats from the
Newfoundland bank and have seen the steamer lying to and are standing by
to help.' But in another five minutes the light shone pink on them
and we saw they were icebergs towering many feet in the air, huge,
glistening masses, deadly white, still, and peaked in a way that had
easily suggested a schooner. We glanced round the horizon and there were
others wherever the eye could reach. The steamer we had to reach was
surrounded by them and we had to make a detour to reach her, for between
