lit up her pretty blooming face, surrounded by a profusion of rich
wavy golden locks, whilst with her left she held her white night-dress
closely over her breast, having been roused from her first slumber by
the unexpected arrival of Van Baerle.

It would have made a fine picture, worthy of Rembrandt, the gloomy
winding stairs illuminated by the reddish glare of the cresset of
Gryphus, with his scowling jailer's countenance at the top, the
melancholy figure of Cornelius bending over the banister to look down
upon the sweet face of Rosa, standing, as it were, in the bright frame
of the door of her chamber, with embarrassed mien at being thus seen by
a stranger.

And at the bottom, quite in the shade, where the details are absorbed
in the obscurity, the mastiff, with his eyes glistening like carbuncles,
and shaking his chain, on which the double light from the lamp of Rosa
and the lantern of Gryphus threw a brilliant glitter.

The sublime master would, however, have been altogether unable to
render the sorrow expressed in the face of Rosa, when she saw this pale,
handsome young man slowly climbing the stairs, and thought of the full
import of the words, which her father had just spoken, "You will have
the family cell."

This vision lasted but a moment,--much less time than we have taken to
describe it. Gryphus then proceeded on his way, Cornelius was forced to
follow him, and five minutes afterwards he entered his prison, of which
it is unnecessary to say more, as the reader is already acquainted with
it.

Gryphus pointed with his finger to the bed on which the martyr had
suffered so much, who on that day had rendered his soul to God. Then,
taking up his cresset, he quitted the cell.

Thus left alone, Cornelius threw himself on his bed, but he slept not,
he kept his eye fixed on the narrow window, barred with iron, which
looked on the Buytenhof; and in this way saw from behind the trees that
first pale beam of light which morning sheds on the earth as a white
mantle.

Now and then during the night horses had galloped at a smart pace over
the Buytenhof, the heavy tramp of the patrols had resounded from the
pavement, and the slow matches of the arquebuses, flaring in the east
wind, had thrown up at intervals a sudden glare as far as to the panes
of his window.

But when the rising sun began to gild the coping stones at the gable
ends of the houses, Cornelius, eager to know whether there was any
living creature about him, approached the window, and cast a sad look
round the circular yard before him.

At the end of the yard a dark mass, tinted with a dingy blue by the
morning dawn, rose before him, its dark outlines standing out in
contrast to the houses already illuminated by the pale light of early
morning.

Cornelius recognised the gibbet.

On it were suspended two shapeless trunks, which indeed were no more
than bleeding skeletons.

The good people of the Hague had chopped off the flesh of its victims,
but faithfully carried the remainder to the gibbet, to have a pretext
for a double inscription written on a huge placard, on which Cornelius;
with the keen sight of a young man of twenty-eight, was able to read the
following lines, daubed by the coarse brush of a sign-painter:--

"Here are hanging the great rogue of the name of John de Witt, and the
little rogue Cornelius de Witt, his brother, two enemies of the people,
but great friends of the king of France."

Cornelius uttered a cry of horror, and in the agony of his frantic
terror knocked with his hands and feet at the door so violently and
continuously, that Gryphus, with his huge bunch of keys in his hand, ran
furiously up.

The jailer opened the door, with terrible imprecations against the
prisoner who disturbed him at an hour which Master Gryphus was not
accustomed to be aroused.

"Well, now, by my soul, he is mad, this new De Witt," he cried, "but all
those De Witts have the devil in them."

"Master, master," cried Cornelius, seizing the jailer by the arm and
dragging him towards the window,--"master, what have I read down there?"

"Where down there?"

"On that placard."

And, trembling, pale, and gasping for breath, he pointed to the gibbet
at the other side of the yard, with the cynical inscription surmounting
it.

Gryphus broke out into a laugh.

"Eh! eh!" he answered, "so, you have read it. Well, my good sir, that's
what people will get for corresponding with the enemies of his Highness
the Prince of Orange."

"The brothers De Witt are murdered!" Cornelius muttered, with the cold
sweat on his brow, and sank on his bed, his arms hanging by his side,
and his eyes closed.

"The brothers De Witt have been judged by the people," said Gryphus;
"you call that murdered, do you? well, I call it executed."

And seeing that the prisoner was not only quiet, but entirely prostrate
and senseless, he rushed from the cell, violently slamming the door, and
noisily drawing the bolts.

Recovering his consciousness, Cornelius found himself alone, and
recognised the room where he was,--"the family cell," as Gryphus had
called it,--as the fatal passage leading to ignominious death.

And as he was a philosopher, and, more than that, as he was a Christian,
he began to pray for the soul of his godfather, then for that of the
Grand Pensionary, and at last submitted with resignation to all the
sufferings which God might ordain for him.

Then turning again to the concerns of earth, and having satisfied
himself that he was alone in his dungeon, he drew from his breast the
three bulbs of the black tulip, and concealed them behind a block of
stone, on which the traditional water-jug of the prison was standing, in
the darkest corner of his cell.

Useless labour of so many years! such sweet hopes crushed; his discovery
was, after all, to lead to naught, just as his own career was to be cut
short. Here, in his prison, there was not a trace of vegetation, not an
atom of soil, not a ray of sunshine.

At this thought Cornelius fell into a gloomy despair, from which he was
only aroused by an extraordinary circumstance.

What was this circumstance?

We shall inform the reader in our next chapter.




Chapter 10. The Jailer's Daughter


On the same evening Gryphus, as he brought the prisoner his mess,
slipped on the damp flags whilst opening the door of the cell, and fell,
in the attempt to steady himself, on his hand; but as it was turned the
wrong way, he broke his arm just above the wrist.

Cornelius rushed forward towards the jailer, but Gryphus, who was not
yet aware of the serious nature of his injury, called out to him,--

"It is nothing: don't you stir."

He then tried to support himself on his arm, but the bone gave way; then
only he felt the pain, and uttered a cry.

When he became aware that his arm was broken, this man, so harsh to
others, fell swooning on the threshold, where he remained motionless and
cold, as if dead.

During all this time the door of the cell stood open and Cornelius found
himself almost free. But the thought never entered his mind of profiting
by this accident; he had seen from the manner in which the arm was bent,
and from the noise it made in bending, that the bone was fractured, and
that the patient must be in great pain; and now he thought of nothing
else but of administering relief to the sufferer, however little
benevolent the man had shown himself during their short interview.

At the noise of Gryphus's fall, and at the cry which escaped him, a
hasty step was heard on the staircase, and immediately after a lovely
apparition presented itself to the eyes of Cornelius.

It was the beautiful young Frisian, who, seeing her father stretched on
the ground, and the prisoner bending over him, uttered a faint cry, as
in the first fright she thought Gryphus, whose brutality she well knew,
had fallen in consequence of a struggle between him and the prisoner.

Cornelius understood what was passing in the mind of the girl, at the
very moment when the suspicion arose in her heart.

But one moment told her the true state of the case and, ashamed of her
first thoughts, she cast her beautiful eyes, wet with tears, on the
young man, and said to him,--

"I beg your pardon, and thank you, sir; the first for what I have
thought, and the second for what you are doing."

Cornelius blushed, and said, "I am but doing my duty as a Christian in
helping my neighbour."

"Yes, and affording him your help this evening, you have forgotten the
abuse which he heaped on you this morning. Oh, sir! this is more than
humanity,--this is indeed Christian charity."

Cornelius cast his eyes on the beautiful girl, quite astonished to hear
from the mouth of one so humble such a noble and feeling speech.

But he had no time to express his surprise. Gryphus recovered from his
swoon, opened his eyes, and as his brutality was returning with his
senses, he growled "That's it, a fellow is in a hurry to bring to a
prisoner his supper, and falls and breaks his arm, and is left lying on
the ground."

"Hush, my father," said Rosa, "you are unjust to this gentleman, whom I
found endeavouring to give you his aid."

"His aid?" Gryphus replied, with a doubtful air.

"It is quite true, master! I am quite ready to help you still more."

"You!" said Gryphus, "are you a medical man?"

"It was formerly my profession."

"And so you would be able to set my arm?"

"Perfectly."

"And what would you need to do it? let us hear."

"Two splinters of wood, and some linen for a bandage."

"Do you hear, Rosa?" said Gryphus, "the prisoner is going to set my arm,
that's a saving; come, assist me to get up, I feel as heavy as lead."

Rosa lent the sufferer her shoulder; he put his unhurt arm around her
neck, and making an effort, got on his legs, whilst Cornelius, to save
him a walk, pushed a chair towards him.

Gryphus sat down; then, turning towards his daughter, he said,--

"Well, didn't you hear? go and fetch what is wanted."

Rosa went down, and immediately after returned with two staves of a
small barrel and a large roll of linen bandage.

Cornelius had made use of the intervening moments to take off the man's
coat, and to tuck up his shirt sleeve.

"Is this what you require, sir?" asked Rosa.

"Yes, mademoiselle," answered Cornelius, looking at the things she had
brought,--"yes, that's right. Now push this table, whilst I support the
arm of your father."

Rosa pushed the table, Cornelius placed the broken arm on it so as
to make it flat, and with perfect skill set the bone, adjusted the
splinters, and fastened the bandages.

At the last touch, the jailer fainted a second time.

"Go and fetch vinegar, mademoiselle," said Cornelius; "we will bathe his
temples, and he will recover."

But, instead of acting up to the doctor's prescription, Rosa, after
having satisfied herself that her father was still unconscious,
approached Cornelius and said,--

"Service for service, sir."

"What do you mean, my pretty child?" said Cornelius.

"I mean to say, sir, that the judge who is to examine you to-morrow has
inquired to-day for the room in which you are confined, and, on being
told that you are occupying the cell of Mynheer Cornelius de Witt,
laughed in a very strange and very disagreeable manner, which makes me
fear that no good awaits you."

"But," asked Cornelius, "what harm can they do to me?"

"Look at that gibbet."

"But I am not guilty," said Cornelius.

"Were they guilty whom you see down there gibbeted, mangled, and torn to
pieces?"

"That's true," said Cornelius, gravely.

"And besides," continued Rosa, "the people want to find you guilty. But
whether innocent or guilty, your trial begins to-morrow, and the day
after you will be condemned. Matters are settled very quickly in these
times."

"Well, and what do you conclude from all this?"

"I conclude that I am alone, that I am weak, that my father is lying in
a swoon, that the dog is muzzled, and that consequently there is nothing
to prevent your making your escape. Fly, then; that's what I mean."

"What do you say?"

"I say that I was not able to save Mynheer Cornelius or Mynheer John
de Witt, and that I should like to save you. Only be quick; there, my
father is regaining his breath, one minute more, and he will open his
eyes, and it will be too late. Do you hesitate?"

In fact, Cornelius stood immovable, looking at Rosa, yet looking at her
as if he did not hear her.

"Don't you understand me?" said the young girl, with some impatience.

"Yes, I do," said Cornelius, "but----"

"But?"

"I will not, they would accuse you."

"Never mind," said Rosa, blushing, "never mind that."

"You are very good, my dear child," replied Cornelius, "but I stay."

"You stay, oh, sir! oh, sir! don't you understand that you will be
condemned to death, executed on the scaffold, perhaps assassinated
and torn to pieces, just like Mynheer John and Mynheer Cornelius. For
heaven's sake, don't think of me, but fly from this place, Take care, it
bears ill luck to the De Witts!"

"Halloa!" cried the jailer, recovering his senses, "who is talking of
those rogues, those wretches, those villains, the De Witts?"

"Don't be angry, my good man," said Cornelius, with his good-tempered
smile, "the worst thing for a fracture is excitement, by which the blood
is heated."

Thereupon, he said in an undertone to Rosa--

"My child, I am innocent, and I shall await my trial with tranquillity
and an easy mind."

"Hush," said Rosa.

"Why hush?"

"My father must not suppose that we have been talking to each other."

"What harm would that do?"

"What harm? He would never allow me to come here any more," said Rosa.

Cornelius received this innocent confidence with a smile; he felt as if
a ray of good fortune were shining on his path.

"Now, then, what are you chattering there together about?" said Gryphus,
rising and supporting his right arm with his left.

"Nothing," said Rosa; "the doctor is explaining to me what diet you are
to keep."
