Project Gutenberg's The Masters of the Peaks, by Joseph A. Altsheler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Masters of the Peaks
       A Story of the Great North Woods

Author: Joseph A. Altsheler

Release Date: February 26, 2004 [EBook #11311]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MASTERS OF THE PEAKS ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Nicolas Hayes, Beth Scott and PG Distributed
Proofreaders





The MASTERS of the PEAKS

A STORY OF THE GREAT NORTH WOODS


BY JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER

1918




FOREWORD


"The Masters of the Peaks," while presenting a complete story in
itself is the fourth volume of the French and Indian War Series, of
which the predecessors were "The Hunters of the Hills," "The Shadow
of the North," and "The Rulers of the Lakes." Robert Lennox, Tayoga,
Willet, and all the other important characters of the earlier romances
reappear in the present book.




CHARACTERS IN THE FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR SERIES


ROBERT LENNOX:              A lad of unknown origin

TAYOGA                      A young Onondaga warrior

DAVID WILLET                A hunter

RAYMOND LOUIS DE ST. LUC    A brilliant French officer

AUGUSTE DE COURCELLES       A French officer

FRANCOIS DE JUMONVILLE      A French officer

LOUIS DE GALISSONNIERE      A young French officer

JEAN DE MEZY                A corrupt Frenchman

ARMAND GLANDELET            A young Frenchman

PIERRE BOUCHER              A bully and bravo

PHILIBERT DROUILLARD        A French priest

THE MARQUIS DUQUESNE        Governor-General of Canada

MARQUIS DE VAUDREUIL        Governor-General of Canada

FRANCOIS BIGOT              Intendant of Canada

MARQUIS DE MONTCALM         French commander-in-chief

DE LEVIS                    A French general

BOURLAMAQUE                 A French general

BOUGAINVILLE                A French general

ARMAND DUBOIS               A follower of St. Luc

M. DE CHATILLARD            An old French Seigneur

CHARLES LANGLADE            A French partisan

THE DOVE                    The Indian wife of Langlade

TANDAKORA                   An Ojibway chief

DAGONOWEDA                  A young Mohawk chief

HENDRICK                    An old Mohawk chief

BRADDOCK                    A British general

ABERCROMBIE                 A British general

WOLFE                       A British general

COL. WILLIAM JOHNSON        Anglo-American leader

MOLLY BRANT                 Col. Wm. Johnson's Indian wife

JOSEPH BRANT                Young brother of Molly Brant, afterward
                            the great Mohawk chief, Thayendanegea

ROBERT DINWIDDIE            Lieutenant-Governor of Virginia




CHARACTERS


William Shirley        Governor of Massachusetts

Benjamin Franklin      Famous American patriot

James Colden           A young Philadelphia captain

William Wilton         A young Philadelphia lieutenant

Hugh Carson            A young Philadelphia lieutenant

Jacobus Huysman        An Albany burgher

Caterina               Jacobus Huysman's cook

Alexander McLean       An Albany schoolmaster

Benjamin Hardy         A New York merchant

Johnathan Pillsbury    Clerk to Benjamin Hardy

Adrian Van Zoon        A New York merchant

The Slaver             A nameless rover

Achille Garay          A French spy

Alfred Grosvenor       A young English officer

James Cabell           A young Virginian

Walter Stuart          A young Virginian

Black Rifle            A famous "Indian fighter"

Elihu Strong           A Massachusetts colonel

Alan Hervey            A New York financier

Stuart Whyte           Captain of the British sloop, _Hawk_

John Latham            Lieutenant of the British sloop, _Hawk_

Edward Charteris       A young officer of the Royal Americans

Zebedee Crane          A young scout and forest runner

Robert Rogers          Famous Captain of American Rangers




CONTENTS

CHAPTER


I. IN THE DEEP WOODS

II. ON THE RIDGES

III. THE BRAVE DEFENCE

IV. THE GODS AT PLAY

V. TAMING A SPY

VI. PUPILS OF THE BEAR

VII. THE SLEEPING SENTINELS

VIII. BEFORE MONTCALM

IX. THE SIGN OF THE BEAR

X. THE FLIGHT OF THE TWO

XI. THE MYSTIC VOYAGE

XII. THE MARVELOUS TRAILER

XIII. READING THE SIGNS

XIV. ST. LUC'S REVENGE




CHAPTER I


IN THE DEEP WOODS

A light wind sang through the foliage, turned to varying and vivid
hues now by the touch of autumn, and it had an edge of cold that made
Robert Lennox shiver a little, despite a hardy life in wilderness and
open. But it was only a passing feeling. A moment or two later he
forgot it, and, turning his eyes to the west, watched the vast
terraces of blazing color piled one above another by the sinking sun.

Often as he had seen it the wonderful late glow over the mighty forest
never failed to stir him, and to make his pulse beat a little faster.
His sensitive mind, akin in quality to that of a poet, responded with
eagerness and joy to the beauty and majesty of nature. Forgetting
danger and the great task they had set for themselves, he watched the
banks of color, red and pink, salmon and blue, purple and yellow,
shift and change, while in the very heart of the vast panorama the
huge, red orb, too strong for human sight, glittered and flamed.

The air, instinct with life, intoxicated him and he became rapt as in
a vision. People whom he had met in his few but eventful years passed
before him again in all the seeming of reality, and then his spirit
leaped into the future, dreaming of the great things he would see, and
in which perhaps he would have a share.

Tayoga, the young Onondaga, looked at his comrade and he understood.
The same imaginative thread had been woven into the warp of which
he was made, and his nostrils and lips quivered as he drank in the
splendor of a world that appealed with such peculiar force to him, a
son of the woods.

"The spirit of Areskoui (the Sun God) is upon Dagaeoga, and he has
left us to dwell for a little while upon the seas of color heaped
against the western horizon," he said.

Willet, the hunter, smiled. The two lads were very dear to him. He
knew that they were uncommon types, raised by the gift of God far
above the normal.

"Let him rest there, Tayoga," he said, "while those brilliant banks
last, which won't be long. All things change, and the glorious hues
will soon give way to the dark."

"True, Great Bear, but if the night comes it, in turn, must yield to
the dawn. All things change, as you say, but nothing perishes. The sun
tomorrow will be the same sun that we see today. Black night will not
take a single ray from its glory."

"It's so, Tayoga, but you talk like a book or a prophet. I'm wondering
if our lives are not like the going and coming of the sun. Maybe we
pass on from one to another, forever and forever, without ending."

"Great Bear himself feels the spell of Areskoui also."

"I do, but we'd better stop rhapsodizing and think about our needs.
Here, Robert, wake up and come back to earth! It's no time to sing a
song to the sun with the forest full of our red enemies and the white
too, perhaps."

Robert awoke with a start.

"You dragged me out of a beautiful world," he said.

"A world in which you were the central star," rejoined the hunter.

"So I was, but isn't that the case with all the imaginary worlds a man
creates? He's their sun or he wouldn't create 'em."

"We're getting too deep into the unknown. Plant your feet on the solid
earth, Robert, and let's think about the problems a dark night is
going to bring us in the Indian country, not far south of the St.
Lawrence."

Young Lennox shivered again. The terraces in the west suddenly began
to fade and the wind took on a fresh and sharper edge.

"I know one thing," he said. "I know the night's going to be cold. It
always is in the late autumn, up here among the high hills, and I'd
like to see a fire, before which we could bask and upon which we could
warm our food."

The hunter glanced at the Onondaga.

"That tells the state of my mind, too," he said, "but I doubt whether
it would be safe. If we're to be good scouts, fit to discover the
plans of the French and Indians, we won't get ourselves cut off by
some rash act in the very beginning."

"It may not be a great danger or any at all," said Tayoga. "There is
much rough and rocky ground to our right, cut by deep chasms, and
we might find in there a protected recess in which we could build a
smothered fire."

"You're a friend at the right time, Tayoga," said Robert. "I feel that
I must have warmth. Lead on and find the stony hollow for us."

