Project Gutenberg's The Shades of the Wilderness, by Joseph A. Altsheler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Shades of the Wilderness
       A Story of Lee's Great Stand

Author: Joseph A. Altsheler

Posting Date: August 24, 2014 [EBook #12532]
First Posted: June 5, 2004
Last Updated: January 21, 2011

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHADES OF THE WILDERNESS ***




Produced by Ken Reeder.  HTML version by Al Haines.









THE SHADES OF THE WILDERNESS

A STORY OF LEE'S GREAT STAND

by JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER




FOREWORD


"The Shades of the Wilderness" is the seventh volume of the Civil War
Series, of which the predecessors have been "The Guns of Bull Run,"
"The Guns of Shiloh," "The Scouts of Stonewall," "The Sword of
Antietam", "The Star of Gettysburg" and "The Rock of Chickamauga."  The
romance in this story reverts to the Southern side and deals with the
fortunes of Harry Kenton and his friends.  It takes them on the retreat
from Gettysburg, gives the hero a short period of social life in
Richmond, describes the great battles of the Wilderness and
Spottsylvania, and ends with the deadlock in the trenches before
Petersburg.




THE CIVIL WAR SERIES


 VOLUMES IN THE CIVIL WAR SERIES

  THE GUNS OF BULL RUN.
  THE GUNS OF SHILOH.
  THE SCOUTS OF STONEWALL.
  THE SWORD OF ANTIETAM.
  THE STAR OF GETTYSBURG.
  THE ROCK OF CHICKAMAUGA.
  THE SHADES OF THE WILDERNESS.
  THE TREE OF APPOMATTOX.


 PRINCIPAL CHARACTERS IN THE CIVIL WAR SERIES

  HARRY KENTON, A Lad Who Fights on the Southern Side.
  DICK MASON, Cousin of Harry Kenton, Who Fights on the Northern Side.
  COLONEL GEORGE KENTON, Father of Harry Kenton.
  MRS. MASON, Mother of Dick Mason.
  JULIANA, Mrs. Mason's Devoted Colored Servant.
  COLONEL ARTHUR WINCHESTER, Dick Mason's Regimental Commander.
  COLONEL LEONIDAS TALBOT, Commander of the Invincibles,
   a Southern Regiment.
  LIEUTENANT COLONEL HECTOR ST. HILAIRE, Second in Command of the
   Invincibles.
  ALAN HERTFORD, A Northern Cavalry Leader.
  PHILIP SHERBURNE, A Southern Cavalry Leader.
  WILLIAM J. SHEPARD, A Northern Spy.
  DANIEL WHITLEY, A Northern Sergeant and Veteran of the Plains.
  GEORGE WARNER, A Vermont Youth Who Loves Mathematics.
  FRANK PENNINGTON, A Nebraska Youth, Friend of Dick Mason.
  ARTHUR ST. CLAIR, A Native of Charleston, Friend of Harry Kenton.
  TOM LANGDON, Friend of Harry Kenton.
  GEORGE DALTON, Friend of Harry Kenton.
  BILL SKELLY, Mountaineer and Guerrilla.
  TOM SLADE, A Guerrilla Chief.
  SAM JARVIS, The Singing Mountaineer.
  IKE SIMMONS, Jarvis' Nephew.
  AUNT "SUSE," A Centenarian and Prophetess.
  BILL PETTY, A Mountaineer and Guide.
  JULIEN DE LANGEAIS, A Musician and Soldier from Louisiana.
  JOHN CARRINGTON, Famous Northern Artillery Officer.
  DR. RUSSELL, Principal of the Pendleton School.
  ARTHUR TRAVERS, A Lawyer.
  JAMES BERTRAND, A Messenger from the South.
  JOHN NEWCOMB, A Pennsylvania Colonel.
  JOHN MARKHAM, A Northern Officer.
  JOHN WATSON, A Northern Contractor.
  WILLIAM CURTIS, A Southern Merchant and Blockade Runner.
  MRS. CURTIS, Wife of William Curtis.
  HENRIETTA CARDEN, A Seamstress in Richmond.
  DICK JONES, A North Carolina Mountaineer.
  VICTOR WOODVILLE, A Young Mississippi Officer.
  JOHN WOODVILLE, Father of Victor Woodville.
  CHARLES WOODVILLE, Uncle of Victor Woodville.
  COLONEL BEDFORD, A Northern Officer.
  CHARLES GORDON, A Southern Staff Officer.
  JOHN LANHAM, An Editor.
  JUDGE KENDRICK, A Lawyer.
  MR. CULVER, A State Senator.
  MR. BRACKEN, A Tobacco Grower.
  ARTHUR WHITRIDGE, A State Senator.


 HISTORICAL CHARACTERS

  ABRAHAM LINCOLN, President of the United States.
  JEFFERSON DAVIS, President of the Southern Confederacy.
  JUDAH P. BENJAMIN, Member of the Confederate Cabinet.
  U. S. GRANT, Northern Commander.
  ROBERT E. LEE, Southern Commander.
  STONEWALL JACKSON, Southern General.
  PHILIP H. SHERIDAN, Northern General.
  GEORGE H. THOMAS, "The Rock of Chickamauga."
  ALBERT SIDNEY JOHNSTON, Southern General.
  A. P. HILL, Southern General.
  W. S. HANCOCK, Northern General.
  GEORGE B. McCLELLAN, Northern General.
  AMBROSE E. BURNSIDE, Northern General.
  TURNER ASHBY, Southern Cavalry Leader.
  J. E. B. STUART, Southern Cavalry Leader.
  JOSEPH HOOKER, Northern General.
  RICHARD S. EWELL, Southern General.
  JUBAL EARLY, Southern General.
  WILLIAM S. ROSECRANS, Northern General.
  SIMON BOLIVAR BUCKNER, Southern General.
  LEONIDAS POLK, Southern General and Bishop.
  BRAXTON BRAGG, Southern General.
  NATHAN BEDFORD FORREST, Southern Cavalry Leader.
  JOHN MORGAN, Southern Cavalry Leader.
  GEORGE J. MEADE, Northern General.
  DON CARLOS BUELL, Northern General.
  W. T. SHERMAN, Northern General.
  JAMES LONGSTREET, Southern General.
  P. G. T. BEAUREGARD, Southern General.
  WILLIAM L. YANCEY, Alabama Orator.
  JAMES A. GARFIELD, Northern General, afterwards President of
   the United States.

  And many others


 IMPORTANT BATTLES DESCRIBED IN THE CIVIL WAR SERIES

  BULL RUN
  KERNSTOWN
  CROSS KEYS
  WINCHESTER
  PORT REPUBLIC
  THE SEVEN DAYS
  MILL SPRING
  FORT DONELSON
  SHILOH
  PERRYVILLE
  STONE RIVER
  THE SECOND MANASSAS
  ANTIETAM
  FREDERICKSBURG
  CHANCELLORSVILLE
  GETTYSBURG
  CHAMPION HILL
  VICKSBURG
  CHICKAMAUGA
  MISSIONARY RIDGE
  THE WILDERNESS
  SPOTTSYLVANIA
  COLD HARBOR
  FISHER'S HILL
  CEDAR CREEK
  APPOMATTOX



CONTENTS

    I.  THE SOUTHERN RETREAT

   II.  THE NORTHERN SPY

  III.  THE FLOODED RIVER

   IV.  A HERALD TO LEE

    V.  THE DANGEROUS ROAD

   VI.  TESTS OF COURAGE

  VII.  IN THE WAGON

 VIII.  THE CROSSING

   IX.  IN SOCIETY

    X.  THE MISSING PAPER

   XI.  A VAIN PURSUIT

  XII.  IN WINTER QUARTERS

 XIII.  THE COMING OF GRANT

  XIV.  THE GHOSTLY RIDE

   XV.  THE WILDERNESS

  XVI.  SPOTTSYLVANIA




THE SHADES OF THE WILDERNESS




CHAPTER I

THE SOUTHERN RETREAT


A train of wagons and men wound slowly over the hills in the darkness
and rain toward the South.  In the wagons lay fourteen or fifteen
thousand wounded soldiers, but they made little noise, as the wheels
sank suddenly in the mud or bumped over stones.  Although the vast
majority of them were young, boys or not much more, they had learned to
be masters of themselves, and they suffered in silence, save when some
one, lost in fever, uttered a groan.

But the chief sound was a blended note made by the turning of wheels,
and the hoofs of horses sinking in the soft earth.  The officers gave
but few orders, and the cavalrymen who rode on either flank looked
solicitously into the wagons now and then to see how their wounded
friends fared, though they seldom spoke.  The darkness they did not
mind, because they were used to it, and the rain and the coolness were
a relief, after three days of the fiercest battle the American
continent had ever known, fought in the hottest days that the troops
could recall.

Thus Lee's army drew its long length from the fatal field of
Gettysburg, although his valiant brigades did not yet know that the
clump of trees upon Cemetery Hill had marked the high tide of the
Confederacy.  All that memorable Fourth of July, following the close of
the battle they had lain, facing Meade and challenging him to come on,
confident that while the invasion of the North was over they could beat
back once more the invasion of the South.

They had no word of complaint against their great commander, Lee. The
faith in him, which was so high, remained unbroken, as it was destined
to remain so to the last.  But men began to whisper to one another, and
say if only Jackson had been there.  They mourned anew that terrible
evening in the Wilderness when Lee had lost his mighty lieutenant, his
striking arm, the invincible Stonewall.  If the man in the old slouch
hat had only been with Lee on Seminary Ridge it would now be the army
of Meade retreating farther into the North, and they would be pursuing.
That belief was destined to sink deep in the soul of the South, and
remain there long after the Confederacy was but a name.

The same thought was often in the mind of Harry Kenton, as he rode near
the rear of the column, whence he had been sent by Lee to observe and
then to report.  It was far after midnight now, and the last of the
Southern army could not leave Seminary Ridge before morning.  But Harry
could detect no sign of pursuit.  Now and then, a distant gun boomed,
and the thunder muttered on the horizon, as if in answer.  But there
was nothing to indicate that the Army of the Potomac was moving from
Gettysburg in pursuit, although the President in Washington, his heart
filled with bitterness, was vainly asking why his army would not reap
the fruits of a victory won so hardly.  Fifty thousand men had fallen
on the hills and in the valleys about Gettysburg, and it seemed, for
the time, that nothing would come of such a slaughter.  But the
Northern army had suffered immense losses, and Lee and his men were
ready to fight again if attacked.  Perhaps it was wiser to remain
content upon the field with their sanguinary success.  At least, Meade
and his generals thought so.

Harry, toward morning came upon St. Clair and Langdon riding together.
Both had been wounded slightly, but their hurts had not kept them from
the saddle, and they were in cheerful mood.

"You've been further back than we, Harry," said St. Clair.  "Is Meade
hot upon our track?  We hear the throb of a cannon now and then."

"It doesn't mean anything.  Meade hasn't moved.  While we didn't win we
struck the Yankees such a mighty blow that they'll have to rest, and
breathe a while before they follow."

"And I guess we need a little resting and breathing ourselves," said
Langdon frankly.  "There were times when I thought the whole world had
just turned itself into a volcano of fire."

"But we'll come back again," said St. Clair.  "We'll make these
Pennsylvania Dutchmen take notice of us a second time."

"That's the right spirit," said Langdon.  "Arthur had nearly all of his
fine uniform shot off him, but he's managed to fasten the pieces
together, and ride on, just as if it were brand new."

But Harry was silent.  The prescient spirit of his famous great
grandfather, Henry Ware, had descended upon his valiant great grandson.
Hope had not gone from him, but it did not enter his mind that they
should invade Pennsylvania again.

"I'm glad to leave Gettysburg," he said.  "More good men of ours have
fallen there than anywhere else."

"That's true," said St. Clair, "but Marse Bob will win for us, anyhow.
You don't think any of these Union generals here in the East can whip
our Lee, do you?"

"Of course not!" said Happy Tom.  "Besides, Lee has me to help him."

"How are Colonel Talbot and Lieutenant-Colonel St. Hilaire?" asked
Harry.

"Sound asleep, both of 'em," replied St. Clair.  "And it's a strange
thing, too.  They were sitting in a wagon, having resumed that game of
chess which they began in the Valley of Virginia, but they were so
exhausted that both fell sound asleep while playing.  They are sitting
upright, as they sleep, and Lieutenant-Colonel St. Hilaire's thumb and
forefinger rest upon a white pawn that he intended to move."

"I hope they won't be jarred out of their rest and that they'll sleep
on," said Harry.  "Nobody deserves it more."

He waved a hand to his friends and continued his ride toward the rear.
The column passed slowly on in silence.  Now and then gusts of rain
lashed across his face, but he liked the feeling.  It was a fillip to
his blood, and his nerves began to recover from the tremendous strain
and excitement of the last four days.

Obeying his orders he rode almost directly back toward the field of
Gettysburg from which the Southern forces were still marching.  A
friendly voice from a little wood hailed him, and he recognized it at
once as that of Sherburne, who sat his horse alone among the trees.

"Come here, Harry," he said.

