The Project Gutenberg EBook of Happy Jack, by Thornton Burgess

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Happy Jack

Author: Thornton Burgess

Release Date: September 2, 2004 [EBook #13355]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAPPY JACK ***




Produced by Stephen Schulze and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.







HAPPY JACK

BY

THORNTON W. BURGESS

_With Illustrations by HARRISON CADY_

This book, while produced under wartime conditions, in full compliance
with government regulations for the conservation of paper and other
essential materials, is COMPLETE AND UNABRIDGED.



_1918,_




TO

DR. WILLIAM T. HORNADAY

TO WHOM POSTERITY WILL OWE A DEBT OF GRATITUDE FOR HIS VALIANT FIGHT TO
PRESERVE AMERICAN WILD LIFE, WHO HAS BEEN A LIFELONG CHAMPION OF HAPPY
JACK SQUIRREL, AND TO WHOM THE AUTHOR IS DEEPLY INDEBTED FOR
ENCOURAGEMENT AND ASSISTANCE THIS BOOK IS GRATEFULLY DEDICATED




CONTENTS


       I. HAPPY JACK DROPS A NUT

      II. THE QUARREL

     III. STRIPED CHIPMUNK Is KEPT VERY BUSY

      IV. HAPPY JACK AND CHATTERER FEEL FOOLISH

       V. HAPPY JACK SUSPECTS STRIPED CHIPMUNK

      VI. HAPPY JACK SPIES ON STRIPED CHIPMUNK

     VII. STRIPED CHIPMUNK HAS FUN WITH HAPPY JACK

    VIII. HAPPY JACK TURNS BURGLAR

      IX. HAPPY JACK SQUIRREL'S SAD MISTAKE

       X. STRIPED CHIPMUNK'S HAPPY THOUGHT

      XI. STRIPED CHIPMUNK'S THANKSGIVING DINNER

     XII. HAPPY JACK DOES SOME THINKING

    XIII. HAPPY JACK GETS A WARNING

     XIV. HAPPY JACK'S RUN FOR LIFE

      XV. WHO SAVED HAPPY JACK SQUIRREL?

     XVI. HAPPY JACK MISSES FARMER BROWN'S BOY

    XVII. TOMMY TIT BRINGS NEWS

   XVIII. HAPPY JACK DECIDES TO MAKE A CALL

     XIX. TOMMY TIT AND HAPPY JACK PAY A VISIT

      XX. WHAT WAS THE MATTER WITH FARMER BROWN'S BOY?

     XXI. HAPPY JACK SQUIRREL GROWS VERY BOLD

    XXII. HAPPY JACK DARES TOMMY TIT

   XXIII. SAMMY JAY IS QUITE UPSET

    XXIV. A DREAM COMES TRUE

     XXV. HAPPY JACK HAS A HAPPY THOUGHT

    XXVI. FARMER BROWN'S BOY WAKES WITH A START

   XXVII. HAPPY JACK IS AFRAID TO GO HOME

  XXVIII. HAPPY JACK FINDS A NEW HOME

    XXIX. FARMER BROWN'S BOY TAKES A PRISONER

     XXX. A PRISONER WITHOUT FEAR

    XXXI. WHAT FARMER BROWN'S BOY DID WITH SHADOW

   XXXII. HAPPY JACK IS PERFECTLY HAPPY

  XXXIII. SAMMY JAY UPSETS HAPPY JACK




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Peter Rabbit, who happened along just then, put his hands over his ears

Happy Jack tried every trick he knew to get away from Shadow the Weasel

"Did you find out anything?" asked Happy Jack eagerly

It wasn't long before Shadow began to receive many visitors




HAPPY JACK




CHAPTER I

HAPPY JACK DROPS A NUT

    Save a little every day,
    And for the future put away.

    _Happy Jack._


Happy Jack Squirrel sat on the tip of one of the highest branches of a
big hickory tree. Happy Jack was up very early that morning. In fact,
jolly, round, red Mr. Sun was still in his bed behind the Purple Hills
when Happy Jack hopped briskly out of bed. He washed himself thoroughly
and was ready for business by the time Mr. Sun began his climb up in
the blue, blue sky.

You see, Happy Jack had found that big hickory tree just loaded with
nuts all ripe and ready to gather. He was quite sure that no one else
had found that special tree, and he wanted to get all the nuts before
any one else found out about them. So he was all ready and off he raced
to the big tree just as soon as it was light enough to see.

    "The nuts that grow in the hickory tree--
    They're all for me! They're all for me!"

Happy Jack was humming that little song as he rested for a few minutes
'way up in the top of the tree and wondered if his storehouse would hold
all these big, fat nuts. Just then he heard a great scolding a little
way over in the Green Forest. Happy Jack stopped humming and listened.
He knew that voice. It was his cousin's voice--the voice of Chatterer
the Red Squirrel. Happy Jack frowned. "I hope he won't come over this
way," muttered Happy Jack. He does not love his cousin Chatterer anyway,
and then there was the big tree full of hickory nuts! He didn't want
Chatterer to find that.

I am afraid that Happy Jack was selfish. There were more nuts than he
could possibly eat in one winter, and yet he wasn't willing that his
cousin, Chatterer the Red Squirrel, should have a single one. Now
Chatterer is short-tempered and a great scold. Some one or something
had upset him this morning, and he was scolding as fast as his tongue
could go, as he came running right towards the tree in which Happy Jack
was sitting. Happy Jack sat perfectly still and watched. He didn't move
so much as the tip of his big gray tail. Would Chatterer go past and not
see that big tree full of nuts? It looked very much as if he would, for
he was so busy scolding that he wasn't paying much attention to other
things.

Happy Jack smiled as Chatterer came running under the tree without once
looking up. He was so tickled that he started to hug himself and didn't
remember that he was holding a big, fat nut in his hands. Of course he
dropped it. Where do you think it went? Well, Sir, it fell straight
down, from the top of that tall tree, and it landed right on the head of
Chatterer the Red Squirrel!

"My stars!" cried Chatterer, stopping his scolding and his running
together, and rubbing his head where the nut had hit him. Then he looked
up to see where it had come from. Of course, he looked straight up at
Happy Jack.

"You did that purposely!" screamed Chatterer, his short temper flaring
up.

"I didn't!" snapped Happy Jack.

"You did!"

"I didn't!"

Oh, dear, oh, dear, such a sight! two little Squirrels, one in a gray
suit and one in a red suit, contradicting each other and calling names!
It was such a sad, sad sight, for you know they were cousins.




CHAPTER II

THE QUARREL

    It's up to you and up to me
    To see how thrifty we can be.
    To do our bit like soldiers true
    It's up to me and up to you.

    _Happy Jack._


Two angry little people were making a dreadful noise in the Green
Forest. It was a beautiful morning, a very beautiful fall morning, but
all the beauty of it was being spoiled by the dreadful noise these two
little people. You see they were quarreling. Yes, Sir, they were
quarreling, and it wasn't at all nice to see or nice to hear.

You know who they were. One was Happy Jack Squirrel, who wears a coat
of gray, and the other was Chatterer the Red Squirrel, who always wears
a red coat with vest of white. When Happy Jack had dropped that nut from
the tiptop of the tall hickory tree and it had landed right on top of
Chatterer's head it really had been an accident. All the time Happy Jack
had been sitting as still as still could be, hoping that his cousin
Chatterer would pass by without looking up and so seeing the big fat
nuts in the top of that tree. You see Happy Jack was greedy and wanted
all of them himself. Now Chatterer the Red Squirrel has a sharp temper,
and also he has sharp eyes. All the time he was scolding Happy Jack and
calling him names Chatterer's bright eyes were taking note of all those
big, fat hickory-nuts and his mouth began to water. Without wasting any
more time he started up the tree to get some.

Happy Jack grew very angry, very angry indeed. He hurried down to meet
Chatterer the Red Squirrel and to prevent him climbing the tree.

"You keep out of this tree; it's mine!" he shrieked.

"No such thing! You don't own the tree and I've got just as much right
here as you have!" screamed Chatterer, dodging around to the other side
of the tree.

"'Tis, too, mine! I found it first!" shouted Happy Jack. "You're a
thief, so there!"

"I'm not!"

"You are!"

"You're a pig, Happy Jack! You're just a great big pig!"

"I'm not a pig! I found these nuts first and I tell you they're mine!"
shrieked Happy Jack, so angry that every time he spoke he jerked his
tail. And all the time he was chasing round and round the trunk of the
tree trying to prevent Chatterer getting up.

Now Happy Jack is ever so much bigger than his cousin Chatterer but he
isn't as spry. So in spite of him Chatterer got past, and like a little
red flash was up in the top of the tree where the big, fat nuts were.
But he didn't have time to pick even one, for after him came Happy Jack
so angry that Chatterer knew that he would fare badly if Happy Jack
should catch him. Round and round, over and across, this way and that
way, in the top of the tall hickory tree raced Chatterer the Red
Squirrel with his cousin, Happy Jack the Gray Squirrel, right at his
heels, and calling him everything bad to be thought of. Yes, indeed it
was truly dreadful, and Peter Rabbit, who happened along just then, put
his hands over his ears so as not to hear such a dreadful quarrel.

[Illustration: PETER RABBIT, WHO HAPPENED ALONG JUST THEN, PUT HIS HANDS
OVER HIS EARS.]




CHAPTER III

STRIPED CHIPMUNK IS KEPT VERY BUSY
