The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Adventures of Unc' Billy Possum, by
Thornton W. Burgess, Illustrated by Harrison Cady


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Adventures of Unc' Billy Possum

Author: Thornton W. Burgess

Release Date: January 19, 2005  [eBook #14732]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF UNC' BILLY
POSSUM***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Richard J. Shiffer, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 14732-h.htm or 14732-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/7/3/14732/14732-h/14732-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/4/7/3/14732/14732-h.zip)





The Bedtime Story-Books

THE ADVENTURES OF UNC' BILLY POSSUM

by

THORNTON W. BURGESS

Author of _The Adventures of Peter Cottontail_, _Old Mother West Wind_,
etc.

With Illustrations by HARRISON CADY

Boston
Little, Brown, and Company

1920







[Illustration: Reddy Fox sprang up as if some one had stuck a pin into
him. FRONTISPIECE.]




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER

      I. UNC' BILLY POSSUM IS CAUGHT
     II. REDDY FOX THINKS HE SEES A GHOST
    III. UNC' BILLY POSSUM SENDS FOR HIS FAMILY
     IV. BOBBY COON ENTERS THE WRONG HOUSE
      V. BOBBY COON IS WAKED UP
     VI. SAMMY JAY LEARNS PETER RABBIT'S SECRET
    VII. FOUR LITTLE SCAMPS PLAN MISCHIEF
   VIII. PETER RABBIT SENDS OUT WORD
     IX. MR. TOAD AND PRICKLY PORKY PUT THEIR HEADS TOGETHER
      X. THE RUNAWAY CABBAGE
     XI. REDDY FOX GOES HUNGRY
    XII. PRICKLY PORKY MAKES HIMSELF AT HOME
   XIII. UNC' BILLY POSSUM GROWS HUNGRY
    XIV. OLD MRS. POSSUM GROWS WORRIED
     XV. THE FOOLISHNESS OF UNC' BILLY POSSUM
    XVI. WHY UNC' BILLY POSSUM DIDN'T GO HOME
   XVII. UNC' BILLY POSSUM LIES LOW
  XVIII. UNC' BILLY POSSUM IS A PRISONER
    XIX. WHAT THE SNOW DID
     XX. UNC' BILLY POSSUM WISHES HE HAD SNOWSHOES
    XXI. FARMER BROWN'S BOY CHOPS DOWN A TREE
   XXII. WHERE UNC' BILLY POSSUM WAS
  XXIII. HAPPY JACK SQUIRREL MAKES AN UNEXPECTED CALL
   XXIV. HAPPY JACK SQUIRREL HELPS UNC' BILLY POSSUM
    XXV. HAPPY JACK SQUIRREL'S BRIGHT IDEA




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  REDDY FOX SPRANG UP AS IF SOME ONE HAD STUCK A PIN INTO HIM

  MY! MY! MY! SUCH A RUMPUS AS THERE WAS RIGHT AWAY IN THAT
      HOLLOW TREE!

  "WHAT DO YOU MEAN?" EXCLAIMED THE OTHERS ALL TOGETHER

  HE JUST ATE AND ATE AND ATE UNTIL HE COULDN'T EAT ANOTHER ONE

  THERE ALL THE WAY FROM FARMER BROWN'S HEN-HOUSE, WAS A BROAD TRAIL
      IN THE SMOOTH WHITE SNOW

  "YO' TELL UNC' BILLY POSSUM THAT AH DON' CARE IF HE NEVER COMES BACK"





I

UNC' BILLY POSSUM IS CAUGHT


The Green Meadows were thrown into great excitement late one
afternoon, just as the black shadows came creeping down from the
Purple Hills. Reddy Fox brought the news, and when he told it he
grinned as if he enjoyed it and was glad of it.

"Old Billy Possum is dead. I know it because I saw Farmer Brown's boy
carrying him home by the tail," said Reddy. "So you see he wasn't so
smart as you thought he was," he added maliciously.

No one really believed Reddy Fox, for every one knows that he seldom
tells the truth, but when Jimmy Skunk came mournfully down the Crooked
Little Path and said that it was true, they had to believe it. Then
everybody began to talk about Unc' Billy and say nice things about him
and tell how much they had enjoyed having him live in the Green Forest
since he came up from "Ol' Virginny." That is, everybody but Reddy Fox
said so. Reddy said that it served Unc' Billy right, because he was of
no account, anyway. Then everybody began to hoot and hiss at Reddy
until he was glad enough to slink away.

And while they were all saying such nice things about him, Unc' Billy
Possum was having an exciting adventure. For once he had been too
bold. He had gone up to Farmer Brown's hen-house before dark. Jimmy
Skunk had tried to stop him, but he had heeded Jimmy Skunk not at
all. He had said that he was hungry and wanted an egg, and he couldn't
wait till dark to get it. So off he had started, for Unc' Billy Possum
is very headstrong and obstinate.

He had reached the hen-house and slipped inside without being seen.
The nests were full of eggs, and soon Unc' Billy was enjoying his
feast so that he forgot to keep watch. Suddenly the door opened, and
in stepped Farmer Brown's boy to get some eggs for supper. There was
no time to run. Unc' Billy just dropped right down in his tracks as if
he were dead.

When Farmer Brown's boy saw him, he didn't know what to make of him,
for he had never seen Unc' Billy before.

"Well, well, I wonder what happened to this fellow," said Farmer
Brown's boy, turning Unc' Billy over with the toe of one foot. "He
certainly is dead enough, whatever killed him. I wonder what he was
doing in here."

Then he saw some egg on Unc' Billy's lips. "Ho! ho!" shouted Farmer
Brown's boy. "So you are the thief who has been getting my eggs!" And
picking up Unc' Billy by the tail, he started with him for the house.

As they passed the woodpile, he tossed Unc' Billy on the
chopping-block while he gathered an armful of kindlings to take to the
house. When he turned to pick up Unc' Billy again, Unc' Billy wasn't
there.

Farmer Brown's boy dropped his wood and hunted everywhere, but not a
trace of Unc' Billy could he find.




II

REDDY FOX THINKS HE SEES A GHOST


Reddy Fox came down the Lone Little Path through the Green Forest on
his way to the Green Meadows. He had brushed his red coat until it
shone. His white waistcoat was spotless, and he carried his big tail
high in the air, that it might not become soiled. Reddy was feeling as
fine as he looked. He would have liked to sing, but every time he
tried his voice cracked, and he was afraid that some one would hear
him and laugh at him. If there is one thing that Reddy Fox dislikes
more than another, it is being laughed at.

Reddy chuckled at his thoughts, and what do you think he was thinking
about? Why, about how he had seen Farmer Brown's boy carrying off
Unc' Billy Possum by the tail the afternoon before. He knew how Farmer
Brown's boy had caught Unc' Billy in the hen-house, and with his own
eyes he had seen Unc' Billy carried off. Of course Unc' Billy was
dead. There could be no doubt about it. And Reddy was glad of it. Yes,
Sir, Reddy was glad of it. Unc' Billy Possum had made altogether too
many friends in the Green Forest and on the Green Meadows, and he had
made Reddy the laughing-stock of them all by the way he had dared
Reddy to meet Bowser the Hound, and actually had waited for Bowser
while Reddy ran away.

Reddy remembered that Unc' Billy's hollow tree was not far away. He
would go over that way, just to have another look at it. So over he
went. There stood the old hollow tree, and half way up was the door
out of which Unc' Billy used to look down on him and grin. It was
Reddy's turn to grin now. Presently he sat down with his back against
the foot of the tree, crossed his legs, looked this way and that way
to make sure that no one was about, and then in a dreadfully cracked
voice he began to sing:

   "Ol' Bill Possum, he's gone before!
    Ol' Bill Possum, he is no more!
