The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Hunters of the Hills, by Joseph Altsheler


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Hunters of the Hills

Author: Joseph Altsheler

Release Date: February 3, 2005  [eBook #14890]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUNTERS OF THE HILLS***


E-text prepared by Suzanne Shell, Graeme Mackreth, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



THE HUNTERS OF THE HILLS

A Story of the Great French and Indian War

by

JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER

Author of _The Tree Of Appomattox_, _The Keepers Of The Trail_, _The
Forest Of Swords_, etc.

Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc.
New York

1916







FOREWORD


"The Hunters of the Hills" is the first volume of a series dealing with
the great struggle of France and England and their colonies for dominion
in North America, culminating with the fall of Quebec. It is also
concerned to a large extent with the Iroquois, the mighty league known
in their own language as the Hodenosaunee, for the favor of which both
French and English were high bidders. In his treatment of the theme the
author has consulted many authorities, and he is not conscious of any
historical error.




CHARACTERS IN THE FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR SERIES

   ROBERT LENNOX                 A lad of unknown origin
   TAYOGA                        A young Onondaga warrior
   DAVID WILLET                  A hunter
   RAYMOND LOUIS DE ST. LUC      A brilliant French officer
   AGUSTE DE COURCELLES          A French officer
   FRANCOIS DE JUMONVILLE        A French officer
   LOUIS DE GALISONNIERE         A young French officer
   JEAN DE MEZY                  A corrupt Frenchman
   ARMAND GLANDELET              A young Frenchman
   PIERRE BOUCHER                A bully and bravo
   PHILIBERT DROUILLARD          A French priest
   THE MARQUIS DUQUESNE          Governor-General of Canada
   MARQUIS DE VAUDREUIL          Governor-General of Canada
   FRANCOIS BIGOT                Intendant of Canada
   MARQUIS DE MONTCALM           French commander-in-chief
   DE LEVIS                      A French general
   BOURLAMAQUE                   A French general
   BOUGAINVILLE                  A French general
   ARMAND DUBOIS                 A follower of St. Luc
   M. DE CHATILLARD              An old French Seigneur
   CHARLES LANGLADE              A French partisan
   THE DOVE                      The Indian wife of Langlade
   TANDAKORA                     An Ojibway chief
   DAGANOWEDA                    A young Mohawk chief
   HENDRICK                      An old Mohawk chief
   BRADDOCK                      A British general
   ABERCROMBIE                   A British general
   WOLFE                         A British general
   COL. WILLIAM JOHNSON          Anglo-American leader
   MOLLY BRANT                   Col. Wm. Johnson's Indian wife
   JOSEPH BRANT                  Young brother of Molly Brant,
                                   afterward the great Mohawk
                                   chief, Thayendanegea
   ROBERT DINWIDDIE              Lieutenant-Governor of Virginia
   WILLIAM SHIRLEY               Governor of Massachusetts
   BENJAMIN FRANKLIN             Famous American patriot
   JAMES COLDEN                  A young Philadelphia captain
   WILLIAM WILTON                A young Philadelphia lieutenant
   HUGH CARSON                   A young Philadelphia lieutenant
   JACOBUS HUYSMAN               An Albany burgher
   CATERINA                      Jacobus Huysman's cook
   ALEXANDER MCLEAN              An Albany schoolmaster
   BENJAMIN HARDY                A New York merchant
   JOHNATHAN PILLSBURY           Clerk to Benjamin Hardy
   ADRIAN VAN ZOON               A New York merchant
   THE SLAVER                    A nameless rover
   ACHILLE GARAY                 A French spy
   ALFRED GROSVENOR              A young English officer
   JAMES CABELL                  A young Virginian
   WALTER STUART                 A young Virginian
   BLACK RIFLE                   A famous "Indian fighter"
   ELIHU STRONG                  A Massachusetts colonel
   ALAN HERVEY                   A New York financier
   STUART WHYTE                  Captain of the British sloop, _Hawk_
   JOHN LATHAM                   Lieutenant of the British sloop, _Hawk_
   EDWARD CHARTERIS              A young officer of the Royal Americans
   ZEBEDEE CRANE                 A young scout and forest runner
   ROBERT ROGERS                 Famous Captain of American Rangers




CONTENTS


   CHAPTER

      I. THE THREE FRIENDS

     II. ST. LUC

    III. THE TOMAHAWK

     IV. THE INTELLIGENT CANOE

      V. THE MOHAWK CHIEF

     VI. THE TWO FRENCHMEN

    VII. NEW FRANCE

   VIII. GUESTS OF THE ENEMY

     IX. AT THE INN

      X. THE MEETING

     XI. BIGOT'S BALL

    XII. THE HUNTER AND THE BRAVO

   XIII. THE BOWMEN

    XIV. ON CHAMPLAIN

     XV. THE VALE OF ONONDAGA

    XVI. THE GREAT TEST




CHAPTER I

THE THREE FRIENDS


A canoe containing two boys and a man was moving slowly on one of the
little lakes in the great northern wilderness of what is now the State
of New York. The water, a brilliant blue under skies of the same intense
sapphire tint, rippled away gently on either side of the prow, or rose
in heaps of glittering bubbles, as the paddles were lifted for a new
stroke.

Vast masses of dense foliage in the tender green of early spring crowned
the high banks of the lake on every side. The eye found no break
anywhere. Only the pink or delicate red of a wild flower just bursting
into bloom varied the solid expanse of emerald walls; and save for the
canoe and a bird of prey, darting in a streak of silver for a fish, the
surface of the water was lone and silent.

The three who used the paddles were individual and unlike, none of them
bearing any resemblance to the other two. The man sat in the stern. He
was of middle years, built very powerfully and with muscles and sinews
developed to an amazing degree. His face, in childhood quite fair, had
been burned almost as brown as that of an Indian by long exposure. He
was clothed wholly in tanned deerskin adorned with many little colored
beads. A hatchet and knife were in the broad belt at his waist, and a
long rifle lay at his feet.

His face was fine and open and he would have been noticed anywhere. But
the eyes of the curious would surely have rested first upon the two
youths with him.

One was back of the canoe's center on the right side and the other was
forward on the left. The weight of the three occupants was balanced so
nicely that their delicate craft floated on a perfectly even keel. The
lad near the prow was an Indian of a nobler type than is often seen in
these later days, when he has been deprived of the native surroundings
that fit him like the setting of a gem.

The Indian, although several years short of full manhood, was tall, with
limbs slender as was usual in his kind; but his shoulders were broad and
his chest wide and deep. His color was a light copper, the tint verging
toward red, and his face was illumined wonderfully by black eyes that
often flashed with a lofty look of courage and pride.

The young warrior, Tayoga, a coming chief of the clan of the Bear, of
the nation Onondaga, of the League of the Hodenosaunee, known to white
men as the Iroquois, was in all the wild splendor of full forest
attire. His headdress, _gustoweh_, was the product of long and careful
labor. It was a splint arch, curving over the head, and crossed by
another arch from side to side, the whole inclosed by a cap of fine
network, fastened with a silver band. From the crest, like the plume of
a Roman knight, a cluster of pure white feathers hung, and on the side
of it a white feather of uncommon size projected upward and backward,
the end of the feather set in a little tube which revolved with the
wind, the whole imparting a further air of distinction to his strong and
haughty countenance.

The upper part of his body was clothed in the garment called by the
Hodenosaunee _gakaah_, a long tunic of deerskin tanned beautifully,
descending to the knees, belted at the waist, and decorated elaborately
with the quills of the porcupine, stained red, yellow and blue and
varied with the natural white.

His leggings, called in his own language _giseha_, were fastened by
bands above the knees, and met his moccasins. They too were of deerskin
tanned with the same skill, and along the seams and around the bottom,
were adorned with the quills of the porcupine and rows of small, colored
beads. The moccasins, _ahtaquaoweh_, of deerskin, were also decorated
with quills and beads, but the broad belt, _gagehta_, holding in his
tunic at the waist, was of rich blue velvet, heavy with bead work. The
knife at his belt had a silver hilt, and the rifle in the bottom of the
canoe was silver-mounted. Nowhere in the world could one have found a
young forest warrior more splendid in figure, manner and dress.

The white youth was the equal in age and height of his red comrade, but
was built a little more heavily. His face, tanned red instead of brown,
was of the blonde type and bore an aspect of refinement unusual in the
woods. The blue eyes were thoughtful and the chin, curving rather
delicately, indicated gentleness and a sense of humor, allied with
firmness of purpose and great courage. His dress was similar in fashion
to that of the older man, but was finer in quality. He was armed like
the others.

"I suppose we're the only people on the lake," said the hunter and
scout, David Willet, "and I'm glad of it, lads. It's not a time, just
when the spring has come and the woods are so fine, to be shot at by
Huron warriors and their like down from Canada."

"I don't want 'em to send their bullets at me in the spring or any other
time," said the white lad, Robert Lennox. "Hurons are not good marksmen,
but if they kept on firing they'd be likely to hit at last. I don't
think, though, that we'll find any of 'em here. What do you say,
Tayoga?"

The Indian youth flashed a swift look along the green wall of forest,
and replied in pure Onondaga, which both Lennox and Willet understood:

"I think they do not come. Nothing stirs in the woods on the high banks.
Yet Onontio (the Governor General of Canada) would send the Hurons and
the other nations allied with the French against the people of Corlear
(the Governor of the Province of New York). But they fear the
Hodenosaunee."

"Well they may!" said Willet. "The Iroquois have stopped many a foray
of the French. More than one little settlement has thriven in the shade
of the Long House."

The young warrior smiled and lifted his head a little. Nobody had more
pride of birth and race than an Onondaga or a Mohawk. The home of the
Hodenosaunee was in New York, but their hunting grounds and real domain,
over which they were lords, extended from the Hudson to the Ohio and
from the St. Lawrence to the Cumberland and the Tennessee, where the
land of the Cherokees began. No truer kings of the forest ever lived,
and for generations their warlike spirit fed upon the fact.

"It is true," said Tayoga gravely, "but a shadow gathers in the north.
The children of Corlear wish to plow the land and raise corn, but the
sons of Onontio go into the forest and become hunters and warriors with
the Hurons. It is easy for the man in the woods to shoot down the man in
the field."

"You put it well, Tayoga," exclaimed Willet. "That's the kernel in the
nut. The English settle upon the land, but the French take to the wild
life and would rather be rovers. When it comes to fighting it puts our
people at a great disadvantage. I know that some sort of a wicked broth
is brewing at Quebec, but none of us can tell just when it will boil
over."

"Have you ever been to Quebec, Dave?" asked Robert.

"Twice. It's a fortress on a rock high above the St. Lawrence, and it's
the seat of the French power in North America. We English in this
country rule our selves mostly, but the French in Canada don't have
much to say. It's the officials sent out from France who govern as they
please."

"And you believe they'll attack us, Dave?"

"When they're ready, yes, but they intend to choose time and place. I
think they've been sending war belts to the tribes in the north, but I
can't prove it."

"The French in France are a brave and gallant race, Dave, and they are
brave and gallant here too, but I think they're often more cruel than we
are."

It was in David Willet's mind to say it was because the French had
adapted themselves more readily than the English to the ways of the
Indian, but consideration for the feelings of Tayoga restrained him. The
wilderness ranger had an innate delicacy and to him Tayoga was always a
nobleman of the forest.

"You've often told me, Dave," said Lennox, "that I've French blood in
me."

"There's evidence pointing that way," said Willet, "and when I was in
Quebec I saw some of the men from Northern France. I suppose we mostly
think of the French as short and dark, but these were tall and fair.
Some of them had blue eyes and yellow hair, and they made me think a
little of you, Robert."

Young Lennox sighed and became very thoughtful. The mystery of his
lineage puzzled and saddened him at times. It was a loss never to have
known a father or a mother, and for his kindest and best friends to be
of a blood not his own. The moments of depression, however, were brief,
as he had that greatest of all gifts from the gods, a cheerful and
hopeful temperament.

The three began to paddle with renewed vigor. Gasna Gaowo, the canoe in
which they sat, was a noble example of Onondaga art. It was about
sixteen feet in length and was made of the bark of the red elm, the rim,
however, being of white ash, stitched thoroughly to the bark. The ribs
also were of white ash, strong and flexible, and fastened at each end
under the rim. The prow, where the ends of the bark came together, was
quite sharp, and the canoe, while very light and apparently frail, was
exceedingly strong, able to carry a weight of more than a thousand
pounds. The Indians surpassed all other people in an art so useful in a
land of many lakes and rivers and they lavished willing labor upon their
canoes, often decorating them with great beauty and taste.

"We're now within the land of the Mohawks, are we not, Tayoga?" asked
Lennox.

"Ganeagaono, the Keepers of the Eastern Gate, rule here," replied the
