The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Palace Beautiful, by L. T. Meade

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Palace Beautiful
       A Story for Girls

Author: L. T. Meade

Release Date: February 22, 2005 [EBook #15149]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PALACE BEAUTIFUL ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Suzanne Lybarger and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.





THE PALACE BEAUTIFUL.

A STORY FOR GIRLS.

BY

L.T. MEADE,

_Author of "A World of Girls," "Scamp and I," "Daddy's Boy," &c., &c._


NEW YORK:
WM. L. ALLISON CO., PUBLISHERS.




CONTENTS.


       I. Early Days

      II. The First Month of their Trouble

     III. Miss Martineau

      IV. To the Rescue

       V. The Contents of the Cabinet

      VI. Many Visitors

     VII. Shortlands

    VIII. Thirty Pounds a Year

      IX. A Strange Letter and a Proposed Visit to London

       X. Ways and Means of Earning a Living

      XI. Bread and Butter

     XII. They Would Not be Parted

    XIII. Mrs. Ellsworthy's Letter

     XIV. Quite Contrary

      XV. In Spite of Opposition

     XVI. Penelope Mansion

    XVII. Escorted by Miss Slowcum

   XVIII. In St. Paul's Cathedral

     XIX. A Bright Day

      XX. Getting Lost

     XXI. How to Paint China and How to Form Style

    XXII. Cross Purposes

   XXIII. Dark Days

    XXIV. Dove's Joke

     XXV. Daisy's Promise

    XXVI. A Delightful Plan

   XXVII. The Poor Doves

  XXVIII. A Startling Discovery

    XXIX. A Blessing

     XXX. Voice of the Prince

    XXXI. A "Continual Reader"

   XXXII. Jasmine Begins to Soar

  XXXIII. Visiting the Publishers

   XXXIV. A Plan

    XXXV. Their Quarter's Allowance

   XXXVI. _The Joy-Bell_

  XXXVII. Endorsing a Cheque

 XXXVIII. Daisy's Request

   XXXIX. The Journey

      XL. A Bitter Disappointment

     XLI. Mrs. Dredge to the Rescue

    XLII. A New Employment

   XLIII. In the Field

    XLIV. Too Much for Dove

     XLV. The Prince to the Rescue

    XLVI. Delivered from the Ogre

   XLVII. Almost Defeated

  XLVIII. One Shoe Off and One Shoe On

    XLIX. Spanish Lace

       L. A Dazzling Day

      LI. A Letter

     LII. "I Love Mrs. Ellsworthy"

    LIII. Telegraph Wires

     LIV. A Discovery

      LV. An Invitation for the Ladies of Penelope Mansion

     LVI. A Palace Beautiful




THE PALACE BEAUTIFUL.

_A STORY FOR GIRLS._




CHAPTER I.

EARLY DAYS.


The three girls were called after flowers. This is how it came about:

When Primrose opened her eyes on the world she brought back a little
bit of spring to her mother's heart.

Mrs. Mainwaring had gone through a terrible trouble--a trouble so dark
and mysterious, so impossible to feel reconciled to, that her health
had been almost shattered, and she had almost said good-bye to hope.

The baby came in the spring-time, and the soft, velvety touch of the
little face, and the sight of the round baby limbs, had made Mrs.
Mainwaring smile: had caused her to pluck up heart, and to determine
resolutely to take this new blessing, and to begin to live again.

The baby came in the month of March, just when the primroses were
beginning to open their pale and yet bright blossoms. Mrs. Mainwaring
said that the child was a symbol of spring to her, and she called her
Primrose.

The next girl was born in Italy, in the middle of a rich and brilliant
summer. Flowers were everywhere, and the baby, a black-haired,
dark-eyed little mite, had a starry look about her. She was called
Jasmine, and the name from the very first suited her exactly.

The third and youngest of the sisters also came in the summer, but she
was born in an English cottage. Her mother, who had been rich when
Jasmine was born, was now poor; that is, she was poor as far as money
is concerned, but the three little daughters made her feel rich. She
called the child from the first her little country wild flower, and
allowed Primrose and Jasmine to select her name. They brought in
handfuls of field daisies, and begged to have the baby called after
them.

The three girls grew up in the little country cottage. Their father
was in India, in a very unhealthy part of the country. He wrote home
by every mail, and in each letter expressed a hope that the Government
under which he served would allow him to return to England and to his
wife and children. Death, however, came first to the gallant captain.
When Primrose was ten years old, and Daisy was little more than a
baby, Mrs. Mainwaring found herself in the humble position of an
officer's widow, with very little to live on besides her pension.

In the Devonshire village, however, things were cheap, rents were low,
and the manners of life deliciously fresh and primitive.

Primrose, Jasmine, and Daisy grew up something like the flowers,
taking no thought for the morrow, and happy in the grand facts that
they were alive, that they were perfectly healthy, and that the sun
shone and the sweet fresh breezes blew for them. They were as
primitive as the little place where they lived, and cared nothing at
all for fashionably-cut dresses; or for what people who think
themselves wiser would have called the necessary enjoyments of life.
Mrs. Mainwaring, who had gone through a terrible trouble before the
birth of her eldest girl, had her nerves shattered a second time by
her husband's death; from that moment she was more ruled by her girls
than a ruler to them. They did pretty much what they pleased, and she
was content that they should make themselves happy in their own way.

It was lucky for the girls that they were amiable, and had strength of
character.

Primrose was delightfully matter-of-fact. When she saw that her mother
allowed them to learn their lessons anyhow she made little rules for
herself and her sisters--the rules were so playful and so light that
the others, for mere fun, followed them--thus they insisted on their
mother hearing them their daily tasks; they insisted on going
regularly twice a week to a certain old Miss Martineau, who gave them
lessons on an antiquated piano, and taught them obsolete French.
Primrose was considered by her sisters very wise indeed but Primrose
also thought Jasmine wise, and wise with a wisdom which she could
appreciate without touching; for Jasmine had got some gifts from a
fairy wand, she was touched with the spirit of Romance, and had a
beautiful way of looking at life which her sisters loved to encourage.
Daisy was the acknowledged baby of the family--she was very pretty,
and not very strong, was everybody's darling, and was, of course,
something of a spoilt child.

Primrose had a face which harmonized very well with her quaint, sweet
name; her hair was soft, straight, and yellow, her eyes were light
brown, her skin was fair, and her expression extremely calm, gentle,
and placid. To look at Primrose was to feel soothed--she had a
somewhat slow way of speaking, and she never wasted her words. Jasmine
was in all particulars her opposite. She was dark, with very bright
and lovely eyes; her movements were quick, her expression full of
animation, and when excited--and she was generally in a state of
excitement--her words tumbled out almost too quickly for coherence.
Her cheeks would burn, and her eyes sparkle, over such trivial
circumstances as a walk down a country lane, as blackberry-hunting, as
strawberry-picking--a new story-book kept her awake half the
night--she was, in short, a constant little volcano in this quiet
home, and would have been an intolerable child but for the great
sweetness of her temper, and also for the fact that every one more or
less yielded to her.

Daisy was very pretty and fair--her hair was as yellow as Primrose's,
but it curled, and was more or less always in a state of friz; her
eyes were wide open and blue, and she was just a charming little
child, partaking slightly of the qualities of both her elder sisters.

These girls had never had a care or an anxiety--when they were hungry
they could eat, when they were tired sleep could lull them into
dreamless rest--they had never seen any world but the narrow world of
Rosebury, the name of the village where they lived. Even romantic
Jasmine thought that life at Rosebury, with perhaps a few more books
and a few more adventures must form the sum and substance of her
existence. Of course there was a large world outside, but even Jasmine
had not begun to long for it.

Primrose was sixteen, Jasmine between thirteen and fourteen, and Daisy
ten, when a sudden break came to all this quiet and happy routine.
Mrs. Mainwaring without any warning or any leave-taking, suddenly
died.




CHAPTER II.

THE FIRST MONTH OF THEIR TROUBLE.


There are mothers and mothers. Mrs. Mainwaring was the kind of mother
who could not possibly say a harsh word to her children--she could not
be severe to them, she could never do anything but consider them the
sweetest and best of human beings. The girls ruled her, and she liked
to be ruled by them. After her husband's death, and after the first
agony of his loss had passed away, she sank into a sort of subdued
state--she began to live in the present, to be content with the little
blessings of each day, to look upon the sunshine as an unmitigated
boon, and on the girls' laughter as the sweetest music. She had been
rich in her early married life, but Captain Mainwaring had lost his
money, had lost all his large private means, through a bank failure,
and before Daisy came into the world Mrs. Mainwaring knew that she was
a very poor woman indeed. Before the captain went to India he insured
his life for L1000, and after his death Mrs. Mainwaring lived very
placidly on her small pension, and for any wants which she required
over and above what the pension could supply she drew upon the L1000.
She did not care, as a more sensible woman would have done, to invest
this little sum as so much capital; no, she preferred to let it lie in
the bank, and to draw upon it from time to time, as necessity arose.
She had no business friends to advise her, for the few acquaintances
she made at Rosebury knew nothing whatever of the value of money. Like
many another woman who has been brought up in affluence, neither had
Mrs. Mainwaring the faintest idea of how fast a small sum like L1,000
can dwindle. She felt comfortable during the latter years of her life
at the knowledge that she had a good balance in the bank. It never
occurred to her as a possibility that she who was still fairly young
could die suddenly and without warning. This event, however, took
place, and the girls were practically unprovided for.

Mrs. Mainwaring had never really worked for her children, but a mother
who had worked hard for them, and toiled, and exerted all her strength
to provide adequately for their future, might not perhaps have been
loved so well. She died and her children were broken-hearted. They
mourned for her each after her own fashion, and each according to her
individual character. Primrose retained her calmness and her common
sense in the midst of all her grief; Jasmine was tempestuous and
hysterical, bursting into laughter one minute and sobbing wildly the
next. Little Daisy felt frightened in Jasmine's presence--she did not
quite believe that mother would never come back, and she clung to
Primrose, who protected and soothed her; in short, took a mother's
place to her, and felt herself several years older on the spot.

For a month the girls grieved and shut themselves away from their
neighbors, and refused to go out, or to be in any measure comforted. A
month in the ordinary reckoning is really a very short period of time,
but to these girls, in their grief and misery, it seemed almost
endless. One night Jasmine lay awake from the time she laid her head
on the pillow till the first sun had dawned; then Primrose took
fright, and began to resume her old gentle, but still firm authority.

"Jasmine," she said, "we have got our black dresses--they are made
very neatly, and we have done them all ourselves. Staying in the house
this lovely weather won't bring dear mamma back again; we will have
tea a little earlier than usual, and go for a walk this evening."

Jasmine, whenever she could stop crying, had been longing for a walk,
but had crushed down the desire as something unnatural, and
disrespectful to dear mamma, but of course if Primrose suggested it it
was all right. Her face brightened visibly, and as to Daisy, she sat
down and began to play with the kitten on the spot.

That evening the three desolate young creatures put on their new black
dresses, and went down a long, rambling, charming country lane. The
air was delicious--Jasmine refused to cover her hot little face with a
crape veil--they came back after their ramble soothed and refreshed.
As they were walking up the village street a girl of the name of
Poppy, their laundress's child, stepped out of a little cottage,
dropped a courtesy, and said, in a tone of delight--

"Oh, Miss Mainwaring, I'm glad to see you out; and Miss Jasmine,
darling, the little canary is all reared and ready for you. I took a
sight of pains with him, and he'll sing beautiful before long. Shall I
bring him round in the morning, Miss Jasmine?"

"Yes, of course, Poppy; and I'm greatly obliged to you," answered
Jasmine, in her old bright tones. Then she colored high, felt a good
deal ashamed of herself, and hurried after Primrose, who had pulled
down her crape veil, and was holding Daisy's hand tightly.
