The Project Gutenberg eBook, Grace Harlowe's Sophomore Year at High
School, by Jessie Graham Flower


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Grace Harlowe's Sophomore Year at High School

Author: Jessie Graham Flower

Release Date: March 12, 2005  [eBook #15344]
[Date last updated: July 19, 2006]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRACE HARLOWE'S SOPHOMORE YEAR AT
HIGH SCHOOL***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 15344-h.htm or 15344-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/3/4/15344/15344-h/15344-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/3/4/15344/15344-h.zip)





GRACE HARLOWE'S SOPHOMORE YEAR AT HIGH SCHOOL

or

The Record of the Girl Chums in Work and Athletics

by

JESSIE GRAHAM FLOWER, A.M.

Author of Grace Harlowe's Plebe Year at High School, Grace Harlowe's
Junior Year at High School, Grace Harlowe's Senior Year at High School,
etc.

Illustrated

Philadelphia
Henry Altemus Company

1911







[Illustration: "The Sophomores Will Not Submit to Such Impositions."

_Frontispiece--High School Girls No. 2._]



CONTENTS


CHAPTER

    I. A DECLARATION OF WAR

   II. THE WAY OF THE TRANSGRESSOR

  III. A GENEROUS APPEAL

   IV. AN UNFORTUNATE AVIATOR

    V. ON THE EVE OF BATTLE

   VI. THE DEEPEST POSSIBLE DISGRACE

  VII. GATHERING CLOUDS

 VIII. THE PRICE OF FRIENDSHIP

   IX. AN UNSUCCESSFUL INTERVIEW

    X. THE SOPHOMORE BALL

   XI. A LION AT LAST

  XII. THE WAYS OF SCHOOLGIRLS

 XIII. A SKATING PARTY

  XIV. A BRAVE RESCUE

   XV. A BELATED REPENTANCE

  XVI. AN OUNCE OF LOYALTY

 XVII. BURYING THE HATCHET

XVIII. AT THE ELEVENTH HOUR

  XIX. THE GREAT GAME

   XX. A PIECE OF NEWS

  XXI. ANNE AND GRACE COMPARE NOTES

 XXII. A RESCUE AND A REFORM

XXIII. GRACE MEETS A DISTINGUISHED CHARACTER

 XXIV. COMMENCEMENT





CHAPTER I

A DECLARATION OF WAR


"Anne, you will never learn to do a side vault that way. Let me show you,"
exclaimed Grace Harlowe.

The gymnasium was full of High School girls, and a very busy and
interesting picture they made, running, leaping, vaulting, passing the
medicine ball and practising on the rings.

In one corner a class was in progress, the physical culture instructor
calling out her orders like an officer on parade.

The four girl chums had grown somewhat taller than when last seen. A rich
summer-vacation tan had browned their faces and Nora O'Malley's tip-tilted
Irish nose was dotted with freckles. All four were dressed in gymnasium
suits of dark blue and across the front of each blouse in letters of
sky-blue were the initials "O.H.S.S." which stood for "Oakdale High
School Sophomore." They were rather proud of these initials, perhaps
because the lettering was still too recent to have lost its novelty.

"Never mind," replied Anne Pierson; "I don't believe I shall ever learn,
it, but, thank goodness, vaulting isn't entirely necessary to human
happiness."

"Thank goodness it isn't," observed Jessica, who never really enjoyed
gymnasium work.

"It is to mine," protested Grace, glowing with exercise and enthusiasm.
"If I couldn't do every one of these stunts I should certainly lie awake
at night grieving over it."

She gave a joyous laugh as she vaulted over the wooden horse as easily and
gracefully as an acrobat.

"I'd much rather dance," replied Anne. "Ever since Mrs. Gray's Christmas
party I've wanted to learn."

"Why Anne," replied Grace, "I had forgotten that you don't dance. I'll
give you a lesson at once. But you must first learn to waltz, then all
other dancing will be easy."

"Just watch me while I show you the step," Grace continued.

"Now, you try it while I count for you."

"One, two, three. One, two, three. That's right. Just keep on practising,
until you are sure of yourself; then if Jessica will play for us, I'll
waltz with you."

"With pleasure," said Jessica, "Anne must learn to waltz. Her education in
dancing mustn't be neglected another minute."

Anne patiently practised the step while Jessica played a very slow waltz
on the piano and Grace counted for Anne. Then the two girls danced
together, and under Grace's guidance Anne found waltzing wasn't half as
hard as she had imagined it would be.

By this time the gymnasium was almost empty. The class in physical culture
had been dismissed, and the girls belonging to it had withdrawn to the
locker rooms to dress and go home. The four girl chums were practically
alone.

"I do wish the rest of the basketball team would put in an appearance,"
said Grace, as she and Anne stopped to rest. "We need every minute we can
get for practice. The opening game is so very near, and it's really
difficult to get the gymnasium now, for the juniors seem to consider it
their especial possession. One would think they had leased it for the
season."

"They are awfully mean, I think," said Nora O'Malley. "They weren't at all
nice to us last year when we were freshmen and they were sophomores. Even
the dignity of being juniors doesn't seem to improve them any. They are
just as hateful as ever."

"Most of the juniors are really nice girls, but it is due to Julia Crosby
that they behave so badly," said Jessica Bright thoughtfully, "She leads
them, into all kinds of mischief. She is a born trouble-maker."

"She is one of the rudest girls I have ever known," remarked Nora with
emphasis. "How Miriam Nesbit can tolerate her is more than I can see."

"Well," said Grace, "it is hardly a case of toleration. Miriam seems
really fond of her."

"Hush!" said Anne, who had been silently listening to the conversation.
"Here comes the rest of the team, and Miriam is with them."

Readers of the preceding volume of this series, "GRACE HARLOWE'S PLEBE
YEAR AT HIGH SCHOOL," need no introduction to Grace Harlowe and her girl
chums. In that volume was narrated the race for the freshman prize, so
generously offered each year by Mrs. Gray, sponsor of the freshman class,
and the efforts of Miriam Nesbit aided by the disagreeable teacher of
algebra, Miss Leece, to ruin the career of Anne Pierson, the brightest
pupil of Oakdale High School. Through the loyalty and cleverness of Grace
and her friends, the plot was brought to light and Anne was vindicated.

Many and varied were the experiences which fell to the lot of the High
School girls. The encounter with an impostor, masquerading as Mrs. Gray's
nephew, Tom Gray, the escape from wolves in Upton Woods, and Mrs. Gray's
Christmas ball proved exciting additions to the routine of school work.

The contest between Grace and Miriam Nesbit for the basketball captaincy,
resulting in Grace's subsequent election, was also one of the interesting
features of the freshman year.

The beginning of the sophomore year found Miriam Nesbit in a most
unpleasant frame of mind toward Grace and her friends. The loss of the
basketball captaincy had been a severe blow to Miriam's pride, and she
could not forgive Grace her popularity.

As she walked across the gymnasium followed by the other members of the
team, her face wore a sullen expression which deepened as her eyes rested
upon Grace, and she nodded very stiffly to the young captain. Grace, fully
aware of the coldness of Miriam's salutation, returned it as courteously
as though Miriam had been one of her particular friends. Long before this
Grace had made up her mind to treat Miriam as though nothing disagreeable
had ever happened. There was no use in holding a grudge.

"If Miriam once realizes that we are willing to overlook some things
which happened last year," Grace had confided to Anne, "perhaps her better
self will come to the surface. I am sure she has a better self, only she
has never given it a chance to develop."

Anne did not feel quite so positive as to the existence of Miriam's better
self, but agreed with Grace because she adored her.

The entire team having assembled, Grace lost no time in assigning the
players to their various positions.

"Miriam will you play one of the forwards?" she asked.

"Who is going to play center?" queried Miriam ignoring Grace's question.

"Why the girls have asked me to play," replied Grace.

"If I cannot play center," announced Miriam shrugging her shoulders, "I
shall play nothing."

A sudden silence fell upon the group of girls, who, amazed at Miriam's
rudeness, awaited Grace's answer.

Stifling her desire to retort sharply, Grace said? "Why Miriam, I didn't
know you felt that way about it. Certainly you may play center if you wish
to. I am sure I don't wish to seem selfish."

This was too much for Nora O'Malley, who deeply resented Miriam's attitude
toward Grace.

"We want our captain for center," she said. "Don't we, girls?"

"Yes," chorused the girls.

It was a humiliating moment for proud Miriam. Grace realized this and felt
equally embarrassed at their outspoken preference.

Then Miriam said with a contemptuous laugh, "Really, Miss Harlowe, I
congratulate you upon your loyal support. It is a good thing to have
friends at court. However, it is immaterial to me what position I play,
for I am not particularly enthusiastic over basketball. The juniors are
sure to win at any rate."

A flush mounted to Grace's cheeks at Miriam's insulting words. Controlling
her anger, she said quietly:

"Very well, I will play center." Then she rapidly named the other players.

This last formality having been disposed of, the team lined up for
practice. Soon the game was at its height. Miriam in the excitement of the
play, forgot her recently avowed indifference toward basketball and went
to work with all the skill and activity she possessed.

The basketball team, during its infancy in the freshman class had given
splendid promise of future fame. Grace felt proud of her players as she
stopped for a moment to watch their agile movements and spirited work.
Surely, the juniors would have to look out for their laurels this year.
Her blood quickened at thought, of the coming contests which were to take
place during the course of the winter between the two class teams. There
were to be three games that season, and the sophomores had made up their
minds to win all of them. What if the junior team were a famous one, and
had won victory after victory the year before over all other class teams?
The sophomores resolved to be famous, too.

In fact, all of Grace's hopes were centered on the coming season. Napoleon
himself could not have been more eager for victory.

"We must just make up our minds to work, girls," she exhorted her friends.
"I would rather beat those juniors than take a trip to Europe."

Nor was she alone in her desire. The other girls were just as eager to
overthrow the victorious juniors. It was evident, so strong was the
feeling in the class, that something more than a sense of sport had
stirred them to this degree of rivalry.

The former freshman class had many scores against the present juniors. As
sophomores, the winter before, they had never missed an opportunity to
annoy and irritate the freshmen in a hundred disagreeable ways. "The
Black Monks of Asia" still rankled in their memories. Moreover, was not
Julia Crosby, the junior captain? She was the same mischievous sophomore
who had created so much havoc at the Christmas ball. She was always
playing unkind practical jokes on other people. It is true, she was an
intimate and close friend of Miriam Nesbit, but they all were aware that
Miriam was a law unto herself, and none of them had ever attempted to
explain certain doings of hers in connection with Julia Crosby and her
friends during the freshman year.

Grace's mind was busy with these thoughts when the door of the gymnasium
opened noisily. There was a whoop followed by cries and calls and in
rushed the junior players, most of them dressed in gymnasium suits.

Julia Crosby, at their head, had come with so much force, that she now
slid halfway across the room, landing right in the midst of the
