Project Gutenberg's The Adventures of Prickly Porky, by Thornton W. Burgess

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Adventures of Prickly Porky

Author: Thornton W. Burgess

Release Date: April 1, 2005 [EBook #15521]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF PRICKLY PORKY ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Richard J. Shiffer and the PG
Distributed Proofreading Team.







The Bedtime Story-Books




THE ADVENTURES OF PRICKLY PORKY

BY

THORNTON W. BURGESS


Author of "Old Mother West Wind Series," "Mother
West Wind 'How' Stories," "The Bedtime
Story-Books," etc.


_With Illustrations by HARRISON CADY_




BOSTON

LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY

1916




[Illustration: "Do tell me quickly what has happened to Peter!"
FRONTISPIECE. _See page 94._]




CONTENTS


    I HAPPY JACK SQUIRREL MAKES A FIND
   II THE STRANGER FROM THE NORTH
  III PRICKLY PORKY MAKES FRIENDS
   IV PETER RABBIT HAS SOME STARTLING NEWS
    V PETER RABBIT TELLS HIS STORY
   VI PETER HAS TO TELL HIS STORY MANY TIMES
  VII JIMMY SKUNK CALLS ON PRICKLY PORKY
 VIII PRICKLY PORKY NEARLY CHOKES
   IX JIMMY SKUNK AND UNC' BILLY POSSUM TELL DIFFERENT STORIES
    X UNC' BILLY POSSUM TELLS JIMMY SKUNK A SECRET
   XI WHAT HAPPENED TO REDDY FOX
  XII WHAT REDDY FOX SAW AND DID
 XIII REDDY FOX IS VERY MISERABLE
  XIV REDDY FOX TRIES TO KEEP OUT OF SIGHT
   XV OLD GRANNY FOX INVESTIGATES
  XVI OLD GRANNY FOX LOSES HER DIGNITY
 XVII GRANNY FOX CATCHES PETER RABBIT
XVIII A FRIEND IN NEED IS A FRIEND INDEED
  XIX JIMMY SKUNK TAKES WORD TO MRS. PETER
   XX A PLOT TO FRIGHTEN OLD MAN COYOTE
  XXI SAMMY JAY DELIVERS HIS MESSAGE
 XXII OLD MAN COYOTE LOSES HIS APPETITE
XXIII BUSTER BEAR GIVES IT ALL AWAY




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

"DO TELL ME QUICKLY WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO PETER!"  _Frontispiece_

"POOH," EXCLAIMED REDDY FOX. "WHO'S AFRAID OF THAT FELLOW?"

THEN HE BRACED HIMSELF AND PULLED WITH ALL HIS MIGHT

REDDY WOULDN'T HAVE BELIEVED THAT IT WAS ALIVE

"DROP HIM!" HE GRUNTED

"I SEE YOU ARE UP TO YOUR OLD TRICKS, PRICKLY PORKY!" HE SHOUTED




THE ADVENTURES OF PRICKLY PORKY




I

HAPPY JACK SQUIRREL MAKES A FIND


Happy Jack Squirrel had had a wonderful day. He had found some big
chestnut-trees that he had never seen before, and which promised to
give him all the nuts he would want for all the next winter. Now he
was thinking of going home, for it was getting late in the afternoon.
He looked out across the open field where Mr. Goshawk had nearly
caught him that morning. His home was on the other side.

"It's a long way 'round," said Happy Jack to himself, "but it is best
to be safe and sure."

So Happy Jack started on his long journey around the open field. Now,
Happy Jack's eyes are bright, and there is very little that Happy Jack
does not see. So, as he was jumping from one tree to another, he spied
something down on the ground which excited his curiosity.

"I must stop and see what that is," said Happy Jack. So down the tree
he ran, and in a few minutes he had found the queer thing, which had
caught his eyes. It was smooth and black and white, and at one end it
was very sharp with a tiny little barb. Happy Jack found it out by
pricking himself with it.

"Ooch," he cried, and dropped the queer thing. Pretty soon he noticed
there were a lot more on the ground.

"I wonder what they are," said Happy Jack. "They don't grow, for they
haven't any roots. They are not thorns, for there is no plant from
which they could come. They are not alive, so what can they be?"

Now, Happy Jack's eyes are bright, but sometimes he doesn't use them
to the very best advantage. He was so busy examining the queer things
on the ground that he never once thought to look up in the tops of the
trees. If he had, perhaps he would not have been so much puzzled. As
it was he just gathered up three or four of the queer things and
started on again. On the way he met Peter Rabbit and showed Peter what
he had. Now, you know Peter Rabbit is very curious. He just couldn't
sit still, but must scamper over to the place Happy Jack Squirrel told
him about.

"You'd better be careful, Peter Rabbit; they're very sharp," shouted
Happy Jack.

But as usual, Peter was in too much of a hurry to heed what was said
to him. Lipperty-lipperty-lip, lipperty-lipperty-lip, went Peter
Rabbit through the woods, as fast as his long legs would take him.
Then suddenly he squealed and sat down to nurse one of his feet. But
he was up again in a flash with another squeal louder than before.
Peter Rabbit had found the queer things that Happy Jack Squirrel had
told him about. One was sticking in his foot, and one was in the white
patch on the seat of his trousers.




II

THE STRANGER FROM THE NORTH


The Merry Little Breezes of Old Mother West Wind were excited. Yes,
Sir, they certainly were excited. They had met Happy Jack Squirrel and
Peter Rabbit, and they were full of the news of the queer things that
Happy Jack and Peter Rabbit had found over in the Green Forest. They
hurried this way and that way over the Green Meadows and told every
one they met. Finally they reached the Smiling Pool and excitedly told
Grandfather Frog all about it.

Grandfather Frog smoothed down his white and yellow waistcoat and
looked very wise, for you know that Grandfather Frog is very old.

"Pooh," said Grandfather Frog. "I know what they are."

"What?" cried all the Merry Little Breezes together. "Happy Jack says
he is sure they do not grow, for there are no strange plants over
there."

Grandfather Frog opened his big mouth and snapped up a foolish green
fly that one of the Merry Little Breezes blew over to him.

"Chug-a-rum," said Grandfather Frog. "Things do not have to be on
plants in order to grow. Now I am sure that those things grew, and
that they did not grow on a plant."

The Merry Little Breezes looked puzzled. "What is there that grows and
doesn't grow on a plant?" asked one of them.

"How about the claws on Peter Rabbit's toes and the hair of Happy
Jack's tail?" asked Grandfather Frog.

The Merry Little Breezes looked foolish. "Of course," they cried. "We
didn't think of that. But we are quite sure that these queer things
that prick so are not claws, and certainly they are not hair."

"Don't you be too sure," said Grandfather Frog. "You go over to the
