The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Texan Scouts, by Joseph A. Altsheler


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Texan Scouts
       A Story of the Alamo and Goliad


Author: Joseph A. Altsheler

Release Date: May 4, 2005  [eBook #15767]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TEXAN SCOUTS***


E-text prepared by David Garcia and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (www.pgdp.net) from page images generously
made available by the Kentuckiana Digital Library



Note: Images of the original pages are available through the
      Kentuckiana Digital Library. See
      http://kdl.kyvl.org/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=kyetexts;cc=kyetexts;
      xc=1&idno=B92-172-30119848&view=toc





THE TEXAN SCOUTS

A Story of the Alamo and Goliad

by

JOSEPH A. ALTSHELER

Author of _The Texan Star_, _The Quest of the Four_, _The Scouts of the
Valley_, etc.

Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc.
New York


1913



     FOREWORD

     "THE TEXAN SCOUTS," WHILE A COMPLETE STORY IN ITSELF, CONTINUES
     THE FORTUNES OF NED FULTON AND HIS FRIENDS, WHO WERE THE CENTRAL
     CHARACTERS IN "THE TEXAN STAR."




CONTENTS

 CHAPTER

    I. IN THE STORM

   II. THE CAPTIVES

  III. THE FIGHT WITH URREA

   IV. THE CABIN IN THE WOODS

    V. SANTA ANNA'S ADVANCE

   VI. FOR FREEDOM'S SAKE

  VII. THE HERALD OF ATTACK

 VIII. IN THE ALAMO

   IX. THE FLAG OF NO QUARTER

    X. CROCKETT AND BOWIE

   XI. THE DESPERATE DEFENCE

  XII. BEFORE THE DICTATOR

 XIII. TO THE LAST MAN

  XIV. THE NEWS OF THE FALL

   XV. IN ANOTHER TRAP

  XVI. FANNIN'S CAMP

 XVII. THE SAD SURRENDER

XVIII. THE BLACK TRAGEDY

  XIX. THE RACE FOR THE BOAT

   XX. THE CRY FOR VENGEANCE





CHAPTER I

IN THE STORM


The horseman rode slowly toward the west, stopping once or twice to
examine the wide circle of the horizon with eyes that were trained to
note every aspect of the wilderness. On his right the plains melted away
in gentle swell after swell, until they met the horizon. Their brown
surface was broken only by the spiked and thorny cactus and stray bits
of chaparral.

On his left was the wide bed of a river which flowed through the sand,
breaking here and there into several streams, and then reuniting, only
to scatter its volume a hundred yards further into three or four
channels. A bird of prey flew on strong wing over the water, dipped and
then rose again, but there was no other sign of life. Beyond, the
country southward rolled away, gray and bare, sterile and desolate.

The horseman looked most often into the south. His glances into the
north were few and brief, but his eyes dwelled long on the lonely land
that lay beyond the yellow current. His was an attractive face. He was
young, only a boy, but the brow was broad and high, and the eyes, grave
and steady, were those of one who thought much. He was clad completely
in buckskin, and his hat was wide of brim. A rifle held in one hand lay
across the pommel of his saddle and there were weapons in his belt. Two
light, but warm, blankets, folded closely, were tied behind him. The
tanned face and the lithe, strong figure showed a wonderful degree of
health and strength.

Several hours passed and the horseman rode on steadily though slowly.
His main direction was toward the west, and always he kept the river two
or three hundred yards on his left. He never failed to search the plains
on either side, but chiefly in the south, with the eager, intent gaze
that missed nothing. But the lonesome gray land, cut by the coiling
yellow river, still rolled before him, and its desolation and chill
struck to his heart. It was the depth of the Texan winter, and, at
times, icy gusts, born in far mountains, swept across the plains.

The rider presently turned his horse toward the river and stopped on a
low bluff overlooking it. His face showed a tinge of disappointment, as
if his eyes failed to find objects for which they sought. Again he gazed
long and patiently into the south, but without reward.

He resumed his ride parallel with the river, but soon stopped a second
time, and held up an open hand, like one who tests the wind. The air was
growing perceptibly colder. The strong gusts were now fusing into a
steady wind. The day, which had not been bright at any time, was turning
darker. The sun was gone and in the far north banks of mists and vapor
were gathering. A dreary moaning came over the plain.

Ned Fulton, tried and brave though he was, beheld the omens with alarm.
He knew what they portended, and in all that vast wilderness he was
alone. Not a human being to share the danger with him! Not a hand to
help!

He looked for chaparral, something that might serve as a sort of
shelter, but he had left the last clump of it behind, and now he turned
and rode directly north, hoping that he might find some deep depression
between the swells where he and his horse, in a fashion, could hide.

Meanwhile the Norther came down with astonishing speed. The temperature
fell like a plummet. The moan of the wind rose to a shriek, and cold
clouds of dust were swept against Ned and his horse. Then snow mingled
with the dust and both beat upon them. Ned felt his horse shivering
under him, and he shivered, too, despite his will. It had turned so dark
that he could no longer tell where he was going, and he used the wide
brim of his hat to protect himself from the sand.

Soon it was black as night, and the snow was driving in a hurricane. The
wind, unchecked by forest or hill, screamed with a sound almost human.
Ned dismounted and walked in the lee of his horse. The animal turned his
head and nuzzled his master, as if he could give him warmth.

Ned hoped that the storm would blow itself out in an hour or two, but
his hope was vain. The darkness did not abate. The wind rose instead of
falling, and the snow thickened. It lay on the plain several inches
deep, and the walking grew harder. At last the two, the boy and the
horse, stopped. Ned knew that they had come into some kind of a
depression, and the full force of the hurricane passed partly over their
heads.

It was yet very dark, and the driving snow scarcely permitted him to
open his eyes, but by feeling about a little he found that one side of
the dip was covered with a growth of dwarf bushes. He led the horse into
the lower edge of these, where some protection was secured, and,
crouching once more in the lee of the animal, he unfolded the two
blankets, which he wrapped closely about himself to the eyes.

Ned, for the first time since the Norther rushed down upon him, felt
secure. He would not freeze to death, he would escape the fate that
sometimes overtook lone hunters or travelers upon those vast plains.
Warmth from the blankets began gradually to replace the chill in his
bones, and the horse and the bushes together protected his face from the
driven snow which had been cutting like hail. He even had, in some
degree, the sense of comfort which one feels when safe inside four walls
with a storm raging past the windows. The horse whinnied once and rubbed
his nose against Ned's hand. He, too, had ceased to shiver.

All that afternoon the Norther blew with undiminished violence. After a
while the fall of snow thinned somewhat, but the wind did not decrease.
Ned was devoutly thankful for the dip and the bushes that grew within
it. Nor was he less thankful for the companionship of his horse. It was
a good horse, a brave horse, a great bay mustang, built powerfully and
with sinews and muscles of steel. He had secured him just after taking
part in the capture of San Antonio with his comrades, Obed White and the
Ring Tailed Panther, and already the tie between horse and rider had
become strong and enduring. Ned stroked him again, and the horse,
twisting his neck around, thrust his nose under his arm.

"Good old boy! Good fellow!" said Ned, pinching his ear. "We were lucky,
you and I, to find this place."

The horse neighed ever so gently, and rubbed his nose up and down. After
a while the darkness began to increase. Ned knew that it was not a new
development of the storm, but the coming of night, and he grew anxious
again. He and his horse, however secure at the present moment, could not
stay always in that dip among the bushes. Yet he did not dare to leave
it. Above on the plain they would receive the full sweep of the wind,
which was still bitterly cold.

He was worn by the continued buffetings of blast and snow, but he did
not dare to lie down, even in the blankets, lest he never wake again,
and while he considered he saw darker shadows in the darkness above him.
He gazed, all attention, and counted ten shadows, following one another,
a dusky file. He knew by the set of their figures, short and stocky,
that they were Mexicans, and his heart beat heavily. These were the
first Mexicans that any one had seen on Texan soil since the departure
of Cos and his army on parole from captured San Antonio. So the Mexicans
had come back, and no doubt they would return in great force!

Ned crouched lower, and he was very glad that the nose of the horse was
still under his arm. He would not have a chance to whinny to his kind
that bore the Mexicans. But the horse made no attempt to move, and Ned
watched them pass on and out of sight. He had not heard the sound of
footsteps or voices above the wind, and after they were gone it seemed
to him that he had seen a line of phantoms.

But he was sure that his own mortal eyes had beheld that for which he
was looking. He and his comrades had been watching the Rio Grande to see
whether the Mexicans had crossed, and now he at least knew it.

He waited patiently three or four hours longer, until the wind died and
the fall of snow ceased, when he mounted his horse and rode out of the
dip. The wind suddenly sprang up again in about fifteen minutes, but
now it blew from the south and was warm. The darkness thinned away as
the moon and stars came out in a perfect sky of southern blue. The
temperature rose many degrees in an hour and Ned knew that the snow
would melt fast. All danger of freezing was past, but he was as hungry
as a bear and tired to death.

He unwrapped the blankets from his body, folded them again in a small
package which he made fast to his saddle, and once more stroked the nose
of his horse.

"Good Old Jack," he murmured--he had called him Old Jack after Andrew
Jackson, then a mighty hero of the south and west, "you passed through
the ordeal and never moved, like the silent gentleman that you are."

Old Jack whinnied ever so softly, and rubbed his nose against the boy's
coat sleeve. Ned mounted him and rode out of the dip, pausing at the top
of the swell for a long look in every direction. The night was now
peaceful and there was no noise, save for the warm wind that blew out of
the south with a gentle sighing sound almost like the note of music.
Trickles of water from the snow, already melting, ran down the crests.
Lighter and lighter grew the sky. The moon seemed to Ned to be poised
directly overhead, and close by. New stars were springing out as the
last clouds floated away.

Ned sought shelter, warmth and a place in which to sleep, and to secure
these three he felt that he must seek timber. The scouts whom he had
seen were probably the only Mexicans north of the Rio Grande, and, as he
believed, there was not one chance in a thousand of meeting such enemies
again. If he should be so lucky as to find shelter he would sleep there
without fear.

He rode almost due north for more than two hours, seeing patches of
chaparral on both right and left. But, grown fastidious now and not
thinking them sufficient for his purpose, he continued his northern
course. Old Jack's feet made a deep sighing sound as they sank in the
snow, and now there was water everywhere as that soft but conquering
south wind blew steadily over the plain.

When he saw a growth of timber rising high and dark upon a swell he
believed that he had found his place, and he urged his horse to renewed
speed. The trees proved to be pecans, aspens and oaks growing so densely
that he was compelled to dismount and lead Old Jack before they could
force an entrance. Inside he found a clear space, somewhat like the
openings of the north, in shape an irregular circle, but not more than
fifteen feet across. Great spreading boughs of oaks had protected it so
well that but little snow had fallen there, and that little had melted.
Already the ground in the circle was drying.

Ned uttered an exclamation of relief and gratitude. This would be his
camp, and to one used to living in the wilderness it furnished good
shelter. At one edge of the opening was an outcropping of flat rock now
quite dry, and there he would spread his bed. He unsaddled and unbridled
his horse, merely tethering him with a lariat, and spread the horse
blanket upon the flat rock. He would lie upon this and cover himself
with his own blankets, using the saddle as a pillow.

But the security of the covert tempted the boy, who was now as hungry as
a bear just come from winter quarters. He felt weak and relaxed after
his long hours in the snow and storm, and he resolved to have warm food
and drink.

There was much fallen wood among the trees, and with his strong hunting
knife he whittled off the bark and thin dry shavings until he had a fine
heap. Working long with flint and steel, he managed to set fire to the
shavings, and then he fed the flames with larger pieces of wood until
he had a great bed of glowing coals. A cautious wilderness rover,
learning always from his tried friends, Ned never rode the plains
without his traveling equipment, and now he drew from his pack a small
tin coffee pot and tiny cup of the same material. Then with quick and
skillful hands he made coffee over the coals and warmed strips of deer
and buffalo meat.

He ate and drank hungrily, while the horse nibbled the grass that grew
within the covert. Glorious warmth came again and the worn feeling
departed. Life, youthful, fresh and abounding, swelled in every vein.

He now put out all the coals carefully, throwing wet leaves upon them,
in order that not a single spark might shine through the trees to be
seen by an enemy upon the plain. He relied upon the horse to give
warning of a possible approach by man, and to keep away wolves.

Then he made his bed upon the rock, doing everything as he had arranged
it in his mind an hour before, and, wrapped in his blankets, fell into
the soundest of sleeps. The south wind still blew steadily, playing a
low musical song among the trees. The beads of water on the twigs and
the few leaves that remained dried fast. The grass dried, too, and
beyond the covert the snow, so quick to come, was equally quick to go.

The horse ceased to nibble the grass, looked at the sleeping boy,
touched his blankets lightly with his nose, and walked to the other side
of the opening, where he lay down and went to his own horse heaven of
sleep.

It was not many hours until day and Old Jack was a light sleeper. When
he opened his eyes again he saw a clear and beautiful winter day of the
far south. The only clouds in the sky were little drifting bits of fine
white wool, and the warm wind still blew. Old Jack, who was in reality
Young Jack, as his years were not yet four, did not think so much of the
covert now, as he had already eaten away all the grass within the little
opening but his sense of duty was strong. He saw that his human master
and comrade still slept, apparently with no intention of awakening at
any very early date, and he set himself to gleaning stray blades of
grass that might have escaped his notice the night before.

Ned awoke a little after the noon hour, and sprang to his feet in
dismay. The sun was almost directly over his head, showing him how late
it was. He looked at his horse as if to reproach his good comrade for
not waking him sooner, but Old Jack's large mild eyes gave him such a
gaze of benignant unconcern that the boy was ashamed of himself.

"It certainly was not your fault," he said to his horse, "and, after
all, it probably doesn't matter. We've had a long sound sleep and rest,
and I've no doubt that both of us will profit by it. Nothing seems to be
left in here for you to eat, but I'll take a little breakfast myself."

He did not relight the fire, but contented himself with cold food. Then
resaddling, he left the grove and rode northward again until he came to
a hill, or, rather, a swell, that was higher than the rest. Here he
stopped his horse and took a glance at the sun, which was shining with
uncommon brilliancy. Then he produced a small mirror from the pocket of
his hunting shirt and held it in such a position that it made a focus of
the sun's rays, throwing them in a perfect blazing lance of light.

He turned the flaming lance around the horizon, until it completed the
circle and then he started around with it again. Meantime he was keeping
a close watch upon every high point. A hill rose in the north, and he
looked at it longest, but nothing came from it. There was another, but
lower, hill in the west, and before he had completed the second round
with his glass a light flashed from it. It was a brilliant light, almost
like a sheaf of white incandescent rays. He lowered his own mirror and
the light played directly upon his hill. When it ceased he sent back
answering rays, to which, when he stopped, a rejoinder came in like
fashion. Then he put the little mirror back in the safe pocket of his
hunting shirt and rode with perfect confidence toward that western hill.

The crest that Ned sought was several miles away, although it looked
much nearer in the thin clear air of the plains, but he rode now at
