The Project Gutenberg eBook, New National Fourth Reader, by Charles J.
Barnes and J. Marshall Hawkes


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: New National Fourth Reader


Author: Charles J. Barnes and J. Marshall Hawkes

Release Date: May 14, 2005  [eBook #15825]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEW NATIONAL FOURTH READER***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, David Gundry, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 15825-h.htm or 15825-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/8/2/15825/15825-h/15825-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/5/8/2/15825/15825-h.zip)


Transcriber's Notes

      Where reference is made to page numbers, there is an annotation
      showing a footnote number and the relative information is appended
      at the end of each lesson or section.

      Pronunciation marks have been ignored. However, accented syllables
      precede the single apostrophe, which also serves as a break.
      Otherwise breaks are shown by spaces.





Barnes' New National Readers

NEW NATIONAL FOURTH READER

by

CHARLES J. BARNES and J. MARSHALL HAWKES

1884







[Illustration: Destruction of Pompeii by Vesuvius.]





PREFACE


It is thought that the following special features of this book will
commend themselves to Teachers and School Officers.

_The reading matter of the book is more of a descriptive than
conversational style_, as it is presumed that the pupil, after having
finished the previous books of the series, will have formed the habit of
easy intonation and distinct articulation.

_The interesting character of the selections_, so unlike the reading
books of former times.

_The large amount of information_ which has been combined with incidents
of an interesting nature, to insure the pupil's earnest and thoughtful
attention.

_The length of the selections for reading_,--the attention of pupils
being held more readily by long selections than by short ones, though of
equal interest.

_The gradation of the lessons_, which has been systematically maintained
by keeping a careful record of all new words as fast as they appeared,
and using only such pieces as contained a limited number.

_The simplicity of the lessons_, which becomes absolutely necessary in
the schools of to-day, owing to the short school life of the pupil, his
immature age, and inability to comprehend pieces of a metaphysical or
highly poetical nature.

_The ease with which pupils may pass from the Third Reader of this
series to this book_, thereby avoiding the necessity of supplementary
reading before commencing the Fourth Reader, or of using a book of
another series much lower in grade.

_Language Lessons_, of a nature to secure intelligent observation, and
lead the pupil to habits of thought and reflection. Nothing being done
for the learner that he could do for himself.

_Directions for Reading_, which accompany the lessons--specific in their
treatment and not of that general character which young teachers and
pupils are unable to apply.

_All new words of special difficulty, at the heads of the lessons_,
having their syllabication, accent, and pronunciation indicated
according to Webster. Other new words are placed in a vocabulary at the
close of the book.

_The type of this book, like that of the previous books of the series,
is much larger than that generally used_, for a single reason. Parents,
every-where, are complaining that the eye-sight of their children is
being ruined by reading from small, condensed type. It is confidently
expected that this large, clear style will obviate such unfortunate
results.

_The illustrations have been prepared regardless of expense_, and will
commend themselves to every person of taste and refinement.




CONTENTS


LESSONS IN PROSE.


 1.--"I'M GOING TO" (Part I) _Charlotte Daly_.

 2.--"I'M GOING TO" (Part II) _Charlotte Daly_.

 3.--THE BEAN AND THE STONE

 5.--AN ADVENTURE WITH DUSKY WOLVES (I) _Mayne Reid_.

 6.--AN ADVENTURE WITH DUSKY WOLVES (II) _Mayne Reid_.

 7.--THE SAILOR CAT _David Ker_.

 9.--THE LION

10.--ADVENTURE WITH A LION _Livingstone_.

11.--THE NOBLEST DEED OF ALL

13.--THE STORY OF INDIAN SPRING (I) _Aunt Mary_.

14.--THE STORY OF INDIAN SPRING (II)

15.--AN ADVENTURE WITH A SHARK

17.--A FUNNY HORSESHOE "_Christian Union_."

18.--THE GIRAFFE

19.--THE TRADER'S TRICK

21.--ALI, THE CAMEL DRIVER (I)

22.--ALI, THE CAMEL DRIVER (II)

23.--A QUEER PEOPLE

25.--WATER

26.--THE HIDDEN TREASURE (I)

27.--THE HIDDEN TREASURE (II)

28.--THE HIDDEN TREASURE (III)

30.--AIR _J. Berners_ (Adapted).

31.--A TIMELY RESCUE

33.--TRUE COURTESY (I)

34.--TRUE COURTESY (II)

35.--WHY AN APPLE FALLS

37.--THE JAGUAR

38.--HOLLAND (I) _Mary Mapes Dodge_.

39.--HOLLAND (II) _Mary Mapes Dodge_.

41.--SOMETHING ABOUT PLANTS

42.--FOREST ON FIRE (I) _Audubon_.

43.--FOREST ON FIRE (II) _Audubon_.

45.--A GHOST STORY (I) _Louisa M. Alcott_.

46.--A GHOST STORY (II) _Louisa M. Alcott_.

47.--A GHOST STORY (III) _Louisa M. Alcott_.

49.--THE RHINOCEROS

50.--PRESENCE OF MIND

51.--HALBERT AND HIS DOG

53.--THE CATERPILLAR AND BUTTERFLY

54.--WILD HORSES OF SOUTH AMERICA

55.--AN EMPEROR'S KINDNESS

57.--STORY OF THE SIOUX WAR (I)

58.--STORY OF THE SIOUX WAR (II)

59.--VOLCANOES

61.--ANECDOTE OF WASHINGTON (I)

62.--ANECDOTE OF WASHINGTON (II)

63.--THE OSTRICH

65.--AN INCIDENT OF THE REVOLUTION

66.--TROPICAL FRUITS

67.--STORY OF DETROIT

69.--MAKING MAPLE SUGAR (I) _Charles Dudley Warner_.

70.--MAKING MAPLE SUGAR (II) _Charles Dudley Warner_.

72.--NATURAL WONDERS OF AMERICA (I)

73.--NATURAL WONDERS OF AMERICA (II)

74.--AFRICAN ANTS _Du Chaillu_.

76.--EGYPT AND ITS RUINS (I)

77.--EGYPT AND ITS RUINS (II)




LESSONS IN VERSE.


 4.--TO-MORROW _Mrs. M.R. Johnson_.

 8.--RESCUED _Celia Thaxter_.

12.--MARJORIE'S ALMANAC _T.B. Aldrich_.

16.--A LEGEND OF THE NORTHLAND _Phoebe Cary_.

20.--A HAPPY PAIR _Florence Percy_.

24.--ILL-NATURED BRIER _Mrs. Anna Bache_.

29.--LOOKING FOR THE FAIRIES _Julia Bacon_.

32.--BIRDS IN SUMMER _Mary Howitt_.

36.--THE MILLER OF THE DEE _Charles Mackay_.

40.--THE WIND IN A FROLIC _William Howitt_.

44.--COMMON GIFTS

48.--WHAT THE CHIMNEY SANG _Bret Harte_.

52.--THE LIGHT-HOUSE

56.--UNITED AT LAST

60.--THE BROOK _Alfred Tennyson_.

64.--TO-DAY AND TO-MORROW _Charles Mackay_.

68.--THE FISHERMAN _John G. Whittier_.

71.--OLD IRONSIDES _Oliver Wendell Holmes_.

75.--THE LEAP OF ROUSHAN BEG _Henry W. Longfellow_.


DEFINITIONS


GEOGRAPHICAL AND PROPER NAMES







ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.


The publishers desire to thank Messrs. Houghton, Mifflin & Co., the
Century Co., Roberts Brothers, and Charles Scribner's Sons, for
permission to use and adapt some of their valuable copyright matter.







SUGGESTIONS

To Teachers


The following suggestions are submitted for the benefit of young
teachers.

In order that pupils may learn how to define words at the heads of the
lessons, let the teacher read the sentences containing such words and
have pupils copy them upon slate or paper.

Then indicate what words are to be defined, and insist upon the proper
syllabication, accent, marking of letters, etc.

In this way the pupil learns the meaning of the word as it is used, and
not an abstract definition that may be meaningless.

Have pupils study their reading lessons carefully before coming to
recitation.

The position of pupils while reading should be erect, easy, and
graceful.

Give special attention to the subject of articulation, and insist upon a
clear and distinct enunciation.

In order to develop a clear tone of voice, let pupils practice, in
concert, upon some of the open vowel sounds, using such words as _arm,
all, old_.

In this exercise, the force of utterance should be gentle at first, and
the words repeated a number of times; then the force should be increased
by degrees, until "calling tones" are used.

Encourage a natural use of the voice, with such modulations as may be
proper for a correct rendering of the thoughts which are read.

It should, be remembered that the development of a good tone of voice is
the result of careful and constant practice.

Concert reading is recommended as a useful exercise, inasmuch as any
feeling of restraint or timidity disappears while reading with others.

Question individual pupils upon the manner in which lessons should be
read. In this way they will learn to think for themselves.

Do not interrupt a pupil while reading until a thought or sentence is
completed, since such a course tends to make reading mechanical and
deprive it of expression.

Errors in time, force of utterance, emphasis, and inflection should be
carefully corrected, and then the passage read over again.

The "Directions for Reading" throughout the book are intended to be
suggestive rather than exhaustive, and can be added to as occasion
requires.

The "Language Lessons" in this book, should not be neglected. They
contain only such matter as is necessary to meet the requirements of
pupils.

Words and expressions not readily understood, must be made intelligible
to pupils. This has been done in part by definitions, and in part by
interpreting some of the difficult phrases.

After the habit of acquiring the usual meaning has been formed, the
original meaning of those words which are made up of stems modified by
prefixes or affixes should be shown.

The real meaning of such words can be understood far better by a study
of their formation, than by abstract definitions. It will be found,
also, that pupils readily become interested in this kind of work.

As the capabilities of classes of the same grade will differ, it may
sometimes occur that a greater amount of language work can be done
effectively than is laid down in this book. When this happens, more time
can be devoted to such special kinds of work as the needs of the classes
suggest.

Constant drill upon the analysis of lessons, varied at times by the
analysis of short stories taken from other sources and read to the
class, will develop the reasoning faculties of pupils and render the
writing of original compositions a comparatively easy exercise.

Encourage the habit of self-reliance on the part of pupils. Original
investigation, even if followed at first by somewhat crude results, is
in the end more satisfactory than any other course.

The Definitions (pages 373-382) and the List of Proper Names (pages
383 and 384) may be used in the preparation of the lessons.[01]

When exercises are written, particular care should be required in regard
to penmanship, correct spelling, punctuation, and neatness.


[01] "The Definitions" are found at the end of the text, however "the
List of Proper Names" has not been included in this production.






