The Project Gutenberg EBook of Outward Bound, by Oliver Optic

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Outward Bound
       Or, Young America Afloat

Author: Oliver Optic

Release Date: May 27, 2005 [EBook #15920]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUTWARD BOUND ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Norma Elliott and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. (www.pgdp.net)









[Illustration: YOUNG AMERICA ABROAD

By
OLIVER OPTIC


OUTWARD BOUND



BOSTON
LEE & SHEPARD.]

        *       *       *       *       *

OUTWARD BOUND;

OR,

YOUNG AMERICA AFLOAT.

A STORY OF TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE.

BY

WILLIAM T. ADAMS

(_OLIVER OPTIC_).

BOSTON:
LEE AND SHEPARD.

1869.


        *       *       *       *       *


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1866, by
WILLIAM T. ADAMS,
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court
of the District of Massachusetts.


        *       *       *       *       *


TO GEORGE WEBSTER TERRILL

_This Volume_

IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED.


        *       *       *       *       *


YOUNG AMERICA ABROAD.

BY OLIVER OPTIC.


A Library of Travel and Adventure in Foreign Lands. First and Second
Series; six volumes in each Series. 16mo. Illustrated.


_First Series_.

I.  _OUTWARD BOUND,_ OR, YOUNG AMERICA AFLOAT.

II. _SHAMROCK AND THISTLE_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN IRELAND AND SCOTLAND.

III _RED CROSS_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN ENGLAND AND WALES.

IV. _DIKES AND DITCHES_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN HOLLAND AND BELGIUM.

V. _PALACE AND COTTAGE_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN FRANCE AND SWITZERLAND.

VI. _DOWN THE RHINE_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN GERMANY.


_Second Series_.

I. _UP THE BALTIC_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN DENMARK AND SWEDEN.

II. _NORTHERN LANDS_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN PRUSSIA AND RUSSIA.

III. _VINE AND OLIVE_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN SPAIN AND PORTUGAL.

IV. _SUNNY SHORES_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN ITALY AND AUSTRIA.

V. _CROSS AND CRESCENT_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA IN GREECE AND TURKEY.

VI. _ISLES OF THE SEA_; OR, YOUNG AMERICA HOMEWARD BOUND.


        *       *       *       *       *



PREFACE.


Outward Bound is the first volume of "A Library of Travel and Adventure
in Foreign Lands," and contains the voyage of the Academy Ship "Young
America" across the Atlantic. The origin and progress of this aquatic
institution are incidentally developed, and the plan is respectfully
submitted to the consideration of those who are interested in the
education and moral training of the class of young men who are the
characters in the scenes described in this work. Besides a full
description of the routine and discipline of the ship, as an educational
and reformatory institution, the volume contains a rather free _expose_
of the follies and frailties of youth, but their vices are revealed to
suggest the remedy.

The story includes the experience of the officers and crew of the Young
America, eighty-seven in number, though, of course, only a few of them
can appear as prominent actors. As the ship has a little world, with all
the elements of good and evil, within her wooden walls, the story of the
individual will necessarily be interwoven with that of the mass; and the
history of "The Chain League," in the present volume, of which Shuffles
is the hero, will, it is hoped, convey an instructive lesson to young
men who are disposed to rebel against reasonable discipline and
authority. In the succeeding volumes of this series, the adventures,
travels, and "sight-seeing," as well as the individual and collective
experience of the juvenile crew of the Academy Ship, will be narrated.
They will visit the principal ports of Europe, as well as penetrate to
the interior; but they will always be American boys, wherever they are.

The author hopes that the volumes of the series will not only be
instructive as a description of foreign lands, and interesting as a
record of juvenile exploits, but that they will convey correct views of
moral and social duties, and stimulate the young reader to their
faithful performance.

HARRISON SQUARE, MASS.,
November 2, 1866.


        *       *       *       *       *



CONTENTS.


CHAPTER                        PAGE

I. THE IDEA SUGGESTED             11

II. THE YOUNG AMERICA             27

III. THE ENSIGN AT THE PEAK.      43

IV. OFFICERS AND SEAMEN.          59

V. OUR FELLOWS.                   75

VI. THE FOURTH OF JULY.           91

VII. HEAVING THE LOG.            106

VIII. OUTWARD BOUND.             122

IX. THE WATCH BILL.              138

X. MAKING A CHAIN.               154

XI. THE GAMBLERS IN NO. 8.       170

XII. THE ROOT OF ALL EVIL.       186

XIII. PIPING TO MISCHIEF.        202

XIV. ALL HANDS, REEF TOPSAILS!   218

XV. AFTER THE GALE.              233

XVI. THE WRECK OF THE SYLVIA     248

XVII. PEAS AND BEANS             263

XVIII. THE RESULT OF THE BALLOT  280

XIX. MAN OVERBOARD!              299

XX. THE END OF THE CHAIN LEAGUE  318


        *       *       *       *       *


OUTWARD BOUND.




OUTWARD BOUND;

OR,

YOUNG AMERICA AFLOAT


        *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER I.

THE IDEA SUGGESTED.


"There are no such peaches this side of New Jersey; and you can't get
them, for love or money, at the stores. All we have to do is, to fill
our pockets, and keep our mouths closed--till the peaches are ripe
enough to eat," said Robert Shuffles, the older and the larger of two
boys, who had just climbed over the high fence that surrounded the fine
garden of Mr. Lowington.

"What will Baird say if he finds it out?" replied Isaac Monroe, his
companion.

"Baird," the gentleman thus irreverently alluded to, was the principal
of the Brockway Academy, of which Shuffles and Monroe were pupils in the
boarding department.

"What will he say when he finds out that the King of the Tonga Islands
picks his teeth with a pitchfork?" added Shuffles, contemptuously. "I
don't intend that he shall find it out? and he won't, unless you tell
him."

"Of course, I shall not tell him."

"Come along, then? it is nearly dark, and no one will see us."

Shuffles led the way down the gravelled walk, till he came to a brook,
on the bank of which stood the peach tree whose rich fruit had tempted
the young gentlemen to invade the territory of Mr. Lowington with intent
to plunder.

"There they are," said the chief of the young marauders, as he paused
behind a clump of quince bushes, and pointed at the coveted fruit.
"There's no discount on them, and they are worth coming after."

"Hark!" whispered Monroe. "I heard a noise."

"What was it?"

"I don't know. I'm afraid we shall be caught."

"No danger; no one can see us from the house."

"But I'm sure there's some one near. I heard something."

"Nonsense! It was only a dagger of the mind, such as Baird talks about,"
answered Shuffles, as he crawled towards the peach tree. "Come, Monroe,
be quick, and fill your pockets."

This peach tree was a choice variety, in whose cultivation the owner had
been making an elaborate experiment. Mr. Lowington had watched it and
nursed it with the most assiduous care, and now it bore about a dozen
remarkably large and beautiful peaches. They were not quite ripe enough
to be gathered, but Shuffles was confident that they would "mellow" in
his trunk as well as on the tree. The experiment of the cultivator had
been a success, and he had already prepared, with much care and labor, a
paper explanatory of the process, which he intended to read before the
Pomological Society, exhibiting the fruit as the evidence of the
practicability of his method. To Mr. Lowington, therefore, the peaches
had a value far beyond their intrinsic worth.

Shuffles gathered a couple of the peaches, and urged his companion to
use all possible haste in stripping the tree of its rich burden.

"Hallo, there! What are you about?" shouted some one, who hastened to
make his presence known to the plunderers.

Monroe began to retreat.

"Hold on!" interposed Shuffles. "It's no one but Harry Martyn."

"He can tell of us just as well as anybody else."

"If he does, he will catch it."

"What are you doing?" demanded Harry Martyn,--who was a nephew of Mr.
Lowington, and lived with him,--as he crossed the rustic bridge that
spanned the brook.

"Don't you see what I'm doing?" replied Shuffles, with an impudent
coolness which confounded Harry.

"Stop that, Shuffles!" cried Harry, indignantly. "My uncle wouldn't take
ten dollars apiece for those peaches."

"That's more than he'll get for them," added Shuffles, as he reached up
and gathered another peach.

"Stop that, I tell you!" said Harry, angrily, as he stepped up, in a
menacing attitude, before the reckless marauder.

"Shut up, Harry! You know me, and when I get all these peaches, I've got
something to say to you."

Shuffles was about to gather another of the peaches, when Harry, his
indignation overcoming his prudence, grasped his arm, and pulled him
away from the tree.

"What do you mean, Harry Martyn?" exclaimed Shuffles, apparently
astonished at the temerity of the youth. "I can't stop to lick you now;
but I'll do it within twenty-four hours."

"Well, don't you touch those peaches, then."

"Yes, I will touch them. I intend to have the whole of them; and if you
say a word to your uncle or any one else about it, I'll pulverize that
head of yours."

"No, you won't! You shall not have those peaches, anyhow," replied the
resolute little fellow, who was no match, physically, for Shuffles.

"If you open your mouth----"

"Hallo! Uncle Robert! Help, help! Thieves in the garden!" shouted Harry,
who certainly had no defect of the lungs.

"Take that, you little monkey!" said Shuffles, angrily, as he struck the
little fellow a heavy blow on the side of the head with his fist, which
knocked him down. "I'll fix you the next, time I see you."

Shuffles consulted his discretion rather than his valor, now that the
alarm had been given, and retreated towards the place where he had
entered garden.

