The Project Gutenberg EBook of Verses for Children, by Juliana Horatia Ewing

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Verses for Children
       and Songs for Music

Author: Juliana Horatia Ewing

Release Date: September 12, 2005 [EBook #16686]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VERSES FOR CHILDREN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sankar Viswanathan and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                  [Illustration: The Convalescent.]

                          VERSES FOR CHILDREN

                                  AND

                            SONGS FOR MUSIC




                                   BY

                        JULIANA HORATIA EWING.





                                LONDON:

              SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,

                      NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C.

                    NEW YORK: E. & J.B. YOUNG & CO.



[Published under the direction of the General Literature
Committee.]




PREFACE


It has been decided in publishing this volume to reproduce the
illustrations with which the verses originally appeared in _Aunt Judy's
Magazine_. In all cases Mrs. Ewing wrote the lines to fit the pictures,
and it is worthy of note to observe how closely she has introduced every
detail into her words. Most of the woodcuts are by German artists, Oscar
Pletsch, Fedor Flinzer, and others; but the frontispiece is from an
original sketch by Mr. Gordon Browne. In accordance with his special
desire, it has only been used for Mrs. Ewing's poem, as the Convalescent
was a little friend of the artist, who did not live to complete his
recovery. The poem is the last that Mrs. Ewing wrote for children, and
it was penned when she herself was enduring the discomforts of
convalescence with all the courage she so warmly advocates.

Mr. Randolph Caldecott's illustrations to "Mother's Birthday Review"
first appeared in his _Sketch Book_, but the letterpress that
accompanied them was very brief, and Mrs. Ewing could not resist asking
permission to write some verses to the pictures, and publish them in
_Aunt Judy's Magazine_. This favour was kindly granted, and by Mrs.
Caldecott's further kindness the sketches are again used here.

The contents of this volume have been arranged chronologically as far as
is possible.

"The Willow Man" and "Grandmother's Spring" were both written to protest
against wantonly wasting Dame Nature's gifts, and the Note on page 69
shows that Mrs. Ewing had learnt this lesson herself in childhood. My
Father has lately recalled an incident which he believes first roused
our Mother to teach the lesson to us. They were driving to Sheffield one
day, when on Bolsover Hill they saw a well-known veterinary surgeon of
the district, Mr. Peech, who had dismounted from his horse, and was
carefully taking up a few roots of white violets from a bank where they
grew in some profusion. He showed Mrs. Gatty what he was gathering, but
told her he was taking care to _leave a bit behind_. This happened fully
forty years ago, long before the Selborne and other Societies for the
preservation of rare plants and birds had come into existence, and
Mother was much impressed and pleased by Mr. Peech's delicate
scrupulousness.

"A Soldier's Children" was written in 1879, whilst many friends were
fighting in South Africa, and ten years before a story bearing the same
name was issued by the writer of _Bootles' Baby_.

The "Songs for Music" appeared in 1874 in a volume called _Songs by Four
Friends_, except the two last poems, "Anemones" and "Autumn Tints." The
former was given by Mrs. Ewing to her brother, Mr. Alfred Scott-Gatty,
to set to music, and it has recently been published by Messrs. Boosey.
"Autumn Tints" was found amongst Mrs. Ewing's papers after her death,
and is now printed for the first time.

HORATIA K.F. EDEN.

_June 1895._




CONTENTS.


VERSES FOR CHILDREN.




    THE BURIAL OF THE LINNET

    MASTER FRITZ

    THE WILLOW-MAN

    OUR GARDEN

    A FRIEND IN THE GARDEN

    THREE LITTLE NEST BIRDS

    DOLLY'S LULLABY: A NURSERY RHYME

    A HERO TO HIS HOBBY-HORSE

    THE DOLLS' WASH

    HOUSE-BUILDING AND REPAIRS

    THE BLUE-BELLS ON THE LEA

    AN ONLY CHILD'S TEA-PARTY

    PAPA POODLE

    GRANDMOTHER'S SPRING

    BIG SMITH

    KIT'S CRADLE

    THE MILL STREAM

    BOY AND SQUIRREL

    LITTLE MASTER TO HIS BIG DOG

    A SWEET LITTLE DEAR

    BLUE AND RED; OR, THE DISCONTENTED LOBSTER

    THE YELLOW FLY: A TALE WITH A STING IN IT

    CANADA HOME

    THE POET AND THE BROOK: A TALE OF TRANSFORMATIONS

    A SOLDIER'S CHILDREN

    "TOUCH HIM IF YOU DARE:" A TALE OF THE HEDGE

    MOTHER'S BIRTHDAY REVIEW

    THE PROMISE

    CONVALESCENCE

    THE ADVENTURES OF AN ELF. (_Translated_)


SONGS FOR MUSIC.

    SERENADE

    MAIDEN WITH THE GIPSY LOOK

    AH! WOULD I COULD FORGET

    MADRIGAL

    THE ELLEREE: A SONG OF SECOND SIGHT

    OTHER STARS

    FADED FLOWERS

    SPEED WELL

    HOW MANY YEARS AGO?

    "WITH A DIFFERENCE"

    THE LILY OF THE LAKE

    FROM FLEETING PLEASURES: A REQUIEM FOR ONE ALIVE

    THE RUNAWAY'S RETURN

    FANCY FREE: A GIRL'S SONG

    MY LOVE'S GIFT

    ANEMONES

    AUTUMN LEAVES


HYMNS.

    CONFIRMATION

    WHITSUNTIDE

    CHRISTMAS WISHES: A CAROL

    TEACH ME. (_From the Danish_)




VERSES FOR CHILDREN.



THE BURIAL OF THE LINNET.


    Found in the garden--dead in his beauty.
      Ah! that a linnet should die in the spring!
    Bury him, comrades, in pitiful duty,
      Muffle the dinner-bell, solemnly ring.

    Bury him kindly--up in the corner;
      Bird, beast, and gold-fish are sepulchred there;
    Bid the black kitten march as chief mourner,
      Waving her tail like a plume in the air.

    Bury him nobly--next to the donkey;
      Fetch the old banner, and wave it about:
    Bury him deeply--think of the monkey,
      Shallow his grave, and the dogs got him out.

    Bury him softly--white wool around him,
      Kiss his poor feathers,--the first kiss and last;
    Tell his poor widow kind friends have found him:
      Plant his poor grave with whatever grows fast.

    Farewell, sweet singer! dead in thy beauty,
      Silent through summer, though other birds sing;
    Bury him, comrades, in pitiful duty,
      Muffle the dinner-bell, mournfully ring.




    [Illustration: MASTER FRITZ.]


    Fritz and I are not brother and sister, but we're next-door
             neighbours; for we both live next door.
    I mean we both live next door to each other; for I live at
             number three, and Fritz and Nickel the dog live at number
             four.
    In summer we climb through the garret windows and sit
             together on the leads,
    And if the sun is too hot Mother lends us one big kerchief
             to put over both our heads.
    Sometimes she gives us tea under the myrtle tree in the big
             pot that stands in the gutter.
    (One slice each, and I always give Fritz the one that has
             the most butter.)
    In winter we sit on the little stool by the stove at number four;
    For when it's cold Fritz doesn't like to go out to come in next door.
    It was one day in spring that he said, "I should like to
             have a house to myself with you Grethel, and Nickel." And I
             said, "Thank you, Fritz."
    And he said, "If you'll come in at tea-time and sit by the stove, I'll
             tell you tales that'll frighten you into fits.
    About boys who ran away from their homes, and were taken by robbers,
             and run after by wolves, and altogether in a dreadful state.
    I saw the pictures of it in a book I was looking in, to see where
             perhaps I should like to emigrate.
    I've not quite settled whether I shall, or be cast away on a desert
             island, or settle down nearer home;
    But you'd better come in and hear about it, and then, wherever it is,
             you'll be sure to be ready to come."
    So I took my darling Katerina in my arms, and we went in to tea.
    I love Katerina, though she lost her head long ago, poor thing; but
             Fritz made me put her off my knee,
    For he said, "When you're hushabying that silly old doll I know you're
             not attending to me.
    Now look here, Grethel, I think I have made up my mind that we won't
             go far;
    For we can have a house, and I can be master of it just as well where
             we are.
    Under the stairs would be a good place for a house for us if there's
             room.
    It's very dirty, but you're the housewife now, and you must sweep it
             out well with the broom.
    I shall expect you to keep my house very comfortable, and have my meals
             ready when there's anything to eat;
    And when Nickel and I come back from playing outside, you may peep out
             and pretend you're watching for us coming up the street.
    You've kept your apple, I see--I've eaten mine--well, it will be
             something to make a start,
    And I'll put by some of my cake, if you'll keep some of yours, and
             remember Nickel must have part.
    I call it your cake and your apple, but of course now you're my
             housewife everything belongs to me;
    But I shall give you the management of it, and you must make it go as
             far as you can amongst three.
    And if you make nice feasts every day for me and Nickel, and never
             keep us waiting for our food,
    And always do everything I want, and attend to everything I say, I'm
             sure I shall almost always be good.
    And if I am naughty now and then, it'll most likely be your fault;
             and, if it isn't, you mustn't mind;
    For even if I seem to be cross, you ought to know that I mean to be
             kind.
    And I'm sure you'll like combing Nickel's hair for my sake; it'll be
             something for you to do, and it bothers me so!
    But it must be done regularly, for if it's not, his curls tangle into
             lugs as they grow.
    I think that's all, dear Grethel, for I love you so much that I'm sure
             to be easy to please.
    Only remember--it's a trifle--but when I want you, never keep that
             headless doll on your knees.
    I'd much rather not have her in my house--there, don't cry! if you
             will have her, I suppose it must be;
    Though I can't think what you want with Katerina when you've got
             Nickel and me."
    So I said, "Thank you, dear Fritz, for letting me bring her, for I've
             had her so long I shouldn't like to part with her now;
    And I'll try and do everything you want as well as I can, now you've
             told me how."
    But next morning I heard Fritz's garret-window open, and he put out
             his head,
    And shouted, "Grethel! Grethel! I want you. Be quick! Haven't you got
             out of bed?"
    I ran to the window and said, "What is it, dear Fritz?" and he said,
             "I want to tell you that I've changed my mind.
    Hans-Wandermann is here, and he says there are real sapphires on the
             beach; so I'm off to see what I can find."
    "Oh, Fritz!" I said, "can't I come too?" but he said, "You'd better
             not, you'll only be in the way.
    You can stop quietly at home with Katerina, and you may have Nickel
             too, if he'll stay."
    But Nickel wouldn't. I give him far more of my cake than Fritz does,
             but he likes Fritz better than me.
    So dear Katerina and I had breakfast together on the leads under the
             old myrtle tree.




    THE WILLOW-MAN.


    There once was a Willow, and he was very old,
    And all his leaves fell off from him, and left him in the cold;
    But ere the rude winter could buffet him with snow,
    There grew upon his hoary head a crop of Mistletoe.

    All wrinkled and furrowed was this old Willow's skin,
    His taper fingers trembled, and his arms were very thin;
    Two round eyes and hollow, that stared but did not see,
    And sprawling feet that never walked, had this most ancient tree.

    A Dame who dwelt near was the only one who knew
    That every year upon his head the Christmas berries grew;
    And when the Dame cut them, she said--it was her whim--
    "A merry Christmas to you, Sir!" _and left a bit for him_.

    "Oh, Granny dear, tell us," the children cried, "where we
    May find the shining Mistletoe that grows upon the tree?"
    At length the Dame told them, but cautioned them to mind
    To greet the Willow civilly, _and leave a bit behind_.

    "Who cares," said the children, "for this old Willow-man?
    We'll take the Mistletoe, and he may catch us if he can."
    With rage the ancient Willow shakes in every limb,
    For they have taken all, and _have not left a bit for him_!

    Then bright gleamed the holly, the Christmas berries shone,
    But in the wintry wind without the Willow-man did moan:
    "Ungrateful, and wasteful! the mystic Mistletoe
    A hundred years hath grown on me, but never more shall grow."

    A year soon passed by, and the children came once more,
    But not a sprig of Mistletoe the aged Willow bore.
    Each slender spray pointed; he mocked them in his glee,
    And chuckled in his wooden heart, that ancient Willow-tree.

    MORAL.

    Oh, children, who gather the spoils of wood and wold,
    From selfish greed and wilful waste your little hands withhold.
    Though fair things be common, this moral bear in mind,
    "Pick thankfully and modestly, and leave a bit behind."




    [Illustration]

    OUR GARDEN.


    The winter is gone; and at first Jack and I were sad,
    Because of the snow-man's melting, but now we are glad;
    For the spring has come, and it's warm, and we're allowed to garden
             in the afternoon;
    And summer is coming, and oh, how lovely our flowers will be in June!
    We are so fond of flowers, it makes us quite happy to think
    Of our beds--all colours--blue, white, yellow, purple, and pink,
