The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Land of Mystery, by Edward S. Ellis


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Land of Mystery


Author: Edward S. Ellis



Release Date: October 10, 2005  [eBook #16855]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAND OF MYSTERY***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



THE LAND OF MYSTERY

by

EDWARD S. ELLIS

Author of

"Famous American Naval Commanders," "Jungle Fugitives," "Old Ironsides,
The Hero of Tripoli and 1812," etc.


New York
Hurst & Company
Publishers
Copyright
1889 by Frank Lovell Co.
1901 by Street & Smith







THE LAND OF MYSTERY.


CHAPTER I.

IN THE MATTO GROSSO.

The blood-red sun was sinking beyond the distant Geral Mountains, when
a canoe, containing four white men and three natives, came to a halt a
thousand miles from the mighty Amazon, in the upper waters of the Xingu
River, near the great table-land of Matto Grosso.

It was hard work, forcing the long shallow boat against the rapid
current of the stream, whose unknown source is somewhere among the
famous diamond regions of Brazil.  It was plain sailing for three
hundred leagues from the Amazon, from whose majestic volume the little
party of explorers had turned southward more than a month before.  The
broad sail, which was erected in the centre of the craft, swept it
smoothly along over the narrowing bosom of the Xingu, between luxuriant
forests and past tribes of strange-looking Indians, who stood on the
banks staring wonderingly at the extraordinary beings, the like of
which many of them had never seen before.

Occasionally the explorers put ashore, and, using only the language of
signs, exchanged some of the beads and gaudy trinkets for the curious
articles of the savages.  Endless varieties of fruit were so abundant
that it was to be had for the simple trouble of plucking; while the
timid natives stood in such awe of their visitors, that the thought of
harming them never entered their minds.

But ominous changes were gradually noted by our friends, as they
steadily ascended the mysterious stream.  At first the natives fled at
their approach, and failed to understand the signs of comity, or were
so distrustful of the strangers that they refused to meet their
advances.  Fleeing into the woods or high hills, they peeped out from
their coverts, uttering strange cries and indulging in grotesque
gestures, the meaning of which could hardly be mistaken.  Had there
been any misapprehension on the part of the visitors, there was none
after several scores launched their arrows at the boat, as it glided
away from the shore and up stream.  The aim was wild and no one was
struck, but when Professor Ernest Grimcke, the sturdy, blue-eyed
scientist of the party, picked up one of the missiles and carefully
examined it, he made the disturbing announcement that it was tipped
with one of the deadliest of known poisons.

The other members of this exploring party were Fred Ashman, a bright,
intelligent American, four-and-twenty years of age; Jared Long, an
attenuated, muscular New Englander in middle life, and Aaron Johnston,
a grim, reserved but powerful sailor from New Bedford, who had spent
most of his life on whaling voyages.  Professor Grimcke and Ashman were
joint partners in the exploring enterprise, Long and Johnston being
their assistants.

In addition, there were three native servants, or helpers, known as
Bippo, Pedros and Quincal.  They had been engaged at Macapa, near the
mouth of the Amazon.  They were rather small of size, the first-named
being the most intelligent, and in that warm, tropical climate wore no
clothing except a strip of native cloth around the loins.  Ashman had
striven to teach them the use of firearms, but they could never
overcome the terror caused by the jet of fire and the thunderous
explosion when the things were discharged.  They, therefore, clung to
their spears, which, having honest points, cannot be said to have been
very formidable weapons in their hands, even though each native was
able to throw them with remarkable deftness and accuracy.

The sail that had served the explorers so well, where the Xingu was
broader and with a slower current, became useless, or at least proved
unequal to the task of overcoming the force of the stream.
Consequently they had recourse to the broad-bladed oars, with which
they drove the canoe swiftly against the resisting river, cheered by
the oft-repeated declaration of the Professor, whose spirits never
flagged, that the harder it proved going up stream, the easier must it
be in descending, and that the arrangement was much better than if the
condition of affairs were reversed.

The most tiresome work came when they reached some place, where the
falls or rapids compelled them to land, and, lifting the boat and its
contents from the ground, carry it round the obstruction to the more
favorable current above.  These portages varied in length from a few
rods to a fourth of a mile, and the further the party advanced, the
more frequent did they become.

"We have gone far enough for to-night," said the Professor, as the prow
of the boat was turned toward the left bank; "we will go into camp and
make ready for to-morrow."

A few minutes later, the bow of the canoe gently touched the dark sand
of the shore.  Bippo, Pedros and Quincal understood their duty so well
that, without suggestion from the others, they leaped into the shallow
waters, ran a few steps, and, grasping the front of the craft, drew it
so far upon the land that the others stepped out without so much as
wetting the soles of their shoes.

This task was no more than finished, when the natives scattered in the
forest, which came almost to the edge of the water, in quest of fuel.
This of course was so abundant that the work was slight, but since
Professor Grimcke and Fred Ashman paid them well for their services
they were left to attend to that duty unassisted.

As the surroundings of the party were entirely new and strange, Grimcke
proposed that while the evening meal was being prepared, they should
find out, if it could be done, whether any unwelcome neighbors were
likely to disturb them before morning.  After a brief consultation, it
was decided that the Professor and Jared Long should make their way up
the river, keeping close to shore, with the purpose of learning the
extent of the rapids, while Ashman and the sailor, Johnston, should
follow the clearly marked trail which led directly away from the stream
and into the forest.  It was more than probable that one of the couples
would come upon something worth knowing, and it was not unlikely that
both would return with important information.

Twilight is of short duration in the low latitudes, and the wish of the
four white men was to be back in camp at the end of an hour, by which
time night would be fairly upon them.  But the moon was at its full and
would serve them better than the twilight itself.

The German and New Englander, therefore, moved away from camp,
following the course of the Xingu, while their two friends quickly
vanished in the forest.  Each carried his repeating Winchester and his
Smith & Wesson.

Ashman felt some misgiving because of the trail leading into the woods
from a point so near the camp.  It seemed likely to have been worn by
the inhabitants of some village near at hand, though it was possible
that the innumerable feet of wild animals on their way to and from the
river may have been the cause.  The upper waters of the Xingu are
remarkably clear and pure, a fact which rendered the first theory most
probable.

The explorers had landed in a dangerous region, as they were destined
to learn very soon, and the experience of the couples who took routes
at right angles to each other was of the most thrilling character.

It has been stated that the progress of the canoe had been checked, as
was often the case before, by the rapids of the Xingu, which could be
passed only by carrying the canoe and luggage to the smoother waters
above.  It was apparent that the river frequently overflowed its banks,
for immense quantities of driftwood lined both shores, while the
vegetation had been swept away to that extent that a space of a dozen
feet from the margin of the stream was comparatively free from it.
Thus both parties found the travelling easy.

The rapids were a hundred yards wide, more or less, and, with such a
steep incline, that the foamy waves dashed hither and thither and
against each other with the utmost fury, sending the spray high in air
and sweeping forward with such impetuosity that it seemed impossible
for the strongest craft under the most skilful guidance to shoot them.
The explorers studied them with great interest as they ascended the
left bank.

It was inevitable that in a country with such excessive vegetable
growth, every part of the Xingu should show much floating timber.  The
logs which plunged through the rapids played all manner of antics.
Sometimes they leaped high out of the waters, like immense sea
monsters, the out-spreading limbs showing a startling resemblance to
the arms of a drowning person mutely appealing for help.  Then a heavy
trunk would strike a rock just below the surface, and the branches,
dripping with spray, swept over in a huge semi-circle.  The roar and
swirl suggested the whirlpool below the falls of Niagara, one of the
most appalling sights in all nature.




CHAPTER II.

A TRIO OF ENEMIES.

At last, when the full moon was shining, the two men stood at the head
of the rapids and surveyed their surroundings before setting out on
their return to camp.

Both sides of the Xingu were lined by the dense forest, in which the
vegetation is so luxuriant that it must be a source of never ending
wonder to those who look upon it for the first time.  The river above
made a sharp bend, shutting off the view so fully that from their
position, it was impossible to tell how far they would be able to use
the canoe without making another portage.

"We haven't seen a person on our way here," remarked the Professor,
calmly surveying the river and shores; "and I hope Ashman will bring
back a similar report, for we all need a full night's rest."

"How is _that_?"

Long touched the arm of his companion, as he asked the question, and
pointed down stream in the direction of camp.

To the amazement of the Professor, three natives were seen standing on
the very spot where they themselves had stood a brief while before,
evidently scrutinizing the white strangers with profound wonder and
curiosity.

They were dressed similarly to Bippo, Pedros and Quincal--that is, with
only a piece of cloth around the loins--but they displayed a marked
contrast in other respects.  They were taller, more athletic, with
immense bushy heads of hair, enormous rings in their ears, while the
hue of their skins was almost as dark as that of the native African.

One carried a long-bow and a bundle of arrows strapped behind his
shoulders, while the others were armed simply with javelins or spears.

"Those fellows mean fight," added Long.

"No doubt of it," replied the Professor.

"But a Winchester will reach further than their arrows and spears, even
if they are tipped with poison."

"Possibly they may be friendly, if they can be convinced that we intend
them no harm, and you know what an advantage it will be to us if able
to trust all the natives on our return."

Long could not share the confidence of his companion and favored a
direct advance down the bank toward the savages.  If the latter
preserved their armed neutrality, all would be well enough, but at the
first sign of hostility he advocated opening fire on them.

Perhaps he was right in the declaration that anything like timidity in
dealing with savages is the worst possible course.  While the rights of
every barbarian should be respected, it is all important that he should
know that such concession is made not through fear, but because the
superior party wishes to be just and merciful.

The natives stood as motionless as statues for several minutes, during
which the white men scrutinized them with an interest that may be
imagined.

The first and most natural thought of our friends was that an encounter
could be avoided by entering the forest on the right and passing round
the savages, who, it was quite apparent, intended to dispute their
return; but if such was really their purpose, they would have little
trouble in heading off the whites in the dense wood, beside which, for
the weighty reasons already named, it would have been exceedingly
unwise to act as though afraid of the dusky natives.

Despite Long's protest, the Professor decided to make a friendly
advance, being vigilantly on his guard at the same time for the first
offensive move of the savages.  He carried his Winchester in one hand,
while he rested the other on his revolver.  He was determined, while
hoping for comity, to be prepared for hostility or treachery.

Long was so dissatisfied with the looks of things, that he followed his
friend a few paces, then halting with his Winchester ready for any
emergency, and certain in his own mind that a sharp fight was
inevitable.

The approach of the white man was evidently a surprise to the savages.
The middle one, who held the long-bow and arrows, fell back several
paces, as if about to break into flight or dart among the trees so
invitingly near, but something must have been said by his companions to
check him, for he stopped abruptly, and not only came back to his first
position, but advanced a couple of paces beyond.  The noise from the
rapids prevented the Professor hearing their voices, though the
unusually clear moonlight told him that some utterance had passed
between them.

The first ominous act on the part of the natives was by this archer,
who deliberately drew an arrow from over his shoulder and fitted it
against the string of his bow.  The fact that the missile was
undoubtedly coated at the end with a virus more deadly than that of the
rattlesnake or cobra was enough to render the would-be friend
uncomfortable and to increase his alertness.

At the same time that the archer went through this significant
preliminary, his companions shifted their grasp upon their javelins in
a manner that was equally suggestive.

While carrying these primitive weapons, the fingers closed around the
centre of gravity, that naturally being more convenient, but when about
to hurl them, the hand was shoved further toward the head.  Both
natives thus shifted their right hands, though, they still held them
horizontal at their thighs, from which position they could be brought
aloft in the twinkling of an eye.

The white man walked slowly.  The left hand, which supported his rifle,
remained motionless, but removing the right from his revolver, he
continued making signs, whose friendly meaning was so obvious that it
was impossible for the natives to mistake it.

While approaching in this guarded manner, he Studied them with the
closest scrutiny.  Interesting under any circumstances, they were
vastly more so at this time.  What struck him in addition to the
characteristics already named, were their frowsy eyebrows and
glittering coal-black eyes.  These were unusually large and protruding.
The noses, instead of being broad and flat, like those of the native
Africans, were Roman in shape.  The mouths were wide, and, when they
spoke, he observed that the teeth which were displayed were black,
showing that a fashion prevailed among this unknown tribe similar to
that in vogue among many of the natives in the East Indies.

Now, Professor Grimcke was too experienced an explorer to walk directly
into danger, where there was no prospect of avoiding a desperate
encounter.  While eager to make friends with all the people whom he
met, he did not intend to assume any unnecessary risks.  The demeanor
of the natives tendered it certain they were hostile.  They made no
responsive signs to those of the white man, and the latter would have
checked himself half way, but for his suspicion that they were
mystified by his conduct and were undecided as to the precise thing to
do.

He not only heard their peculiar rumbling voices, but saw from the
movements of their lips and their glances in each other's faces, that
they were consulting as to what they should do.  The white man was
already so close that he could easily be reached by the bowman, and
there was little doubt that either of the others could hurl his
poisoned javelin the intervening distance.

The only way of defeating such a movement was for the white man to
secure "the drop" on them, but, in one sense that was impossible.
Unable to understand the words spoken, they were equally unacquainted
with the weapons of the pale face, and would, doubtless pay no heed to
the most threatening demonstration on his part.

"Take my advice and come back," called Jared Long; "keep your face
toward them and blaze away, and I'll do my part!"

Instead of adopting the suggestion of his friend, the Professor slowed
his pace, still making his gestures of good will.  However, when fifty
steps away, he came to a dead halt.

He had advanced three-fourths the distance, and, if the others were
willing to accept his offers, they should signify it by coming forward
and meeting him where he had stopped.

While moving forward in this guarded manner, Grimcke was prudent enough
to edge over toward the woods, which were now so close to his right
side as to be instantly available.  When he came to a stop also it was
near the trunk of a large tree, no more than a yard distant.

"The Professor is cunning," reflected Jared Long, watching every
movement; "he'll whisk behind the tree the instant one of them makes a
move.  Helloa! what's up now?"

To the astonishment of both white men the native with the bow shifted
it at this moment to his right hand, holding the arrow in place against
the string with the same hand, while the weapon was at his side.  Then
he moved a step or two, as if to meet the stranger.

"Look out!" called the vigilant New Englander, "that chap is up to some
deviltry."

