The Project Gutenberg EBook of We and the World, Part II. (of II.), by
Juliana Horatia Ewing

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: We and the World, Part II. (of II.)
       A Book for Boys

Author: Juliana Horatia Ewing

Release Date: April 12, 2006 [EBook #18156]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WE AND THE WORLD, PART II. ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Erik Bent, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                      WE AND THE WORLD:

                       A BOOK FOR BOYS.


                           PART II.


                             BY
                    JULIANA HORATIA EWING.



        SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
            LONDON: NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C.
               BRIGHTON: 129, NORTH STREET.
              NEW YORK: E. & J.B. YOUNG & CO.


[Published under the direction of the General Literature
Committee.]


WE AND THE WORLD.




CHAPTER I.

        "A friend in need is a friend indeed."--_Old Proverb_.


I have often thought that the biggest bit of good luck (and I was
lucky), which befell me on my outset into the world, was that the man I
sat next to in the railway carriage was not a rogue. I travelled third
class to Liverpool for more than one reason--it was the cheapest way,
besides which I did not wish to meet any family friends--and the man I
speak of was a third-class passenger, and he went to Liverpool too.

At the time I was puzzled to think how he came to guess that I was
running away, that I had money with me, and that I had never been to
Liverpool before; but I can well imagine now how my ignorance and
anxiety must have betrayed themselves at every station I mistook for the
end of my journey, and with every question which I put, as I flattered
myself, in the careless tones of common conversation, I really wonder I
had not thought beforehand about my clothes, which fitted very badly on
the character I assumed, and the company I chose; but it was not perhaps
to be expected that I should know then, as I know now, how conspicuous
all over me must have been the absence of those outward signs of
hardship and poverty, which they who know poverty and hardship know so
well.

I wish _I_ had known them, because then I should have given the man some
of my money when we parted, instead of feeling too delicate to do so. I
can remember his face too well not to know now how much he must have
needed it, and how heroic a virtue honesty must have been in him.

It did not seem to strike him as at all strange or unnatural that a lad
of my age should be seeking his own fortune, but I feel sure that he
thought it was misconduct on my part which had made me run away from
home. I had no grievance to describe which he could recognize as
grievous enough to drive me out into the world. However, I felt very
glad that he saw no impossibility in my earning my own livelihood, or
even anything very unusual in my situation.

"I suppose lots of young fellows run away from home and go to sea from a
place like this?" said I, when we had reached Liverpool.

"And there's plenty more goes that has no homes to run from," replied he
sententiously.

Prefacing each fresh counsel with the formula, "You'll excuse _me_," he
gave me some excellent advice as we threaded the greasy streets, and
jostled the disreputable-looking population of the lower part of the
town. General counsels as to my conduct, and the desirableness of
turning over a new leaf for "young chaps" who had been wild and got into
scrapes at home. And particular counsels which were invaluable to me, as
to changing my dress, how to hide my money, what to turn my hand to with
the quickest chance of bread-winning in strange places, and how to keep
my own affairs to myself among strange people.

It was in the greasiest street, and among the most disreputable-looking
people, that we found the "slop-shop" where, by my friend's orders, I
was to "rig out" in clothes befitting my new line of life. He went in
first, so he did not see the qualm that seized me on the doorstep. A
revulsion so violent that it nearly made me sick then and there; and if
some one had seized me by the nape of my neck, and landed me straightway
at my desk in Uncle Henry's office, would, I believe, have left me tamed
for life. For if this unutterable vileness of sights and sounds and
smells which hung around the dark entry of the slop shop were indeed
the world, I felt a sudden and most vehement conviction that I would
willingly renounce the world for ever. As it happened, I had not at that
moment the choice. My friend had gone in, and I dared not stay among the
people outside. I groped my way into the shop, which was so dark as well
as dingy that they had lighted a small oil-lamp just above the head of
the man who served out the slops. Even so the light that fell on him was
dim and fitful, and was the means of giving me another start in which I
gasped out--"Moses Benson!"

The man turned and smiled (he had the Jew-clerk's exact smile), and said
softly,

"Cohen, my dear, not Benson."

And as he bent at another angle of the oil-lamp I saw that he was older
than the clerk, and dirtier; and though his coat was quite curiously
like the one I had so often cleaned, he had evidently either never met
with the invaluable "scouring drops," or did not feel it worth while to
make use of them in such a dingy hole.

One shock helped to cure the other. Come what might, I could not sneak
back now to the civil congratulations of that other Moses, and the scorn
of his eye. But I was so nervous that my fellow-traveller transacted my
business for me, and when the oil-lamp flared and I caught Moses Cohen
looking at me, I jumped as if Snuffy had come behind me. And when we got
out (and it was no easy matter to escape from the various benevolent
offers of the owner of the slop-shop), my friend said,

"You'll excuse me telling you, but whatever you do don't go near that
there Jew again. He's no friend for a young chap like you."

"I should have got your slops cheaper," he added, "if I could have taken
your clothes in without you."

My "slops" were a very loose suit of clothes made of much coarser
material than my own, and I suppose they were called "slops" because
they fitted in such a peculiarly sloppy manner. The whole "rig out" (it
included a strong clasp-knife, and a little leathern bag to keep my
money in, which I was instructed to carry round my neck) was provided by
Mr. Cohen in exchange for the clothes I had been wearing before, with
the addition of ten shillings in cash. I dipped again into the leathern
bag to provide a meal for myself and my friend; then, by his advice, I
put a shilling and some coppers into my pocket, that I might not have to
bring out my purse in public, and with a few parting words of counsel he
wrung my hand, and we parted--he towards some place of business where he
hoped to get employment, and I in the direction of the docks, where the
ships come and go.

"I hope you _will_ get work," were my last words.

"The same to you, my lad," was his reply, and it seemed to acknowledge
me as one of that big brotherhood of toilers who, when they want
"something to do," want it not to pass time but to earn daily bread.




CHAPTER II.

            "Deark d'on Dearka." ("_Beg of a Beggar_.")
                                              _Irish Proverb_.

     "... From her way of speaking they also saw immediately that she
     too was an Eirisher.... They must be a bonny family when they are
     all at home!"--_The Life of Mansie Tailor in Dalkeith_.


"Dock" (so ran the 536th of the 'Penny Numbers') is "a place
artificially formed for the reception of ships, the entrance of which is
generally closed by gates. There are two kinds of docks, dry-docks and
wet-docks. The former are used for receiving ships in order to their
being inspected and repaired. For this purpose the dock must be so
contrived that the water may be admitted or excluded at pleasure, so
that a vessel can be floated in when the tide is high, and that the
water may run out with the fall of the tide, or be pumped out, the
closing of the gates preventing its return. Wet-docks are formed for the
purpose of keeping vessels always afloat.... One of the chief uses of a
dock is to keep a uniform level of water, so that the business of
loading and unloading ships can be carried on without any
interruption.... The first wet-dock for commercial purposes made in this
kingdom was formed in the year 1708 at Liverpool, then a place of no
importance."

_The business of loading and unloading ships can be carried on without
any interruption._ If everything that the Penny Numbers told of were as
true to the life as that, the world's wonders (at least those of them
which begin with the first four letters of the alphabet) must be all
that I had hoped; and perhaps that bee-hive about which Master Isaac and
I had had our jokes, did really yield a "considerable income" to the
fortunate French bee-master!

Loading and unloading, coming and going, lifting and lowering, shouting
and replying, swearing and retorting, creaking and jangling, shrieking
and bumping, cursing and chaffing, the noise and restlessness of men and
things were utterly bewildering. I had often heard of a Babel of sounds,
but I had never before heard anything so like what one might fancy it
must have been when that great crowd of workmen broke up, and left
building their tower, in a confounding of language and misunderstanding
of speech. For the men who went to and fro in these docks, each his own
way, jostling and yelling to each other, were men of all nations, and
the confusion was of tongues as well as of work. At one minute I found
myself standing next to a live Chinaman in a pigtail, who was staring as
hard as I at some swarthy supple-bodied sailors with eager faces, and
scant clothing wrapped tightly round them, chatting to each other in a
language as strange to the Chinaman as to me, their large lustrous eyes
returning our curiosity with interest, and contrasting strangely with
the tea-caddy countenance of my elbow neighbour. Then a turbaned Turk
went by, and then two grinning negroes, and there were lots of men who
looked more like Englishmen, but who spoke with other tongues, and
amongst those who loaded and unloaded in this busy place, which was once
of no importance, Irish brogue seemed the commonest language of all.

One thing made me hopeful--there were plenty of boys no bigger than
myself who were busy working, and therefore earning wages, and as I saw
several lads who were dressed in suits the very counterpart of my own, I
felt sure that my travelling companion had done me a good turn when he
rigged me out in slops. An incident that occurred in the afternoon made
me a little more doubtful about this.

I really had found much to counterbalance the anxieties of my position
in the delightful novelty and variety of life around me, and not a
little to raise my hopes; for I had watched keenly for several hours as
much as I could see from the wharf of what was going on in this ship
and that, and I began to feel less confused. I perceived plainly that a
great deal of every-day sort of work went on in ships as well as in
houses, with the chief difference, in dock at any rate, of being done in
public. In the most free and easy fashion, to the untiring entertainment
of crowds of idlers besides myself, the men and boys on vessel after
vessel lying alongside, washed out their shirts and socks, and hung them
up to dry, cooked their food, cleaned out their pots and pans, tidied
their holes and corners, swept and brushed, and fetched and carried, and
did scores of things which I knew I could do perfectly, for want of
something better to do.

"It's clear there's plenty of dirty work to go on with till one learns
seamanship," I thought, and the thought was an honest satisfaction to
me.

I had always swept Uncle Henry's office, and that had been light work
after cleaning the school-room at Snuffy's. My hands were never likely
to be more chapped at sea than they had been with dirt and snow and want
of things to dry oneself with at school; and as to coal-carrying--

Talking of coals, on board the big ship, out of which great white bales,
strapped with bars of iron, were being pulled up by machinery, and
caught and flung about by the "unloaders," there was a man whose
business it seemed to be to look after the fires, and who seemed also to
have taken a roll in the coal-hole for pleasure; and I saw him find a
tin basin and a square of soap, and a decent rough towel to wash his
face and hands, such as would have been reckoned luxurious in a
dormitory at Snuffy's. Altogether--when a heavy hand was laid suddenly
on my shoulder, and a gruff voice said,

"Well, my young star-gazing greenhorn, and what do you want?"

I replied with alacrity, as well as with more respect than the
stranger's appearance was calculated to inspire, "Please, sir, I want to
go to sea, and I should like to ship for America."

He was not a nice-looking man by any means--far too suggestive of
Snuffy, when Snuffy was partly drunk. But after a pause, he said,

"All right. Where are your papers? What was your ship, and why did ye
run?"

"I have not served in a ship yet, sir," said I, "but I'm sure--"

He did not allow me to go on. With a sudden fierce look that made him
more horribly like Snuffy than before, he caught me by my sleeve and a
bit of my arm, and shoved me back from the edge of the dock till we
stood alone. "Then where did ye steal your slops?" he hissed at me with
oaths. "Look here, ye young gallows-bird, if ye don't stand me a liquor,
I'll run ye in as a runaway apprentice. So cash up, and look sharp."

I was startled, but I was not quite such a fool as I looked, mind or
body. I had once had a hardish struggle with Snuffy himself when he was
savage, and I was strong and agile beyond my seeming. I dived deeply
into my trousers-pocket, as if feeling for the price of a "liquor," and
the man having involuntarily allowed me a little swing for this, I
suddenly put up my shoulders, and ran at him as if my head were a
battering-ram, and his moleskin waistcoat the wall of a beleaguered
city, and then wrenching myself from his grasp, and dodging the leg he
had put out to trip me, I fled blindly down the quay.

No one can take orange-peel into account, however. I slipped on a large
piece and came headlong, with the aggravation of hearing my enemy
breathing hoarsely close above me. As regards him, I suppose it was
