Project Gutenberg's On the Trail, by Lina Beard and Adelia Belle Beard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: On the Trail
       An Outdoor Book for Girls

Author: Lina Beard and Adelia Belle Beard

Release Date: June 7, 2006 [EBook #18525]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON THE TRAIL ***




Produced by Audrey Longhurst, Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











On the Trail

An Outdoor Book for Girls

By
LINA BEARD

AND

ADELIA BELLE BEARD

With Illustrations by the Authors

NEW YORK

Charles Scribner's Sons

1915

COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

Published June, 1915

                   TO ALL GIRLS
          WHO LOVE THE LIFE OF THE OPEN
               WE DEDICATE THIS BOOK

[Illustration: Over-night camp.

Fire notice is posted on tree.]




PRESENTATION


The joyous, exhilarating call of the wilderness and the forest camp is
surely and steadily penetrating through the barriers of brick, stone,
and concrete; through the more or less artificial life of town and city;
and the American girl is listening eagerly. It is awakening in her
longings for free, wholesome, and adventurous outdoor life, for the
innocent delights of nature-loving Thoreau and bird-loving Burroughs.
Sturdy, independent, self-reliant, she is now demanding outdoor books
that are genuine and filled with practical information; books that tell
how to do worth-while things, that teach real woodcraft and are not
adapted to the girl supposed to be afraid of a caterpillar or to shudder
at sight of a harmless snake.

In answer to the demand, "On the Trail" has been written. The authors'
deep desire is to help girls respond to this new, insistent call by
pointing out to them the open trail. It is their hope and wish that
their girl readers may seek the charm of the wild and may find the same
happiness in the life of the open that the American boy has enjoyed
since the first settler built his little cabin on the shores of the New
World. To forward this object, the why and how, the where and when of
things of camp and trail have been embodied in this book.

Thanks are due to Edward Cave, president and editor of _Recreation_, for
kindly allowing the use of some of his wild-life photographs.

                                                  LINA BEARD,
                                                      ADELIA BELLE BEARD.
          FLUSHING, N. Y.,
          March 16, 1915.




CONTENTS

          CHAPTER                                        PAGE
             I. TRAILING                                    3
            II. WOODCRAFT                                  21
           III. CAMPING                                    44
            IV. WHAT TO WEAR ON THE TRAIL                  84
             V. OUTDOOR HANDICRAFT                        106
            VI. MAKING FRIENDS WITH THE OUTDOOR FOLK      119
           VII. WILD FOOD ON THE TRAIL                    138
          VIII. LITTLE FOES OF THE TRAILER                165
            IX. ON THE TRAIL WITH YOUR CAMERA             187
             X. ON AND IN THE WATER                       205
            XI. USEFUL KNOTS AND HOW TO TIE THEM          233
           XII. ACCIDENTS                                 244
          XIII. CAMP FUN AND FROLICS                      255
           XIV. HAPPY AND SANE SUNDAY IN CAMP             269




ILLUSTRATIONS


Over-night camp                                              _Frontispiece_

                                                                       PAGE
One can generally pass around obstructions like this on the trail         5

Difficulties of the Adirondack trail                                      9

Blazing the trail by bending down and breaking branches                  11

Returning to camp by the blazed trail                                    13

Footprints of animals                                                   17

Footprints of animals                                                   19

Ink impressions of leaves                                                23

Ink impressions of leaves                                                24

Ink impressions of leaves                                                25

Pitch-pine and cone                                                      26

Sycamore leaf and fruit of sycamore                                      26

How to use the axe                                                       29

The compass and the North Star                                           37

A permanent camp                                                         49

Outdoor shelters                                                         51

Dining-tent, handy racks, and log bedstead                               53

A forest camp by the water                                               55

In camp                                                                  57

The bough-bed, the cook-fire, and the wall-tent                          59

Soft wood                                                                63

Hard wood                                                                65

Bringing wood for the fire                                               69

Camp fires and camp sanitation                                           81

Trailers' outfits                                                        87

The head-net and blanket-roll                                            91

Some things to carry and how to carry them                              101

Handicraft in the woods                                                 107

Outdoor dressing-table, camp-cupboard, hammock-frame, seat,
  and pot-hook                                                          109

Camp-chair, biscuit-stick, and blanket camp-bed                         111

The birch-bark dish that will hold fluids. Details of making            115

A bear would rather be your friend than your enemy                      118

Making friends with a ruffed grouse                                     120

Found on the trail                                                      122

Timber wolves                                                           124

Baby moose                                                              126

Stalking wild birds                                                     128

The fish-hawk will sometimes build near the ground                      131

Antelopes of the western plains                                         135

Good food on the trail                                                  143

Fruits found principally in the south and the middle west               147

Fruits found principally in the north and the middle west               151

Fruits common to most of the States                                     155

Hickory nuts, sweet and bitter                                          159

Nuts with soft shells. Beechnut and chestnut                            161

Poisonous and non-poisonous snakes                                      173

Plants poison to the touch                                              181

Plants poison to the taste                                              185

The white birch-tree makes a fine background for the beaver             191

Blacktail deer snapped with a background of snow                        193

The skunk                                                               195

The porcupine stood in the shade but the background was light           197

Photographing a woodcock from ambush                                    199

The country through which you pass, with a trailer in the foreground    201

Method of protecting roots to keep plants fresh while you carry
  them to camp for photographing                                        203

A rowboat is a safer craft than a canoe                                 206

Keep your body steady                                                   208

Canoeing on placid waters                                               210

Bring your canoe up broadside to the shore                              212

How to use the paddle and a flat-bottomed rowboat                       215

The raft of logs                                                        219

Primitive weaving in raft building                                      221

Learn to be at home in the water                                        225

For dinner                                                              229

The veteran                                                             231

Bends in knot tying                                                     235

Figure eight knot                                                       237

Overhand bow-line knot                                                  237

Underhand bow-line knot                                                 239

Sheepshank knot                                                         239

Parcel slip-knot                                                        241

Cross-tie parcel knot                                                   241

Fisherman's knot                                                        241

The halter, slip-knot, and hitching-tie                                 243

The fireman's lift                                                      245

Aids in "first aid"                                                     247

Restoring respiration                                                   253

When darkness closes in                                                 259

Wood-thrush                                                             261

Yellow-throated vireo                                                   262

Fire without matches                                                    264

Fire without the bow                                                    267




ON THE TRAIL




CHAPTER I

TRAILING

=What the Outdoor World Can Do for Girls. How to Find the Trail and How
to Keep It=


There is a something in you, as in every one, every man, woman, girl,
and boy, that requires the tonic life of the wild. You may not know it,
many do not, but there is a part of your nature that only the wild can
reach, satisfy, and develop. The much-housed, overheated, overdressed,
and over-entertained life of most girls is artificial, and if one does
not turn away from and leave it for a while, one also becomes greatly
artificial and must go through life not knowing the joy, the strength,
the poise that real outdoor life can give.

What is it about a true woodsman that instantly compels our respect,
that sets him apart from the men who might be of his class in village or
town and puts him in a class by himself, though he may be exteriorly
rough and have little or no book education? The real Adirondack or the
North Woods guide, alert, clean-limbed, clear-eyed, hard-muscled,
bearing his pack-basket or duffel-bag on his back, doing all the hard
work of the camp, never loses his poise or the simple dignity which he
shares with all the things of the wild. It is bred in him, is a part of
himself and the life he leads. He is as conscious of his superior
knowledge of the woods as an astronomer is of his knowledge of the
stars, and patiently tolerates the ignorance and awkwardness of the
"tenderfoot" from the city. Only a keen sense of humor can make this
toleration possible, for I have seen things done by a city-dweller at
camp that would enrage a woodsman, unless the irresistibly funny side of
it made him laugh his inward laugh that seldom reaches the surface.

To live for a while in the wild strengthens the muscles of your mind as
well as of your body. Flabby thoughts and flabby muscles depart together
and are replaced by enthusiasm and vigor of purpose, by strength of limb
and chest and back. To _have_ seems not so desirable as to _be_. When
you have once come into sympathy with this world of the wild--which
holds our cultivated, artificial world in the hollow of its hand and
gives it life--new joy, good, wholesome, heartfelt joy, will well up
within you. New and absorbing interests will claim your attention. You
will breathe deeper, stand straighter. The small, petty things of life
will lose their seeming importance and great things will look larger and
infinitely more worth while. You will know that the woods, the fields,
the streams and great waters bear wonderful messages for you, and,
little by little, you will learn to read them.

The majority of people who visit the up-to-date hotels of the
Adirondacks, which their wily proprietors call camps, may think they see
the wild and are living in it. But for them it is only a big
picnic-ground through which they rush with unseeing eyes and whose
cloisters they invade with unfeeling hearts, seemingly for the one
purpose of building a fire, cooking their lunch, eating it, and then
hurrying back to the comforts of the hotel and the gayety of hotel life.

[Illustration: One can generally pass around obstructions like this on
the trail.]

At their careless and noisy approach the forest suddenly withdraws
itself into its deep reserve and reveals no secrets. It is as if they
entered an empty house and passed through deserted rooms, but all the
time the intruders are stealthily watched by unseen, hostile, or
frightened eyes. Every form of moving life is stilled and magically
fades into its background. The tawny rabbit halts amid the dry leaves of
a fallen tree. No one sees it. The sinuous weasel slips silently under a
rock by the side of the trail and is unnoticed. The mother grouse
crouches low amid the underbrush and her little ones follow her example,
but the careless company has no time to observe and drifts quickly by.
Only the irrepressible red squirrel might be seen, but isn't, when he
loses his balance and drops to a lower branch in his efforts to miss
nothing of the excitement of the invasion.

This is not romance, it is truth. To think sentimentally about nature,
