The Project Gutenberg eBook, With Kitchener in the Soudan, by G. A. Henty,
Illustrated by William Rainey


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: With Kitchener in the Soudan
       A Story of Atbara and Omdurman


Author: G. A. Henty



Release Date: July 19, 2006  [eBook #18868]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WITH KITCHENER IN THE SOUDAN***


E-text prepared by Martin Robb


Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 18868-h.htm or 18868-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/8/8/6/18868/18868-h/18868-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/8/8/6/18868/18868-h.zip)





WITH KITCHENER IN THE SOUDAN:

A Story of Atbara and Omdurman

by

G. A. HENTY.







Contents

            Preface.
Chapter  1: Disinherited.
Chapter  2: The Rising In Alexandria.
Chapter  3: A Terrible Disaster.
Chapter  4: An Appointment.
Chapter  5: Southward.
Chapter  6: Gregory Volunteers.
Chapter  7: To Metemmeh.
Chapter  8: Among The Dervishes.
Chapter  9: Safely Back.
Chapter 10: Afloat.
Chapter 11: A Prisoner.
Chapter 12: The Battle Of Atbara.
Chapter 13: The Final Advance.
Chapter 14: Omdurman.
Chapter 15: Khartoum.
Chapter 16: A Voice From The Dead.
Chapter 17: A Fugitive.
Chapter 18: A Hakim.
Chapter 19: The Last Page.
Chapter 20: A Momentous Communication.
Chapter 21: Gedareh.
Chapter 22: The Crowning Victory.
Chapter 23: An Unexpected Discovery.



Preface.


The reconquest of the Soudan will ever be mentioned as one of the most
difficult, and at the same time the most successful, enterprises ever
undertaken. The task of carrying an army hundreds of miles across a
waterless desert; conveying it up a great river, bristling with
obstacles; defeating an enormously superior force, unsurpassed in the
world for courage; and, finally, killing the leader of the enemy and
crushing out the last spark of opposition; was a stupendous one.

After the death of Gordon, and the retirement of the British troops,
there was no force in existence that could have barred the advance of
the fanatical hordes of the Mahdi, had they poured down into Egypt. The
native Egyptian army was, as yet, in the earliest stage of
organization; and could not be relied upon to stand firm against the
wild rush of the Dervishes. Fortunately, time was given for that
organization to be completed; and when, at last, the Dervish forces
marched north, they were repulsed. Assouan was saved, and Wady Halfa
became the Egyptian outpost.

Gradually, preparations were made for taking the offensive. A railway
was constructed along the banks of the Nile, and a mixed force of
British and Egyptians drove the enemy beyond Dongola; then, by
splendidly organized labour, a railroad was made from Wady Halfa,
across the desert, towards the elbow of the great bend from Dongola to
Abu Hamed. The latter place was captured, by an Egyptian brigade moving
up from the former place; and from that moment, the movement was
carried on with irresistible energy.

The railway was pushed forward to Abu Hamed; and then southward, past
Berber, up to the Atbara river. An army of twenty thousand men, under
one of the Khalifa's sons, was attacked in a strong position and
defeated with immense loss. Fresh British troops were then brought up;
and, escorted by gunboats and steamers carrying provisions, the army
marched up the Nile, crushed the Khalifa's great host before Omdurman,
and recovered possession of Khartoum.

Then, the moving spirit of this enterprise, the man whose marvellous
power of organization had secured its success, was called to other
work. Fortunately, he had a worthy successor in Colonel Wingate; who,
with a native force, encountered that which the Khalifa had again
gathered, near El Obeid, the scene of the total destruction of the army
under Hicks Pasha; routed it with ease, killing the Khalifa and all his
principal emirs. Thus a land that had been turned into a desert, by the
terrible tyranny of the Mahdi and his successor, was wrested from
barbarism and restored to civilization; and the stain upon British
honour, caused by the desertion of Gordon by the British ministry of
the day, was wiped out.

It was a marvellous campaign--marvellous in the perfection of its
organization, marvellous in the completeness of its success.

G. A. Henty.



Chapter 1: Disinherited.


"Wanted, an active and intelligent young man, for general work, in a
commercial house having a branch at Alexandria. It is desirable that he
should be able to write a good hand; and, if necessary, to assist in
office work. Wages, 2 pounds per week. Personal application to be made
at Messieurs Partridge and Company, 453 Leadenhall Street."

This advertisement was read by a man of five or six and twenty, in a
small room in the upper story of a house in Lupus Street, Pimlico. He
was not the only inmate of the room, for a young woman, apparently not
more than eighteen, was sitting there sewing; her work interrupted,
occasionally, by a short, hacking cough. Her husband, for this was the
relation in which he stood to her, put down the paper carelessly, and
then got up.

"I am going out, dear, on my usual search. You know, we have agreed
that it is of no use my trying to live by my pen. I get an article
accepted, occasionally, but it's not enough to provide more than bread
and cheese. I must look for something else."

"But you must succeed, presently, Gregory."

"Yes, dear; but while the grass grows, the horse starves. At any rate,
I will try for something else. If I get anything, it won't prevent my
writing; and when my genius is recognized, I can drop the other thing,
and take to literature regularly, again.

"Well, I won't be away longer than I can help. Anyhow, I will be back
to our midday banquet. I will bring a couple of rashers of bacon in
with me. We have potatoes enough, I think."

So saying, he kissed his wife tenderly, and went out.

Gregory Hartley belonged to a good family. He was the second son of the
Honorable James Hartley, brother of the Marquis of Langdale. He had
been educated at Harrow and Cambridge; and, after leaving the
university, had gone out to Egypt with a friend of his father's, who
was an enthusiast in the exploration of the antiquities of that
country. Gregory had originally intended to stay there a few months, at
most, but he was infected by the enthusiasm of his companion, and
remained in Egypt for two years; when the professor was taken ill and
died, and he returned home.

A year later, he fell in love with the governess in a neighbouring
family. His feeling was reciprocated, and they became engaged. His
father was furious, when his son told him what had taken place.

"It is monstrous," he said, "after the education that you have had, and
the place that I, if I survive him; or, if not, your brother, will take
at the death of your uncle; that you should dream of throwing yourself
away, in this manner. I have looked to your making a good marriage;
for, as you know, I am not what may be called a rich man. Your
brother's tastes are expensive; and what with his education, and yours,
and the allowances I have made you both, it is as much as I have been
able to do to keep up our position. And there are your sisters to be
provided for. The idea of your falling in love with this young woman is
monstrous."

"Young lady, Father. She is a clergyman's daughter."

"I won't hear of such a thing--I will not hear of it for a moment; and
if you persist in this mad folly, I tell you, fairly, that from this
moment I shall have nothing more to say to you! You have to choose
between me, and this penniless beggar."

"I am sorry you put it in that way, sir. My choice is made. I am
engaged to this young lady, and shall certainly marry her. I trust
that, when your present anger has subsided, you will recognize that my
honour was involved in the matter; and that even if I wished it, I
could not, without showing myself to be a downright cad, draw back."

And so, Gregory Hartley married the girl of his choice. She had, for
some time, refused to allow him to sacrifice himself; but when she
found that he was as determined as his father, and absolutely refused
to release her from the engagement, she had given way; and had, after a
quiet marriage, accompanied him to London.

There he had endeavoured to get literary work, but had found it much
harder than he had expected. The market was overcrowded, and they had
moved from comfortable lodgings into small rooms; and so, step by step,
had come to the attic in Lupus Street. He was doing a little better
now, and had hopes that, ere long, he would begin to make his way
steadily up.

But the anxiety had told on his wife. Never very strong, she had
developed a short, hard cough; and he had drawn upon his scanty
reserves, to consult a specialist.

"There is undoubtedly lung trouble," the latter said. "If you can
manage it, I should say that she ought certainly to be taken to a warm
climate. The damage is not extensive, as yet; and it is probable that,
under favourable circumstances, she might shake it off; but I fear
that, if she continues to live in London, her chances are not great."

This, Gregory felt, was almost equivalent to a death sentence; and he
had begun to consult the advertisements in the papers, for some post
abroad. He had, unknown to her, applied for several situations, but
without success.

When he first read the advertisement that morning, he had hardly
thought of applying for the situation. His pride revolted at the idea
of becoming a mere messenger; but his wife's cough had decided him.
What did it matter, so that he could save her life?

"I may not get it," he said to himself, as he went out; "but my
knowledge of Arabic, and the native dialect, is all in my favour. And
at least, in a year or two, she may have thoroughly shaken off the
cough, and that is everything.

"At any rate, I have a better chance of getting this than I had of the
other places that I applied for. There can hardly be a rush of
applicants. When I am out there, I may hear of something better.

"However, I will take another name. Fortunately I have a second one,
which will do very well. Hilliard will do as well as Hartley; and as I
never write it in full as my signature, no one would recognize it as my
name. There is nothing to be ashamed of, in accepting such a post.

"As for the marquis, as he has never been friendly with us, it does not
matter. He is, I have heard, a very tough sort of man; and my father is
not likely to survive him. But I do not think it would be fair to
Geoffrey, when he comes into his peerage, that anyone should be able to
say that he has a brother who is porter, in a mercantile house at
Alexandria. We have never got on very well together. The fact that he
was heir to a title spoilt him. I think he would have been a very good
fellow, if it hadn't been for that."

On arriving at the office in Leadenhall Street, he was, on saying he
wished to speak to Mr. Partridge, at once shown in. A good many of his
personal belongings had been long since pledged; but he had retained
one or two suits, so that he could make as good an appearance as
possible, when he went out. The clerk had merely said, "A gentleman
wishes to speak to you, sir," and the merchant looked up enquiringly at
him, as he entered.

"I have come to see you, sir, with reference to that advertisement, for
a man at your establishment at Alexandria."

A look of surprise came over the merchant's face, and he said:

"Have you called on your own account?"

"Yes; I am anxious to go abroad, for the sake of my wife's health, and
I am not particular as to what I do, so that I can take her to a warm
climate. I may say that I have been two years in Egypt, and speak
Arabic and Koptic fluently. I am strong and active, and am ready to
make myself useful, in any way."

Mr. Partridge did not answer, for a minute. Certainly this applicant
was not at all the sort of man he had expected to apply for the place,
in answer to his advertisement. That he was evidently a gentleman was
far from an advantage, but the fact that he could speak the languages
would add much to his value.

"Can you give me references?" he said, at last.

"I cannot, sir. I should not like to apply to any of my friends, in
such a matter. I must ask you to take me on trust. Frankly, I have
quarrelled with my family, and have to strike out for myself. Were it
not for my wife's health, I could earn my living; but I am told it is
essential that she should go to a warm climate, and as I see no other
way of accomplishing this, I have applied for this situation, hoping
that my knowledge of the language, and my readiness to perform whatever
duties I may be required to do, might induce you to give me a trial."

"And you would, if necessary--say, in the case of illness of one of my
clerks--be ready to help in the office?"

"Certainly, sir."

"Will you call again, in half an hour? I will give you an answer,
then."

By the time Gregory returned, the merchant's mind was made up. He had
come to the conclusion that the story he had heard was a true one. The
way it had been told was convincing. The man was undoubtedly a
gentleman. There was no mistake in his manner and talk. He had
quarrelled with his family, probably over his marriage; and, as so many
had done, found it difficult to keep his head above water. His wife had
been ordered to a warm climate, and he was ready to do anything that
would enable him to keep her there.

It would assuredly be a great advantage to have one who could act, in
an emergency, as a clerk; of course, his knowledge of language would
greatly add to his utility. It certainly was not business to take a man
without a reference, but the advantages more than counterbalanced the
disadvantages. It was not likely that he would stay with him long; but
at any rate, the fact that he was taking his wife with him would ensure
his staying, until he saw something a great deal better elsewhere.

When Gregory returned, therefore, he said:

"I have been thinking this matter over. What is your name?"

"Gregory Hilliard, sir."

"Well, I have been thinking it over, and I have decided to engage you.
I quite believe the story that you have told me, and your appearance
fully carries it out. You may consider the matter settled. I am willing
to pay for a second-class passage for your wife, as well as yourself;
and will give such instructions, to my agents there, as will render
your position as easy for you as possible. In the natural course of
things, your duties would have included the sweeping out of the
offices, and work of that description; but I will instruct him to
engage a native to do this, under your supervision. You will be in
charge of the warehouse, under the chief storekeeper; and, as you say,
you will, in case of pressure of work in the office, take a desk there.

"In consideration of your knowledge of the language, which will render
you, at once, more useful than a green hand would be, I shall add ten
shillings a week to the wages named in the advertisement, which will
enable you to obtain comfortable lodgings."

"I am heartily obliged to you, sir," Gregory said, "and will do my best
to show that your confidence in me has not been misplaced. When do you
wish me to sail? I shall only require a few hours to make my
preparations."

"Then in that case I will take a passage, for you and your wife, in the
P. and O. that sails, next Thursday, from Southampton. I may say that it
is our custom to allow fifteen pounds, for outfit. If you will call
again in half an hour, I will hand you the ticket and a cheque for that
amount; and you can call, the day before you go, for a letter to our
agents there."

Gregory ascended the stairs to his lodging with a far more elastic step
than usual. His wife saw at once, as he entered, that he had good news
of some sort.

"What is it, Gregory?"

"Thank God, darling, that I have good news to give you, at last! I have
obtained a situation, at about a hundred and thirty pounds a year, in
Alexandria."

"Alexandria?" she repeated, in surprise.

"Yes. It is the place of all others that I wanted to go to. You see, I
understand the language. That is one thing; and what is of infinitely
more consequence, it is a place that will suit your health; and you
will, I hope, very soon get rid of that nasty cough. I did not tell you
at the time, but the doctor I took you to said that this London air did
not suit you, but that a warm climate would soon set you up again."

"You are going out there for my sake, Gregory! As if I hadn't brought
trouble enough on you, already!"

"I would bear a good deal more trouble for your sake, dear. You need
not worry about that."

"And what are you going to do?" she asked.

"I am going to be a sort of useful man--extra clerk, assistant
storekeeper, et cetera, et cetera. I like Egypt very much. It will suit
me to a T. At any rate, it will be a vast improvement upon this.

"Talking of that, I have forgotten the rashers. I will go and get them,
at once. We sha'n't have to depend upon them as our main staple, in
future; for fruit is dirt cheap, out there, and one does not want much
meat. We shall be able to live like princes, on two pounds ten a week;
and besides, this appointment may lead to something better, and we may
consider that there is a future before us.

"We are to sail on Thursday. Look! Here are fifteen golden sovereigns.
That is for my outfit, and we can begin with luxuries, at once. We
shall not want much outfit: half a dozen suits of white drill for
myself, and some gowns for you."

"Nonsense, Gregory! I sha'n't want anything. You would not let me sell
any of my dresses, and I have half a dozen light ones. I shall not want
a penny spent on me."

"Very well; then I will begin to be extravagant, at once. In the first
place, I will go down to that confectioner's, round the corner; and we
will celebrate my appointment with a cold chicken, and a bottle of
port. I shall be back in five minutes."

"Will it be very hot, Gregory?" she asked, as they ate their meal. "Not
that I am afraid of heat, you know. I always like summer."

"No. At any rate, not at present. We are going out at the best time of
the year, and it will be a comfort, indeed, to change these November
fogs for the sunshine of Egypt. You will have four or five months to
get strong again, before it begins to be hot. Even in summer, there are
cool breezes morning and evening; and of course, no one thinks of going
out in the middle of the day. I feel as happy as a schoolboy, at the
thought of getting out of this den and this miserable climate, and of
basking in the sunshine. We have had a bad beginning, dear, but we have
better days before us."

"Thank God, Gregory! I have not cared about myself. But it has been a
trial, when your manuscripts have come back, to see you sitting here
slaving away; and to know that it is I who have brought you to this."

"I brought myself to it, you obstinate girl! I have pleased myself,
haven't I? If a man chooses a path for himself, he must not grumble
because he finds it rather rougher than he expected. I have never, for
a single moment, regretted what I have done; at any rate, as far as I,
myself, am concerned."

"Nor I, for my own sake, dear. The life of a governess is not so
cheerful as to cause one regret, at leaving it."

And so, Gregory Hartley and his wife went out to Alexandria, and
established themselves in three bright rooms, in the upper part of a
house that commanded a view of the port, and the sea beyond it. The
outlay required for furniture was small, indeed: some matting for the
floors, a few cushions for the divans which ran round the rooms, a bed,
a few simple cooking utensils, and a small stock of crockery sufficed.

Mr. Ferguson, the manager of the branch, had at first read the letter
that Gregory had brought him with some doubt in his mind, as to the
wisdom of his principal, in sending out a man who was evidently a
gentleman. This feeling, however, soon wore away; and he found him
perfectly ready to undertake any work to which he was set.

There was, indeed, nothing absolutely unpleasant about this. He was at
the office early, and saw that the native swept and dusted the offices.
The rest of the day he was either in the warehouse, or carried
messages, and generally did such odd jobs as were required. A fortnight
after his arrival, one of the clerks was kept away by a sharp attack of
fever; and as work was pressing, the agent asked Gregory to take his
place.

"I will do my best, sir, but I know nothing of mercantile accounts."

"The work will be in no way difficult. Mr. Hardman will take Mr.
Parrot's ledgers; and, as you will only have to copy the storekeeper's
issues into the books, five minutes will show you the form in which
they are entered."

Gregory gave such satisfaction that he was afterwards employed at
office work, whenever there was any pressure.

A year and a half passed comfortably. At the end of twelve months, his
pay was raised another ten shillings a week.

He had, before leaving England, signed a contract to remain with the
firm for two years. He regretted having to do this, as it prevented his
accepting any better position, should an opening occur; but he
recognized that the condition was a fair one, after the firm paying for
his outfit and for two passages. At the end of eighteen months, Gregory
began to look about for something better.

"I don't mind my work a bit," he said to his wife, "but, if only for
the sake of the boy" (a son had been born, a few months after their
arrival), "I must try to raise myself in the scale, a bit. I have
nothing to complain about at the office; far from it. From what the
manager said to me the other day, if a vacancy occurred in the office,
I should have the offer of the berth. Of course, it would be a step;
for I know, from the books, that Hardman gets two hundred a year, which
is forty more than I do."

