The Project Gutenberg EBook of Now or Never, by Oliver Optic

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Now or Never
       The Adventures of Bobby Bright

Author: Oliver Optic

Release Date: October 5, 2006 [EBook #19473]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOW OR NEVER ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Tom Allen and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: "I'm big enough to protect my Mother, and I'll do
it."

_p. 42._]




NOW OR NEVER

OR

THE ADVENTURES OF BOBBY BRIGHT


_A STORY FOR YOUNG FOLKS_


OLIVER OPTIC


_NEW EDITION_


NEW YORK
THE MERSHON COMPANY
PUBLISHERS




Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1856, by

WILLIAM T. ADAMS,

in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of
Massachusetts.


Copyright, 1884,
By WILLIAM T. ADAMS.




NOW OR NEVER.




To my Nephew

CHARLES HENRY POPE

THIS BOOK

IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED




PREFACE


The story contained in this volume is a record of youthful struggles,
not only in the world without, but in the world within; and the
success of the little hero is not merely a gathering up of wealth and
honors, but a triumph over the temptations that beset the pilgrim on
the plain of life. The attainment of worldly prosperity is not the
truest victory; and the author has endeavored to make the interest of
his story depend more on the hero's devotion to principles than on his
success in business.

Bobby Bright is a smart boy; perhaps the reader will think he is
altogether too smart for one of his years. This is a progressive age,
and anything which young America may do need not surprise any
person. That little gentleman is older than his father, knows more
than his mother, can talk politics, smoke cigars, and drive a 2:40
horse. He orders "one stew" with as much ease as a man of forty, and
can even pronounce correctly the villanous names of sundry French and
German wines and liqueurs. One would suppose, to hear him talk, that
he had been intimate with Socrates and Solon, with Napoleon and Noah
Webster; in short, that whatever he did not know was not worth
knowing.

In the face of these manifestations of exuberant genius, it would be
absurd to accuse the author of making his hero do too much. All he has
done is to give this genius a right direction; and for politics,
cigars, 2:40 horses, and "one stew," he has substituted the duties of
a rational and accountable being, regarding them as better fitted to
develop the young gentleman's mind, heart, and soul.

Bobby Bright is something more than a smart boy. He is a good boy, and
makes a true man. His daily life is the moral of the story, and the
author hopes that his devotion to principle will make a stronger
impression upon the mind of the young reader, than even the most
exciting incidents of his eventful career.

  WILLIAM T. ADAMS.




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                    PAGE

       I. In which Bobby goes a fishing, and catches
             a Horse                                            1

      II. In which Bobby blushes several Times, and
             does a Sum in Arithmetic                          13

     III. In which the Little Black House is bought,
             but not paid for                                  26

      IV. In which Bobby gets out of one Scrape, and
             into another                                      38

       V. In which Bobby gives his Note for Sixty
             Dollars                                           52

      VI. In which Bobby sets out on his Travels               66

     VII. In which Bobby stands up for certain "Inalienable
             Rights"                                           78

    VIII. In which Mr. Timmins is astonished, and
             Bobby dines in Chestnut Street                    91

      IX. In which Bobby opens various Accounts, and
             wins his first Victory                           104

       X. In which Bobby is a little too smart                117

      XI. In which Bobby strikes a Balance, and returns
            to Riverdale                                      131

     XII. In which Bobby astonishes sundry Persons,
            and pays Part of his Note                         144

    XIII. In which Bobby declines a Copartnership,
            and visits B---- again                            160

     XIV. In which Bobby's Air Castle is upset, and
            Tom Spicer takes to the Woods                     177

      XV. In which Bobby gets into a Scrape, and
            Tom Spicer turns up again                         191

     XVI. In which Bobby finds "it is an ill wind
            that blows no one any good"                       205

    XVII. In which Tom has a good Time, and Bobby
            meets with a terrible Misfortune                  219

   XVIII. In which Bobby takes French Leave, and
            camps in the Woods                                235

     XIX. In which Bobby has a narrow Escape, and
            goes to Sea with Sam Ray                          248

      XX. In which the Clouds blow over, and Bobby
            is himself again                                  264

     XXI. In which Bobby steps off the Stage, and
            the Author must finish "Now or Never"             280




NOW OR NEVER

OR

THE ADVENTURES OF BOBBY BRIGHT




CHAPTER I

IN WHICH BOBBY GOES A FISHING, AND CATCHES A HORSE


"By jolly! I've got a bite!" exclaimed Tom Spicer, a rough,
hard-looking boy, who sat on a rock by the river's side, anxiously
watching the cork float on his line.

"Catch him, then," quietly responded Bobby Bright, who occupied
another rock near the first speaker, as he pulled up a large pout,
and, without any appearance of exultation, proceeded to unhook and
place him in his basket.

"You are a lucky dog, Bob," added Tom, as he glanced into the basket
of his companion, which now contained six good-sized fishes. "I
haven't caught one yet."

"You don't fish deep enough."

"I fish on the bottom."

"That is too deep."

"It don't make any difference how I fish; it is all luck."

"Not all luck, Tom; there is something in doing it right."

"I shall not catch a fish," continued Tom, in despair.

"You'll catch something else, though, when you go home."

"Will I?"

"I'm afraid you will."

"Who says I will?"

"Didn't you tell me you were 'hooking jack'?"

"Who is going to know anything about it?"

"The master will know you are absent."

"I shall tell him my mother sent me over to the village on an errand."

"I never knew a fellow to 'hook jack,' yet, without getting found
out."

"I shall not get found out unless you blow on me; and you wouldn't be
mean enough to do that;" and Tom glanced uneasily at his companion.

"Suppose your mother should ask me if I had seen you."

"You would tell her you have not, of course."

"Of course?"

"Why, wouldn't you? Wouldn't you do as much as that for a fellow?"

"It would be a lie."

"A lie! Humph!"

"I wouldn't lie for any fellow," replied Bobby, stoutly, as he pulled
in his seventh fish, and placed him in the basket.

"Wouldn't you?"

"No, I wouldn't."

"Then let me tell you this; if you peach on me, I'll smash your head."

Tom Spicer removed one hand from the fish pole and, doubling his fist,
shook it with energy at his companion.

"Smash away," replied Bobby, coolly. "I shall not go out of my way to
tell tales; but if your mother or the master asks me the question, I
shall not lie."

"Won't you?"

"No, I won't."

"I'll bet you will;" and Tom dropped his fish pole, and was on the
point of jumping over to the rock occupied by Bobby, when the float of
the former disappeared beneath the surface of the water.

"You've got a bite," coolly interposed Bobby, pointing to the line.

Tom snatched the pole, and with a violent twitch, pulled up a big
pout; but his violence jerked the hook out of the fish's mouth, and he
disappeared beneath the surface of the river.

"Just my luck!" muttered Tom.

"Keep cool, then."

"I will fix you yet."

"All right; but you had better not let go your pole again, or you will
lose another fish."

"I'm bound to smash your head, though."

"No, you won't."

"Won't I?"

"Two can play at that game."

"Do you stump me?"

"No; I don't want to fight; I won't fight if I can help it."

"I'll bet you won't!" sneered Tom.

"But I will defend myself."

"Humph!"

"I am not a liar, and the fear of a flogging shall not make me tell a
lie."

"Go to Sunday school--don't you?"

"I do; and besides that, my mother always taught me never to tell a
lie."

"Come! you needn't preach to me. By and by, you will call me a liar."

"No, I won't; but just now you told me you meant to lie to your
mother, and to the master."

"What if I did? That is none of your business."
