The Project Gutenberg EBook of Frank and Fearless, by Horatio Alger Jr.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Frank and Fearless
       or The Fortunes of Jasper Kent

Author: Horatio Alger Jr.

Release Date: October 20, 2006 [EBook #19592]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRANK AND FEARLESS ***




Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)






FRANK AND FEARLESS

OR

THE FORTUNES OF JASPER KENT



BY

HORATIO ALGER, JR.

AUTHOR OF "BRAVE AND BOLD SERIES," ETC.



THE JOHN C. WINSTON CO.
PHILADELPHIA
CHICAGO    TORONTO

Copyright, 1897 by
HENRY T. COATES & CO.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                   PAGE

      I. Jasper's Victory,                                   1

     II. Strange News,                                      10

    III. Jasper Recognizes the Visitor,                     19

     IV. Thorn's Revenge,                                   29

      V. Jasper's Return Home,                              37

     VI. The Step-Mother,                                   46

    VII. New Relations,                                     54

   VIII. Sudden Death,                                      63

     IX. A Declaration of War,                              72

      X. Nicholas Appears upon the Scene,                   81

     XI. The Outbreak of Hostilities,                       90

    XII. A Scheme of Vengeance,                            101

   XIII. Mrs. Kent is Foiled,                              108

    XIV. Mediation,                                        117

     XV. Good-Bye,                                         126

    XVI. An Unpleasant Adventure,                          135

   XVII. The Deserted House,                               144

  XVIII. The Kidnapped Child,                              153

    XIX. A Brute in Human Shape,                           158

     XX. A Strange Commission,                             169

    XXI. Jasper is Intrusted with a Delicate Commission,   179

   XXII. A Business Max's Suspicions,                      188

  XXIII. Where Jasper Found Dick,                          197

   XXIV. The Sleeping Potion,                              207

    XXV. Jasper Finds Himself a Prisoner,                  213

   XXVI. In Confinement,                                   217

  XXVII. An Unexpected Friend,                             225

  XVIII. Escape,                                           230

   XXIX. Jasper in a New Character,                        236

    XXX. Jasper Gets a Place,                              245

   XXXI. The Unwelcome Relative,                           255

  XXXII. A Cold Reception,                                 263

 XXXIII. Dick Punishes Nicholas,                           270

  XXXIV. An Important Commission,                          279

   XXXV. An Indian Maiden,                                 283

  XXXVI. In Difficulties,                                  290

 XXXVII. A Startling Summons,                              303

XXXVIII. Dick Comes Back,                                  308

  XXXIX. How It All Ended,                                 318




FRANK AND FEARLESS;

OR,

THE FORTUNES OF JASPER KENT




CHAPTER I.

JASPER'S VICTORY.


A dozen boys were playing ball in a field adjoining the boarding-school
of Dr. Pericles Benton, in the town of Walltham, a hundred and
twenty-five miles northeast of the city of New York. These boys varied
in age from thirteen to seventeen. In another part of the field a few
younger boys were amusing themselves. All these boys were
boarding-scholars connected with the school.

The ball had been knocked to a distance by the batter, and it was the
duty of Nicholas Thorne, one of the oldest boys, to ran after it. But he
thought of an easier way.

"Cameron, run for that ball!" he cried, addressing one of the smaller
boys outside the game.

"I don't want to," said little Cameron.

"Did you hear what I said?" demanded Thorne, imperiously.

"Yes."

"Then you'd better go if you know what's best for yourself," said the
bully, frowning.

"I ain't in the game," said Cameron. "Why should I get the ball?"

"Because I say so!" retorted the tyrant.

"Run after it yourself, Thorne," said a lad named Davies. "It's your
business, not Cameron's."

"It's his business, because I ordered him to do it," said Thorne,
flushed and angry. "Do you think I will allow him to bully me?"

"The boot's on the other leg," said Davies, dryly. "Run after the ball,
and don't keep the game waiting."

"That's so," said half a dozen voices. "Let Cameron alone."

"I won't let him alone," said Thorne, who had by this time worked
himself into a towering passion. "I'll give him the worst flogging he
ever had, if he doesn't obey me!"

So saying, he advanced toward Cameron in a menacing manner.

Thorne was the acknowledged bully of the school. He was a big, hulking
fellow, with a heavy figure and a repulsive face, and small ferret eyes,
emitting a cold and baleful light. He was more than a match for any of
his fellow-pupils, and availed himself of his superior physical strength
to abuse and browbeat the smaller boys. Knowing his strength he was not
afraid of interference, and usually carried his point. If Cameron had
not been particularly occupied playing marbles with a boy of his own age
he would not have ventured to object to obey the despot. When he saw
Thorne advancing toward him with a cruel light in his eyes he became
frightened, and said, hurriedly:

"Don't pound me, Thorne, I'll go."

"Yes," said Thorne, between his teeth, "you'll go; but you ought to have
done so at first. I'll give you something to remind you to be more
prompt next time."

"Don't hit me, Thorne!" pleaded the little boy, with tears in his eyes.
"I'm going."

"Shame, Thorne!" exclaimed Davies.

Thorne glared at Davies wrathfully.

"Take care how you talk," he said, "or it'll be your turn next!"

Davies was two inches shorter than Thorne, and by no means his equal.
So, honestly indignant as he was, he didn't venture to say any more.

Little Cameron turned to run, despairing of help, and Thorne started to
pursue him. Of course there was no chance of the smaller boy's escape,
or would not have been, but for an unexpected incident.

"Stop!" was heard, in a clear, commanding voice.

Thorne turned in surprise. What boy (for it was a boy's voice) had dared
to command him to atop?

He wasn't long in doubt.

Jasper Kent, a new scholar, who had only arrived the day before,
advanced intrepidly to the rescue of the little victim. He was an inch
shorter than Thorne, of a slight, elegant build, with a clear complexion
and a bright, attractive face that would have been pronounced handsome
by anyone. Judging from outward appearances, no one would have thought
him the equal of Thorne in strength.

When Nicholas Thorne's eye lighted on his antagonist his lip turned in
scorn and he paused.

"You're the new boy, I believe?" he said.

"Yes."

"I thought so. If you had been here longer you would know better than to
interfere with me."

This was spoken with the utmost arrogance.

"You appear to consider yourself master here," said Jasper, quietly.

"I am master here," returned Nicholas, in the same tone.

"And you claim the right of ordering around smaller boys?"

"I do."

"And of beating them if they dare to disobey your majesty's commands, I
suppose?" continued Jasper, with sarcasm.

"Yes, I do. Have you anything to say about it?" exclaimed the young
despot, in a swaggering manner.

"Yes, I have," was the quiet answer.

"What have you got to say, I should like to know?"

"That I won't allow it," said Jasper.

"You won't allow it?" exclaimed Thorne, bursting into a brutal laugh.
"And who are you, young poppinjay?"

"My name is Jasper Kent, at your service."

"Then, Mr. Jasper Kent, I beg leave to suggest that you mind your own
business."

"I generally do," said Jasper, coolly; "but that advice comes with a bad
grace from you."

"Why does it?"

"Because you are not attending to your business."

"What is my business?" demanded Thorne, angrily.

"To go after that ball."

"It's Cameron's business. I ordered him to go after it."

"And I order him not to go for it," said Jasper, resolutely, but without
excitement.

Thorne answered with an oath.

"I've a great mind to send you for it," he exclaimed, his small eyes
glaring at his opponent.

"It's one thing to order, and another to secure obedience," said Jasper.

"Your turn will come," growled Thorne, "but just at present I've got
Cameron's case to dispose of. Cameron, go for that ball!"

The little boy started, but his purpose was interrupted. Jasper Kent
hurried forward and placed his hand kindly on his shoulder.

"Don't go, Cameron," he said. "I'll protect you."

Cameron stopped, but looked apprehensively at Thorne. He evidently
doubted the power of his young protector.

Thorne was now thoroughly exasperated. His authority was openly defied.
He rushed at Jasper, intending to overwhelm him by the suddenness and
momentum of his attack. But Jasper was prepared for him. He turned
swiftly aside and planted a blow on Thorne's right ear which sent him
staggering to the earth.

The bully was astonished, but rallied. Almost foaming at the mouth with
rage, he sprang to his feet and renewed the attack. He attempted to
throw his arms round the waist of Jasper and throw him. Had his tactics
been successful, probably Jasper would have been borne to the earth by
the superior weight of his opponent. But here, again, he was prepared.
He stepped back and received Thorne with a blow on his breast, so firmly
planted that he staggered again.

By this time he had lost all control of himself and was thoroughly under
the dominion of passion. He "pitched into" Jasper, trying to get in a
blow wherever he could, and in so doing exposed himself to the skilful
blows of his slighter foe, who had some knowledge of boxing, while
Thorne had none whatever.

Finally Thorne was stretched on his back, not immediately to rise.

"Have you had enough?" asked Jasper, bending over him.

"I'll kill you!" shrieked Thorne.

"Wail till you are able," said Jasper.

Thorne struggled to rise. Jasper held him down forcibly.

"You will stay there till you promise to let Cameron alone," he said.

"I won't promise!"

"Then you'll stay where you are."

But at that moment a small boy came across the field from the school.

"Thorne is wanted," he said. "There's a lady to see him."

"You can rise, then," said Jasper.

Thorne rose sullenly, and without a word strode toward the large, square
building, with an extended wing, which was used for the boarding-school.

Little Cameron seized Jasper's hand and kissed it.

"How brave you are!" he said. "How much I thank you!"

"Oh, it's nothing," said Jasper, modestly. "You just send for me when
you're in trouble, Cameron. I won't let him hurt you."




CHAPTER II.

STRANGE NEWS.


Entering the house, Thorne reported at the doctor's study. His flushed
appearance attracted the teacher's attention.

"What's the matter, Thorne?" he asked.

"The new boy pitched into me and I licked him," said Thorne.

But his sullen manner was so unlike that of a victor that the doctor
shrewdly suspected that his statement was not wholly correct.

"What was the quarrel about?" he asked.

"We were playing ball," said Thorne, evasively.

"I will inquire into it. At present you are wanted in the parlor."

So Thorne left the presence of the principal and entered the opposite
room. A lady, seated on a sofa, arose quickly, and advanced to meet him.
She kissed the boy's cheek, to which he submitted without manifesting
any responsive feeling.

"How long it is since I saw you, Nicholas, my dear boy!" she said.

"It's only about six months," said Nicholas, stolidly.

"And are not six months long for a mother to be separated from her only
child?" said the lady, tenderly.

"It doesn't seem so long," said Nicholas.

The lady looked pained, but she proceeded:

"How you have grown!"

"Yes, I've grown," said Nicholas, showing a little pleasure now. "I
think I shall be a large man."

"Like your father. And how are you improving in your studies, Nicholas?"

"Oh! I'm doing well enough," said the boy, indifferently, for Nicholas
Thorne's taste for study was very moderate. "Did you bring me any money,
mother?"

"You have your regular allowance, Nicholas."

"It isn't enough. What's a dollar a week?"

"It is a good deal for me to pay," said his mother. "Remember, I have to
pay your school bills, and my means are but small."

"A dollar a week is very small for a boy of my age," grumbled Thorne.
"Why, some of the little boys get more; and there's that new boy, Jasper
Kent, gets five dollars, so they say."

The lady betrayed strong interest at the sound of his name.

"I forgot," she said. "So Jasper Kent has arrived, has he?"
