The Project Gutenberg EBook of Grace Harlowe's Plebe Year at High School, by
Jessie Graham Flower

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Grace Harlowe's Plebe Year at High School
       The Merry Doings of the Oakdale Freshmen Girls

Author: Jessie Graham Flower

Release Date: January 28, 2007 [EBook #20472]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRACE HARLOWE'S PLEBE YEAR ***




Produced by David Newman, Sigal Alon, Mary Meehan and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                Grace Harlowe's Plebe Year at High School

                                   OR

              The Merry Doings of the Oakdale Freshmen Girls

                      By JESSIE GRAHAM FLOWER, A. M.

Author of Grace Harlowe's Sophomore Year at High School, Grace Harlowe's
Junior Year at High School, Etc.




PHILADELPHIA
HENRY ALTEMUS COMPANY
Copyright, 1910




[Illustration: A Troop of Black-Robed Figures Were Stealthily
Approaching.]




CONTENTS


       I. The Accident of Friendships

      II. The Sponsor of the Freshman Class

     III. Mrs. Gray Engages a Secretary

      IV. The Black Monks of Asia

       V. Anne Has a Secret

      VI. The Sophomore Ball

     VII. All Hallowe'en

    VIII. Miss Leece

      IX. Thanksgiving Day

       X. Grace Keeps Her Secret

      XI. Mrs. Gray's Adopted Daughters

     XII. Miriam Plans a Revenge

    XIII. Christmas Holidays

     XIV. A Midnight Alarm

      XV. Tom Gray

     XVI. The Marionette Show

    XVII. After the Ball

   XVIII. A Winter Picnic

     XIX. Wolves!

      XX. The Gray Brothers

     XXI. The Lost Letter

    XXII. Danger Ahead

   XXIII. In the Thick of the Night

    XXIV. The Freshman Prize




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


A Troop of Black-Robed Figures Were Stealthily Approaching.

"Miss Pierson, Do You Recognize This Figure?"

"Give That Back! It Is Not Yours."

Tom Gray Escapes from the Wolves




Grace Harlowe's Plebe Year at High School




CHAPTER I

THE ACCIDENT OF FRIENDSHIPS


"Who is the new girl in the class?" asked Miriam Nesbit, flashing her
black eyes from one schoolmate to another, as the girls assembled in the
locker room of the Oakdale High School.

"Her name is Pierson; that is all I know about her," replied Nora
O'Malley, gazing at her pretty Irish face in the looking glass with
secret satisfaction. "She's very quiet and shy and looks as if she would
weep aloud when her turn comes to recite, but I'm sure she's all right,"
she added good naturedly. For Nora had a charming, sunny nature, and
always saw the best if there was any best to see.

"She is very bright," broke in Grace Harlowe decisively. "She went
through her Latin lesson without a mistake, which is certainly more than
I could do."

"Well, I don't like her," pouted Miriam. "I never trust those quiet
little things. And, besides, she is the worst-dressed girl in----"

"Hush!" interrupted Jessica Bright, touching a finger to her lips. "Here
she is."

A little, brown figure entered the room just as Miriam finished
speaking. But Jessica was too late with her warning. The young girl had,
without doubt, heard the cruel speech and her face flushed painfully as
she pinned on a shabby old hat, slipped her arms into a thin black
jacket and stepped out again without looking at the crowd of schoolmates
who watched her silently.

"Miriam, I should think you'd learn to be more careful," exclaimed
hot-tempered Nora, her soft heart touched by the appealing little
stranger.

"Well, what difference does it make?" replied Miriam. "If Miss Pierson
doesn't know already that she's the shabbiest girl in school, it's high
time she found it out. I have a suspicion her mother takes in washing or
something, and I mean to find it out right now. We can't invite a girl
like that to our class parties and entertainments. She would disgrace
us."

"Miriam," said Grace quietly, "I believe we are all privileged to invite
whom we please to our homes. I intend to give a class tea next Saturday,
and I mean to follow Miss Pierson right now and ask her to help me
receive."

The two girls looked into each other's faces for a moment without
speaking. Grace was quiet and contained, Miriam flushed and furiously
angry. They had been rival leaders always at the Grammar School, but the
rivalry had never come to open battle until now.

Miriam was the first to drop her eyes. She did not reply, but from that
moment she was the sworn enemy of Grace Harlowe and her two friends,
Nora and Jessica.

"Well, we had better hurry," said Jessica, trying to calm the troubled
scene. "Nobody knows exactly where Miss Pierson lives and she will be
out of sight before we can catch her."

The three girls ran lightly out of the basement of the fine old building
that was the pride of Oakdale. It was large and imposing, built of
smooth, gray stone, with four huge columns supporting the front portico.
A hundred yards away stood the companion building, the Boys' High
School, exactly like the first in every respect except that a wing had
been added for a gymnasium which the girls had the privilege of using on
certain days. A wide campus surrounded the two buildings, shaded by elm
and oak trees. Certainly no other town in the state could boast of twin
high schools as fine as these; and especially did the situation appeal
to the people of Oakdale, for the ten level acres surrounding the two
buildings gave ample space for the various athletic fields, and the
doings of the high schools formed the very life of the place.

But we must return to our three girls who were hurrying down the shady
street, followed in a more leisurely and dignified fashion by Miriam and
her friends. The shabby figure of the little stranger had just turned
the corner as the girls left the High School grounds.

"Come on," cried Grace breathlessly, leading the way. Having once made
up her mind, she always pursued her point with a fine obstinacy
regardless of opinion.

When they had come to the cross street they saw their quarry again, now
making her way slowly toward the street next the river. This was the
shabbiest street in Oakdale, though no one knew exactly why, since the
river bank might have been the chosen site for all the handsomest
buildings; but towns are as incorrigible as people, sometimes, and
insist on growing one way when they should grow another, without the
slightest regard for future appearances.

And so, when little Miss Pierson stopped in front of one of the smallest
and meanest cottages on River Street, the girls knew she must, indeed,
be very poor. The house, small and forlorn, presented a sad countenance
streaked with tear stains from a leaky gutter. An uneven pavement led to
the front door, which bore a painted sign: "Plain Sewing."

They paused irresolutely at the gate, and were taking counsel together
when Miriam Nesbit passed with her friends. She pointed at the door and
laughed.

"Really, that girl's conduct is contemptible!" exclaimed Grace, giving
the wooden gate a vigorous push. "I simply won't tolerate her rudeness.
She is an unmitigated snob!" Grace knocked on the door rather sharply to
emphasize her feelings. It was opened almost immediately by Miss Pierson
herself, still in her hat and coat; and in her surprise and
embarrassment she almost shut the door in their faces. But Jessica's
gentle smile reassured her, and Grace, who was a born leader, took her
hand kindly and plunged at once into the subject.

"You left school so quickly this afternoon, Miss Pierson, that I didn't
have a chance to see you. I have something very particular I want to ask
you to-day."

"Won't you come in?" said the other, opening the door into the parlor,
which had an air of refinement about it in spite of its utter poorness.

"Anne!" called a querulous voice down the passage.

"Yes, mother, I'm coming," answered the girl, hurrying out of the room
with a frightened look in her eyes. In a few moments she was back again.

"Please excuse me for leaving you," she said. "My mother is an invalid
and needs my sister or me with her constantly."

"Her name is Anne, then," thought Grace. "I shall call her so at once
and break the ice."

"Anne," she said aloud, "I think you know my friends, don't you--Jessica
Bright and Nora O'Malley? And I am Grace Harlowe."

"Oh, yes," replied Anne, brightening at the friendly advances of the
others. "I remember your names from the roll call."

"Of course," replied Grace. "But I think we should all be more to each
other than roll-call acquaintances, we freshmen. I am very ambitious for
our class. I want it to be the best that ever graduated from Oakdale
High School, and for that reason, I think all the girls in it should try
to be friends and work together to advance the cause. I'm going to start
the ball rolling by giving a tea to our class next Saturday afternoon.
Will you come and receive with Jessica and Nora and me?"

Anne clasped her hands delightedly for a moment. Then her eyes filled
with tears and her lips trembled so that the girls were afraid she might
be going to cry. Tender-hearted Jessica turned her face away for fear of
showing too much sympathy.

"I'm sorry," said Anne at last, rather unsteadily, "but I am afraid I
can't accept your delightful invitation. I----"

"I beg your pardon," said a voice at the door, "I didn't mean to intrude
on your visitors, Anne, but I couldn't help overhearing Miss Harlowe's
invitation."

A small woman, much older than Anne, but very like her in face and
figure, appeared at the door.

"This is my sister," said Anne, taking the other's hand affectionately.

"Anne imagines she can't go, but she certainly can," went on the older
Miss Pierson, calmly, not in the least embarrassed by the strange young
girls. "Of course, she must go. I can arrange it easily."

"But, Mary----" protested Anne.

"Never mind, little sister," interrupted Mary, "it will be all right.
Miss Harlowe, what time must she be there?"

"At four o'clock," answered Grace, rising to go, "and I am delighted
that she can come. Remember, Anne, I'm counting on you to pour the
lemonade. The other girls are going to help with the sandwiches and ice
cream. By the way," she added, as they went down the steps, "be sure and
come to the basketball meeting at the gym this afternoon."

And so it was arranged that Anne Pierson, the shabbiest and poorest girl
in Oakdale High School, was to help receive at one of the prettiest and
most charming houses in town. Miriam Nesbit's rudeness was to bring
about a friendship between Anne Pierson and her three schoolmates that
lasted a lifetime.

After the half-past two o'clock dinner, which was the universal custom
in Oakdale, the chums met again at the gymnasium in the Boys' High
School. Wednesdays and Saturdays were nicknamed "ladies' days" by the
High School boys, for on these afternoons the girls were permitted free
use of the gymnasium.

The meeting to-day was not for gymnastic exercises, however, but an
important subject was to be discussed--the Freshman Basketball Team.
Also the captain of the team was to be elected.

Other club meetings were in full force when the girls arrived, and the
great room vibrated with the hum of voices. The three freshmen, who knew
better than to interrupt sophomores and juniors at their pow-wows, made
their way quietly across the hall to the appointed place of rendezvous.
Of course, the entire Freshman Class did not assemble to discuss this
subject. Many members were not interested in basketball, except to look
on. Girls who were overstudious, and not physically strong, could not at
any rate play on the team, and therefore they seldom attended such
meetings. Jessica Bright was one of these, nevertheless, she followed
her two friends, who had always been foremost in athletics at the
Central Grammar School.

The election of a captain was the first business of the meeting. That
over, the captain, after due and serious consultation with a friendly
cabinet, chose the players and their substitutes.

Undoubtedly Grace Harlowe had the coolest head in the class, and was the
most to be relied upon at critical moments; yet Miriam Nesbit exerted a
strange influence over her followers, who were almost her slaves. She
was the richest of all the girls and wore the costliest clothes. The
parties she gave, from time to time, in her mother's large and handsome
home were the talk of the place. She was also the cleverest girl in the
class, and had taken undisputed first place since she was a child. She
was not a close student, but seemed to absorb her lessons in half the
time that it took her friends to master them. Popular she certainly was,
or rather she was feared by her schoolmates. Her masterful, overpowering
spirit seemed to sweep everything before it.

Grace Harlowe was quite as powerful in her way, but she had a noble,
unselfish disposition and was much beloved by her friends. She stood
well in her studies, but had never taken first place. Perhaps this was
because she had interested herself so much in outdoor sports that she
had not given enough time to study.

Both girls were handsome--Miriam tall, dark and oriental-looking, with
flashing eyes and an imperious curve to her lips; Grace was also tall,
with wavy, chestnut hair, fine gray eyes, regular features, a full,
generous chin and cheeks glowing with health.

Miriam Nesbit had already done a good deal of lobbying when the three
girls arrived on the scene. She wished to be elected captain of the team
at any cost; but Grace's adherents were holding off, quietly waiting for
her arrival.

"Well, here you are at last!" said Marian Barber, who had been preparing
the ballots for the coming election.
