The Project Gutenberg EBook of Heidi, by Johanna Spyri

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Heidi
       (Gift Edition)

Author: Johanna Spyri

Commentator: Charles Wharton Stork

Illustrator: Maria Kirk

Translator: Elisabeth Stork

Release Date: March 9, 2007 [EBook #20781]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEIDI ***




Produced by Jason Isbell, Emma Morgan Isbell, Jeannie Howse
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net. This file is gratefully uploaded to
the PG collection in honor of Distributed Proofreaders
having posted over 10,000 ebooks.






       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | This document reproduces the text for the Gift Edition of |
    | Heidi, if you would like to see the illustrations, margin |
    | art, and decorations, the html version is recommended.    |
    |                                                           |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has     |
    | been preserved.                                           |
    |                                                           |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected in this  |
    | text. For a complete list, please see the end of this     |
    | document.                                                 |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




                            HEIDI

                        JOHANNA SPYRI


                   [Illustration: (Heidi)]

                   [Illustration: (Peter)]




                            HEIDI

                         GIFT EDITION


   [Illustration: WAVING HER HAND AND LOOKING AFTER HER DEPARTING
   FRIEND TILL HE SEEMED NO BIGGER THAN A LITTLE DOT
   _Page 228_]




                            HEIDI

                              BY
                        JOHANNA SPYRI

                        TRANSLATED BY
                      ELISABETH P. STORK

                  _WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY_
              CHARLES WHARTON STORK, A.M., PH.D.

                _14 ILLUSTRATIONS IN COLOR BY_
                        MARIA L. KIRK

                         GIFT EDITION

                   PHILADELPHIA AND LONDON
                   J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY
                             1919




         COPYRIGHT, 1915. BY J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY

           ADDITIONAL ILLUSTRATIONS AND DECORATIONS
         COPYRIGHT, 1919, BY J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY


              PRINTED BY J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY
                AT THE WASHINGTON SQUARE PRESS
                     PHILADELPHIA, U.S.A.




INTRODUCTION


Unassuming in plot and style, "Heidi" may none the less lay claim to
rank as a world classic. In the first place, both background and
characters ring true. The air of the Alps is wafted to us in every
page; the house among the pines, the meadows, and the eagle poised
above the naked rocks form a picture that no one could willingly
forget. And the people, from the kindly towns-folk to the quaint and
touching peasant types, are as real as any representation of human
nature need be. Every goat even, has its personality. As for the
little heroine, she is a blessing not only to everyone in the story,
but to everyone who reads it. The narrative merits of the book are too
apparent to call for comment.

As to the author, Johanna Spyri, she has so entirely lost herself in
her creation that we may pass over her career rather rapidly. She was
born in Switzerland in 1829, came of a literary family, and devoted
all her talent to the writing of books for and about children.

Since "Heidi" has been so often translated into English it may well be
asked why there is any need for a new version. The answer lies partly
in the conventional character of the previous translations. Now, if
there is any quality in "Heidi" that gives it a particular charm, that
quality is freshness, absolute spontaneity. To be sure, the story is
so attractive that it could never be wholly spoiled; but has not the
reader the right to enjoy it in English at least very nearly as much
as he could in German? The two languages are so different in nature
that anything like a literal rendering of one into the other is sure
to result in awkwardness and indirectness. Such a book must be not
translated, but re-lived and re-created.

To perform such a feat the writer must, to begin with, be familiar
with the mountains, and able to appreciate with Wordsworth

    The silence that is in the starry sky,
    The sleep that is among the lonely hills.

The translator of the present version was born and reared in a region
closely similar to that of the story. Her home was originally in the
picturesque town of Salzburg, and her father, Franz von Pausinger, was
one of the greatest landscape painters of his country and generation.
Another equally important requisite is knowledge of children. It
happens that this translator has a daughter just the age of the
heroine, who moreover loves to dress in Tyrolese costume. To translate
"Heidi" was for her therefore a labor of love, which means that the
love contended with and overcame the labor.

The English style of the present version is, then, distinctive. It has
often been noticed that those who acquire a foreign language often
learn to speak it with unusual clearness and purity. For illustration
we need go no further than Joseph Conrad, a Pole, probably the
greatest master of narrative English writing to-day; or to our own
fellow-citizen Carl Schurz. In the present case, the writer has lived
seven years in America and has strengthened an excellent training with
a wide reading of the best English classics.

Many people say that they read without noticing the author's style.
This is seldom quite true; unconsciously every one is impressed in
some way or other by the style of every book, or by its lack of style.
Children are particularly sensitive in this respect and should,
therefore, as much as is practicable, read only the best. In the new
translation of "Heidi" here offered to the public I believe that most
readers will notice an especial flavor, that very quality of delight
in mountain scenes, in mountain people and in child life generally,
which is one of the chief merits of the German original. The phrasing
has also been carefully adapted to the purpose of reading aloud--a
thing that few translators think of. In conclusion, the author,
realising the difference between the two languages, has endeavored to
write the story afresh, as Johanna Spyri would have written it had
English been her native tongue. How successful the attempt has been
the reader will judge.

                                    CHARLES WHARTON STORK
                            Assistant Professor of English at the
                                   University of Pennsylvania


[Illustration]




CONTENTS


PART I

HEIDI'S YEARS OF LEARNING AND TRAVEL

CHAPTER                                                      PAGE
    I. GOING UP TO THE ALM-UNCLE                               17

   II. WITH THE GRANDFATHER                                    38

  III. ON THE PASTURE                                          50

   IV. IN THE GRANDMOTHER'S HUT                                67

    V. TWO VISITORS                                            83

   VI. A NEW CHAPTER WITH NEW THINGS                           95

  VII. MISS ROTTENMEIER HAS AN UNCOMFORTABLE DAY              104

 VIII. GREAT DISTURBANCES IN THE SESEMANN HOUSE               119

   IX. THE MASTER OF THE HOUSE HEARS OF STRANGE DOINGS        129

    X. A GRANDMAMA                                            136

   XI. HEIDI GAINS IN SOME RESPECTS AND LOSES IN OTHERS       146

  XII. THE SESEMANN HOUSE IS HAUNTED                          153

 XIII. UP THE ALP ON A SUMMER EVENING                         165

  XIV. ON SUNDAY WHEN THE CHURCH BELLS RING                   183


PART II

HEIDI MAKES USE OF HER EXPERIENCE

   XV. PREPARATIONS FOR A JOURNEY                             199

  XVI. A GUEST ON THE ALP                                     207

 XVII. RETALIATION                                            219

XVIII. WINTER IN THE VILLAGE                                  229

  XIX. WINTER STILL CONTINUES                                 243

   XX. NEWS FROM DISTANT FRIENDS                              252

  XXI. ON FURTHER EVENTS ON THE ALP                           268

 XXII. SOMETHING UNEXPECTED HAPPENS                           276

XXIII. PARTING TO MEET AGAIN                                  293




ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                             PAGE
WAVING HER HAND AND LOOKING AFTER HER DEPARTING
  FRIEND TILL HE LOOKED NO BIGGER THAN A LITTLE
  DOT                                              _Frontispiece_

SHE UNDID THE HEAVY SHAWL AND THE TWO LITTLE DRESSES           30

HERE A NEAT LITTLE BED WAS PREPARED                            41

SHE HANDED HIM ALSO THE WHOLE SLICE OF CHEESE                  57

OFF THEY STARTED AT SUCH A PACE THAT HEIDI SHOUTED FOR
  JOY                                                          71

WHEN HEIDI HEARD THAT SHE STRUGGLED TO GET FREE                92

OFF THEY STARTED, AND SOON HEIDI WAS PULLING THE
  DOOR-BELL                                                   116

THERE SHE WOULD REMAIN, EATING HER HEART AWAY WITH
  LONGING                                                     152

THROWING HERSELF IN HER GRANDFATHER'S ARMS, SHE HELD HIM
  TIGHT                                                       179

WITH HEIDI'S HAND IN HIS THEY WANDERED DOWN TOGETHER          192

THEY ARE COMING, OH, THE DOCTOR IS COMING FIRST               211

THE TWO CHILDREN WERE ALREADY FLYING DOWN THE ALP             241

HE WATCHED HIS FALLEN ENEMY TUMBLING DOWNWARDS,
  DOWNWARDS                                                   277

PETER SHOT OFF AND RUSHED DOWN THE MOUNTAIN-SIDE,
  TURNING WILD SOMERSAULTS ON HIS PERILOUS WAY                298




Part I

Heidi's Years of Learning and Travel

[Illustration]




HEIDI


I

GOING UP TO THE ALM-UNCLE


The little old town of Mayenfeld is charmingly situated. From it a
footpath leads through green, well-wooded stretches to the foot of the
heights which look down imposingly upon the valley. Where the footpath
begins to go steeply and abruptly up the Alps, the heath, with its
short grass and pungent herbage, at once sends out its soft perfume to
meet the wayfarer.

One bright sunny morning in June, a tall, vigorous maiden of the
mountain region climbed up the narrow path, leading a little girl by
