The Project Gutenberg EBook of For Love of Country, by Cyrus Townsend Brady

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: For Love of Country
       A Story of Land and Sea in the Days of the Revolution

Author: Cyrus Townsend Brady

Release Date: March 10, 2007 [EBook #20791]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOR LOVE OF COUNTRY ***




Produced by Al Haines










For Love of Country


_A Story of Land and Sea in the Days of the Revolution_


BY

CYRUS TOWNSEND BRADY




AUTHOR OF "THE GRIP OF HONOR," "FOR THE FREEDOM OF THE SEA," ETC.




NEW YORK

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

1908




Copyright, 1898,

BY CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS


_All rights reserved._




TO THE

Society of the Sons of the Revolution,


  _And those kindred organizations whose chief function is to
  cultivate a spirit of patriotism and love of country
  in the present by recalling the struggles and
  sacrifices of the past._




PREFACE

Since the action of this story falls during the periods, and the book
deals with personages and incidents, which are usually treated of in
the more serious pages of history, it is proper that some brief word of
explanation should be written by which I might confirm some of the
romantic happenings hereafter related, which to the casual reader may
appear to draw too heavily upon his credulity for acceptance.

The action between the Randolph and the Yarmouth really happened, the
smaller ship did engage the greater for the indicated purpose, much as
I have told it; and if I have ventured to substitute another name for
that of the gallant sailor and daring hero, Captain Nicholas Biddle,
who commanded the little Randolph, and lost his life, on that occasion,
I trust this paragraph may be considered as making ample amends.  The
remarkable fight between those two ships is worthy of more extended
notice than has hitherto been given it, in any but the larger tones
(and not even in some of those) of the time.  As far as my information
permits me to say, there never was a more heroic battle on the seas.

Again, it is evident to students of history that the character of
Washington has not been properly understood hitherto, by the very
people who revere his name, though the excellent books of Messrs. Ford,
Wilson, Lodge, Fiske, and others are doing much to destroy the popular
canonization which made of the man a saint; in defence of my
characterization of him I am able to say that the incidents and
anecdotes and most of the conversations in which he appears are
absolutely historical.

If I have dwelt too long and too circumstantially upon the Trenton and
Princeton campaigns for a book so light in character as is this one, it
may be set down to an ardent admiration for Washington as man and
soldier, and a design again to exhibit him as he was at one of the most
critical and brilliant points of his career.  Furthermore, I find that
the school and other histories commonly accessible to ordinary people
are not sufficiently awake to the importance and brilliancy of the
campaign, and I cherish the hope that this book may serve, in some
measure, to establish its value.

I have freely used all the histories and narratives to which I had
access, without hesitation; and if I have anticipated a distinguished
arrival, or hastened the departure of a ship, or altered the date of a
naval battle, or changed its scene, I plead the example of the
distinguished masters of fiction, to warrant me.

In closing I cannot refrain from thanking those who have so kindly
assisted me with advice and correction during the writing of this story
and the reading of the proof, especially the Rev. A. J. P. McClure.

C. T. B.

PHILADELPHIA, PENNA.,
  _November_, 1897.




Contents


Book I

THE EVENTS OF A NIGHT

CHAPTER

       I  KATHARINE YIELDS HER INDEPENDENCE
      II  THE COUNTRY FIRST OF ALL
     III  COLONEL WILTON
      IV  LORD DUNMORE'S MEN PAY AN EVENING CALL
       V  A TIMELY INTERFERENCE
      VI  A FAITHFUL SUBJECT OF HIS MAJESTY
     VII  THE LOYAL TALBOTS
    VIII  AN UNTOLD STORY
      IX  BENTLEY'S PRAYER
       X  A SOLDIER'S EPITAPH


Book II

KNIGHTS ERRANT OF THE SEA

      XI  CAPTAIN JOHN PAUL JONES
     XII  AN IMPORTANT COMMISSION
    XIII  A CLEVER STRATAGEM
     XIV  A SURPRISE FOR THE JUNO
      XV  CHASED BY A FRIGATE
     XVI  'TWIXT LOVE AND DUTY
    XVII  AN INCIDENTAL PASSAGE AT ARMS
   XVIII  DUTY WINS THE GAME


Book III

THE LION AT BAY

     XIX  THE PORT OF PHILADELPHIA
      XX  A WINTER CAMP
     XXI  THE BOATSWAIN TELLS THE STORY
    XXII  WASHINGTON--A MAN WITH HUMAN PASSIONS
   XXIII  LIEUTENANT MARTIN'S LESSON
    XXIV  CROSSING THE DELAWARE
     XXV  TRENTON--THE LION STRIKES
    XXVI  MY LORD CORNWALLIS
   XXVII  THE LION TURNS FOX
  XXVIII  THE BRITISH PLAY "TAPS"
    XXIX  THE LAST OF THE TALBOTS


Book IV

A DEATH GRAPPLE ON THE DEEP

     XXX  A SAILOR'S OPINION OF THE LAND
    XXXI  SEYMOUR'S DESPERATE RESOLUTION
   XXXII  THE PRISONERS ON THE YARMOUTH
  XXXIII  TWO PROPOSALS
   XXXIV  CAPTAIN VINCENT MYSTIFIED
    XXXV  BENTLEY SAYS GOOD-BY
   XXXVI  THE LAST OF THE RANDOLPH
  XXXVII  FOR LOVE OF COUNTRY
 XXXVIII  PHILIP DISOBEYS ORDERS
   XXXIX  THREE PICTURES OF THE SEA.



Book V

THE DEAD ALIVE AGAIN

      XL  A FINAL APPEAL
     XLI  INTO THE HAVEN AT LAST




BOOK I

THE EVENTS OF A NIGHT


For Love of Country

CHAPTER I

_Katharine Yields her Independence_

If Seymour could have voiced his thought, he would have said that the
earth itself did not afford a fairer picture than that which lay within
the level radius of his vision, and which had imprinted itself so
powerfully upon his impressionable and youthful heart.  It was not the
scenery of Virginia either, the landscape on the Potomac, of which he
would have spoken so enthusiastically, though even that were a thing
not to be disdained by such a lover of the beautiful as Seymour had
shown himself to be,--the dry brown hills rising in swelling slopes
from the edge of the wide quiet river; the bare and leafless trees upon
their crests, now scarce veiling the comfortable old white house, which
in the summer they quite concealed beneath their masses of foliage; and
all the world lying dreamy and calm and still, in the motionless haze
of one of those rare seasons in November which so suggests departed
days that men name it summer again.  For all that he then saw in nature
was but a setting for a woman; even the sun itself, low in the west,
robbed of its glory, and faded into a dull red ball seeking to hide its
head, but served to throw into high relief the noble and beautiful face
of the girl upon whom he gazed,--the girl who was sun and life and
light and world for him.

The most confirmed misogynist would have found it difficult to
challenge her claim to beauty; and yet it would require a more severe
critic or a sterner analyst than a lover would be likely to prove, to
say in just what point could be found that which would justify the
claim.  Was it in the mass of light wavy brown hair, springing from a
low point on her forehead and gently rippling back, which she wore
plaited and tied with a ribbon and destitute of powder?  How sweetly
simple it looked to him after the bepowdered and betowered misses of
the town with whom he was most acquainted!  Was it in the broad low
brow, or the brown, almost black eyes which laughed beneath it; or the
very fair complexion, which seemed to him a strangely delightful and
unusual combination?  Or was it in the perfection of a faultless, if
somewhat slender and still undeveloped figure, half concealed by the
vivid "Cardinal" cloak she wore, which one little hand held loosely
together about her, while the other dabbled in the water by her side?

Be this as it may, the whole impression she produced was one which
charmed and fascinated to the last degree, and Mistress Katharine
Wilton's sway among the young men of the colony was-well-nigh
undisputed.  A toast and a belle in half Virginia, Seymour was not the
first, nor was he destined to be the last, of her adorers.

The strong, steady, practised stroke, denoting the accomplished
oarsman, with which he had urged the little boat through the water, had
given way to an idle and purposeless drift.  He longed to cast himself
down before the little feet, in their smart high-heeled buckled shoes
and clocked stockings, which peeped out at him from under her
embroidered camlet petticoat in such a maliciously coquettish manner;
he longed to kneel down there in the skiff, at the imminent risk of
spoiling his own gay attire, and declare the passion which consumed
him; but something--he did not know what it was, and she did not tell
him--constrained him, and he sat still, and felt himself as far away as
if she had been in the stars.

In his way he was quite as good to look at as the young maiden; tall,
blond, stalwart, blue-eyed, pleasant-featured, with the frank engaging
air which seems to belong to those who go down to the sea in ships,
Lieutenant John Seymour Seymour was an excellent specimen of that
hardy, daring, gallant class of men who in this war and in the next
were to shed such imperishable lustre upon American arms by their
exploits in the naval service.  Born of an old and distinguished
Philadelphia family, so proud of its name that in his instance they had
doubled it, the usual bluntness and roughness of the sea were tempered
by this gentle birth and breeding, and by frequent attrition with men
and women of the politest society of the largest and most important
city of the colonies.  Offering his services as soon as the news of
Lexington precipitated the conflict with the mother country, he had
already made his name known among that gallant band of seamen among
whom Jones, Biddle, Dale, and Conyngham were pre-eminent.

The delicious silence which he had been unwilling to break, since it
permitted him to gaze undisturbed upon his fair shipmate, was
terminated at last by that lady herself.

She looked up from the water with which she had been playing, and then
appearing to notice for the first time his steady ardent gaze, she
laughed lightly and said,--

"Well, sir, it grows late.  When you have finished contemplating the
scenery, perhaps you will turn the boat, and take me home; then you can
feast your eyes upon something more attractive."

"And what is that, pray?" he asked.

"Your supper, sir.  You must be very anxious for it by this time, and
really you know you look quite hungry.  We have been out so long; but I
will have pity on you, and detain you no longer here.  Turn the boat
around, Lieutenant Seymour, and put me on shore at once.  I will stand
between no man and his dinner."

"Hungry?  Yes, I am, but not for dinner,--for you, Mistress Katharine,"
he replied.

"Oh, what a horrid appetite!  I don't feel safe in the boat with you.
Are you very hungry?"

"Really, Miss Wilton, I am not jesting at all," he said with immense
dignity.

"Oh! oh!  He is in earnest.  Shall I scream?  No use; we are a mile
from the house, at least."

"Oh, Miss Wilton--Katharine," he replied desperately, "I am devoured by
my--"

