The Project Gutenberg eBook, Mother West Wind's Children, by Thornton W.
Burgess, Illustrated by George Kerr


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Mother West Wind's Children


Author: Thornton W. Burgess



Release Date: March 22, 2007  [eBook #20877]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MOTHER WEST WIND'S CHILDREN***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 20877-h.htm or 20877-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/8/7/20877/20877-h/20877-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/0/8/7/20877/20877-h.zip)





MOTHER WEST WIND'S CHILDREN

by

THORNTON W. BURGESS

Author of "Old Mother West Wind"

Illustrated by George Kerr







[Frontispiece: "Yap-yap-yap," barked Reddy Fox, as loud as he could.]




Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers
New York
By arrangement with Little, Brown and Company

Copyright, 1911,
by Thornton W. Burgess.
All rights reserved




TO

ALL THE LITTLE FRIENDS

OF

JOHNNY CHUCK AND REDDY FOX,

AND TO

ALL WHO LOVE THE GREEN MEADOWS

AND THE SMILING POOL,

THE LAUGHING BROOK AND THE MERRY LITTLE BREEZES,

THIS LITTLE BOOK IS DEDICATED.




CONTENTS


   CHAPTER

       I.  DANNY MEADOW MOUSE LEARNS WHY HIS TAIL IS SHORT
      II.  WHY REDDY FOX HAS NO FRIENDS
     III.  WHY PETER RABBIT'S EARS ARE LONG
      IV.  REDDY FOX DISOBEYS
       V.  STRIPED CHIPMUNK'S POCKETS
      VI.  REDDY FOX, THE BOASTER
     VII.  JOHNNY CHUCK'S SECRET
    VIII.  JOHNNY CHUCK'S GREAT FIGHT
      IX.  MR. TOAD'S OLD SUIT
       X.  GRANDFATHER FROG GETS EVEN
      XI.  THE DISAPPOINTED BUSH
     XII.  WHY BOBBY COON WASHES HIS FOOD
    XIII.  THE MERRY LITTLE BREEZES HAVE A BUSY DAY
     XIV.  WHY HOOTY THE OWL DOES NOT PLAY ON THE GREEN MEADOWS
      XV.  DANNY MEADOW MOUSE LEARNS TO LAUGH




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


   "YAP-YAP-YAP," BARKED REDDY FOX, AS LOUD
     AS HE COULD . . . . . . . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

   MR. RABBIT HAD A GREAT DEAL OF CURIOSITY,
     A VERY GREAT DEAL, INDEED

   THEN EVERYBODY SHOUTED "HAW!  HAW!  HAW!"

   HE WAS SO SURPRISED HE FORGOT TO CLOSE IT




MOTHER WEST WIND'S CHILDREN


I

DANNY MEADOW MOUSE LEARNS WHY HIS TAIL IS SHORT

Danny Meadow Mouse sat in his doorway and looked down the Lone Little
Path across the Green Meadows.  Way, way over near the Smiling Pool he
could see Old Mother West Wind's Children, the Merry Little Breezes, at
play.  Sammy Jay was sitting on a fence post.  He pretended to be
taking a sun bath, but really he was planning mischief.  You never see
Sammy Jay that he isn't in mischief or planning it.

Reddy Fox had trotted past an hour before in a great hurry.  Up on the
hill Danny Meadow Mouse could just see Jimmy Skunk pulling over every
old stick and stone he could find, no matter whose house it might be,
and excusing himself because he was hungry and was looking for beetles.

Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun was playing at hide and seek behind some
fleecy white clouds.  All the birds were singing and singing, and the
world was happy--all but Danny Meadow Mouse.

No, Danny Meadow Mouse was not happy.  Indeed, he was very far from
happy, and all because his tail was short.

By and by up came old Mr. Toad.  It was a warm day and Mr. Toad was
very hot and very, very thirsty.  He stopped to rest beside the house
of Danny Meadow Mouse.

"Good morning, Danny Meadow Mouse," said old Mr. Toad, "it's a fine
morning."

"Morning," said Danny Meadow Mouse, grumpily.

"I hope your health is good this morning," continued old Mr. Toad, just
as if he hadn't noticed how short and cross Danny Meadow Mouse had
answered.

Now old Mr. Toad is very ugly to look upon, but the ugliness is all in
his looks.  He has the sunniest of hearts and always he is looking for
a chance to help someone.

"Danny Meadow Mouse," said old Mr. Toad, "you make me think of your
grandfather a thousand times removed.  You do indeed.  You look just as
he did when he lost the half of his tail and realized that he never,
never could get it back again."

Danny Meadow Mouse sat up suddenly.

"What are you talking about, old Mr. Toad?  What are you talking
about?" he asked.  "Did my grandfather a thousand times removed lose
the half of his tail, and was it shorter then than mine is now?  Was
it, old Mr. Toad?  And how did he come to lose the half of it?"

Old Mr. Toad laughed a funny silent laugh.  "It's a long story," said
old Mr. Toad, "and I'm afraid I can't tell it.  Go down to the Smiling
Pool and ask Great-Grandfather Frog, who is my first cousin, how it
happened your grandfather a thousand times removed lost the half of his
tail.  But before you go catch three fat, foolish, green flies and take
them with you as a present to Grandfather Frog."

Danny Meadow Mouse could hardly wait for old Mr. Toad to stop speaking.
In fact, he was in such a hurry that he almost forgot his manners.  Not
quite, however, for he shouted "Thank you, Mr. Toad, thank you!" over
his shoulder as he rushed off down the Lone Little Path.

You see his short tail had always been a matter of mortification to
Danny Meadow Mouse.  All his cousins in the Mouse family and the Rat
family have long, smooth, tapering tails, and they have always been a
source of envy to Danny Meadow Mouse.  He had felt his queer short tail
to be a sort of disgrace.  So when he would meet one of his cousins
dancing down the Lone Little Path, with his long, slim, tapering tail
behind him, Danny Meadow Mouse would slip out of sight under the long
grass, he was so ashamed of his own little tail.  It looked so mean and
small!  He had wondered and wondered if the Meadow Mice had always had
short tails.  He used to ask everyone who came his way if they had ever
seen a Meadow Mouse with a long tail, but he had never found any one
who had.

"Perhaps," thought Danny Meadow Mouse as he hurried down the Lone
Little Path, "perhaps Grandfather Frog, who is very wise, will know why
my tail is short."

So he hurried this way and he hurried that way over the Green Meadows
in search of fat, foolish, green flies.  And when he had caught three,
he caught one more for good measure.  Then he started for the Smiling
Pool as fast as his short legs would take him.

When finally he reached the edge of the Smiling Pool he was quite out
of breath.  There sat Great-Grandfather Frog on his big, green lily
pad.  He was blinking his great goggle eyes at jolly, round, red Mr.
Sun.

"Oh, Grandfather Frog," said Danny Meadow Mouse in a very small voice,
for you know he was quite out of breath with running, "Oh, Grandfather
Frog, I've brought you four fat, foolish, green flies."

Grandfather Frog put a hand behind an ear and listened.  "Did I hear
someone say 'foolish, green flies?'" asked Grandfather Frog.

"Yes, Grandfather Frog, here they are," said Danny Meadow Mouse, still
in a very small voice.  Then he gave Grandfather Frog the four fat,
foolish, green flies.

"What is it that you want me to do for you, Danny Meadow Mouse?" asked
Grandfather Frog as he smacked his lips, for he knew that Danny Meadow
Mouse must want something to bring him four fat, foolish, green flies.

"If you please," said Danny Meadow Mouse, very politely, "if you
please, Grandfather Frog, old Mr. Toad told me that you could tell me
how Grandfather Meadow Mouse a thousand times removed lost half of his
tail.  Will you, Grandfather Frog--will you?"

"Chug-a-rum," said Grandfather Frog.  "My cousin, Mr. Toad, talks too
much."

But he settled himself comfortably on the big lily pad, and this is
what he told Danny Meadow Mouse:

"Once upon a time, when the world was young, Mr. Meadow Mouse, your
grandfather a thousand times removed, was a very fine gentleman.  He
took a great deal of pride in his appearance, did Mr. Meadow Mouse, and
they used to say on the Green Meadows that he spent an hour, a full
hour, every day combing his whiskers and brushing his coat.

"Anyway, he was very fine to look upon, was Mr. Meadow Mouse, and not
the least attractive thing about him was his beautiful, long, slim
tail, of which he was very proud.

"Now about this time there was a great deal of trouble on the Green
Meadows and in the Green Forest, for some one was stealing--yes,
stealing!  Mr. Rabbit complained first.  To be sure, Mr. Rabbit was
lazy and his cabbage patch had grown little more than weeds while he
had been minding other folks' affairs rather than his own, but, then,
that was no reason why he should lose half of the little which he did
raise.  And that is just what he said had happened.

"No one really believed what Mr. Rabbit said, for he had such a bad
name for telling things which were not so that when he did tell the
truth no one could be quite sure of it.

"So no one paid much heed to what Mr. Rabbit said until Happy Jack
Squirrel one day went to his snug little hollow in the big chestnut
tree where he stores his nuts and discovered half had been stolen.
Then Striped Chipmunk lost the greater part of his winter store of
corn.  A fat trout was stolen from Billy Mink.

"It was a terrible time, for every one suspected every one else, and no
one on the Green Meadows was happy.

"One evening Mr. Meadow Mouse went for a stroll along the Crooked
Little Path up the hill.  It was dark, very dark indeed.  But just as
he passed Striped Chipmunk's granary, the place where he stores his
supply of corn and acorns for the winter, Mr. Meadow Mouse met his
cousin, Mr. Wharf Rat.  Now Mr. Wharf Rat was very big and strong and
Mr. Meadow Mouse had for a long time looked up to and admired him.

"'Good evening, Cousin Meadow Mouse,' said Mr. Wharf Rat, swinging a
bag down from his shoulder.  'Will you do a favor for me?'

"Now Mr. Meadow Mouse felt very much flattered, and as he was a very
obliging fellow anyway, he promptly said he would.

"'All right,' said Mr. Wharf Rat.  'I'm going to get you to tote this
bag down the Crooked Little Path to the hollow chestnut tree.  I've got
an errand back on top of the hill.'

"So Mr. Meadow Mouse picked up the bag, which was very heavy, and swung
it over his shoulder.  Then he started down the Crooked Little Path.
Half way down he met Striped Chipmunk.

"'Good evening, Mr. Meadow Mouse,' said Striped Chipmunk.  'What are
you toting in the bag across your shoulder?'

"Now, of course, Mr. Meadow Mouse didn't know what was in the bag and
he didn't like to admit that he was working for another, for he was
very proud, was Mr. Meadow Mouse.

"So he said: 'Just a planting of potatoes I begged from Jimmy Skunk,
just a planting of potatoes, Striped Chipmunk.'

"Now no one had ever suspected Mr. Meadow Mouse of stealing--no indeed!
Striped Chipmunk would have gone his way and thought no more about it,
had it not happened that there was a hole in the bag and from it
something dropped at his feet.  Striped Chipmunk picked it up and it
_wasn't_ a potato.  It was a fat acorn.  Striped Chipmunk said nothing
but slipped it into his pocket.

"'Good night,' said Mr. Meadow Mouse, once more shouldering the bag.

"'Good night,' said Striped Chipmunk.

"No sooner had Mr. Meadow Mouse disappeared in the darkness down the
Crooked Little Path than Striped Chipmunk hurried to his granary.  Some
one had been there and stolen all his acorns!

"Then Striped Chipmunk ran to the house of his cousin, Happy Jack
Squirrel, and told him how the acorns had been stolen from his granary
and how he had met Mr. Meadow Mouse with a bag over his shoulder and
how Mr. Meadow Mouse had said that he was toting home a planting of
potatoes he had begged from Jimmy Skunk.  'And this,' said Striped
Chipmunk, holding out the fat acorn, 'is what fell out of the bag.'

"Then Striped Chipmunk and Happy Jack Squirrel hurried over to Jimmy
Skunk's house, and, just as they expected, they found that Mr. Meadow
Mouse had not begged a planting of potatoes of Jimmy Skunk.

"So Striped Chipmunk and Happy Jack Squirrel and Jimmy Skunk hurried
over to Mr. Rabbit's and told him all about Mr. Meadow Mouse and the
bag of potatoes that dropped acorns.  Mr. Rabbit looked very grave,
very grave indeed.  Then Striped Chipmunk and Happy Jack Squirrel and
Jimmy Skunk and Mr. Rabbit started to tell Mr. Coon, who was cousin to
old King Bear.

"On the way they met Hooty the Owl, and because he could fly softly and
quickly, they sent Hooty the Owl to tell all the meadow people who were
awake to come to the hollow chestnut tree.  So Hooty the Owl flew away
to tell all the little meadow people who were awake to meet at the
hollow chestnut tree.

"When they reached the hollow chestnut tree whom should they find there
but Mr. Meadow Mouse fast asleep beside the bag he had brought for Mr.
Wharf Rat, who had wisely stayed away.

"Very softly Striped Chipmunk stole up and opened the bag.  Out fell
his store of fat acorns.  Then they waked Mr. Meadow Mouse and marched
him off to old Mother Nature, where they charged him with being a thief.

"Old Mother Nature listened to all they had to say.  She saw the bag of
acorns and she heard how Mr. Meadow Mouse had said that he had a
planting of potatoes.  Then she asked him if he had stolen the acorns.
Yes, Sir, she asked him right out if he had stolen the acorns.

"Of course Mr. Meadow Mouse said that he had not stolen the acorns.

"'Then where did you get the bag of acorns?' asked old Mother Nature.

"When she asked this, Mr. Wharf Rat, who was sitting in the crowd of
