The Project Gutenberg EBook of Boycotted, by Talbot Baines Reed

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Boycotted
       And Other Stories

Author: Talbot Baines Reed

Illustrator: unknown

Release Date: April 12, 2007 [EBook #21039]
Last updated: March 19, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOYCOTTED ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England





Boycotted
and other stories

By Talbot Baines Reed
________________________________________________________________________
Here are fifteen of the most eccentric short stories you can imagine.
To make the job more difficult the hard copy of the book from which I
worked was in very poor condition, with the pages extensively browned.

That said, in the way of my poor workmanship making me blame my tools,
I do not think I have made too much of a mess of it, and you should be
able to gain much enjoyment from reading the book.

The whole ensemble is not really very long, about two-thirds of the
length of a typical book by this author.  So go ahead and see how you
get on.  NH.
________________________________________________________________________
BOYCOTTED
AND OTHER STORIES

BY TALBOT BAINES REED



CHAPTER ONE.

Sub-Chapter I.

THE SCHOOL CUTS ME.

I hardly know yet what it was all about, and at the time I had not an
idea.  I don't think I was more of a fool than most fellows of my age at
Draven's, and I rather hope I wasn't an out-and-out cad.

But when it all happened, I had my doubts on both points, and could
explain the affair in no other way than by supposing I must be like the
lunatic in the asylum, who, when asked how he came to be there, said, "I
said the world was mad, the world said I was mad; the world was bigger
than I was, so it shut me up here!"

It had been a dismal enough term, as it was, quite apart from my
troubles.  That affair of Browne had upset us all, and taken the spirit
out of Draven's.  We missed him at every turn.  What was the good of
getting up the football fifteen when our only "place-kick" was gone?
Where was the fun in the "Saturday nights" when our only comic singer,
our only reciter, our only orator wasn't there?  Who cared about giving
study suppers or any other sociable entertainment, when there was no
Browne to invite?

Browne had left us suddenly.  One day he had been the life and soul of
Draven's, next morning he had been summoned to Draven's study, and that
same evening we saw him drive off to the station in a cab with his
portmanteau on the top.

Very few of the fellows knew why he had been expelled.  I scarcely knew
myself, though I was his greatest chum.  On the morning of the day he
left, he met me on his way back from Draven's study.

"I'm expelled, Smither," he said, with a dismal face.

"Go on," replied I, taking his arm and scrutinising his face to see
where the joke was hidden.  But it was no joke.

"I am," said he hopelessly: "I am to go this evening.  It's my own
fault.  I've been a cad.  I was led into it.  It's bad enough; but I'm
not such a blackleg as Draven makes out--"

And here for the first time in my life I saw Browne look like breaking
down.

He wasn't going to let me see it, and hurried away before I could find
anything to say.

If he hadn't told me himself, I should have called any one who told me
Browne had been a cad--well, I'd better not say what I should have
called him.  I knew my chum had been a rollicking sort of fellow, who
found it hard to say No to anybody who asked anything of him; but that
he was a blackleg I, for one, would not believe, for all the Dravens in
the world.

Hardly knowing what I did, I walked up to the master's study door and
knocked.

"Come in."  I could tell by the voice that came through the door I
should do no good.

I went in.  Mr Draven was pacing up and down the room, and stopped
short in front of me as I entered.  "Well?"

I wished I was on the other side of the door; but I wasn't, and must say
something, however desperate.

"Please, sir, Browne--"

"Browne leaves here to-day," said Mr Draven coldly; "what do you want?"

"Please, sir, I hope you will--"

I forgot where I was and what I was saying.  My mind wandered aimlessly,
and I ended my sentence I don't know how.

Draven saw I was confused, and wasn't unkind.

"You have been a friend of Browne, I know," he said, "and you are sorry.
So am I, terribly sorry," and his voice quite quavered as he spoke.

There was a pause, and I made a frantic effort to recall my scattered
thoughts.

"Won't you let him off this time, sir?"  I gasped.

"That, Smither, is out of the question," said the head master, so
steadily and incisively that I gave it up, and left the room without
another word.  The fellows were trooping down the passage to breakfast,
little guessing the secret of my miserable looks, or the reason why
Browne was not in his usual place.

But the secret came out, and the school staggered under the shock.  Mr
Draven announced our comrade's departure kindly enough in the afternoon,
adding that he had confessed the offence for which he was expelled, and
was penitent.  Two hours later we saw his cab drive off, and as we
watched it disappear it all seemed to us like a hideous dream.

We said little about it to one another.  We did not even care to inquire
particularly into the offence for which he had suffered.  But we moped
and missed him at every turn, and wished the miserable term were ending
instead of beginning.

This, however, is a long digression.  I sat down to write the story of
my own trouble, not Browne's.  But the reader will understand now why I
said that, as it was, apart from my own misfortunes, the term, which had
still a month more to run when my story begins, had been a dismal one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I was wandering about the playground one frosty November morning,
beginning to hope that if a frost should come we might after all get a
little fun at Draven's before the holidays came, when Odger junior,
whistling shrilly, crossed my path.

Odger junior was not exactly my fag, for we had no fags at Draven's, and
if we had had, I had not yet reached that pitch of dignity at which one
fellow has the right to demand the services of another.  Still Odger
junior had, for a consideration, done a good many odd jobs for me, and I
had got into the way of regarding him as a quasi-fag.

"Hullo, youngster!" said I, as we met, "there's going to be a stunning
frost.  Can't you smell it in the air?  I wish you'd cut down to
Bangle's and get me a pair of straps for my skates."

To my astonishment, not wholly unmixed with amusement, Odger junior
regarded me majestically for a moment, and then, ejaculating the
oracular phrase, "Oh, ah!" walked off, his four-foot-one drawn to its
full height, his hands behind his back, and his mouth still drawn up for
whistling, but apparently too overcome with dignity to emit the music
which an observer would naturally be led to expect.

I was not on the whole a short-tempered youth.  My laziness saved me
from that.  It certainly did occur to me on this bright frosty morning
that it would be exhilarating both for young Odger and me if I were to
go after him and kick him.  But what was the use?  He would enjoy it as
much as I should.  There would be plenty of ways in which to pay him out
less fatiguing than an undignified chase round the playground.  So I let
him go, and grinned to think how much nicer monkeys are when they behave
like monkeys, and not like men.

I had a lot of work to do in my study that morning before afternoon
school, and so had very little time to think of Odger junior, or any one
else.  As it was, I was only just in time to take my usual place in the
Greek class when Mr Draven sailed into the room and the lesson began.

I had been so flurried by my hasty arrival that I did not at first
observe that the desk on my right, usually occupied by a boy called
Potter, was vacant.

"Where's Potter?"  I asked of my neighbour on the left.  "Is he--why,
there he is at Browne's old desk!"  I added, catching sight of the
deserter across the room.

Browne's desk had always been left empty since its late owner went.
None of us had cared to appropriate it, and the sight of it day after
day had fed our sorrow over his loss.  It seemed to me, therefore, an
act almost of disloyalty on Potter's part towards the memory of my old
chum to install himself coolly at his desk without saying a word to
anybody.

"What's he gone there for?"  I inquired of Sadgrove on my left.  "He's
got no--"

"Don't talk to me!" said Sadgrove.

Sadgrove was in a temper, and I wasn't surprised.  So was I, lazy as I
was.  We had all stuck to Browne through the term, and it was a little
too much now to find a fellow like Potter, who professed to be Browne's
friend too, stepping in this cold-blooded way into his place.  Sadgrove
was put up to construe, so there was no opportunity for further
conversation, had we desired it.

I wasn't surprised that Potter avoided me in the playground after
school.  He guessed, I supposed, what I had to say to him, and had the
decency to be ashamed of himself.  However, I was determined to have it
out, and that evening, after preparation, went up to his study.  He was
there, and looked guilty enough when he saw me.

"Look here, Potter," I began, trying to be friendly in spite of all.  I
got no further, for Potter, without a word, walked out of the door,
leaving me standing alone in the middle of his study.

I had seen the working of a guilty conscience once or twice before at
Draven's, but never knew it to work in quite so strange a manner as it
did with Potter that evening.

There was nothing for it but to give him up as a bad job, and go to bed.
Which I did; and awoke next morning in a forgiving mood.

It was always a scramble at breakfast on Saturdays at Draven's to see
who could get nearest to the ham, for we sickened of the cold mutton
they gave us on other days.  This morning, to my gratification, I was
"well up."  That is, there were only two fellows before me, so that at
any rate I was good for a fair, straight slice from the middle.

"Huzza!" said I, crowding up to Williams, who was next above me.  "I've
never had anything but knuckle all this--"

Williams faced round as he heard my voice; and then, without waiting to
hear the end of my sentence, got up and took a seat at the lower end of
the table.

"Poor beggar's out of sorts," said I to myself.  "Another of his bilious
attacks, I suppose," I added, moving up to his seat and addressing the
proud occupant of the carver's chair.  This fellow was Harrison, whom,
next to Browne, we counted the oiliest fellow at Draven's.  He could
sing, and make puns, and though a long way behind Browne, was a popular,
jovial companion.

He appeared not to hear my remark, but, hitching his chair a little
away, began deliberately to carve a slice of ham.

He took a long time about it, and I watched him patiently till he was
done.  It was a prime ham, I could see, and, ashamed as I am to confess
it, it made me feel amiable to all the world to find it was so.

"If they were all like this--" I began.

"There's room here, Harrison, old man," Williams called up the table.

Whereupon Harrison, plate in hand, went down to keep Williams company,
leaving me for the first time in my life "top-hammer."

Somehow I did not enjoy the dignity quite as much as I should have
expected.  I was sorry Harrison had gone, for I wanted to speak to him
about Potter, and I could not help fancying, from his unusual manner,
that he was put out about something, and I thought he might have told me
about it instead of chumming up to Williams.  However, I was hungry, and
took my slice of ham and passed the dish along to the fellow next me,
who sat below the two empty chairs up which I had risen.

It was rather a solitary meal, and I was glad when it was over and the
bell rang for first school.  There at least I should have the society of
the sympathetic Sadgrove, who, as I knew, felt as sore as I did about
Potters behaviour.

But, to my mortification as well as perplexity, Sadgrove I found, had
cleared out his desk and removed his goods and chattels to a seat on the
row behind mine, where he appeared to have met with a cordial welcome
from his new neighbours.

I could not make it out.  He always told me he liked his desk better
than any, and would not change it even for Browne's.  And here he was,
for no apparent reason, on a lower form, at a smaller desk, and in--
well, less select society.

As I sat in my place that morning, with an empty desk on each side of
me, it began slowly to dawn on my mind that something was wrong
somewhere.

The proceedings of Odger junior, Potter, Sadgrove, Williams, and
Harrison, taken singly, were not of much importance, but taken as a
whole I did not like them.  I might be wrong.  There might be no
intention to cut me, and I could not think of anything I had done or
said which would account for it.  I would try, at any rate, to get to
the bottom of it before I was many hours older.

So I went in search of my cousin, who was a few months my senior, and a
particular chum of Williams.

"I say, Arthur, what did Williams cut me dead for this morning?"

Arthur looked uncomfortable and said--

"How should I know?"
