The Project Gutenberg EBook of Bird Day; How to prepare for it, by
Charles Almanzo Babcock

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Bird Day; How to prepare for it

Author: Charles Almanzo Babcock

Release Date: April 30, 2007 [EBook #21266]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRD DAY; HOW TO PREPARE FOR IT ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Library of Congress)









                               BIRD DAY

                        HOW TO PREPARE FOR IT




                                  BY


                   CHARLES A. BABCOCK, A.M., LL.B.

         _Superintendent of Schools, Oil City, Pennsylvania_





                     SILVER, BURDETT AND COMPANY

                       NEW YORK BOSTON CHICAGO




                           COPYRIGHT, 1901,

                    BY SILVER, BURDETT AND COMPANY

       *       *       *       *       *




THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED

TO THE LOVERS OF CHILDREN

AND OF BIRDS

       *       *       *       *       *




AUTHOR'S NOTE


The aim of this book is to assist school children in the accurate
study of a few birds. It is believed that if this be attained, further
study of birds will take care of itself.

Thanks are due the Audubon Society, ornithologists, educators, and
legislators, for the generous approbation and assistance which they
have given the Bird Day movement.

Special thanks are due the Department of Agriculture for permission to
use the illustrations in this volume. Those on pages 65, 67, 69, 71,
73, 75, 77, 79, 85, 87, 89, 93, and 95 are printed from electrotypes
from the original illustrations appearing in "Farmer's Bulletin," No.
54. Those on pages 81 and 83 are from the Yearbook of the Department
for 1899, and that on page 91 from the Yearbook for 1898. All these
publications are issued by the Department.




CONTENTS


I.      HISTORY OF THE MOVEMENT FOR "BIRD DAY"

II.     THE VALUE OF BIRDS

III.    THE DESTRUCTION OF BIRDS

IV.     PLAN OF STUDY

V.      FURTHER SUGGESTIONS

VI.     DIRECTIONS FOR WRITTEN WORK

VII.    PROGRAMS FOR BIRD DAY

VIII.   THE POETS AND THE BIRDS

IX.     OBJECTS AND RESULTS OF BIRD DAY

X.      SOME REPRESENTATIVE BIRDS

       *       *       *       *       *




PART I

BIRD DAY. HOW TO PREPARE FOR IT

       *       *       *       *       *




BIRD DAY

HOW TO PREPARE FOR IT




I

HISTORY OF THE MOVEMENT FOR "BIRD DAY"


In the spring of 1894 the writer's attention was attracted to the
interest of the children in that part of their nature study which
related to birds. Their descriptions of the appearance and habits of
the birds they had observed were given with evident pleasure. They had
a strong desire to tell what they had seen, not in the spirit of
rivalry, but with the wish of adding to the knowledge of a subject in
which all were equally interested.

It was thought that this work would be done with even more
effectiveness if a day were appointed to be celebrated as "Bird Day."
With the hope of making a memorable occasion of the day for those
taking part in it, several of the noted friends of birds were asked to
write something to the children, and to give their opinion of the
introduction of "Bird Day" into the schools.

Secretary J. Sterling Morton, the father of "Arbor Day," responded
with the following earnest letter, which was at once given to the
public through Washington dispatches, and later was sent out from the
Department of Agriculture, in circular No. 17:--

WASHINGTON, D. C., April 23, 1894.

MR. C. A. BABCOCK, SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS, OIL CITY, PA.

     _Dear Sir_,--Your proposition to establish a "Bird Day" on
     the same general plan as "Arbor Day," has my cordial
     approval.

     Such a movement can hardly fail to promote the development
     of a healthy public sentiment toward our native birds,
     favoring their preservation and increase. If directed toward
     this end, and not to the encouragement of the importation of
     foreign species, it is sure to meet the approval of the
     American people.

     It is a melancholy fact that among the enemies of our birds
     two of the most destructive and relentless are our women and
     our boys. The love of feather ornamentation so heartlessly
     persisted in by thousands of women, and the mania for
     collecting eggs and killing birds so deeply rooted in our
     boys, are legacies of barbarism inherited from our savage
     ancestry. The number of beautiful and useful birds annually
     slaughtered for bonnet trimmings runs up into the hundreds
     of thousands, and threatens, if it has not already
     accomplished, the extermination of some of the rarer
     species. The insidious egg-hunting and pea-shooting
     proclivities of the small boy are hardly less widespread and
     destructive. It matters little which of the two agencies is
     the more fatal, since neither is productive of any good. One
     looks to the gratification of a shallow vanity, the other to
     the gratification of a cruel instinct and an expenditure of
     boyish energy that might be profitably diverted into other
     channels. The evil is one against which legislation can be
     only palliative and of local efficiency. Public sentiment,
     on the other hand, if properly fostered in the schools,
     would gain force with the growth and development of our boys
     and girls, and would become a hundredfold more potent than
     any law enacted by the State or Congress. I believe such a
     sentiment can be developed, so strong and so universal that
     a respectable woman will be ashamed to be seen with the wing
     of a wild bird on her bonnet, and an honest boy will be
     ashamed to own that he ever robbed a nest or wantonly took
     the life of a bird.

     Birds are of inestimable value to mankind. Without their
     unremitting services our gardens and fields would be laid
     waste by insect pests. But we owe them a greater debt even
     than this, for the study of birds tends to develop some of
     the best attributes and impulses of our natures. Among them
     we find examples of generosity, unselfish devotion, of the
     love of mother for offspring, and other estimable qualities.
     Their industry, patience, and ingenuity excite our
     admiration; their songs inspire us with a love of music and
     poetry; their beautiful plumages and graceful manners appeal
     to our aesthetic sense; their long migrations to distant
     lands stimulate our imaginations and tempt us to inquire
     into the causes of these periodic movements; and finally,
     the endless modifications of form and habits by which they
     are enabled to live under most diverse conditions of food
     and climate--on land and at sea--invite the student of
     nature into inexhaustible fields of pleasurable research.

     The cause of bird protection is one that appeals to the best
     side of our natures. Let us yield to the appeal. Let us have
     a Bird Day--a day set apart from all the other days of the
     year to tell the children about the birds. But we must not
     stop here. We should strive continually to develop and
     intensify the sentiment of bird protection, not alone for
     the sake of preserving the birds, but also for the sake of
     replacing as far as possible the barbaric impulses inherent
     in child nature by the nobler impulses and aspirations that
     should characterize advanced civilization.

Respectfully,

J. STERLING MORTON,

_Secretary of Agriculture._

Other friends of the birds responded cordially to the request, as will
be seen by the following letters:--

WEST PARK, N. Y., April 22, 1894.

     _Dear Sir_,--In response to yours of the seventeenth, I
     enclose a few notes about birds to be read upon your "Bird
     Day"--just an item or two to stimulate the curiosity of the
     young people. The idea is a good one, and I hope you may
     succeed in starting a movement that may extend to all the
     schools of the country.

Very truly yours,

JOHN BURROUGHS.

628 HANCOCK STREET, BROOKLYN, N. Y., April 25, 1894.

MR. C. A. BABCOCK.

     _Dear Sir_,--Yours of the nineteenth is received. I am
     delighted to know that your school children are to have a
     "Bird Day." I wish I could be there to tell them something
     of the delight of getting acquainted with their little
     brothers in feathers; how much more interesting they are
     when alive and doing all sorts of quaint and charming things
     than when dead and made into "skins" or stuffed; and how
     much greater is the pleasure of watching them to see how
     they live, where they get their dinner, how they take care
     of themselves, than of killing them, or hurting them, or
     even just driving them away. If the boys and girls only try
     keeping still and watching birds to see what they will do, I
     am sure no boy will ever again want to throw a stone at one,
     and no girl ever to have a dead bird on her hat.

Very truly yours,

OLIVE THORNE MILLER.

CLINTON, April 30, 1894.

     _My Dear Sir_,--It strikes me that your idea is a
     particularly happy one. Should you institute a "Bird Day,"
     the feathered tribe ought to furnish music for the occasion.
     A chorus of robins and thrushes and a few other songsters
     would be more appropriate than an orchestra. With thanks for
     your cordial good wishes, I am,

Yours faithfully,

CLINTON SCOLLARD.
