The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pirate City, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Pirate City
       An Algerine Tale

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 6, 2007 [EBook #21692]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIRATE CITY ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




THE PIRATE CITY, BY R.M. BALLANTINE.

A Tale of the Pirates of the City of Algiers, and their Defeat by the
British Navy.

The Time of the Action is about 1817.

The Pirate City--by RM Ballantyne



CHAPTER ONE.

OPENS THE TALE.

Some time within the first quarter of the present nineteenth century, a
little old lady--some people would even have called her a dear little
old lady--sat one afternoon in a high-backed chair beside a cottage
window, from which might be had a magnificent view of Sicilian rocks,
with the Mediterranean beyond.

This little old lady was so pleasant in all respects that an adequate
description of her is an impossibility.  Her mouth was a perfect study.
It was not troubled with anything in the shape of teeth.  It lay between
a delicate little down-turned nose and a soft little up-turned chin,
which two seemed as if anxious to meet in order to protect it.  The
wrinkles that surrounded that mouth were innumerable, and each wrinkle
was a distinct and separate smile; so that, whether pursing or
expanding, it was at all times rippling with an expression of tender
benignity.

This little old lady plays no part in our tale; nevertheless she merits
passing introduction as being the grandmother of our hero, a Sicilian
youth of nineteen, who, at the time we write of, sat on a stool at her
feet engaged in earnest conversation.

"Grandmother," said the youth in a perplexed mood, "why won't you let
_me_ go into the Church instead of brother Lucien?  I'm certain that he
does not want to, though he is fit enough, as far as education goes, and
goodness; but you know well enough that he is desperately fond of
Juliet, and she is equally desperate about him, and nothing could be
more pleasant than that they should get married."

"Tut, child, you talk nonsense," said the old lady, letting a sigh
escape from the rippling mouth.  "Your father's dearest wish has always
been to see Lucien enter the Church, and although Juliet is our adopted
child, we do not intend to interfere with the wishes of her uncle the
abbot, who has offered to place her in the convent of Saint Shutemup.
As to you taking Lucien's place,"--here the mouth expanded
considerably--"ah!  Mariano, you are too foolish, too giddy; better
fitted to be a sailor or soldier I should think--"

"How!" interrupted Mariano.  "Do you then estimate the profession of the
soldier and sailor so low, that you think only foolish and giddy fellows
are fit for it?"

"Not so, child; but it is a school which is eminently fitted to teach
respect and obedience to foolish and giddy fellows who are pert to their
grandmothers."

"Ah! how unfair," exclaimed Mariano, with assumed solemnity; "I give you
good advice, with gravity equal to that of any priest, and yet you call
me pert.  Grandmother, you are ungrateful as well as unjust.  Have I not
been good to you all my life?"

"You have, my child," said the little old lady; "very good--also rather
troublesome, especially in the way of talking nonsense, and I'm sorry to
find that although your goodness continues, your troublesomeness does
not cease!"

"Well, well," replied the youth, with a sprightly toss of the head,
"Lucien and I shall enjoy at least a few weeks more of our old life on
the blue sea before he takes to musty books and I to the stool of the
clerk.  Ah, why did you allow father to give us a good education?  How
much more enjoyable it would have been to have lived the free life of a
fisherman--or of that pig," he said, pointing to one which had just
strayed into the garden and lain down to roll in the earth--"what happy
ignorance or ignorant happiness; what concentrated enjoyment of the
present, what perfect oblivion as to the past, what obvious disregard of
the future--"

"Ay," interrupted the little old lady, "what blissful ignorance of the
deeds of ancient heroes, of the noble achievements of great and good
men, of the adventures of Marco Polo, and Magellan, and Vasco de Gama,
over whose voyages you have so often and so fondly pored."

"I see, grandmother, that it is useless to argue with you.  Let us turn
to a graver subject.  Tell me, what am I to bring you from Malta?  As
this is in very truth to be our last voyage, I must bring you something
grand, something costly.--Ah, here comes Juliet to help us to decide."

As he spoke a pretty dark-eyed girl of nineteen entered the room and
joined their council, but before they had gone very deep into the
question which Mariano had propounded, they were interrupted by the
entrance of the head of the house, Francisco Rimini, a strong portly man
of about fifty years of age, with a brown, healthy complexion, grizzled
locks, a bald pate, and a semi-nautical gait.  He was followed by a
stranger, and by his eldest son, Lucien--a tall, grave, slender youth of
twenty-three, who was in many respects the opposite of his brother
Mariano, physically as well as mentally.  The latter was middle-sized,
broad-shouldered, and very powerful, with short curly brown hair,
flashing eyes and sprightly disposition--active as a kitten, and rather
mischievous.  Lucien was grave, gentle, and studious; elegantly rather
than powerfully formed, and disposed rather to enjoy fun by looking on
than engaging in it.  Both brothers, as well as their father, possessed
kindly dispositions and resolute spirits.

"Mother," said Francisco, "let me introduce to you my friend Signor
Bacri, a merchant who goes in my vessel as a passenger to Malta.  He
dines with us to-day; and that reminds me that you must hasten our
dinner, as events have transpired which oblige me to set sail two hours
earlier than I had intended; so please expedite matters, Juliet."

The stranger bowed with Oriental dignity to the little old lady, and,
seating himself by her side, entered into conversation.

Bacri was a middle-aged man of magnificent appearance.  From the cast of
his features it was easy to perceive that he was of Jewish extraction,
and his proportions might have been compared to those of the ancient
enemy of his nation, Goliath.  Like Saul, he was a head and shoulders
higher than ordinary men, yet he evidently placed no confidence in his
physical strength, for although his countenance was grave and his
expression dignified, he stooped a good deal, as though to avoid
knocking his head against ceilings and beams, and was singularly humble
and unobtrusive in his manners.  There was a winning softness, too, in
his voice and in his smile, which went far to disarm that distrust of,
and antipathy to, his race which prevailed in days of old, and
unfortunately prevails still, to some extent, in Christendom.

With the activity of a good housewife, Juliet expedited the operations
of the cook; dinner was served in good time; Francisco, who was owner of
his vessel and cargo, as well as padrone or captain, entertained Bacri
with accounts of his adventures on the sea, which the Jew returned in
kind with his experiences of mercantile transactions in savage lands.
Mariano drank in all that they said with youthful avidity, and the
little old lady's mouth rippled responsive, like the aspen leaf to the
breeze; while Lucien and Juliet, thus left to themselves, had no other
resource than to entertain each other as best they could!

Then the adieux were said, the voyagers went down to the port, embarked
on board their good ship--a trim-built schooner--and set sail with a
fair wind.

"I wish I saw them all safe back again!" said the little old lady, with
a sigh.

Juliet said nothing, though she echoed the sigh.

Meanwhile the schooner leant over to the breeze, and ere night-fall left
the shores of Sicily far behind.



CHAPTER TWO.

UNFOLDS A LITTLE OF THE TALE.

Another and a very different vessel chanced to be floating in those seas
at the time the Sicilian trader set sail.  At a distance she might have
been mistaken for a fishing-boat, for she carried only two lateen sails,
of that high triangular form which may still be seen in the
Mediterranean and on the lakes of Switzerland.  In reality, however, the
vessel was of greater dimensions than even the largest boat, and her
main-mast with its sail was of gigantic proportions.  She was also
full-decked, and several pieces of heavy ordnance pointed their black
muzzles from port-holes in her bulwarks.

No one could have mistaken her character as a vessel of war, for,
besides the guns referred to, she had an unusually large crew of bronzed
and stalwart men.  Their costume, as well as their arms, told that these
were of Eastern origin.  Although there was much variety in detail, they
all wore the same gold-laced jackets, the same loose Turkish drawers
gathered in below the knees, and broad silken scarfs round their waists,
with richly chased silver-mounted pistols and yataghans or curved
swords.  Some wore the turban, others the blue-tasselled red fez or
tarbouch of Tunis, while a few contented themselves with a kerchief tied
loosely round their heads.

One, who appeared to be the captain of the vessel, stood near the
steersman, leaning on the bulwarks, and scanning the horizon with a
telescope.  His costume was similar to that of his men, but of richer
material.

"It is certainly a sail," said he whom we have styled the captain to one
who stood by his side, and might have been his lieutenant or mate.

"She bears sou'-west, I think," replied the latter.

"So much the better," returned the captain; "let her fall off a little--
so, steady.  If this wind holds for half an hour we shall get well
abreast of her, and then--"

The captain shut up the telescope with an emphatic bang, by way of
termination to his remark, and, turning on his heel, paced the deck
rapidly by the side of his mate.

"We have been unlucky hitherto," he observed; "perchance fortune may
change and now be favourable.  At all events, we shall be ready.  See,
the breeze freshens.  Go, call up the men and clear for action."

The breeze had indeed been freshening while he spoke, and now came down
in a series of squalls that caused the piratical-looking craft to lie
over as if she were about to capsize.  The vessel which they were
pursuing also bent over to the breeze and crowded all sail; for well did
Francisco, its owner and padrone, know, from past experience, that
Algerine corsairs were fast sailers, and that his only hope lay in
showing them his heels!  He had often given them the slip before--why
should he not again?

While thus doing his best to escape, however, the bluff merchant did not
neglect to make preparations for defence.

"Clear away the big gun," he said to Mariano, who acted as his first
officer, Lucien being the scrivano or supercargo of the vessel; "'tis a
good piece, and has turned the flight of many a pirate with its first
bark."

The latter part of this remark was addressed to Bacri, who stood,
leaning over the taffrail, looking anxiously at the vessel in chase.

"If it be Sidi Hassan," muttered the Jew half aloud, "there is little
chance--"

"What say you?" demanded Francisco.

"I say that if it be the vessel of a man whom I happen to know, you will
have to trust to your sails for deliverance--fighting will be of no
avail."

Francisco looked at the Jew with some surprise, not unmingled with
contempt.

"A warlike spirit, it seems, does not always consort with a powerful
frame," he said; "but how come you to have scraped acquaintance with
these pirates, whose existence is a blight upon the commerce of the
Mediterranean, and a disgrace to our age?"

"None should know better than thyself that a trader, like any other
traveller, becomes acquainted with strange bedfellows," replied Bacri,
with a quiet smile.  "As to a warlike spirit, of what use would it be in
a despised Israelite to display such?"

"There is truth in that," returned the padrone in a more respectful
tone; "nevertheless, if fighting becomes needful, I trust that one
furnished with such thews and sinews will not fail to lend effective
aid."

"That he will not, I dare say; and here is a cutlass for him, wherewith
to carve a name and fame," said Mariano, coming aft at the moment and
presenting the weapon to Bacri, who took it with a half-humorous smile,
and laid it on the seat beside him.

"Hast got the big gun ready, boy?" demanded Francisco.

"Ay--loaded her almost to the muzzle.  I ordered her to be
double-shotted, and that big black rascal Manqua slily crammed in a
handful of nails without leave.  I only hope she won't burst."

"Burst!" exclaimed the padrone, with a laugh; "if you were to load her
even beyond the muzzle she wouldn't burst.  I remember once loading her
with a full dose of canister, and clapped two round shot on the top of
that, after which the same negro you have mentioned, (for he has a
tendency in that way), shoved in a handspike without orders, and let the
whole concern fly at a pirate boat, which it blew clean out of the
water: she well-nigh burst the drums of our ears on that occasion, but
showed no sign whatever of bursting herself."

"Nevertheless," said Bacri earnestly, "I advise you to trust entirely to
your sails."

"We haven't another stitch of canvas to set," said Francisco in reply;
"and if we had, the old schooner couldn't stand it, for, as you may see,
the strain is already as much as she can bear."

This was indeed the case, for the vessel was by that time flying before
a stiff breeze, with all the sail set that she could carry, while the
water dashed in clouds from her bows, and rushed over her lee bulwarks.

But the sailing powers of the pirate-vessel were superior to those of
the trading schooner.  In a short time she was close alongside, and
fired a shot across her bows to cause her to heave-to.  This, however,
the determined skipper resolved not to do.  In reply he sent on board
the pirates the varied contents of the big gun, which cut the halyards
of their smaller sail, and brought it down on the deck.  This result was
celebrated by a hearty cheer from the schooner's crew.  The pirates, in
return, discharged a broadside which cut away the foremast of the
schooner, thus rendering escape impossible.

"Now, men," cried Francisco, when the disaster occurred, "you must this
day make your choice--victory or slavery--for there is no mercy in the
breasts of these scoundrels."

He waited for no reply, but at once sprang to the big gun, which had
been re-loaded with a charge so miscellaneous that the sable Manqua
grinned with satisfaction as he endeavoured to ram it home.

Meanwhile Mariano and Lucien placed the men, who were armed to the
teeth, at the gangways, and along the weather-side of the schooner, to
be in readiness to repel the foe when they should attempt to board.

There was no hesitation on the part of the pirates, although they saw
plainly the vigorous preparations which were being made to receive them.
Bearing down on the crippled vessel at full speed, in spite of the
bellowing discharge from the great gun, and a well-delivered volley of
small shot, which stretched many of them on the deck, they ran straight
against her, threw grappling-irons into the rigging, and sprang on board
with a fierce yell.

The melee that followed was sharp, but very short and decisive.  The
Sicilian crew fought with the courage of desperate men, but were almost
