Project Gutenberg's The Youngest Girl in the Fifth, by Angela Brazil

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Youngest Girl in the Fifth
       A School Story

Author: Angela Brazil

Illustrator: Stanley Davis

Release Date: June 6, 2007 [EBook #21687]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YOUNGEST GIRL IN THE FIFTH ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









             [Illustration: GWEN IS CAUGHT BY THE STORM]



                          The Youngest Girl

                            in the Fifth


                            A School Story



                                  BY

                            ANGELA BRAZIL

              Author of "The Leader of the Lower School"
         "A Pair of Schoolgirls" "The New Girl at St. Chad's"
                    "A Fourth Form Friendship" &c.



                    _ILLUSTRATED BY STANLEY DAVIS_




                       BLACKIE AND SON LIMITED

                      LONDON GLASGOW AND BOMBAY

       *       *       *       *       *




Contents


CHAP.

I.      AN UNEXPECTED REMOVE

II.     THE GASCOYNE GIRLS

III.    A FALSE STEP

IV.     A DELICATE TRANSACTION

V.      TROUBLE IN THE FIFTH

VI.     A CASTING VOTE

VII.    DICK CHAMBERS

VIII.   GWEN RECEIVES A LETTER

IX.     KEEPING CHRISTMAS

X.      A PRODIGAL

XI.     A PRIZE ESSAY

XII.    GWEN TURNS HENWIFE

XIII.   THE SHOE PINCHES

XIV.    GWEN MEETS TROUBLE

XV.     STORM CLOUDS

XVI.    FIRST AID

XVII.   A PRESSING ACCOUNT

XVIII.  GWEN'S BRIGHT IDEA

XIX.    A SCHOOL GYMKHANA

XX.     A DAY OF RECKONING

XXI.    RETRIBUTION

XXII.   THE TENNIS TOURNAMENT

XXIII.  GWEN TO THE RESCUE

XXIV.   THE SENIOR OXFORD

       *       *       *       *       *




Illustrations


GWEN IS CAUGHT BY THE STORM      _Frontispiece_

GWEN MEETS DICK

"THINGS GO SO HARDLY WITH ME SOMEHOW, DAD"

"OH, I SAY, WELL CAUGHT!"

"YES, YOU CAN EASILY GO MILES OUT OF YOUR WAY"

"IT WAS BASIL WHO SPIED HIM FIRST"

       *       *       *       *       *




THE YOUNGEST GIRL IN THE FIFTH

CHAPTER I

An Unexpected Remove


"Gwen! Gwen Gascoyne! Gwen! Anybody seen her? I say, have you all gone
deaf? Don't you hear me? Where's Gwen? I--want--Gwen--Gascoyne!"

The speaker--Ida Bridge--a small, perky, spindle-legged Junior, jumped
on to the nearest seat, and raising her shrill voice to its topmost
pitch, twice shouted the "Gwen Gascoyne", with an aggressive energy
calculated to make herself heard above the babel of general chatter
that pervaded the schoolroom. Her effort, though far from musical, at
any rate secured her the notice she desired.

"Hello, there! Stop that noise! It's like a dog howling!" irately
commanded a girl in spectacles who was cleaning the blackboard.

"And get down from my desk this minute! Who said you might climb up
there?"

"Look here, you kid, what are you doing in our classroom?"

"Take yourself off at once! Fly! Scoot!"

The "kid", however, stood her ground.

"Shan't move till you've answered my question," she replied with
aggravating impudence. "I want Gwen Gascoyne."

"Why, there she is all the time!"

"Where?"

"Under your very nose, you stupid baby! Get down from my desk, I tell
you!"

The Junior cast what was intended to be a withering glance before she
descended.

"Gwen Gascoyne, why couldn't you answer when I called you?" she
demanded abruptly.

Gwen paused in the act of sharpening a lead pencil, and eyed the
intruder.

"Who asked you to come in here?" she retorted.

"You babes must keep to your own classrooms! Hey, presto! Vanish! And
be quick about it!" interposed Myra Johnson.

"Shan't! Not till I've spoken to Gwen."

"Cheek!"

"Suppress that kid!"

"But I've got a message!" squeaked the babe, as sundry arms of justice
thrust her summarily in the direction of the door. "Oh, I have
really--a message for Gwen from Miss Roscoe! She's to go to the
library--now!"

"Then why couldn't you say so at first?"

"You never gave me a chance!"

Gwen threw the half-sharpened pencil inside her desk and banged down
the lid.

"What does Miss Roscoe want with me?" she asked in some consternation.
"Are you sure she meant me?"

A summons from the headmistress rarely boded good fortune to the
recipient, and the girls stared at Gwen with interested sympathy.

"What have you been doing?" murmured Eve Dawkins.

"Glad I'm not in your shoes!" proclaimed Daisy Hurst.

"Oh, Gwen, I am sorry for you!" bleated Alma Richardson.

"I've not been doing anything!" protested Gwen indignantly. "You've no
need to look at me as if I were a cross between a criminal and a
martyr! Here, you babe, what did Miss Roscoe say?"

"Only that you're to go to the library; and you'd better be quick,
because she said: 'Tell her to come at once!' Said it in her snappiest
way, too! I shouldn't be a month about going if I were you. Hello!
There's the bell. Ta-ta, I'm off! I wish you luck!" and Ida Bridge
fled to the region of her own classroom, with a grin on her impish
face.

Though she might rail at the impudence of the small fry, Gwen was not
above taking a hint--headmistresses do not lightly brook being kept
waiting--so she started at a run up the passage, turning over in her
mind every possible crime which she might unwittingly have committed.

"Can't remember using the front gate, or not changing my boots, or
talking on the stairs, or--oh, wow! Here I am at the library! Well,
whatever I've done, I suppose I'm in for it now! I hope she won't
absolutely wither me up!"

So far from looking withering as Gwen entered the room, the Principal
wore an unusually encouraging and benign expression. She was a
handsome, large, imposing woman, with a stern cast of features, and
was held in great awe by the whole school. As a rule, Seniors and
Juniors quailed alike under the glance of her keen dark eyes.

"Come here, Gwen," she said blandly, as her pupil stood hesitating
near the door. "I want to have a little talk with you. I've been
looking over your reports for the last few weeks, and I find that
you've done well--so well, that I consider the standard of the Upper
Fourth is too easy for you. I think you ought to be able to manage the
work of the Fifth Form, and I'm going to move you there."

Gwen stared at Miss Roscoe, too surprised to answer. Such a proposal
as a change of Form was absolutely the last thing she could have
expected. In the middle of a term it was surely an unprecedented
happening. For the moment she scarcely knew whether to be alarmed or
flattered at the honour thus thrust upon her.

"You may find the mathematics a little difficult," continued Miss
Roscoe; "but Miss Woodville shall coach you until you've caught up the
rest of the class. She can also go over the arrears of Latin
translation with you. With that help you shouldn't be so far behind.
I've spoken to both Miss Slade and Miss Douglas about it, and they
fully agree with me. Do you think yourself you'll be able to manage
the work?"

"I don't know, I'm sure," stammered Gwen. "I expect I'm behind in
maths.--but--"

"But you must try your best. I shall trust you to make a great effort.
I should be very sorry to have to put you down again. Come with me
now, and I'll take you to your new Form."

Gwen followed the Principal with her head in a buzzing whirl. It
seemed like a dream to be suddenly translated from the Lower School to
the Upper. She wished she could have had a little time to get
accustomed to the idea: she would have liked a day's preparation at
least, so as to think the change over and discuss it at home. Miss
Roscoe, however, always did things in a hurry; she never had a moment
to waste, and at present she whisked her pupil along the corridor and
into the Fifth Form room with almost breathless energy.

"Here's Gwen Gascoyne, Miss Douglas," she announced. "We'll try if she
can manage the work, and I've arranged with Miss Woodville to give her
the extra coaching we spoke about. She can bring her books from her
old classroom at eleven."

Thus saying, she bustled away to take a history lecture, leaving the
new member of the Fifth standing in much embarrassment. The eyes of
every girl in the room naturally were glued upon Gwen, who felt
herself twitching with nervousness under the scrutiny; but Miss
