The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hunted and Harried, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Hunted and Harried

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 7, 2007 [EBook #21738]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HUNTED AND HARRIED ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




HUNTED AND HARRIED, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.

CHAPTER ONE.

ON THE HUNT.

On a brilliant summer morning in the last quarter of the seventeenth
century a small troop of horsemen crossed the ford of the river Cairn,
in Dumfriesshire, not far from the spot where stands the little church
of Irongray, and, gaining the road on the western bank of the stream,
wended their way towards the moors and uplands which lie in the
neighbourhood of Skeoch Hill.

The dragoons, for such they were, trotted rapidly along the road that
led into the solitudes of the hills, with all the careless dash of men
whose interests are centred chiefly on the excitements of the passing
hour, yet with the unflagging perseverance of those who have a fixed
purpose in view--their somewhat worn aspect and the mud with which they
were bespattered, from jack-boot to iron headpiece, telling of a long
ride over rugged ground.

The officer in command of the party rode a little in advance.  Close
behind him followed two troopers, one of whom was a burly middle-aged
man with a stern, swarthy countenance; the other a youth whose tall
frame was scarcely, if at all, less powerful than that of his
comrade-in-arms, though much more elegant in form, while his youthful
and ruddy, yet masculine, countenance suggested that he must at that
time have been but a novice in the art of war.

This youth alone, of all the party, had a somewhat careworn and sad
expression on his brow.  It could hardly have been the result of
fatigue, for there was more of ease and vigour in his carriage than in
that of any of his companions.

"We should be near the river by this time, Glendinning," said the leader
of the party, reining in and addressing the swarthy trooper.

"Ay, sir, the Cluden rins jist ayont the turn o' the road there,"
replied the man.  "Ye'll hear the roar o' the fa' in a meenit or twa."

Even as he spoke the dull growl of a cataract was heard, and, a few
minutes later, the party came upon the ford of the river.

It was situated not many yards below the picturesque waterfall, which is
now spanned by the Routen Bridge, but which, at that time, was
unbridged--at all events, if a bridge had previously existed, it had
fallen in or been carried away--and the wild gorge was impassable.

The sound of the fall alone told of its vicinity, for a dense mass of
foliage hid it completely from the troopers' view until they had
surmounted the steep bank on the other side of the stream.

"Are you well acquainted with this man Black?" asked the leader of the
party as they emerged from the thick belt of trees and shrubs by which
the Cluden was shaded, and continued their journey on the more open
ground beyond.

"I ken him weel, sir," answered the trooper.  "Andrew Black was an auld
freend o' mine, an' a big, stoot, angry man he is--kindly disposed, nae
doot, when ye let him alane, but a perfe't deevil incarnate when he's
roosed.  He did me an ill turn ance that I've no paid him off for
_yet_."

"I suppose, then," said the officer, "that your guiding us so willingly
to his cottage is in part payment of this unsettled debt?"

"Maybe it is," replied the trooper grimly.

"They say," continued the other, "that there is some mystery about the
man; that somehow nobody can catch him.  Like an eel he has slipped
through our fellows' fingers and disappeared more than once, when they
thought they had him quite safe.  It is said that on one occasion he
managed even to give the slip to Claverhouse himself, which, you know,
is not easy."

"That may be, sir, but he'll no slip through my fingers gin I ance git a
grup o' his thrapple," said the swarthy man, with a revengeful look.

"We must get a grip of him somehow," returned the officer, "for it is
said that he is a sly helper of the rebels--though it is as difficult to
convict as to catch him; and as this gathering, of which our spies have
brought information, is to be in the neighbourhood of his house, he is
sure to be mixed up with it."

"Nae doot o' that, sir, an' so we may manage to kill twa birds wi' ae
stane.  But I'm in a diffeeculty noo, sir, for ye ken I'm no acquaint
wi' this country nae farer than the Cluden ford, an' here we hae come to
a fork i' the road."

The party halted as he spoke, while the perplexed guide stroked his
rather long nose and looked seriously at the two roads, or bridle-paths,
into which their road had resolved itself, and each of which led into
very divergent parts of the heathclad hills.

This guide, Glendinning, had become acquainted with Black at a time when
the latter resided in Lanarkshire, and, as he had just said, was
unacquainted with the region through which they now travelled beyond the
river Cluden.  After a short conference the officer in command decided
to divide the party and explore both paths.

"You will take one man, Glendinning, and proceed along the path to the
right," he said; "I will try the left.  If you discover anything like a
house or cot within a mile or two you will at once send your comrade
back to let me know, while you take up your quarters in the cottage and
await my coming.  Choose whom you will for your companion."

"I choose Will Wallace, then," said Glendinning, with a nod to the young
trooper whom we have already introduced.

The youth did not seem at all flattered by the selection, but of course
obeyed orders with military promptitude, and followed his comrade for
some time in silence, though with a clouded brow.

"It seems to me," said the swarthy trooper, as they drew rein and
proceeded up a steep ascent at a walk, "that ye're no' sae pleased as ye
might be wi' the wark we hae on hand."

"Pleased!" exclaimed the youth, whose tone and speech seemed to indicate
him an Englishman, "how can I be pleased when all I have been called on
to do since I enlisted has been to aid and abet in robbery, cruelty, and
murder?  I honour loyalty and detest rebellion as much as any man in the
troop, but if I had known what I now know I would never have joined
you."

Glendinning gazed at his companion in amazement.  Having been absent on
detached service when Will Wallace had joined--about three weeks
previously--he was ignorant both as to his character and his recent
experiences.  He had chosen him on the present occasion simply on
account of his youth and magnificent physique.

"I doot I've made a mistake in choosin' _you_," said Glendinning with
some asperity, after a few moments, "but it's ower late noo to
rectifee't.  What ails ye, lad?  What hae ye seen?"

"I have seen what I did not believe possible," answered the other with
suppressed feeling.  "I have seen a little boy tortured with the
thumbscrews, pricked with bayonets, and otherwise inhumanly treated
because he would not, or could not, tell where his father was.  I have
seen a man hung up to a beam by his thumbs because he would not give up
money which perhaps he did not possess.  I have seen a woman tortured by
having lighted matches put between her fingers because she would not, or
could not, tell where a conventicle was being held.  I did not, indeed,
see the last deed actually done, else would I have cut down the coward
who did it.  The poor thing had fainted and the torture was over when I
came upon them.  Only two days ago I was ordered out with a party who
pillaged the house of a farmer because he refused to take an oath of
allegiance, which seems to have been purposely so worded as to make
those who take it virtually bondslaves to the King, and which makes him
master of the lives, properties, and consciences of his subjects--and
all this done in the King's name and by the King's troops!"

"An' what pairt did _you_ tak' in these doin's?" asked Glendinning with
some curiosity.

"I did my best to restrain my comrades, and when they were burning the
hayricks, throwing the meal on the dunghill, and wrecking the property
of the farmer, I cut the cords with which they had bound the poor fellow
to his chair and let him go free."

"Did onybody see you do that?"

"I believe not; though I should not have cared if they had.  I'm
thoroughly disgusted with the service.  I know little or nothing of the
principles of these rebels--these fanatics, as you call them--but
tyranny or injustice I cannot stand, whether practised by a king or a
beggar, and I am resolved to have nothing more to do with such fiendish
work."

"Young man," said the swarthy comrade in a voice of considerable
solemnity, "ye hae obviously mista'en your callin'.  If you werena new
to thae pairts, ye would ken that the things ye objec' to are quite
common.  Punishin' an' harryin' the rebels and fanatics--_Covenanters_,
they ca' theirsels--has been gaun on for years ower a' the land.  In my
opeenion it's weel deserved, an' naething that ye can do or say wull
prevent it, though what ye do an' say is no' unlikely to cut short yer
ain career by means o' a rope roond yer thrapple.  But losh! man, I
wonder ye haena heard about thae matters afore now."

"My having spent the last few years of my life in an out-of-the-way part
of Ireland may account for that," said Wallace.  "My father's recent
death obliged my mother to give up her farm and return to her native
town of Lanark, where she now lives with a brother.  Poverty and the
urgency of a cousin have induced me, unfortunately, to take service with
the dragoons."

"After what ye've said, hoo am I to coont on yer helpin' me e'noo?"
asked Glendinning.

"As long as I wear the King's uniform you may count on my obeying orders
unless I am commanded to break the plainest laws of God," answered the
young man.  "As our present business is only to discover the cottage of
Andrew Black, there seems likely to be no difficulty between us just
now."

"H'm!  I'm no' sure o' that; but if ye'll tak' my advice, lad, ye'll
haud yer tongue aboot thae matters.  If Clavers heard the half o' what
ye've said to me, he'd send ye into the next warl' withoot gieing ye
time to say yer prayers.  Freedom of speech is no permitted at the
present time in Scotland--unless it be the right kind of speech, and--"

He stopped, for at that moment two young girls suddenly appeared at a
bend of the road in front of them.  They gazed for a moment at the
soldiers in evident surprise, and then turned as if to fly, but
Glendinning put spurs to his horse and was beside them in a moment.
Leaping to the ground, he seized the girls roughly by their arms as they
clung together in alarm.  One of the two was a dark-eyed little child.
The other was fair, unusually pretty, and apparently about fifteen or
sixteen years of age.

The trooper proceeded to question them sharply.

"Be gentle," said Will Wallace sternly, as he rode up, and, also
dismounting, stood beside them.  "No fear of their running away now."

The swarthy trooper pretended not to hear, but nevertheless relaxed his
grip and merely rested his hand upon the fair girl's shoulder as he said
to the other--

"Now, my wee doo, ye canna be far frae hame, I's be sworn.  What's yer
name?"

"Aggie Wilson," answered the child at once.

"And yours?"

"Jean Black," replied the blonde timidly.

"Oho! an' yer faither's name is Andrew, an' his hoose is close by, I'll
be bound, so ye'll be guid eneuch to show us the way till't.  But first,
my bonny lass, ye'll gie me a--"

Slipping his arm round the waist of the terrified blonde, the trooper
rudely attempted to terminate his sentence in a practical manner; but
before his lips could touch her face he received a blow from his comrade
that sent him staggering against a neighbouring tree.

Blazing with astonishment and wrath, Glendinning drew his sword and
sprang at his companion, who, already full of indignation at the memory
of what he had been so recently compelled to witness, could ill brook
the indignity thus offered to the defenceless girl.  His weapon flashed
from its sheath on the instant, and for a few moments the two men cut
and thrust at each other with savage ferocity.  Wallace, however, was
too young and unused to mortal strife to contemplate with indifference
the possibility of shedding the blood of a comrade.  Quickly recovering
himself, he stood entirely on the defensive, which his vigorous activity
enabled him easily to do.  Burning under the insult he had received,
Glendinning felt no such compunctions.  He pushed his adversary
fiercely, and made a lunge at last which not only passed the sword
through the left sleeve of the youth's coat, but slightly wounded his
arm.  Roused to uncontrollable anger by this, Will Wallace fetched his
opponent a blow so powerful that it beat down his guard, rang like a
hammer on his iron headpiece, and fairly hurled the man into the ditch
at the roadside.

Somewhat alarmed at this sudden result, the youth hastily pulled him
out, and, kneeling beside him, anxiously examined his head.  Much to his
relief he found that there was no wound at all, and that the man was
only stunned.  After the examination, Wallace observed that the girls
had taken advantage of the fray to make their escape.

Indignation and anger having by that time evaporated, and his judgment
having become cool, Wallace began gradually to appreciate his true
position, and to feel exceedingly uncomfortable.  He had recklessly
expressed opinions and confessed to actions which would of themselves
ensure his being disgraced and cast into prison, if not worse; he had
almost killed one of his own comrades, and had helped two girls to
escape who could probably have assisted in the accomplishment of the
duty on which they had been despatched.  His case, he suddenly
perceived, was hopeless, and he felt that he was a lost man.

Will Wallace was quick of thought and prompt in action.  Carefully
disposing the limbs of his fallen comrade, and resting his head
comfortably on a grassy bank, he cast a hurried glance around him.

On his left hand and behind him lay the rich belt of woodland that
marked the courses of the rivers Cluden and Cairn.  In front stretched
the moors and hills of the ancient district of Galloway, at that time
given over to the tender mercies of Graham of Claverhouse.  Beside him
stood the two patient troop-horses, gazing quietly at the prostrate man,
as if in mild surprise at his unusual stillness.

Beyond this he could not see with the physical eye; but with the mental
orb he saw a dark vista of ruined character, blighted hopes, and dismal
prospects.  The vision sufficed to fix his decision.  Quietly, like a
warrior's wraith, he sheathed his sword and betook himself to the covert
of the peat-morass and the heather hill.

He was not the first good man and true who had sought the same shelter.

At the time of which we write Scotland had for many years been in a
woeful plight--with tyranny draining her life-blood, cupidity grasping
her wealth, hypocrisy and bigotry misconstruing her motives and
falsifying her character.  Charles the Second filled the throne.
Unprincipled men, alike in Church and State, made use of their position
and power to gain their own ends and enslave the people.  The King,
determined to root out Presbytery from Scotland, as less subservient to
his despotic aims, and forcibly to impose Prelacy on her as a
stepping-stone to Popery, had no difficulty in finding ecclesiastical
and courtly bravos to carry out his designs; and for a long series of
dismal years persecution stalked red-handed through the land.

Happily for the well-being of future generations, our covenanting
forefathers stood their ground with Christian heroism, for both civil
and religious liberty were involved in the struggle.  Their so-called
fanaticism consisted in a refusal to give up the worship of God after
the manner dictated by conscience and practised by their forefathers; in
declining to attend the ministry of the ignorant, and too often vicious,
curates forced upon them; and in refusing to take the oath of allegiance
just referred to by Will Wallace.

Conventicles, as they were called--or the gathering together of
Christians in houses and barns, or on the hillsides, to worship God--
were illegally pronounced illegal by the King and Council; and
disobedience to the tyrannous law was punished with imprisonment,
torture, confiscation of property, and death.  To enforce these
penalties the greater part of Scotland--especially the south and west--
was overrun by troops, and treated as if it were a conquered country.
The people--holding that in some matters it is incumbent to "obey God
rather than man," and that they were bound "not to forsake the
assembling of themselves together"--resolved to set the intolerable law
at defiance, and went armed to the hill-meetings.

They took up arms at first, however, chiefly, if not solely, to protect
themselves from a licentious soldiery, who went about devastating the
land, not scrupling to rob and insult helpless women and children, and
to shed innocent blood.  Our Scottish forefathers, believing--in common
with the lower animals and lowest savages--that it was a duty to defend
their females and little ones, naturally availed themselves of the best
means of doing so.

About this time a meeting, or conventicle, of considerable importance
was appointed to be held among the secluded hills in the neighbourhood
of Irongray; and Andrew Black, the farmer, was chosen to select the
particular spot, and make the preliminary arrangements.

Now this man Black is not easily described, for his was a curiously
compound character.  To a heart saturated with the milk of human
kindness was united a will more inflexible, if possible, than that of a
Mexican mule; a frame of Herculean mould, and a spirit in which profound
gravity and reverence waged incessant warfare with a keen appreciation
of the ludicrous.  Peacefully inclined in disposition, with a tendency
to believe well of all men, and somewhat free and easy in the formation
of his opinions, he was very unwilling to resist authority; but the love
of truth and justice was stronger within him than the love of peace.

In company with his shepherd, Quentin Dick--a man of nearly his own size
and build--Andrew Black proceeded to a secluded hollow in Skeoch Hill to
gather and place in order the masses of rock which were to form the
seats of the communicants at the contemplated religious gathering--which
seats remain to this day in the position they occupied at that time, and
are familiarly known in the district as "the Communion stones of
Irongray."

CHAPTER TWO.

THE "FANATIC" AND THE "SPY."

The night was dark and threatening when Andrew Black and his shepherd
left their cottage, and quickly but quietly made for the neighbouring
hill.  The weather was well suited for deeds of secrecy, for gusts of
wind, with an occasional spattering of rain, swept along the hill-face,
and driving clouds obscured the moon, which was then in its first
quarter.

At first the two men were obliged to walk with care, for the light was
barely sufficient to enable them to distinguish the sheep-track which
they followed, and the few words they found it necessary to speak were
uttered in subdued tones.  Jean Black and her cousin Aggie Wilson had
reported their _rencontre_ with the two dragoons, and Quentin Dick had
himself seen the main body of the troops from behind a heather bush on
his way back to the farm, therefore caution was advisable.  But as they
climbed Skeoch Hill, and the moon shed a few feeble rays on their path,
they began to converse more freely.  For a few minutes their intercourse
related chiefly to sheep and the work of the farm, for both Andrew and
his man were of that sedate, imperturbable nature which is not easily
thrown off its balance by excitement or danger.  Then their thoughts
turned to the business in hand.

"Nae fear o' the sodgers comin' here on a nicht like this," remarked
Andrew, as a squall nearly swept the blue bonnet off his head.

"Maybe no," growled Quentin Dick sternly, "but I've heard frae Tam
Chanter that servants o' that Papist Earl o' Nithsdale, an' o' the
scoondrel Sir Robert Dalziel, hae been seen pokin' their noses aboot at
Irongray.  If they git wund o' the place, we're no likely to hae a quiet
time o't.  Did ye say that the sodgers ill-used the bairns?"

"Na!--ane o' them was inclined to be impident, but the ither, a
guid-lookin' young felly, accordin' to Jean, took their pairt an'
quarrelled wi' his comrade, sae that they cam to loggerheeds at last,
but what was the upshot naebody kens, for the bairns took to their heels
an' left them fechtin'."

"An' what if they sud fin' yer hoose an' the bairns unproteckit?" asked
the shepherd.

"They're no likely to fin' the hoose in a nicht like this, man; an' if
they do, they'll fin' naebody but Ramblin' Peter there, for I gied the
lassies an' the women strick orders to tak' to the hidy-hole at the
first soond o' horses' feet."

By this time the men had reached a secluded hollow in the hill, so
completely enclosed as to be screened from observation on all sides.
They halted here a few moments, for two dark forms were seen in the
uncertain light to be moving about just in front of them.

"It's them," whispered Andrew.

"Whae?" asked the shepherd.

"Alexander McCubine an' Edward Gordon."

"Guid an' safe men baith," responded Quentin; "ye better gie them a
cry."

Andrew did so by imitating the cry of a plover.  It was replied to at
once.

"The stanes are big, ye see," explained Andrew, while the two men were
approaching.  "It'll tak' the strength o' the fowr o' us to lift some o'
them."

"We've got the cairn aboot finished," said McCubine as he came up.  He
spoke in a low voice, for although there was no probability of any one
being near, they were so accustomed to expect danger because of the
innumerable enemies who swarmed about the country, that caution had
almost become a second nature.

Without further converse the four men set to work in silence.  They
completed a circular heap, or cairn, of stones three or four feet high,
and levelled the top thereof to serve as a table or a pulpit at the
approaching assembly.  In front of this, and stretching towards a
sloping brae, they arranged four rows of very large stones to serve as
seats for the communicants, with a few larger stones between them, as if
for the support of rude tables of plank.  It took several hours to
complete the work.  When it was done Andrew Black surveyed it with
complacency, and gave it as his opinion that it was a "braw kirk,
capable o' accommodatin' a congregation o' some thoosands, mair or
less."  Then the two men, Gordon and McCubine, bidding him and the
shepherd good-night, went away into the darkness from which they had
emerged.

"Whar'll they be sleepin' the nicht?" asked the shepherd, as he and
Andrew turned homeward.

"I' the peat-bog, I doot, for I daurna tak' them hame whan the dragoons
is likely to gie us a ca'; besides, the hidy-hole wull be ower fu' soon.
Noo, lad," he added, as they surmounted a hillock, from which they had
a dim view of the surrounding country, "gang ye doon an' see if ye can
fin' oot onything mair aboot thae sodgers.  I'll awa' hame an see that
a's right there."

They parted, the shepherd turning sharp off to the right, while the
farmer descended towards his cottage.  He had not advanced above half
the distance when an object a little to the left of his path induced him
to stop.  It resembled a round stone, and was too small to have
attracted the attention of any eye save one which was familiar with
every bush and stone on the ground.  Grasping a stout thorn stick which
he carried, Andrew advanced towards the object in question with catlike
caution until quite close to it, when he discovered that it was the head
of a man who was sleeping soundly under a whin-bush.  A closer
inspection showed that the man wore an iron headpiece, a soldier's coat,
and huge jack-boots.

"A dragoon and a spy!" thought Andrew, while he raised his cudgel, the
only weapon he carried, and frowned.  But Andrew was a merciful man; he
could not bring himself to strike a sleeping man, even though waking him
might entail a doubtful conflict, for he could see that the trooper's
hand grasped the hilt of his naked sword.  For a few moments he surveyed
the sleeper, as if calculating his chances, then he quietly dropped his
plaid, took off his coat, and untying his neckcloth, laid it carefully
on one side over a bush.  Having made these preparations, he knelt
beside Will Wallace--for it was he--and grasped him firmly by the throat
with both hands.

As might have been expected, the young trooper attempted to spring up,
and tried to use his weapon; but, finding this to be impossible at such
close quarters, he dropped it, and grappled the farmer with all his
might; but Andrew, holding on to him like a vice, placed his knee upon
his chest and held him firmly down.

"It's o' nae manner o' use to strive, ye see," said Andrew, relaxing his
grip a little; "I've gotten ye, an' if ye like to do my biddin' I'll no
be hard on ye."

"If you will let me rise and stand before me in fair fight, I'll do your
business if not your bidding," returned Wallace in a tone of what may be
termed stern sulkiness.

"Div ye think it's likely I'll staund before you in fair fecht, as you
ca'd--you wi' a swurd, and me wi' a bit stick, my lad?  Na, na, ye'll
hae to submit, little though ye like it."

"Give me the stick, then, and take you the sword, I shall be content,"
said the indignant trooper, making another violent but unsuccessful
effort to free himself.
