The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gorilla Hunters, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Gorilla Hunters

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 7, 2007 [EBook #21736]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GORILLA HUNTERS ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




THE GORILLA HUNTERS, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

IN WHICH THE HUNTERS ARE INTRODUCED.

It was five o'clock in the afternoon.  There can be no doubt whatever as
to that.  Old Agnes may say what she pleases--she has a habit of doing
so--but I know for certain (because I looked at my watch not ten minutes
before it happened) that it was exactly five o'clock in the afternoon
when I received a most singular and every way remarkable visit--a visit
which has left an indelible impression on my memory, as well it might;
for, independent of its singularity and unexpectedness, one of its
results was the series of strange adventures which are faithfully
detailed in this volume.

It happened thus:--

I was seated in an armchair in my private study in a small town on the
west coast of England.  It was a splendid afternoon, and it was exactly
five o'clock.  Mark that.  Not that there is anything singular about the
mere fact, neither is it in any way mixed up with the thread of this
tale; but old Agnes is very obstinate--singularly positive--and I have a
special desire that she should see it in print, that I have not given in
on that point.  Yes, it was five precisely, and a beautiful evening.  I
was ruminating, as I frequently do, on the pleasant memories of bygone
days, especially the happy days that I spent long ago among the coral
islands of the Pacific, when a tap at the door aroused me.

"Come in."

"A veesiter, sir," said old Agnes (my landlady), "an' he'll no gie his
name."

Old Agnes, I may remark, is a Scotchwoman.

"Show him in," said I.

"Maybe he's a pickpocket," suggested Agnes.

"I'll take my chance of that."

"Ay! that's like 'ee.  Cares for naethin'.  Losh, man, what if he cuts
yer throat?"

"I'll take my chance of that too; only _do_ show him in, my good woman,"
said I, with a gesture of impatience that caused the excellent (though
obstinate) old creature to depart, grumbling.

In another moment a quick step was heard on the stair, and a stranger
burst into the room, shut the door in my landlady's face as she followed
him, and locked it.

I was naturally surprised, though not alarmed, by the abrupt and
eccentric conduct of my visitor, who did not condescend to take off his
hat, but stood with his arms folded on his breast, gazing at me and
breathing hard.

"You are agitated, sir; pray be seated," said I, pointing to a chair.

The stranger, who was a little man and evidently a gentleman, made no
reply, but, seizing a chair, placed it exactly before me, sat down on it
as he would have seated himself on a horse, rested his arms on the back,
and stared me in the face.

"You are disposed to be facetious," said I, smiling (for I never take
offence without excessively good reason).

"Not at all, by no means," said he, taking off his hat and throwing it
recklessly on the floor.  "You are Mr Rover, I presume?"

"The same, sir, at your service."

"Are you? oh, that's yet to be seen!  Pray, is your Christian name
Ralph?"

"It is," said I, in some surprise at the coolness of my visitor.

"Ah! just so.  Christian name Ralph, t'other name Rover--Ralph Rover.
Very good.  Age twenty-two yesterday, eh?"

"My birthday _was_ yesterday, and my age _is_ twenty-two.  You appear to
know more of my private history than I have the pleasure of knowing of
yours.  Pray, sir, may I--but, bless me! are you unwell?"

I asked this in some alarm, because the little man was rolling about in
his seat, holding his sides, and growing very red in the face.

"Oh no! not at all; perfectly well--never was better in my life," he
said, becoming all at once preternaturally grave.  "You were once in the
Pacific--lived on a coral island--"

"I did."

"Oh, don't trouble yourself to answer.  Just shut up for a minute or
two.  You were rather a soft green youth then, and you don't seem to be
much harder or less verdant now."

"Sir!"  I exclaimed, getting angry.

"Just so," continued he, "and you knew a young rascal there--"

"I know a rascal _here_," I exclaimed, starting up, "whom I'll kick--"

"What!" cried the little stranger, also starting up and capsizing the
chair; "Ralph Rover, has time and sunburning and war so changed my
visage that you cannot recognise Peterkin?"

I almost gasped for breath.

"Peterkin--Peterkin Gay!"  I exclaimed.

I am not prone to indulge in effeminate demonstration, but I am not
ashamed to confess that when I gazed on the weather-beaten though ruddy
countenance of my old companion, and observed the eager glance of his
bright blue eyes, I was quite overcome, and rushed violently into his
arms.  I may also add that until that day I had had no idea of
Peterkin's physical strength; for during the next five minutes he
twisted me about and spun me round and round my own room until my brain
began to reel, and I was fain to cry him mercy.

"So, you're all right--the same jolly, young old wiseacre in whiskers
and long coat," cried Peterkin.  "Come now, Ralph, sit down if you can.
I mean to stay with you all evening, and all night, and all to-morrow,
and all next day, so we'll have lots of time to fight our battles o'er
again.  Meanwhile compose yourself, and I'll tell you what I've come
about.  Of course, my first and chief reason was to see your face, old
boy; but I have another reason too--a very peculiar reason.  I've a
proposal to make and a plan to unfold, both of 'em stunners; they'll
shut you up and screw you down, and altogether flabbergast you when you
hear 'em, so sit down and keep quiet--do."

I sat down accordingly, and tried to compose myself; but, to say truth,
I was so much overjoyed and excited by the sight of my old friend and
companion that I had some difficulty at first in fixing my attention on
what he said, the more especially that he spoke with extreme volubility,
and interrupted his discourse very frequently, in order to ask questions
or to explain.

"Now, old fellow," he began, "here goes, and mind you don't interrupt
me.  Well, I mean to go, and I mean you to go with me, to--but, I
forgot, perhaps you won't be able to go.  What are you?"

"What am I?"

"Ay, your profession, your calling; lawyer, M.D., scrivener--which?"

"I am a naturalist."

"A what?"

"A naturalist."

"Ralph," said Peterkin slowly, "have you been long troubled with that
complaint?"

"Yes," I replied, laughing; "I have suffered from it from my earliest
infancy, more or less."

"I thought so," rejoined my companion, shaking his head gravely.  "I
fancied that I observed the development of that disease when we lived
together on the coral island.  It don't bring you in many thousands a
year, does it?"

"No," said I, "it does not.  I am only an amateur, having a sufficiency
of this world's goods to live on without working for my bread.  But
although my dear father at his death left me a small fortune, which
yields me three hundred a year, I do not feel entitled to lead the life
of an idler in this busy world, where so many are obliged to toil night
and day for the bare necessaries of life.  I have therefore taken to my
favourite studies as a sort of business, and flatter myself that I have
made one or two not unimportant discoveries, and added a few mites to
the sum of human knowledge.  A good deal of my time is spent in
scientific roving expeditions throughout the country, and in
contributing papers to several magazines."

While I was thus speaking I observed that Peterkin's face was undergoing
the most remarkable series of changes of expression, which, as I
concluded, merged into a smile of beaming delight, as he said,--"Ralph,
you're a trump!"

"Possibly," said I, "you are right; but, setting that question aside for
the present, let me remind you that you have not yet told me where you
mean to go to."

"I mean," said Peterkin slowly, placing both hands on his knees and
looking me steadily in the face--"I mean to go a-hunting in--but I
forgot.  You don't know that I'm a hunter, a somewhat famous hunter?"

"Of course I don't.  You are so full of your plans and proposals that
you have not yet told me where you have been or what doing these six
years.  And you ye never written to me once all that time, shabby
fellow.  I thought you were dead."

"Did you go into mourning for me, Ralph?"

"No, of course not."

"A pretty fellow you are to find fault.  You thought that I, your oldest
and best friend, was dead, and you did not go into mourning.  How could
I write to you when you parted from me without giving me your address?
It was a mere chance my finding you out even now.  I was taking a quiet
cup of coffee in the commercial room of a hotel not far distant, when I
overheard a stranger speaking of his friend `Ralph Rover, the
philosopher,' so I plunged at him promiscuously, and made him give me
your address.  But I've corresponded with Jack ever since we parted on
the pier at Dover."

"What!  Jack--Jack Martin?"  I exclaimed, as a warm gush of feeling
filled my heart at the sound of his well-remembered name.  "Is Jack
alive?"

"Alive!  I should think so.  If possible, he's more alive than ever; for
I should suppose he must be full-grown now, which he was not when we
last met.  He and I have corresponded regularly.  He lives in the north
of England, and by good luck happens to be just now within thirty miles
of this town.  You don't mean to say, Ralph, that you have never met!"

"Never.  The very same mistake that happened with you occurred between
him and me.  We parted vowing to correspond as long as we should live,
and three hours after I remembered that we had neglected to exchange our
addresses, so that we could not correspond.  I have often, often made
inquiries both for you and him, but have always failed.  I never heard
of Jack from the time we parted at Dover till to-day."

"Then no doubt you thought us both dead, and yet you did not go into
mourning for either of us!  O Ralph, Ralph, I had entertained too good
an opinion of you."

"But tell me about Jack," said I, impatient to hear more concerning my
dear old comrade.

"Not just now, my boy; more of him in a few minutes.  First let us
return to the point.  What was it?  Oh! a--about my being a celebrated
hunter.  A very Nimrod--at least a miniature copy.  Well, Ralph, since
we last met I have been all over the world, right round and round it.
I'm a lieutenant in the navy now--at least I was a week ago.  I've been
fighting with the Kaffirs and the Chinamen, and been punishing the
rascally sepoys in India, and been hunting elephants in Ceylon and
tiger-shooting in the jungles, and harpooning whales in the polar seas,
and shooting lions at the Cape; oh, you've no notion where all I've
been.  It's a perfect marvel I've turned up here alive.  But there's one
beast I've not yet seen, and I'm resolved to see him and shoot him
too--"

"But," said I, interrupting, "what mean you by saying that you were a
lieutenant in the navy a week ago?"

"I mean that I've given it up.  I'm tired of the sea.  I only value it
as a means of getting from one country to another.  The land, the land
for me!  You must know that an old uncle, a rich old uncle of mine, whom
I never saw, died lately and left me his whole fortune.  Of course he
died in India.  All old uncles who die suddenly and leave unexpected
fortunes to unsuspecting nephews are old Indian uncles, and mine was no
exception to the general rule.  So I'm independent, like you, Ralph,
only I've got three or four thousand a year instead of hundreds, I
believe; but I'm not sure and don't care--and I'm determined now to go
on a long hunting expedition.  What think ye of all that, my boy?"

"In truth," said I, "it would puzzle me to say what I think, I am so
filled with surprise by all you tell me.  But you forget that you have
not yet told me to which part of the world you mean to go, and what sort
of beast it is you are so determined to see and shoot if you can."

"If I can!" echoed Peterkin, with a contemptuous curl of the lip.  "Did
not I tell you that I was a _celebrated_ hunter?  Without meaning to
boast, I may tell you that there is no peradventure in my shooting.  If
I only get there and see the brute within long range, I'll--ha! won't
I!"

"Get _where_, and see _what_?"

"Get to Africa and see the gorilla!" cried Peterkin, while a glow of
enthusiasm lighted up his eyes.  "You've heard of the gorilla, Ralph, of
course--the great ape--the enormous puggy--the huge baboon--the man
monkey, that we've been hearing so much of for some years back, and that
the niggers on the African coast used to dilate about till they caused
the very hair of my head to stand upon end?  I'm determined to shoot a
gorilla, or prove him to be a myth.  And I mean you to come and help me,
Ralph; he's quite in your way.  A bit of natural history, I suppose,
although he seems by all accounts to be a very unnatural monster.  And
Jack shall go too--I'm resolved on that; and we three shall roam the
wild woods again, as we did in days of yore, and--"

"Hold, Peterkin," said I, interrupting.  "How do you know that Jack will
go?"

"How do I know?  Intuitively, of course.  I shall write to him to-night;
the post does not leave till ten.  He'll get it to-morrow at breakfast,
and will catch the forenoon coach, which will bring him down here by two
o'clock, and then we'll begin our preparations at once, and talk the
matter over at dinner.  So you see it's all cut and dry.  Give me a
sheet of paper and I'll write at once.  Ah! here's a bit; now a pen.
Bless me, Ralph, haven't you got a quill?  Who ever heard of a
philosophical naturalist writing with steel.  Now, then, here
goes:--`B'luv'd Jack,'--will that do to begin with, eh?  I'm afraid it's
too affectionate; he'll think it's from a lady friend.  But it can't be
altered,--`Here I am, and here's Ralph--Ralph Rover!!!!!! think of
that,' (I say, Ralph, I've put six marks of admiration there); `I've
found him out.  Do come to see us.  Excruciatingly important business.
Ever thine--Peterkin Gay.'  Will that bring him, d'ye think?"

"I think it will," said I, laughing.

"Then off with it, Ralph," cried my volatile friend, jumping up and
looking hastily round for the bell-rope.  Not being able to find it, my
bell-pull being an unobtrusive knob and not a rope, he rushed to the
door, unlocked it, darted out, and uttered a tremendous roar, which was
followed by a clatter and a scream from old Agnes, whom he had upset and
tumbled over.

It was curious to note the sudden change that took place in Peterkin's
face, voice, and manner, as he lifted the poor old woman, who was very
thin and light, in his arms, and carrying her into the room, placed her
in my easy-chair.  Real anxiety was depicted in his countenance, and he
set her down with a degree of care and tenderness that quite amazed me.
