The Project Gutenberg eBook, Held Fast For England, by G. A. Henty,
Illustrated by Gordon Browne


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Held Fast For England
       A Tale of the Siege of Gibraltar (1779-83)


Author: G. A. Henty



Release Date: June 9, 2007  [eBook #21788]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HELD FAST FOR ENGLAND***


E-text prepared by Martin Robb



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 21788-h.htm or 21788-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/7/8/21788/21788-h/21788-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/7/8/21788/21788-h.zip)





HELD FAST FOR ENGLAND:

A Tale of the Siege of Gibraltar (1779-83)

by

G. A. HENTY.







Contents

   Preface.
   Chapter 1:  "Something Like An Adventure."
   Chapter 2:  A Great Change.
   Chapter 3:  An Unexpected Journey.
   Chapter 4:  Preparations For A Voyage.
   Chapter 5:  A French Privateer.
   Chapter 6:  The Rock Fortress.
   Chapter 7:  Troubles Ahead.
   Chapter 8:  The Siege Begins.
   Chapter 9:  The Antelope.
   Chapter 10: A Cruise In A Privateer.
   Chapter 11: Cutting Out A Prize.
   Chapter 12: A Rich Prize.
   Chapter 13: Oranges And Lemons.
   Chapter 14: A Welcome Cargo.
   Chapter 15: Bob's Mission.
   Chapter 16: A Cruise In The Brilliant.
   Chapter 17: The Floating Batteries.



Illustrations

   Bob and his Companions surprise the Burglars.
   View of Gibraltar from the Mediterranean.
   View of Gibraltar from the Bay.
   The Professor gets excited.
   The Rock and Bay of Gibraltar.
   'The old gentleman is a brick,' exclaimed Gerald.
   Bob swims off to the Spanish Warship.
   They found the two Spanish mates playing at cards.
   They find Boxes of Silver in the Lazaretto.
   Bob receives a Commission from the Governor.



Preface.


The Siege of Gibraltar stands almost alone in the annals of
warfare, alike in its duration and in the immense preparations
made, by the united powers of France and Spain, for the capture of
the fortress. A greater number of guns were employed than in any
operation up to that time; although in number, and still more in
calibre, the artillery then used have in, modern times, been thrown
into the shade by the sieges of Sebastopol and Paris. Gibraltar
differs, however, from these sieges, inasmuch as the defence was a
successful one and, indeed, at no period of the investment was the
fortress in any danger of capture, save by hunger.

At that period England was not, as she afterwards became,
invincible by sea; and as we were engaged at the same time in war
with France, Spain, Holland, and the United States, it was only
occasionally that a fleet could be spared to bring succour and
provisions to the beleaguered garrison. Scurvy was the direst enemy
of the defenders. The art of preserving meat in tins had not been
discovered, and they were forced to subsist almost entirely upon
salt meat. During the first year of the siege the supply of fresh
vegetables was scanty, in the extreme, and the garrison
consequently suffered so severely, from scurvy, that at one time
scarcely half of the men of the garrison were strong enough to
carry a firelock, and perform their duty. The providential capture
of a vessel laden with oranges and lemons checked the ravages of
the scourge; and the successful efforts of the garrison to raise
vegetables prevented it from ever, afterwards, getting a firm hold
upon them.

In such a siege there was but little scope for deeds of individual
gallantry. It was a long monotony of hardship and suffering, nobly
endured, and terminating in one of the greatest triumphs ever
recorded in the long roll of British victories.

G. A. Henty.



Chapter 1: "Something Like An Adventure."


Had Mr. Tulloch, the headmaster and proprietor of a large school at
Putney, been asked which was the most troublesome boy in his
school, he would probably have replied, without hesitation, "Bob
Repton."

But, being a just and fair-minded man, he would have hastened to
qualify this remark, by adding:

"Most troublesome, but by no means the worst boy. You must
understand that. He is always in scrapes, always in mischief. In
all my experience I have never before come across a boy who had
such an aptitude for getting into trouble; but I have nothing else
to say against him. He is straightforward and manly. I have never
known him to tell a lie, to screen himself. He is an example to
many others in that way. I like the boy, in spite of the endless
trouble he gives, and yet there is scarcely a day passes that I am
not obliged to cane him; and even that does him no good, as far as
I can see, for he seems to forget it, five minutes after it is
over. I wonder, sometimes, if he has really got hardened, and
doesn't feel it.

"He is sharp, and does his lessons well. I have no difficulty with
him, on that score; but he is a perfect imp of mischief."

With such characteristics, it need hardly be said that Bob Repton
was one of the most popular boys at Tulloch's school.

School life was, in those days--for it was in August, 1778, that
Bob was at Tulloch's--a very different thing to what it is, at
present. Learning was thrashed into boys. It was supposed that it
could only be instilled in this manner; and although some masters
were, of course, more tyrannical and brutal than others, the cane
was everywhere in use, and that frequently. Lads, then, had far
less liberty and fewer sports than at present; but as boys' spirits
cannot be altogether suppressed, even by the use of the cane, they
found vent in other ways, and there was much more mischief, and
more breaking out of bounds, than now take place. Boys were less
trusted, and more harshly treated; in consequence of which there
was a kind of warfare between the masters and the boys, in which
the masters, in spite of their canes, did not always get the best
of it.

Bob Repton was nearly fifteen. He was short, rather than tall for
his age, but squarely built and strong. His hair could never be got
to lie down, but bristled aggressively over his head. His nose was
inclined to turn up, his gray eyes had a merry, mischievous
expression, and his lips were generally parted in a smile. A casual
observer would have said that he was a happy-go-lucky, merry,
impudent-looking lad; but he was more than this. He was shrewd,
intelligent, and exceptionally plucky; always ready to do a good
turn to others, and to take more than his fair share of blame, for
every scrape he got into. He had fought many battles, and that with
boys older than himself, but he had never been beaten. The opinion,
generally, among the boys was that he did not feel pain and, being
caned so frequently, such punishment as he got in a fight was a
mere trifle to him.

He was a thorn in the side of Mr. Purfleet, the usher who was
generally in charge of the playground; who had learned by long
experience that, whenever Bob Repton was quiet, he was certain to
be planning some special piece of mischief. The usher was sitting
now on a bench, with a book in his hand; but his attention was, at
present, directed to a group of four boys who had drawn together in
a corner of the playground.

"There is Repton, again," he said to himself. "I wonder what he is
plotting, now. That boy will be the death of me. I am quite sure it
was he who put that eel in my bed, last week; though of course, I
could not prove it."

Mr. Purfleet prided himself on his nerve. He had been telling the
boys some stories he had read of snakes, in India; among them, one
of an officer who, when seated at table, had felt a snake winding
itself round his leg, and who sat for several minutes without
moving, until some friends brought a saucer of milk and placed it
near, when the snake uncurled itself and went to drink.

"It must have required a lot of nerve, Mr. Purfleet," Bob Repton
had said, "to sit as quiet as that."

"Not at all, not at all," the usher replied, confidently. "It was
the natural thing to do. A man should always be calm, in case of
sudden danger, Bob. The first thought in his mind should be, 'What
is this?' the second, 'What had best be done, under the
circumstances?' and, these two things being decided, a man of
courage will deal coolly with the danger. I should despise myself,
if I were to act otherwise."

It was two nights later that the usher, having walked down between
the two rows of beds in the dormitory, and seeing that all the boys
were quiet, and apparently asleep, proceeded to his own bed, which
was at the end of the room, and partly screened off from the rest
by a curtain. No sooner did he disappear behind this than half a
dozen heads were raised. An oil lamp burned at the end of the room,
affording light for the usher to undress; and enabling him, as he
lay in bed, to command a general, if somewhat faint view of the
dormitory. Five minutes after Mr. Purfleet had disappeared behind
the curtain, the watching eyes saw the clothes at the end of the
bed pulled down, and caught a partial view of Mr. Purfleet as he
climbed in. A second later there was a yell of terror, and the
usher leapt from the bed. Instantly, the dormitory was in an
uproar.

"What is it, Mr. Purfleet--what is the matter, sir?" and several of
the boys sprang from their beds, and ran towards him; the only
exceptions to the general excitement being the four or five who
were in the secret. These lay shaking with suppressed laughter,
with the bedclothes or the corner of a pillow thrust into their
mouths, to prevent them from breaking out into screams of delight.

"What is it, sir?"

It was some time before the usher could recover himself
sufficiently to explain.

"There is a snake in my bed," he said.

"A snake!" the boys repeated, in astonishment, several of the more
timid at once making off to their beds.

"Certainly, a snake," Mr. Purfleet panted. "I put my legs down, and
they came against something cold, and it began to twist about. In a
moment, if I had not leapt out, I should no doubt have received a
fatal wound."

"Where did it come from?"

"What is to be done?"

And a variety of other questions burst from the boys.

"I will run down and get three or four hockey sticks, Mr.
Purfleet," one of the elder boys said.

"That will be the best plan, Mason. Quick, quick! There, do you see
it moving, under the clothes?"

There was certainly something wriggling, so there was a general
movement back from the bed.

"We had better hold the clothes down, Mr. Purfleet," Bob Repton
said, pushing himself forward. "If it were to crawl out at the top,
and get on to the floor, it might bite a dozen of us. I will hold
the clothes down tight, on one side, if someone will hold them on
the other."

One of the other boys came forward, and the clothes were stretched
tightly across the bed, by the pillow. In a minute or two, Mason
ran up with four hockey sticks.

"Now, you must be careful," Mr. Purfleet said, "because if it
should get out, the consequences might be terrible. Now, then, four
of you take the sticks, and all hit together, as hard as you
can--now."

The sticks descended together. There was a violent writhing and
contortion beneath the clothes, but the blows rained down fast and,
in a very short time, all movement ceased.

"It must be dead, now," Bob Repton said. "I think we can look at it
now, sir."

"Well, draw the clothes down very gently; boys, and be ready to
strike again, if you see the least movement."

The clothes were drawn down, till the creature was visible.

"It must be a cobra," the usher said, looking at it from a
distance. "It is thick and short. It must have escaped from
somewhere. Be very careful, all of you."

Mason approached cautiously, to get a nearer view; and then
exclaimed:

"Why, sir, it is an eel!"

There was a moment's silence, and then a perfect yell of laughter
from the boys. For a moment the usher was dumbfounded, then he
rallied.

"You will all go to your beds, at once," he said. "I shall report
the matter to Mr. Tulloch, in the morning."

The boys retired, laughing, to their beds; but above the din the
usher heard the words, in a muffled voice:

"A man should always be calm, in sudden danger."

Another voice, equally disguised, said:

"Yes, he should first ask himself 'What is this?' then 'What had
best be done, under the circumstances?'"

A third voice then took it up:

"It follows that a man of courage will deal coolly with the
danger."

Then there was a chorus of half a dozen voices:

"I should despise myself, if I were to act otherwise."

"Silence!" the usher shouted, rushing down the line between the
beds. "I will thrash the first boy who speaks."

As Mr. Purfleet had one of the hockey sticks in his hand, the
threat was sufficient to ensure silence.

To the relief of the two or three boys engaged in the affair, Mr.
Purfleet made no report in the morning. Mr. Tulloch by no means
spared the cane, but he always inquired before he flogged and, as
the usher felt sure that the snake story would be brought forward,
by way of excuse for the trick played upon him, he thought it
better to drop it; making a mental note, however, that he would get
even with Bob Repton, another time--for he made sure that he was at
the bottom of the matter, especially as he had been one of those
who had listened to the snake story.

Mr. Purfleet was held in but light respect by the boys. He was a
pale young man, and looked as if he had been poorly fed, as a boy.
He took the junior classes, and the belief was that he knew nothing
of Latin.

Moffat, who took the upper classes, was much more severe, and sent
up many more boys to be caned than did the junior usher; but the
boys did not dislike him. Caning they considered their natural
portion, and felt no ill will on that account; while they knew that
Mr. Moffat was a capital scholar and, though strict, was always
scrupulously just. Above all, he was not a sneak. If he reported
them, he reported them openly, but brought no accusation against
them behind their back; while Mr. Purfleet was always carrying
tittle tattle to the headmaster. There was, therefore, little
gratitude towards him for holding his tongue as to the eel; for the
boys guessed the real reason of his silence, and put it down to
dread of ridicule, and not to any kindliness of feeling.

"Purfleet would give sixpence to know what we are talking about,
Bob," one of the group talking in the corner of the playground
said.

"It is worth more than that, Jim; still, we shall have to be extra
careful. He suspects it was our lot who played him the trick about
the eel, and he will do his best to catch us out, in something.

"Well, as I was saying, Johnny Gibson has got a first-rate dog for
rabbits, and he says there are lots of them up on the Common. I
told him that I would come, and I expected two or three more; and
we would meet him at the top of the hill, at four o'clock tomorrow
morning. It will be getting light by that time. Of course, we shall
get out in the usual way, and we can be back by half past six, and
no one will be any the wiser. Old Thomas never comes down till a
quarter to seven. I have heard him a dozen times. He just comes
down in time to ring the bell for us to get up."

"Oh, I ain't afraid of Thomas," one of the others said, "but I am
afraid of Purfleet."

"There need be no fear about him. He never wakes till the bell
rings, and sleeps like a top. Why, he didn't wake, the other
morning, when we had a scrimmage and you tumbled out of bed.
Besides, we all sleep at the other end of the room and, even if he
did wake up in the night, he wouldn't notice that we had gone;
especially if we shoved something in the bed, to make a lump.

"My only fear is that we shan't wake. We ought to keep watch till
it's time to get up, but I am sure we shouldn't keep awake. We must
all make up our minds to wake at three, then one of us will be sure
to do it. And mind, if one wakes, he must promise not to go to
sleep again before he hears the hall clock strike, and knows what
time it is. If it is before three, he can go off to sleep again.
That way, one of us is sure to be awake, when it strikes three."

"I say, shan't we just be licked, if we are found out, Bob?"

"Of course we shall; but as we get licked pretty well every day,
that won't make much difference, and we shall have had awful fun.
Still, if any of you fellows don't like it, don't you go. I am
going, but I don't want to persuade any of you."

"Of course we are going, if you are going, Bob. What are we going
to do with the rabbits?"

"Oh, I settled Johnny Gibson should keep them. He is going to bring
his dog, you know; besides, what could we do with them? We can't
cook them, can we?"

As it was clear to all the party that this could not be managed, no
objection was raised to this disposal of their game.

Bob Repton slept but little that night. They went to bed at eight,
and he heard every hour strike after nine; dozing off occasionally,
and waking up, each time, convinced that the clock would strike
three next time. At last he heard the three welcome strokes, and at
once got up and went to the beds of the other three boys.

They were all sound asleep, and required some shaking before they
could be convinced that it was time to get up. Then each boy put
his bolster in his bed, rolled up his night shirt into a ball and
laid it on the pillow, and then partly covered it up with the
clothes. Then they slipped on their shirts, breeches, and stockings
and, taking their jackets and shoes in their hand, stole out of the
door at their end of the room, and closed it behind them. They then
crept downstairs to the room where their caps were kept, put on
these and their jackets, and each boy got a hockey stick out of the
cupboard in the corner in which they were kept. Then they very
cautiously unfastened the shutter, raised the window, and slipped
out. They pulled the shutter to behind them, closed the window, and
then put on their shoes.

"That is managed first rate," Bob said. "There wasn't the least
noise. I made sure Wharton would have dropped his shoes."

"Why should I drop them, more than anyone else?" Wharton asked in
an aggrieved voice.

"I don't know, Billy. The idea occurred to me. I didn't think
anyone else would do it, but I quite made up my mind that you
would."

"Well, I wish you wouldn't be so fast about making up your mind,
then," Wharton grumbled. "I ain't more clumsy than other people."

"You are all right," Jim Sankey put in. "Bob's only joking."

"Well, he might as well joke with somebody else, Jim. I don't see
any joke in it."

"No, that is where the joke is, Billy," Bob said. "If you did see
the joke, there wouldn't be any joke in it.

"Well, never mind, here is the walnut tree. Now, who will get over
first?"

