The Project Gutenberg EBook of Away in the Wilderness, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Away in the Wilderness

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 7, 2007 [EBook #21715]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AWAY IN THE WILDERNESS ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




AWAY IN THE WILDERNESS, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE HUNTER.

On a beautiful summer evening, not many years ago, a man was seen to
ascend the side of a little mound or hillock, on the top of which he
lingered to gaze upon the wild scenery that lay stretched out before
him.

The man wore the leathern coat and leggings of a North American hunter,
or trapper, or backwoodsman; and well did he deserve all these titles,
for Jasper Derry was known to his friends as the best hunter, the most
successful trapper, and the boldest man in the backwoods.

Jasper was big and strong as well as bold, but he was not a bully.  Men
of true courage are in general peacefully disposed.  Jasper could fight
like a lion when there was occasion to do so; but he was gentle and
grave, and quiet by nature.  He was also extremely good-humoured; had a
low soft voice, and, both in mind and body, seemed to delight in a state
of repose.

We have said that his coat was made of leather; the moccasins or Indian
shoes on his feet were made of the same material.  When Jasper first put
them on they were soft like a glove of chamois leather, and bright
yellow; but hard service had turned them into a dirty brown, which
looked more business like.  The sun had burned his face and hands to as
deep a brown as his coat.  On his head he wore a little round cap, which
he had made with his own hands, after having caught the black fox that
supplied the fur, in one of his own traps.  A coloured worsted belt
bound his coat round his waist, and beneath the coat he wore a scarlet
flannel shirt.  A long knife and a small hatchet were stuck in the belt
at his back, and in front hung a small cloth bag, which was so thickly
ornamented with beads of many colours, that little of the cloth could be
seen.

This last was a fire-bag--so called because it contained the flint,
steel, and tinder required for making a fire.  It also contained
Jasper's pipe and tobacco--for he smoked, as a matter of course.  Men
smoke everywhere--more's the pity--and Jasper followed the example of
those around him.  Smoking was almost his only fault.  He was a
tremendous smoker.  Often, when out of tobacco, he had smoked tea.
Frequently he had tried bark and dried leaves; and once, when hard
pressed, he had smoked oakum.  He would rather have gone without his
supper than without his pipe!  A powder-horn and shot pouch were slung
over his shoulders by two cross belts, and he carried a long
single-barrelled gun.

I have been thus particular in describing Jasper Derry, because he is
our hero, and he is worth describing, being a fine, hearty, handsome
fellow, who cared as little for a wild Indian or a grizzly bear as he
did for a butterfly, and who was one of the best of companions, as he
was one of the best of hunters, in the wilderness.

Having gained the top of the hillock, Jasper placed the butt of his long
gun on the ground, and, crossing his hands over the muzzle, stood there
for some time so motionless, that he might have been mistaken for a
statue.  A magnificent country was spread out before him.  Just in front
lay a clear lake of about a mile in extent, and the evening was so still
that every tree, stone, and bush on its margin, was reflected as in a
mirror.  Here, hundreds of wild ducks and wild geese were feeding among
the sedges of the bays, or flying to and fro mingling their cries with
those of thousands of plover and other kinds of water-fowl that
inhabited the place.  At the lower end of this lake a small rivulet was
seen to issue forth and wind its way through woods and plains like a
silver thread, until it was lost to view in the far distance.  On the
right and left and behind, the earth was covered with the dense foliage
of the wild woods.

The hillock on which the western hunter stood, lay in the very heart of
that great uncultivated wilderness which forms part of the British
possessions in North America.  This region lies to the north of the
Canadas, is nearly as large as all Europe, and goes by the name of the
Hudson's Bay Territory, or Rupert's Land.

It had taken Jasper many long weeks of hard travel by land and water, in
canoes and on foot, to get there; and several weeks of toil still lay
before him, ere he could attain the object, for which his journey had
been undertaken.

Wicked people say that "woman is at the bottom of all mischief!"  Did it
never occur to these same wicked individuals, that woman is just as much
at the bottom of all good?  Whether for good or for evil, woman was at
the bottom of Jasper Perry's heart and affairs.  The cause of his
journey was love; the aim and end of it was marriage!  Did true love
ever run smooth?  "No, never," says the proverb.  We shall see.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE THREE FRIENDS.

When the hunter had stood for full five minutes gazing at the beautiful
scenery by which he was surrounded, it suddenly occurred to him that a
pipe would render him much more capable of enjoying it; so he sat down
on the trunk of a fallen tree, leaned his gun on it, pulled the fire-bag
from his belt, and began to fill his pipe, which was one of the kind
used by the savages of the country, with a stone head and a wooden stem.
It was soon lighted, and Jasper was thinking how much more clear and
beautiful a landscape looked through tobacco smoke, when a hand was laid
lightly on his shoulder.  Looking quickly round, he beheld a tall
dark-faced Indian standing by his side.

Jasper betrayed neither alarm nor surprise; for the youth was his own
comrade, who had merely come to tell him that the canoe in which they
had been travelling together, and which had been slightly damaged, was
repaired and ready for service.

"Why, Arrowhead, you steal on me with the soft tread of a fox.  My ears
are not dull, yet I did not hear your approach, lad."

A smile lighted up the countenance of the young Indian for a moment, as
he listened to a compliment which gratified him much; but the grave
expression which was natural to him instantly returned, as he said,
"Arrowhead has hunted in the Rocky Mountains where the men are
treacherous; he has learned to tread lightly there."

"No doubt, ye had need to be always on the look out where there are such
varmints; but hereaway, Arrowhead, there are no foes to fear, and
therefore no need to take yer friends by surprise.  But ye're proud o'
your gifts, lad, an' I suppose it's natural to like to show them off.
Is the canoe ready?"

The Indian replied by a nod.

"That's well, lad, it will be sun-down in another hour, an' I would like
to camp on the point of pines to-night; so come along."

"Hist!" exclaimed the Indian, pointing to a flock of geese which came
into view at that moment.

"Ah! you come of a masterful race," said Jasper, shaking his head
gravely, "you're never content when ye've got enough, but must always be
killing God's creatures right and left for pure sport.  Haven't we got
one grey goose already for supper, an' that's enough for two men surely.
Of course I make no account o' the artist, poor cratur', for he eats
next to nothin'.  Hows'ever, as your appetite may be sharper set than
usual, I've no objection to bring down another for ye."

So saying the hunter and the Indian crouched behind a bush, and the
former, while he cocked his gun and examined the priming, gave utterance
to a series of cries so loud and discordant, that any one who was
ignorant of a hunter's ways must have thought he was anxious to drive
all the living creatures within six miles of him away in terror.  Jasper
had no such wish, however.  He was merely imitating the cry of the wild
geese.  The birds, which were at first so far-off that a rifle-ball
could not have reached them, no sooner heard the cry of their friends
(as they doubtless thought it) than they turned out of their course, and
came gradually towards the bush where the two men lay hidden.

The hunter did not cease to cry until the birds were within gunshot.
Then he fixed his eye on one of the flock that seemed plump and fat.
The long barrel of the gun was quickly raised, the geese discovered
their mistake, and the whole flock were thrown into wild confusion as
they attempted to sheer off; but it was too late.  Smoke and fire burst
from the bush, and an enormous grey goose fell with a heavy crash to the
ground.

"What have you shot? what have you shot?" cried a shrill and somewhat
weak voice in the distance.  In another moment the owner of the voice
appeared, running eagerly towards the two men.

"Use your eyes, John Heywood, an' ye won't need to ask," said Jasper,
with a quiet smile, as he carefully reloaded his gun.

"Ah!  I see--a grey swan--no, surely, it cannot be a goose?" said
Heywood, turning the bird over and regarding it with astonishment; "why,
this is the biggest one I ever did see."

"What's yon in the water?  Deer, I do believe," cried Jasper, quickly
drawing the small shot from his gun and putting in a ball instead.
"Come, lads, we shall have venison for supper to-night.  That beast
can't reach t'other side so soon as we can."

Jasper leaped quickly down the hill, and dashed through the bushes
towards the spot where their canoe lay.  He was closely followed by his
companions, and in less than two minutes they were darting across the
lake in their little Indian canoe, which was made of birch-bark, and was
so light that one man could carry it easily.

While they are thus engaged I will introduce the reader to John Heywood.
This individual was a youth of nineteen or twenty years of age, who was
by profession a painter of landscapes and animals.  He was tall and
slender in person, with straight black hair, a pale haggard-looking
face, an excitable nervous manner, and an enthusiastic temperament.
Being adventurous in his disposition, he had left his father's home in
Canada, and entreated his friend, Jasper Derry, to take him along with
him into the wilderness.  At first Jasper was very unwilling to agree to
this request; because the young artist was utterly ignorant of
everything connected with a life in the woods, and he could neither use
a paddle nor a gun.  But Heywood's father had done him some service at a
time when he was ill and in difficulties, so, as the youth was very
anxious to go, he resolved to repay this good turn of the father by
doing a kindness to the son.

Heywood turned out but a poor backwoodsman, but he proved to be a
pleasant, amusing companion, and as Jasper and the Indian were quite
sufficient for the management of the light canoe, and the good gun of
the former was more than sufficient to feed the party, it mattered
nothing to Jasper that Heywood spent most of his time seated in the
middle of the canoe, sketching the scenery as they went along.  Still
less did it matter that Heywood missed everything he fired at, whether
it was close at hand or far away.

At first Jasper was disposed to look upon his young companion as a poor
useless creature; and the Indian regarded him with undisguised contempt.
But after they had been some time in his company, the opinions of these
two men of the woods changed; for they found that the artist was wise,
and well informed on many subjects of which they were extremely
ignorant; and they beheld with deep admiration the beautiful and
life-like drawings and paintings which he produced in rapid succession.

Such was the romantic youth who had, for the sake of seeing and painting
the wilderness, joined himself to these rough sons of the forest, and
who now sat in the centre of the canoe swaying his arms about and
shouting with excitement as they quickly drew near to the swimming herd
of deer.

"Keep yourself still," said Jasper, looking over his shoulder, "ye'll
upset the canoe if ye go on like that."

"Give me the axe, give me the axe, I'll kill him!" cried Heywood.

"Take your pencil and draw him," observed the hunter, with a quiet
laugh.  "Now, Arrowhead, two good strokes of the paddle will do--there--
so."

As he spoke the canoe glanced up alongside of an affrighted deer, and in
the twinkling of an eye Jasper's long knife was in its heart, and the
water was dyed with blood.  This happened quite near to the opposite
shore of the lake, so that in little more than half an hour after it was
killed the animal was cut up and packed, and the canoe was again
speeding towards the upper end of the lake, where the party arrived just
as night began to fling its dark mantle over the wilderness.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE ENCAMPMENT.

Camping out in the woods at night is truly a delightful thing, and the
pleasantest part of it, perhaps, is the lighting of the fire.  Light is
agreeable to human eyes and cheering to the human heart.  Solomon knew
and felt that when he penned the words, "A pleasant thing it is for the
eyes to behold the sun."  And the rising of the sun is scarcely more
grateful to the feelings than the lighting of a fire on a dark night.
So our friends thought and felt, when the fire blazed up, but they were
too busy and too hungry at the time to think about the state of their
feelings.

The Indian was hungry.  A good fire had to be made before the venison
could be roasted, so he gave his whole attention to the felling of dry
trees and cutting them up into logs for the fire.  Jasper was also
hungry, and a slight shower had wetted all the moss and withered grass,
so he had enough to do to strike fire with flint and steel, catch a
spark on a little piece of tinder, and then blow and coax the spark into
a flame.

The artist was indeed free to indulge in a little meditation; but he had
stumbled in the dark on landing, and bruised his shins, so he could only
sit down on a rock and rub them and feel miserable.

But the fire soon caught; branches were heaped up, great logs were piled
on, forked tongues of flame began to leap up and lick the branches of
the overhanging trees.  The green leaves looked rich and warm; the thick
stems looked red and hot; the faces and clothes of the men seemed as if
about to catch fire as they moved about the encampment preparing supper.
In short, the whole scene was so extremely comfortable, in reality as
well as in appearance, that Heywood forgot his bruised shins and began
to rub his hands with delight.

In a very short time three juicy venison-steaks were steaming before the
three travellers, and in a much shorter time they had disappeared
altogether and were replaced by three new ones.  The mode of cooking was
very simple.  Each steak was fixed on a piece of stick and set up before
the fire to roast.  When one side was ready, the artist, who seemed to
have very little patience, began to cut off pieces and eat them while
the other side was cooking.

To say truth, men out in those regions have usually such good appetites
that they are not particular as to the cooking of their food.  Quantity,
not quality, is what they desire.  They generally feel very much like
the Russian, of whom it is said, that he would be content to eat sawdust
if only he _got_ _plenty_ _of_ _it_!  The steaks were washed down with
tea.  There is no other drink in Rupert's Land.  The Hudson's Bay
Company found that spirits were so hurtful to the Indians that they
refused to send them into the country; and at the present day there is
no strong drink to be had for love or money over the length and breadth
