The Project Gutenberg EBook of Erling the Bold, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Erling the Bold

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: June 7, 2007 [EBook #21730]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ERLING THE BOLD ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




ERLING THE BOLD, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

IN WHICH THE TALE BEGINS SOMEWHAT FURIOUSLY.

By the early light of a bright summer morning, long, long ago, two small
boats were seen to issue from one of the fiords or firths on the west
coast of Norway, and row towards the skerries or low rocky islets that
lay about a mile distant from the mainland.

Although the morning was young, the sun was already high in the heavens,
and brought out in glowing colours the varied characteristics of a
mountain scene of unrivalled grandeur.

The two shallops moved swiftly towards the islands, their oars shivering
the liquid mirror of the sea, and producing almost the only sound that
disturbed the universal stillness, for at that early hour Nature herself
seemed buried in deep repose.  A silvery mist hung over the water,
through which the innumerable rocks and islands assumed fantastic
shapes, and the more distant among them appeared as though they floated
in air.  A few seagulls rose startled from their nests, and sailed
upwards with plaintive cries, as the keels of the boats grated on the
rocks, and the men stepped out and hauled them up on the beach of one of
the islets.

A wild uncouth crew were those Norsemen of old!  All were armed, for in
their days the power and the means of self-defence were absolutely
necessary to self-preservation.

Most of them wore portions of scale armour, or shirts of ring mail, and
headpieces of steel, though a few among them appeared to have confidence
in the protection afforded by the thick hide of the wolf, which,
converted into rude, yet not ungraceful, garments, covered their broad
shoulders.  All, without exception, carried sword or battle-axe and
shield.  They were goodly stalwart men every one, but silent and stern.

It might have been observed that the two boats, although bound for the
same islet, did not row in company.  They were beached as far from each
other as the little bay into which they ran would admit of, and the
crews stood aloof in two distinct groups.

In the centre of each group stood a man who, from his aspect and
bearing, appeared to be superior to his fellows.  One was in the prime
of life, dark and grave; the other in the first flush of manhood, full
grown, though beardless, fair, and ruddy.  Both were taller and stouter
than their comrades.

The two men had met there to fight, and the cause of their feud was--
Love!

Both loved a fair Norse maiden in Horlingdal.  The father of the maid
favoured the elder warrior; the maid herself preferred the younger.

In those days, barbarous though they undoubtedly were, law and justice
were more respected and more frequently appealed to in Norway than in
almost any other country.  Liberty, crushed elsewhere under the
deadweight of feudalism, found a home in the bleak North, and a rough
but loving welcome from the piratical, sea-roving!  She did not, indeed,
dwell altogether scathless among her demi-savage guardians, who, if
their perceptions of right and wrong were somewhat confused, might have
urged in excuse that their light was small.  She received many shocks
and frequent insults from individuals, but liberty was sincerely loved
and fondly cherished by the body of the Norwegian people, through all
the period of those dark ages during which other nations scarce dared to
mention her name.

Nevertheless, it was sometimes deemed more convenient to settle disputes
by the summary method of an appeal to arms than to await the issue of a
tedious and uncertain lawsuit such an appeal being perfectly competent
to those who preferred it, and the belief being strong among the fiery
spirits of the age that Odin, the god of war, would assuredly give
victory to the right.

In the present instance it was not considered any infringement of the
law of liberty that the issue of the combat would be the disposal of a
fair woman's hand, with or without her heart.  Then, as now, women were
often forced to marry against their will.

Having gone to that island to fight--an island being a naturally
circumscribed battlefield whose limits could not conveniently be
transgressed--the two champions set to work at once with the cool
businesslike promptitude of men sprung from a warlike race, and nurtured
from their birth in the midst of war's alarms.

Together, and without speaking, they ascended the rock, which was low
and almost barren, with a small extent of turf in the centre, level, and
admirably suited to their purpose.  Here they faced each other; the one
drew his sword, the other raised his battle-axe.

There was no sentiment in that combat.  The times and the men were
extremely matter-of-fact.  The act of slaying gracefully had not yet
been acquired; yet there was much of manly grace displayed as each threw
himself into the position that nature and experience had taught him was
best suited to the wielding of his peculiar weapon.

For one instant each gazed intently into the face of the other, as if to
read there his premeditated plan of attack.  At that moment the clear
blue eye of the younger man dilated, and, as his courage rose, the
colour mounted to his cheek.  The swart brow of the other darkened as he
marked the change; then, with sudden spring and shout, the two fell upon
each other and dealt their blows with incredible vigour and rapidity.

They were a well-matched pair.  For nearly two hours did they toil and
moil over the narrow limits of that sea-girt rock--yet victory leaned to
neither side.  Now the furious blows rained incessant on the sounding
shields; anon the din of strife ceased, while the combatants moved round
each other, shifting their position with elastic step, as, with wary
motion and eagle glances, each sought to catch the other off his guard,
and the clash of steel, as the weapons met in sudden onset, was mingled
with the shout of anger or defiance.  The sun glanced on whirling blade
and axe, and sparkled on their coats of mail as if the lightning flash
were playing round them; while screaming seamews flew and circled
overhead, as though they regarded with intelligent interest and terror
the mortal strife that was going on below.

Blood ere long began to flow freely on both sides; the vigour of the
blows began to abate, the steps to falter.  The youthful cheek grew
pale; the dark warrior's brow grew darker, while heaving chests,
labouring breath, and an occasional gasp, betokened the approaching
termination of the struggle.  Suddenly the youth, as if under the
influence of a new impulse, dropped his shield, sprang forward, raised
himself to his full height, grasped his axe with both hands, and,
throwing it aloft (thus recklessly exposing his person), brought it down
with terrific violence on the shield of his adversary.

The action was so sudden that the other, already much exhausted, was for
the moment paralysed, and failed to take advantage of his opportunity.
He met but failed to arrest the blow with his shield.  It was crushed
down upon his head, and in another moment the swarthy warrior lay
stretched upon the turf.

Sternly the men conveyed their fallen chief to his boat, and rowed him
to the mainland, and many a week passed by ere he recovered from the
effects of the blow that felled him.  His conqueror returned to have his
wounds dressed by the bride for whom he had fought so long and so
valiantly on that bright summer morning.

Thus it was that King Haldor of Horlingdal, surnamed the Fierce,
conquered King Ulf of Romsdal, acquired his distinctive appellation, and
won Herfrida the Soft-eyed for his bride.

It must not be supposed that these warriors were kings in the ordinary
acceptation of that term.  They belonged to the class of "small" or
petty kings, of whom there were great numbers in Norway in those days,
and were merely rich and powerful free-landholders or udallers.

Haldor the Fierce had a large family of sons and daughters.  They were
all fair, strong, and extremely handsome, like himself.

Ulf of Romsdal did not die of his wounds, neither did he die of love.
Disappointed love was then, as now, a terrible disease, but not
necessarily fatal.  Northmen were very sturdy in the olden time.  They
almost always recovered from that disease sooner or later.  When his
wounds were healed, Ulf married a fair girl of the Horlingdal district,
and went to reside there, but his change of abode did not alter his
title.  He was always spoken of as Ulf of Romsdal.  He and his old enemy
Haldor the Fierce speedily became fast friends; and so was it with their
wives, Astrid and Herfrida, who also took mightily to each other.  They
span, and carded wool, and sewed together oftentimes, and discussed the
affairs of Horlingdal, no doubt with mutual advantage and satisfaction.

Twenty years passed away, and Haldor's eldest son, Erling, grew to be a
man.  He was very like his father--almost a giant in size; fair, very
strong, and remarkably handsome.  His silken yellow hair fell in heavy
curls on a pair of the broadest shoulders in the dale.  Although so
young, he already had a thick short beard, which was very soft and
curly.  His limbs were massive, but they were so well proportioned, and
his movements so lithe, that his great size and strength were not fully
appreciated until one stood close by his side or fell into his powerful
grasp.

Erling was lion-like, yet he was by nature gentle and retiring.  He had
a kindly smile, a hearty laugh, and bright blue eyes.  Had he lived in
modern days he would undoubtedly have been a man of peace.  But he lived
"long long ago"--therefore he was a man of war.  Being unusually
fearless, his companions of the valley called him Erling the Bold.  He
was, moreover, extremely fond of the sea, and often went on viking
cruises in his own ships, whence he was also styled Erling the Sea-king,
although he did not at that time possess a foot of land over which to
exercise kingly authority.

Now, it must be explained here that the words Sea-king and Viking do not
denote the same thing.  One is apt to be misled by the termination of
the latter word, which has no reference whatever to the royal title
king.  A viking was merely a piratical rover on the sea, the sea-warrior
of the period, but a Sea-king was a leader and commander of vikings.
Every Sea-king was a viking, but every viking was not a Sea-king; just
as every Admiral is a sailor, but every sailor is not an Admiral.  When
it is said that Erling was a Sea-king, it is much as if we had said he
was an admiral in a small way.



CHAPTER TWO.

INTRODUCES, AMONG OTHERS, THE HERO AND HEROINE, AND OPENS UP A VIEW OF
NORSE LIFE IN THE OLDEN TIME.

Ulf of Romsdal had a daughter named Hilda.  She was fair, and extremely
pretty.

The young men said that her brow was the habitation of the lily, her eye
the mirror of the heavens, her cheek the dwelling-place of the rose.
True, in the ardour of their feelings and strength of their imaginations
they used strong language; nevertheless it was impossible to overpraise
the Norse maiden.  Her nut-brown hair fell in luxuriant masses over her
shapely shoulders, reaching far below the waist; her skin was fair, and
her manners engaging.  Hilda was undoubtedly blue-eyed and beautiful.
She was just seventeen at this time.  Those who loved her (and there
were few who did not) styled her the sunbeam.

Erling and Hilda had dwelt near each other from infancy.  They had been
playmates, and for many years were as brother and sister to each other.
Erling's affection had gradually grown into a stronger passion, but he
never mentioned the fact to anyone, being exceedingly shamefaced and shy
in regard to love.  He would have given his ears to have known that his
love was returned, but he dared not to ask.  He was very stupid on this
point.  In regard to other things he was sharp-witted above his fellows.
None knew better than he how to guide the "warship" through the
intricate mazes of the island-studded coast of Norway; none equalled him
in deeds of arms; no one excelled him in speed of foot, in scaling the
fells, or in tracking the wolf and bear to their dens; but all beat him
in love-making!  He was wondrously slow and obtuse at that, and could by
no means discover whether or not Hilda regarded him as a lover or a
brother.  As uncertainty on this point continued, Erling became jealous
of all the young men who approached her, and in proportion as this
feeling increased his natural disposition changed, and his chafing
spirit struggled fiercely within him.  But his native good sense and
modesty enabled him pretty well to conceal his feelings.  As for Hilda,
no one knew the state of her mind.  It is probable that at this time she
herself had not a very distinct idea on the point.

Hilda had a foster-sister named Ada, who was also very beautiful.  She
was unusually dark for a Norse maiden.  Her akin indeed was fair, but
her hair and eyes were black like the raven's wing.  Her father was King
Hakon of Drontheim.

It was the custom in those warlike days for parents to send out some of
their children to be fostered by others--in order, no doubt, to render
next to impossible the total extirpation of their families at a time
when sudden descents upon households were common.  By thus scattering
their children the chances of family annihilation were lessened, and the
probability that some members might be left alive to take revenge was
greatly increased.

Hilda and Ada were warmly attached.  Having been brought up together,
they loved each other as sisters--all the more, perhaps, that in
character they were somewhat opposed.  Hilda was grave, thoughtful,
almost pensive.  Ada was full of vivacity and mirth, fond of fun, and by
no means averse to a little of what she styled harmless mischief.

Now there was a man in Horlingdal called Glumm, surnamed the Gruff, who
loved Ada fervently.  He was a stout, handsome man, of ruddy complexion,
and second only to Erling in personal strength and prowess.  But by
nature he was morose and gloomy.  Nothing worse, however, could be said
of him.  In other respects he was esteemed a brave, excellent man.
Glumm was too proud to show his love to Ada very plainly; but she had
wit enough to discover it, though no one else did, and she resolved to
punish him for his pride by keeping him in suspense.

Horlingdal, where Ulf and Haldor and their families dwelt was, like
nearly all the vales on the west of Norway, hemmed in by steep mountains
of great height, which were covered with dark pines and birch trees.  To
the level pastures high up on mountain tops the inhabitants were wont to
send their cattle to feed in summer--the small crops of hay in the
valleys being carefully gathered and housed for winter use.

Every morning, before the birds began to twitter, Hilda set out, with
her pail and her wooden box, to climb the mountain to the upland dairy
or "saeter", and fetch the milk and butter required by the family during
the day.  Although the maid was of noble birth--Ulf claiming descent
from one of those who are said to have come over with Odin and his
twelve godars or priests from Asia--this was not deemed an inappropriate
occupation.  Among the Norsemen labour was the lot of high and low.  He
was esteemed the best man who could fight most valiantly in battle and
labour most actively in the field or with the tools of the smith and
carpenter.  Ulf of Romsdal, although styled king in virtue of his
descent, was not too proud, in the busy summertime, to throw off his
coat and toss the hay in his own fields in the midst of his thralls
[slaves taken in war] and house-carles.  Neither he, nor Haldor, nor any
of the small kings, although they were the chief men of the districts in
which they resided, thought it beneath their dignity to forge their own
spearheads and anchors, or to mend their own doors.  As it was with the
men, so was it with the women.  Hilda the Sunbeam was not despised
because she climbed the mountainside to fetch milk and butter for the
family.

One morning, in returning from the fell, Hilda heard the loud clatter of
the anvil at Haldorstede.  Having learned that morning that Danish
vikings had been seen prowling among the islands near the fiord, she
turned aside to enquire the news.

Haldorstede lay about a mile up the valley, and Hilda passed it every
morning on her way to and from the saeter.  Ulfstede lay near the shore
of the fiord.  Turning into the smithy, she found Erling busily engaged
in hammering a huge mass of stubborn red-hot metal.  So intent was the
young man on his occupation that he failed to observe the entrance of
his fair visitor, who set down her milk pail, and stood for a few
minutes with her hands folded and her eyes fixed demurely on her lover.

Erling had thrown off his jerkin and rolled up the sleeves of his shirt
of coarse homespun fabric, in order to give his thick muscular arms
unimpeded play in wielding the hammer and turning the mass of glowing
metal on the anvil.  He wore woollen breeches and hose, both of which
had been fashioned by the fingers of his buxom mother, Herfrida.  A pair
of neatly formed shoes of untanned hide--his own workmanship--protected
his feet, and his waist was encircled by a broad leathern girdle, from
one side of which depended a short hunting-knife, and from the other a
flap, with a slit in it, to support his sword.  The latter weapon--a
heavy double-edged blade--stood leaning against the forge chimney, along
with a huge battle-axe, within reach of his hand.  The collar of his
shirt was thrown well back, exposing to view a neck and chest whose
muscles denoted extraordinary power, and the whiteness of which
contrasted strikingly with the ruddy hue of his deeply bronzed
countenance.

The young giant appeared to take pleasure in the exercise of his
superabundant strength, for, instead of using the ordinary single-hand
hammer with which other men were wont to bend the glowing metal to their
will, he wielded the great forehammer, and did it as easily, too, with
his right arm as if it had been but a wooden mallet.  The mass of metal
at which he wrought was thick and unyielding, but under his heavy blows
it began to assume the form of an axe--a fact which Hilda noticed with a
somewhat saddened brow.  Erling's long hair, rolling as it did down his
shoulders, frequently straggled over his face and interfered slightly
with his vision, whereupon he shook it back with an impatient toss, as a
lion might shake his mane, while he toiled with violent energy at his
work.  To look at him, one might suppose that Vulcan himself had
condescended to visit the abodes of men, and work in a terrestrial
smithy!

During one of the tosses with which he threw back his hair, Erling
