The Project Gutenberg eBook, For Name and Fame, by G. A. Henty,
Illustrated by Gordon Browne


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: For Name and Fame
       Or Through Afghan Passes


Author: G. A. Henty



Release Date: June 30, 2007  [eBook #21979]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOR NAME AND FAME***


E-text prepared by Martin Robb



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 21979-h.htm or 21979-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/9/7/21979/21979-h/21979-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/1/9/7/21979/21979-h.zip)





FOR NAME AND FAME

Or Through Afghan Passes

by

G. A. HENTY.







Contents

   Preface.
   Chapter 1:   The Lost Child.
   Chapter 2:   The Foundling.
   Chapter 3:   Life On A Smack.
   Chapter 4:   Run Down.
   Chapter 5:   The Castaways.
   Chapter 6:   The Attack On The Village.
   Chapter 7:   The Fight With The Prahus.
   Chapter 8:   The Torpedo.
   Chapter 9:  The Advance Into Afghanistan.
   Chapter 10: The Peiwar-Khotal.
   Chapter 11: A Prisoner.
   Chapter 12: The Advance Up The Khyber.
   Chapter 13: The Massacre At Cabul.
   Chapter 14: The Advance Upon Cabul.
   Chapter 15: The Fighting Round Cabul.
   Chapter 16: The Fight In The Pass.
   Chapter 17: At Candahar.
   Chapter 18: On The Helmund.
   Chapter 19: The Battle Of Maiwand.
   Chapter 20: Candahar.
   Chapter 21: The Battle Of Candahar.
   Chapter 22: At Home At Last.

Illustrations

   Sam Dickson finds little Willie Gale.
   Will and Hans in Search of a Shelter.
   Captain Herbert saved.
   William Gale in the hands of the Afghans.
   One of the Gunpowder Magazines had Exploded.
   Letters from the General.
   Will saves Colonel Ripon.
   Gundi carried by the Bayonet.



Preface.


In following the hero of this story through the last Afghan war,
you will be improving your acquaintance with a country which is of
supreme importance to the British Empire and, at the same time, be
able to trace the operations by which Lord Roberts made his great
reputation as a general, and a leader of men. Afghanistan stands as
a line between the two great empires of England and Russia; and is
likely, sooner or later, to become the scene of a tremendous
struggle between these nations. Happily, at the present time the
Afghans are on our side. It is true that we have warred with, and
beaten them; but our retirement, after victory, has at least shown
them that we have no desire to take their country while, on the
other hand, they know that for those races upon whom Russia has
once laid her hand there is no escape.

In these pages you will see the strength and the weakness of these
wild people of the mountains; their strength lying in their
personal bravery, their determination to preserve their freedom at
all costs, and the nature of their country. Their weakness consists
in their want of organization, their tribal jealousies, and their
impatience of regular habits and of the restraint necessary to
render them good soldiers. But, when led and organized by English
officers, there are no better soldiers in the world; as is proved
by the splendid services which have been rendered by the frontier
force, which is composed almost entirely of Afghan tribesmen.

Their history shows that defeat has little moral effect upon them.
Crushed one day, they will rise again the next; scattered--it would
seem hopelessly--they are ready to reassemble, and renew the
conflict, at the first summons of their chiefs. Guided by British
advice, led by British officers and, it may be, paid by British
gold, Afghanistan is likely to prove an invaluable ally to us, when
the day comes that Russia believes herself strong enough to move
forward towards the goal of all her hopes and efforts, for the last
fifty years--the conquest of India.

G. A. Henty.



Chapter 1: The Lost Child.


"My poor pets!" a lady exclaimed, sorrowfully; "it is too bad. They
all knew me so well; and ran to meet me, when they saw me coming;
and seemed really pleased to see me, even when I had no food to
give them."

"Which was not often, my dear," Captain Ripon--her husband--said.
"However it is, as you say, too bad; and I will bring the fellow to
justice, if I can. There are twelve prize fowls--worth a couple of
guineas apiece, not to mention the fact of their being pets of
yours--stolen, probably by tramps; who will eat them, and for whom
the commonest barn-door chickens would have done as well. There are
marks of blood in two or three places, so they have evidently been
killed for food. The house was locked up last night, all right; for
you see they got in by breaking in a panel of the door.

"Robson, run down to the village, at once, and tell the policeman
to come up here; and ask if any gypsies, or tramps, have been seen
in the neighborhood."

The village lay at the gate of Captain Ripon's park, and the
gardener soon returned with the policeman.

"I've heard say there are some gypsies camped on Netherwood Common,
four miles away," that functionary said, in answer to Captain
Ripon.

"Put the gray mare in the dog cart, Sam. We will drive over at
once. They will hardly expect us so soon. We will pick up another
policeman, at Netherwood. They may show fight, if we are not in
strength."

Five minutes later, Captain Ripon was traveling along the road at
the rate of twelve miles an hour; with Sam by his side, and the
policeman sitting behind. At Netherwood they took up another
policeman and, a few minutes later, drove up to the gypsy
encampment.

There was a slight stir when they were seen approaching; and then
the gypsies went on with their usual work, the women weaving
baskets from osiers, the men cutting up gorse into skewers. There
were four low tents, and a wagon stood near; a bony horse grazing
on the common.

"Now," Captain Ripon said, "I am a magistrate, and I daresay you
know what I have come for. My fowl house has been broken open, and
some valuable fowls stolen.

"Now, policeman, look about, and see if you can find any traces of
them."

The gypsies rose to their feet, with angry gestures.

"Why do you come to us?" one of the men said. "When a fowl is
stolen you always suspect us, as if there were no other thieves in
the world."

"There are plenty of other thieves, my friend; and we shall not
interfere with you, if we find nothing suspicious."

"There have been some fowls plucked, here," one of the policemen
said. "Here is a little feather--" and he showed one, of only half
an inch in length "--and there is another, on that woman's hair.
They have cleaned them up nicely enough, but it ain't easy to pick
up every feather. I'll be bound we find a fowl, in the pot."

Two of the gypsies leaped forward, stick in hand; but the oldest
man present said a word or two to them, in their own dialect.

"You may look in the pot," he said, turning to Captain Ripon, "and
maybe you will find a fowl there, with other things. We bought 'em
at the market at Hunston, yesterday."

The policeman lifted the lid off the great pot, which was hanging
over the fire, and stirred up the contents with a stick.

"There's rabbits here--two or three of them, I should say--and a
fowl, perhaps two, but they are cut up."

"I cannot swear to that," Captain Ripon said, examining the
portions of fowl, "though the plumpness of the breasts, and the
size, show that they are not ordinary fowls."

He looked round again at the tents.

"But I can pretty well swear to this," he said, as he stooped and
picked up a feather which lay, half concealed, between the edge of
one of the tents and the grass. "This is a breast feather of a
Spangled Dorking. These are not birds which would be sold for
eating in Hunston market, and it will be for these men to show
where they got it from."

A smothered oath broke from one or two of the men. The elder signed
to them to be quiet.

"That's not proof," he said, insolently. "You can't convict five
men, because the feather of a fowl which you cannot swear to is
found in their camp."

"No," Captain Ripon said, quietly. "I do not want to convict anyone
but the thief; but the proof is sufficient for taking you in
custody, and we shall find out which was the guilty man,
afterwards.

"Now, lads, it will be worse for you, if you make trouble.

"Constables, take them up to Mr. Bailey. He lives half a mile away.
Fortunately, we have means of proving which is the fellow
concerned.

"Now, Sam, you and I will go up with the Netherwood constable to
Mr. Bailey.

"And do you," he said, to the other policeman, "keep a sharp watch
over these women. You say you can find nothing in the tents; but it
is likely the other fowls are hid, not far off, and I will put all
the boys of the village to search, when I come back."

The gypsies, with sullen faces, accompanied Captain Ripon and the
policeman to the magistrate's.

"Is that feather the only proof you have, Ripon?" Mr. Bailey asked,
when he had given his evidence. "I do not think that it will be
enough to convict, if unsupported; besides, you cannot bring it
home to any one of them. But it is sufficient for me to have them
locked up for twenty-four hours and, in the meantime, you may find
the other fowls."

"But I have means of identification," Captain Ripon said. "There is
a footmark in some earth, at the fowl house door. It is made by a
boot which has got hobnails and a horseshoe heel, and a piece of
that heel has been broken off.

"Now, which of these men has got such a boot on? Whichever has, he
is the man."

There was a sudden movement among the accused.

"It's of no use," one of them said, when the policeman approached
to examine their boots. "I'm the man, I'll admit it. I can't get
over the boot," and he held up his right foot.

"That is the boot, sir," the constable exclaimed. "I can swear that
it will fit the impression, exactly."

"Very well," the magistrate said. "Constable, take that man to the
lockup; and bring him before the bench, tomorrow, for final
committal for trial. There is no evidence against the other four.
They can go."

With surly, threatening faces the men left the room; while the
constable placed handcuffs on the prisoner.

"Constable," Mr. Bailey said, "you had better not put this man in
the village lockup. The place is of no great strength, and his
comrades would as likely as not get him out, tonight. Put him in my
dog cart. My groom shall drive you over to Hunston."

Captain Ripon returned with his groom to Netherwood, and set all
the children searching the gorse, copses, and hedges near the
common, by the promise of ten shillings reward, if they found the
missing fowls. Half an hour later, the gypsies struck their tents,
loaded the van, and went off.

Late that afternoon, the ten missing fowls were discovered in a
small copse by the wayside, half a mile from the common, on the
road to Captain Ripon's park.

"I cannot bring your fowls back to life, Emma," that gentleman
said, when he returned home, "but I have got the thief. It was one
of the gypsies on Netherwood Common. We found two of the fowls in
their pot. No doubt they thought that they would have plenty of
time to get their dinner before anyone came, even if suspicion fell
on them; and they have hidden the rest away somewhere, but I expect
that we shall find them.

"They had burnt all the feathers, as they thought; but I found a
breast feather of a Spangled Dorking, and that was enough for me to
give them in custody. Then, when it came to the question of boots,
the thief found it no good to deny it, any longer."

That evening, Captain Ripen was told that a woman wished to speak
to him and, on going out into the hall, he saw a gypsy of some
thirty years of age.

"I have come, sir, to beg you not to appear against my husband."

