Project Gutenberg's Chatterbox Stories of Natural History, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Chatterbox Stories of Natural History

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: August 26, 2007 [EBook #22408]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHATTERBOX STORIES ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Janet Blenkinship
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was made using scans of
public domain works in the International Children's Digital
Library.)









  [Illustration]

  CHATTERBOX

  STORIES OF

  NATURAL HISTORY

  NEW YORK R. WORTHINGTON 770 BROADWAY.

  COPYRIGHT,

  1880,

  By R. WORTHINGTON.

  New York: J. J. Little & Co., Printers, 10 to 20 Astor Place.


         *       *       *       *       *

 +------------------------------------------------------------------------+
 |Transcriber's note: There was no Table of Contents in the original book,|
 |and one has been provided for this version.                             |
 +------------------------------------------------------------------------+

  THE KING OF THE CASTLE.
  ZEBRA AND YOUNG.
  MRS. BRUIN AND FAMILY.
  LITTLE OWLS.
  AUROCHS.
  THE KANGAROO.
  THE PEACOCK.
  SWANS.
  THE SEA LION.
  A--THE ASS.
  BADGERS.
  THE BIRD'S NEST.
  THE CHAMOIS.
  JACKO WITH PUSSY'S BONE.
  MEMBERS OF THE POACHING FRATERNITY.
  A COW WORKING A PUMP.
  CARRIER PIGEONS.
  THE SIASIN, OR ANTELOPE OF INDIA.
  THE COMMON SNIPE.
  D--THE DOE.
  MRS. BUNNY AND FAMILY.
  THE LYNX.
  THE SWAN AND THE DRAKE.
  THE BEAVER.
  LIONESS AND CUBS.
  A PET JACK.
  THE SWALLOW'S NEST.
  THE BRAVE DOG OF ST. BERNARD.
  G--THE GIRAFFE.
  MOTHER-DEER AND BABY.
  WHOOPING CRANE.
  THE ELK.
  TOYS FOR ANIMALS.
  THE SUCKING-PIG.
  BELL-RINGERS.
  THE GUINEA-PIG.
  J--THE JAY.
  WAITING.
  THE ARGUS.
  THE YOUNG MONKEY.
  THE CLEVER FOX.
  TESTING HIS STRENGTH.
  A WISE DOG.
  M--THE MANDRILL.
  SPRING.
  SUMMER.
  TIMOTHY.
  THE BRAVE COCKATOO.
  HARE TAKING THE WATER.
  AUTUMN.
  WINTER.
  OUR WILD BIRDS.
  P--THE PELICAN.
  BLACKBIRDS AND YOUNG.
  A USEFUL PILOT.
  JACK.
  S--THE SWALLOW.
  A SINGULAR HABIT OF THE WOODCOCK.
  THE SKY-LARK
  THE STORY OF A SEAL.
  THE KING OF THE MOUNTAINS.
  THE BEE.
  V--THE VULTURE.
  MOTHER AND PUPS.
  THE FRIENDLY TERNS.
  Y--THE YAK.
  SHEEP AND LAMBS.
  THE CAPTIVE SQUIRREL.
  A STROLL IN THE COUNTRY.
  THE OTTER.
  THE MASTIFF.
  THE CUNNING WOOD-PIGEONS.
  SEA REPTILES.
  SWISS MOUNTAIN SCENERY.
  PARTRIDGE AND YOUNG.
  THE KINGFISHERS' HOME.
  RATS CARRYING EGGS UP STAIRS.
  A HERON ATTACKED BY A HAWK.
  A HORSE GUARDIAN.
  BATTLE BETWEEN A FOX AND A SWAN.
  TOUSY.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: CARLO.]




THE KING OF THE CASTLE.


As the lion is called the king of beasts, so the eagle is called the
king of birds; but except that it is bigger, stronger, and swifter than
other birds, there does not seem much reason for the name. It is a
mistake to attribute noble or mean qualities to animals or birds, or to
think they can do good or bad actions, when they can only do what God
has created them to do, and as their instinct teaches.

The most powerful of the eagles is the Golden Eagle, so called because
of the rich yellowish-brown bordering to its feathers. It makes its nest
in the clefts of the rocky sides of the mountains, and seldom on a tree,
unless where one has sprung up in between the clefts, and the tangled
roots make a sort of platform. This the eagles cover with sticks, and
here they make their house, living in it always, and not only when they
lay eggs or have young ones.

If there are eaglets in the nest, the food is at once carried home to
them, and the skinning and eating done at home. Eagles are very
attentive to their young, and feed them with great care until they are
able to take care of themselves.

[Illustration]




ZEBRA AND YOUNG.


Mrs. Zebra, standing with her baby by her side, asks proudly of the
lookers-on, "Did you ever see such a likeness?" and certainly mother and
child are very much alike, striped all over their bodies, from head to
foot, and from nose to tail, with the same regular marks of black.
Strong and wild by nature, the zebra family are left very much to
themselves, which is a source of great happiness to the mother and child
in the picture before us. "No! no! my baby is not going to become as
tame as the donkey, or to draw carts and carriages like the horse; it is
to have its freedom, and go just where it likes all over these large
plains;"--so says Mrs. Zebra, and she means it too, for if anybody took
the trouble to go all the way to the hot country of Africa, where Mrs.
Zebra is at home, and tried to carry off her baby, they would find their
journey a vain one, and that she would kick severely, and perhaps break
the legs of the person bold enough to take away her darling.

[Illustration]




MRS. BRUIN AND FAMILY.


This is the American black bear, who is looking so lively and seemingly
inviting the young folks to have a romp, which they will be only too
willing to join in. The black bear is of a timid disposition, and seldom
attacks man except in self-defense. The female bear is a most
affectionate mother, and many stories are related showing her care and
love for her young, and her sorrow and mournful cries when any evil
befalls them. On one occasion a black bear with her two cubs was pursued
across the ice by some armed sailors. At first she urged her cubs to
increased speed, but finding her pursuers gaining upon them, she
carried, pushed, and pitched them, alternately, forward, until she
effected their escape from her pursuers.

[Illustration]




LITTLE OWLS.


Who has not at one time or other of his life read fairy tales and
sympathized with stories of enchanted princes and princesses? I once
thought of this when a country boy offered me a nest with four of the
young of the Little Owl. I put them into a large cage, where they could
stare at each other and at my pigeons to their hearts' content.

Let me say that this little owl is a very useful bird, for it keeps
mice, bats, beetles, and other creatures in check, which might otherwise
multiply too fast. On a spring or summer evening you may hear its
plaintive hoot among the apple-blossoms of an orchard, or the sheaves of
a cornfield. Curiously enough, this simple sound earned the little bird
the name of being the harbinger of death, and peasants believed that
whenever its cry was heard where sickness was in the family, the patient
was sure to die.

[Illustration]




AUROCHS.


An Aurochs in blind rage, charging through thick and thin, has had a
fascination for me as long as I can remember. The true aurochs and this,
the European Bison, ceased to exist in the British Isles, except in the
Zoological Gardens; but the latter is still found wild in Lithuania, and
is also carefully preserved in other parts of Russia, of which the
Emperor has a herd. There is much talk about their being untamable--that
they will not mix with tame cattle--that tame cows shrink from the
aurochs' calves; but does not any cow shrink from any calf not her own?
The American Bison, with which you are all pretty familiar, is very
similar to the one just mentioned. There have been several attempts made
to domesticate the American bison, and have been so far successful. The
size and strength of the animal make it probable that if domesticated,
it would be of great use.

[Illustration]




THE KANGAROO.


"Well," said little Herbert Joyce, as he looked over the books of
