The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Land of the Long Night, by Paul du Chaillu

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Land of the Long Night

Author: Paul du Chaillu

Illustrator: M. J. Burns

Release Date: September 22, 2007 [EBook #22727]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAND OF THE LONG NIGHT ***




Produced by Peter Vachuska, Chuck Greif, Stephen Blundell
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









 The
 Land of the Long Night




[Illustration: Your Friend, Paul Du Chaillu]




                        The

               Land of the Long Night


                         By

                   Paul Du Chaillu

 Author of "The Viking Age," "Ivar the Viking," "The
       Land of the Midnight Sun," "Exploration
             in Equatorial Africa," etc.



            _Illustrated by M. J. Burns_



                      New York
               Charles Scribner's Sons
                        1901




 _Copyright, 1899,_
 BY CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS.



 University Press:
 JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE, U.S.A.




_TO_

_EX-CHIEF JUSTICE CHARLES P. DALY_

_As I write this dedication, dear Judge Daly, a flood of recollections
comes over me of unbroken friendship and great kindness on your part and
that of your wife, whose memory I venerate and cherish. This friendship
has never faltered for a moment, but has grown stronger and stronger as
the years have rolled by. Fortunate is the man who wins for himself two
such friends! I have never ceased to remember the warm interest you and
your noble-hearted wife took from the first in my explorations in
Africa. I can only give you in return love and devotion for all the
kindness I have experienced at your hands._

                         _Your devoted friend,_

                                        _PAUL DU CHAILLU._

_September 1, 1899._




Introduction


MY DEAR YOUNG FOLKS:

Friend Paul has led many of you into the great Equatorial Forest of
Africa. We met there many strange and wild tribes of men, and lived
among cannibals and dwarfs or pygmies. We hunted together, and killed
many elephants, fierce gorillas, leopards, huge crocodiles, hippopotami,
buffalos, antelopes, strange-looking monkeys, wonderful chimpanzees of
different varieties,--some of them white, others yellow or black,--and
many other kinds of animals.

In this book I am going to take you to a very different part of the
world. I am going to lead you towards the far North, to "The Land of the
Long Night,"--a land where during a part of the year the sun is not
seen, for it does not rise above the horizon, and in some parts of the
country does not show itself for sixty-seven days, during which time the
moon, stars, and the aurora borealis take its place.

"The Land of the Long Night" is a land of darkness, of snow, of wind,
and at times of intense cold; and we shall have a long journey before
us, and shall have to change horses and vehicles at many post stations,
and at those places we shall get meals and lodgings.

When once in "The Land of the Long Night," we shall roam far and
wide--east, west, north--over a vast trackless region, covered with deep
snow, drawn by reindeer instead of horses, and sometimes we shall walk
or run with skees, which are the snowshoes of that country, and very
unlike those used by our Indians.

We shall sleep on the snow in bags made of reindeer skins, follow the
nomadic Laplander and his reindeer, live with him and sleep in his
_kata_ or tent. We shall hunt wolves, bears, and different kinds of
foxes and other animals, and sail and fish on the stormy Arctic seas.

We shall have plenty of fun, in spite of the snow, the terrific wind,
and the cold we shall encounter; and, thanks to the houses of refuge
which we shall find in our times of peril, we shall not perish in these
Arctic regions. But woe to the man who wanders in that far northern land
without a guide or without knowing where these houses or farms of refuge
are to be found, for he will surely succumb in some one of the storms
that are certain to overtake him.

We shall cross the Swedish and Norwegian mountains of the far North,
which rise to a height of several thousand feet, and come to the
desolate shores of the Arctic Ocean, and there live among the people.

In a sunny room at the Marlborough in Broadway I have written this book.
It is a dear little room, made bright at night with electric lights, and
full of delightful reminiscences of cheerful evenings with friends, all
kinds of knick-knacks, tin horns, "booby" prizes, mugs, etc.,--souvenirs
of frolics at which I have had fine times. My two windows look out on
the roof of a church; it is all I can see; the noise of a wheel never
reaches my ears. It is an ideal room to write books in.

I am surrounded by pictures of boys and girls, and many older friends;
they look down upon me and cheer me, and when I write they all seem to
say, "Go on, Paul," and at other times, they cry, "Stop, Paul, you have
written enough to-day; go and take a walk, go and see people and life,
dine with friends; you will work much better to-morrow. 'All work and no
play makes Jack a dull boy.' We shall be here to welcome you when you
come back."

How good it is to have friends, no matter how humble some of them are. I
love them all. No one ever has too many friends, and life without them
is not worth having.

Now, as I am ready to lay down my pen, I draw a long breath--"The Land
of the Long Night" is ready for the printer. I am just thinking: all my
books have been published in New York, and all but two have been
written, in the dear old city.

                         Your friend,

                                        PAUL DU CHAILLU.




Contents


 Chapter                                                            Page

 I. On the Way to "The Land of the Long Night."--Homesick.--Tempted
         to Return.--Girls and Boys Say "No; Go on, Go on,
         Paul."--Decide to Continue my Journey.--Winter Coming
         On.--Don Warmer Clothing.--From Stockholm North.              1

 II. Snow Land.--A Great Snowstorm.--Fearful
         Roads.--Snow-ploughs.--Losing the Way.--Intelligence of
         the Horses.--Upset in the Snow.--Difficulty of Righting
         Ourselves.--Perspiring at 23 Degrees below Zero.--Houses
         Buried in the Snow.                                           9

 III. Halt at a Farmhouse.--Made Welcome.--A Strange-looking
         Interior.--Queer Beds.--Snowed In.--Exit through the
         Chimney.--Clearing Paths.--I Resume my Journey.--Reach
         Haparanda.                                                   17

 IV. Good Advice from the People of Haparanda.--Warned against
         Still Colder Weather.--Different Costume Needed.--Dressed
         as a Laplander.--Lapp Grass for Feet Protection.             29

 V. What the Arctic Circle is.--Description of the Phenomenon of
         the Long Night.--Reasons for its Existence.--The Ecliptic
         and the Equinoxes.--Length of the Long Night at Different
         Places.                                                      36

 VI. Fine Weather Leaving Haparanda.--Windstorms succeed.--A
         Finlander's Farm.--Strange Fireplace.--Interior of a
         Cow-House.--Queer Food for Cattle.--Passing the Arctic
         Circle.                                                      40

 VII. Skees, or the Queer Snowshoes of the North.--How They Are
         Made.--Learning to Use Them.--Joseff's Instructions.--Hard
         Work at First.--Going Down Hill.--I Bid Joseff Good-bye.     48

 VIII. A Primitive Steam Bath House.--How the Bath was
         Prepared.--What are the Twigs for?--I Ascertain.--Rolling
         in the Snow.--Fine Effect of the Bath.                       56

 IX. How the Laps and Finns Travel.--Strange-looking
         Sleighs.--Different Varieties.--Lassoing
         Reindeer.--Description of the Reindeer.                      60

 X. Harnessing Reindeer.--The First Lessons in Driving.--Constantly
         Upset at First.--Going Down Hill with Reindeer.--Thrown
         Out at the Bottom.--Queer Noise Made by Reindeer Hoofs.      66

 XI. The Last Days of the Sun.--Beginning of the Long Night.--A
         Mighty Wall of Ice.--The Long Night's Warning Voice--The
         Aurora Borealis and its Magnificence.                        73

 XII. The Snow Getting Deeper.--Lapp Hospitality.--A Lapp
         Repast.--Coffee and Tobacco Lapp Staples.--Babies
         in Strange Cradles.--How the Tents are Made.--Going
         to Sleep with the Mercury at 39 deg. Below.                      77

 XIII. Toilet with Snow.--A Lapp Breakfast.--Lapp Dogs. Talks
         with my Lapp Friend about the Reindeer.--Their Habits
         and Various Forms of Usefulness.                             89

 XIV. Moving Camp.--Another Great Blizzard.--A Remarkable
         Sight--Deer Getting their Food by Digging the
         Snow.--How Reindeer are Butchered.                           99

 XV. Watching for the Reappearance of the Sun.--The Upper Rim
         First Visible.--The Whole Orb Seen from a Hill.--Days
         of Sunshine Ahead.                                          109

 XVI. Wolves the Great Foe of the Lapps.--How the Reindeer are
         Protected against Them.--Watching for the Treacherous
         Brutes.--Stories of their Sagacity.                         112

 XVII. In Search of Wolves.--A Large Pack.--They Hold a
         Consultation.--Their Fierce Attack on the
         Reindeer.--Pursuing Them on Skees.--Killing the
         Chief of the Pack.                                          122

 XVIII. Great Skill of the Lapps with Their Skees.--Leaping over
         Wide Gullies and Rivers.--Prodigious Length of Their
         Leaps.--Accuracy of Their Coasting.--I Start Them by
         Waving the American Flag.                                   129

 XIX. We Encounter More Wolves.--My Guide Kills Two with
         his Bludgeon.--A Visiting Trip with a Lapp
         Family.--Extraordinary Speed of Reindeer.--We
         Strike a Boulder.--Lake Givijaervi.--Eastward Again.         136

 XX. The Lapp Hamlet of Kautokeino.--A Bath in a Big Iron
         Pot.--An Arctic Way of Washing Clothes.--Dress and
         Ornaments of the Lapps.--Appearance and Height of
         the Lapps.--Givijaervi.--Karasjok.                           142

 XXI. Leave Karasjok still Travelling Northward.--The River
         Tana.--River Lapps.--Filthy Dwellings.--On the Way
         to Nordkyn.--The Most Northern Land in Europe.              150

 XXII. Leave Nordkyn.--Frantic Efforts of the Reindeer to Keep
         their Footing on the Ice.--The Bear's Night.--Foxes
         and Ermines.--Weird Cries of Foxes.--Building Snow
         Houses.--Shooting-boxes.--Killing Foxes.--Traps for
         Ermines.--A Snow Owl.                                       155

 XXIII. Jakob Talks to Me about Bears.--The Bear's Night.--Watching
         a Bear Seeking for Winter Quarters.--They Are Very
         Suspicious.--I Tell a Bear Story in my Turn.                165

 XXIV. Preparations for Crossing the Mountains to the Arctic
         Ocean.--Decide to Take the Trail to the Ulf Fjord.--Houses
         of Refuge.--A Series of Terrific Windstorms in the
         Mountains.--Lost.--Gloomy Reflections.--A Happy Reunion.    170

 XXV. A Dangerous Descent.--How to Descend the Mountains.--The
         Most Perilous Portion of the Journey.--Exhaustion of the
         Reindeer.--All Safe at the Bottom.--Arrival at the Shore
         of the Arctic Sea.                                          183

 XXVI. Sail on the Arctic Ocean.--The Brig _Ragnild_.--AEgir and
         Ran, the God and Goddess of the Sea.--The Nine Daughters
         of AEgir and Ran.--Great Storms.--Compelled to Heave To.     190

 XXVII. A Dark Night at Sea.--Wake of the _Ragnild_.--Thousands
         of Phosphorescent Lights.--A Light Ahead.--An Arctic
         Fair.--A Fishing Settlement.--How the Cod are
         Cured.--Fish and Fertilizer Fragrance.                      199

 XXVIII. Among the Fishermen.--Their Lodgings and How They
         Look.--What They Have to Eat.--An Evening of Talk
         about Cod, Salmon, and Herring.--The Immense Number
         of Fish.--A Snoring Match.                                  205

 XXIX. Departure for the Fishing Banks.--Great Number of
         Boats.--More than Five Thousand Oars Fall into the
         Water at the Same Time.--Quantities of Buoys and
         Glass Balls.--A Notable Catch of Cod.                       211

 XXX. A Great Viking Sea Fight.--Svein King of Denmark, Olaf King
         of Sweden, Erik Jarl of Norway, against King Olaf
         Tryggvasson of Norway.--They Lie in Ambush.--Magnificent
         Ships.--The _Long Serpent_.--Ready for the Fight.--The
         Attack.--The _Jarn Bardi_.--Defeat of Olaf Tryggvasson.     219

 XXXI. Sailing along the Coast of Finmarken.--Hammerfest, the
         Most Northern Town in the World.--Schools.--Fruholmen,
         the Most Northern Lighthouse in the World.--Among the
         Sea Lapps.--Men and Women Sailors.                          227

 XXXII. A Sea Lapp Hamlet.--Strange Houses.--Their
         Interiors.--Summer Dress of the Sea Lapps.--Primitive
         Wooden Cart.--Animals Eat Raw Fish.--I Sleep in a Sea
         Lapp's House.--They Tell Me to Hurry Southward.             232

 XXXIII. Comparison of Finmarken with Alaska.--The Two
         Lands Much Alike.--What Must be Done for
         Alaska.--Colonization.--Importation of
         Reindeer.--Protection of Fisheries.--Houses of Refuge.      241

 XXXIV. Preparation to Leave the Arctic Coast.--Great Danger of
         Encountering Melting Snow, or Rivers Made Dangerous by
         the Ice Breaking.--Reindeer Come.--Farewell to the Sea
         Lapps.--I Leave for More Southern Land.                     244

 XXXV. We Enter a Birch Forest.--The Reindeer are Soon
         Fagged.--Sleep on the Snow.--The Rays of the Sun Melt
         through the Snow.--Great difficulty in Travelling.--Meet
         Herds of Reindeer.--Reindeer Bulls Fight Each Other.        249

 XXXVI. Variable Weather.--Snowy Days.--An Uninhabited House of
         Refuge.--Animals Changing the Color of their Fur.--Mikel
         Tells Me about a Bear.--Killing the Bear.--Hurrying on
         over Soft Snow and Frozen Rivers.--The Ice Begins to
         Break.--Pass the Arctic Circle.                             256




List of Illustrations

 "Your friend, Paul Du Chaillu."                          _Frontispiece_

                                                             FACING PAGE

 "On the road were many snow-ploughs at work levelling the snow."      8

 "The husband suddenly disappeared through the trap-door and soon
         came back with potatoes and a big piece of bacon."           20

 "The boys got hold of my hands and pulled me through."               24

 "It was, indeed, a fearful wind storm."                              40

 "Paulus, try again!"                                                 54

 "The man had to use all his strength."                               64

 "I was shot out of the sleigh."                                      68

 "At noon I saw the sun's lower rim touching the horizon."            72
