The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lost in the Forest, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Lost in the Forest
       Wandering Will's Adventures in South America

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: October 31, 2007 [EBook #23274]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOST IN THE FOREST ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Lost in the Forest, by R.M. Ballantyne.

________________________________________________________________________
In this book we meet once again "Wandering Will", one of Ballantyne's
perpetual heroes.  They are on a touristic cruise in the eastern
Pacific, when the second mate, Griffin, eggs on some of the seamen to
mutiny and take over the ship.  The captain and some of the senior
officers are cast off in a ship's dinghy to survive however they can,
while Will and others of his party are retained on board the "Rover",
because of their medical knowledge, which Griffin believes might one
day come in useful.

They visit a small island to restock the larder, and then head for the
mainland of South America.  On arriving a party goes ashore, including
our heroes, landing through heavy surf.  Everyone made it to shore, but
Griffin touches ground on quicksand, and suddenly disappears from sight,
never to be seen again. At this point our heroes manage to give the
mutineers the slip, and disappear into the forest. Unfortunately they
become disorientated, so their original plan of regaining the coast and
then travelling northward along it until they should come to some major
settlement had to be abandoned.  Hence the title of the book.

Thereafter we are given an interesting tour of the Andes, very well
written and entertaining.  Eventually our heroes find a way to where
they can take ship for England.

________________________________________________________________________
LOST IN THE FOREST, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

AT SEA--AN ALARMING CRY AND A RESCUE.

"At sea once more!" said Will Osten in a meditative mood.

Our hero made this remark one night to himself, which was overheard and
replied to by his friend, Captain Dall, in a manner that surprised him.

"It's my opinion, doctor," said the captain in a low voice, "that this
is the last time you or I will ever be at sea, or anywhere else, if our
skipper don't look better after his men, for a more rascally crew I
never set eyes on, and, from a word or two I have heard dropped now and
then, I feel sure some mischief is in the wind.  Come aft with me to a
place where we ain't so likely to be overheard by eavesdroppers, and
I'll tell you all about it."

Will Osten was so much astonished at his friend's remark, that he
followed him to the after part of the ship without uttering a word, and
there sat down on the taffrail to listen to what he had to communicate.

There was no moon in the clear sky, and the hosts of stars that studded
the dark vault overhead did not shed any appreciable light on the waters
of the Pacific, on which the _Rover_ floated almost motionless.  That
beautiful and mysterious phosphorescence which sometimes illumines the
sea was gleaming in vivid flashes in the vessel's wake, and a glowing
trail of it appeared to follow the rudder like a serpent of lambent
fire.

It was one of those calm, peaceful nights in which God seems to draw
nearer than usual to the souls of His creatures.  The only sounds that
broke the profound stillness were the pattering of reef-points on the
sails as the vessel rose and sank gently on the oily swell; the measured
tread of the officer of the watch, and the humming of the man at the
wheel, as he stood idly at his post, for the vessel had scarcely
steering-way.

"Doctor," said Captain Dall in a low whisper, taking Will Osten by the
button-hole and bending forward until his eyes were close to those of
his young friend, "I little thought when I set sail from England that,
in a few weeks after, my good ship the _Foam_ would come a wreck an'
sink to the bottom of the Pacific before my eyes.  Still less did I
think that I should be cast on a coral island, have to fight like a
naked savage, and be saved at last by missionaries from being roasted
and eaten.  Yet all this has happened within a few months."

At any other time Will Osten would have smiled at the solemn manner in
which this was said, but there was something in the hour, and also in
the tone of his friend's voice, which tended to repress levity and raise
a feeling of anxiety in his mind.

"Well, captain," he said, "what has this to do with the present evil
that you seem to apprehend?"

"To do with it, lad? nothing--'xcept that it reminds me that we little
know what is in store for us.  Here are we becalmed--three day's sail
from the coral island, where the niggers were so near converting us into
cooked victuals, and I wouldn't at this minute give twopence in security
for the life of any one on board the _Rover_."

"Why, what mean you?" asked Will, with increasing perplexity.  "Some of
the crew are bad enough, no doubt, but many of them are evidently good
men--what is it that you fear?"

"Fear! why, there's everything to fear," said the captain in a
suppressed but excited whisper, drawing still closer to his friend.
"I've often sailed in these seas, and I know that while some of the
traders sailing between these islands and South America and other parts
are decentish enough, others are as great cut-throats as ever deserved
to swing at the yard-arm.  But that's not the point.  I have overheard,
of late, some of the rascals plotting to murder the officers and take
this ship.  But I cannot point 'em out, for though I heard their voices
I couldn't see their faces.  I think I know who they are, but could not
swear to 'em, and it would be worse than useless to denounce them till
we have some evidence to go on.  I therefore want you to help me with
your advice and assistance, so that we may get up a counterplot to spoil
their fun--for I'm quite certain that if we fail to--hark! what's that?"

Will did not answer, but both listened intently to the sound which had
interrupted Captain Dall's discourse.  It was evident that the officer
and men of the watch had also heard it, for they, too, had ceased to
walk to and fro, and their figures could be dimly seen in a listening
attitude at the gangway.

For several minutes they listened without hearing anything--then a
hoarse, guttural shout broke the stillness of the night for a few
seconds and died away.  The men looked at each other, and some of the
more superstitious among them grew pale.  Again the cry was repeated,
somewhat nearer, and again all was still.  Some of the oldest hands in
the watch stood transfixed and powerless with terror.  They would have
faced death in any form manfully, but this mysterious sound unnerved
them!

The officer of the watch went down to report it to Captain Blathers, who
immediately came on deck.  Just as he appeared, the cry was repeated and
a slight splash was heard.

"Some one in distress," cried Captain Blathers promptly; "a crew for the
starboard quarter-boat to pick him up.  Stand by to lower.  Be smart,
lads!"

These words, heartily uttered, put superstitious fears to flight at
once.  The men threw off their jackets; the boat was lowered, and in a
few minutes was pulling about and searching in all directions.  Our hero
was one of the first to leap into her, and he pulled the bow oar.  For
some time they rowed about in vain.  The night was intensely dark, and
the cry was not repeated, so that they had nothing to guide them in
their movements.  A lantern was fixed in the ship half way up the mizzen
rigging, but the lantern in the boat was concealed until the moment when
it should be required, because it is easier for men to distinguish
surrounding objects in comparative darkness than when a light is glaring
near them.  Presently Will Osten saw a dark object like a small canoe
right ahead of the boat.

"Back water--all!" he shouted.

The men obeyed, but it was too late; the boat struck the object, and
overturned it.  Will saw something like a human form roll into the
water, and heard a gurgling cry.  Without a moment's hesitation he
leaped overboard, head foremost, and catching hold of the object,
brought it to the surface.  He remembered at that moment having heard of
a fact which is worth stating here.  The best way to save a drowning man
is to approach him from behind, seize him under the armpits, and, then,
getting on your back, draw him partly on to your breast and swim _on
your back_ to the shore, or to a place of safety.  Thought is quicker
than the lightning flash.  Will could not, of course, carry out this
plan fully, nevertheless the memory of it served him in good stead, for,
the instant he caught the drowning man by the hair, he kept him at arm's
length, and thus avoided his death-clutch until he could grasp him under
the armpits _from behind_, and thus render him powerless.  He then rose
and drew him gently upon his breast, at the same time striking out with
his feet and shouting--

"Bear a hand, lads--I've got him!"

A loud "hurrah!" burst from the men in the boat, and was re-echoed
vehemently from the ship.  They had overshot the spot only by a few
yards.  Instantly they pulled round: two strokes brought them to the
spot where Will was swimming, and in another moment our hero and the
rescued man were hauled into the boat.  The men gave vent to another
loud and prolonged cheer, which was again replied to from the ship.

The boat was soon alongside, and the rescued man, who proved to be a man
of colour in a very emaciated and exhausted condition, was hoisted on
board.  His story was soon told.  He was not a native of the islands,
but had been living on one of them, and had gone off to fish in a canoe,
when a gale sprang up and blew him out to sea.  Four days and nights had
he been exposed to the storm in his frail bark, without food or water,
and was on the point of perishing when the ship chanced to pass near
him.  The utterance of the cry which had attracted attention, was almost
the last effort of which he was capable.  He spoke a little broken
English, having learnt it while serving on board of an English trading
vessel.  His name, he said, was Bunco, and a fine powerful-looking
fellow he was, despite the sad condition to which he had been reduced.
His shoulders, and indeed most parts of his body, were blistered by the
continual washing of the sea over him, and when he was lifted on board
his skin was icy cold.  Had he not been a man of iron mould, he must
certainly have perished.  The poor fellow was at once taken into the
cabin and carefully attended to.  He was first bathed in fresh water,
then rolled in blankets, and a tumbler of hot wine and water
administered, which greatly revived him, and soon caused him to fall
into a sound sleep.

Whether it was that this incident softened the hearts of the seamen for
a time, or that their plans were not yet ripe for execution, we cannot
tell, but certain it is that nothing whatever occurred to justify
Captain Dall's suspicions for several weeks after that.



CHAPTER TWO.

DESCRIBES A MUTINY, AND SHOWS THAT THE BEST OF FRIENDS MAY PART SOONER
THAN THEY EXPECT.

"A wilful man will have his way."  That this is a true proverb is almost
universally admitted; indeed, there is reason to believe that it is
equally true of women as of men; nevertheless, Captain Blathers did not
believe it although he was himself a living illustration of its truth.
He laughed at Captain Dall when that worthy warned him of the mutinous
intentions of his crew, and when several weeks had passed away without
any signs of disaffection appearing, he rallied him a good deal about
what he styled his suspicious disposition, and refused to take any steps
to guard against surprise.  The consequence was, that when the storm did
break, he was utterly unprepared to meet it.

Griffin, the second mate, was the leader of the conspiracy, but so ably
did he act his villainous part, that no one suspected him.  He was a
tall, powerful, swarthy man, with a handsome but forbidding countenance.

One evening a little before sunset, while the captain was sitting at tea
with those who usually messed in the cabin, Griffin looked down the
skylight and reported "a sail on the weather bow."  The captain
immediately rose and went on deck.  The moment he appeared he was seized
by Griffin.  Captain Blathers was an active and powerful man, and very
passionate.  He clenched his fist and struck the second mate a blow on
the chest, which caused him to stagger back, but, before he could repeat
it, two sailors seized him from behind and held him fast.  The noise of
the scuffle at once brought up the first mate, who was followed by Will
Osten, Captain Dall, and others, all of whom were seized by the crew and
secured as they successively made their appearance.

Resistance was of course offered by each, but in vain, for the thing was
promptly and thoroughly carried out.  Four strong men stood at the head
of the companion with ropes ready to secure their prisoners, while the
greater part of the crew stood close by, armed with pistols and
cutlasses.

"It is of no use resisting, Captain Blathers," said Griffin, when the
former was pinioned; "you see we are quite prepared, and thoroughly in
earnest."

The captain looked round, and a glance sufficed to convince him that
this was true.  Not a friendly eye met his, because those of the crew
who were suspected of being favourable to him, or who could not be
safely relied on, had been seized by another party of mutineers at the
same time that those in the cabin were captured, and among them were
three friends of our hero--Mr Cupples the mate, Muggins, and Larry
O'Hale, seamen belonging to the lost _Foam_ to which Captain Dall had
referred while conversing with Will.

For a few seconds Captain Blathers' face blazed with wrath, and he
seemed about to make a desperate attempt to break his bonds, but by a
strong effort he restrained himself.

"What do you intend to do?" he asked at length, in a deep, husky voice.

"To take possession of this ship," replied the second mate, with a
slightly sarcastic smile.  "These men have taken a fancy to lead a free,
roving life, and to make me their captain, and I am inclined to fall in
with their fancy, and to relieve you of the command."

"Scoundrel!" exclaimed the captain, "say rather that you have misled the
men, and that--"

He checked himself, and then said sternly, "And pray what do you intend
to do with _me_?"

"I shall allow you a boat and provisions, Captain Blathers, for the use
of yourself and your friends, and then bid you farewell.  You see we are
mercifully inclined, and have no desire to shed your blood.  Ho! there--
lower one of the quarter boats."

This order was obeyed with promptitude.  Some provisions were thrown
into the boat, and the captain was cast loose and ordered to get into
it.  He turned to make a last appeal to the crew, but Griffin presented
a pistol at his head and ordered him peremptorily to get into the boat.
It is probable that he would have made another effort, had not two of
the men forced him over the side.  Seeing this, Will Osten was so
indignant and so anxious to quit the ship, that he stepped forward with
alacrity to follow him.

"No, no, my fine young fellow," said Griffin, thrusting him back, "we
