The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cannibal Islands, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Cannibal Islands
       Captain Cook's Adventure in the South Seas

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: October 31, 2007 [EBook #23267]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CANNIBAL ISLANDS ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




The Cannibal Islands, by R.M. Ballantyne.

________________________________________________________________________
This book describes some of the voyages of Captain Cook to Tahiti and
other islands in the Pacific.  Tahiti had been previously discovered by
a Captain Wallis, and Cook was sent out there in order to make some
astronomical observations that could not be done in Europe.  The island
was very verdant, and it was scarcely necessary for its people to work
at all, so that they were very indolent.  They were also inclined to
steal, although they realised that it was wrong to do so.

There is a description of some of the more revolting habits of certain
Pacific islanders, for instance preparing the body of a slain rival so
that it could be "worn" by slipping the head through a hole made right
in the middle of the body.  There was also cannibalism on some of the
islands, which of course laid people open to CJD and similar diseases
that are slow to take effect, but very devastating when they do.

The book tells in great detail the final episode of his life when he was
murdered by the islanders, whom he had been so glad to know.

________________________________________________________________________
THE CANNIBAL ISLANDS, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



CHAPTER ONE.

A HERO WHO ROSE FROM THE RANKS.

More than a hundred years ago, there lived a man who dwelt in a mud
cottage in the county of York; his name was Cook.  He was a poor, honest
labourer--a farm servant.  This man was the father of that James Cook
who lived to be a captain in the British Navy, and who, before he was
killed, became one of the best and greatest navigators that ever spread
his sails to the breeze and crossed the stormy sea.

Captain Cook was a true hero.  His name is known throughout the whole
world wherever books are read.  He was born in the lowest condition of
life, and raised himself to the highest point of fame.  He was a
self-taught man too.  No large sums of money or long years of time were
spent upon his schooling.  No college education made him what he was.
An old woman taught him his letters, but he was not sent to school till
he was thirteen years of age.  He remained only four years at the
village school, where he learned a little writing and a little figuring.
This was all he had to start with.  The knowledge which he afterwards
acquired, the great deeds that he performed, and the wonderful
discoveries that he made, were all owing to the sound brain, the patient
persevering spirit, the modest practical nature, and the good stout arm
with which the Almighty had blessed him.  It is the glory of England
that many of her greatest men have risen from the ranks of those sons of
toil who earn their daily bread in the sweat of their brow.  Among all
who have thus risen, few stand so high as Captain Cook.

Many bold things he did, many strange regions he visited, in his voyages
round the world, the records of which fill bulky volumes.  In this
little book we shall confine our attention to some of the interesting
discoveries that were made by him among the romantic islands of the
South Pacific--islands which are so beautiful that they have been aptly
styled "gems of ocean," but which, nevertheless, are inhabited by savage
races so thoroughly addicted to the terrible practice of eating human
flesh, that we have thought fit to adopt the other, and not less
appropriate, name of the Cannibal Islands.

Before proceeding with the narrative, let us glance briefly at the early
career of Captain James Cook.  He was born in 1728.  After receiving the
very slight education already referred to, he was bound apprentice to a
shopkeeper.  But the roving spirit within him soon caused him to break
away from an occupation so uncongenial.  He passed little more than a
year behind the counter, and then, in 1746, went to sea.

Young Cook's first voyages were in connection with the coasting trade.
He began his career in a collier trading between London and Newcastle.
In a very short time it became evident that he would soon be a rising
man.  Promotion came rapidly.  Little more than three years after the
expiry of his apprenticeship he became mate of the _Friendship_, but, a
few years later, he turned a longing eye on the navy--"having," as he
himself said, "a mind to try his fortune that way."  In the year 1755 he
entered the King's service on board the _Eagle_, a sixty-gun ship,
commanded by Sir Hugh Palliser.  This officer was one of Cook's warmest
friends through life.

In the navy the young sailor displayed the same steady, thorough-going
character that had won him advancement in the coasting trade.  The
secret of his good fortune (if secret it may be called) was his untiring
perseverance and energy in the pursuit of one object at one time.  His
attention was never divided.  He seemed to have the power of giving his
whole soul to the work in hand, whatever that might be, without
troubling himself about the future.  Whatever his hand found to do he
did it with all his might.  The consequence was that he became a
first-rate man.  His superiors soon found that out.  He did not require
to boast or push himself forward.  His _work_ spoke for him, and the
result was that he was promoted from the forecastle to the quarter-deck,
and became a master on board the _Mercury_ when he was about thirty
years of age.

About this time he went with the fleet to the Gulf of Saint Lawrence,
and took part in the war then raging between the British and French in
Canada.  Winter in that region is long and bitterly cold.  The gulfs and
rivers there are at that season covered with thick ice; ships cannot
move about, and war cannot be carried on.  Thus the fleet was for a long
period inactive.  Cook took advantage of this leisure time to study
mathematics and astronomy, and, although he little thought it, was thus
fitting himself for the great work of discovery which he afterwards
undertook with signal success.

In this expedition to Canada Cook distinguished himself greatly--
especially in his surveys of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence, and in piloting
the fleet safely through the dangerous shoals and rocks of that inland
sea.  So careful and correct was he in all that he did, that men in
power and in high places began to take special notice of him; and,
finally, when, in the year 1767, an expedition of importance was about
to be sent to the southern seas for scientific purposes, Cook was chosen
to command it.

This was indeed a high honour, for the success of that expedition
depended on the man who should be placed at its head.  In order to mark
the importance of the command, and at the same time invest the commander
with proper authority, Cook was promoted to the rank of lieutenant in
the Royal Navy.  He had long been a gentleman in heart and conduct; he
was now raised to the social position of one by the King's commission.

From this point in his career Cook's history as a great navigator and
discoverer began.  We shall now follow him more closely in his brilliant
course over the world of waters.  He was about forty years of age at
this time; modest and unassuming in manners and appearance; upwards of
six feet high, and good-looking, with quick piercing eyes and brown
hair, which latter he wore, according to the fashion of the time, tied
behind in a pig-tail.  It was not until the end of his first voyage that
he was promoted to the rank of captain.



CHAPTER TWO.

SHOWS WHAT MEN WILL DO AND DARE IN THE CAUSE OF SCIENCE.

Men who study the stars tell us strange and wonderful things--things
that the unlearned find it hard to understand, and harder still to
believe, yet things that we are now as sure of as we are of the fact
that two and two make four!

There was a time when men said that the sun moved round the earth; and
very natural it was in men to say so, for, to the eye of sense, it looks
as if this were really the case.  But those who study the stars have
found out that the earth moves round the sun--a discovery which has been
of the greatest importance to mankind--though the importance thereof
cannot be fully understood except by scientific men.

Among other difficult things, these astronomers have attempted to
measure the distance of the sun, moon, and stars from our earth.
Moreover, they have tried to ascertain the exact size of these celestial
lights, and they have, to a considerable extent, been successful in
their efforts.  By their complicated calculations, the men who study the
stars can tell the exact day, hour, and minute when certain events will
happen, such as an eclipse of the sun or of the moon.

Now, about the year 1768 the attention of the scientific world was
eagerly turned to an event which was to take place in the following
year.  This was the passage of the planet Venus across the face of the
sun.  Astronomers term this the _Transit of Venus_.  It happens very
seldom: it occurred in 1769, but not again till 1874, and 1882.  By
observing this passage--this transit--of Venus across the sun from
different parts of our earth, it was hoped that such information could
be obtained as would enable us to measure not only the distance of the
sun from the earth with greater accuracy than heretofore, but also the
extent of the whole host of stars that move with our earth around the
sun and form what is called our Solar System.

An opportunity occurring so seldom was not to be lost.  Learned men were
sent to all parts of the world to observe the event.  Among others,
Captain Cook was sent to the south seas--there, among the far-off coral
isles, to note the passage of a little star across the sun's face--an
apparently trifling, though in reality important, event in the history
of science.

So much for the object of Cook's first voyage.  Let us now turn to the
details thereof.

The vessel chosen by him for his long and dangerous voyage to unknown
seas was a small one of only 370 tons burden.  It was named the
_Endeavour_.  The crew consisted of forty-one seamen, twelve marines,
and nine servants--these, with the officers and the scientific men of
the expedition, made up a body of eighty-five persons.

The scientific men above mentioned were, Mr Green, an astronomer; Mr
Banks, a naturalist, who afterwards became Sir Joseph Banks and a
celebrated man; Doctor Solander, who was also a naturalist; and two
draughtsmen, one of whom was skilled in drawing objects of natural
history, the other in taking views of scenery.

The _Endeavour_ was victualled for a cruise of eighteen months.  She was
a three-masted vessel of the barque rig, and carried twenty-two large
guns, besides a store of small arms,--for the region of the world to
which they were bound was inhabited by savages, against whom they might
find it necessary to defend themselves.

When all was ready, Captain Cook hoisted his flag, and spread his sails,
and, on the 26th of August 1768, the voyage began--England soon dropped
out of sight astern, and ere long the blue sky above and the blue sea
below were all that remained for the eyes of the navigators to rest
upon.

It is a wonderful thought, when we come to consider it, the idea of
_going to sea_!  To sailors who are used to it, the thought, indeed, may
be very commonplace, and to lazy minds that are not much given to think
deeply upon any subject, the thought may not appear very wonderful; but
it is so, nevertheless, to us, men of the land, when we calmly sit down
and ponder the idea of making to ourselves a house of planks and beams
of wood, launching it upon the sea, loading it with food and
merchandise, setting up tall poles above its roof, spreading great
sheets thereon, and then rushing out upon the troubled waters of the
great deep, there, for days and nights, for weeks and months, and even
years, to brave the fury of the winds and waves, with nothing between us
and death except a wooden plank, some two or three inches thick!

It seems a bold thing for man to act in this fashion, even when he is
accustomed to it, and when he knows all about the sea which he sails
over; but when, like Cook, he knows very little about the far-off ocean
to which he is bound, his boldness seems and really is, much greater.
It is this very uncertainty, however, that charms the minds of
enterprising men, and gives interest to such voyages.

The Bible says, "They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business
in great waters; these see the works of the Lord, and His wonders in the
deep."  Navigators in all ages have borne testimony to the truth of
this.  The very first pages in Cook's journal mention some of these
wonders.  He says that, while they were off the coast of Spain, Mr
Banks and Dr Solander, the naturalists, had an opportunity of observing
some very curious marine animals, some of which were like jelly, and so
colourless that it was difficult to see them in the water except at
night, when they became luminous, and glowed like pale liquid fire.
One, that was carefully examined, was about three inches long, and an
inch thick, with a hollow passing quite through it, and a brown spot at
one end, which was supposed to be its stomach.  Four of these, when
first taken up out of the sea in a bucket, were found to be adhering
together, and were supposed to be one animal; but on being put into a
glass of water they separated and swam briskly about.  Many of them
resembled precious stones, and shone in the water with bright and
beautiful colours.  One little animal of this kind lived several hours
in a glass of salt water, swimming about with great agility, and at
every motion displaying a change of colours.

These _Medusae_, as they are called, have been spoken of by many
travellers, who tell us that in some parts of the sea they are so
numerous that the whole ocean is covered with them, and seems to be
composed of liquid fire, usually of a pale blue or green colour.  The
appearance is described as being of great splendour.  Even in the seas
on our own coasts this beautiful light is often seen.  It is called
phosphoric light.  Something of the same kind may be seen in the carcass
of a decaying fish if taken into a dark room.

Not long after this, they saw flying-fish.  Cook says that when seen
from the cabin windows they were beautiful beyond imagination, their
sides having the colour and brightness of burnished silver.  When seen
from the deck they did not look so beautiful, because their backs were
