The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Yacht Club, by Oliver Optic

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Yacht Club
       or The Young Boat-Builder

Author: Oliver Optic

Release Date: November 6, 2007 [EBook #23351]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE YACHT CLUB ***




Produced by David Edwards, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from scans of public domain material produced by
Microsoft for their Live Search Books site.)







[Illustration: YACHT CLUB SERIES]

[Illustration: MISS NELLIE PATTERDALE AND DON JOHN. Frontispiece.]




[Illustration: OLIVER OPTIC'S YACHT CLUB SERIES.

        THE YACHT CLUB.
        LEE & SHEPARD,
        BOSTON]




THE YACHT CLUB SERIES.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE YACHT CLUB;

OR,

THE YOUNG BOAT-BUILDER.

BY

OLIVER OPTIC,

        AUTHOR OF "YOUNG AMERICA ABROAD," "THE ARMY AND NAVY SERIES,"
        "THE WOODVILLE STORIES," "THE STARRY FLAG SERIES," "THE
        BOAT CLUB STORIES," "THE LAKE SHORE SERIES,"
        "THE UPWARD AND ONWARD SERIES,"
        ETC., ETC.

_WITH THIRTEEN ILLUSTRATIONS._

        BOSTON:
        LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS.
        NEW YORK:
        LEE, SHEPARD AND DILLINGHAM.

        Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1873,
        BY WILLIAM T. ADAMS,
        In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.

       *       *       *       *       *

        Brown Type-Setting Machine Company.

        TO

        MY YOUNG FRIEND

        _CHARLES H. HASTINGS_,

        OF NEW YORK,

        This Book is Affectionately Dedicated.



The Yacht Club Series.


        1. LITTLE BOBTAIL; OR, THE WRECK OF THE PENOBSCOT.

        2. THE YACHT CLUB; OR, THE YOUNG BOAT-BUILDER.

        3. MONEY-MAKER; OR, THE VICTORY OF THE BASILISK.

        4. THE COMING WAVE; OR, THE HIDDEN TREASURE OF HIGH ROCK.

        5. THE DORCAS CLUB; OR, OUR GIRLS AFLOAT.

        (The sixth in preparation.)




PREFACE.


"THE YACHT CLUB" is the second volume of the YACHT CLUB SERIES, to which
it gives a name; and like its predecessor, is an independent story. The
hero has not before appeared, though some of the characters of "LITTLE
BOBTAIL" take part in the incidents: but each volume may be read
understandingly without any knowledge of the contents of the other. In
this story, the interest centres in Don John, the Boat-builder, who is
certainly a very enterprising young man, though his achievements have
been more than paralleled in the domain of actual life.

Like the first volume of the series, the incidents of the story
transpire on the waters of the beautiful Penobscot Bay, and on its
shores. They include several yacht races, which must be more interesting
to those who are engaged in the exciting sport of yachting, than to
others. But the principal incidents are distinct from the aquatic
narrative; and those who are not interested in boats and boating will
find that Don John and Nellie Patterdale do not spend all their time on
the water.

The hero is a young man of high aims and noble purposes: and the writer
believes that it is unpardonable to awaken the interest and sympathy of
his readers for any other than high-minded and well-meaning characters.
But he is not faultless; he makes some grave mistakes, even while he has
high aims. The most important lesson in morals to be derived from his
experience is that it is unwise and dangerous for young people to
conceal their actions from their parents and friends; and that men and
women who seek concealment "choose darkness because their deeds are
evil."

 HARRISON SQUARE, BOSTON,
              May 22, 1873.




CONTENTS.


                                                     PAGE

        CHAPTER I.
        DON JOHN OF BELFAST, AND FRIENDS               11

        CHAPTER II.
        ABOUT THE TIN BOX                              28

        CHAPTER III.
        THE YACHT CLUB AT TURTLE HEAD                  46

        CHAPTER IV.
        A SAD EVENT IN THE RAMSAY FAMILY               63

        CHAPTER V.
        CAPTAIN SHIVERNOCK                             81

        CHAPTER VI.
        DONALD GETS THE JOB                            99

        CHAPTER VII.
        LAYING DOWN THE KEEL.                         117

        CHAPTER VIII.
        THE FIRST REGATTA.                            135

        CHAPTER IX.
        THE SKYLARK AND THE SEA FOAM.                 153

        CHAPTER X.
        THE LAUNCH OF THE MAUD.                       171

        CHAPTER XI.
        THE WHITE CROSS OF DENMARK.                   189

        CHAPTER XII.
        DONALD ANSWERS QUESTIONS.                     207

        CHAPTER XIII.
        MOONLIGHT ON THE JUNO.                        226

        CHAPTER XIV.
        CAPTAIN SHIVERNOCK'S JOKE.                    244

        CHAPTER XV.
        LAUD CAVENDISH TAKES CARE OF HIMSELF.         264

        CHAPTER XVI.
        SATURDAY COVE.                                283

        CHAPTER XVII.
        THE GREAT RACE.                               302

        CHAPTER XVIII.
        THE HASBROOK OUTRAGE, AND OTHER MATTERS.      320




THE YACHT CLUB;

OR,

THE YOUNG BOAT-BUILDER.





CHAPTER I.

DON JOHN OF BELFAST, AND FRIENDS.


"Why, Don John, how you frightened me!" exclaimed Miss Nellie
Patterdale, as she sprang up from her reclining position in a
lolling-chair.

It was an intensely warm day near the close of June, and the young lady
had chosen the coolest and shadiest place she could find on the piazza
of her father's elegant mansion in Belfast. She was as pretty as she was
bright and vivacious, and was a general favorite among the pupils of the
High School, which she attended. She was deeply absorbed in the reading
of a story in one of the July magazines, which had just come from the
post-office, when she heard a step near her. The sound startled her, it
was so near; and, looking up, she discovered the young man whom she had
spoken to close beside her. He was not Don John of Austria, but Donald
John Ramsay of Belfast, who had been addressed by his companions simply
as Don, a natural abbreviation of his first name, until he of Austria
happened to be mentioned in the history recitation in school, when the
whole class looked at Don, and smiled; some of the girls even giggled,
and got a check for it; but the republican young gentleman became a
titular Spanish hidalgo from that moment. Though he was the son of a
boat-builder, by trade a ship carpenter, he was a good-looking, and
gentlemanly fellow, and was treated with kindness and consideration by
most of the sons and daughters of the wealthy men of Belfast, who
attended the High School. It was hardly a secret that Don John regarded
Miss Nellie with especial admiration, or that, while he was polite to
all the young ladies, he was particularly so to her. It is a fact, too,
that he blushed when she turned her startled gaze upon him on the
piazza; and it is just as true that Miss Nellie colored deeply, though
it may have been only the natural consequence of her surprise.

"I beg your pardon, Nellie; I did not mean to frighten you," replied
Donald.

"I don't suppose you did, Don John; but you startled me just as much as
though you had meant it," added she, with a pleasant smile, so forgiving
that the young man had no fear of the consequences. "How terribly hot it
is! I am almost melted."

"It is very warm," answered Donald, who, somehow or other, found it very
difficult to carry on a conversation with Nellie; and his eyes seemed to
him to be twice as serviceable as his tongue.

"It is dreadful warm."

And so they went on repeating the same thing over and over again, till
there was no other known form of expression for warm weather.

"How in the world did you get to the side of my chair without my hearing
you?" demanded Nellie, when it was evidently impossible to say anything
more about the heat.

"I came up the front steps, and was walking around on the piazza to your
father's library. I didn't see you till you spoke," replied Donald,
reminded by this explanation that he had come to Captain Patterdale's
house for a purpose. "Is Ned at home?"

"No; he has gone up to Searsport to stay over Sunday with uncle Henry."

"Has he? I'm sorry. Is your father at home?"

"He is in his library, and there is some one with him. Won't you sit
down, Don John?"

"Thank you," added Donald, seating himself in a rustic chair. "It is
very warm this afternoon."

Nellie actually laughed, for she was conscious of the difficulties of
the situation--more so than her visitor. But we must do our hero--for
such he is--the justice to say, that he did not refer to the exhausted
topic with the intention of confining the conversation to it, but to
introduce the business which had called him to the house.

"It is intensely hot, Don John," laughed Nellie.

"But I was going to ask you if you would not like to take a sail," said
