The Project Gutenberg EBook of Orthography, by Elmer W. Cavins

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Orthography
       As Outlined in the State Course of Study for Illinois

Author: Elmer W. Cavins

Release Date: November 7, 2007 [EBook #23395]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ORTHOGRAPHY ***




Produced by Kevin Handy, John Hagerson, Irma Spehar and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





                              ORTHOGRAPHY
                          AS OUTLINED IN THE
                  STATE COURSE OF STUDY FOR ILLINOIS.

                       SEVENTH AND EIGHTH YEARS.

                          BY ELMER W. CAVINS,
      TEACHER OF ORTHOGRAPHY IN ILLINOIS STATE NORMAL UNIVERSITY.

                 INTRODUCTION BY DR. EDWIN C. HEWETT.

                    SECOND EDITION--JANUARY, 1906.

                      _PUBLISHED BY C. M. PARKER,
                        TAYLORVILLE, ILLINOIS._

                   Copyright, 1904, by C. M. Parker.




                               PREFACE.


This book is prepared for teachers and pupils who use the Illinois
State Course of Study. The outline in Orthography for the Seventh and
Eighth Years is the basis of all that is included herein. Three fifths
or more of this work is word analysis which, valuable as it is,
teachers as a rule are unable to teach without the aid of a text,
never having learned much of it themselves. What, for example, can the
average teacher unaided do toward writing a list of words to be
analyzed which contain the root _ann_, meaning year? He might turn in
the dictionary to _annual_, _anniversary_, and _annuity_, but he must
fall back on his acquired knowledge for such as, _biennial_,
_centennial_, _millennium_, _perennial_, and _superannuate_. And
having the list, very many teachers, as well as pupils, need help in
the analysis.

The aim of this book has been to set down in an orderly and convenient
form such facts as are needed by those who follow the State Course of
Study.

Emphasis has been placed upon word analysis. The author believes that
this has more value in education than is generally attributed to it.
When Mr. Kennedy named his work on word analysis "What Words Say", he
gave it the best possible title. Composite words have a wealth of
meaning; each syllable is significant. And, as a rule, only to those
who can read this significance does the word yield its full meaning.
Accuracy is the mark of a scholar. Accuracy in speech and in the
understanding of speech cannot be attained by those whose knowledge of
words is vague and general. Pupils should early learn how to interpret
_what words say_, and to discriminate carefully in the use of words,
for these are the tools which they are to use in all the various
departments for acquiring knowledge.

Normal, Ill., Aug. 30, 1904. E. W. CAVINS.




                             INTRODUCTION

                        BY DR. EDWIN C. HEWETT.


I have long thought that the careful, discriminating study of words is
much neglected in our schools. And I am glad to approve, and help to
forward, anything that will promote such a study.

Not only will such a study improve a person's language greatly, but it
will, at the same time, do much to improve the clearness and precision
of his thinking; thought and language have a reciprocal effect.

If a child, while young, can be made to be interested in words
themselves,--their origin, their exact meaning, their relations to
each other and some of the changes in their meaning which result from
their use,--he will be likely to retain that interest through life; it
will be more likely to increase than to diminish.

It seems often to be assumed that a student can do nothing profitably
with the study of words made up from Greek and Latin roots till he has
acquired some mastery of those languages. But I know from experience
and much observation that this is not true. Why should it be? Must one
master Greek and Latin before he can understand that, in English
words, _graph_ means write; _ge_ means earth; _phone_ means sound;
_cur_ means run; _fin_ means limit; _port_ means carry, etc.?

And then having learned the meaning of the prefixes and suffixes, is
it preposterous to train him to know the etymological significance of
a few hundred words by showing him how they are built up?

Of course, we know that many words in common use have shades of
meaning quite different from, and in some cases almost opposite to,
their literal significance. But will not the student be better able to
understand these derived meanings by knowing their literal
significance than in any other way? At any rate, I am fully persuaded
that such a study of words as this book proposes can be made very
profitable to those pupils for whose use it is prepared.

The teacher will find, however, that the teaching of this subject will
require much careful labor on his part. The mere learning of the
meaning of prefixes and suffixes and of the roots themselves, with the
brief remarks on the meaning of some of the words, will need to be
supplemented by a careful mastery of it all on his part. And to this
must be added much thought of his own, together with careful research
in the great dictionaries. But to the earnest and intelligent teacher,
such thought and research will yield very rich fruit in his own
thinking, and in his use of English speech.

I cheerfully commend the book as a move in the right direction; and as
adapted, in my opinion, to do much to supply a serious lack in the
present work of the schools.

Normal, Ill., Aug. 18, 1904. E. C. H.




                       SUGGESTIONS TO TEACHERS.


1. From the lists given in this book omit such words as in your
opinion are beyond the vocabulary of your pupils.

2. All words given for the first month's work are either defined or
illustrated below the lists. This is done to help make clear the
method of showing their _literal_ significance. Further along in each
year's work only the most difficult words are explained. Insist that
pupils in every case where it is possible define or illustrate so as
to show the _literal_ meaning, else much of the value of the study is
lost.

And, moreover, the ordinary, or current meaning, _where it differs
from the literal_, should be given. Very many of the words have
various uses. Thorough work requires that these be illustrated. This
necessitates a free use of the dictionary.

It is strongly urged that the pupils (with the aid of the teacher when
necessary) try to find _an appropriate sentence to illustrate each
word_ and write the same in an orderly way in a note book for the
purpose.

In work of this kind a teacher should not underrate the value of
reviews. By this means fix facts on the minds of your pupils,
especially the meanings of roots and prefixes. Since these meanings
are given in a single word, reviews may proceed rapidly.

One convenient method of recitation in this subject is to send pupils
to the blackboard without their books, assign them by turns words to
be analyzed according to the examples given under "Directions to
Pupils", and then let each pupil read to the class what he has written
on the board.




                         DIRECTIONS TO PUPILS.


Given in the seventh and eighth years' work of the State Course of
Study are 45 prefixes, 64 roots, and 33 suffixes,--in all 142 elements
or component parts of words. In this book a list of words is furnished
to illustrate each element, the average number of words in each list
being about eleven, and the total number of different words analyzed,
or partially analyzed, is over 1200.


                          TO ANALYZE A WORD.

1. Name its component parts--root, prefix, and suffix--and give the
literal meaning of each.

2. Combine these meanings in a definition, _supplying additional words
if necessary_, to make the sense complete. In exceptional cases,
however, the exact literal meanings of the parts cannot be put
together in a good definition. One or more of the parts must then be
omitted entirely, or represented by words which are not exactly
literal.

3. Give an illustration of the use of the word.

(Caution: Carefully distinguish verbs, adjectives and nouns. Do not
define adjectives as nouns or verbs, or vice versa. Do not, for
illustration, say _audible_ is _that which_ can be _heard_; but rather
say _audible_ means _capable of_ being _heard_.)


                               EXAMPLES.

avert: (1) _a_, away + _vert_, turn.
       (2) To _turn away_; to ward off.
       (3) The evils which exist are necessary to _avert_ greater evils.

deify: (1) _dei_, god + _fy_, to make.
       (2) To _make_ a _god_ of; to praise and revere as if a deity.
       (3) The people of India _deify_ the Ganges River.

hostile: (1)_host_, enemy + _ile_, belonging to.
         (2) _Belonging to_ or having the characteristics of an _enemy_.
         (3) Yon tower which rears its head so high invites the
             _hostile_ winds.

portable: (1) _port_, carry + _able_, capable of.
          (2) _capable of_ being _carried_ or moved from place to place;
              not stationary.
          (3) A _portable_ photograph gallery stopped for three
              days at the cross-roads near my home.

benefactor: (1) _bene_, good + _fact_, make, do + _or_, one who.
            (2) _One who does good_; especially one who makes a
                charitable donation.
            (3) "He is a true _benefactor_ and alone worthy of honor who
                brings comfort where before was wretchedness, who dries
                the tear of sorrow."

A careful study of the five examples given above will reveal that to
analyze words a pupil must--

1. Learn some _facts_--meanings of the component parts of words.

2. Be careful in putting these facts together to make a sensible
definition.

3. Use the dictionary to find the ordinary, or current, use of a word.

4. Gather illustrations. This is not easy, but it should not be
neglected, for it is the most practical feature of word analysis.
Pupils should help each other, and the teacher may contribute when his
help is needed. One good illustration for a difficult word might
suffice the entire class.




                               PART ONE

                            Word Analysis.

                             SEVENTH YEAR.


                             FIRST MONTH.


#a, ab, abs# = from, away.

1. a _vert_, turn
2. ab _brevi_ ate, short
3. ab _duct_, lead
4. ab _ject_, cast
5. ab _lut_ ion, wash
6. ab _origin_ es, beginning
7. ab _rupt_, break
8. ab _sorb_, suck in
9. ab _solve_, loosen
10. ab _use_, use.

2. To _shorten_, to take _from_; to make briefer.

3. To _lead away_; to carry off by force; to kidnap.

4. An _abject_ person is one sunk to low condition (as if _cast from_
the society of others).

5. An _ablution_ is a _washing_ or _cleansing_; especially a religious
rite.

6. The inhabitants of a country _from_ the _beginning_. The earliest
inhabitants of which anything is known.

7. _Broken_ or appearing as if broken _away_ or off; as an _abrupt_
cliff.

8. To _suck_ up; to drink in. A brick will _absorb_ a pint of water.

9. To _loosen_ or set free, as _from_ some duty or obligation

10. To divert _from_ the proper _use_; to misuse.


#ambi, (amphi)# = both, on both sides, around.

1. ambi _dextr_ ous, right hand
2. ambi _ti_ on, go
3. amphi _bi_ ous, life
4. amphi _theatre_, view.

1. _Having_ skill with _both_ hands (as if both were _right hands_).

2. A _going around_ or about, as of a candidate soliciting votes;
eager for favors; strongly desirous.
