The Project Gutenberg EBook of Under the Waves, by R M Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Under the Waves
       Diving in Deep Waters

Author: R M Ballantyne

Illustrator: Pearson

Release Date: November 15, 2007 [EBook #23493]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UNDER THE WAVES ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Under the Waves; or, Diving in Deep Waters, by R.M.Ballantyne.

________________________________________________________________________

This was a very difficult book to obtain.  There was a copy in the
British Library, and another one in a Library in Dartmouth, Devon.  For
several years I tried at least weekly to find a copy via Abebooks or
eBay, with no success.  The copy belonging to the Ballantyne family had
disappeared, not to put too fine a point on it.  Eventually a kind
family in Canada offered to scan the pages of their copy, and send the
images to me, and this is the result.

Ballantyne did indeed try out some diving equipment, so as to obtain a
first-hand feel for diving. It is related that something went wrong, too
much air was sent down, and he surfaced rapidly upside down.  A similar
episode is related in the book.

Ballantyne's style often gives rise to two or even three stories
continuing simultaneously, and here we have the adventures of one Rooney
Machowl, an Irishman who decides to move from his ship's carpenter trade
to that of diving.  In fact divers should always have another trade, or
they wouldn't be much use under the water.  In addition there is the
aspiration of Edgar Berrington to win the hand of a fair young lady,
there are the events happening to the young lady's father, and then
again the events happening to the young lady's companion.  So it is all
fairly convoluted.  But you'll certainly learn a lot about diving, as
the art stood in 1876.  It is rather strange that Ballantyne, having
written this book, which ran to several printings, did not much mention
diving in any other of his books.

________________________________________________________________________

UNDER THE WAVES; OR, DIVING IN DEEP WATERS, BY R.M.BALLANTYNE.


PREFACE.

This tale makes no claim to the character of an exhaustive illustration
of all that belongs to the art of diving.  It merely deals with the most
important points, and some of the most interesting incidents connected
therewith.  In writing it I have sought carefully to exhibit the true
and to ignore the false or improbable.

I have to acknowledge myself indebted to the well-known submarine
engineers Messrs. Siebe and Gorman, and Messrs. Heinke and Davis, of
London, for much valuable information; and to Messrs. Denayrouze, of
Paris, for permitting me to go under water in one of their
diving-dresses.  Also--among many others--to Captain John Hewat,
formerly Commander in the service of the Rajah of Sarawak, for much
interesting material respecting the pirates of the Eastern Seas.

R.M.B.  Edinburgh, 1876.



CHAPTER ONE.

INTRODUCES OUR HERO, ONE OF HIS ADVISERS, AND SOME OF HIS DIFFICULTIES.

"So, sir, it seems that you've set your heart on learning something of
everything?"

The man who said this was a tall and rugged professional diver.  He to
whom it was said was Edgar Berrington, our hero, a strapping youth of
twenty-one.

"Well--yes, I have set my heart upon something of that sort, Baldwin,"
answered the youth.  "You see, I hold that an engineer ought to be
practically acquainted, more or less, with everything that bears, even
remotely, on his profession; therefore I have come to you for some
instruction in the noble art of diving."

"You've come to the right shop, Mister Edgar," replied Baldwin, with a
gratified look.  "I taught you to swim when you wasn't much bigger than
a marlinespike, an' to make boats a'most before you could handle a
clasp-knife without cuttin' your fingers, an' now that you've come to
man's estate nothin'll please me more than to make a diver of you.
But," continued Baldwin, while a shade clouded his wrinkled and
weatherbeaten visage, "I can't let you go down in the dress without
leave.  I'm under authority, you know, and durstn't overstep--"

"Don't let that trouble you," interrupted his companion, drawing a
letter from his pocket; "I had anticipated that difficulty, and wrote to
your employers.  Here is their answer, granting me permission to use
their dresses."

"All right, sir," said Baldwin, returning the letter without looking at
it; "I'll take your word for it, sir, as it's not much in my line to
make out the meanin' o' pot-hooks and hangers.--Now, then, when will you
have your first lesson?"

"The sooner the better."

"Just so," said the diver, looking about him with a thoughtful air.

The apartment in which the man and the youth conversed was a species of
out-house or lumber-room which had been selected by Baldwin for the
stowing away of his diving apparatus and stores while these were not in
use at the new pier which was in process of erection in the neighbouring
harbour.  Its floor was littered with snaky coils of india-rubber
tubing; enormous boots with leaden soles upwards of an inch thick;
several diving helmets, two of which were of brightly polished metal,
while the others were more or less battered, dulled, and dinted by hard
service in the deep.  The walls were adorned with large damp
india-rubber dresses, which suggested the idea of baby-giants who had
fallen into the water and been sent off to bed while their costumes were
hung up to dry.  In one corner lay several of the massive breast and
back weights by which divers manage to sink themselves to the bottom of
the sea; in another stood the chest containing the air-pump by means of
which they are enabled to maintain themselves alive in that
uncomfortable position; while in a third and very dark corner, an old
worn-out helmet, catching a gleam from the solitary window by which the
place was insufficiently lighted, seemed to glare enviously out of its
goggle-eyes at its glittering successors.  Altogether, what with the
strange spectral objects and the dim light, there was something weird in
the aspect of the place, that accorded well with the spirit of young
Berrington, who, being a hero and twenty-one, was naturally romantic.

But let us pause here to assert that he was also practical--eminently
so.  Practicality is compatible with romance as well as with rascality.
If we be right in holding that romance is gushing enthusiasm, then are
we entitled to hold that many methodical and practical men have been,
are, and ever will be, romantic.  Time sobers their enthusiasm a little,
no doubt, but does by no means abate it, unless the object on which it
is expended be unworthy.

Recovering from his thoughtful air, and repeating "Just so," the diver
added, "Well, I suppose we'd better begin wi' them 'ere odds an' ends
about us."

"Not so," returned the youth quickly; "I have often seen the apparatus,
and am quite familiar with it.  Let us rather go to the pier at once.
I'm anxious to go down."

"Ah!  Mister Edgar--hasty as usual," said Baldwin, shaking his head
slowly.  "It's two years since I last saw you, and I _had_ hoped to find
that time had quieted you a bit, but--.  Well, well--now, look here: you
think you've seen all my apparatus, an' know all about it?"

"Not exactly all," returned the youth, with a smile; "but you know I've
often been in this store of yours, and heard you enlarge on most if not
all of the things in it."

"Yes--most, but not _all_, that's where it lies, sir.  You've often seen
Siebe and Gorman's dresses, but did you ever see this helmet made by
Heinke and Davis?"

"No, I don't think I ever did."

"Or that noo helmet wi' the speakin'-toobe made by Denayrouze and
Company, an' this dress made by the same?"

"No, I've seen none of these things, and certainly this is the first
time I have heard of a speaking-tube for divers."

"Well then, you see, Mister Edgar, you have something to larn here after
all; among other things, that Denayrouze's is _not_ the first
speakin'-toobe," said Baldwin, who thereupon proceeded with the most
impressive manner and earnest voice to explain minutely to his no less
earnest pupil the various clever contrivances by which the several
makers sought to render their apparatus perfect.

With all this, however, we will not trouble the reader, but proceed at
once to the port, where diving operations were being carried on in
connection with repairs to the breakwater.

On their way thither the diver and his young companion continued their
conversation.

"Which of the various dresses do you think the best?" asked Edgar.

"I don't know," answered Baldwin.

"Ah, then you are not bigotedly attached to that of your employer--like
some of your fraternity with whom I have conversed?"

"I _am_ attached to Siebe and Gorman's dress," returned Baldwin, "but I
am no bigot.  I believe in every thing and every creature having good
and bad points.  The dress I wear and the apparatus I work seem to me as
near perfection as may be, but I've lived too long in this world to
suppose nobody can improve on 'em.  I've heard men who go down in the
dresses of other makers praise 'em just as much as I do mine, an' maybe
with as good reason.  I believe 'em all to be serviceable.  When I've
had more experience of 'em I'll be able to say which I think the best.--
I've got a noo hand on to-day," continued Baldwin, "an' as he's goin'
down this afternoon for the first time, so you've come at a good time.
He's a smart young man, but I'm not very hopeful of him, for he's an
Irishman."

"Come, old fellow," said Edgar, with a laugh, "mind what you say about
Irishmen.  I've got a dash of Irish blood in me through my mother, and
won't hear her countrymen spoken of with disrespect.  Why should not an
Irishman make a good diver?"

"Because he's too excitable, as a rule," replied Baldwin.  "You see,
Mister Edgar, it takes a cool, quiet, collected sort of man to make a
good diver, and Irishmen ain't so cool as I should wish.  Englishmen are
better, but the best of all are Scotchmen.  Give me a good, heavy,
raw-boned lump of a Scotchman, who'll believe nothin' till he's
convinced, and accept nothin' till it's proved, who'll argue with a
stone wall, if he's got nobody else to dispute with, in that slow sedate
humdrum way that drives everybody wild but himself, who's got an amazin'
conscience, but no nerves whatever to speak of--ah, that's the man to go
under water, an' crawl about by the hour among mud and wreckage without
gittin' excited or makin' a fuss about it if he should get his life-line
or air-toobe entangled among iron bolts, smashed-up timbers, twisted
wire-ropes, or such like."

"Scotchmen should feel complimented by your opinion of them," said
Edgar.

"So they should, for I mean it," replied Baldwin, "but I hope the
Irishman will turn up a trump this time.--May I take the liberty of
askin' how you're gittin' on wi' the engineering, Mister Edgar?"

"Oh, famously.  That is to say, I've just finished my engagement with
the firm of Steel, Bolt, Hardy, and Company, and am now on the point of
going to sea."

Baldwin looked at his companion in surprise.  "Going to sea!" he
repeated, "why, I thought you didn't like the sea?"

"You thought right, Baldwin, but men are sometimes under the necessity
of submitting to what they don't like.  I have no love for the sea,
except, indeed, as a beautiful object to be admired from the shore, but,
you see, I want to finish my education by going a voyage as one of the
subordinate engineers in an ocean-steamer, so as to get some practical
acquaintance with marine engineering.  Besides, I have taken a fancy to
see something of foreign parts before settling down vigorously to my
profession, and--"

"Well?" said Baldwin, as the youth made rather a long pause.

"Can you keep a secret, Baldwin, and give advice to a fellow who stands
sorely in need of it?"

The youth said this so earnestly that the huge diver, who was a
sympathetic soul, declared with much fervour that he could do both.

"You must know, then," began Edgar with some hesitation, "the fact is--
you're such an old friend, Baldwin, and took such care of me when I was
a boy up to that sad time when I lost my father, and you lost an
employer--"

"Ay, the best master I ever had," interrupted the diver.

"That--that I think I may trust you; in short, Baldwin, I'm over head
and ears with a young girl, and--and--"

"An' your love ain't requited--eh?" said Baldwin interrogatively, while
his weatherbeaten face elongated.

"No, not exactly that," rejoined Edgar, with a laugh.  "Aileen loves me
almost, I believe, as well as I love her, but her father is dead against
us.  He scorns me because I am not a man of wealth."

"What is _he_?" demanded Baldwin.

"A rich China merchant."

"He's more than that," said Baldwin.

"Indeed!" said Edgar, with a surprised look; "what more is he?"

"He's a goose!" returned the diver stoutly.

"Don't be too hard on him, Baldwin.  Remember, I hope some day to call
him father-in-law.  But why do you hold so low an opinion of him?"

"Why, because he forgets that riches may, and often do, take to
themselves wings and fly away, whereas broad shoulders, and deep chest,
and sound limbs, and a good brain, usually last the better part of a
lifetime; and a brave heart will last for ever."

"I am afraid that I have yet to prove, to myself as well as to the old
gentleman, that the brave heart is mine," returned Edgar.  "As to the
physique--you may be so far right, but he evidently undervalues that."

"I said nothing about physic," returned Baldwin, who still frowned as he
thought of the China merchant, "and the less that you and I have to do
wi' that the better.  But what are you goin' to do, sir?"

"That is just the point on which I want to have your advice.  What ought
I to do?"

"Don't run away with her, whatever you do," said Baldwin emphatically.

The youth laughed slightly as he explained that there was no chance
whatever of his doing that, because Aileen would never consent to run
away or to disobey her father.

"Good--good," said the diver, with still greater emphasis than before,
"I like that.  The gal that would sacrifice herself and her lover sooner
than disobey her father--even though he is a goose--is made o' the right
stuff.  If it's not takin' too great a liberty, Mister Edgar, may I ask
what she's like?"

"What she's like--eh?" murmured the other, dropping his head as if in
reverie, and stroking the dark shadow on his chin which was beginning to
do duty for a beard.  "Why, she--she's like nothing that I ever saw on
earth before."

"No!" ejaculated Baldwin, elevating his eyebrows a little, as he said
gravely, "what, not even like an angel?"

"Well, yes; but even that does not sufficiently describe her.  She's
fair,"--he waxed enthusiastic here,--"surpassingly fair, with wavy
golden tresses and blue eyes, and a bright complexion and a winning
voice, and a sylph-like figure and a thinnish but remarkably pretty
face--"

"Ah!" interrupted Baldwin, with a sigh, "I know: just like my missus."

"Why, my good fellow," cried Edgar, unable to restrain a fit of
laughter, "I do not wish to deny the good looks of Mrs Baldwin, but you
know that she's uncommonly ruddy and fat and heavy, as well as fair."

"Ay, an' forty, if you come to that," said the diver.  "She's fourteen
stun if she's an ounce; but let me tell you, Mister Edgar, she wasn't
always heavy.  There _was_ a time when my Susan was as trim and taut and
clipper-built as any Aileen that ever was born."

"I have no doubt of it whatever," returned the youth, "but I was going
to say, when you interrupted me, it is her eyes that are her strong
point--her deep, liquid, melting blue eyes, that look at you so
