Project Gutenberg's Quadrupeds, What They Are and Where Found, by Mayne Reid

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Quadrupeds, What They Are and Where Found
       A Book of Zoology for Boys

Author: Mayne Reid

Illustrator: William Harvey

Release Date: November 21, 2007 [EBook #23576]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK QUADRUPEDS, WHAT THEY ARE ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Quadrupeds, what they are and where found, by Captain Mayne Reid.

________________________________________________________________________
This is a fairly short book, but it certainly hits the spot, for its aim
is to inform young people about the four-legged animals of our planet,
and this it does very competently.

Of course there is no reason why young ladies should not read this book:
I am sure they would enjoy this just as much Reid's target readership,
which was boys.

There are 24 chapters, each dealing with a kind of animal.  Sometimes an
animal genus is given two chapters, for instance domestic dogs, and wild
dogs.  One grouse: the phrase "well-known" occurs over forty times.
Would the "well-known" fact be well-known to the book's intended
readership?  Probably not.

There are a score of very nice illustrations, most showing numerous
animals of that chapter's genus.

________________________________________________________________________
QUADRUPEDS, WHAT THEY ARE AND WHERE FOUND, BY CAPTAIN MAYNE REID.



PREFACE.

I have been called upon to write illustrative sketches to a series of
engravings, designed by an eminent artist.  In performing my part of the
work I have thrown the _Mammalia_ into twenty-four groups--corresponding
more or less to the picture designs--and have dwelt chiefly on the
geographical distribution of the animals.  The _Cetaceae_ and
_Vespertilionidae_ are properly omitted.

In the groups given there is no attempt made at any very scientific
arrangement.  The sketches are purely of a popular character, even the
scientific nomenclature being avoided.  It is hoped, however, that they
may prove of service to the zoological tyro, and form as it were his
first stepping-stone to a higher order of classification.

In reality, notwithstanding the prodigious _speculations_ of learned
anatomists, no truly good arrangement of the _Mammalia_ has yet been
arrived at; the deficiency arising from the fact that, as yet, no true
zoologist has had the opportunity of a sufficiently extended observation
of the natural habits of animals.

Now, however, that the great agent--steam--has as it were "brought the
ends of the earth together," the opportunity is no longer wanting; and
it is to be hoped that a better classification may soon be obtained.
Who knows but that some ardent young zoologist, who has taken his first
lessons from this little book, may be the man to supply the desideratum?
Who knows?

Such a result would be a proud triumph for the author of these
monographic sketches.

Mayne Reid.



CHAPTER ONE.

MONKEYS OF THE OLD WORLD.

The great family of the Monkeys, or the "Monkey tribe," as it is usually
called, is divided by naturalists into two large groups--the "Monkeys of
the Old World," or those that inhabit Africa, Asia, and the Asiatic
islands; and the "Monkeys of the New World," or those that belong to
America.  This classification is neither scientific nor natural, but as
it serves to simplify the study of these quadrupeds--or _quadrumana_, as
they are termed--it is here retained.  Moreover, as there is no genus of
monkey, nor even a species, common to both hemispheres, such a division
can do no harm.

The number of species of these animals, both in the Old and New Worlds,
is so great, that to give a particular description of each would fill a
large volume.  It will be only possible in this sketch to point out the
countries they inhabit, and to say a word or two of the more remarkable
kinds.

In point of precedence, the great _Ourang-outang_ contests the palm with
the _Chimpanzee_.  Both these creatures often attain the size of an
ordinary man, and individuals of both have been captured exceeding this
size; while, at the same time, in muscular strength, one of them is
supposed to equal seven or eight men.  It is remarkable how little is
known of the habits of either.  This is accounted for by the fact that
they both inhabit regions still unexplored by civilised man, dwelling in
thick impenetrable forests, where even the savage himself rarely
penetrates.

Although many exaggerated stories are told of these great satyr apes,
and many of these are only "sailors' yarns," yet it is easy to believe
that animals approaching in structure, and even in intelligence, to man
himself, must possess habits of the most singular kind.  There is little
more known of them than there was hundreds of years ago--indeed, we
might say thousands of years; for it is evident that the Carthaginians
came into contact with the chimpanzee on the western coast of Africa,
and through them the Romans became acquainted with it; and no doubt it
was this animal that gave origin to most of their stories of satyrs and
wild men of the woods.

The chimpanzee is found only in the forests of tropical Africa--more
especially along the west coast, the banks of the Gaboon, and other
rivers.  The ourang-outang is exclusively Asiatic--inhabiting Borneo,
Sumatra, the peninsula of Malacca, Cochin China, and several others of
the large Oriental islands.  Of the ourang-outang there are two
species--perhaps three--differing very little, except in point of size
and colour.

A group of large tail-less apes, usually denominated _Gibbons_, or
Long-armed Apes, come next in order.  These are neither so large nor
human-like as the ourang or the chimpanzee; nevertheless, they are
capable of walking upon their hind legs, after the manner of bipeds.
They are all long-armed apes, and generally use their fore-arms in
walking, but more to assist them in clinging to the branches of trees,
and swinging themselves from one to the other.

The gibbons are all Asiatic monkeys, and inhabit the same countries with
the ourang, viz., the tropical forests of India and the Indian
Archipelago.  There are at least a dozen species of them, nearly half of
which are found in the Island of Sumatra alone.

The _Proboscis_ monkeys follow the gibbons.  These are also long-armed
apes, but with tails and sharp proboscis-like snouts, from which their
name is derived.  Only two species are known--both belonging to the
great Island of Borneo, so rich in varieties of these human-like
mammalia.  One of the species of proboscis monkeys has also been
observed in Cochin China.  Another large tribe of Asiatic apes,
containing in all nearly twenty different species, has been constituted
into a genus called _Semnopithecus_.  These also inhabit the Indian
continent and the great islands; but they are not so exclusively
tropical in their habits, since several of the species extend their
range northward to Nepaul, and other districts among the Himalaya
Mountains.  It is a species, or more than one, of these ugly apes that
is venerated by the Hindus; and they are permitted to live without
molestation in the sacred groves and temples, though they often prove
most troublesome protegees to their fanatical benefactors.

In Africa, the representatives of this last-mentioned tribe are found in
the _Colobus_ monkeys.  Of these there are about a dozen species; and
from several of them are obtained the long-haired monkey skins of
commerce.  They are all tropical animals, and inhabit the middle zone of
Africa--their range extending from Abyssinia to the shores of the
Atlantic.

Another very large tribe, containing in all as many as thirty species,
and belonging exclusively to Africa, are the _Guenons_.  They are
closely allied to the colobus monkeys, but yet sufficiently different
from them in habits and conformation to be classed into a separate
genus.  Most of the guenons inhabit the central regions of Africa; but
they are not exclusively tropical, since several kinds belong to
Kaffraria, and that region indefinitely called the Cape of Good Hope.

The _Macaco_ apes constitute another genus, which forms the link between
the guenons and the baboons, or dog-headed monkeys.  They are neither
exclusively African nor Asiatic monkeys, since species of macacoes are
found in both these continents.  They are usually subdivided into the
macacoes with long tails, and those with short tails; and there is one
species which wants this appendage altogether.  This is the Magot--
perhaps the most noted of all the macacoes, since it was the earliest
known to European nations, and is, in fact, the only species that is
indigenous to Europe.  It is the magot that inhabits the Rock of
Gibraltar.  Much has been written as to whether this monkey is really
indigenous to Europe--some naturalists alleging that it reached
Gibraltar from Africa, where it is also common.  But it is not generally
known that, on European ground, the magot is not confined solely to the
Gibraltar Rock.  It is also found in other parts of the south of Spain;
and, it is likely enough, has existed there long enough to claim the
character of a native.

In the chain of natural affinities, the _Baboons_, or dog-headed
monkeys, stand next to the macacoes.  These are more of a quadruped form
than any yet mentioned; and, both in a moral and physical sense, they
are certainly the ugliest of animals.  The hideous Drills and Mandrills,
so well-known in our menageries, belong to this genus; as also the
Chacma, or great dog-monkey of the Cape.

There are, in all, seven or eight species of baboons, and most of them
inhabit Africa.  One of the most singular of them, the Hamadryas,
extends its range into Arabia; while another, the Black Baboon, is an
inhabitant of the Philippine Isles.

With the baboons we close our list of the Monkeys of the Old World; but,
in order to complete the account of these quadruped mammalia, it is
necessary to find a place for those strange creatures usually known as
Lemurs.  These are usually grouped by themselves, and in a
classification succeed the American monkeys--to some of which they have
a greater resemblance than to those of the Old World; but, as they are
all exclusively inhabitants of the latter, they may appropriately be
noticed here.

The _Lemurs_ are animals having very much the appearance and habits of
monkeys, but with long snouts or muzzles, resembling that of the fox.
Hence they are sometimes called fox-apes.  There are many kinds of them,
however; and, although classed in a group called lemurs, they differ
exceedingly from one another, some of them having the appearance of
foxes, others more resembling squirrels, and still others like flying
squirrels--being possessed of a similar wing-like appendage, and
capable, like them, of extended flight.  They are known under different
appellations, as Makis, Indris, Loris, Galagos, Tarsiers, Ay-ays,
etcetera, and naturalists have subdivided them into a great number of
genera.  They are found both in Africa and Asia; but by far the greater
number of them, as the Makis and Ay-ays, belong to the Island of
Madagascar.  The last are not to be confounded with an animal bearing
the same name--the ay-ay of America.  The latter is the singular
creature known as the sloth, of which there are several distinct
species, all inhabitants of the great forests of tropical America.

Of the lemurs, at least thirty different kinds are known, more than half
of which belong to the Island of Madagascar.  A few species are found on
the west coast of Africa: and the others inhabit the Oriental islands--
Ceylon, Java, Sumatra, Timor, Mindanao, and the Philippine Archipelago.



CHAPTER TWO.

MONKEYS OF THE NEW WORLD.

The Monkeys of America differ in many respects from those of the Old
World.  In general they are smaller--none of the species being quite so
large as the baboons.  Their bodies and limbs are also more slender and
spider-like; and their whole conformation seems intended to adapt them
for dwelling in the great virgin forests of the New World.  There is one
particular in which they differ most remarkably from their congeners of
the Old World; that is, in having _prehensile_ tails.  With these they
are enabled to suspend themselves from the branches of trees, or swing
their bodies from one to the other; and this prehensile power is far
greater than could be obtained by any clutch of the hand.  So great is
it, that even after the animal has died from the effect of a shot or
other wound, its tail will still remain hooped around the branch; and if
the body is not taken down by the hunter, it will hang there till
released by the decay of the tail!

Not all the monkeys of America possess this prehensile power of tail.
Some are entirely without it, and approach nearer to certain kinds in
the Old World; while there are a few species that very closely resemble
the lemurs.  These differences have led to a classification of the
American monkeys; and they have been thrown into three groups, though it
may be remarked that these groups are not very natural.

They are as follow:--The _Sapajous_, whose tails are not only
prehensile, but naked underneath, and tubercled near the tips; the
_Sajoas_, who possess the prehensile power, but have hairy tails; and
the _Sajouins_, whose tails are _not_ prehensile.

For want of a better, this classification may be adopted.

The Sapajous are subdivided into three genera, of which the Howlers form
one.  They are so denominated from their habit of assembling in troops,
and uttering the most terrible howlings, so loud that the forest is
filled with their sonorous voices.  Their cries can be heard at a
half-league's distance, and produce upon a stranger unaccustomed to such
sounds a very disagreeable impression.  The unusual strength of voice is
accounted for by a peculiar drum-like construction of the _os hyoides_,
common to all the genera of Sapajous, but more developed in some than in
others; and those in whom the voice is loudest constitute the genus of
_Alouatles_, or Howlers.

Of the true howlers there are about a dozen species known to
naturalists.  Most of them are denizens of the tropical forests of
Guiana and Brazil; but some species are not so tropical in their habits,
since one or two extend the kingdom of the monkeys into Mexico on the
north, and southward to Paraguay.

Closely allied to the last, are the _Ateles_, or Spider monkeys.  These
derive their generic name from their singular spider-like appearance--
caused by their disproportionately long and slender limbs, and the great
length of their tails.  None equal them in the prehensile power of the
caudal appendage; and it is of them that that curious story is related--
the story of the Monkeys' Bridge--where it is told how they pass over a
stream: a number of the strongest joining their bodies together by means
of their long tails, and thus forming a bridge, by which the whole troop
are enabled to cross.

Of the spider monkeys there are about a dozen species; but three of
these have been taken to form one of the three genera into which, as
already stated, the Sapajous are divided.  These three differ very
little from the other spider monkeys, except in being covered with a
soft, woolly hair; and, furthermore, in being much more rare than the
others; at all events, they are more rarely seen, as they dwell only in
the thickest forests, far remote from the habitations of man.

The third and last genus of the Sapajous is that termed _Lagothrix_.
They are small monkeys, covered also with soft woolly hair; and their
habitat is along the banks of rivers.  They have a strange habit, not
observable among their congeners, of collecting in small troops, and
rolling or "clewing" themselves up together.  This they do in cold
weather, or on the approach of a storm.  They summon each other by means
of signals and cries; and selecting the convenient bifurcation of some
tree, they there form the singular group.  The jaguar and other beasts
of prey take advantage of this habit, and often make victims of the
whole _tableau vivant_!  There are three species already described, all
denizens of the Brazilian forests.

The Sajous form the second group of the American monkeys.  These have
also prehensile tails; but the power is not so highly-developed in them
as in the Sapajous, nor are their tails naked.  Moreover, the bodies of
the Sajous are more robust, and their limbs of stouter make.

The Sajous are well-tempered creatures, and easily domesticated.  Some
of the species are favourite pets--on account of their pleasing manners,
and the docility of their nature.  The old males, however, scarcely
deserve this reputation, as they will bite freely enough when provoked.

They are not subdivided; but permitted to constitute a single genus, of
which there are nearly twenty species--all of them inhabiting equatorial
America.

The Sajouins form the third group; but as the name merely signifies
those monkeys that have not the power of suspending themselves by the
tail, it can hardly be considered a natural group, since there are very
varied and numerous genera who lack this power.  The group of Sajouins
must therefore be subdivided into several lesser groups.

First of all we have the true Sajouins; and of these the _Saimiri_ or
_Titi_ is the most distinguished species.  This pretty little creature
is about equal in size to a squirrel, and possesses all the playful
disposition of the latter.  Its childlike innocence of countenance, as
well as its pleasing and graceful manners, render it a favourite pet
wherever it can be obtained.  Its rich robe of yellowish-grey, mixed
with green, adds to the attraction of its presence.  There are several
species of Sajouins, known as the Widow monkey, the Moloch, the Mitred
monkey, and the Black-handed Sajouin--all of them dwellers in the
tropical regions of America.  The Doroucouli is another small species,
that in the nocturnal forest often alarms the traveller by its singular
cry; and an allied species of Doroucouli constitutes, with the one
above-mentioned, a second genus of the Sajouins.

The _Sakis_ form of themselves another and somewhat extensive family of
the Sajouins.  There are a dozen species of them in all; and they
possess the peculiarity of being insect-eaters.  They are fond of honey,
too; and are often seen ranging the woods, in little troops of ten or
twelve, in search of the nests of the wild bees, which they plunder of
their luscious stores.

The _Ouistitis_ also constitute a genus.  These, like the Saimiris, are
beautiful little creatures--many of the species not being larger than
squirrels, and marked with the most lively colours: as bright red and
orange.  There are many different kinds of small squirrels known by this
name, or by its abbreviation--Titi--some of them belonging to the group
of Saimiris, and others to the Ouistitis, properly so called.

Last of all come the little Tamunus; some of which, in beauty of
colours, in playfulness of disposition, and other amiable qualities,
need not yield either to the Saimiris or Ouistitis.  They are equally
prized as pets; and among their Creole owners have equally applied to
them the endearing appellation of Titi-titi.

Quadrupeds, what they are and where found--by Captain Mayne Reid



CHAPTER THREE.

BEARS.

In the days of Linnaeus--that is, a century and a half ago--it was
supposed there was only one kind of Bear in existence--the common Brown
bear of Europe.  It is true that Linnaeus before his death had heard of
the great Polar bear, but he had never seen one, and was not certain of
its being a distinct species.  Not only has the Polar bear proved to be
a very different animal from his brown congener, but other species have
turned up in remote quarters of the globe: until the list of these
interesting quadrupeds has been extended to the number of at least a
dozen distinct species--differing not only in size, shape, and colour,
but also in many more essential characteristics.  Bears have been found
in North America, and others in South America; some in Asia, and still
others in the islands of the Indian Archipelago; entirely unlike the
brown bear of Europe, as they are to one another.

As the _Brown bear_ is the oldest of the family known to naturalists, I
shall give him the precedence in this little monograph.

It is a misnomer to call him the brown bear of Europe, since he is even
more common in many parts of Asia--especially throughout Asiatic Russia
and Kamtschatka.  But he is also met with in most European countries,
where there are extensive ranges of mountains.  In the mountains of
Hungary and Transylvania--as well as in those of Russia, Sweden, and
Norway--the brown bear is found.  He is also met with as far south as
the Alps--and even the Pyrenees, and Asturias, mountains of Spain; but
the bear of these last-mentioned localities differs considerably from
the real brown bear of the northern regions; and most probably is a
different species.

Again, in North America--in a very remote and sterile region lying to
the westward of Hudson's Bay, and known as the Barren Grounds--a large
brown bear has been observed by travellers and traders of the Fur
Company, supposed to be identical with the European bear.  This,
however, is a doubtful point; and in all likelihood the bear of the
Barren Grounds is a new species, only found in that desolate region.

The brown bear is of solitary habits.  During the summer season he roams
about, growing fat upon roots, fruits, seeds, and wild honey--when he
can procure it.  At the approach of winter this animal has the singular
habit of returning to his den, and there remaining dormant or torpid
throughout the season of cold.  During this prolonged slumber he takes
no sustenance of any kind; and although exceedingly fat when going to
rest, he comes forth in the spring-time as thin as a skeleton.  The den
is usually a cave or hollow tree; or, failing this, a _lair_, which the
animal constructs for himself out of branches, lining it snugly with
leaves and moss.

The brown bear is a long-lived animal.  Individuals have been known of
the age of fifty years.  The cubs when first born are not much larger
than the puppies of a mastiff.  The people of Kamtschatka hunt this
species with great assiduity, and obtain from it many of the comforts
and necessaries of life.  The skins are used for their beds and
coverlets, for their caps, gloves, and boots.  They manufacture from it
harness for their dogs.  From the intestines they make masks for their
faces, to protect them from the glare of the sun; and they also use the
latter stretched over their windows as a substitute for glass.  The
flesh and fat are among the most esteemed dainties of a Kamtschatkan
_cuisine_.  Even the shoulder-blades are used as sickles for cutting
grass.  The Laplanders, also--of whose cold country the brown bear is an
inhabitant--have a great esteem for this animal.  They regard its
prowess as something wonderful, alleging that it has the strength of ten
men, and the sense of twelve!  The name for it, in their language,
signifies the dog of God.

The _White_, or _Polar bear_, is, perhaps, the most interesting of the
whole family: not so much on account of his superior size--since the
brown and the grizzly are sometimes as large as he--but rather from his
singular habits, and the many odd stories told about him, dining the
last fifty years, by whalers and Arctic explorers.

To describe the appearance of the Polar bear would be superfluous.
Everybody has seen either a living individual in a menagerie, or a
stuffed skin of one in a museum; and the long, low, tail-less body--with
outstretched neck and sharp projecting snout--covered with a thick coat
of white hair, renders it impossible to mistake the Polar bear for any
other animal.

This quadruped is more of a _sea_ than _land_ animal.  Sometimes, it is
true, he wanders inland for fifty miles or so; but this he does in
following the course of some river or marshy inlet, where he finds fish.
His usual haunts are along the icy shores of the Arctic Ocean, and the
numerous ice-bound islands of the great Polar Sea.  There he roams about
over the frozen banks, or floats upon icebergs and drifts; or, if need
be, takes to the open water, where he can swim with almost the facility
of a fish.

A proof of his natatory powers is found in the fact that Arctic voyagers
have observed him swimming about in the open sea full twenty miles from
the nearest land!  He is equally expert as a diver; and uses this art
for the purpose of capturing various kinds of marine animals, upon which
he subsists.  In regard to food, the Polar bear differs altogether from
his congeners.  He is almost wholly carnivorous in his habits.  Indeed,
were it otherwise, he could not exist in his icy kingdom--in many parts
of which not a trace of vegetation is to be found.  Fish of many kinds,
birds, and their eggs, and four-footed beasts--when he can lay his claws
upon them--all are welcome to his palate.  Nor will he disdain to feast
upon the carcass of the great whale--when chance, or the whale
fishermen, leaves such a provender in his way.  The seal is a particular
favourite with him, and he hunts this creature with skill and assiduity.
When he perceives the seal basking upon a ledge of ice, he slips
quietly into the water, and swims to leeward of his intended victim.  He
approaches by frequent short dives--so calculating his distance, that at
the last he comes up close to the spot where the seal is lying.  Should
the victim attempt to escape, by rolling into the water, it falls into
the bear's clutches: if, on the contrary, it lies still, the bear makes
a powerful spring, seizes it on the ice, and then kills and devours it
at his leisure.

In swimming, the Polar bear not only moves rapidly through the water,
but is also capable of darting forward in such a way as to seize a fish
before it can escape beyond reach.  On the land, also, he can move with
rapidity--his slouching trot being almost as fast as the gallop of a
horse.

Individuals have been shot that weighed as much as 1600 pounds!

