The Project Gutenberg eBook, Carl and the Cotton Gin, by Sara Ware
Bassett, Illustrated by William F. Stecher


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Carl and the Cotton Gin


Author: Sara Ware Bassett



Release Date: November 20, 2007  [eBook #23560]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CARL AND THE COTTON GIN***


E-text prepared by La Monte H. P. Yarroll, Karen Smith-Cox of Lovington
Jr.-Sr. High School, and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 23560-h.htm or 23560-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/5/6/23560/23560-h/23560-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/5/6/23560/23560-h.zip)


Transcriber's note:

      Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note.

      The Frontispiece is not available for this ebook.





The Invention Series

CARL AND THE COTTON GIN

by

SARA WARE BASSETT

With Illustrations by William F. Stecher







Boston
Little, Brown, and Company
1924

Copyright, 1924,
by Little, Brown, and Company.
All rights reserved

Published September, 1924

Printed in the United States of America




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                      PAGE

    I THE MCGREGORS                                             1

   II CARL TELLS A STORY                                       17

  III A TRAGEDY                                                31

   IV PROBLEMS                                                 45

    V A TANGLE OF SURPRISES                                    60

   VI THE WEB WIDENS                                           71

  VII THE COMING OF THE FAIRY GODMOTHER                        79

 VIII THE ROMANCE OF COTTON                                    97

   IX NORTH AND SOUTH                                         112

    X A LESSON IN THRIFT                                      124

   XI A FAMILY CONGRESS                                       140

  XII A CLUE                                                  160

 XIII HAL REPEATS HIS VISIT                                   180

  XIV SPINNING YARNS                                          193

   XV TIDINGS                                                 219

  XVI A RELUCTANT ALTRUIST                                    228

 XVII AN ORDEAL                                               237

XVIII THE SOLUTION OF MANY MYSTERIES                          250

  XIX UNRAVELING THE SNARLS                                   259




ILLUSTRATIONS


"MR. CARL MCGREGOR," ANNOUNCED HE IN A STENTORIAN
TONE                                                _Frontispiece_

                                                            _Page_

"THE COTTON IS SENT TO FACTORIES TO BE GINNED"        "       129

"BUT THAT ISN'T OUR BASKET, MOTHER," CARL SAID. "THIS
IS MUCH BIGGER"                                               155

"I'VE HUNTED FOR YOU AND YOUR RED CAR EVER SINCE"             253




CARL AND THE COTTON GIN





CHAPTER I

THE McGREGORS


"Carl!"

"Coming, Ma!"

Mrs. McGregor waited a moment.

"But you aren't coming," protested she fretfully. "You never seem to
come when you're wanted. Drat the child! Where is he? Carl!"

"Yes, Ma."

"_Yes, Ma!_ _Yes, Ma!_" the woman mimicked impatiently. "It's easy
enough to shout _Yes, Ma_; but where are you--that's what I want to
know. You're the slowest creature on God's earth, I believe. A tortoise
would be a race horse compared with you. What under the sun are you
doing?"

The boy entered, a good-humored grin on his face.

He was thin, lanky, and blue-eyed, and a rebellious lock of tawny hair
that curled despite all he could do waved back from his forehead. He
might have been fourteen years old or he might have been seventeen; it
was hard to tell whether he was an overgrown younger boy or an
under-sized older one. Whatever his age, however, he could certainly
boast a serene disposition, for his mother's caustic comments failed to
ruffle his temper. Having heard them ever since babyhood he was quite
accustomed to their acid tang; moreover, he had learned to gage them
for what they were worth and class them along with the froth on a soda
or the sputter of a freshly lighted match. The thing underneath was
what mattered and he knew well that beneath the torrent of words his
mother was the best mother on earth, so what more could a boy ask?

Therefore he stood before her, whistling softly and waiting to see what
would happen next. For something surely would happen; it always did
when Mrs. McGregor rolled up her sleeves, and they were rolled up now,
displaying beneath the margin of blue gingham a powerful arm
terminating in a strong hand and slender, capable fingers.

Years ago she had come to Mulberry Court with a large brood of children
and it had been a long time before she could number one friend among
her neighbors. The chief complaint entered against her was that she was
not sociable, and if you were not sociable at Mulberry Court it meant
you were lofty, uppish, considered yourself better than other folks.
What it really meant, however, was that you did not hang out of your
window and chatter to the inhabitant of the opposite tenement; or
loiter in the doorway or on the sidewalk to gossip with the women who
lived on the floors below.

At the outset Mrs. McGregor had let it be understood that she had no
time for gossip and it was this decree that had earned for her the
stigma of not being sociable, the acme of all crimes at Mulberry Court.
Of course she had not proclaimed her policy in so many words. No,
indeed! Yet she might as well have done so for the business-like manner
in which she hastened home from market and shot up the stairs published
her philosophy more forcefully than any words could have done.

"She's just too good for the rest of us," announced Mrs. O'Dowd
sarcastically to the little circle who were wont to await her verdict
on every newcomer to the district. "Proud and snappy and stuck-up, I
call her. Not much of an addition to the house, if you ask my opinion."

This snapshot judgment, hasty as it was, was promptly accepted by the
other women, for was not Julie O'Dowd the social dictator of the
community? Had she ever been known to be wrong? With one accord
Mulberry Court turned its back on the new arrival who so flagrantly
defied the etiquette of the place.

Indeed had not Mrs. O'Dowd's baby fallen ill the seal of disapproval
put on Mrs. McGregor might have rested on her all her days, and she and
her entire family been completely ostracized by the neighborhood. But
little Joey O'Dowd, the youngest of Julie's flock, was seized with
pneumonia, and although the flock was a large one Julie was too genuine
a mother to feel she could spare one out of her fold. Was not Joey the
littlest of all, the pet of her household? All the motherhood in her
revolted at the thought of losing him. Strangely enough until the
present moment she had escaped great crises with her children. She was
well schooled in the ways of whooping cough, measles, and chicken pox
and could do up a cut finger with almost professional skill; but in the
face of crucial illness she was like a warrior without weapons.

Overwhelmed with terror, therefore, by the immediate calamity, she did
in benumbed fashion everything the doctor directed and still Joey was
no better; if anything he grew steadily worse. Motionless he lay in his
crib, his great staring eyes giving forth no flicker of recognition.
There was not much hope, the neighbors whispered, after they had
tiptoed in to look at him and tiptoed out again. He was as good as
gone. Julie could never save him in the world.

The whispers, humanely muffled, did not reach the panic-stricken mother
but she was not blind to the despairing head-shaking and these suddenly
awakened her to the realization that according to general opinion the
battle she was waging was a losing one. It was a terrible discovery.
What should she do? She must do something. Wild-eyed she plunged into
the hall, a vague impulse to seek help moving her; and it was just as
she paused irresolute at the head of the stairs that she came face to
face with Mrs. McGregor ascending to her fifth-floor flat.

Now Mrs. McGregor was a born nurse, whose skill had been increased by
constant practice. With a wisdom that amounted almost to genius she had
brought her large family through many an appalling conflict and emerged
victorious. Sickness, therefore, had no terrors for her. Instantly the
mother in her read and interpreted the desperation in Julie's face and
without a word she slipped through the open door into the room where
Joey lay. One glance of her experienced eye showed that there was
plenty to be done. The interior was close and untidy, for Mrs. O'Dowd
in her distraction had cast aside every consideration but her baby.

Mrs. McGregor stooped down over the crib.

What she saw there or did not see she at least kept to herself, and
when she straightened up it was to meet the searching gaze of her
neighbor with a grave smile.

"He's going to die," moaned Julie, wringing her hands. "He is going to
die--my baby--and I can't help it!"

Although for a long time the two women had lived beneath the same roof,
these were the first words Mrs. O'Dowd had ever addressed to Mrs.
McGregor.

"Might I touch him?" the latter inquired gently.

Like a suspicious animal Julie stiffened jealously.

"I'll not hurt him," Mrs. McGregor hastened to say, not taking offense
at the other's attitude. "I just want to raise him up so he can breathe
better." Then she added reassuringly, "I'd not give up if I were you.
You must keep on fighting to the very last minute. There is much we can
do yet to make him comfortable."

"What?"

"We can bathe him a little for one thing, if you would heat some
water."

Dumbly Julie turned to obey.

"I've a big family of my own," went on Mrs. McGregor in matter-of-fact
fashion, "and I've seen so many children pull through when they looked
fit to die that I've learned never to quit hoping. You'll get nowhere
in a fight if you haven't courage."

"I had courage enough at first," whispered the baby's mother in a
shaking voice, "but I've lost my nerve now. I'm frightened--and--and
tired."

Tears came into her eyes.

"Of course you are," came with quick sympathy from Mrs. McGregor. "We
all are apt to lose our nerve when we are worn out. I don't wonder
you're tired. You've had no sleep day or night, I'll be bound."

"Not much. The neighbors were kind about offering but somehow I
couldn't leave Joey with 'em. Besides, how can you sleep when you are
worried half out of your mind?"

"I know! I know!" nodded the other woman. "Still you can't go on
forever without rest. Next you know you will be down sick yourself and
then where will your baby be--to say nothing of your other children. A
mother has got to think ahead. Now listen. Would you trust me to watch
the baby while you curled up on the sofa and got a wink or two of
sleep? I'll promise to call you should there be an atom of change. Do
now! Be a sensible woman. And how would you feel about my giving the
little chap a drop of medicine? A Scotch doctor in the old country once
gave me a prescription that I've tried on both Timmie and Martin and it
did 'em worlds of good at a time just like this. It might do nothing
for your child, mind. I'm not promising it would. Still, it couldn't
hurt him and it might cure."

Julie's dulled mind caught the final word. _Cure!_ Alas, she had given
up hope that anything in the world could do that. The reaction that
came with the suggestion was so wonderful that it left her speechless.

"Now see here," burst out Mrs. McGregor misinterpreting her silence,
"use your common sense. Do I look as if I had come to poison your baby?
Why, woman, I love children better than anything on earth. They're a
precious lot of bother, there's no denying, and sometimes I get that
impatient with one or the other of 'em I could toss him out the window.
But for all their hectoring, and their noise, and their dirt--their
meddling, and smashing, and mending, I'd not be without them."

While speaking she had been touching the baby with a hand so yearning
and tender that it could not be stayed. She had raised his head,
smoothed his pillow, straightened the coverings that lay over him. It
was amazing how quietly and deftly her hands moved. Even the child
seemed conscious of her healing presence, for all of a sudden his wee
fingers curled about one of hers and he smiled faintly.

"See!" exclaimed Mrs. McGregor, "the baby is not afraid to trust me."

"Nor am I any longer," put in Julie with eager surrender. "Do as you
like with Joey. You know better than I."

"Oh, it isn't that," the visitor protested, rising. "It is just that
it's sometimes well not to leave a stone unturned. You might regret not
having taken the chance. I'll slip upstairs and get the medicine. It
won't take a minute."

"If you'll be that kind."

The Scotchwoman needed no second bidding. She was gone and back again
in a twinkling, the magic green bottle in her hand.

"Now if I might have a cup of hot water," said she. "I've a dropper
here. We'll see what a spoonful of this mixture will do for the wee
laddie. What is his name?"

"Joey."

Mrs. O'Dowd's eyes had brightened and they now beamed on her neighbor.

"It's a nice name," replied Mrs. McGregor, beaming in turn. "I always
liked the name of Joseph. Well, Joey boy, we'll see if we can make you
well. Here, little fellow!"

Gently she forced the liquid between the baby's lips.

"Now we'll sponge him a bit, put on a fresh slip, and give him some
air!"

"But won't he----"

"Catch cold? Not if he is shielded from the draught. He'll like the air
and feel the better for it. It will help him to breathe."

Noiselessly she went to work and within an hour both Joey and his
surroundings took on a different aspect.

"Now," said she to the grateful mother, "you roll up in that comforter
and take a nap. Don't worry about the baby. I'll be right here. Will
you trust me?"

Julie hesitated.

"It's not that I won't trust you," murmured she. "But you're so
heavenly kind. Not another soul has done for me what you have and I'm a
hundred times better acquainted with 'em, too. Of course I know they
have all they can do without taking on the cares of others. I'm not
blaming them. You yourself can't have much time to spare. Haven't you
other things to do?"

"Of course I have," came with curt honesty from Mrs. McGregor. "I've
six children and they leave me little time for idling. But when I do
take time away from 'em, I plan to take it to some purpose. Just now I
