The Project Gutenberg EBook of Woodland Tales, by Ernest Seton-Thompson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Woodland Tales

Author: Ernest Seton-Thompson

Release Date: November 30, 2007 [EBook #23667]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOODLAND TALES ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
Music transcribed by Linda Cantoni











WOODLAND TALES




        WOODLAND TALES

        BY
        ERNEST THOMPSON SETON

        [Illustration]

        WITH 100 DRAWINGS

        BY

        THE AUTHOR

        AUTHOR OF "WILD ANIMALS AT HOME," "WILD
        ANIMALS I HAVE KNOWN," "TWO LITTLE SAVAGES,"
        "BIOGRAPHY OF A GRIZZLY," "LIFE
        HISTORIES OF NORTHERN ANIMALS," "ROLF IN
        THE WOODS," "THE BOOK OF WOODCRAFT."
        CHIEF OF THE WOODCRAFT LEAGUE OF AMERICA

        GARDEN CITY      NEW YORK
        DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY
         1922




        COPYRIGHT, 1905, 1920, 1921, BY

        ERNEST THOMPSON SETON

        ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, INCLUDING THAT OF TRANSLATION
        INTO FOREIGN LANGUAGES, INCLUDING THE SCANDINAVIAN

        COPYRIGHT 1903, 1904, BY THE CENTURY COMPANY

        PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES
        AT
        THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS, GARDEN CITY, N. Y.




PREFACE

_To the Guide_


These Mother Carey Tales were written for children of all ages, who have
not outgrown the delight of a fairy tale. It might almost be said that
they were written chiefly for myself, for I not only have had the
pleasure of telling them to the little ones, and enjoying their quick
response, but have also had the greater pleasure of thinking them and
setting them down.

As I write, I look from a loved window, across a landscape that I love,
and my eye rests on a tall beautiful pine planted with my own hands
years ago. It is a mass of green fringes, with gem-like tips of buds and
baby cones, beautiful, exquisitely beautiful, whether seen from afar as
a green spire, or viewed close at hand as jewellery. It is beautiful,
fragile and--unimportant, as the world sees it; yet through its
wind-waved mass one can get little glimpses of the thing that backs it
all, the storm-defying shaft, the enduring rigid living growing trunk of
massive timber that gives it the nobility of strength, and adds value to
the rest; sometimes it must be sought for, but it always surely is
there, ennobling the lesser pretty things.

I hope this tree is a fair image of my fairy tale. I know my child
friends will love the piney fringes and the jewel cones, and they can
find the unyielding timber in its underlying truth, if they seek for it.
If they do not, it is enough to have them love the cones.

All are not fairy tales. Other chapters set forth things to see, thing
to do, things to go to, things to know, things to remember. These,
sanctified in the blue outdoors, spell "Woodcraft," the one pursuit of
man that never dies or palls, the thing that in the bygone ages gifted
him and yet again will gift him with the seeing eye, the thinking hand,
the body that fails not, the winged soul that stores up precious
memories.

It is hoped that these chapters will show how easy and alluring, and how
good a thing it is.

While they are meant for the children six years of age and upward, it is
assumed that Mother (or Father) will be active as a leader; therefore it
is addressed, first of all, to the parent, whom throughout we shall call
the "Guide."

       *       *       *       *       *

Some of these stories date back to my school days, although the first
actually published was "Why the Chicadee Goes Crazy Twice a Year." This
in its original form appeared in "Our Animal Friends" in September,
1893. Others, as "The Fingerboard Goldenrod," "Brook-Brownie," "The
Bluebird," "Diablo and the Dogwood," "How the Violets Came," "How the
Indian Summer Came," "The Twin Stars," "The Fairy Lamps," "How the
Littlest Owl Came," "How the Shad Came," appeared in slightly different
form in the _Century Magazine_, 1903 and 1904.

       *       *       *       *       *

My thanks are due to the Authorities of the American Museum who have
helped me with specimens and criticism; to the published writings of Dr.
W. J. Holland and Clarence M. Weed for guidance in insect problems; to
Britton and Browne's "Illustrated Flora, U. S. and Canada"; and to the
Nature Library of Doubleday, Page & Co., for light in matters botanic;
to Mrs. Daphne Drake and Mrs. Mary S. Dominick for many valuable
suggestions, and to my wife, Grace Gallatin Seton, for help with the
purely literary work.

Also to Oliver P. Medsger, the naturalist of Lincoln High School, Jersey
City, N. J., for reading with critical care those parts of the
manuscript that deal with flowers and insects, as well as for the ballad
of the Ox-eye, the story of its coming to America, and the photograph of
the Mecha-meck.




CONTENTS


  Things to See in Springtime

  _The Seeing Eye_

  TALE NO.                                                         PAGE

   1. Blue-eyes, the Snow-child, or the Story of Hepatica             3

   2. The Story of the Dawnsinger, or How the Bloodroot Came          5

   3. The Prairie-girl with Yellow Hair                               6

   4. The Cat's-eye Toad, a child of Maka Ina                        11

   5. How the Bluebird Came                                          14

   6. Robin, the Bird that Loves to Make Clay Pots                   17

   7. Brook Brownie, or How the Song Sparrow Got his Streaks         20

   8. Diablo and the Dogwood                                         20

   9. The Woolly-bear                                                23

   10. How the Violets Came                                          25

   11. Cocoons                                                       26

   12. Butterflies and Moths                                         28

   13. The Mourning-cloak Butterfly or the Camberwell Beauty         30

   14. The Wandering Monarch                                         32

   15. The Bells of the Solomon Seal                                 35

   16. The Silver Bells of the False Solomon Seal                    37


  Things to See in Summertime

   17. How the Mouse-bird made Fun of the Brownie                    43

   18. The Pot-herb that Sailed with the Pilgrims                    44

   19. How the Red Clover Got the White Mark on Its Leaves           47

   20. The Shamrock and Her Three Sisters                            51

   21. The Indian Basket-Maker                                       53

   22. Crinkleroot; or Who Hid the Salad?                            56

   23. The Mecha-meck                                                61

   24. Dutchman's Breeches                                           63

   25. The Seven Sour Sisters                                        65

   26. Self-heal or Blue-curls in the Grass                          65

   27. The Four Butterflies You See Every Summer                     67

   28. The Beautiful Poison Caterpillar                              72

   29. The Great Splendid Silk-moth or _Samia Cecropia_              77

   30. The Green Fairy with the Long Train                           79

   31. The Wicked Hoptoad and the Little Yellow Dragon               82

   32. The Fairy Bird or the Humming-bird Moth                       85

   33. Ribgrass or Whiteman's-Foot                                   88

   34. Jack-in-the-Pulpit                                            91

   35. How the Indian Pipe Came                                      91

   36. The Cucumber Under the Brownie's Umbrella                     93

   37. The Hickory Horn-Devil                                        95


  Things to See in Autumntime

   38. The Purple and Gold of Autumn                                103

   39. Why the Chicadee Goes Crazy Twice a Year                     104

   40. The Story of the Quaking Aspen or Poplar                     107

   41. The Witch-hazel                                              109

   42. How the Shad Came and How the Chestnut Got Its Burrs         112

   43. How the Littlest Owl Came                                    113

   44. The Wood-witch and the Bog-nuts                              114

   45. The Mud-dauber Wasp                                          117

   46. The Cicada and the Katydid                                   121

   47. The Digger Wasp That Killed the Cicada                       123

   48. How the Indian Summer Came                                   126


  Things to See in Wintertime

   49. The North Star, or the Home Star                             129

   50. The Pappoose on the Squaw's Back                             131

   51. Orion the Hunter, and his Fight with the Bull                133

   52. The Pleiades, that Orion Fired at the Bull                   134

   53. The Twin Stars                                               136

   54. Stoutheart and His Black Cravat                              137

   55. Tracks and the Stories They Tell                             138

   56. A Rabbit's Story of His Life                                 140

   57. The Singing Hawk                                             144

   58. The Fingerboard Goldenrod                                    145

   59. Woodchuck Day--February Second                               149


  Things to Know

  _The Story of The Trail_

   60. How the Pine Tree Tells its Own Story                       153

   61. Blazes                                                      155

   62. Totems                                                      155

   63. Symbols                                                     159

   64. Sign Language                                               161

   65. The Language of Hens                                        161

   66. Why the Squirrel Wears a Bushy Tail                         162

   67. Why the Dog Wags His Tail                                   163

