The Project Gutenberg EBook of Country Walks of a Naturalist with His
Children, by W. Houghton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Country Walks of a Naturalist with His Children

Author: W. Houghton

Release Date: December 20, 2007 [EBook #23941]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COUNTRY WALKS ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Diane Monico, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was made using scans of
public domain works in the International Children's Digital
Library.)









[Illustration]




COUNTRY WALKS OF A NATURALIST

WITH

HIS CHILDREN.

BY

REV. W. HOUGHTON, M.A., F.L.S.,
RECTOR OF PRESTON ON THE WILD MOORS, SHROPSHIRE.

ILLUSTRATED WITH EIGHT COLOURED PLATES AND
NUMEROUS WOOD ENGRAVINGS.

SECOND EDITION.

LONDON:
GROOMBRIDGE AND SONS,
5, PATERNOSTER ROW.

MDCCCLXX.




PREFACE.


In this little book my desire has been, not so much to impart
knowledge to young people, as to induce them to acquire it for
themselves. I have endeavoured to show that Country Walks may be full
of interest and instruction to all who care to make good use of their
eyes. If I have failed, the fault rests with me for the way in which I
have treated the subject. I am aware that I have occasionally used
words and phrases which may puzzle young brains, but I hope that
nearly all will be intelligible to boys and girls of nine or ten years
old, with a little explanation from parents or teachers.

The chief, if not the sole merit of this little book consists in the
illustrations which adorn it; and I must express my sincere gratitude
to Mr. Gould, the eminent ornithologist, for his kind permission to
copy some of the magnificent drawings in his work on 'The Birds of
Great Britain.' To Mr. R. S. Chattock, of Solihull, I am also deeply
indebted, for the pains he has taken in reproducing, on a reduced
scale, Mr. Gould's drawings, and for the drawings of the sticklebacks
and the frontispiece. My generous friend and neighbour, Mr. Eyton, of
Eyton, has furnished another instance of his numerous acts of
kindness, in allowing me the use of Mr. Gould's work and of various
woodcuts. To two lady friends I also express my best thanks; and last,
though not least, to the publishers, Messrs. Groombridge, for the care
they have taken to present the volume to the public in a very
attractive form.




CONTENTS.


                                                                  PAGE

WALK I.--APRIL                                                       1

On the Moors--Swallows--Water-voles--Peewits--Marsh
Marigold--Water-primrose--Moles--Herons--Kingfishers--
Moschatelle--Water-scorpion.

WALK II.--APRIL                                                     17

Ophrydium--Reed Sparrow--Whirligig Beetles--Fresh-water
Mussels--Zebra Mussel--Titmice--Thrushes cracking
Snail-shells--Dabbling in a Pond--Dyticus, or Great
Water-beetle--Corethra Larva--Weasels.

WALK III.--MAY                                                      36

Searching for Sticklebacks' Nests--Nest-making Fish--Snail
Leeches--Other Leeches--Cuckoo Flowers--Blue
Speedwell--Stitchwort--Tadpoles--Frogs--Frog and Cat.

WALK IV.--MAY                                                       50

The Melicerta or Tubicolous Wheel-animalcule--Water-crowfoot
or Buttercup--Sedge-warbler--Reed-warbler's
Nest--Cuckoos--Horsetail--Hydrae.

WALK V.--MAY                                                        69

Drive to Shawbury--Trout Fishing--Parasite on Trout--Curious habit
of a Two-winged Fly--Ephemerae, or May-flies--Willy hooking out
Dace--Another fish Parasite--Globe Flower--Dragon-flies--Quotation
from Thomson's 'Seasons.'

WALK VI.--JUNE                                                      84

In the Fields--St. George's Mushroom--Tree-creepers--A handful
of Grasses--Nettles and Dead Nettles--Butterfly--Larvae feeding
on Nettle Leaves--Fresh-water Polyzoa--Eggs of Newts--Development
of Newts--Donacia Beetles--Planarian Worms.


WALK VII.--JUNE                                                    103

Hedgehog and young ones--Hedgehogs, injurious or not?--On the
Moors again--Great Tomtit--Shrikes or Butcher Birds--Lady-bird
Beetles--Swifts--Coots--Water-hens--Grebes--Convolvulus.


WALK VIII.--JULY                                                   119

Frog's Spawn Alga--Other Fresh-water Algae--Hawks--Kestrel--Sparrow
Hawk--Buzzard--Shrew-mouse, superstitions about--Spiders' Nests
and Webs--Spiders' Fangs--Spiders' Feet.


WALK IX.--JULY                                                     133

In the Fields again--Scarlet Pimpernel--Goat's Beard--Caddis Worms
and Flies--Forget-me-not--Goldfinches--Cruelty of country lads to
young birds--Grasshoppers--Crickets--Pike, voracity and size of.


WALK X.--OCTOBER                                                   145

In the Woods at the foot of the Wrekin--A hunt for Fungi--Fly
Agarics--Victims nailed to a tree--Gamekeepers--Squirrels--Rare
Fungi--Woodcocks--Ring-marks on fallen timber--Conclusion.

       *       *       *       *       *




COUNTRY WALKS OF A NATURALIST

WITH

HIS CHILDREN.




WALK I.

APRIL.


We could not have a more pleasant day, children, for a ramble in the
fields than to-day. It is warm and bright, and the birds are singing
merrily, thoroughly enjoying the sunshine; the little lambs are
frisking about, and running races with each other. Put away lessons
then, and we will have a holiday. "Oh," said Willy, "it will be so
pleasant, and I will take one or two bottles, and my gauze net,
because we are sure to find something interesting to bring home. Where
shall we go?" "I do not think it much matters where, for there is
always much to observe and to admire wherever we stroll in the
country." "Let us go on the moors, then," said Jack, "for you know,
papa, a little boy in the village told me the other day he had found a
peewit's nest with four eggs in, and I should like to try and find
one myself." Well, here we are, then; we shall have to jump over a
drain or two in our ramble, and as the banks are soft it will be
necessary to take great care, or we may tumble in. Ah! do you see,
there are two sand-martins, the first I have seen this year. See how
fast they fly, now sailing high up in the air, now skimming quite
close to the ground. I have not seen any swallows or house-martins
yet, but no doubt they will make their appearance in a few days.
"Where do they come from, papa," asked May, "because we never see
these birds in the winter? You often say, when the spring comes we
shall see the swallows, and then they go away again towards the end of
summer." Let us sit down on this clump of wood, and I will tell you
about the swallows.

We have in this country four different species of the swallow family
which visit us every year; they come to us from Africa: these are the
sand-martin, two specimens of which we have just seen, the swallow,
the house-martin, and the swift. A very little attention will enable
you to distinguish these different kinds. The sand-martin is the
smallest of the family; as the birds fly by us you notice that the
back part is brown, or mouse colour; the under part white. The back of
the house-martin is of a glossy black or bluish-black colour; it is
white underneath; while the swallow, which is larger than the other
two, has a glossy back, like the house-martin; but underneath it is
more or less tinged with buff; and see, as I speak here is one flying
past us. To-day is the 12th of April, about the time the swallow
generally comes to this country. Now you see clearly enough its
colour, and you will notice, too, a very marked difference in the form
of its tail; see how much forked it is, much more so than the tail of
the martin. This forked appearance is produced by the two outer tail
feathers, which are much longer than the rest. Now I hope you will
take notice of these differences, and call things by their right
names, instead of jumbling them all up together under the name of
swallow. I have not spoken of the swift, which does not visit this
country till May; it is the largest of the swallow family, and has the
whole of its body, both above and beneath, of a blackish-brown colour,
except a small patch of dirty white under the chin.

"But, papa," said Jack, "do all these four kinds of swallows come from
Africa? It is very curious to know how they can find their way
backwards and forwards from Africa to this country, and how they come
back to the very spots they visited the year before?" Indeed, it is a
very curious thing; nevertheless experiments have been made to show
that these birds return every year to the same localities.

Many years ago Dr. Jenner procured several swifts from a farmhouse in
Gloucestershire, and marked them by cutting off two claws from the
foot of twelve of them. Next year their hiding places were examined in
the evening, when the birds had gone to roost, when Dr. Jenner found
many of the birds he had marked by cutting off the two claws. For two
or three consecutive years he examined their nesting places, and
always found some of his marked birds. At the end of seven years a cat
brought a swift into the farmer's kitchen, and this was one of those
which Dr. Jenner had marked. Now, Willy, I will ask you a question in
geography. The swallow family visits this country from Africa. What
sea, then, must the birds fly across? "The Mediterranean, papa." Quite
right; and now can you tell me the narrowest part of the Mediterranean
Sea? "The Straits of Gibraltar." Right again; and there the passage is
about five miles wide; and at Gibraltar swallows, swifts, and martins
are often seen as well as several other bird-visitors of this country.
People on board ship have seen swallows a long way from land passing
between Europe and Africa. Sometimes the poor birds are so tired from
their flight that they are obliged to rest on the masts, yards, and
rigging of the vessels. This often happens when the weather is hazy.
Holloa, Jack, what is that splash in the water about six yards off?
Keep quiet, and we shall see what it was. Ah! it is one of my friends,
the water-voles; I see the rogue, with his large yellow teeth and
black eyes. Do you see? He is on the other side of the drain, nibbling
away at something. People generally call him a water-rat, but he is no
relation at all to a rat, nor is he an injurious creature like it.
"Well, but papa," said Willy, "the lads in the village always kill
these water-rats, as they call them, whenever they can. I suppose they
take them for common rats. Do you say they do no harm?" Very little,
water-voles will not eat young chickens and ducklings; nor do they
find their way into stacks and consume the corn; their food is
entirely confined to vegetables, such as the roots and stems of
water-weeds. I feel, however, pretty sure that the water-vole is fond
of beans, and will occasionally do some mischief where a field of
newly-sown beans adjoins the river or stream, in the banks of which
these animals form their holes. I will clap my hands, and off our
little friend with his dusky coat starts, diving under the water,
whence when he comes out he will probably escape into a hole on the
bank. Some day I will show you the skulls of a water-vole and a rat,
and you will see there is a great difference in the form and
arrangement of the teeth, and that the first-named animal is not, as I
said before, related to the rat. The water-vole is really a relative
of that interesting creature you have often read of--I mean the
beaver. "Well, papa," said Jack, "I am tired of sitting here, let us
now go and hunt for peewit's eggs." All right, Jack, and if you find
any you shall each have one for your breakfast in the morning. When
hard-boiled and cold, a peewit's egg is a very delicious thing, though
I think the peewits are such valuable birds, and do so much good, that
I should not like to take many of their eggs. We had better separate
from each other, so as to have a better chance of finding a nest. Soon
we hear a shout from Willy, whose sharp eyes had discovered a nest
with four eggs in it; so off we all scamper to him. See how the old
bird screams and flaps, and how near she comes to us; she knows we
have found her eggs, and wishes to lure us away from the spot; so she
pretends she has been wounded, and tries to make us follow after her.
Now, Jack, run and catch her. Hah! Hah! There they go. I will back the
peewit against the boy. So you have given up the chase, have you?
Well, rest again, and take breath. The peewit, as you saw, makes
scarcely any nest, merely a hollow in the ground, with, perhaps, a few
dried grasses. The peculiar instinct of the peewit in misleading
people as to the whereabouts of its eggs, or young ones, is very
curious.

[Illustration: LAPWING.]

A very observant naturalist says, "As soon as any one appears in the
fields where the nest is, the bird runs quietly and rapidly in a
stooping posture to some distance from it, and then rises with loud
cries and appearance of alarm, as if her nest was immediately below
the spot she rose from. When the young ones are hatched, too, the
place to look for them is, _not_ where the parent birds are screaming
and fluttering about, but at some little distance from it. As soon as
you actually come to the spot where their young are, the old birds
alight on the ground a hundred yards or so from you, watching your
movements. If, however, you pick up one of the young ones, both male
and female immediately throw off all disguise, and come wheeling and
screaming around your head, as if about to fly in your face." Peewits
are certainly bold birds when their young ones are in danger. Mr.
Charles St. John says he has often seen the hooded crows hunting the
fields frequented by the peewits, as regularly as a pointer, flying a
few yards above the ground, and searching for the eggs. The cunning
crow always selects the time when the old birds are away on the shore.
As soon as he is perceived, however, the peewits all combine in
chasing him away. We are told that they will also attack any bird of
prey that ventures near their breeding ground; they are quarrelsome,
too, and the cock birds will fight with each other should they come
into too close quarters. A cock bird one day attacked a wounded male
bird which came near his nest; the pugnacious little fellow ran up to
the intruder, and taking advantage of his weakness, jumped on him, and
pecking at his head, dragged him along the ground as fiercely as a
game cock. This was witnessed by Mr. St. John.[A] "I have often heard
peewits uttering their peculiar noise," said Willy, "quite late at
night. What do they feed on? I should so much like to have a tame
young one." The food of the peewits consists of insects, worms,
snails, slugs, the larvae of various insects; I am certain they do much
good to the farmer by destroying numerous insect-pests. "Oh, papa,"
exclaimed May, "do come here, what a splendid cluster of bright golden
flowers is growing on the side of the drain." Yes, indeed it is a
beautiful cluster; it is the marsh-marigold, and looks like a gigantic
buttercup; it is sometimes in flower as early as March, and continues
to blossom for three months or more. Country people often call it the
may-flower, as being one of the flowers once used for may-garlands. I
dare say you have sometimes seen wreaths hanging on cottage doors.
Some people have invented what I think very ugly names for this showy
plant, such as horse-blob, water-blob.

    "Beneath the shelving bank's retreat
    The horseblob swells its golden ball."

I have somewhere read that the young buds are sometimes pickled and
used instead of capers, but I do not think I should like to try them.
"And what," asked May, "are those bright green feathery tufts under
the water? they are very pretty, but they do not bear any flowers."
No, there are no flowers at present, but in about a month's time you
will see plenty. Out of the middle of the feathery tuft there grows a
single tall stem with whorls of four, five, or six pale purple flowers
occurring at intervals. Its English name is water-violet,--not a
fitting name for it, because this plant is not at all related to the
violet tribe, but is one of the primrose family; so we should more
correctly call it water-primrose. Its Latin name is _Hottonia
palustris_; it is called Hottonia in honour of a German botanist,
Professor Hotton, of Leyden. Willy will tell us that the word
_palustris_ means "marshy," in allusion to the places where the water
primrose is found growing. It is a very common plant in the ditches on
the moors here, and I will take care to show you its pretty tall stem
when the flowers appear. While I was talking to May about the water
primrose, Jack espied a sulphur-coloured butterfly, and off he set in
full chase; he did not, however, succeed in capturing it, for his foot
tripped over a molehill and down he tumbled--the beautiful sulphur
butterfly having fled across a wide ditch and escaped. Not far from
where he fell there was a thorn bush and a number of unfortunate moles
gibbeted thereon: some had been killed quite recently, so I took three
or four from the thorn with the intention of taking them home and
examining their stomachs to see what they had eaten. In the meantime,
down we sat on an adjoining bank covered with primroses looking so gay
and smelling so sweet. Willy then wanted to know the history of the
mole; why people generally think it right to kill these animals, and
whether they really are blind. May, of course, could not resist the
charm of collecting primroses for mamma. The two boys cared more for
animals, so I answered their questions about the mole. First of all I
pointed out the amazing strength of its feet, its soft and silky fur,
the form of its body so well adapted for a rapid progress through the
underground passages it forms. Look, I said, at its soft fur, how it
will lie in any direction; each delicate hair is inserted in the skin
perpendicularly to its surface, so that the mole can move rapidly
either backwards or forwards with great ease; the fur, lying as
readily in one direction as another, makes no difficulty to a backward
retreat. If you look closely when I push away the fur with my finger
and breath in the neighbourhood of the eyes, you will see two tiny
black specs; so we can hardly call the mole a blind animal; but as it
lives for the most part underground its power of vision must be small.
The fore feet do the work of the spade and potato-fork combined; its
sense of smell is acute, and this, no doubt, aids the animal in the
search of its food; the mole's sense of hearing is also very good.
"Well, but, papa," exclaimed Jack, "a mole has got no ears, so how can
it hear?" There is no outward appearance of ears, it is true, but
look: I blow away the fur, and now you see clearly a hole which is the
beginning of the passage that leads to the internal ear. The ears of
many animals are very admirably made and fitted for the purpose of
receiving sounds, but you must not suppose that because some
animals--as moles, seals, whales, &c.--have no outward appendages,
they are destitute of ears and the power of hearing. But you must wait
till you are a little older, and then I will explain to you the matter
more fully. The little curiously shaped earbones which are found in
all mammalia are found also in the mole; and I have in my drawer at
home a mole's earbones which I dissected from the animal.

But here comes, I do think, the mole-catcher himself; let us hear what
he has to say. "Good morning, Mr. Mole-catcher; have you been setting
any more traps to-day? I suppose those unfortunate fellows gibbeted on
yonder thorn were caught by you." "Well, yeez, sir," he replied, "I
reckons as they were; I have stopped their play, I guess; but there's
a plaguey lot more on them about, I'm a thinking." "What harm do you
consider that moles do?" I asked. "Harm, maister? why, lor' bless you,
see them hummocks they throw up all about. The farmers dunna like them
ugly heaps, I can assure you." "Probably not; still if they were
spread on the land the soil would be as good as top-dressing. Do you
know what moles eat?" "Well, sir, I believes they eats worms." "Yes,
they feed principally on worms, but they also devour wireworms and
other creatures which prey upon the farmer's crops. I think moles do
more good than harm, and I have examined the stomachs of many, and I
am of opinion that it is a mistake to kill them." "Lor', sir, you be's
a gemman that has seen the inside of a mole's stomach, has you? You
may be a cliver sort of a mon, but moles be varmint." Thus saying, the
old fellow wished us good morning and left us. "Papa," said Willy, "do
not moles make very curious places under the ground in which they
reside at times? I think I have somewhere seen pictures of these
encampments." Yes, they do; but I only know of them from description
and figures; the fortress is generally made under a hillock; it
consists of many galleries connected with each other, and with a
central chamber. You remember a young mole was brought to us last
summer, and that we put it into a box with plenty of loose earth and
some worms. We only kept it a day or two. One morning I found it dead.
I suppose it had not enough to eat. The mole has an insatiable
appetite, and, according to the observations of some naturalists, it
will devour birds. Mr. Bell says that "even the weaker of its own
species under particular circumstances are not exempted from this
promiscuous ferocity; for if two moles be placed together in a box
without a very plentiful supply of food the weaker certainly falls a
prey to the stronger. No thoroughbred bulldog keeps a firmer hold of
the object of its attack than the mole. Mr. Jackson, a very
intelligent mole-catcher, says that, when a boy, his hand was so
severely and firmly laid hold of by one that he was obliged to use his
teeth in order to loosen its hold."

[Illustration: HERON AND YOUNG.]

We now proceeded on our ramble, and I espied about one hundred yards
off a heron on the bank of the Strine. He did not see us at first, but
when we got a little nearer, off he flew, with his long legs stretched
out behind, and his head bent close to his shoulders. He had evidently
been fishing, for we could see the scales of fish on the side of the
bank. Willy asked whether herons built on trees, and Jack wanted to
know how they managed with their great long legs while sitting on
their nests. These birds in the breeding season assemble together and
make their nests on tall firs or oak trees; sometimes they build on
rocks near the sea coast. It is said, too, that they will occasionally
build on the ground. The heron's nest is not unlike that of the rook,
only larger and broader; it is made of sticks and lined with wool and
coarse grass; the female lays four or five eggs of a green colour, her
long legs are tucked under her. Rooks and jackdaws sometimes take up
their quarters near to a heronry, and do you know they steal their
eggs, the rogues, and devour them. Both male and female herons take
great care of their little ones and bring them food. Besides fish the
heron will eat frogs, rats, young ducks, and coots. Eels are great
dainties in the opinion of Mr. Heron; and sometimes an eel, after
being pierced through the head by the sharp and strong bill of the
heron, manages to wrap himself so tight round the bird's neck as to
stop his breathing and cause his death. A good many years ago herons
were protected by the law; they were considered royal game, and their
capture by the peregrine falcon was looked upon as very exciting
sport. As we followed the bank of the stream out flew a couple of
kingfishers with straight and rapid flight; we distinctly heard the
shrill note these birds utter; they flew about two hundred yards and
lighted on a rail near the water's edge. Let us see if we can get a
little nearer to them, I said, and then sit down and see what they
will do. "Papa," said May, "is not the kingfisher a very beautiful
bird, and the most brightly coloured of all British birds?" Yes, it
is; its splendid colours remind one of the gorgeous plumage of
tropical birds, and we have no other British bird with such brilliant
colours. There, did you see that? one of the birds darted off the rail
into the water. I have no doubt he has caught a small fish; and now he
has lighted on the same rail, and with my pocket telescope I can see
him throw his head up and swallow some dainty morsel. It is not at all
an uncommon sight to see a kingfisher hover over the water after the
manner of a kestril-hawk; suddenly it will descend with the greatest
rapidity and again emerge, seldom failing to secure a fish for its
dinner. "Did you ever find a kingfisher's nest, papa?" Willy inquired.
Yes; some years ago I found one in a hole in a bank; there were four
eggs in it, and I had to put my whole arm into the hole before I got
at the nest, which consisted of sand mixed with a great quantity of
very small fish bones. The eggs are very pretty, having a delicate
pink tinge, the shell is thin, and the form of the egg almost round.
"But where," asked Jack, "do the little fish bones of the nest come
from?" I think I have told you that many birds--hawks, eagles, owls,
shrikes, &c.--throw up from their crops the indigestible portions of
their food. It is not uncommon to find these on the ground in the
course of one's rambles. Kingfishers possess this power; they throw up
the undigested fishbones, and curiously enough, as it would appear,
form them into a nest. There is a kingfisher's nest in the British
Museum, which I remember to have seen a few years ago. It has been a
disputed point whether the parent bird throws the fishbones up at
random into the hole where she is going to lay, or whether she forms
them into a nest. The nest in the British Museum was secured at the
expense of great patience and pains by the celebrated ornithologist
and splendid draughtsman, Mr. Gould, whose drawings you may one day
see in the library of the museum at Eyton. This specimen, if I
remember right, was of a flattened form and fully half an inch thick.
