The Project Gutenberg EBook of Over the Rocky Mountains, by R.M. Ballantyne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Over the Rocky Mountains
       Wandering Will in the Land of the Redskin

Author: R.M. Ballantyne

Illustrator: R.M. Ballantyne

Release Date: December 31, 2007 [EBook #24086]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OVER THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Over the Rocky Mountains, by R.M. Ballantyne.

________________________________________________________________________
This is one of the short but interesting books that Ballantyne wrote
with the less well-off members of his readership in mind.  All of these
were of about 120 pages, and quite small books, that could be sold for
only a shilling or two.  The hero of many of them is a character called
Will Osten, or Wandering Will.  In this book he returns from a long trip
away, during which his father had died, so his mother was very pleased
to see him.  But just before he died his father had been left a property
in California--it was the time of the Gold Rush.  Will gathered some of
his friends, and off they went to have a look at this property.  So what
the book is really about is the life of the miners in the Gold Rush.

Surprise, surprise!  A young lady whom Will had met on one of his
previous adventures appeared on the scene, on her way back to England.
Will is determined to see more of her, but he has no money to pay the
exorbitant sum demanded for his fare back to England, so he finds a very
quick agent, who finds a very quick lawyer, so that his estate can be
sold, and the money raised for the fare.  He catches the boat by the
skin of his teeth.  Of course we will go with him on some more of his
wanderings.

________________________________________________________________________
OVER THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.



PREFACE.

Note: Plan of this Miscellany.

There is a vast amount of interesting information, on almost all
subjects, which many people, especially the young, cannot attain to
because of the expense, and, in some instances, the rarity of the books
in which it is contained.

To place some of this information, in an attractive form, within the
reach of those who cannot afford to purchase expensive books, is the
principal object of this Miscellany.

Truth is stranger than fiction, but fiction is a valuable assistant in
the development of truth.  Both, therefore, shall be used in these
volumes.  Care will be taken to insure, as far as is possible, that the
_facts_ stated shall be true, and that the _impressions_ given shall be
truthful.

As all classes, in every age, have proved that tales and stories, are
the most popular style of literature, each volume of the series (with,
perhaps, one or two exceptions) will contain a complete tale, the heroes
and actors in which, together with the combination of circumstances in
which they move, shall be more or less fictitious.

In writing these volumes, the author has earnestly endeavoured to keep
in view the glory of God and the good of man.



CHAPTER ONE.

DESCRIBES HOME-COMING, AND SHOWS THAT MATTERS WHISPERED IN THE
DRAWING-ROOM ARE SOMETIMES LOUDLY PROCLAIMED BELOW-STAIRS.

It was late on a winter evening when our hero, William Osten, arrived in
England, in company with his two friends and former messmates, Bunco and
Larry O'Hale.

When a youth returns to his native land, after a long absence which
commenced with his running away to sea, he may perhaps experience some
anxieties on nearing the old home; but our hero was not thus troubled,
because, his father having died during his absence, and his mother
having always been tender-hearted and forgiving, he felt sure of a warm
reception.

Our hero was so anxious to see his mother, that he resolved to travel by
the night-coach to his native town of B--, leaving his companions to
follow by the mail in the morning.  Railways, although in use throughout
the country, had not at that time cut their way to the town of B--.
Travellers who undertook to visit that part of the land did so with
feelings somewhat akin to those of discoverers about to set out on a
distant voyage.  They laid in a stock of provisions for the journey, and
provided great supply of wraps for all weathers.  When Will Osten
reached the coach-office, he found that all the inside places were
taken.

"You'll have to go aloft, sir," said the coachman, a stout and somewhat
facetiously inclined individual, who, observing something of the sailor
in Will's costume and gait, suited his language to his supposed
character; "there's only one berth left vacant, on the fogs'l 'longside
o' myself."

"Well, I'll take it," said Will.

Five minutes afterwards the guard shouted "all right," and they set off.

"Do you happen to know many of the people in the town of B--?" said Will
to the coachman, as they emerged from the suburbs and dashed out upon a
long tract of moorland.

"Know many of 'em, sir," said the man, tipping the off-leader on the
flank by way of keeping his hand in; "I should 'ope I does; it's two
year, this very day, since I came to this 'ere part o' the country, and
I've got married in B-- to a 'ooman as knows everythink and everybody,
so, of course, I knows everythink and everybody, too."

"Then you have heard of a Mrs Osten, no doubt, a widow lady?" said
Will.

"Wot, the widder o' that grumpy old gen'lman as died last year, leavin',
they say, a big estate in furrin parts?"

Will felt a tendency to seize the man by the throat, and tumble him off
his box into the road, but on second thoughts he restrained himself and
said--

"She is the widow of a gentleman with whom I was intimately acquainted.
I did not know anything about his having estates abroad."

"I axe your pardon, sir," said the man, a little abashed by Will's grave
manner; "didn't know they wos friends of yours.  No offence, I 'ope.
The old lady is raither low since her husband's death--for it wos
somewhat sudden--an' they do say she's never got over the runnin' away
of her only son--at least so my wife says, an' she ought to know, for
she's bin intimate with the family for many years, an' knows the ooman
as nussed the boy--"

"What, Maryann?" exclaimed Will.

"The same.  You seems to know 'em all, sir."

"Yes, I know them well.  Is Maryann still with my--with Mrs Osten?"

"Yes, sir, she is, an' wot's more, she aint likely to quit in a 'urry.
W'y, sir, that 'ooman 'as 'ad no fewer than six hoffers of marriage, an'
'as refused 'em all for love of the old lady.  My wife, she says to me
the other night, when she wos a-washin' of the baby in the big bread
can--you see, sir, the washin' tub's gone and sprung a leak, an' so
we're redoosed to the bread can--Well, as I wos a-sayin', my wife says
to me--`Richards,' says she, `it's my belief that Marryhann will never
marry, for her 'art an' soul is set upon Mrs Osten, an' she's got a
strange feelin' of sartinty that Master Will, as she calls the runaway
boy, will come back to comfort 'is mother an' look arter the furrin
estates.  No, Richards, mark my words, Maryhann will never marry.'"

"`It may be so, Jemimar,' says I,--Did you speak, sir?" said the
coachman, turning sharp round on hearing Will utter an exclamation of
surprise.

"Is your wife's name Jemima?"

"Yes, it is; d'you 'appen to know her, too?"

"Well, I think I do, if she is the same person who used to attend upon
Mrs Osten--a tall and--thin--and and--somewhat--"

"Stiff sort of woman--hout with it, sir, you'll not 'urt my feelins.  I
didn't marry Jemimar for her beauty, no, nor yet for her money nor her
youth, for she aint young, sir--older than myself a long way.  I took
her for her _worth_, sir, her sterlin' qualities.  _You_ know, sir, as
well as I do, that it aint the fattest an' youngest 'osses as is the
best.  Jemimar is a trump, sir, without any nonsense about her.  Her
capacity for fryin' 'am, sir, an' bilin' potatoes is marvellous, an' the
way she do dress up the baby (we've only got one, sir) is the
hadmiration of the neighbour'ood."

"You said something just now about the deceased Mr Osten's estate.  Can
you tell me how he came by it?"

"No, sir, I can't.  That's the only thing that my wife 'as failed to
fathom.  There's somethink mysterious about it, I think, for Missis
Hosten she won't speak to Marryhann on the subjec', an' all she knows
about it is that the lawyer says there's an estate somewheres in furrin
parts as needs lookin' arter.  The lawyer didn't say that to Maryhann,
sir, of course, but she's got a 'abit of hairin' 'er ears at key'oles
an' over'ears things now an' then."

Further conversation on this point was here stopped by the arrival of
the coach at the end of a stage, and when the journey was resumed with
fresh horses, Will felt inclined to sleep.  He therefore buttoned up his
coat tight to the chin, fixed his hat well down on his brows, and put
himself into one of those numerous attitudes of torture with which
"outsides" were wont to beguile the weary hours of night in coaching
days.  When the sun rose next morning, Will was still in that state of
semi-somnolence which causes the expression of the countenance to become
idiotic and the eyes owlish.  At last the chimneys of his native town
became visible, and in a short time he found himself standing before the
well-remembered house tapping at the old door, whose panels--especially
near the foot--still bore the deep marks of his own juvenile toes.

It is not necessary to drag the reader through the affecting scene of
meeting between mother and son.  Two days after his arrival we find them
both seated at tea in the old drawing-room drinking out of the old mug,
with the name "William" emblazoned on it, in which, in days gone by, he
was wont to dip his infantine lips and nose.  Not that he had selected
this vessel of his own free will, but his mother, who was a romantic old
lady, insisted on his using it, in order to bring back to her more
vividly the days of his childhood, and Will, in the fulness of his
heart, said he would be glad to drink tea out of the coal-scuttle if
that would give her pleasure.  The good lady even sent to the
lumber-room for the old arm-chair of his babyhood, but as neither
ingenuity nor perseverance could enable him to squeeze his stout person
into that, he was fain to content himself with an ordinary chair.

"Now, dear mother," said Will, commencing the fifth slice of toast,
under pressure (having eaten the fourth with difficulty), "you have not
yet told me about this wonderful estate which everybody seems to know of
except myself."

"Ah! darling Will," sighed Mrs Osten, "I have avoided the subject as
long as possible, for I know it is to be the cause of our being
separated again.  But there is no help for it, because I promised your
dear father when he was dying that I would tell you his wishes in regard
to it, and that I would not attempt to dissuade you from doing your
duty.  Well, you remember uncle Edward, I suppose?"

"His name--yes," said Will, "but I never knew anything else about him.
I had nothing to remember or to forget, except, indeed, that he got the
name of being a wild scapegrace, something like myself!"

"Like yourself, darling," exclaimed the old lady, with a look of
indignation--"no indeed!  Have not you repented and come back, like a
good prodigal son; and didn't the dear beautiful letter that you wrote
from that awful island--what's its name--where you were all but eaten
alive--"

"The coral island," suggested Will.

"Yes, the coral island--didn't that dear letter give more delight to
your beloved father than any letter he ever received in his life, and
more than made up to him for your running away, and cheered him to his
last hour, whereas uncle Edward was wicked to the last--at least so it
is said, but I don't know, and it's not right to speak ill of the dead.
Well, as I was going to say, uncle Edward died in some outlandish place
in North America, I never can remember the name, but it's in the papers,
so you'll see it--somewhere on the other side of the something
mountains--I forget--"

"Rocky, perhaps."

"Yes, that's it, the Rocky Mountains, and I wish they were not so rocky,
for your sake, darling, for you've got to go there and take possession
(or serve yourself heir to, or something of that sort) of the property.
Not that it's large, so they say (I wish with all my heart it did not
exist at all), but they tell me there is gold on it, though whether it
is lying on the fields or down in holes I'm sure I don't know, and oh
dear, I don't care, for it entails your going away again, my darling
boy."

Here the poor old lady broke down, and, throwing her arms round Will's
neck--regardless of the fact that in so doing she upset and broke one of
her best china tea-cups--wept upon his bosom.

Such was the manner of the announcement of the news in the drawing-room.

In the kitchen the same subject was being discussed by a select party,
consisting of Maryann, Mr Richards the coachman, his spouse Jemima--
formerly Scrubbins--the baby Richards--who has already been referred to
as being reduced in the matter of his ablutions to a bread can--and
Larry O'Hale with his faithful Indian friend Bunco.

"To think," said Maryann, with a quiet laugh, as she handed a cup of tea
to Bunco--"to think that I should ever come for to sit at tea with a
live red Indian from Ameriky--not that he's red either, for I'm sure
that hany one with eyes in their 'ead could see that he's only brown."

"Ah, my dear, that's 'cause he's changed colour," said Larry, pushing in
his cup for more tea.  "He wasn't always like that.  Sure, when I first
know'd Bunco he was scarlet--pure scarlet, only he took a fancy one day,
when he was in a wild mood, to run his canoe over the falls of Niagara
for a wager, an', faix, when he came up out o' the wather after it he
was turned brown, an's bin that same ever since."

"Gammon," exclaimed Maryann.

"Sure ye don't misdoubt me word, Maryann," said Larry reproachfully;
"isn't it true, Bunco?"

"Yoos a norribable liar, Larry," answered Bunco with a broad grin.

Richards the coachman, who had been for some minutes too busy with the
buttered toast and bacon to do more than listen and chuckle, here burst
into a loud guffaw and choked himself partially.  Jemima and Maryann
also laughed, whereupon the baby, not to be outdone, broke suddenly into
a tremendous crow, and waved its fat arms so furiously that it
overturned a tea-cup and sent the contents into Bunco's lap.  This
created a momentary confusion, and when calm was restored, Mrs Richards
asked Maryann "if hanythink noo 'ad turned up in regard to the estate?"
which she seemed to know so much about, but in regard to which she was,
apparently, so unwilling to be communicative.

"Not so, Jemimar," said Maryann, with a look of offended dignity,
"_unwillin'_ to speak I am not, though _unable_ I may be--at least I was
so until yesterday, but I _have_ come to know a little more about it
since Master Will came 'ome while I chanced to be near--"

Maryann hesitated a moment, and Richards, through a mouthful of toast,
muttered "the keyhole."

