The Project Gutenberg EBook of A History of Nursery Rhymes, by Percy B. Green

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A History of Nursery Rhymes

Author: Percy B. Green

Release Date: December 28, 2007 [EBook #24065]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HISTORY OF NURSERY RHYMES ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Stephen Blundell and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 A
 HISTORY
 OF
 NURSERY
 RHYMES


                                       BY
                                 PERCY B. GREEN



                     LONDON
              GREENING & CO., LTD.
                 20, CECIL COURT
               CHARING CROSS ROAD
                      1899

                 Now Reissued by
               Singing Tree Press
 1249 Washington Blvd., Detroit, Michigan. 1968




Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 68-31082


Transcriber's Note:

    Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note, whilst
    significant amendments are noted at the end of the text.

    Archaic and dialect spellings remain as printed.

    Greek text has been transliterated and is shown between {braces}.

    The oe ligature is shown as [oe]. The + character has been used to
    represent the cross symbols used in Chapter IX.




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE
 INTRODUCTION                                                       xiii


                                PART I.

 CHAP.
    I. Prehistoric man--His language one of signs and sounds--The
         story of Psammetichus and the Two Babies--Idiom of
         language a survival of primitive peoples                      1

   II. Modern types of early man--Sign-language of people living on
         the globe to-day--The custom of the UVINZA grandees--The
         "good-morning" of the Walunga tribe--Signs of
         hospitality in the sign vocabulary of the North American
         Indian--The "attingere extremis digitis" of the
         Romans--Clap-hands one of the first lessons of the
         Nursery--The modern survival of hand-clapping--"Is it
         rude to shake hands, Nurse?"--A hypercritical
         mother--Plato's rebuke--Agesilaus and his
         children--Nursery classics and critical babies--"Lalla,
         lalla, lalla" of the Roman child--The well-known baby
         dance of "Crow and caper, caper and crow"                     8

  III. Writers on comparative religions show that entire religious
         observances come down to modern peoples from heathen
         sources--The Bohemian Peasant and his Apple Tree--A myth
         of long descent found in the rhyme of "A Woman, a
         Spaniel, and Walnut Tree"; our modern "Pippin, pippin,
         fly away," indicates the same sentiment--The fairy tale
         of Ashputtel and the Golden Slipper, the legend from
         which came our story of Cinderella--Tylor on Children's
         Sports--The mystery of Northern Europe at Christ's
         coming--The Baby's Rattle--Ancestral worship follows sun
         and moon worship, and gives us the tales of fairies,
         goblins, and elves--Boyd Dawkins' story of the Isle of
         Man farmer--A Scandinavian Manxman--Modernised lullaby
         of a Polish mother--"Shine, Stars"--"Rain, rain, go
         away"--Wind making--LULLABIES--Bulgarian, German,
         "Sleep, Baby, Sleep"--The lullaby of the Black
         Guitar--"Baby, go to Sleep"--English version, "Hush
         thee, my Babby"--Danish lullaby of "Sweetly sleep, my
         little Child"--"Bye, baby bunting"                           17

   IV. Elf-land--Old-time superstitions--A custom of providing a
         feast for the dead known in Yorkshire, North-west
         Ireland, and in Armenia--The Erl King of Goethe--Ballet
         of the Leaf-dressed Girl--The Spirit of the Waters--An
         Irish legend of Fior Usga--Scotch superstition--Jenny
         Greenteeth of Lancashire--The Merrow of the West of
         Ireland--Soul Cages--The German rhyme of "O Man of the
         Sea, come list unto Me"--Mysticism among uncivilised
         races--The Corn Spirit--The Rye-wolf--"The Cow's in the
         Corn"--"Ring a ring a rosies"--"Cuckoo Cherry Tree"--Our
         earliest song, "Summer is a-coming in"--"Hot Cockles" at
         Yorkshire funerals--"Over the Cuckoo Hill, I
         oh!"--Indian Lore                                            34


                                PART II.

    I. GAMES--Whipping-tops, Marbles, etc.--"I am good at Scourging
         of my Toppe," date 15--(?)--Dice and
         Pitch-and-Toss--"Dab a Prin in my Lottery Book"--"A'
         the Birds of the Air"--Hop Scotch--"Zickety, dickety,
         dock"--"All good Children go to Heaven"--"Mary at the
         Cottage Door."

         MARRIAGE GAMES--"If ever I Marry I'll Marry a Maid,"
         1557 A.D.--London Street Games--A Wedding--"Choose one,
         choose two, choose the nearest one to you"--"Rosy
         Apple, Lemon, and Pear"--The King of the
         Barbarines--"I've got Gold and I've got Silver"--A
         Lancashire Round Game--"Fol th' riddle, I do, I do, I
         do"--Round Game of the Mulberry Bush--"Pray, Mr. Fox,
         what time is it?"--"Mother, buy me a Milking
         Can"--"Here comes a Poor Sailor from Botany Bay"--"Can
         I get there by Candle-light?"                                58

   II. NURSERY GAMES--A Game for a Wet Day--"Cows and Horses walk
         on four legs"--A Game nearly 300 years old--"There were
         two birds sitting on a stone"--A B C Game--"Hi diddle
         diddle"--"I Apprentice my Son"--An Armenian Child's
         Game, "Jack's Alive"--Russian Superstition                   80

  III. JEWISH RHYMES--"A kid, a kid my father bought for two
         pieces of money--a kid! a kid!"--"The house that Jack
         built"--The Scotch version, "There was an old woman
         swept her house and found a silver penny"--The Chad
         Gadya--"Who knoweth One"                                     89

   IV. An ancient English Rhyme--"A Frog who would a-wooing go,"
         the version of same sung in Henry VIII.'s reign--Songs
         of London Boys in Tudor times--"Quoth John to
         Joan"--"Good parents in good manners do instruct their
         child"--"Tom a Lin"--"Bryan O'Lynn"--Four songs sung by
         children in Elizabeth's reign--"We'll have a Wedding at
         our House"                                                  100

    V. CAT RHYMES--"Pussy-cat, pussy-cat"--"Ten little mice sat down
         to spin"--"The rose is red, the grass is green"--"I Love
         little Pussy"--"Three Cats sat by the Fireside"--"There
         was a Crooked Man"--"Ding dong bell"--Cat tale of Dick
         Whittington                                                 112

   VI. A Cradle Song of the first century, "Sleep, O son, sleep"     117

  VII. JACK RHYMES                                                   123

 VIII. RIDDLE MAKING--German riddle of "Seven White and Seven
         Black Horses"--Greek riddle of the Two Sisters; another
         of "The year, months, and days"--"Old Mother
         Needle"--"Purple, yellow, red, and green"--"As round as
         an Apple"--"Humpty Dumpty"--The Ph[oe]nix
         fable--"Ladybird! ladybird! fly away home"                  127

   IX. NURSERY CHARMS--"When a twister twisting twists him a
         twist"--An Essex Charm for a Churn--"Matthew, Mark,
         Luke, and John" Charms.

         MONEY RHYMES--"How a lass gave her lover three slips
         for a tester"--"Little Mary Esther"--"Sing a Song of
         Sixpence"--"There was an old man in a velvet
         coat"--"See-saw"--"One a penny"--"There's never a
         maiden in all the town"--"Pinky, pinky,
         bow-bell"--Numerical Nursery Rhyme--Baker's Man             134

    X. SCRAPS--"Oh, slumber, my darling, thy sire is a
         knight"--"Bye, baby bumpkin"--"Nose, nose, jolly red
         nose"--"I saw a man in the moon"--A Henry VIII.
         Rhyme--"Peg-Peg"--"Round about"--"Father
         Long-legs"--"Two-penny rice"--"Come when you're
         called"--A Game--"Nanny Natty Coat"--"As I was going
         down Sandy Lane"--"There was an old woman"--"Robert
         Rowley"--"Little General Monk"--"Dr. Tom Tit"--"Tommy
         Trot"--"Goosey Gander"--"The White Dove sat on the
         Castell Wall"--"This Little Pig"--"Little Bo
         Peep"--"See-saw, Margery Daw"--"Four-and-twenty
         Tailors"--"Little Moppet"--"Hub-a-dub, dub"--"Diddle
         Dumpling"--"Jack and Jyll"--"The Cat and the
         Fiddle"--"Baa! baa! black sheep"--"Here comes a poor
         Duke out of Spain"--"Ride to the
         market"--"Cross-patch"--"The Man of the South"--A
         Lancashire Fragment--"Dickery dock"--"There was an old
         woman toss'd up in a blanket"--"We're all in the
         dumps"--A Proverb--A Compliment--The Reverse                141

   XI. SONGS--"Will the love that you're so rich
         in?"--"Cock-a-doodle doo"--"King Cole"--"Rowsty
         dowt"--"There was a Little Man"--The Creole's
         Song--"Dapple Grey"--"Blue Betty"--"Tom, Tom, the
         Piper's Son"--"Oh dear, what can the matter
         be?"--"Simple Simon"--"I saw a Ship a-sailing"--"David
         the Welshman"--"My Father he Died"                          152

  XII. SCOTCH RHYMES--"As I went up the Brandy Hill"--Scotch
         version of Bryan O'Lynn--"Cripple Dick"--"Pan, Pan,
         Play"--"Gi'e a thing"--A Gruesome Riddle--"King and
         Queen of Cantelon"--Hidee--"Wha's your Daddie?"--"The
         Moon is a Lady"                                             162

 XIII. A favourite Nursery Hymn--The Latin version of the
         Virgin's Lullaby                                            169

  XIV. "There was a maid came out of Kent"--"Martin Smart"--"Great
         A, little B"--A Nursery Tale--"A duck, a drake"--"Hark!
         Hark!"--A B C Jingles--A Catch Rhyme                        173

   XV. BELL RHYMES--"Banbury Cross"--"Gay go up, and gay go
         down"--"Mary, Mary, quite contrary"--The Provencal
         "Ding-dong"                                                 178

  XVI. Political Significations of Nursery Rhymes--"Come,
         Jack"--"A man of words"--Pastorini, Lord Grey,
         Lyttleton, Dan O'Connell, and Lord Brougham caricatured     185




INTRODUCTION


Without advancing any theory touching the progression of the mother's
song to her babe, other than declaring lullabies to be about as old as
babies, a statement which recalls to mind an old story, entitled "The
Owl's Advice to an Inquisitive Cat."

"O cat," said the sage owl of the legend, "to pass life agreeably most
of all you need a philosophy; you and I indeed enjoy many things in
common, especially night air and mice, yet you sadly need a philosophy
to search after, and think about matters most difficult to discover."
After saying this the owl ruffled his feathers and pretended to think.

But the cat observed that it was foolish to search after such things.
"Indeed," she purringly said, "I only trouble about easy matters."

"Ah! I will give you an example of my philosophy, and how inquiry ought
to be made. You at least know, I presume," scoffingly exclaimed the owl,
"that the chicken arises from the egg, and the egg comes from the hen.
Now the object of true philosophy is to examine this statement in all
its bearings, and consider which was first, the egg or the bird."

The cat was quite struck with the proposition.

"It is quite clear," went on the owl, "to all but the ignorant, one or
other appeared first, since neither is immortal."

The cat inquired, "Do you find out this thing by philosophy?"

"Really! how absurd of you to ask," concluded the feathered one. "And I
thank the gods for it, were it as you suggest, O cat, philosophy would
give no delight to inquirers, for knowing all things would mean the end
and destruction of philosophy."

With this owl's apology nursery-lore is presented to my readers without
the legion of verified references of that character demanded as
corroborative evidence in the schools of criticism to-day.

A few leading thoughts culled from such men as Tylor, Lubbock, Wilson,
McLennan, Frazer, and Boyd Dawkins, etc., the experiences of our modern
travellers among primitive races, Indian and European folk-lore, the
world's credulities past and present, have helped me to fix the idea
that amongst the true historians of mankind the children of our streets
find a place.




 A HISTORY
 OF
 NURSERY RHYMES




PART I.

CHAPTER I.

    "The scene was savage, but the scene was new."


Scientists tell us many marvellous tales, none the less true because
marvellous, about the prehistoric past. Like the owl in the preface,
they are not discouraged because the starting-point is beyond reach; and
we, like the cat, should try to awaken our interest when evidences are
presented to us that on first hearing sound like the wonderful tales of
the Orient.

Thousands of years ago in our own land dwelt two races of people, the
River Drift-men and the Cave-dwellers. The River Drift-man was a hunter
of a very low order, possessing only the limited intelligence of the
modern Australian native. This man supported life much in the same way
we should expect a man to do, surrounded by similar conditions; but, on
the other hand, the Cave-dweller showed a singular talent for
representing the animals he hunted, and his sketches reveal to us the
capacity he had for seeing the beauty and grace of natural objects. Were
a visit to be paid to the British Museum, his handicraft, rude when
compared to modern art, could be seen in the fragments beyond all cavil
recording his primitive culture.

Without, then, any very great stretch of imagination we can picture to
ourselves this man as belonging to one of the most primitive types of
our race, having little occasion to use a vocabulary--save of a most
meagre order; and indeed his language would embody only a supply of
words just expressive of his few simple wants. Without daring to compare
primitive culture with modern advancement, this prototype's appetites
would have been possibly served for the greater part by sign-language,
and the use of a few easy protophones. To-day, after the lapse of ages
since this Second Stone Age, man went up and possessed the land; we with
our new inventions, wants, and newly-acquired tastes have added a legion
of scientifically constructed sounds, built up on the foundation he laid
with his first utterances, for language is not the outcome of race, but
of social contact. As an interpolation the tale of the Egyptian
Psammetichus is worth telling at this stage.

Desirous of finding--as the ancients then thought existed--the original
language of mankind, Psammetichus isolated two babies from birth in
separate apartments, and for two years they were not allowed to hear the
sound of a human voice. At the end of that time they were brought
together and kept for a few hours without food. Psammetichus then
entered the room, and both children uttered the same strange cry,
"Becos, Becos." "Ah!" said Psammetichus, "'Becos, Becos,' why! that is
Phrygian for bread," and Phrygian was said to have been the ancient
universal language of man. Still, however one feels disposed to imagine
what took place in the Baby Kingdom of these remote ages, brief
allusions only will be made to the veiled past, when either
sign-language, or relics, or myths of long descent are presented to us
in the form of nursery-lore.

How many thousands of years have gone by since the period known to
scientists as the Pleistocene was here--a time when the whole of Britain
and North-West Europe wore a glistening mantle of ice, and when man
could scarce exist, save on the fringe of the south-east littoral of
England--none can say. At all events it may be safely assumed that not
till the end of the Pleistocene Era was Britain or Scandinavia the abode
of man, when the fauna and flora assumed approximately their present
condition, and the state of things called Recent by geologists set in.

Whether the Aryans be accepted as the first people to inhabit our
ice-bound shores in the remote past matters little, and from whence they
sprang (according to Max Mueller "somewhere in Asia," or Dr. Schrader
"European Russia," or Herr Penka "from the east to the far west of the
Scandinavian Peninsula") matters still less, "for," says Professor
Huxley, "the speakers of primitive Aryan may have been (themselves) a
mixture of two or more races, just as are the speakers of English or of
French at the present time"; and archaeology takes us no further back
than into the Neolithic or Second Stone Age, when the poetry of the
human voice gave a dramatic value to the hitherto primitive
sign-language limitation of the Old Drift-men. At this age, the
Neolithic, arithmetical questions arising in the course of life would
necessarily assume a vocal value instead of a digital one. No longer
would fifteen be counted by holding out ten fingers and five toes, but
an idiomatic phrase, descriptive of the former sign-language, "_of two
hands and one foot's worth_" would be used, just as to-day an African
would express the same problem in a number of cows, and as the
comparatively modern Roman used such pictorial phrases as "_to condemn
a person of his head_." From this era, centuries before the Celt
traversed our shores, "the progress of civilisation" has gone on in one
unbroken continuity from the Second Stone Age man to the present time.




CHAPTER II.

    "O dea, si prima repetens ab origine pergam et vacet annales
    nostrorum audire laborum. Ante diem clauso componat Vesper
    Olympo."--VERGIL, _AEneid_, Book I. 372.

    "O goddess, if I were to proceed retracing them from their first
    origin, and thou hadst leisure to hear the records of our labours
    before (the end), the Evening Star would lull the day to rest,
    Olympus being closed."


However, granting the scientific imagination to assume a starting-point
when the vast Ice Period was vanishing and language was not the test of
race, but of social contact, it must be allowed that the River Drift-man
was the first of his species that touched our shores, followed by the
Cave-dwellers some thousands of years later; the latter man having his
abode fixed to a locality, and his wanderings within prescribed limits.

He may have, this prehistoric man, this Cave-dweller, chattered like a
monkey in a patois understood only by his own family; but what is more
reasonable to suppose than that the Drift-men of the marshes and
coastlines had only a restricted use for vocal sounds, sign-language
being expressive enough to meet their few wants? Meagre social
conditions, peculiar isolation, savagery, strife for life, call for no
complex language, but sign-language has the authority of people living
on the globe to-day, not only amongst uncivilised races, but traces are
seen in our very midst.

The few examples of custom and signs given below will better illustrate
the force of the statement.

"Amongst the Uvinza, when two grandees meet, the junior leans forward,
bends his knees, and places the palms of his hands on the ground, one on
either side his feet, while the senior claps hands over him six or
seven times."

In the morning among the Walunga all the villagers turn out, and a
continuous clapping is kept up to the vocalisation of a shrill
"Kwi-tata?" or "How do you do?"

Two special signs for "good" are in the sign-vocabulary of the North
American Indians, and are worth recording. The person greeting holds the
right hand, back up, in front of and close to the heart, with the
fingers extended and pointing to the left. Another habit is that of
passing the open right hand, palm downwards, from the heart, towards the
person greeted. A stranger making his appearance on the frontier line of
an Indian camp seldom fails to recognise the true sentiment of the
chief's salutation, the extended fingers on the left side meaning--

"You are near my heart--expect no treachery," a most solemn surety;
while the hand sent from the heart towards the visitor seems to say--

"I extend hospitality to you."

The "attingere extremis digitis" of the Romans expressed the same
temperate conduct.

