The Project Gutenberg eBook, Little Wizard Stories of Oz, by L. Frank
Baum, Illustrated by John R. Neill


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Little Wizard Stories of Oz


Author: L. Frank Baum



Release Date: May 19, 2008  [eBook #25519]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE WIZARD STORIES OF OZ***


E-text prepared by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Greg Bergquist, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this file which
      includes the many lovely original colored illustrations.
      See 25519-h.htm or 25519-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/5/5/1/25519/25519-h/25519-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/5/5/1/25519/25519-h.zip)





[Illustration: THIS BOOK BELONGS TO]

[Illustration]

LITTLE WIZARD STORIES OF OZ

by

L. FRANK BAUM

Illustrated by John R. Neill







Little
Wizard
Stories
of Oz




Contents


  The Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger       15

  Little Dorothy and Toto                      39

  Tiktok and the Nome King                     63

  Ozma and the Little Wizard                   87

  Jack Pumpkinhead and the Sawhorse           111

  The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman           135

[Illustration]




THE COWARDLY LION AND THE HUNGRY TIGER


In the splendid palace of the Emerald City, which is in the center of
the fairy Land of Oz, is a great Throne Room, where Princess Ozma, the
Ruler, for an hour each day sits in a throne of glistening emeralds and
listens to all the troubles of her people, which they are sure to tell
her about. Around Ozma's throne, on such occasions, are grouped all
the important personages of Oz, such as the Scarecrow, Jack Pumpkinhead,
Tiktok the Clockwork Man, the Tin Woodman, the Wizard of Oz, the Shaggy
Man and other famous fairy people. Little Dorothy usually has a seat at
Ozma's feet, and crouched on either side the throne are two enormous
beasts known as the Hungry Tiger and the Cowardly Lion.

[Illustration]

These two beasts are Ozma's chief guardians, but as everyone loves the
beautiful girl Princess there has never been any disturbance in the
great Throne Room, or anything for the guardians to do but look fierce
and solemn and keep quiet until the Royal Audience is over and the
people go away to their homes.

Of course no one would dare be naughty while the huge Lion and Tiger
crouched beside the throne; but the fact is, the people of Oz are very
seldom naughty. So Ozma's big guards are more ornamental than useful,
and no one realizes that better than the beasts themselves.

One day, after everybody had left the Throne Room except the Cowardly
Lion and the Hungry Tiger, the Lion yawned and said to his friend:

"I'm getting tired of this job. No one is afraid of us and no one pays
any attention to us."

"That is true," replied the big Tiger, purring softly. "We might as well
be in the thick jungles where we were born, as trying to protect Ozma
when she needs no protection. And I'm dreadfully hungry all the time."

"You have enough to eat, I'm sure," said the Lion, swaying his tail
slowly back and forth.

"Enough, perhaps; but not the kind of food I long for," answered the
Tiger. "What I'm hungry for is fat babies. I have a great desire to eat
a few fat babies. Then, perhaps, the people of Oz would fear me and I'd
become more important."

[Illustration]

"True," agreed the Lion. "It would stir up quite a rumpus if you ate but
_one_ fat baby. As for myself; my claws are sharp as needles and strong
as crowbars, while my teeth are powerful enough to tear a person to
pieces in a few seconds. If I should spring upon a man and make chop
suey of him, there would be wild excitement in the Emerald City and the
people would fall upon their knees and beg me for mercy. That, in my
opinion, would render me of considerable importance."

"After you had torn the person to pieces, what would you do next?" asked
the Tiger sleepily.

"Then I would roar so loudly it would shake the earth and stalk away to
the jungle to hide myself, before anyone could attack me or kill me for
what I had done."

"I see," nodded the Tiger. "You are really cowardly."

"To be sure. That is why I am named the Cowardly Lion. That is why I
have always been so tame and peaceable. But I'm awfully tired of being
tame," added the Lion, with a sigh, "and it would be fun to raise a row
and show people what a terrible beast I really am."

The Tiger remained silent for several minutes, thinking deeply as he
slowly washed his face with his left paw. Then he said:

"I'm getting old, and it would please me to eat at least one fat baby
before I die. Suppose we surprise these people of Oz and prove our
power. What do you say? We will walk out of here just as usual and the
first baby we meet I'll eat in a jiffy, and the first man or woman you
meet you will tear to pieces. Then we will both run out of the city
gates and gallop across the country and hide in the jungle before anyone
can stop us."

"All right; I'm game," said the Lion, yawning again so that he showed
two rows of dreadfully sharp teeth.

The Tiger got up and stretched his great, sleek body.

"Come on," he said. The Lion stood up and proved he was the larger of
the two, for he was almost as big as a small horse.

Out of the palace they walked, and met no one. They passed through the
beautiful grounds, past fountains and beds of lovely flowers, and met no
