The Project Gutenberg EBook of Do and Dare, by Horatio Alger, Jr.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Do and Dare
       A Brave Boy's Fight for Fortune

Author: Horatio Alger, Jr.

Release Date: May, 2004 [EBook #5747]
Posting Date: March 27, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DO AND DARE ***




Produced by Carrie Fellman









DO AND DARE

or

A BRAVE BOY'S FIGHT FOR FORTUNE

By Horatio Alger, Jr.


NEW YORK




CHAPTER I. THE POST OFFICE AT WAYNEBORO.


"If we could only keep the post office, mother, we should be all right,"
said Herbert Carr, as he and his mother sat together in the little
sitting room of the plain cottage which the two had occupied ever since
he was a boy of five.

"Yes, Herbert, but I am afraid there won't be much chance of it."

"Who would want to take it from you, mother?"

"Men are selfish, Herbert, and there is no office, however small, that
is not sought after."

"What was the income last year?" inquired Herbert.

Mrs. Carr referred to a blank book lying on the table in which the
post-office accounts were kept, and answered:

"Three hundred and ninety-eight dollars and fifty cents."

"I shouldn't think that would be much of an inducement to an able-bodied
man, who could work at any business."

"Your father was glad to have it."

"Yes, mother, but he had lost an arm in the war, and could not engage in
any business that required both hands."

"That is true, Herbert, but I am afraid there will be more than one who
will be willing to relieve me of the duties. Old Mrs. Allen called at
the office to-day, and told me she understood that there was a movement
on foot to have Ebenezer Graham appointed."

"Squire Walsingham's nephew?"

"Yes; it is understood that the squire will throw his influence into the
scale, and that will probably decide the matter."

"Then it's very mean of Squire Walsingham," said Herbert, indignantly.
"He knows that you depend on the office for a living."

"Most men are selfish, my dear Herbert."

"But he was an old schoolfellow of father's, and it was as his
substitute that father went to the war where he was wounded."

"True, Herbert, but I am afraid that consideration won't weigh much with
John Walsingham."

"I have a great mind to go and see him, mother. Have you any
objections?"

"I have no objections, but I am afraid it will do no good."

"Mr. Graham ought to be ashamed, with the profits of his store, to want
the post office also. His store alone pays him handsomely."

"Mr. Graham is fond of money. He means to be a rich man."

"That is true enough. He is about the meanest man in town."

A few words are needed in explanation, though the conversation explains
itself pretty well.

Herbert's father, returning from the war with the loss of an arm, was
fortunate enough to receive the appointment of postmaster, and thus
earn a small, but, with strict economy, adequate income, until a fever
terminated his earthly career at middle age. Mr. Graham was a rival
applicant for the office, but Mr. Carr's services in the war were
thought to give him superior claims, and he secured it. During the month
that had elapsed since his death, Mrs. Carr had carried on the post
office under a temporary appointment. She was a woman of good business
capacity, and already familiar with the duties of the office, having
assisted her husband, especially during his sickness, when nearly the
whole work devolved upon her. Most of the village people were in favor
of having her retained, but the local influence of Squire Walsingham and
his nephew was so great that a petition in favor of the latter secured
numerous signatures, and was already on file at the department in
Washington, and backed by the congressman of the district, who was
a political friend of the squire. Mrs. Carr was not aware that the
movement for her displacement had gone so far.

It was already nine o'clock when Herbert's conversation with his mother
ended, and he resolved to defer his call upon Squire Walsingham till the
next morning.

About nine o'clock in the forenoon our young hero rang the bell of
the village magnate, and with but little delay was ushered into his
presence.

Squire Walsingham was a tall, portly man of fifty, sleek and evidently
on excellent terms with himself. Indeed, he was but five years older
than his nephew, Ebenezer Graham, and looked the younger of the two,
despite the relationship. If he had been a United States Senator he
could not have been more dignified in his deportment, or esteemed
himself of greater consequence. He was a selfish man, but he was free
from the mean traits that characterized his nephew.

"You are the Carr boy," said the squire, pompously, looking over his
spectacles at Herbert, as he entered the door.

"My name is Herbert Carr," said Herbert, shortly. "You have known me all
my life."

"Certainly," said the squire, a little ruffled at the failure of his
grand manner to impose upon his young visitor. "Did I not call you the
Carr boy?"

Herbert did not fancy being called the Carr boy, but he was there to ask
a favor, and he thought it prudent not to show his dissatisfaction. He
resolved to come to the point at once.

"I have called, Squire Walsingham," he commenced, "to ask if you will
use your influence to have my mother retained in charge of the post
office."

"Ahem!" said the squire, somewhat embarrassed. "I am not in charge of
the post-office department."

"No, sir, I am aware of that; but the postmaster general will be
influenced by the recommendations of people in the village."

"Very true!" said the squire, complacently. "Very true, and very proper.
I do not pretend to say that my recommendation would not weigh with the
authorities at Washington. Indeed, the member from our district is a
personal friend of mine."

"You know how we are situated," continued Herbert, who thought it best
to state his case as briefly as possible. "Father was unable to save
anything, and we have no money ahead. If mother can keep the post
office, we shall get along nicely, but if she loses it, we shall have a
hard time."

"I am surprised that in your father's long tenure of office he did not
save something," said the squire, in a tone which indicated not only
surprise but reproof.

"There was not much chance to save on a salary of four hundred dollars a
year," said Herbert, soberly, "after supporting a family of three."

"Ahem!" said the squire, sagely; "where there's a will there's a way.
Improvidence is the great fault of the lower classes."

"We don't belong to the lower classes," said Herbert, flushing with
indignation.

Squire Walmsgham was secretly ambitious of representing his district
some day in Congress, and he felt that he had made a mistake. It won't
do for an aspirant to office to speak of the lower classes, and the
squire hastened to repair his error.

"That was not the term I intended to imply," he condescended to explain.
"I meant to say that improvidence is the prevailing fault of those whose
income is small."

"We haven't had much chance to be improvident!" said Herbert "We have
had to spend all our income, but we are not in debt--that is, we have no
debts that we are unable to pay."

"That is well," said Squire Walsingham, "but, my young constituent--I
mean my young friend--I apprehend that you do not take a right view
of public office. It is not designed to support a privileged class in
luxury."

"Luxury, on four hundred a year!" replied Herbert.

"I am speaking in general terms," said the squire, hastily. "I mean to
say that I cannot recommend a person to office simply because he or she
needs the income."

"No, sir, I know that; but my mother understands the duties of the
office, and no complaint has been made that she does not make a good
postmaster."

"Possibly," said the squire, non-commitally; "but I am opposed upon
principle to conferring offices upon women. Men are more efficient, and
better qualified to discharge responsible duties."

"Then, sir," said Herbert, his heart sinking, "I am to understand that
you do not favor the appointment of my mother?"

"I should be glad to hear that your mother was doing well," said the
squire, "but I cannot conscientiously favor the appointment of a woman
to be postmaster of Wayneboro."

"That means that he prefers the appointment should go to his nephew,"
thought Herbert.

"If my mother were not competent to discharge the duties," he said, his
face showing his disappointment in spite of himself, "I would not ask
your influence, notwithstanding you were a schoolmate of father's, and
he lost his arm while acting as your substitute."

"I have already said that I wish your mother well," said the squire,
coloring, "and in any other way I am ready to help her and you. Indeed,
I may be able to secure you a situation."

"Where, sir?"

"Mr. Graham needs a boy in his store, and I think he will take you on my
recommendation."

"Is Tom Tripp going away?" asked Herbert.

"The Tripp boy is unsatisfactory, so Mr. Graham tells me."

Herbert knew something of what it would be to be employed by Mr. Graham.
Tom Tripp worked early and late for a dollar and a half per week,
without board, for a hard and suspicious taskmaster, who was continually
finding fault with him. But for sheer necessity, he would have left
Mr. Graham's store long ago. He had confided the unpleasantness of
his position to Herbert more than once, and enlisted his sympathy and
indignation. Herbert felt that he would not like to work for Mr. Graham
at any price, more especially as it seemed likely that the storekeeper
was likely to deprive his mother of her office and income.

"I should not like to work for Mr. Graham, sir," he said.

"It appears to me that you are very particular, young man," said Squire
Walsingham.

"I would be willing to work for you, sir, but not for him."

"Ahem!" said the squire, somewhat mollified, "I will think of your
case."

Herbert left the house, feeling that his mother's removal was only a
matter of time.




CHAPTER II. HERBERT'S CHANCE.



Herbert left the house of Squire Walsingham in a sober frame of mind. He
saw clearly that his mother would not long remain in office, and without
her official income they would find it hard to get along. To be sure,
she received a pension of eight dollars a month, in consideration of
her husband's services in the war, but eight dollars would not go far
towards supporting their family, small as it was. There were other means
of earning a living, to be sure, but Wayneboro was an agricultural town
mainly, and unless he hired out on a farm there seemed no way open to
him, while the little sewing his mother might be able to procure would
probably pay her less than a dollar a week.

The blow fell sooner than he expected. In the course of the next week
Mrs. Carr was notified that Ebenezer Graham had been appointed her
successor, and she was directed to turn over the papers and property of
the office to him.

She received the official notification by the afternoon mail, and in the
evening she was favored by a call from her successor.

Ebenezer Graham was a small man, with insignificant, mean-looking
features, including a pair of weazel-like eyes and a turn-up nose. It
did not require a skillful physiognomist to read his character in his
face. Meanness was stamped upon it in unmistakable characters.

"Good-evening, Mr. Graham," said the widow, gravely.

"Good-evening, ma'am," said the storekeeper. "I've called to see you,
Mrs. Carr, about the post office, I presume you have heard--"

"I have heard that you are to be my successor."

"Just so. As long as your husband was alive, I didn't want to step into
his shoes."

"But you are willing to step into mine," said Mrs. Carr, smiling
faintly.

"Just so--that is, the gov'ment appear to think a man ought to be in
charge of so responsible a position."

"I shall be glad if you manage the office better than I have done."

"You see, ma'am, it stands to reason that a man is better fitted for
business than a woman," said Ebenezer Graham, in a smooth tone for he
wanted to get over this rather awkward business as easily as possible.
"Women, you know, was made to adorn the domestic circles, et cetery."

"Adorning the domestic circle won't give me a living," said Mrs. Carr,
with some bitterness, for she knew that but for the grasping spirit of
the man before her she would have been allowed to retain her office.

"I was comin' to that," said the new postmaster. "Of course, I
appreciate your position as a widder, without much means, and I'm going
to make you an offer; that is, your boy, Herbert."

Herbert looked up from a book he was reading, and listened with interest
to hear the benevolent intentions of the new postmaster.

"I am ready to give him a place in my store," proceeded Ebenezer. "I
always keep a boy, and thinks I to myself, the wages I give will
help along the widder Carr. You see, I like to combine business with
consideration for my feller creeters."

Mrs. Carr smiled faintly, for in spite of her serious strait she could
not help being amused at the notion of Ebenezer Graham's philanthropy.

"What's going to become of Tom Tripp?" asked Herbert, abruptly.

"Thomas Tripp isn't exactly the kind of boy I want in my store," said
Mr. Graham. "He's a harum-scarum sort of boy, and likes to shirk his
work. Then I suspect he stops to play on the way when I send him on
errands. Yesterday he was five minutes longer than he need to have been
in goin' to Sam Dunning's to carry some groceries. Thomas doesn't seem
to appreciate his privileges in bein' connected with a business like
mine."

Tom Tripp was hardly to blame for not recognizing his good luck in
occupying a position where he received a dollar and a half a week for
fourteen hours daily work, with half a dozen scoldings thrown in.

"How do you know I will suit you any better than Tom?" asked Herbert,
who did not think it necessary to thank Mr. Graham for the proffered
engagement until he learned just what was expected of him, and what his
pay was to be.

"You're a different sort of a boy," said Ebenezer, with an attempt at a
pleasant smile. "You've been brought up different. I've heard you're a
smart, capable boy, that isn't afraid of work."

"No, sir, I am not, if I am fairly paid for my work."

The new postmaster's jaw fell, and he looked uneasy, for he always
grudged the money he paid out, even the paltry dollar and a half which
went to poor Tom.

"I always calkerlate to pay fair wages," he said; "but I ain't rich, and
I can't afford to fling away money."

"How much do you pay Tom Tripp?" asked Herbert.

He knew, but he wanted to draw Mr. Graham out.

"I pay Thomas a dollar and fifty cents a week," answered the
storekeeper, in a tone which indicated that he regarded this, on the
whole, as rather a munificent sum.

"And he works from seven in the morning till nine o'clock at night,"
proceeded Herbert.

