The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Treasure of the Incas, by G. A. Henty

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Treasure of the Incas
       A Story of Adventure in Peru

Author: G. A. Henty

Posting Date: June 1, 2012 [EBook #7070]
Release Date: December, 2004
First Posted: March 5, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TREASURE OF THE INCAS ***




Produced by Anne Soulard, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.









The Treasure of the Incas

A Story of Adventure in Peru


BY

G. A. HENTY




[Illustration: IT DID NOT TAKE LONG TO TRANSFER THE SACKS INTO THE BOAT
_Page 339_]




PREFACE TO THE ORIGINAL EDITION


The mysterious loss of a large portion of the treasure of the Incas has
never been completely cleared up. By torturing the natives to whom the
secret had been entrusted, the Spaniards made two or three discoveries,
but there can be little doubt that these finds were only a small
proportion of the total amount of the missing hoards, although for
years after their occupation of the country the Spaniards spared no
pains and hesitated at no cruelty to bring to light the hidden wealth.
The story of the boat which put to sea laden with treasure is
historical, and it was generally supposed that she was lost in a storm
that took place soon after she sailed. It was also morally certain that
the Peruvians who left the country when the Spaniards became masters
carried off with them a very large amount of treasure into that part of
South America lying east of Peru. Legends are current that they founded
a great city there, and that their descendants occupy it at the present
time. But the forests are so thick, and the Indian tribes so hostile,
that the country has never yet been explored, and it may be reserved
for some future traveller, possessing the determination of my two
heroes, to clear up the mystery of this city as they penetrated that of
the lost treasure-ship. It need hardly be said that the state of
confusion, misrule, and incessant civil wars which I have described as
prevailing in Peru presents a true picture of the country at the period
in which this story is laid.

G. A. HENTY.




CONTENTS


CHAP.

    I. HOW IT CAME ABOUT

   II. THE START

  III. AT LIMA

   IV. A STREET FRAY

    V. AMONG THE MOUNTAINS

   VI. A TROPICAL FOREST

  VII. AN INDIAN ATTACK

 VIII. DEFEAT OF THE NATIVES

   IX. THE SIGNAL STAR

    X. A FRESH START

   XI. BRIGANDS

  XII. PRISONERS

 XIII. LETTERS FROM HOME

  XIV. THE CASTLE OF THE DEMONS

   XV. INVESTIGATIONS

  XVI. THE SEARCH BEGINS

 XVII. AT WORK

XVIII. DISAPPOINTMENT

  XIX. THE TREASURE

   XX. HOME




ILLUSTRATIONS


IT DID NOT TAKE LONG TO TRANSFER THE SACKS INTO THE BOAT.

AN INDIAN SPIES THE EXPEDITION.

THEY SAW APPROACHING A PEASANT WOMAN SITTING ON A MULE.

HARRY DROPPED THE BARREL OF HIS RIFLE INTO THE PALM OF HIS LEFT HAND.

Map of Peru

[Illustration: MAP OF PERU]




THE TREASURE OF THE INCAS




CHAPTER I

HOW IT CAME ABOUT


Two men were sitting in the smoking-room of a London club. The room was
almost empty, and as they occupied arm-chairs in one corner of it, they
were able to talk freely without fear of being overheard. One of them
was a man of sixty, the other some five or six and twenty.

"I must do something," the younger man said, "for I have been kicking
my heels about London since my ship was paid off two years ago. At
first, of course, it didn't matter, for I have enough to live upon; but
recently I have been fool enough to fall in love with a girl whose
parents would never dream of allowing her to marry a half-pay
lieutenant of the navy with no chance in the world of getting employed
again, for I have no interest whatever."

"It is an awkward case certainly, Prendergast," the other said; "and
upon my word, though I sympathize with you, I cannot blame Fortescue.
He is not what you might call a genial man, but there is no doubt that
he was a splendid lawyer and a wonderful worker. For ten years he
earned more than any man at the bar. I know that he was twice offered
the solicitor-generalship, but as he was making two or three times the
official salary, he would not take it. I believe he would have gone on
working till now had he not suddenly come in for a very fine estate,
owing to the death, in the course of two or three years, of four men
who stood between him and it. Besides, I fancy he got hints that in the
general opinion of the bar he had had a wonderfully good innings, and
it was about time that younger men had a share in it. What his savings
were I do not know, but they must be very large. His three sons are all
at the bar, and are rising men, so there was no occasion for him to go
on piling up money for them. But, as I say, he has always had the
reputation of being a hard man, and it is practically certain that he
would never allow his daughter to marry a man whom he would regard as
next door to a pauper. Now, what are you thinking of doing?"

"Well, sir, Miss Fortescue has agreed to wait for me for two years, and
of course I am eager to do something, but the question is what? I can
sail a ship, but even could I get the command of a merchantman, it
would not improve my position in the eyes of the parents of the lady in
question. Now, you have been knocking about all over the world, I do
wish you would give me your advice. Where is there money to be got? I
am equally ready to go to the North Pole or the Equator, to enter the
service of an Indian prince, or to start in search of a treasure hidden
by the old bucaneers."

"You talk Spanish, don't you?"

"Yes; all my service has been in the Mediterranean. We were two years
off the coast of Spain, and in and out of its ports, and as time hung
heavily on our hands, I got up the language partly to amuse myself and
partly to be able to talk fluently with my partners at a ball."

The elder man did not speak for a minute or two.

"You have not thought of South America?" he said at last.

"No, Mr. Barnett; I don't know that I have ever thought of one place
more than another."

The other was again silent.

"I don't think you could do better anywhere," he said slowly. "It is a
land with great possibilities; at any rate it is a land where you could
be understood, and of course it would be folly to go anywhere without a
knowledge of the language. I was, as you know, five years out there,
and came home when the war broke out between Chili and the Spaniards. I
have been more in Peru than in Chili, and as Peru was still in the
hands of the Spanish, it would have been impossible for me to go there
again as long as the war lasted. Knocking about as I did, I heard a
great deal from the natives (I mean the Indians). I gathered from them
a number of their traditions, and I am convinced that they know of any
number of gold mines that were formerly worked, but were blocked up
when the Spaniards invaded the country, and have been kept secret ever
since.

"The natives have never spoken on the subject at all to the Spaniards.
If they had, they would have been flogged until they revealed all they
knew--that is to say, they would have been flogged to death, for no
tortures will wring from an Indian anything he knows about gold. They
look upon that metal as the source of all the misfortunes that have
fallen upon their race. With an Englishman whom they knew and trusted,
and who, as they also knew, had no wish whatever to discover gold
mines, they were a little less reticent. I never asked them any
questions on a subject in which I had not a shadow of interest, but I
certainly had some curiosity, not of a pecuniary kind, because the
matter had always been a riddle as to the hiding-place of the Incas'
treasures. And from what I learned I should say it is absolutely
certain that a great portion of these escaped the search of their
Spanish tyrants.

"Whether the men who were employed in the work all died without
revealing the secret, or whether it had been trusted to a chosen few, I
know not; but the natives believe that there are still a few among them
to whom the secret has been passed down from father to son. Anyhow, all
had heard vague traditions. Some said that part of the treasure was
carried hundreds of miles inland and given over to a tribe of fierce
savages, in a country into which no European can enter. Another
tradition is that a portion of it was carried off by sea in a great
canoe, which was never heard of again and was believed to have been
lost. I am not for a moment supposing, Prendergast, that if you went
out there you would have the most remote chance of discovering what the
Spaniards, ever since they landed there, have been in vain trying to
find, and I certainly should not think of recommending a mad-brained
adventure, but undoubtedly there are many rich gold mines yet to be
found. There are openings for trade, too; and I can give you
introductions to merchants both in Chili and Peru. It is not a thing I
should recommend to everyone, far from it; but if you want to combine
adventure with a chance, however small, of making money, I don't know
that you can do better than go to South America. You are fitted for no
calling here; your income, counting your half-pay, would suffice to
keep you out there, and a couple of years of such a life would do you
no harm."

"It is just what I should like," the young man said enthusiastically;
"though I don't know how I should set to work if I did find a mine."

"You would have to bring home specimens, with particulars of the width
of the lode. Of course you would crush pieces up and wash them
yourself, or get your Indian to wash them; that would give you an
approximate idea of the percentage of gold. If it were rich, I could
introduce you to men who would advance money for working it, giving you
a share of the profits. They would send out a mining expert with you.
He would verify your report, and then you would take up the concession.
I don't know whether there have been any changes in the regulations,
but there is no difficulty in learning how to proceed from one or other
of the men to whom I will give you introductions. The thing would not
be worth thinking of were it not that the man who always went with me
as guide and muleteer is an Indian, and has, I am convinced, a
knowledge of some of these places. He was with me all the time I was
out there. I saved his life when a puma sprang upon him, and he more
than once hinted that he could make me a rich man, but I had no
inclination that way, my income being sufficient for all my wants.
Still, on the chance that he is alive--and he was about thirty when he
was with me fifteen years ago, so it is probable that he is still to
the fore--I will give you a letter to him telling him that you are a
dear friend of mine, and that I trust to him to do any service he can
for you just as he would have done for myself. Had it not been for that
I should never have mentioned the matter to you. These old mines are
the dream of every Peruvian. They have been searching for them ever
since the conquest of the country, and as they have failed, it is
absurd to think that an Englishman would have the slightest chance of
lighting upon a mine, still less of finding any of the Incas'
treasures. But with the Indian's aid it is just possible that you may
find something, though I should advise you most strongly not to build
in any way upon the chance. I consider that you cannot possibly win
Miss Fortescue; that being so, two years of knocking about will not
make your position worse, and by the time you come back, you may have
ceased to struggle against fate. It will afford you a remote--but
distinctly remote--opportunity of bettering your position, will give
you something else to think about besides that young lady's charms, and
you may even come to recognize that life is, after all, possible
without her. You may shake your head, lad; but you know children cry
for the moon sometimes, yet afterwards come to understand that it would
not be a desirable plaything."

"Well, at any rate, Mr. Barnett, I am extremely obliged for your
suggestion and for your offer of introductions. It is just the life
that I should enjoy thoroughly. As you say, the chance that anything
will come of it is extremely small, but at least there is a
possibility, and I take it as a drowning man catches at a straw."

"By the way, you mustn't think only of gold; silver is, after all, the
chief source of the riches of Peru, and there are numbers of
extraordinarily rich mines. It is calculated that three hundred
millions have been produced since the first occupation by the
Spaniards. Quicksilver is also very abundant; copper and lead are found
too, but there is not much to be done with them at present, owing to
the cost of carriage. There is good shooting in the mountains on the
eastern side of the Andes, and you will find plenty of sport there."

They talked over the matter for some time before they separated, and
Harry Prendergast became quite excited over it. On his return to his
rooms he was astonished to find the candles alight and a strong smell
of tobacco pervading the place. A lad of about sixteen leapt from the
easy-chair in which he had been sitting, with his feet on another.

"Hullo, Harry, I didn't expect you back so soon! The maid said you were
dining out, and I suppose that generally means one o'clock before you
are back."

"Well, what brings you here, Bert? I thought I had got you off my hands
for a year at least."

"I thought so, myself," the lad said coolly; "but circumstances have
been too strong for me. We were running down the Channel the night
before last, when a craft that was beating up ran smack into us. I
don't know that it was his fault more than ours; the night was dark,
and it was very thick, and we did not see each other until she was
within a length of us. Luck was against us; if she had been a few
seconds quicker we should have caught her broadside, but as it was she
rammed us, knocking a hole in our side as big as a house, and we had
just time to jump on board her. Our old craft went down two minutes
after the skipper, who was of course the last man, left her. The other
fellow had stove his bow in. Luckily we were only about a couple of
miles off Dungeness, and though she leaked like a sieve, we were able
to run her into the bay, where she settled down in two and a half
fathoms of water. As soon as it was light we landed and tramped to
Dover. A hoy was starting for the river that evening, and most of us
came up in her, arriving at the Pool about three hours ago. It is a bad
job, Harry, and I am horribly put out about it. Of course nothing could
be saved, and there is all the new kit you bought for me down at the
bottom. I sha'n't bother you again; I have quite made up my mind that I
shall ship before the mast this time, and a five-pound note will buy me
a good enough outfit for that."

"We need not talk about that now, Bertie. You are certainly an unlucky
beggar; this is the second time you have been wrecked."

"It is a frightful nuisance," the boy said. "It is the kit I am
thinking of, otherwise I should not mind. I didn't care for the
skipper. He seemed all right and decent enough before we started, but I
soon heard from fellows who had sailed with him before that he was a
tartar; and what was worse, they said he was in the habit of being
drunk two nights out of three. However, that has nothing to do with it.
I am really awfully sorry, Harry. You have been a thundering good elder
brother. I hated to think that you had to shell out last time, and I
have quite made up my mind that you sha'n't do it again."

"Well, it cannot be helped; it is no fault of yours; still, of course,
it is a nuisance. Thank God that no harm has come to you, that is the
principal thing. Now, sit down and go on with your pipe, you young
monkey. I did not think you had taken to smoking."

"One has to," the lad said, "everyone else does it; and there is no
doubt that, when you have got the middle watch on cold nights with foul
winds, it is a comfort."

"Well, go on smoking," his brother said. "I will light up too. Now shut
your mouth altogether. I want to think."

They were silent for fully ten minutes, then Harry said;

"I told you about that business of mine with Miss Fortescue."

Bertie grinned all over his face, which, as he sat, was not visible to
his brother. Then with preternatural gravity he turned towards him.

"Yes, you told me about it; an uncomfortable business wasn't it?--surly
old father, lovely daughter, and so on."

"I will pull your ear for you, you young scamp," Harry said wrathfully,
"if you make fun of it; and I have a good mind not to say what I was
going to."

"Say it, Harry, don't mind my feelings," the lad said. "You can't say I
did not stand it well when I was here last week, and gave you no end of
sympathy. Go ahead, old fellow; I dare say I shall be taken bad some
day, and then I shall be able to make allowances for you."

"I'll have nothing more to say to you, you young imp."

"Don't say that, Harry," the lad said in a tone of alarm. "You know how
sympathizing I am, and I know what a comfort it is for you to unburden
yourself; but I do think that it won't be necessary to go into personal
descriptions, you know, or to tell me what you said to her or she said
to you, because you told me all that ten days ago, also what her
tyrannical old father said. But really seriously I am awfully sorry
about it all, and if there is anything that I can possibly do for you I
shall be only too pleased. I don't see that it would be any advantage
for me to go and give the old gentleman my opinion of him; but if you
think it would, and can coach me in some of his sore points, we might
see how we could work upon them."

"I always thought you were a young ass, Bertie," Harry said sternly,
"but I have not realized before how utterly assified you are."

"All right, Harry!" the lad said cheerfully; "hit me as hard as you
like, under the circumstances I feel that I cannot kick."

Harry said nothing for another five minutes.

"This is a serious matter," he said at last, "and I don't want any
tomfoolery."

"All right, Harry! I will be as serious as a judge."

"I am thinking of going away for two years."

The lad turned half round in his chair and had a good look at his
brother.
