Project Gutenberg's The Princess and the Goblin, by George MacDonald

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Princess and the Goblin

Author: George MacDonald

Posting Date: September 27, 2008 [EBook #708]
Release Date: November, 1996

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRINCESS AND THE GOBLIN ***




Produced by Jo Churcher.  HTML version by Al Haines.









THE PRINCESS AND THE GOBLIN


by

GEORGE MACDONALD




CONTENTS


   1.  Why the Princess Has a Story About Her
   2.  The Princess Loses Herself
   3.  The Princess and--We Shall See Who
   4.  What the Nurse Thought of It
   5.  The Princess Lets Well Alone
   6.  The Little Miner
   7.  The Mines
   8.  The Goblins
   9.  The Hall of the Goblin Palace
  10.  The Princess's King-Papa
  11.  The Old Lady's Bedroom
  12.  A Short Chapter About Curdie
  13.  The Cobs' Creatures
  14.  That Night Week
  15.  Woven and then Spun
  16.  The Ring
  17.  Springtime
  18.  Curdie's Clue
  19.  Goblin Counsels
  20.  Irene's Clue
  21.  The Escape
  22.  The Old Lady and Curdie
  23.  Curdie and His Mother
  24.  Irene Behaves Like a Princess
  25.  Curdie Comes to Grief
  26.  The Goblin-Miners
  27.  The Goblins in the King's House
  28.  Curdie's Guide
  29.  Masonwork
  30.  The King and the Kiss
  31.  The Subterranean Waters
  32.  The Last Chapter




CHAPTER 1

Why the Princess Has a Story About Her

There was once a little princess whose father was king over a great
country full of mountains and valleys.  His palace was built upon one
of the mountains, and was very grand and beautiful.  The princess,
whose name was Irene, was born there, but she was sent soon after her
birth, because her mother was not very strong, to be brought up by
country people in a large house, half castle, half farmhouse, on the
side of another mountain, about half-way between its base and its peak.

The princess was a sweet little creature, and at the time my story
begins was about eight years old, I think, but she got older very fast.
Her face was fair and pretty, with eyes like two bits of night sky,
each with a star dissolved in the blue.  Those eyes you would have
thought must have known they came from there, so often were they turned
up in that direction.  The ceiling of her nursery was blue, with stars
in it, as like the sky as they could make it. But I doubt if ever she
saw the real sky with the stars in it, for a reason which I had better
mention at once.

These mountains were full of hollow places underneath; huge caverns,
and winding ways, some with water running through them, and some
shining with all colours of the rainbow when a light was taken in.
There would not have been much known about them, had there not been
mines there, great deep pits, with long galleries and passages running
off from them, which had been dug to get at the ore of which the
mountains were full.  In the course of digging, the miners came upon
many of these natural caverns.  A few of them had far-off openings out
on the side of a mountain, or into a ravine.

Now in these subterranean caverns lived a strange race of beings,
called by some gnomes, by some kobolds, by some goblins.  There was a
legend current in the country that at one time they lived above ground,
and were very like other people.  But for some reason or other,
concerning which there were different legendary theories, the king had
laid what they thought too severe taxes upon them, or had required
observances of them they did not like, or had begun to treat them with
more severity, in some way or other, and impose stricter laws; and the
consequence was that they had all disappeared from the face of the
country.  According to the legend, however, instead of going to some
other country, they had all taken refuge in the subterranean caverns,
whence they never came out but at night, and then seldom showed
themselves in any numbers, and never to many people at once.  It was
only in the least frequented and most difficult parts of the mountains
that they were said to gather even at night in the open air.  Those who
had caught sight of any of them said that they had greatly altered in
the course of generations; and no wonder, seeing they lived away from
the sun, in cold and wet and dark places.  They were now, not
ordinarily ugly, but either absolutely hideous, or ludicrously
grotesque both in face and form.  There was no invention, they said, of
the most lawless imagination expressed by pen or pencil, that could
surpass the extravagance of their appearance.  But I suspect those who
said so had mistaken some of their animal companions for the goblins
themselves--of which more by and by.  The goblins themselves were not
so far removed from the human as such a description would imply.  And
as they grew misshapen in body they had grown in knowledge and
cleverness, and now were able to do things no mortal could see the
possibility of.  But as they grew in cunning, they grew in mischief,
and their great delight was in every way they could think of to annoy
the people who lived in the open-air storey above them.  They had
enough of affection left for each other to preserve them from being
absolutely cruel for cruelty's sake to those that came in their way;
but still they so heartily cherished the ancestral grudge against those
who occupied their former possessions and especially against the
descendants of the king who had caused their expulsion, that they
sought every opportunity of tormenting them in ways that were as odd as
their inventors; and although dwarfed and misshapen, they had strength
equal to their cunning.  In the process of time they had got a king and
a government of their own, whose chief business, beyond their own
simple affairs, was to devise trouble for their neighbours.  It will
now be pretty evident why the little princess had never seen the sky at
night.  They were much too afraid of the goblins to let her out of the
house then, even in company with ever so many attendants; and they had
good reason, as we shall see by and by.



CHAPTER 2

The Princess Loses Herself

I have said the Princess Irene was about eight years old when my story
begins.  And this is how it begins.

One very wet day, when the mountain was covered with mist which was
constantly gathering itself together into raindrops, and pouring down
on the roofs of the great old house, whence it fell in a fringe of
water from the eaves all round about it, the princess could not of
course go out.  She got very tired, so tired that even her toys could
no longer amuse her.  You would wonder at that if I had time to
describe to you one half of the toys she had.  But then, you wouldn't
have the toys themselves, and that makes all the difference: you can't
get tired of a thing before you have it.  It was a picture, though,
worth seeing--the princess sitting in the nursery with the sky ceiling
over her head, at a great table covered with her toys.  If the artist
would like to draw this, I should advise him not to meddle with the
toys.  I am afraid of attempting to describe them, and I think he had
better not try to draw them.  He had better not.  He can do a thousand
things I can't, but I don't think he could draw those toys.  No man
could better make the princess herself than he could, though--leaning
with her back bowed into the back of the chair, her head hanging down,
and her hands in her lap, very miserable as she would say herself, not
even knowing what she would like, except it were to go out and get
thoroughly wet, and catch a particularly nice cold, and have to go to
bed and take gruel.  The next moment after you see her sitting there,
her nurse goes out of the room.

Even that is a change, and the princess wakes up a little, and looks
about her.  Then she tumbles off her chair and runs out of the door,
not the same door the nurse went out of, but one which opened at the
foot of a curious old stair of worm-eaten oak, which looked as if never
anyone had set foot upon it.  She had once before been up six steps,
and that was sufficient reason, in such a day, for trying to find out
what was at the top of it.

Up and up she ran--such a long way it seemed to her!--until she came to
the top of the third flight.  There she found the landing was the end
of a long passage.  Into this she ran.  It was full of doors on each
side.  There were so many that she did not care to open any, but ran on
to the end, where she turned into another passage, also full of doors.
When she had turned twice more, and still saw doors and only doors
about her, she began to get frightened.  It was so silent!  And all
those doors must hide rooms with nobody in them!  That was dreadful.
Also the rain made a great trampling noise on the roof.  She turned and
started at full speed, her little footsteps echoing through the sounds
of the rain--back for the stairs and her safe nursery.  So she thought,
but she had lost herself long ago.  It doesn't follow that she was
lost, because she had lost herself, though.

She ran for some distance, turned several times, and then began to be
afraid.  Very soon she was sure that she had lost the way back. Rooms
everywhere, and no stair!  Her little heart beat as fast as her little
feet ran, and a lump of tears was growing in her throat. But she was
too eager and perhaps too frightened to cry for some time.  At last her
hope failed her.  Nothing but passages and doors everywhere!  She threw
herself on the floor, and burst into a wailing cry broken by sobs.

She did not cry long, however, for she was as brave as could be
expected of a princess of her age.  After a good cry, she got up, and
brushed the dust from her frock.  Oh, what old dust it was! Then she
wiped her eyes with her hands, for princesses don't always have their
handkerchiefs in their pockets, any more than some other little girls I
know of.  Next, like a true princess, she resolved on going wisely to
work to find her way back: she would walk through the passages, and
look in every direction for the stair. This she did, but without
success.  She went over the same ground again an again without knowing
it, for the passages and doors were all alike.  At last, in a corner,
through a half-open door, she did see a stair.  But alas! it went the
wrong way: instead of going down, it went up.  Frightened as she was,
however, she could not help wishing to see where yet further the stair
could lead.  It was very narrow, and so steep that she went on like a
four-legged creature on her hands and feet.



CHAPTER 3

The Princess and--We Shall See Who

When she came to the top, she found herself in a little square place,
with three doors, two opposite each other, and one opposite the top of
the stair.  She stood for a moment, without an idea in her little head
what to do next.  But as she stood, she began to hear a curious humming
sound.  Could it be the rain?  No.  It was much more gentle, and even
monotonous than the sound of the rain, which now she scarcely heard.
The low sweet humming sound went on, sometimes stopping for a little
while and then beginning again.  It was more like the hum of a very
happy bee that had found a rich well of honey in some globular flower,
than anything else I can think of at this moment.  Where could it come
from?  She laid her ear first to one of the doors to hearken if it was
there--then to another.  When she laid her ear against the third door,
there could be no doubt where it came from: it must be from something
in that room.  What could it be?  She was rather afraid, but her
curiosity was stronger than her fear, and she opened the door very
gently and peeped in.  What do you think she saw?  A very old lady who
sat spinning.

Perhaps you will wonder how the princess could tell that the old lady
was an old lady, when I inform you that not only was she beautiful, but
her skin was smooth and white.  I will tell you more.  Her hair was
combed back from her forehead and face, and hung loose far down and all
over her back.  That is not much like an old lady--is it?  Ah! but it
was white almost as snow.  And although her face was so smooth, her
eyes looked so wise that you could not have helped seeing she must be
old.  The princess, though she could not have told you why, did think
her very old indeed--quite fifty, she said to herself.  But she was
rather older than that, as you shall hear.

While the princess stared bewildered, with her head just inside the
door, the old lady lifted hers, and said, in a sweet, but old and
rather shaky voice, which mingled very pleasantly with the continued
hum of her wheel:

'Come in, my dear; come in.  I am glad to see you.'

That the princess was a real princess you might see now quite plainly;
for she didn't hang on to the handle of the door, and stare without
moving, as I have known some do who ought to have been princesses but
were only rather vulgar little girls.  She did as she was told, stepped
inside the door at once, and shut it gently behind her.

'Come to me, my dear,' said the old lady.

And again the princess did as she was told.  She approached the old
lady--rather slowly, I confess--but did not stop until she stood by her
side, and looked up in her face with her blue eyes and the two melted
stars in them.

'Why, what have you been doing with your eyes, child?' asked the old
lady.

'Crying,' answered the princess.

'Why, child?'

'Because I couldn't find my way down again.'

'But you could find your way up.'

'Not at first--not for a long time.'

'But your face is streaked like the back of a zebra.  Hadn't you a
handkerchief to wipe your eyes with?'

'No.'

'Then why didn't you come to me to wipe them for you?'

'Please, I didn't know you were here.  I will next time.'

'There's a good child!' said the old lady.

