Project Gutenberg's The Birds' Christmas Carol, by Kate Douglas Wiggin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Birds' Christmas Carol

Author: Kate Douglas Wiggin

Posting Date: July 23, 2008 [EBook #721]
Release Date: November, 1996

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BIRDS' CHRISTMAS CAROL ***




Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.









THE BIRDS' CHRISTMAS CAROL

BY

KATE DOUGLAS WIGGIN



To

The Three Dearest Children in the World, BERTHA, LUCY, AND HORATIO.


  "O little ones, ye cannot know
      The power with which ye plead,
  Nor why, as on through life we go,
      The little child doth lead."




CONTENTS

   I. A LITTLE SNOW-BIRD
  II. DROOPING WINGS
 III. THE BIRD'S NEST
  IV. "BIRDS OF A FEATHER FLOCK TOGETHER"
   V. SOME OTHER BIRDS ARE TAUGHT TO FLY
  VI. "WHEN THE PIE WAS OPENED, THE BIRDS BEGAN TO SING"
 VII. THE BIRDLING FLIES AWAY




The Birds' Christmas Carol.



I.

A LITTLE SNOW BIRD.

It was very early Christmas morning, and in the stillness of the dawn,
with the soft snow falling on the housetops, a little child was born in
the Bird household.

They had intended to name the baby Lucy, if it were a girl; but they
hadn't expected her on Christmas morning, and a real Christmas baby was
not to be lightly named--the whole family agreed in that.

They were consulting about it in the nursery.  Mr. Bird said that he
had assisted in naming the three boys, and that he should leave this
matter entirely to Mrs. Bird; Donald wanted the child called "Maud,"
after a pretty little curly-haired girl who sat next him in school;
Paul chose "Luella," for Luella was the nurse who had been with him
during his whole babyhood, up to the time of his first trousers, and
the name suggested all sorts of comfortable things.  Uncle Jack said
that the first girl should always be named for her mother, no matter
how hideous the name happened to be.

Grandma said that she would prefer not to take any part in the
discussion, and everybody suddenly remembered that Mrs. Bird had
thought of naming the baby Lucy, for Grandma herself; and, while it
would be indelicate for her to favor that name, it would be against
human nature for her to suggest any other, under the circumstances.

Hugh, the "hitherto baby," if that is a possible term, sat in one
corner and said nothing, but felt, in some mysterious way, that his
nose was out of joint; for there was a newer baby now, a possibility he
had never taken into consideration; and the "first girl," too, a still
higher development of treason, which made him actually green with
jealousy.

But it was too profound a subject to be settled then and there, on the
spot; besides, Mama had not been asked, and everybody felt it rather
absurd, after all, to forestall a decree that was certain to be
absolutely wise, just and perfect.

The reason that the subject had been brought up at all so early in the
day lay in the fact that Mrs. Bird never allowed her babies to go over
night unnamed.  She was a person of so great decision of character that
she would have blushed at such a thing; she said that to let blessed
babies go dangling and dawdling about without names, for months and
months, was enough to ruin them for life.  She also said that if one
could not make up one's mind in twenty-four hours it was a sign
that--but I will not repeat the rest, as it might prejudice you against
the most charming woman in the world.

So Donald took his new velocipede and went out to ride up and down the
stone pavement and notch the shins of innocent people as they passed
by, while Paul spun his musical top on the front steps.

But Hugh refused to leave the scene of action.  He seated himself on
the top stair in the hall, banged his head against the railing a few
times, just by way of uncorking the vials of his wrath, and then
subsided into gloomy silence, waiting to declare war if more "first
girl babies" were thrust upon a family already surfeited with that
unnecessary article.

Meanwhile dear Mrs. Bird lay in her room, weak, but safe and happy with
her sweet girl baby by her side and the heaven of motherhood opening
before her.  Nurse was making gruel in the kitchen, and the room was
dim and quiet.  There was a cheerful open fire in the grate, but though
the shutters were closed, the side windows that looked out on the
Church of our Saviour, next door, were wide open.

Suddenly a sound of music poured out into the bright air and drifted
into the chamber.  It was the boy-choir singing Christmas anthems.
Higher and higher rose the clear, fresh voices, full of hope and cheer,
as children's voices always are.  Fuller and fuller grew the burst of
melody as one glad strain fell upon another in joyful harmony:

          "Carol, brothers, carol,
              Carol joyfully,
           Carol the good tidings,
              Carol merrily!
           And pray a gladsome Christmas
              For all your fellow-men;
           Carol, brothers, carol,
              Christmas Day again."

One verse followed another always with the same glad refrain:

          "And pray a gladsome Christmas
              For all your fellow-men:
          Carol, brothers, carol,
              Christmas Day again."

Mrs. Bird thought, as the music floated in upon her gentle sleep, that
she had slipped into heaven with her new baby, and that the angels were
bidding them welcome.  But the tiny bundle by her side stirred a
little, and though it was scarcely more than the ruffling of a feather,
she awoke; for the mother-ear is so close to the heart that it can hear
the faintest whisper of a child.

She opened her eyes and drew the baby closer.  It looked like a rose
dipped in milk, she thought, this pink and white blossom of girlhood,
