The Project Gutenberg EBook of With Buller in Natal, by G. A. Henty

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: With Buller in Natal
       A Born Leader

Author: G. A. Henty

Posting Date: June 2, 2012 [EBook #7334]
Release Date: January, 2005
First Posted: April 15, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WITH BULLER IN NATAL ***




Produced by Tony Hyland, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.










WITH BULLER IN NATAL


[Illustration: "CHRIS SPRANG AT HIM."]


WITH BULLER IN NATAL

OR, A BORN LEADER

BY

G. A. HENTY



PREFACE

It will be a long time before the story of the late war can be written
fully and impartially. Even among the narratives of those who witnessed
the engagements there are many differences and discrepancies, as is
necessarily the case when the men who write are in different parts of
the field. Until, then, the very meagre military despatches are
supplemented by much fuller details, anything like an accurate history
of the war would be impossible. I have, however, endeavoured to
reconcile the various narratives of the fighting in Natal, and to make
the account of the military occurrences as clear as possible.
Fortunately this is not a history, but a story, to which the war forms
the background, and, as is necessary in such a case, it is the heroes
of my tale, the little band of lads from Johannesburg, rather than the
leaders of the British troops, who are the most conspicuous characters
in the narrative. As these, although possessed of many admirable
qualities, had not the faculty of being at two places at once, I was
obliged to confine the action of the story to Natal. With the doings of
the main army I hope to deal next year.

G. A. HENTY



CONTENTS

I. THE BURSTING OF THE STORM

II. A TERRIBLE JOURNEY

III. AT THE FRONT

IV. DUNDEE

V. THE FIRST BATTLE

VI. ELANDSLAAGTE

VII. LADYSMITH BESIEGED

VIII. A DESPERATE PROJECT

IX. KOMATI-POORT

X. AN EXPLOSION

XI. BACK WITH THE ARMY

XII. THE BATTLE OF COLENSO

XIII. PRISONERS

XIV. SPION KOP

XV. SPION KOP

XVI. A COLONIST'S ADVENTURE

XVII. A RESCUE

XVIII. RAILWAY HILL

XIX. MAJUBA DAY

XX. LADYSMITH



ILLUSTRATIONS

"CHRIS SPRANG AT HIM"

CHRIS OFFERS HIS SERVICES TO SIR PENN SYMONS

CHRIS AND HIS COMPANIONS SCOUTING

"BOTH RIFLES CRACKED AT ONCE"

"THERE WAS A TREMENDOUS ROAR AND A BLINDING CRASH"

"WITH A SHOUT OF TRIUMPH THE TWO BOERS RAN DOWN"

"PRESENTLY FROM BEHIND THE FOOT OF THE HILL SIX HORSEMEN DASHED OUT"

THE NAVAL GUNS ON MOUNT ALICE

"ONE OF THE BOERS HELD UP HIS RIFLE WITH A WHITE FLAG TIED TO IT"

THE RELIEF OF LADYSMITH




[Illustration: SOUTH EASTERN AFRICA]

WITH BULLER IN NATAL




CHAPTER I

THE BURSTING OF THE STORM


A group of excited men were gathered in front of the Stock Exchange at
Johannesburg. It was evident that something altogether unusual had
happened. All wore anxious and angry expressions, but a few shook hands
with each other, as if the news that so much agitated them, although
painful, was yet welcome; and indeed this was so.

For months a war-cloud had hung over the town, but it had been thought
that it might pass over without bursting. None imagined that the blow
would come so suddenly, and when it fell it had all the force of a
complete surprise, although it had been so threatening for many weeks
that a considerable portion of the population had already fled. It was
true that great numbers of men, well armed, and with large numbers of
cannon, had been moving south, but negotiations were still going on and
might continue for some time yet; and now by the folly and arrogance of
one man the cloud had burst, and in thirty hours war would begin.

Similar though smaller groups were gathered here and there in the
streets. Parties of Boers from the country round rode up and down with
an air of insolent triumph, some of them shouting "We shall soon be rid
of you; in another month there will not be a rooinek left in South
Africa."

Those addressed paid no heed to the words. They had heard the same
thing over and over again for the past two months. There was a
tightening of the lips and a closing of the fingers as if on a sword or
rifle, but no one replied to the insolent taunts. For years it had been
the hope of the Uitlanders that this would come, and that there would
be an end to a position that was well-nigh intolerable. Never before
had a large body of intelligent men been kept in a state of abject
subjection by an inferior race, a race almost without even the elements
of civilization, ignorant and brutal beyond any existing white
community, and superior only in the fact that they were organized and
armed, whereas those they trampled upon were deficient in both these
respects. Having no votes, these were powerless to better their
condition by the means common to civilized communities throughout the
world. They were ground down by an enormous taxation, towards which the
Boers themselves contributed practically nothing, and the revenue drawn
from them was spent in the purchase of munitions of war, artillery, and
fortifications, so enormously beyond the needs of the country, that it
was no secret that they were intended not only for the defence of the
republic against invasion, but for a general rising of the Boer
population and the establishment of Dutch supremacy throughout the
whole of South Africa.

The Boer government was corrupt from the highest to the lowest. The
president and the members of his family piled up wealth to an enormous
amount, and nothing could be done without wholesale bribery. The price
of everything connected with the mining industry was doubled by the
supply being in the hands of monopolists, who shared their gains with
high state officials. Money was lavished like water on what was called
secret service, in subsidizing newspapers to influence public opinion
throughout Europe, and, as it was strongly suspected, in carrying on a
propaganda among the Dutch in Cape Colony, and in securing the return
of members and a ministry secretly pledged to further in every way the
aims of the Presidents of the Transvaal and the Orange Free State. The
British and other aliens were not only deprived of all rights of
citizenship, but even freedom of speech and the right of public meeting
was denied them; they were not allowed to carry arms except by a
special license, their children were taught in Dutch in the schools,
they had no right of trial by jury; judges who had the courage to
refuse to carry out the illegal behests of the president were deprived
of their offices, and the few editors of newspapers representing the
Uitlanders--as all men not born in the state were called-were
imprisoned and their journals suppressed.

Intolerable as was such a state of things to a civilized community, it
might have been borne with some patience had it not been that the
insolence of their masters was unbounded. Every Boer seemed to take a
pleasure in neglecting no opportunity of showing his contempt for the
men whose enterprise and labour had enormously enriched the country,
and whose superior intelligence he was too grossly ignorant to
appreciate. A Boar farmer would refuse a cup of water to a passing
traveller, and would enforce his refusal by producing his rifle
immediately if the stranger ventured to urge his request. Of late the
insolence of the Boers had greatly increased; the manner in which
England had, instead of demanding justice with the sternness and
determination that the circumstances called for, permitted her
remonstrances to be simply ignored, was put down as a consciousness of
weakness. And having now collected arms sufficient not only for
themselves but for the whole Dutch population of South Africa, the
Boers were convinced that their hour of triumph had come, and that in a
very short time their flag would float over every public building
throughout the country and the Union Jack disappear for ever.

The long discussions that had been going on with regard to a five or
seven years' franchise were regarded with absolute indifference by the
Uitlanders--even the shorter time would have afforded them no advantage
whatever. The members from the mining districts would be in a hopeless
minority in the assembly; and indeed, very few of those entitled to a
vote would have cared to claim it, inasmuch as they would thereby
render themselves citizens of the republic, and be liable to be
commandeered and called upon to serve in arms, not only against the
natives, upon whom the Boers were always making aggressions, but
against England, when the war, which all foresaw could not long be
delayed, broke out.

For months the negotiations went on between President Kruger and Mr.
Chamberlain, the British colonial minister, and the certainty that the
Boers were bent upon fighting became more and more evident. Vast
quantities of rifles, ammunition, and cannon poured into the Transvaal,
their passage being more than winked at by the Dutch ministry of Cape
Colony.

It was that day known that President Kruger had thrown off the mask of
a pretended desire for peace, and that an ultimatum had been
telegraphed to England couched in terms of such studied insolence that
it was certain war must ensue. The greatest civilized power on earth
would have shown less arrogance towards the most feeble. Not only was
England called upon to send no more troops to South Africa, but to
withdraw most of her forces already in the country, and this by a state
that owed its very existence to her, and whose total population was not
more than that of a small English county.

The terms of that ultimatum had just become known in Johannesburg, and
it was not surprising that it had created an intense excitement. All
had long felt that war must come, and that at an early date, but the
step that had now been taken came as a surprise. From all appearances
it had seemed that the negotiations might be continued for months yet
before the crisis arrived, and that it should thus have been forced on
by the wording of the ultimatum showed that the Boers were satisfied
that their preparations were complete, and that they were in a position
to overrun Natal and Cape Colony before any British force capable of
withstanding them could arrive. England, indeed, had been placed in a
most difficult position. The ministry were not unaware of the enormous
preparations that the Boers were making, and had for some time past
been quietly sending out a large number of officers and a few
non-commissioned officers and men to the Cape. But so long as there was
a hope that the Boers would finally grant some redress to the
Uitlanders, they could not despatch any considerable number of troops,
for had they done so they would have been accused not only on the
Continent, but by a section of Englishmen, of forcing on a war with a
weak state, whereas in point of fact the war was being forced on by a
country that most erroneously believed itself to be stronger than
England. The Boers of the Transvaal knew already that the Orange Free
State would join them at once, and believed firmly that every Dutchman
in Natal and Cape Colony would at the signal take up arms.

Presently a gentleman detached himself from the crowd in front of the
Exchange, and joined a lad of some sixteen years old who was standing
on the other side of the street.

"Well, father, is it all true what they say?" the latter asked--"that
Kruger has sent such an ultimatum to England that war is certain?"

"It is quite true, Chris; war is absolutely certain. Kruger has given
the British Government only two days to reply to the most insolent
demand ever addressed to a great power, and worded in the most
offensive manner. I imagine that no reply will be given; and as the
ultimatum was sent off yesterday, we shall to-morrow morning be in a
state of war."

"Well, father, there is no doubt what the result will be."

"No doubt whatever as to the final result, but I am afraid things will
go very badly for a time. I am glad, very glad, that Kruger should have
sent such an ultimatum. It cannot but be accepted as a defiance by all
England; and I should say that even the opposition, which has of late
continually attacked Mr. Chamberlain, will now be silenced, and that
Government will be supported by all parties."

After a quarter of an hour's walk they arrived at home. It was a
handsome house, for Mr. King was one of the leading men in
Johannesburg. He had come out with a wife and son ten years before,
being sent by some London capitalists to report to them fully upon the
prospects of the gold-fields. Under his advice they had purchased
several properties, which had been brought out as companies, and proved
extremely valuable. He was himself a large holder in each of these, and
acted as manager and director of the group. "What is the news, Robert?"
his wife asked, as he and her son came in. "I have had three or four
visitors in here, and they all say that there is quite an excitement in
the town."

"It has come at last," he said gravely; "war is inevitable, and will
begin in twenty-four hours. Kruger has sent one of the most
extraordinary demands ever drawn up. He calls upon England to cease
sending out troops, and to speedily recall most of those now in South
Africa, and has given two days for a reply, of which one has already
expired. As it is absolutely certain that England will not grant this
modest request, we may say that the war has begun. I wish now that I
had sent you and Chris down to Durban a fortnight ago, for there will
be a fearful rush, and judging by the attitude of the Boers, I fear
they will make the journey a very unpleasant one. As we have agreed, it
is absolutely necessary that I should remain here. There is no saying
what steps the Boers will take with reference to the mines; but it is
certain that we must, if possible, keep them going--not for the sake of
the profit, which you may be sure Kruger will not allow to go out of
the country, but because if they were to be stopped it would cost an
immense deal of money to put them in working condition again,
especially if, as is likely enough, the Boers damage the machinery. I
shall do as little work as I can; and the Boers will not, I fancy,
interfere with us as long as they can benefit by the working. For
myself, I would risk any loss or damage rather than aid in supplying
them with gold, but for the sake of our shareholders in Europe I must
do my best to save the mines from destruction. Indeed, if I don't work
them, probably they will do so until the end is at hand, and will then
do as much damage as possible. You know we have agreed on this point."

"Yes, I suppose it is best, Robert; but it seems terrible leaving you
alone here, and I shall be in a perpetual state of anxiety about you."

"I don't think there is any occasion for that; as long as I am working
the mines and they are taking the gold, which no doubt they will have
to repay when our army are masters here, they will not interfere with
me. They treat us badly enough, as we know; but they love the gold even
more than they hate us, so I have no fear whatever as to my personal
safety. I am afraid, dear, that for a time things will go very badly
with us. Already we know that commandos have gone forward in great
strength to the frontier, and I should not be surprised if the whole of
South Africa rises; at any rate, the Boers are confident that it will
be so. Gladstone's miserable surrender after our disasters at Laing's
Nek and Majuba have puffed them up with such an idea of their own
fighting powers and our weakness, that I believe they think they are
going to have almost a walk over. Still, though it was certain that we
should have a hard time whenever war came, we have been hoping for
years that England would at last interfere to obtain redress for us,
and we must not grumble now that what we have been so long expecting
has at last come to pass. I believe there will be some stern fighting.
The Boers are no cowards; courage is, indeed, as far as I know, the
only virtue they possess. In the long run they must certainly be
beaten, but it will only be after very hard fighting."

"What do you think they will do, father?"

"I can't say what they will do, but I am sure that what they ought to
do is to merely hold the passes from Natal with enough men for the
purpose, and to march their whole force, broken up into half a dozen
columns, into Cape Colony. There is no force there that could resist
them, they would be undoubtedly joined by every Dutchman there, and I
am convinced that the Africander ministry would at once declare for
them, in which case England would have to undertake the tremendous work
of conquering the whole of South Africa afresh, for certainly she could
not allow it to slip from her hands, even if it should prove as stern a
business as the conquering of half India after the Sepoy Mutiny. Now to
