The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Phoenix and the Carpet, by E. Nesbit

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Phoenix and the Carpet

Author: E. Nesbit

Posting Date: August 2, 2008 [EBook #836]
Release Date: March, 1997

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHOENIX AND THE CARPET ***




Produced by Jo Churcher





THE PHOENIX AND THE CARPET

E. Nesbit



     TO

     My Dear Godson
     HUBERT GRIFFITH
     and his sister
     MARGARET


     TO HUBERT

     Dear Hubert, if I ever found
     A wishing-carpet lying round,
     I'd stand upon it, and I'd say:
     'Take me to Hubert, right away!'
     And then we'd travel very far
     To where the magic countries are
     That you and I will never see,
     And choose the loveliest gifts for you, from me.

     But oh! alack! and well-a-day!
     No wishing-carpets come my way.
     I never found a Phoenix yet,
     And Psammeads are so hard to get!
     So I give you nothing fine--
     Only this book your book and mine,
     And hers, whose name by yours is set;
     Your book, my book, the book of Margaret!

     E. NESBIT
     DYMCHURCH
     September, 1904




CONTENTS

     1 The Egg
     2 The Topless Tower
     3 The Queen Cook
     4 Two Bazaars
     5 The Temple
     6 Doing Good
     7 Mews from Persia
     8 The Cats, the Cow, and the Burglar
     9 The Burglar's Bride
     10 The Hole in the Carpet
     11 The Beginning of the End
     12 The End of the End




CHAPTER 1. THE EGG


It began with the day when it was almost the Fifth of November, and a
doubt arose in some breast--Robert's, I fancy--as to the quality of the
fireworks laid in for the Guy Fawkes celebration.

'They were jolly cheap,' said whoever it was, and I think it was Robert,
'and suppose they didn't go off on the night? Those Prosser kids would
have something to snigger about then.'

'The ones _I_ got are all right,' Jane said; 'I know they are, because
the man at the shop said they were worth thribble the money--'

'I'm sure thribble isn't grammar,' Anthea said.

'Of course it isn't,' said Cyril; 'one word can't be grammar all by
itself, so you needn't be so jolly clever.'

Anthea was rummaging in the corner-drawers of her mind for a very
disagreeable answer, when she remembered what a wet day it was, and how
the boys had been disappointed of that ride to London and back on the
top of the tram, which their mother had promised them as a reward for
not having once forgotten, for six whole days, to wipe their boots on
the mat when they came home from school.

So Anthea only said, 'Don't be so jolly clever yourself, Squirrel. And
the fireworks look all right, and you'll have the eightpence that your
tram fares didn't cost to-day, to buy something more with. You ought to
get a perfectly lovely Catharine wheel for eightpence.'

'I daresay,' said Cyril, coldly; 'but it's not YOUR eightpence anyhow--'

'But look here,' said Robert, 'really now, about the fireworks. We don't
want to be disgraced before those kids next door. They think because
they wear red plush on Sundays no one else is any good.'

'I wouldn't wear plush if it was ever so--unless it was black to be
beheaded in, if I was Mary Queen of Scots,' said Anthea, with scorn.

Robert stuck steadily to his point. One great point about Robert is the
steadiness with which he can stick.

'I think we ought to test them,' he said.

'You young duffer,' said Cyril, 'fireworks are like postage-stamps. You
can only use them once.'

'What do you suppose it means by "Carter's tested seeds" in the
advertisement?'

There was a blank silence. Then Cyril touched his forehead with his
finger and shook his head.

'A little wrong here,' he said. 'I was always afraid of that with poor
Robert. All that cleverness, you know, and being top in algebra so
often--it's bound to tell--'

'Dry up,' said Robert, fiercely. 'Don't you see? You can't TEST seeds if
you do them ALL. You just take a few here and there, and if those
grow you can feel pretty sure the others will be--what do you call
it?--Father told me--"up to sample". Don't you think we ought to sample
the fire-works? Just shut our eyes and each draw one out, and then try
them.'

'But it's raining cats and dogs,' said Jane.

'And Queen Anne is dead,' rejoined Robert. No one was in a very good
temper. 'We needn't go out to do them; we can just move back the table,
and let them off on the old tea-tray we play toboggans with. I don't
know what YOU think, but _I_ think it's time we did something, and
that would be really useful; because then we shouldn't just HOPE the
fireworks would make those Prossers sit up--we should KNOW.'

'It WOULD be something to do,' Cyril owned with languid approval.

So the table was moved back. And then the hole in the carpet, that
had been near the window till the carpet was turned round, showed most
awfully. But Anthea stole out on tip-toe, and got the tray when cook
wasn't looking, and brought it in and put it over the hole.

Then all the fireworks were put on the table, and each of the four
children shut its eyes very tight and put out its hand and grasped
something. Robert took a cracker, Cyril and Anthea had Roman candles;
but Jane's fat paw closed on the gem of the whole collection, the
Jack-in-the-box that had cost two shillings, and one at least of the
party--I will not say which, because it was sorry afterwards--declared
that Jane had done it on purpose. Nobody was pleased. For the worst of
it was that these four children, with a very proper dislike of anything
even faintly bordering on the sneakish, had a law, unalterable as those
of the Medes and Persians, that one had to stand by the results of a
toss-up, or a drawing of lots, or any other appeal to chance, however
much one might happen to dislike the way things were turning out.

'I didn't mean to,' said Jane, near tears. 'I don't care, I'll draw
another--'

'You know jolly well you can't,' said Cyril, bitterly. 'It's settled.
It's Medium and Persian. You've done it, and you'll have to stand by
it--and us too, worse luck. Never mind. YOU'LL have your pocket-money
before the Fifth. Anyway, we'll have the Jack-in-the-box LAST, and get
the most out of it we can.'

So the cracker and the Roman candles were lighted, and they were
all that could be expected for the money; but when it came to the
Jack-in-the-box it simply sat in the tray and laughed at them, as Cyril
said. They tried to light it with paper and they tried to light it with
matches; they tried to light it with Vesuvian fusees from the pocket
of father's second-best overcoat that was hanging in the hall. And then
Anthea slipped away to the cupboard under the stairs where the brooms
and dustpans were kept, and the rosiny fire-lighters that smell so nice
and like the woods where pine-trees grow, and the old newspapers and the
bees-wax and turpentine, and the horrid an stiff dark rags that are used
for cleaning brass and furniture, and the paraffin for the lamps. She
came back with a little pot that had once cost sevenpence-halfpenny when
it was full of red-currant jelly; but the jelly had been all eaten long
ago, and now Anthea had filled the jar with paraffin. She came in, and
she threw the paraffin over the tray just at the moment when Cyril was
trying with the twenty-third match to light the Jack-in-the-box. The
Jack-in-the-box did not catch fire any more than usual, but the paraffin
acted quite differently, and in an instant a hot flash of flame leapt
up and burnt off Cyril's eyelashes, and scorched the faces of all
four before they could spring back. They backed, in four instantaneous
bounds, as far as they could, which was to the wall, and the pillar of
fire reached from floor to ceiling.

'My hat,' said Cyril, with emotion, 'You've done it this time, Anthea.'

The flame was spreading out under the ceiling like the rose of fire in
Mr Rider Haggard's exciting story about Allan Quatermain. Robert and
Cyril saw that no time was to be lost. They turned up the edges of the
carpet, and kicked them over the tray. This cut off the column of fire,
and it disappeared and there was nothing left but smoke and a dreadful
smell of lamps that have been turned too low.

All hands now rushed to the rescue, and the paraffin fire was only a
bundle of trampled carpet, when suddenly a sharp crack beneath their
feet made the amateur firemen start back. Another crack--the carpet
moved as if it had had a cat wrapped in it; the Jack-in-the-box had at
last allowed itself to be lighted, and it was going off with desperate
violence inside the carpet.

Robert, with the air of one doing the only possible thing, rushed to the
window and opened it. Anthea screamed, Jane burst into tears, and
Cyril turned the table wrong way up on top of the carpet heap. But the
firework went on, banging and bursting and spluttering even underneath
the table.

Next moment mother rushed in, attracted by the howls of Anthea, and in a
few moments the firework desisted and there was a dead silence, and
the children stood looking at each other's black faces, and, out of the
corners of their eyes, at mother's white one.

The fact that the nursery carpet was ruined occasioned but little
surprise, nor was any one really astonished that bed should prove the
immediate end of the adventure. It has been said that all roads lead to
Rome; this may be true, but at any rate, in early youth I am quite sure
that many roads lead to BED, and stop there--or YOU do.

The rest of the fireworks were confiscated, and mother was not pleased
when father let them off himself in the back garden, though he said,
'Well, how else can you get rid of them, my dear?'

You see, father had forgotten that the children were in disgrace, and
that their bedroom windows looked out on to the back garden. So that
they all saw the fireworks most beautifully, and admired the skill with
which father handled them.

Next day all was forgotten and forgiven; only the nursery had to
be deeply cleaned (like spring-cleaning), and the ceiling had to be
whitewashed.

And mother went out; and just at tea-time next day a man came with a
rolled-up carpet, and father paid him, and mother said--

'If the carpet isn't in good condition, you know, I shall expect you to
change it.' And the man replied--

'There ain't a thread gone in it nowhere, mum. It's a bargain, if ever
there was one, and I'm more'n 'arf sorry I let it go at the price; but
we can't resist the lydies, can we, sir?' and he winked at father and
went away.

Then the carpet was put down in the nursery, and sure enough there
wasn't a hole in it anywhere.

As the last fold was unrolled something hard and loud-sounding bumped
out of it and trundled along the nursery floor. All the children
scrambled for it, and Cyril got it. He took it to the gas. It was shaped
like an egg, very yellow and shiny, half-transparent, and it had an odd
sort of light in it that changed as you held it in different ways. It
was as though it was an egg with a yolk of pale fire that just showed
through the stone.

'I MAY keep it, mayn't I, mother?' Cyril asked.

And of course mother said no; they must take it back to the man who had
brought the carpet, because she had only paid for a carpet, and not for
a stone egg with a fiery yolk to it.

So she told them where the shop was, and it was in the Kentish Town
Road, not far from the hotel that is called the Bull and Gate. It was
a poky little shop, and the man was arranging furniture outside on the
pavement very cunningly, so that the more broken parts should show as
little as possible. And directly he saw the children he knew them again,
and he began at once, without giving them a chance to speak.

'No you don't' he cried loudly; 'I ain't a-goin' to take back no
carpets, so don't you make no bloomin' errer. A bargain's a bargain, and
the carpet's puffik throughout.'

'We don't want you to take it back,' said Cyril; 'but we found something
in it.'

'It must have got into it up at your place, then,' said the man, with
indignant promptness, 'for there ain't nothing in nothing as I sell.
It's all as clean as a whistle.'

'I never said it wasn't CLEAN,' said Cyril, 'but--'

'Oh, if it's MOTHS,' said the man, 'that's easy cured with borax. But I
expect it was only an odd one. I tell you the carpet's good through and
through. It hadn't got no moths when it left my 'ands--not so much as an
hegg.'

'But that's just it,' interrupted Jane; 'there WAS so much as an egg.'

The man made a sort of rush at the children and stamped his foot.

'Clear out, I say!' he shouted, 'or I'll call for the police. A nice
thing for customers to 'ear you a-coming 'ere a-charging me with finding
things in goods what I sells. 'Ere, be off, afore I sends you off with a
flea in your ears. Hi! constable--'

The children fled, and they think, and their father thinks, that they
couldn't have done anything else. Mother has her own opinion.

But father said they might keep the egg.

'The man certainly didn't know the egg was there when he brought the
carpet,' said he, 'any more than your mother did, and we've as much
right to it as he had.'

So the egg was put on the mantelpiece, where it quite brightened up the
dingy nursery. The nursery was dingy, because it was a basement room,
and its windows looked out on a stone area with a rockery made of
clinkers facing the windows. Nothing grew in the rockery except London
pride and snails.

The room had been described in the house agent's list as a 'convenient
breakfast-room in basement,' and in the daytime it was rather dark. This
did not matter so much in the evenings when the gas was alight, but then
it was in the evening that the blackbeetles got so sociable, and used to
come out of the low cupboards on each side of the fireplace where their
homes were, and try to make friends with the children. At least, I
suppose that was what they wanted, but the children never would.

On the Fifth of November father and mother went to the theatre, and
the children were not happy, because the Prossers next door had lots of
fireworks and they had none.

They were not even allowed to have a bonfire in the garden.

'No more playing with fire, thank you,' was father's answer, when they
asked him.

When the baby had been put to bed the children sat sadly round the fire
in the nursery.

'I'm beastly bored,' said Robert.

'Let's talk about the Psammead,' said Anthea, who generally tried to
give the conversation a cheerful turn.

'What's the good of TALKING?' said Cyril. 'What I want is for something
to happen. It's awfully stuffy for a chap not to be allowed out in the
evenings. There's simply nothing to do when you've got through your
homers.'

Jane finished the last of her home-lessons and shut the book with a
bang.

'We've got the pleasure of memory,' said she. 'Just think of last
holidays.'

Last holidays, indeed, offered something to think of--for they had
been spent in the country at a white house between a sand-pit and a
gravel-pit, and things had happened. The children had found a Psammead,
or sand-fairy, and it had let them have anything they wished for--just
exactly anything, with no bother about its not being really for their
good, or anything like that. And if you want to know what kind of things
they wished for, and how their wishes turned out you can read it all in
a book called Five Children and It (It was the Psammead). If you've not
read it, perhaps I ought to tell you that the fifth child was the baby
brother, who was called the Lamb, because the first thing he ever said
was 'Baa!' and that the other children were not particularly handsome,
nor were they extra clever, nor extraordinarily good. But they were not
bad sorts on the whole; in fact, they were rather like you.

'I don't want to think about the pleasures of memory,' said Cyril; 'I
want some more things to happen.'

'We're very much luckier than any one else, as it is,' said Jane. 'Why,
no one else ever found a Psammead. We ought to be grateful.'

'Why shouldn't we GO ON being, though?' Cyril asked--'lucky, I mean, not
grateful. Why's it all got to stop?'

'Perhaps something will happen,' said Anthea, comfortably. 'Do you know,
sometimes I think we are the sort of people that things DO happen to.'

'It's like that in history,' said Jane: 'some kings are full of
interesting things, and others--nothing ever happens to them, except
their being born and crowned and buried, and sometimes not that.'

'I think Panther's right,' said Cyril: 'I think we are the sort of
people things do happen to. I have a sort of feeling things would happen
