The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Patchwork Girl of Oz, by L. Frank Baum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Patchwork Girl of Oz

Author: L. Frank Baum

Posting Date: March 25, 2009 [EBook #955]
Release Date: June, 1997
Last Updated: March 2, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PATCHWORK GIRL OF OZ ***




Produced by Anthony Matonac and Paul Selkirk









THE PATCHWORK GIRL OF OZ


by

L. FRANK BAUM




  Affectionately Dedicated to my young friend
  Sumner Hamilton Britton of Chicago




Prologue

Through the kindness of Dorothy Gale of Kansas, afterward Princess
Dorothy of Oz, an humble writer in the United States of America was
once appointed Royal Historian of Oz, with the privilege of writing the
chronicle of that wonderful fairyland. But after making six books about
the adventures of those interesting but queer people who live in the
Land of Oz, the Historian learned with sorrow that by an edict of the
Supreme Ruler, Ozma of Oz, her country would thereafter be rendered
invisible to all who lived outside its borders and that all
communication with Oz would, in the future, be cut off.

The children who had learned to look for the books about Oz and who
loved the stories about the gay and happy people inhabiting that
favored country, were as sorry as their Historian that there would be
no more books of Oz stories. They wrote many letters asking if the
Historian did not know of some adventures to write about that had
happened before the Land of Oz was shut out from all the rest of the
world. But he did not know of any. Finally one of the children inquired
why we couldn't hear from Princess Dorothy by wireless telegraph, which
would enable her to communicate to the Historian whatever happened in
the far-off Land of Oz without his seeing her, or even knowing just
where Oz is.

That seemed a good idea; so the Historian rigged up a high tower in his
back yard, and took lessons in wireless telegraphy until he understood
it, and then began to call "Princess Dorothy of Oz" by sending messages
into the air.

Now, it wasn't likely that Dorothy would be looking for wireless
messages or would heed the call; but one thing the Historian was sure
of, and that was that the powerful Sorceress, Glinda, would know what
he was doing and that he desired to communicate with Dorothy. For
Glinda has a big book in which is recorded every event that takes place
anywhere in the world, just the moment that it happens, and so of
course the book would tell her about the wireless message.

And that was the way Dorothy heard that the Historian wanted to speak
with her, and there was a Shaggy Man in the Land of Oz who knew how to
telegraph a wireless reply. The result was that the Historian begged so
hard to be told the latest news of Oz, so that he could write it down
for the children to read, that Dorothy asked permission of Ozma and
Ozma graciously consented.

That is why, after two long years of waiting, another Oz story is now
presented to the children of America. This would not have been possible
had not some clever man invented the "wireless" and an equally clever
child suggested the idea of reaching the mysterious Land of Oz by its
means.

L. Frank Baum.

"OZCOT"
  at Hollywood
    in California




LIST OF CHAPTERS

   1 - Ojo and Unc Nunkie
   2 - The Crooked Magician
   3 - The Patchwork Girl
   4 - The Glass Cat
   5 - A Terrible Accident
   6 - The Journey
   7 - The Troublesome Phonograph
   8 - The Foolish Owl and the Wise Donkey
   9 - They Meet the Woozy
  10 - Shaggy Man to the Rescue
  11 - A Good Friend
  12 - The Giant Porcupine
  13 - Scraps and the Scarecrow
  14 - Ojo Breaks the Law
  15 - Ozma's Prisoner
  16 - Princess Dorothy
  17 - Ozma and Her Friends
  18 - Ojo is Forgiven
  19 - Trouble with the Tottenhots
  20 - The Captive Yoop
  21 - Hip Hopper the Champion
  22 - The Joking Horners
  23 - Peace is Declared
  24 - Ojo Finds the Dark Well
  25 - They Bribe the Lazy Quadling
  26 - The Trick River
  27 - The Tin Woodman Objects
  28 - The Wonderful Wizard of Oz




The Patchwork Girl of Oz




Chapter One

Ojo and Unc Nunkie


"Where's the butter, Unc Nunkie?" asked Ojo.

Unc looked out of the window and stroked his long beard. Then he turned
to the Munchkin boy and shook his head.

"Isn't," said he.

"Isn't any butter? That's too bad, Unc. Where's the jam then?" inquired
Ojo, standing on a stool so he could look through all the shelves of
the cupboard. But Unc Nunkie shook his head again.

"Gone," he said.

"No jam, either? And no cake--no jelly--no apples--nothing but bread?"

"All," said Unc, again stroking his beard as he gazed from the window.

The little boy brought the stool and sat beside his uncle, munching the
dry bread slowly and seeming in deep thought.

"Nothing grows in our yard but the bread tree," he mused, "and there
are only two more loaves on that tree; and they're not ripe yet. Tell
me, Unc; why are we so poor?"

The old Munchkin turned and looked at Ojo. He had kindly eyes, but he
hadn't smiled or laughed in so long that the boy had forgotten that Unc
Nunkie could look any other way than solemn. And Unc never spoke any
more words than he was obliged to, so his little nephew, who lived
alone with him, had learned to understand a great deal from one word.

"Why are we so poor, Unc?" repeated the boy.

"Not," said the old Munchkin.

"I think we are," declared Ojo. "What have we got?"

"House," said Unc Nunkie.

"I know; but everyone in the Land of Oz has a place to live. What else,
Unc?"

"Bread."

"I'm eating the last loaf that's ripe. There; I've put aside your
share, Unc. It's on the table, so you can eat it when you get hungry.
But when that is gone, what shall we eat, Unc?"

The old man shifted in his chair but merely shook his head.

"Of course," said Ojo, who was obliged to talk because his uncle would
not, "no one starves in the Land of Oz, either. There is plenty for
everyone, you know; only, if it isn't just where you happen to be, you
must go where it is."

The aged Munchkin wriggled again and stared at his small nephew as if
disturbed by his argument.

"By to-morrow morning," the boy went on, "we must go where there is
something to eat, or we shall grow very hungry and become very unhappy."

"Where?" asked Unc.

"Where shall we go? I don't know, I'm sure," replied Ojo. "But you must
know, Unc. You must have traveled, in your time, because you're so old.
I don't remember it, because ever since I could remember anything we've
lived right here in this lonesome, round house, with a little garden
back of it and the thick woods all around. All I've ever seen of the
great Land of Oz, Unc dear, is the view of that mountain over at the
south, where they say the Hammerheads live--who won't let anybody go by
them--and that mountain at the north, where they say nobody lives."

"One," declared Unc, correcting him.

"Oh, yes; one family lives there, I've heard. That's the Crooked
Magician, who is named Dr. Pipt, and his wife Margolotte. One year you
told me about them; I think it took you a whole year, Unc, to say as
much as I've just said about the Crooked Magician and his wife. They
live high up on the mountain, and the good Munchkin Country, where the
fruits and flowers grow, is just the other side. It's funny you and I
should live here all alone, in the middle of the forest, isn't it?"

"Yes," said Unc.

"Then let's go away and visit the Munchkin Country and its jolly,
good-natured people. I'd love to get a sight of something besides
woods, Unc Nunkie."

"Too little," said Unc.

"Why, I'm not so little as I used to be," answered the boy earnestly.
"I think I can walk as far and as fast through the woods as you can,
Unc. And now that nothing grows in our back yard that is good to eat,
we must go where there is food."

Unc Nunkie made no reply for a time. Then he shut down the window and
turned his chair to face the room, for the sun was sinking behind the
tree-tops and it was growing cool.

By and by Ojo lighted the fire and the logs blazed freely in the broad
fireplace. The two sat in the firelight a long time--the old,
white-bearded Munchkin and the little boy. Both were thinking. When it
grew quite dark outside, Ojo said:

"Eat your bread, Unc, and then we will go to bed."

But Unc Nunkie did not eat the bread; neither did he go directly to
bed. Long after his little nephew was sound asleep in the corner of the
room the old man sat by the fire, thinking.




Chapter Two

The Crooked Magician


Just at dawn next morning Unc Nunkie laid his hand tenderly on Ojo's
head and awakened him.

"Come," he said.

Ojo dressed. He wore blue silk stockings, blue knee pants with gold
buckles, a blue ruffled waist and a jacket of bright blue braided with
gold. His shoes were of blue leather and turned up at the toes, which
were pointed. His hat had a peaked crown and a flat brim, and around
the brim was a row of tiny golden bells that tinkled when he moved.
This was the native costume of those who inhabited the Munchkin Country
of the Land of Oz, so Unc Nunkie's dress was much like that of his
nephew. Instead of shoes, the old man wore boots with turnover tops and
his blue coat had wide cuffs of gold braid.

The boy noticed that his uncle had not eaten the bread, and supposed
the old man had not been hungry. Ojo was hungry, though; so he divided
the piece of bread upon the table and ate his half for breakfast,
washing it down with fresh, cool water from the brook. Unc put the
other piece of bread in his jacket pocket, after which he again said,
as he walked out through the doorway: "Come."

Ojo was well pleased. He was dreadfully tired of living all alone in
the woods and wanted to travel and see people. For a long time he had
wished to explore the beautiful Land of Oz in which they lived. When
they were outside, Unc simply latched the door and started up the path.
No one would disturb their little house, even if anyone came so far
into the thick forest while they were gone.

At the foot of the mountain that separated the Country of the Munchkins
from the Country of the Gillikins, the path divided. One way led to the
left and the other to the right--straight up the mountain. Unc Nunkie
took this right-hand path and Ojo followed without asking why. He knew
it would take them to the house of the Crooked Magician, whom he had
never seen but who was their nearest neighbor.

All the morning they trudged up the mountain path and at noon Unc and
Ojo sat on a fallen tree-trunk and ate the last of the bread which the
old Munchkin had placed in his pocket. Then they started on again and
two hours later came in sight of the house of Dr. Pipt.

It was a big house, round, as were all the Munchkin houses, and painted
blue, which is the distinctive color of the Munchkin Country of Oz.
There was a pretty garden around the house, where blue trees and blue
flowers grew in abundance and in one place were beds of blue cabbages,
blue carrots and blue lettuce, all of which were delicious to eat. In
Dr. Pipt's garden grew bun-trees, cake-trees, cream-puff bushes, blue
buttercups which yielded excellent blue butter and a row of
chocolate-caramel plants. Paths of blue gravel divided the vegetable
and flower beds and a wider path led up to the front door. The place
was in a clearing on the mountain, but a little way off was the grim
forest, which completely surrounded it.

Unc knocked at the door of the house and a chubby, pleasant-faced
woman, dressed all in blue, opened it and greeted the visitors with a
smile.

"Ah," said Ojo; "you must be Dame Margolotte, the good wife of Dr.
Pipt."

"I am, my dear, and all strangers are welcome to my home."

"May we see the famous Magician, Madam?"

"He is very busy just now," she said, shaking her head doubtfully. "But
come in and let me give you something to eat, for you must have
traveled far in order to get our lonely place."

"We have," replied Ojo, as he and Unc entered the house. "We have come
from a far lonelier place than this."

"A lonelier place! And in the Munchkin Country?" she exclaimed. "Then
it must be somewhere in the Blue Forest."

"It is, good Dame Margolotte."

"Dear me!" she said, looking at the man, "you must be Unc Nunkie, known
as the Silent One." Then she looked at the boy. "And you must be Ojo
the Unlucky," she added.

"Yes," said Unc.

"I never knew I was called the Unlucky," said Ojo, soberly; "but it is
really a good name for me."

"Well," remarked the woman, as she bustled around the room and set the
table and brought food from the cupboard, "you were unlucky to live all
alone in that dismal forest, which is much worse than the forest around
here; but perhaps your luck will change, now you are away from it. If,
during your travels, you can manage to lose that 'Un' at the beginning
of your name 'Unlucky,' you will then become Ojo the Lucky, which will
be a great improvement."

"How can I lose that 'Un,' Dame Margolotte?"

"I do not know how, but you must keep the matter in mind and perhaps
the chance will come to you," she replied.

Ojo had never eaten such a fine meal in all his life. There was a
savory stew, smoking hot, a dish of blue peas, a bowl of sweet milk of
a delicate blue tint and a blue pudding with blue plums in it. When the
visitors had eaten heartily of this fare the woman said to them:

"Do you wish to see Dr. Pipt on business or for pleasure?"

Unc shook his head.

"We are traveling," replied Ojo, "and we stopped at your house just to
rest and refresh ourselves. I do not think Unc Nunkie cares very much
to see the famous Crooked Magician; but for my part I am curious to
look at such a great man."

The woman seemed thoughtful.

"I remember that Unc Nunkie and my husband used to be friends, many
years ago," she said, "so perhaps they will be glad to meet again. The
Magician is very busy, as I said, but if you will promise not to
