With an oath, Rafferty, who was no coward, sprang upon Joe, and it
would have gone hard with him but for Watson.  The latter was now
broad awake.  He seized Rafferty by the collar, and, dashing him
backward upon the floor, threw himself upon him.

"Two can play at that game!" said he.  "Light the candle, Joe."

"Help, pard!" called Rafferty.

But Hogan, on whom he called, suspecting how matters stood, was in
full flight.

The candle was lighted, and in the struggling ruffian Joe recognized
the man who, three months before, had robbed him of his little all.




CHAPTER XXIII

NOT WHOLLY BLACK

"I know this man, Mr. Watson," said Joe.

"Who is he?"

"He is the same man who robbed me of my money one night about three
months ago--the one I told you of."

For the first time, Rafferty recognized Joe.

"There wasn't enough to make a fuss about," he said.  "There was only
two dollars and a half."

"It was all I had."

"Let me up!" said Rafferty, renewing his struggles.

"Joe, have you got a rope?" asked Watson.

"Yes."

"Bring it here, then.  I can't hold this man all night."

"What are you going to do with me?" demanded Rafferty uneasily.

"Tie you hand and foot till to-morrow morning and then deliver you
over to the authorities."

"No, you won't!"

He made a renewed struggle, but Watson was a man with muscles of
iron, and the attempt was unsuccessful.

It was not without considerable difficulty, however, that the
midnight intruder was secured.  When, at length, he was bound hand
and foot, Watson withdrew to a little distance.  Joe and he looked at
Rafferty, and each felt that he had seldom seen a more brutal face.

"Well," growled Rafferty, "I hope you are satisfied?"

"Not yet," returned Watson.  "When you are delivered into the hands
of the authorities we shall be satisfied."

"Oh, for an hour's freedom!" muttered Jack Rafferty, expressing his
thoughts aloud.

"What use would you make of it?" asked Watson, in a tone of curiosity.

"I'd kill the man that led me into this trap!"

Watson and Joe were surprised.

"Was there such a man.  Didn't you come here alone?"

"No; there was a man got me to come.  Curse him, He told me I would
only find the boy here!"

"What has become of him?"

"He ran away, I reckon, instead of standing by me."

"Where was he?"

"At the winder."

"Could it have been Hogan?" thought Joe.

"I think I know the man," said our hero.  "I'll describe the man I
mean and you can tell me if it was he."

He described Hogan as well as he could.

"That's the man," said Rafferty.  "I wouldn't peach if he hadn't
served me such a mean trick.  What's his name?"

"His name is Hogan.  He came over on the same steamer with me, after
robbing me of fifty dollars in New York.  He has been at the mines,
but didn't make out well.  This very afternoon I gave him supper--all
he could eat--and charged him nothing for it.  He repays me by
planning a robbery."

"He's a mean skunk," said Watson bluntly.

"You're right, stranger," said Rafferty.  "I'm a scamp myself, but
I'll be blowed if I'd turn on a man that fed me when I was hungry."

The tones were gruff but the man was evidently sincere.

"You're better than you look," said Watson, surprised to hear such a
sentiment from a man of such ruffianly appearance.

Jack Rafferty laughed shortly.

"I ain't used to compliments," he said, "and I expect I'm bad enough,
but I ain't all bad.  I won't turn on my pal, unless he does it
first, and I ain't mean enough to rob a man that's done me a good
turn."

"No, you ain't all bad," said Watson.  "It's a pity you won't make up
your mind to earn an honest living."

"Too late for that, I reckon.  What do you think they'll do with me?"

In those days punishments were summary and severe.  Watson knew it
and Joe had seen something of it.  Our hero began to feel compassion
for the foiled burglar.  He whispered in Watson's ear.  Watson
hesitated, but finally yielded.

"Stranger," said he, "the boy wants me to let you go."

"Does he?" inquired Rafferty, in surprise.

"Yes.  He is afraid it will go hard with you if we give you up."

"Likely it will," muttered Rafferty, watching Watson's face eagerly,
to see whether he favored Joe's proposal.

"Suppose we let you go--will you promise not to make another attempt
upon this place?"

"What do you take me for?  I'm not such a mean cuss as that."

"One thing more--you won't kill this man that brought you here?"

"If I knowed it wasn't a trap he led me into.  He told me there was
only the boy."

"He thought so.  I don't belong here.  The boy let me sleep here out
of kindness.  Hogan knew nothing of this.  I didn't come till after
he had left."

"That's different," said Rafferty; "but he shouldn't have gone back
on me."

"He is a coward, probably."

"I guess you're right," said Rafferty contemptuously.

"You promise, then?"

"Not to kill him?  Yes."

"Then we'll let you go."

Watson unloosed the bonds that confined the prisoner.  Rafferty
raised himself to his full height and stretched his limbs.

"There--I feel better," he said.  "You tied the rope pretty tight."

"I found it necessary," said Watson, laughing.  "Now, Joe, if you
will open the door, this gentleman will pass out."

Rafferty turned to Joe, as he was about to leave the restaurant.

"Boy," said he, "I won't forget this.  I ain't much of a friend to
boast of, but I'm your friend.  You've saved me from prison, and
worse, it's likely; and, if you need help any time, send for me.  If
I had that money I took from you I'd pay it back."

"I don't need it," said Joe.  "I've been lucky, and am doing well.  I
hope you'll make up your mind to turn over a new leaf.  If you do,
and are ever hard up for a meal, come to me, and you shall have it
without money and without price."

"Thank you, boy," said Rafferty.  "I'll remember it."

He strode out of the restaurant, and disappeared in the darkness.

"Human nature's a curious thing, Joe," said Watson.  "Who would have
expected to find any redeeming quality in such a man as that?"

"I would sooner trust him than Hogan."

"So would I.  Hogan is a mean scoundrel, who is not so much of a
ruffian as this man only because he is too much of a coward to be."

"I am glad we let him go," said Joe.

"I am not sure whether it was best, but I knew we should have to be
awake all night if we didn't.  He could have loosened the knots after
awhile.  He won't trouble you any more."

"I wish I felt as sure about Hogan," said Joe.

"Hogan is a coward.  I advise you to keep ft revolver constantly on
hand.  He won't dare to break in by himself."

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning, after breakfast, Watson prepared to go out in
search of work.

"I must begin at the bottom of the ladder once more," he said to Joe.
"It's my own fault, and I won't complain.  But what a fool I have
been!  I might have gone home by the next steamer if I hadn't gambled
away all my hard earnings."

"What sort of work shall you try to get?"

"Anything--I have no right to be particular.  Anything that will pay
my expenses and give me a chance to lay by something for my family at
home."

"Mr. Watson," said Joe suddenly, "I've been thinking of something
that may suit you.  Since I came to San Francisco I have never gone
outside.  I would like to go to the mines."

"You wouldn't make as much as you do here."

"Perhaps not; but I have laid by some money and I would like to see
something of the country.  Will you carry on the restaurant for me
for three months, if I give you your board and half of the profits?"

"Will I?  I should think myself very lucky to get the chance."

"Then you shall have the chance."

"How do you know that I can be trusted?" asked Watson.

"I haven't known you long," said Joe, "but I feel confidence in your
honesty."

"I don't think you'll repent your confidence.  When do you want to
go?"

"I'll stay here a few days, till you get used to the business, then I
will start."

"I was lucky to fall in with you," said Watson.  "I didn't want to go
back to the mines and tell the boys what a fool I have been.  I begin
to think there's a chance for me yet."




CHAPTER XXIV

MR. BICKFORD, OF PUMPKIN HOLLOW

It may be thought that Joe was rash in deciding to leave his business
in the hands of a man whose acquaintance he had made but twelve hours
previous.  But in the early history of California friendships ripened
fast.  There was more confidence between man and man, and I am
assured that even now, though the State is more settled and as far
advanced in civilization and refinement as any of her sister States
on the Atlantic coast, the people are bound together by more friendly
ties, and exhibit less of cold caution than at the East.  At all
events, Joe never dreamed of distrusting his new acquaintance.  A
common peril, successfully overcome, had doubtless something to do in
strengthening the bond between them.

Joe went round to his friend Mr. Morgan and announced his intention.

"I don't think you will make money by your new plan, Joe," said
Morgan.

"I don't expect to," said Joe, "but I want to see the mines.  If I
don't succeed, I can come back to my business here."

"That is true.  I should like very well to go, too."

"Why won't you, Mr. Morgan?"

"I cannot leave my business as readily as you can.  Do you feel
confidence in this man whom you are leaving in charge?"

"Yes, sir.  He has been unlucky, but I am sure he is honest."

"He will have considerable money belonging to you by the time you
return--that is, if you stay any length of time."

"I want to speak to you about that, Mr. Morgan.  I have directed him
to make a statement to you once a month, and put in your hands what
money comes to me--if it won't trouble you too much."

"Not at all, Joe.  I shall be glad to be of service to you."

"If you meet with any good investment for the money while I am away,
I should like to have you act for me as you would for yourself."

"All right, Joe."

Joe learned from Watson that the latter had been mining on the Yuba
River, not far from the town of Marysville.  He decided to go there,
although he might have found mines nearer the city.  The next
question was, How should he get there, and should he go alone?

About this time a long, lank Yankee walked into the restaurant, one
day, and, seating himself at a table, began to inspect the bill of
fare which Joe used to write up every morning.  He looked
disappointed.

"Don't you find what you want?" inquired Joe.

"No," said the visitor.  "I say, this is a queer country.  I've been
hankerin' arter a good dish of baked beans for a week, and ain't
found any."

"We sometimes have them," said Joe.  "Come here at one o'clock, and
you shall be accommodated."

The stranger brightened up.

"That's the talk," said he.  "I'll come."

"Have you just come out here?" asked Joe curiously.

"A week ago."

"Are you a Southerner?" asked Joe demurely.

"No, I guess not!" said the Yankee, with emphasis.

"I was raised in Pumpkin Hollow, State of Maine.  I was twenty-one
last first of April, but I ain't no April fool, I tell you.  Dad and
me carried on the farm till I, began to hear tell of Californy.  I'd
got about three hundred dollars saved up and I took it to come out
here."

"I suppose you've come out to make your fortune?"

"Yes, sir-ee, that's just what I come for."

"How have you succeeded so far?"

"I've succeeded in spendin' all my money, except fifty dollars.  I
say, it costs a sight to eat and drink out here.  I can't afford to
take but one meal a day, and then I eat like all possessed."

"I should think you would, Mr.-------"

"Joshua Bickford--that's my name when I'm to hum."

"Well, Mr. Bickford, what are your plans?"

"I want to go out to the mines and dig gold.  I guess I can dig as
well as anybody.  I've had experience in diggin' ever since I was ten
year old."

"Not digging gold, I suppose?"

"Diggin' potatoes, and sich."

"I'm going to the mines myself, Mr. Bickford.  What do you say to
going along with me?"

"I'm on hand.  You know the way, don't you?"

"We can find it, I have no doubt.  I have never been there, but my
friend Mr. Watson is an experienced miner."

"How much gold did you dig?" asked Joshua bluntly.

"Two thousand dollars," answered Watson, not thinking it necessary to
add that he had parted with the money since at the gaming-table.

"Two thousand dollars?" exclaimed Joshua, duly impressed.  "That's a
heap of money!"

"Yes; it's a pretty good pile."

"I'd like to get that much.  I know what I'd do."

"What would you do, Mr. Bickford?"

"I'd go home and marry Sukey Smith, by gosh!"

"Then I hope you'll get the money, for Miss Smith's sake."

"There's a feller hangin' round her," said Joshua, "kinder
slick-lookin', with his hair parted in the middle; he tends in the
dry-goods store; but, if I come home with two thousand dollars,
she'll have me, I guess.  Why, with two thousand dollars I can buy
the farm next to dad's, with a house with five rooms into it, and a
good-sized barn.  I guess Sukey wouldn't say no to me then, but would
change her name to Bickford mighty sudden."

"I hope you will succeed in your plans, Mr. Bickford."

"Seems to me you're kinder young to be out here," said Bickford,
turning his attention to Joe.

"Yes; I am not quite old enough to think of marrying."
