
"I want to sell these bonds."

The clerk took them and drew them out of the envelope. Then he figured a
little on a slip of paper, and said:

"They are worth two hundred and twenty-five dollars and twenty-five
cents."

"All right, sir."

"Will you take a check or currency?"

Frank hesitated.

"Perhaps I'd better ask the man I am getting them for."

"Very well. You can bring them here to-morrow."

"Oh, I will let you know in a minute! The man is just outside."

This answer immediately excited suspicion. Frank was too little versed
in business ways to understand how singular it was for his principal not
to transact his own business under the circumstances, but the brokers
were necessarily keen, shrewd men.

"Wait a minute," said the clerk; "I will speak to Mr. Jones."

Mr. Jones came forward and addressed Frank.

"Are you acquainted with the man who gave you these bonds to sell?" he
asked.

"No, sir. I met him in the street."

"Did he offer you any pay for selling them?"

"Yes, sir. He is going to give me a dollar."

"Will you go out and ask him to come in here a moment?"

Frank obeyed.

When his employer saw him coming, he asked, eagerly:

"Have you got the money?"

"No," answered Frank. "They asked me if I wanted a check or currency."

"Either currency or gold," answered the man, hastily. "Go back at once,
and don't keep me waiting."

"They want to see you, sir."

"What for?" inquired the man, looking disturbed.

"I don't know."

"There is no need of my going in," said the man, angrily. "I paid you to
sell the bonds. Now go back."

"He won't come," reported Frank. "He says I can attend to the business.
He will take either gold or currency."

"No doubt," said Mr. Jones, significantly. "Thomas, go out with this
boy, and tell the man that employed him that we do not purchase bonds
unless we have a reasonable assurance that they belong to the person
offering them. We will take the liberty of retaining them, giving him a
receipt for them, and if we are satisfied, he can have his money
to-morrow."

Robinson, who had been examining some newspaper slips, here came
forward, and said:

"That is unnecessary. I find that these bonds are among those stolen
from the house of Henry Percival, Madison Avenue, a week since. We must
manage to delay the man while we notify the police."

Frank was very much surprised to learn that he was acting as agent for a
bond robber, and was fearful that he might himself be regarded with
suspicion; but he need not have troubled himself on this score. Wall
Street men are good judges of human nature, and it was at once concluded
in the office that Frank was the dupe of a designing knave.

A boy was dispatched to the nearest police office, and Frank was
directed to tell his principal that he would not long be delayed.

Naturally, however, the man outside had become suspicious.

"I can't wait," he said. "Meet me on the steps of the Astor House at
five o'clock with the money. I am obliged to hurry away now to a
business appointment."

Frank could think of no other pretext for delaying him, and was forced
to see him hurry away.

He hastened back to the office and gave the alarm.

"He has taken fright," said Robinson. "I fear we have lost him. Where
did he go?"

Frank, however, was too ignorant of city streets to give any accurate
information.

The consequence was that when the policeman appeared on the scene, there
was no occasion for his services.

"At any rate," said the broker, "we have secured a little of the
plunder. What is your name and address my boy? We may wish to
communicate with you."

Frank gave his name, and added the directions of his boarding house.

"Shall I meet the man at the Astor House?" he inquired, as he was
leaving the office.

"To be sure!" said Mr. Jones. "I came near forgetting that. Officer,
will you be on hand at the time?"

"Better employ a detective, sir, as my uniform would keep the thief at a
distance. I don't think he'll appear, at any rate."

"I do," said the broker. "He won't give up the money while he thinks
there is a chance of securing it."




CHAPTER XXI

THE CAPTURE


At the hour named, Frank repaired to the Astor House, and took a
position on the steps.

He looked about him for his street acquaintance, but could see no one
who bore any resemblance to him.

Finally, a man dressed in a gray suit with a pair of green glasses,
walked carelessly up to our hero and said, in a low voice:

"Have you got the money?"

Frank looked at him in surprise.

This man had thick, black whiskers, while the man who had employed him
had none at all, so far as he could remember. Besides, the green glasses
altered him considerably.

To make sure that he was not deceived he inquired:

"What money?"

"You know very well," said the man, impatiently. "You are the boy whom I
employed to sell some bonds this morning."

"You don't look like the same man," said Frank.

"Because of my glasses. I have to wear them at times on account of the
weakness of my eyes."

While he was speaking, a quiet-looking man approached and listened to
the conversation.

"Then," said Frank, "you can tell me how many bonds you handed me."

"They were two five-twenty government bonds of a hundred dollars each."

"Correct, sir."

"Then hand me the money and be quick about it, for I have no time to
waste! You shall have the dollar I promised you."

But here the quiet-looking man took a part in the conversation. Passing
his arm through that of the man with the green glasses, he said:

"I will trouble you to come with me."

"How dare you touch me? Do you mean to insult me?" demanded the other,
struggling with captor.

"I will make all clear in due time. You must come with me and explain
how you came in possession of the bonds you gave this boy."

"They were put in my hands by an acquaintance. If there is anything
wrong, I am not to blame."

"In that case no harm will come to you; but now you must come along."

After his experience, Frank walked to his boarding place. He was quite
ready for six o'clock.

When he entered the dining room, his hostess introduced him to all.

A young man sat next to him and entered into conversation.

"What do you do, Mr. Courtney?"

"I have taken an agency to sell tea for the Great Pekin Tea Company. I
am to begin to-morrow."

"I am afraid you won't like it. A friend of mine tried it once and came
near starving."

This was not encouraging, but Frank was not going to despair before he
had fairly begun his work.

"I find that boys receive such small wages," Frank continued, "that I
preferred to try an agency."

"Quite true," said Mr. Preston, condescendingly. "When I started I was
paid a paltry sum; now I am not paid what I am worth. Still, twenty-five
dollars a week is fair."

"Quite fair," responded Frank, who could not, of course, know that Mr.
Preston did not receive one-half of this sum, though he chose to give
that impression.

After dinner, Preston was obliged to go back to the store where he was
employed. By invitation, Frank walked with him.

Turning into Sixth Avenue they passed a saloon.

"Won't you have something to drink, Courtney?" said Preston.

"No, thank you, I never drink," answered Frank.

"It will brace you up, and make you feel jolly. Better come in!"

"I don't need bracing up," answered Frank, quietly.

"Well, perhaps you are right," said Mr. Peter Preston. "I don't indulge
very often, but sometimes I feel like it."

Some boys might have yielded to the temptation, but Frank had determined
that he would abstain from liquor, and kept his resolution. A boy who
comes to the city is exposed at every step to this peril, and needs a
firm will to withstand it. It is the fruitful source of crime and
misery, and does more to fill our prisons than any other cause.

"This is my store," said Preston, as he pointed to a modest-looking shop
on the west side of the avenue. "I wish I could keep you company longer,
but business before pleasure, you know."

Before returning to his boarding house, Frank sat down for a short time
in Washington Park, and reviewed his plans and prospects. He could not
tell how he would succeed in his tea agency; but if that failed, he was
resolved to try something else.

He didn't feel homesick, for since his mother's death he had no longer
any home ties. Young as he was, he felt that one part of his life was
at an end, and that a new life and a new career were before him.




CHAPTER XXII

THE YOUNG TEA MERCHANT


The next morning, at breakfast, one of the gentlemen, who had been
running his eyes over the morning paper, said, suddenly:

"Ah! I see they have caught one of the gang who robbed the house of Mr.
Percival, on Madison Avenue, a week ago."

"Read the paragraph, Mr. Smith," said one of the boarders.

Mr. Smith read as follows:

"About noon yesterday a boy entered the banking house of Jones &
Robinson, in Wall Street, and offered for sale two one-hundred-dollar
government bonds. On inquiry, he said that the bonds belonged to a man
in the street, whom he had never before met, and who had offered him a
dollar to sell them. This naturally excited suspicion, and a policeman
was sent for. Before he could arrive the man had hastily departed,
requesting the boy to meet him at a specified hour in front of the Astor
House and hand him the money. He came to the rendezvous, but in
disguise, and, while talking to the boy, was arrested. It is understood
that he has agreed to turn State's evidence, and probably the entire sum
stolen, amounting to several thousand dollars, will be recovered."

Frank listened to this paragraph with interest. He was glad that his
name was not mentioned in the account, as he didn't care for such
publicity. He ventured to ask a question.

"Is Mr. Percival a rich man?" he asked.

"Very rich," answered Mr. Smith. "He is not now in the city, but is
expected home from Europe in three or four weeks. His house was left in
charge of an old servant--a coachman--and his wife; but the burglars
proved too much for them."

"I am glad they are caught," said Mrs. Fletcher. "It makes my blood run
cold to think of having the houses entered at night by burglars."

"Preston," said Mr. Smith, jokingly, "I hope you have your bonds locked
securely up."

"I don't believe the sharpest burglar can find them," said Preston. "I
only wish I could get hold of them myself."

"The boy who helped to capture the burglar ought to be well rewarded,"
said one of the boarders.

"Don't you wish it had been you, Courtney?" said Mr. Preston.

"It was," answered Frank, quietly.

There was a great sensation upon this announcement. All eyes were turned
upon our hero--most, it must be admitted, with an expression of
incredulity.

"Come, now, you are joking!" said Preston. "You don't really mean it?"

"I do mean it," assured Frank.

"Tell us all about it," said Mrs. Fletcher, who had her share of
curiosity. "I didn't suppose we had such a hero in our house."

"It didn't require much heroism," said Frank, smiling.

"Tell us all about it, at any rate."

Frank told the story as simply as he could, much to the satisfaction of
the company.

"You'll come in for a handsome reward, when Mr. Percival gets home,"
suggested Mr. Smith.

"I don't expect anything," said Frank. "I shall be satisfied if I get
the dollar which was promised me. I haven't received that yet."

"I wish I were in your shoes--that's all I've got to say," said Preston,
nodding vigorously. "Will you sell out for five dollars?"

"Cash down?" asked Frank, smiling.

"Well, I'll give you my note at thirty days," said the Sixth Avenue
salesman, who seldom kept five dollars in advance of his liabilities.

"I won't sell what I haven't got," said Frank. "Probably I shall hear
nothing from Mr. Percival."

After breakfast Frank went downtown and sought the store of the Great
Pekin Company.

After half an hour's delay--for there were others in advance of him--he
was fitted out with samples and started for Brooklyn.

It was his first visit to that city, but he had received some directions
which made his expedition less embarrassing.

At the ferry he took a Flatbush Avenue car, and rode up Fulton Street,
and past the City Hall, up Fulton Avenue, for nearly a mile.

Here were interesting streets, lined with comfortable houses--for Frank
had made up his mind first to try private houses. He had with him a few
pound parcels of tea, which he thought he could perhaps succeed in
disposing of at such places.

He selected a house at random, and rang the bell.

A servant answered the ring.

Frank felt rather embarrassed, but there was no time to hesitate.

