"When you do," he said, "let me know."

"I will."

"By the way, you won't want that boat of yours now."

"Why not?"

"You won't get time to use it. I'll give you twenty dollars for it."

"It is not for sale," answered Andy, firmly.

"It will be after a while," said Conrad, in a self-satisfied tone. "I
will see the time when you will be glad enough to get the money I
offer."

During the few days that Andy remained at home he did some work on the
farm. Mr. Grant's boy helper was sick with a cold, and Andy stepped into
his place.

The next time of Conrad's meeting him he was at work digging potatoes.
Conrad smiled and nodded. He felt quite friendly as he witnessed what he
considered Andy's humiliation.

"My father may give you a little job," he said, as he leaned over the
fence.

"What is it?"

"He needs some work done round the house. He will pay you fifty cents a
day. When can you come?"

"Just at present I am too busy. If I can spare the time I will let you
know."

"I like to see upstarts brought down to their level," thought Conrad.
"Andy Grant won't be putting on any more airs, I reckon."

On Monday morning Andy stood on the platform of the railroad station
with a good-sized gripsack in his hand. He was about starting for New
York to enter upon his duties at the jewelry store.

Swinging a light cane, Conrad Carter appeared on the platform with his
father, who was going to the city on business. With a good deal of
surprise he recognized Andy.

"Where are you going?" he asked, abruptly, with a glance at the
gripsack.

"To New York," answered Andy.

"What business have you there?"

"I have a position in a store on Union Square. I shall be pleased to
have you call when you are in the city."

Conrad was greatly surprised.

"What kind of a store is it?" he asked.

"A jewelry store. I haven't a card with me, but will send you one."

Conrad didn't appear to be glad at Andy's good fortune. He had made up
his mind that his humble rival, as he chose to consider him, would be
obliged to work on the farm, and now he had found a way to avoid it.

"I think your father will have to find some one else to assist him,"
Andy continued; "you see, I shall be otherwise occupied."

"What pay will you receive?"

"If you will excuse me, I would rather not tell."

"Oh, just as you like. Where will you live? Will you sleep in the
store?"

"No; I am to board on Clinton Place, with a Mrs. Norris."

"Did you know about this when we were talking the other day?"

"Yes."

"Why didn't you tell me?"

"I would have done so if I had known how much interest you took in my
plans."

The rumble of the approaching train was heard, and Andy was obliged to
enter a car. It chanced that it was unusually full, and Andy found but
one vacant seat--the one beside Squire Carter.

The squire now noticed Andy for the first time.

"Where are you going, Andrew?" he asked.

"To New York, sir."

"On any special errand?"

"I am going to work there."

"Indeed! What kind of a place?"

"I shall have a place with Mr. Flint, of Union Square, a jeweler."

"I suppose Mr. Gale obtained you the place?"

"Yes, sir."

"I am not sure that you are acting wisely. I doubt if you can make
expenses. What are you to be paid?"

"Five dollars a week."

"That is very fair pay for a boy of your age, but it won't go very far
in New York."

"I suppose New York is an expensive place to live in," said Andy,
noncommittally.

"Yes. You will have to pay all your wages for board. Your other expenses
will have to come out of your father's pocket."

"I may be advanced."

"It will be a good while, first. You seem to be acting very
injudiciously."

This remark did not trouble Andy. As his board was to be paid by Mr.
Gale, his salary would be practically ten dollars a week; but this he
did not care to tell.

"Country boys are always in a stew to get work in the city," observed
the squire. "If they would only take the advice of their elders, they
would see that it is better to stay in the country."

"They think probably that there is more chance of advancement in the
city. Horace Greeley never would have risen to distinction if he had
remained in his native village."

"Ahem! there are exceptions. What is the number of the store where you
will be employed?"

Andy told him.

"I may call in upon you some time. I am often in the city on business."

"I shall be glad if you will," said Andy, sincerely. "It will seem
pleasant to me to see an Arden face."

Andy got out of the cars at the Grand Central Depot. He was not quite
sure of his way to Clinton Place, but he was not in the least disturbed.
He was naturally self-reliant.

He asked the question of a gentleman, and was advised to take a Fourth
Avenue car through the tunnel as far as Eighth Street, but he thought he
should prefer to walk, as it would enable him to enjoy the sights and
scenes of the metropolis. All these were fresh and interesting to him.

He had gone but a dozen steps from the depot when a plausible stranger
of thirty-five years, apparently, stopped him.

"Young man, may I have a word with you?" he asked.

"If you wish."

"I speak to you, because I judge from your appearance that you have a
good, kind heart."

"I hope you are right, sir."

"I am very awkwardly placed. My sister is very sick in Yonkers and has
sent for me. On my way to the depot in a horse car I had my pocket
picked, and I have not enough money to get to the bedside of my poor
sister. If you would kindly lend me a quarter--"

Andy was kind-hearted, and he was not versed in city wiles. He put his
hand in his pocket and drew out a twenty-five-cent silver coin.

"I am glad to help you," he said, as he passed the coin to the
applicant.

"You have a noble heart. I thank you," said the stranger, feelingly.

Andy felt pleased to think that he had done the man a favor, but his
satisfaction was short-lived.

A stout, pleasant-looking man who had caught sight of the conference
addressed him.

"Did you give that man any money?" he asked.

"Yes sir."

"What did he need it for?"

"His pocket had been picked, and he wanted to go to Yonkers to visit his
sick sister."

His new friend laughed.

"That's a new story," he said. "The man is an arrant fraud. Your money
will be spent for drink. He has no sick sister."

This was quite a shock to Andy. He saw that he had been victimized, and
must hereafter be on his guard against plausible strangers.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE FIRST DAY IN NEW YORK.


By dint of a little inquiry Andy found his way to Mrs. Norris' boarding
house in Clinton Place. It was a plain three-story-and-basement house
of brick and looked thoroughly respectable.

Andy took a general view of it, and thought he should take it. To his
country eyes it looked quite aristocratic. It was higher than any house
in Arden, even Squire Carter's.

He ascended the steps and rang the bell.

It was answered by a Swedish girl named Eva, a blond girl of the true
Scandinavian type.

"Is Mrs. Norris at home?" he asked.

"She is upstairs," was the reply.

"I should like to see her."

"Who shall I tell her calls?"

"She won't know my name. Tell her it is some one with a letter from Mr.
Walter Gale."

"Won't you step in?"

She ushered Andy into a small reception room opening from the hall. It
was a very small room, provided with a sofa, one chair and a writing
desk. Just over the sofa hung an engraving of Washington crossing the
Delaware.

Andy sat down on the sofa and placed his gripsack in front of him. There
was nothing to occupy his mind, so he sat patiently, wondering what sort
of a looking woman the landlady might be.

Soon there was a rustle of garments, and a stout, pleasant-looking lady,
of perhaps fifty, wearing a small cap set off with red ribbons, entered
the room.

"Mrs. Norris?" said Andy, inquiringly, rising out of respect.

"Yes, I am Mrs. Norris. Eva told me you had a letter from Mr.--I didn't
catch the name."

"Mr. Walter Gale."

"Oh, yes, Mr. Gale. I know him very well."

"Did he ever board here?"

"No; he boarded at one of the hotels. Mr. Gale is a rich man."

She took the letter and read it.

"Mr. Gale asks if I can take you to board, and offers to pay your board.
He must be a great friend of yours?"

"He is. I hope the arrangement will be satisfactory."

"Quite so. I couldn't wish any better paymaster than Mr. Gale. Are you
going to work in the city?"

"Yes. I have a place in Mr. Flint's jewelry store on Union Square."

"Really? That is quite a high-toned place. I got my best spoons there."

"Have you got a room for me?" asked Andy, a little anxiously.

"Yes, I've got a small hall bedroom. I suppose you didn't expect a
square room?"

"It would be too expensive."

"It wouldn't be if you had a roommate. There's a gentleman on the third
floor front, a Mr. Warren. He is sickly, and writes for some of the
papers. He told me he would like a roommate; but perhaps you would
prefer a small room alone?"

"I should."

"Then I've a small room on the same floor. It was occupied till last
week by a music teacher, but he was three weeks behind in his rent and I
had to let him go. It's a trying business, keeping a boarding house,
Mr.--"

"Grant," suggested Andy.

"Yes. That's a good name. I suppose you're in nowise related to the
general?"

"No; I wish I was."

"If you will follow me upstairs I'll show you the room. You can bring
