of a good son turned his attention to matters above his sphere; and
thinking of great things, he had come to talk great things.  It was not
a bad fault, after all.  Boys need not necessarily be frivolous.  Play
is a good thing, an excellent thing, in its place, and is as much a
part of the boy's education as his grammar and arithmetic.  It not only
develops his muscles, but enlarges his mental capacity; it not only
fills with excitement the idle hours of the long day, but it sharpens
the judgment, and helps to fit the boy for the active duties of life.

It need not be supposed, because Bobby had to turn his attention to
serious things, that he was not fond of fun; that he could not or did
not play.  At a game of round ball, he was a lucky fellow who secured
him upon his side; for the same energy which made him a useful son
rendered him a desirable hand in a difficult game.

When the supper things were all removed, the dishes washed and put
away, Bobby drew out his pocket memorandum book.  It was a beautiful
article, and Mrs. Bright was duly astonished at its gilded leaves and
the elegant workmanship.  Very likely her first impulse was to reprove
her son for such a piece of reckless extravagance; but this matter was
set right by Bobby's informing her how it came into his possession.

"Here is my ledger, mother," he said, handing her the book.

Mrs. Bright put on her spectacles, and after bestowing a careful
scrutiny upon the memorandum book, turned to the accounts.

"Fifty books!" she exclaimed, as she read the first entry.

"Yes, mother; and I sold them all."

"Fifty dollars!"

"But I had to pay for the books out of that."

"To be sure you had; but I suppose you made as much as ten cents a
piece on them, and that would be--let me see; ten times fifty--"

"But I made more than that, I hope."

"How much?"

The proud young merchant referred her to the profit and loss account,
which exhibited a balance of fifteen dollars.

"Gracious!  Three dollars a day!"

"Just so, mother.  Now I will pay you the dollar I borrowed of you when
I went away."

"You didn't borrow it of me."

"But I shall pay it."

Mrs. Bright was astonished at this unexpected and gratifying result.
If she had discovered a gold mine in the cellar of the little black
house, it could not have afforded her so much satisfaction; for this
money was the reward of her son's talent and energy.  Her own earnings
scarcely ever amounted to more than three or four dollars a week, and
Bobby, a boy of thirteen, had come home with fifteen for five days'
work.  She could scarcely believe the evidence other own senses, and
she ceased to wonder that he talked big.

It was nearly ten o'clock when the widow and her son went to bed, so
deeply were they interested in discussing our hero's affairs.  He had
intended to call upon Squire Lee that night, but the time passed away
so rapidly that he was obliged to defer it till the next day.

After breakfast the following morning, he hastened to pay the intended
visit.  There was a tumult of strange emotions in his bosom as he
knocked at the squire's door.  He was proud of the success he had
achieved, and even then his cheek burned under the anticipated
commendations which his generous friend would bestow upon him.
Besides, Annie would be glad to see him, for she had expressed such a
desire when they parted on the Monday preceding.  I don't think that
Bobby cherished any silly ideas, but the sympathy of the little maiden
fell not coldly or unwelcomely upon his warm heart.  In coming from the
house he had placed his copy of "The Wayfarer" under his arm, for Annie
was fond of reading; and on the way over, he had pictured to himself
the pleasure she would derive from reading his book.

Of course he received a warm welcome from the squire and his daughter.
Each of them had bestowed more than a thought upon the little wanderer
as he went from house to house, and more than once they had conversed
together about him.

"Well, Bobby, how is trade in the book line?" asked the squire, after
the young pilgrim had been cordially greeted.

"Pretty fair," replied Bobby, with as much indifference as he could
command, though it was hard even to seem indifferent then and there.

"Where have you been travelling?"

"In B----."

"Fine place.  Books sell well there?"

"Very well; in fact, I sold out all my stock by noon yesterday."

"How many books did you carry?"

"Fifty."

"You did well."

"I should think you did!" added Annie, with an enthusiasm which quite
upset all Bobby's assumed indifference.  "Fifty books!"

"Yes, Miss Annie; and I have brought you a copy of the book I have been
selling; I thought you would like to read it.  It is a splendid work,
and will be _the_ book of the season."

"I shall be delighted to read it," replied Annie, taking the proffered
volume.  "It looks real good," she continued, as she turned over the
leaves.

"It is first rate; I have read it through."

"It was very kind of you to think of me when you have so much business
on your mind," added she, with a roguish smile.

"I shall never have so much business on my mind that I cannot think of
my friends," replied Bobby, so gallantly and so smartly that it
astonished himself.

"I was just thinking what I should read next; I am so glad you have
come."

"Never mind her, Bobby; all she wanted was the book," interposed Squire
Lee, laughing.

"Now, pa!"

"Then I shall bring her one very often."

"You are too bad, pa," said Annie, who, like most young ladies just
entering their teens, resented any imputation upon the immaculateness
of human love, or human friendship.

"I have got a little money for you, Squire Lee," continued Bobby,
thinking it time the subject was changed.

He took out his gilded memorandum book, whose elegant appearance rather
startled the squire, and from its "treasury department" extracted the
little roll of bills, representing an aggregate of ten dollars which he
had carefully reserved for his creditor.

"Never mind that, Bobby," replied the squire.  "You will want all your
capital to do business with."

"I must pay my debts before I think of any thing else."

"A very good plan, Bobby, but this is an exception to the general rule."

"No, sir, I think not.  If you please, I insist upon paying you tea
dollars on my note."

"O, well, if you insist, I suppose I can't help myself."

"I would rather pay it, I shall feel so much better."

"You want to indorse it on the note, I suppose."

That was just what Bobby wanted.  Indorsed on the note was the idea,
and our hero had often passed that expression through his mind.  There
was something gratifying in the act to a man of business integrity like
himself; it was discharging a sacred obligation,--he had already come
to deem it a sacred duty to pay one's debts,--and as the squire wrote
the indorsement across the back of the note, he felt more like a hero
than ever before.

"'Pay as you go' is an excellent idea; John Randolph called it the
philosopher's stone," added Squire Lee, as he returned the note to his
pocket book.

"That is what I mean to do just as soon as I can."

"You will do, Bobby."

The young merchant spent nearly the whole forenoon at the squire's, and
declined an invitation to dinner only on the plea that his mother would
wait for him.




CHAPTER XIII.

IN WHICH BOBBY DECLINES A COPARTNERSHIP AND VISITS B---- AGAIN.

After dinner Bobby performed his Saturday afternoon chores as usual.
He split wood enough to last for a week, so that his mother might not
miss him too much, and then, feeling a desire to visit his favorite
resorts in the vicinity, he concluded to go a fishing.  The day was
favorable, the sky being overcast and the wind very light.  After
digging a little box of worms in the garden back of the house, he
shouldered his fish pole; and certainly no one would have suspected
that he was a distinguished travelling merchant.  He was fond of
fishing, and it is a remarkable coincidence that Daniel Webster, and
many other famous men, have manifested a decided passion for this
exciting sport.  No doubt a fondness for angling is a peculiarity of
genius; and if being an expert fisherman makes a great man, then our
hero was a great man.

He had scarcely seated himself on his favorite rock, and dropped his
line into the water, before he saw Tom Spicer approaching the spot.
The bully had never been a welcome companion.  There was no sympathy
between them.  They could never agree, for their views, opinions, and
tastes were always conflicting.

Bobby had not seen Tom since he left him to crawl out of the ditch on
the preceding week, and he had good reason to believe that he should
not be regarded with much favor.  Tom was malicious and revengeful, and
our hero was satisfied that the blow which had prostrated him in the
ditch would not be forgotten till it had been atoned for.  He was
prepared, therefore, for any disagreeable scene which might occur.

There was another circumstance also which rendered the bully's presence
decidedly unpleasant at this time--an event that had occurred during
his absence, the particulars of which he had received from his mother.

Tom's father, who was a poor man, and addicted to intemperance, had
lost ten dollars.  He had brought it home, and, as he affirmed, placed
it in one of the bureau drawers.  The next day it could not be found.

Spicer, for some reason, was satisfied that Tom had taken it; but the
boy stoutly and persistently denied it.  No money was found upon him,
however, and it did not appear that he had spent any at the stores in
Riverdale Centre.

The affair created some excitement in the vicinity, for Spicer made no
secret of his suspicions, and publicly accused Tom of the theft.  He
did not get much sympathy from any except his pot companions; for there
was no evidence but his bare and unsupported statement to substantiate
the grave accusation.  Tom had been in the room when the money was
placed in the drawer, and, as his father asserted, had watched him
closely while he deposited the bills under the clothing.  No one else
could have taken it.  These were the proofs.  But people generally
believed that Spicer had carried no money home, especially as it was
known that he was intoxicated on the night in question; and that the
alleged theft was only a ruse to satisfy certain importunate creditors.

Every body knew that Tom was bad enough to steal, even from his father;
from which my readers can understand that it is an excellent thing to
have a good reputation.  Bobby knew that he would lie and use profane
language; that he spent his Sundays by the river, or in roaming through
the woods; and that he played truant from school as often as the fear
of the rod would permit; and the boy that would do all these things
certainty would steal if he got a good chance.  Our hero's judgment,
therefore, of the case was not favorable to the bully, and he would
have thanked him to stay away from the river while he was there.

"Hallo, Bob!  How are you?" shouted Tom, when he had come within
hailing distance.

"Very well," replied Bobby, rather coolly.

"Been to Boston, they say."

"Yes."

"Well, how did you like it?" continued Tom as he seated himself on the
rock near our hero.

"First rate."

"Been to work there?"

"No."

"What have you been doing?"

"Travelling about."

"What doing?"

"Selling books."

"Was you, though?  Did you sell any?"

"Yes, a few."

"How many?"

"O, about fifty."

"You didn't, though--did you?  How much did you make?"

"About fifteen dollars."

"By Jolly!  You are a smart one, Bobby.  There are not many fellows
that would have done that."

"Easy enough," replied Bobby, who was not a little surprised at this
warm commendation from one whom he regarded as his enemy.

"Yon had to buy the books first--didn't you?" asked Tom, who began to
manifest a deep interest in the trade.

"Of course; no one will give you the books."

"What do you pay for them?"

"I buy them so as to make a profit on them," answered Bobby, who, like
a discreet merchant, was not disposed to be too communicative.

"That business would suit me first rate."

"It is pretty hard work."

"I don't care for that.  Don't you believe I could do something in this
line?"

"I don't know; perhaps you could."

"Why not, as well as you?"

This was a hard question; and, as Bobby did not wish to be uncivil, he
talked about a big pout he hauled in at that moment, instead of
answering it.  He was politic, and deprecated the anger of the bully;
