Glade, an open place in the forest. Glen, a valley, a dale. 4. Un-meet',
improper, unfitting.



XXXV. THE THUNDERSTORM.

Washington Irving (b. 1783, d. 1859). This distinguished author, whose
works have enriched American literature, was born in the city of New York.
He had an ordinary school education, and began his literary career at the
age of nineteen, by writing for a paper published by his brother. His
first book, "Salmagundi," was published in 1807. Two years later he
published "Knickerbocker's History of New York." In 1815 he sailed for
Europe, and remained abroad seventeen years, during which time he wrote
several of his works. From 1842 to 1846 he was minister to Spain. The last
years of his life were passed at "Sunnyside," near Tarrytown, N.Y. He was
never married. "The Life of Washington," his last work, was completed in
the same year in which he died. Mr. Irving's works are characterized by
humor, chaste sentiment, and elegance and correctness of expression. The
following selection is from "Dolph" in "Bracehridge Hall."

1. In the second day of the voyage, they came to the Highlands. It was the
latter part of a calm, sultry day, that they floated gently with the tide
between these stern mountains. There was that perfect quiet which prevails
over nature in the languor of summer heat. The turning of a plank, or the
accidental falling of an oar, on deck, was echoed from the mountain side
and reverberated along the shores; and, if by chance the captain gave a
shout of command, there were airy tongues that mocked it from every cliff.


2. Dolph gazed about him, in mute delight and wonder, at these scenes of
nature's magnificence. To the left, the Dunderberg reared its woody
precipices, height over height, forest over forest, away into the deep
summer sky. To the right, strutted forth the bold promontory of Antony's
Nose, with a solitary eagle wheeling about it; while beyond, mountain
succeeded to mountain, until they seemed to lock their arms together and
confine this mighty rive in their embraces.

3. In the midst of this admiration, Dolph remarked a pile of bright, snowy
clouds peering above the western heights. It was succeeded by another, and
another, each seemingly pushing onward its predecessor, and towering, with
dazzling brilliancy, in the deep blue atmosphere; and now muttering peals
of thunder were faintly heard rolling behind the mountains. The river,
hitherto still and glassy, reflecting pictures of the sky and land, now
showed a dark ripple at a distance, as the wind came creeping up it. The
fishhawks wheeled and screamed, and sought their nests on the high, dry
trees; the crows flew clamorously to the crevices of the rocks; and all
nature seemed conscious of the approaching thunder gust.

4. The clouds now rolled in volumes over the mountain tops; their summits
still bright and snowy, but the lower parts of an inky blackness. The rain
began to patter down in broad and scattered drops; the wind freshened, and
curled up the waves; at length, it seemed as if the bellying clouds were
torn open by the mountain tops, and complete torrents of rain came
rattling down. The lightning leaped from cloud to cloud, and streamed
quivering against the rocks, splitting and rending the stoutest forest
trees. The thunder burst in tremendous explosions; the peals were echoed
from mountain to mountain; they crashed upon Dunderberg, and then rolled
up the long defile of the Highlands, each headland making a new echo,
until old Bull Hill seemed to bellow back the storm.

5. For a time the scudding rack and mist and the sheeted rain almost hid
the landscape from the sight. There was a fearful gloom, illumined still
more fearfully by the streams of lightning which glittered among the
raindrops. Never had Dolph beheld such an absolute warring of the
elements; it seemed as if the storm was tearing and rending its way
through the mountain defile, and had brought all the artillery of heaven
into action.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Lan'guor (pro. lang'gwer), exhaustion of strength,
dullness. 3. Re-marked', noticed, observed. Pred-e-ces'-sor, the one going
immediately before. Clam'or-ous-ly, with a loud noise. 4. Bel'ly-ing,
swelling out. De-file', a long, narrow pass. 5. Rack, thin, flying, broken
clouds. El'e-ments, a term usually including fire, water, earth, and air.


NOTES.--1. The Highlands are a mountainous region in New York, bordering
the Hudson River above Peekskill.

2. The Dunderberg and Antony's Nose are names of two peaks of the
Highlands.

4. Bull Hill, also called Mt. Taurus, is 15 miles farther north.



XXXVI. APRIL DAY.

Caroline Anne Southey (b. 1786, d.1854), the second wife of Southey the
poet, and better known as Caroline Bowles, was born near Lymington,
Hampshire, England. Her first work, "Ellen Fitzarthur," a poem, was
published in 1820; and for more than twenty years her writings were
published anonymously. In 1839 she was married to Mr. Southey, and
survived him over ten years. Her poetry is graceful in expression, and
full of tenderness, though somewhat melancholy. The following extract
first appeared in 1822 in a collection entitled, "The Widow's Tale, and
other Poems."

1. All day the low-hung clouds have dropped
     Their garnered fullness down;
   All day that soft, gray mist hath wrapped
     Hill, valley, grove, and town.

2. There has not been a sound to-day
     To break the calm of nature;
   Nor motion, I might almost say,
     Of life or living creature;

3. Of waving bough, or warbling bird,
     Or cattle faintly lowing;
   I could have half believed I heard
     The leaves and blossoms growing.

4. I stood to hear--I love it well--
     The rain's continuous sound;
   Small drops, but thick and fast they fell,
     Down straight into the ground.

5. For leafy thickness is not yet
     Earth's naked breast to screen,
   Though every dripping branch is set
     With shoots of tender green.

6. Sure, since I looked, at early morn,
     Those honeysuckle buds
   Have swelled to double growth; that thorn
     Hath put forth larger studs.

7. That lilac's cleaving cones have burst,
     The milk-white flowers revealing;
   Even now upon my senses first
     Methinks their sweets are stealing.

8. The very earth, the steamy air,
     Is all with fragrance rife!
   And grace and beauty everywhere
     Are flushing into life.

9. Down, down they come, those fruitful stores,
     Those earth-rejoicing drops!
   A momentary deluge pours,
     Then thins, decreases, stops.

10. And ere the dimples on the stream
      Have circled out of sight,
    Lo! from the west a parting gleam
      Breaks forth of amber light.

* * * * * * *

11. But yet behold--abrupt and loud,
      Comes down the glittering rain;
    The farewell of a passing cloud,
      The fringes of its train.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Gar'nered, laid up, treasured. 6. Studs, knobs, buds. 7.
Cleav'ing, dividing. 10. Dim'ples, small depressions. Am'ber, the color of
amber, yellow.



XXXVII. THE TEA ROSE.

1. There it stood, in its little green vase, on a light ebony stand in the
window of the drawing-room. The rich satin curtains, with their costly
fringes, swept down on either side of it, and around it glittered every
rare and fanciful trifle which wealth can offer to luxury, and yet that
simple rose was the fairest of them all. So pure it looked, its white
leaves just touched with that delicious, creamy tint peculiar to its kind:
its cup so full, so perfect its head bending, as if it were sinking and
melting away in its own richness.--Oh! when did ever man make anything to
equal the living, perfect flower!

2. But the sunlight that streamed through the window    revealed something
fairer than the rose--a young lady reclining on an ottoman, who was thus
addressed by her livelier cousin: "I say, cousin, I have been thinking
what you are to do with your pet rose when you go to New York; as, to our
consternation, you are determined to do. You know it would be a sad pity
to leave it with such a scatter-brain as I am. I love flowers,
indeed,--that is, I like a regular bouquet, cut off and tied up, to carry
to a party; but as to all this tending and fussing which is needful to
keep them growing, I have no gifts in that line."

3. "Make yourself easy as to that, Kate," said Florence, with a
smile; "I have no intention of calling upon your talent; I have an
asylum in view for my favorite."

4. "Oh, then you know just what I was going to say. Mrs. Marshall, I
presume, has been speaking to you; she was here yesterday, and I was quite
pathetic upon the subject; telling her the loss your favorite would
sustain, and so forth; and she said how delighted she would be to have it
in her greenhouse; it is in such a fine state now, so full of buds. I told
her I knew you would like to give it to her; you are so fond of Mrs.
Marshall, you know."

5. "Now, Kate, I am sorry, but I have otherwise engaged."

"Whom can it be to? you have so few intimates here."

"Oh, it is only one of my odd fancies."

"But do tell me, Florence."

"Well, cousin, you know the little pale girl to whom we give sewing?"

6. "What! little Mary Stephens? How absurd, Florence! This is just another
of your motherly, old-maidish ways; dressing dolls for poor children,
making bonnets, and knitting socks for all the little dirty babies in the
neighborhood. I do believe you have made more calls in those two vile,
ill-smelling alleys behind our house than ever you have in Chestnut
Street, though you know everybody is half dying to see you; and now, to
crown all, you must give this choice little bijou to a seamstress girl,
when one of your most intimate friends, in your own class, would value it
so highly. What in the world can people in their circumstances want with
flowers?"

7. "Just the same as I do," replied Florence, calmly. "Have you not
noticed that the little girl never comes without looking wistfully at the
opening buds? And don't you remember, the other morning she asked me so
prettily if I would let her mother come and see it, she was so fond of
flowers?"

8. "But, Florence, only think of this rare flower standing on a table with
ham, eggs, cheese, and flour, and stifled in that close little room, where
Mrs. Stephens and her daughter manage to wash, iron, and cook."

9. "Well, Kate, and if I were obliged to live in one coarse room, and
wash, and iron, and cook, as you say; if I had to spend every moment of my
time in toil, with no prospect from my window but a brick wall and a dirty
lane, such a flower as this would be untold enjoyment to me."

10. "Pshaw, Florence; all sentiment! Poor people have no time to be
sentimental. Besides, I don't believe it will grow with them; it is a
greenhouse flower, and used to delicate living."

11. "Oh, as to that, a flower never inquires whether its owner is rich or
poor; and poor Mrs. Stephens, whatever else she has not, has sunshine of
as good quality as this that streams through our window. The beautiful
things that God makes are his gifts to all alike. You will see that my
fair rose will be as well and cheerful in Mrs. Stephens's room as in
ours."

12. "Well, after all, how odd! When one gives to poor people, one wants to
give them something useful--a bushel of potatoes, a ham, and such things."

13. "Why, certainly, potatoes and ham must be supplied; but, having
ministered to the first and most craving wants, why not add any other
little pleasures or gratifications we may have it in our power to bestow?
I know there are many of the poor who have fine feeling and a keen sense
of the beautiful, which rusts out and dies because they are too hard
pressed to procure it any gratification. Poor Mrs. Stephens, for example;
I know she would enjoy birds, and flowers, and music as much as I do. I
have seen her eye light up as she looked upon these things in our drawing.
room, and yet not one beautiful thing can she command. From necessity, her
room, her clothing,--all she has, must be coarse and plain. You should
have seen the almost rapture she and Mary felt when I offered them my
rose."

14. "Dear me! all this may be true, but I never thought of it before. I
never thought that these hard-working people had any ideas of taste!"

15. "Then why do you see the geranium or rose so carefully nursed in the
old cracked teapot in the poorest room, or the morning-glory planted in a
box and twined about the window? Do not these show that the human heart
yearns for the beautiful in all ranks of life? You remember, Kate, how our
washerwoman sat up a whole night, after a hard day's work, to make her
first baby a pretty dress to be baptized in." "Yes, and I remember how I
laughed at you for making such a tasteful little cap for it."

16. "True, Kate, but I think the look of perfect delight with which the
poor woman regarded her baby in its new dress and cap was something quite
worth creating; I do believe she could not have felt more grateful if 1
had sent her a barrel of flour."

17. "Well, I never thought before of giving anything to the poor but what
they really needed, and I have always been willing to do that when I could
without going far out of my way."

18. "Ah! cousin, if our heavenly Father gave to us after this mode, we
should have only coarse, shapeless piles of provisions lying about the
world, instead of all this beautiful variety of trees, and fruits, and
flowers,"

19. "Well, well, cousin, I suppose you are right, but have mercy on my
poor head; it is too small to hold so many new ideas all at once, so go on
your own way;" and the little lady began practicing a waltzing step before
the glass with great satisfaction.


DEFINITIONS.--2. Ot'to-man, a stuffed seat without a back. 3. A-sy'lum, a
place of refuge and protection. 4. Pa-thet'ic, moving to pity or grief. 6.
Bi-jou' (pro. be-zhoo'), a jewel. Cir'cum-stanc-es, condition in regard to
worldly property. 10. Sen-ti-ment'al, showing an excess of sentiment or
feeling. 13. Com-mand', to claim. Rap'-ture, extreme joy or pleasure,
ecstasy. 14. Taste, the faculty of discerning beauty or whatever forms
excellence. 15. Yearns, longs, is eager.



XXXVIII. THE CATARACT OF LODORE.

1. "How does the water
   Come down at Lodore?"
   My little boy asked me
     Thus once on a time;
   And, moreover, he tasked me
     To tell him in rhyme.

2. Anon at the word,
   There first came one daughter,
   And then came another,
     To second and third
   The request of their brother,
   And to hear how the water
     Comes down at Lodore,
     With its rush and its roar,
       As many a time
    They had seen it before.

3. So I told them in rhyme,
   For of rhymes I had store,
     And 't was in my vocation
     For their recreation
   That so I should sing;
   Because I was Laureate
   To them and the King.

4. From its sources which well
   In the tarn on the fell;
   From its fountains
   In the mountains,
Its rills and its gills;
  Through moss and through brake,
    It runs and it creeps
    For a while, till it sleeps
  In its own little lake.

5. And thence at departing,
   Awakening and starting,
   It runs through the reeds,
   And away it proceeds,
   Through meadow and glade,
   In sun and in shade,
   And through the wood shelter,
     Among crags in its flurry,
   Helter-skelter,
     Hurry-skurry.

6. Here it comes sparkling,
   And there it lies darkling;
   Now smoking and frothing
   Its tumult and wrath in,
   Till, in this rapid race
     On which it is bent,
   It reaches the place
     Of its steep descent.

7. The cataract strong
   Then plunges along,
   Striking and raging
   As if a war waging
Its caverns and rocks among;

8. Rising and leaping,
   Sinking and creeping,
   Swelling and sweeping,
   Showering and springing,
   Flying and flinging,
   Writhing and ringing,
   Eddying and whisking,
   Spouting and frisking,
   Turning and twisting,
   Around and around
   With endless rebound;
   Smiting and fighting,
   A sight to delight in;
   Confounding, astounding,
Dizzying, and deafening the ear with its sound

9. Collecting, projecting,
  Receding and speeding,
  And shocking and rocking,
  And darting and parting,
  And threading and spreading,
  And whizzing and hissing,
  And dripping and skipping,
  And hitting and splitting,
  And shining and twining,
  And rattling and battling,
  And shaking and quaking,
  And pouring and roaring,
  And waving and raving,
  And tossing and crossing,
  And guggling and struggling,
  And heaving and cleaving,
  And moaning and groaning,
  And glittering and frittering,
  And gathering and feathering,
  And whitening and brightening,
  And quivering and shivering,
  And hurrying and skurrying,
  And thundering and floundering;

10. Dividing and gliding and sliding,
    And falling and brawling and sprawling,
    And driving and riving and striving,
    And sprinkling and twinkling and wrinkling;

11. And thumping and plumping and bumping and jumping,
    And dashing and flashing and splashing and clashing;
    And so never ending, but always descending,
    Sounds and motions forever and ever are blending,
      All at once and all o'er, with a mighty uproar,
      And this way the water comes down at Lodore.
                                      --Abridged from Southey.


DEFINITIONS.--4. Tarn, a small lake among the mountains. Fell (provincial
English), a stony hill. Gills (provincial English), brooks. 10. Brawl'ing,
roaring. Riv'ing, splitting.


NOTES.--1. Lodore is a cascade on the banks of Lake Derwentwater, in
Cumberland, England, near where Southey lived.

3. Laureate. The term probably arose from a custom in the English
universities of presenting a laurel wreath to graduates in rhetoric and
versification. In England the poet laureate's office is filled by
appointment of the lord chamberlain. The salary is quite small, and the
office is valued chiefly as one of honor.

This lesson is peculiarly adapted for practice on the difficult sound
"ing".



XXXIX. THE BOBOLINK.

1. The happiest bird of our spring, however, and one that rivals the
European lark in my estimation, is the boblincoln, or bobolink as he is
commonly called. He arrives at that choice portion of our year which, in
this latitude, answers to the description of the month of May so often
