out of him, for no one could be more generous than old Hart when he was
at all flush of cash.

He came down, however, this morning, and told her he was going.

"For a fortnight or so?" responded Mrs. Timms. "You'll leave Miss
Josephine behind as usual? I'll take good care of her."

"No, Miss Josephine is also going. Make out our bills, my good Timms,
I can pay you in full."

That evening there arrived at Northbury by the seven o'clock train a
single first-class passenger--a girl dressed in a long gray cloak, and a
big, picturesque shady hat stepped on to the platform. She was the only
passenger to alight at Northbury, and the one or two sleepy porters
regarded her with interest and admiration. She was very graceful, and
her light-colored eyes had a peculiar quick expression which made people
turn to watch her again.

The strange girl had scarcely any luggage--only a small portmanteau
covered with a neat case of brown holland, and a little trunk to match.

She asked one of the porters to call a cab, did not disdain the shaky
and ghastly-looking conveyance which Loftus Bertram had been too proud
to use; sprang lightly into it, desired the porter to put her luggage on
the roof, and gave the address of Rosendale Manor.

"Oh, that accounts for it," said the man to his mate. "She's one of them
proud Bertram folk. I thought by the looks of her as she didn't belong
to none of the Northbury people."

The other laughed.

"She have got an eye," he said. "My word, don't it shine? Seems to
scorch one up."

"There's the 7.12 luggage train signalled, Jim!" exclaimed the other.

The men forgot the strange girl and returned to their duties.

Meanwhile, she sat back in her cab, and gazed complacently about her.
She knew the scene through which she was passing--she had looked on it
before. Very travel-stained and weary she had been then; very fresh and
keen, and all alive she felt now.

She threw open the windows of the close cab, and took a long breath of
the delicious sea air. It was a hot evening towards the middle of July,
but a slight breeze rippled the little waves in the harbor, and then
travelled up and up until it reached the girl in the dusty cab.

The Northburians were most of them out on the water. No one who knew
anything of the ways of Northbury expected to see the good folk in the
streets on an evening like this. No, the water was their highway, the
water was their pleasure-scene. Each house owned a boat, each garden
ended in steps against which the said boat was moored. It was the
tiniest walk from the supper room or the high tea-table to the little
green-painted boat, and then away to float over the limpid waves.

All the girls in Northbury could row, steer--in short, manage a boat as
well as their brothers.

There was a view of the straggling, steep little High Street from the
water; and the Bells now, in a large white boat with four oars, and
occupied at the present moment by Mrs. Bell, fat and comfortable in the
stern, Alice and Sophy each propelling a couple of oars, and the
blushing, conscious Matty in the bow, where Captain Bertram bore her
company, all saw the old cab, as it toiled up the hill in the direction
of Rosendale Manor.

"Do look at Davis's cab!" exclaimed Matty. "Look, Captain Bertram, it's
going in your direction. I wonder now, if any one has come by the train.
It's certainly going to the Manor. There are no other houses out in that
direction. Do look, Captain Bertram."

"Lor, Matty, you are so curious!" exclaimed her sister Sophy, who
overheard these remarks from her position as bow oar. "As if Captain
Bertram cared! You always do so fuss over little things, Matty. Even if
there are visitors coming to the Manor, I'm sure the captain doesn't
care. He is not like us who never see anybody. Are you, Captain
Bertram?"

"I beg your pardon," said the captain, waking put of a reverie into
which he had sunk. "Did you speak, Miss Bell?" he continued, turning
with a little courteous movement, which vastly became him, towards the
enamored Matty.

"I said a cab was going up the hill," said Matty.

"Oh, really! A cab _is_ an interesting sight, particularly a
Northbury cab. Shall I make a riddle for you on the spot, Miss Bell?
What is the sole surviving curiosity still to be found out of Noah's
ark?"

Matty went off into her usual half-hysterical laughter.

"Oh! I do declare, Captain Bertram, you are too killingly clever for
anything," she responded. "Oh, my poor side--I'll die if I laugh any
more. Oh, do have mercy on me! To compare that poor cab to Noah's ark!"

"I didn't; it isn't the least like the ark, only I think it must once
have found a shelter within that place of refuge."

"Oh! oh! oh! I am taken with such a stitch when I laugh. You are too
witty, Captain Bertram. Sophy, you must hear what the captain has said.
Oh, you killing, funny man--you must repeat that lovely joke to Sophy."

"Excuse me, it was only meant for Miss Matty's ears."

Matty stopped laughing, to blush all over her face, and Sophy thought it
more decorous to turn her back on the pair.

"Does not that green boat belong to Miss Meadowsweet?" interrupted
Bertram. "Look, Miss Bell, I am sure that is Miss Meadowsweet's boat."

(He had seen it for the last ten minutes, and had been secretly hoping
that Mrs. Bell would unconsciously steer in that direction; she was
going the other way, however, and he was obliged to speak.)

"Yes, that's Beatrice," said Matty, in an indifferent tone. "She
generally goes for a row in the evening."

"All alone like that?"

"Yes, Mrs. Meadowsweet is such a coward. She is afraid of the water."

"Poor Miss Meadowsweet, how sad for her to be by herself!"

Matty gave a furtive and not too well-pleased glance at her captain.

"Bee likes to be alone," she said.

"I should never have thought it. She seems a sociable, bright sort of
girl. Don't you want to talk to her? I know you do. I see it in your
face. You think it will be irksome for me, but, never mind, we need not
stay long. I must not be selfish nor indulge in the wish to keep you all
to myself. I know you want to talk to Miss Meadowsweet, and so you
shall,--I _won't_ have you balked."

Here he raised his voice.

"Mrs. Bell, will you steer over to Miss Meadowsweet's boat? Miss Matty,
here, has something to say to her."

Not an earthly thing had Matty to communicate to her friend, but the
captain had managed to put the matter in such a light that she could
only try to look pleased, and pretend to acquiesce.

"Oh, yes, she had always lots to say to her darling Bee," she murmured.
And then, somehow, her poor little silly spirits went down, and she had
a sensation of feeling rather flat.

As will be seen by the foregoing remarks, Captain Bertram had a rare
gift for making killing and funny speeches.

Matty had over and over pronounced him to be the most brilliantly witty
person she had ever in the whole course of her life encountered. But his
talent as a supposed wit was nothing at all to the cleverness with which
he now managed to keep the large white boat by the side of the small
green one for the remainder of the evening. It was entirely managed by
the superior will of one person, for certainly none of the Bells wished
for this propinquity.

Mrs. Bell, who like a watchful hen-mother was apparently seeing nothing,
and yet all the time was tenderly brooding over the little chick whom
she hoped was soon about to take flight from the parent nest, saw at a
glance that her chick looked nothing at all beside that superior chicken
of Mrs. Meadowsweet's. For Matty's little nose was sadly burnt, and one
lock of her thin limp hair was flying not too picturesquely in the
breeze. And her home-cut jacket was by no means remarkably becoming, and
one of her small, uncovered hands--why _would_ Matty take her
gloves off?--was burnt red, not brown by the sun. Beatrice, on the
contrary, looked as she always did, trim and neat, and bright and
gracious. She had on the gray cashmere dress which she had worn when
Captain Bertram first began to lose his heart to her, and over this,
tonight, she had twisted a long bright crimson scarf. Into her white
hat, too, she had pinned a great bunch of crimson roses, so that,
altogether, Beatrice in her pretty green boat made a beautiful picture.
She would have made this in any case, for her pose was so good, and her
figure fine, but when, in addition, there was a sweet intelligent face
without one scrap of self-consciousness about it, and two gray eyes full
of a tender and sympathetic light, and when the rosy lips only opened to
make the pleasantest and most appropriate speeches, and only to give
utterance to words of tact and kindness, Mrs. Bell was not very far
wrong when she felt a sense of uneasiness for her own poor chick.

Shuffle, however, as she would up in the stern, viciously pull the
rudder string so as to incline the boat away from Beatrice, the
captain's will still kept the green boat and the white together. Was he
likely to give in or to succumb to a woman like Mrs. Bell? Had he not
planned this meeting in his own mind from an early hour that morning?
For had he not met Beatrice and incidentally gathered that she would be
sure to be on the water that night? And after receiving this
information, had he not carefully made his plans, wandering about on the
quay just when the Bells were getting into their boat, accepting the
invitation eagerly given that he should go on the water with them, and
afterwards come home to supper.

"Sophy," Mrs. Bell had gasped, at that critical and triumphant moment in
a whisper, pulling her youngest daughter aside, "fly up to Gibb's at the
corner, and order in two lobsters for supper. The captain loves lobsters
with the coral in them. Be sure you see that they have the coral in
them, Sophy. Fly, child. We'll wait for you here."

And Captain Bertram had overheard this whisper, and mentally determined
that Beatrice Meadowsweet should also eat lobster with coral in it for
supper. Was it likely, therefore, that he would now yield to that
impatient tug of Mrs. Bell's rudder? On the contrary, he put out his
hand in apparently the most unconscious way, and held the little green
boat to the side of the white. In his way he was a diplomat, and even
Matty did not suspect that he wanted to do anything but show her a
kindness by keeping her in such close conversation with her friend.

"It's getting quite chill," suddenly exclaimed Mrs. Bell. "Girls, it's
time for us to be getting home. Your father likes his supper punctually.
Well, Bee, my dear, there's no use in asking you to supper, I suppose?
Of course, more than welcome you'd be if you would come, lovey, but
you're such a daughter--one in a thousand. I assure you, Captain
Bertram, I can hardly ever get that girl to leave her mother alone in
the evening."

Beatrice laughed.

"It so happens," she said, "that my mother is having tea and supper
to-night at Mrs. Butler's. So if you really care to have me, Mrs. Bell,
I shall be delighted to come."

Beatrice, the popular, the beloved of all in the town, never knew, never
to her dying day, that on a certain memorable occasion, good-humored,
fat, pompous Mrs. Bell would have given half a sovereign to box her
ears. The astute captain, however, guessed her feelings, and chuckled
inwardly. He had also found out during his brief morning's conversation
that Mrs. Meadowsweet was going to sup from home.

"How delightful you look, Miss Bell!" he said, suddenly, fixing his dark
eyes on Matty.

Their glance caused her to start and blush.

"Mrs. Bell," he said, raising his voice again, "Miss Matty has been so
anxious to have Miss Meadowsweet's company this evening. And now we are
all happy," he added, gayly. "Shall I give you another riddle, Miss
Matty?"

Mrs. Bell's anxious brows relaxed, and she smiled inwardly.

"Poor man! He is over head and ears in love," she murmured. "I suppose
he thinks Beatrice will play gooseberry with the other girls, and leave
him more chance to be alone with little Matty. She does _not_ look
her best, that I will say for her; but, poor fellow, he sees no faults,
that's evident. How beautiful the love-light in his eyes is--ah, dear
me, it reminds me of the time when I was young, and Bell used to go on
his knees to me--Bell hadn't eyes like Captain Bertram though. Dear,
dear, he is attentive, poor man, and how close he bends over Matty. I'll
help him, so I will. I'll take Beatrice and the other girls away when
once we get out of the boat. We four will walk up to the house together,
and let Captain Bertram and his little girl follow. Why, of course,
she's his little girl; bless her, the dear child! Then when we get in,
I'll get Bee and Alice and Sophy to come upstairs by way of consulting
how Matty's new dress is to be made, so the two poor things can have the
drawing-room to themselves. I shouldn't be a bit surprised if he popped
there and then. Well, I am gratified. Bertram is a pretty name--Matilda
Bertram! She won't like to be known as Matty, then. 'Mrs. Captain
Bertram'--it sounds very stylish. I wonder how much money pa will allow
for the trousseau. And how am I to manage about the breakfast? None of
our rooms are big, and all the town's people will want to be asked. It
isn't for me to turn my back on old friends; but I doubt if the Bertrams
will like to meet every one, of course, they are the first to be
considered. Lor, Sophy, how you startled me; what's the matter, child?"

"You're in a brown study, ma. How much longer are you going to stay in
the boat? We have all landed."

"Good gracious! mercy mother! Help me out quick, Sophy, quick! Bee,
Beatrice, come and lend me your hand. You are bigger than my girls, and
my legs are always a little unsteady in a boat. Oh, not you, Captain
Bertram, I beg, I pray. You just go on with Matty to the house, and
we'll follow presently. Go on like a good man, and don't bother
yourself."

Here she winked broadly at Beatrice, who started and colored.

"I don't want to keep him back," she said, in a broad whisper to the
young lady, who was helping her to alight on the steps. "He's over head
and ears, and I thought we would give them their chance. You stay close
to me, lovey. What a fine strong arm you have! There! Alice hasn't a bit
of gumption--as if Matty wanted Alice to walk with her! Alice, come back
and help your mother. I'm quite giddy from the motion of the water. Come
back, child, I say!"

But it was not Alice who turned. Captain Bertram, with the most gracious
gallantry, proffered his arm to the fat old lady, and while he helped
her to the house looked again and again at Beatrice.




CHAPTER XIV.

AT HER GATES.


Mr. Bell was as thin as his wife was fat, and as quiet and unassuming as
she was bumptious and talkative. On the occasion of this memorable
supper he very nearly drove his better half into fits by his utter want
of observation.

"It's that that worries me in Bell," the good woman was often heard to
say. "When a thing is as plain as the nose on his face he won't see it.
And not all my hints will make him see it. Hints!--You might hint
forever to Bell, and he wouldn't know what you were driving at."

These remarks Mrs. Bell had made, times without number, concerning her
spouse, but never had ehe more cause to give utterance to them than on
the present occasion. For just when the whole party were seated at
supper, and she by the boldest manoeuvres had placed Captain Bertram
next to herself by the coffee-tray, and had planted Matty at his other
side, so that he was in a measure hemmed in, and if he did not talk to
Matty had no one to fall back on but herself, who, of course, would
quickly, using the metaphor of battledore and shuttlecock, toss him back
to her daughter--having arranged all this, what should Bell do but put
his foot in it?

"Captain Bertram," he called in his thin voice across the table, "I hope
you enjoyed your row, and I'm proud to see you at my humble board. But
come up here, my good young sir; you're quite smothered by the missis
and the teacups. We have fine room at this end, haven't we, Beatrice?
You come away up here, Captain Bertram, where you'll have room to use
your elbows; the missis mustn't keep you to herself altogether, that
ain't fair play."

"Oh, we're as comfortable as possible, Peter," almost screamed Mrs.
Bell.

But in vain. The captain was too acute a person not to seize this
opportunity. He said a courteous word or two to Mrs. Bell, apologized
for having already crowded her, smiled at Matty, and then with a light
heart seated himself beside Beatrice.

After this, matters seemed to go wrong as far as the Bells were
concerned. It is true that after supper Beatrice called Matty to her
side, and looked over a photographic album with her, and tried hard to
draw her into the gay conversation and to get her to reply to the light
repartee which Captain Bertram so deftly employed. But, alas for poor
Matty she had no conversational powers; she was only great at
interjections, at ceaseless giggling, and at violent and uncontrollable
fits of blushing. Even Beatrice felt a sense of repulsion at the very
open way in which Matty played her innocent cards. Matty was in love,
and she showed it by voice, look and gesture. Beatrice tried to shield
her, she was mortified for her, and felt a burning sense of resentment
against the captain.

In spite, however, of the resentment of the one girl, and the too
manifest admiration of the other, this hero managed to have pretty much
his own way. Beatrice had to reply to his sallies, she was forced to
meet his eyes; now and then even he drew a smile from her.

When the time came for Miss Meadowsweet to go home, Albert Bell was
eagerly summoned to accompany her.

"This is unnecessary," said the captain; "I will see Miss Meadowsweet
