Susy dashed upstairs. She put on her hat and jacket, snatched up a pair
of gloves, and the next moment was out of the house.

"Free at last," she thought. "But, oh, what an evening I have had! I
must say it is horrid to be poor. Now, if I was rich like Kathleen,
wouldn't I have a gay time of it? Poor dear mother should drive in a
carriage, and I'd ride on my pony by her side; and Tom should be a
public school boy. There'd be no horrid shop then, and no horrid women
coming in for ha'p'orths and penn'orths of paper."

But as she ran through the autumn night-air she felt that, after all,
there was something good in life. Her pulses, which had been languid
enough in the stuffy little parlor at the back of the shop, now galloped
fiercely. She arrived two or three minutes after nine, but still in
fairly good time to see a number of dark heads surrounding a bright
light. This light was caused by two lamps which had been placed on the
ground in the old quarry; Kathleen had brought them herself in a hamper.
She had managed to buy them that day, and had smuggled them off without
any one being the wiser. A large bottle of crystalline oil accompanied
the lamps. Kathleen, who had dressed lamps for pleasure at home, knew
quite well how to manage them, and when Susy appeared they stood at each
end of a wide patch of light. Kathleen herself was in the midst of the
light, and the other girls clustered round the edge.

"Isn't it scrumptious?" said Kate Rourke.--"Oh, is that you, Susy
Hopkins? You are late."

"Yes, I know I am. It's a wonder I could come at all," said Susy.

"Ruth Craven hasn't come yet," said another voice.

"Yes, here she is," cried a third, and Ruth came and stood at the edge
of the patch of light.

Kathleen flung off her hat, and the light from the lamps lit up her
brilliant hair. Her cheeks were flaming with color, and her very
dark-blue eyes looked as black as night. She faced her companions.

"Well," she said, "here we are, and we call ourselves the Wild Irish
Girls. I really wonder if you English girls who are assembled here in
the old quarry to-night have the least idea what it means to be a wild
Irish girl. If you don't know, I'd like to tell you."

"Yes, do tell us," cried several.

"The principal thing that it means," continued Kathleen, raising her
voice to a slightly theatrical pitch, and extending her arm so that the
lamplight fell all over it--"the chief thing that it means is to be
free--yes, free as the air, free as the mountain streams, free as the
dear, darling, glorious, everlasting mountains themselves. Oh, to know
freedom and then to be torn away from it! Girls, I will tell you the
truth. I feel in your dull old England as though I were in prison. Yes,
that's about it. I don't like England. I want you girls to join me in
loving Ireland."

"But we can't hate England," said Kate Rourke; "that is quite
impossible. If Ireland is your native land, England is ours, and we
cannot help loving her very, very much."

"You have never known Ireland," continued Kathleen. "You are not cramped
up in that favored spot; you are allowed to get up when you like and to
go to bed when you like, to eat what you like, to read what books you
like, to row on the lake, to shoot in the bogs, to gallop on your pony
over the moors, and--and--oh, to live the life of the _free_."

It was Ruth Craven who now interrupted the eager words of the queen of
the new society.

"Can't you tell us, Kathleen," she said, "how to get Ireland into
England--how to introduce what is good of Ireland into England? That is
the use of the society as far as I am concerned. With the exception of
yourself we are all English girls."

"Yes," said Susy suddenly; "and we have very bad times most of us. I
wish you knew what a dull evening I have just been living
through--taking care of a tiny, very dull little shop. Mother was out
looking after a sick child, and I had to mind the shop. Poor women came
in for penn'orths of paper. I can tell you there wasn't much freedom
about that; it was all horrid."

"Well, we have shops in Ireland too," continued Kathleen, "and I
suppose people have to mind them. But what I want to say now is this. I
have been sent over to this country to learn. My aunt Katie
O'Flynn--she's the finest figure of a woman you ever laid eyes
on--thought that I ought to have learning; mother thought so too, but
the dad didn't much care. However, I needn't worry you about that. I
have been sent here, and here I am. When I came to your wonderful school
and looked all around me, I said to myself, 'If I'm not to have
companions, why, I'll die; the heart of Kathleen O'Hara will be broken.
Now, who amongst the schoolgirls will suit me? I saw that very dull
Cassandra Weldon, and I noticed a few companions of hers who were much
the same sort. Then I observed dear, pretty little Ruth Craven, and some
one said to me, 'You won't take much notice of Ruth, for she's only a
foundation girl.' That made me mad. Oh yes, it did--Give me your hand,
Ruth.--That made my whole heart go out to Ruth. Then I was told that a
lot of the girls were foundation girls, and they weren't as rich as the
others, and they were somewhat snubbed. So I thought, 'My time has come.
I am an Irish girl, and the heritage of every Irish girl, handed down to
her from a long line of ancestors, is to help the oppressed,' So now I
am going to help all of you, and we are going to found this society, and
we are going to have a good time."

Kathleen's somewhat incoherent speech was received with shouts of
applause.

"We must make a few rules," she continued when her young companions had
ceased to shout--"just a few big rules which will be quite easy for all
of us to obey."

"Certainly," said Kate. "And I have brought a note-book with me, and if
you will dictate them, Kathleen, I will jot them down."

"That is easy enough," said Kathleen. "Well, I am queen."

"Certainly you are!" "Who else could be?" "Of course you are queen!"
"Darling!" "Dear!" "Sweet!" "Duck!" fell from various pairs of lips.

"Thank you," said Kathleen, looking round at them, her dark-blue eyes
becoming dewy with a sudden emotion. "I think," she added, "I love you
all already, and there is nothing on earth I wouldn't do for you."

"Hear her, the dear! She is bringing a fine change into our lives, cried
a mass of girls who stood a little out of the line of light.

"Well," said Kathleen, "I am queen, and I have my Cabinet. Now the girls
of my Cabinet are the following: Ruth Craven is my Prime Minister; Kate
Rourke comes next in importance; then follow Susy Hopkins, Clara Sawyer,
Hannah Johnson, Rosy Myers, and Mary Rand. Now all of you girls whom I
have named are expected to uphold order--such order as is alone
necessary for the Wild Irish Girls. You are expected on all occasions to
uphold the authority of me, your queen. You are never under any
circumstances to breathe a word against dear old Ireland. The other
girls who join the society will be looked after by you; you will
instruct them in our rules, and you will help them to be good members of
a most important society. I believe there are a great many girls willing
to join. If so, will they hold up their hands?"

Immediately a great show of hands was visible.

"Now, Kate Rourke," cried Kathleen, "please take down the names of the
girls who intend to become members of the Wild Irish Girls."

The girls came forward one by one, and Kate took down their names; and
it was quickly discovered that, out of the hundred foundationers who
belonged to the Great Shirley School, sixty had joined Kathleen's
society.

"We shall soon get the remaining forty," said Mary Rand. "They will be
all agog to come on. Their positions are not so very pleasant as it is,
poor things!"

"Perhaps sixty are about as many as we can manage for the present," said
Kathleen. "Now, girls, I intend to present you each with a tiny badge. I
have a bag full of them here. Will you each come forward and accept the
badge of membership?"

Kathleen's badges were very much admired, the eager girls bending down
towards the light of the lamps in order to examine them more thoroughly.
She had strung narrow green ribbon through each of the little silver
hearts, and the girls could therefore slip them over their heads at
once.

"You must hide them," said Kathleen. "The thing about these badges is
that you will always feel them pressing against your hearts, and nobody
else will know anything about them. They belong to Ireland and to me--to
the home of the free and to Kathleen O'Hara. They seal you as my loving
friends and followers for ever and ever."

Girls are easily impressed, and Kathleen's words were so fervent that
some of them felt quite choky about the throat. They received their
badges with hands that very nearly trembled. Kathleen next handed a
slightly handsomer badge, but with exactly the same device, to the
members of her Cabinet. Finally, she took the box of pale-blue cashmere
blouses and opened it in the light of the lamps. The enthusiasm, which
had been extremely keen before the appearance of the blouses, now rose
to fever-height. Whom were these exquisite creations meant for? Kathleen
smiled as she handed one to Mary Rand, another to Ruth Craven, another
to Kate Rourke, and finally to each member of her Cabinet.

"I wish I could give you all a blouse apiece," she said to the other
girls of the society, "but I am afraid that is not within my means. I
chose these sweet blouses on purpose, because I know you could wear them
at any time, girls," she added, turning to the members of her Cabinet.
"Outsiders won't know. They will wonder at the beauty of your dress, but
they won't know what it means; but _we_ will know," she shouted aloud to
her companions--"we will know that these girls belong to us and to old
Ireland, and in particular to me, and they will be faithful to me as
their queen."

"Oh dear," said little Alice Harding, a pale-faced girl, who loved fine
dress and never could aspire to it, "what means can I take to become a
member of the Cabinet?"

"By being a very good outside member, and trusting to your luck,"
laughed Kathleen. "But the time is passing, and we must proceed to what
little business is left for to-night."

Each member of the Cabinet took possession of her own blouse, wrapped it
up tenderly, and tucked it under her arm. Kathleen desired some one to
throw the tell-tale box away, and then she collected her followers round
her.

"Now," she said, _"Rule One_. To stick through thick and thin each to
the other."

"Yes!" cried every voice.

_"Rule Two._ If possible, never to quarrel each with the other."

This rule also was received with acclamations.

_"Rule Three._ To have a bit of fun all to ourselves at least once a
week."

This rule quite "brought down the house." They shouted so loud that if
the spot had been less lonely some one would certainly have taken
cognizance of their proceedings.

_"Rule Four._ That as far as possible we hold ourselves aloof from the
paying members of the Great Shirley School."

This rule was not quite as enthusiastically received. The foundationers
were not altogether without friends amongst the other girls of the
school. Ruth Craven in particular had several.

"I don't think that is a very fair rule," she said. "I am fond of Alice
Tennant, and I am fond of Cassandra Weldon."

"And I care for Lucy Sharp"; "And I am devoted to Amelia Dawson," said
other members of the Cabinet.

Nevertheless Kathleen was firm.

"The rule must be held," she said. "In a society like ours there are
always rules which are not quite agreeable to every one. My principal
object in starting this society is to put those horrid paying girls in
their proper places. There must not be friendship--not real friendship,
I mean--between us and them."

"You are a paying girl yourself," suddenly exclaimed Mary Rand.

"I know. I wish I were not, but I can't help myself. You must allow me
to stand alone; I am your queen."

"That you are, and I love you," said Mary.

"This rule must hold good," repeated Kathleen. "I must insist on my
society adhering to it.--Ruth Craven, why are you silent?"

"Because I earnestly wish I had not joined. I cannot give up Cassandra,
nor Alice, nor--nor other girls."

"Nonsense, Ruth! You dare not fail me now," said Kathleen, with
enthusiasm. "I will make it up to you. You shall come with me to Ireland
in the summer. You shall. Oh Ruth, don't fail me!"

"I won't; but I hate that rule."

"And, girls, I think we must part now," said Kate Rourke. "It is getting
late, and it would never do for our secret meetings to be discovered."

"Whatever happens, we must stick together," said Kathleen. "Well,
good-night; we meet again this day week."

There was quite a flutter of excitement along that lonely road as the
Wild Irish Girls returned to their different homes. Susy Hopkins felt
quite the happiest and most light-hearted of any. By-and-by she and Ruth
Craven found themselves the only girls who were walking down the road
called Southwood Lane. This road led right into the centre of the shops
where Susy's mother lived.

"What a good thing," said Susy, "that I took the latchkey with me! It is
past ten o'clock. Mother would be wild if she had to sit up so late."

Ruth was silent.

"Aren't you happy, Ruthie? Don't you think it is all splendid?" cried
Susy.

"Yes and no," said Ruth. "You see, I am a foundationer, and when she
pressed me to join I hated not to; but now I am sorry that I have
joined. What am I to do about Cassandra and about Alice?"

"You think a great deal about Cassandra, don't you?"

"Oh, yes; she is quite a splendid girl, and she has been so very good to
me."

"I suppose you are quite in love with her?"

"No, I don't think I am. It isn't my way to fall violently in love with
girls, like some of the rest of you. But I like her; and I like Alice
Tennant."

"All the same," said Susy, "it is worth sacrificing a little thing to
belong to the Wild Irish Girls. Did you ever in all your life see any
one look more splendid than Kathleen as she stood with the light of
those big lamps upon her? She is a wonderful girl--so graceful, and with
such a power of eloquence. And she has such a way of just taking you by
storm; and her language is so poetic. Oh, I adore her! She is the sort
of girl that I could die for. If all Irish girls are like her, Ireland
must be a wonderful country to live in."

"But they are not," said Ruth. "Half of them are quite commonplace. She
happens to be rich and beautiful, and to have a taking way; but all the
others are not like her, I am certain of it."

"Anyhow, whether they are or not, I am glad to belong to the society,"
said Susy. "It will give us great fun, and we need not mind now whether
the paying girls are disagreeable to us or not. Then, too, think of the
blouses we have got. Oh dear! oh dear! when I put mine on on Sunday
mother will gape. I shall feel proud of myself in it. It was just sweet
of her to get things like this to give us. And she knew we weren't well
off. Oh, I do think she's one in a thousand! She must have thought of
you, Ruth, when she ordered these sweet pale-blue colors, for that color
is yours, isn't it?"

"I suppose so," said Ruth. "Well, all the same, I feel rather anxious. I
like her, of course, but I think she is mistaken. I must go on now, but
I feel somehow----"

"What?" said Susy, with some impatience.

"As though I had not done right--as though I had something to conceal.
Well, I can't help myself, only I won't hate the girls who are good to
me. Good-night, Susy. We won't be in time for school in the morning if
we stay talking any longer."




CHAPTER XI.

THE BLOUSE AND THE ROBBERY.


Susy Hopkins shared none of Ruth Craven's scruples. To her the Wild Irish
Girls' Society was all that was lovely. She trod on air as she went down
the street, and when she finally let herself into her mother's little
shop, locked the door after her, and went softly upstairs, her heart was
beating so loud that she hardly knew herself. She slept in a tiny room
just at the back of her mother's; it was sparsely furnished, and had a
sloping roof at one side. The chest of drawers also did duty as a
dressing-table, and there was a small square of looking-glass placed on
the top. Susy had secured a candle in a tin candlestick, with which she
had lighted herself to her bedroom, but when she got there she had no
intention of putting up with such feeble illumination. She first of all
drew the bolt to secure herself against intrusion, and then stepping on
tiptoe, she unlocked a drawer and took from it several ends of candle
which she had collected from time to time. These she stuck on the
dressing-table, and when she had made her little garret almost as bright
as day she unfolded her pale-blue blouse. She bent low over her
treasure, examining the blue embroidery, which was rendered still more
fascinating with small stitches of pink silk, looking with ecstacy at
the real lace round the neck and cuffs and finally pressing the delicate
color against her blooming cheek.

Susy Hopkins was quite an ordinary-looking little girl. Her nose was
decidedly snub, her mouth wide; but her eyes were dark and bright, and
she had fairly good eyebrows. She had a low forehead, rather nice curly
hair, and a high color in her cheeks.

"In this blouse I shall look a positive beauty," she thought. "Won't Tom
respect me when he sees me in it on Sunday? I must try it on now; I
really must."

Accordingly she slipped off her bodice, and substituted the pale-blue
cashmere blouse for the ugly and threadbare garment she had removed.
Whether the blouse was becoming to Susy Hopkins or not remains to be
proved, but it certainly delighted its wearer, causing her eyes to
sparkle and the color in her cheeks to grow brighter.

"It is the most beautiful thing I ever saw in my life," she thought.
"Why, Kathleen is like a fairy godmother. And how well it fits! And what
a perfect cut about the neck! And, oh! these darling little cuffs at the
end of the sleeves, and this sweet pink embroidery and this little
ruffle of lace round the neck. Oh! there never, never was anything made
so beautifully before. I am in luck; I am--I am."

Her mother's hand knocking on the wall brought her down from the clouds.

"Go to bed, dear," called out her parent. "It is very late, and you are
disturbing me."

"Yes, mother," called back Susy.

She removed the blouse, folded it in tissue-paper, put it into her
drawer, blew out the candles, and got into bed. But all through the
remainder of the night Susy dreamt of her blouse. The blouse filled her
thoughts, otherwise she might have been in raptures over her pretty
silver locket and its green ribbon. But as this was for private wear,
and must on no account be shown to any one who was not a member of the
society, it did not give her the amount of rapture it would otherwise
have done.

"It is lovely too. It is a badge, and means a great deal," she said to
herself, and she closed her hand over it as she lay in bed. "It is
tiresome that I cannot show it. It is a sweet little locket, and I might
save up money enough to have it gilded over. People would think I had a
gold locket. I have always nearly died to have one; but of course I
couldn't do that, for it would displease our queen, the darling, and I
wouldn't for all I am worth do anything to annoy her. Oh dear, things
are turning out lovely! I am twice as happy a girl as I was before
Kathleen O'Hara came to the school."

