
"Vote against it," said Tim, and Charles accepted the suggestion.

"Ten; it is a vote, though not unanimous," continued Frank, as he cast a
reproachful glance at his friend who had voted against the proposition.

He was not surprised to see Tim Bunker vote against it; but that
Charles should receive the advice of such a counselor, and such advice,
too, was calculated to alarm him. His friend had but little firmness,
and was perhaps more likely to be led away by bad influence than any
other member of the club. He was sorry to see Tim exhibiting his dogged
disposition, but more sorry to see Charles so much under his control.

"Hurrah!" shouted Tony, when the vote was declared. "Let us send up to
Mr. Munroe, and tell him what we have done, and get little Paul. They
won't want him now."

"But, Tony, you forget that our doings must be approved by our
directors," said Frank.

"I'll risk them."

"It would be better to have everything right before we promise Mr.
Munroe."

"So it would. Is your father at home?"

"I believe so."

"George is, and it won't take five minutes to obtain his consent. Let go
the fasts forward," said Tony, as he cast off the line astern.

"We will go ashore and try to find my father," added Frank.
"Ready--pull!"

Away dashed the Zephyr towards her boat house, while the Butterfly came
about so that Tony could leap on shore.

Of course both Captain Sedley and George Weston were surprised at the
sudden action of the clubs; but the deed was too noble, too honorable to
their kind hearts to want their sanction, and it was readily given. In
less than half an hour the boats were pulling towards a convenient
landing-place near Mr. Munroe's house.

The poor man was confounded when the committee of two from each club
waited upon him and stated their business. His eyes filled with tears,
and he and Little Paul wept together.

But Mr. Munroe could not think of taking the money at first. He declared
that he would suffer anything rather than deprive the boys of the
gratification which their money would purchase.

"We are a little selfish about it, sir," said Tony. "We want to keep
Paul among us."

"That's the idea," added Henry Brown, who was his colleague on the
committee.

"I can't take your money, boys," replied Mr. Munroe, firmly.

"You will oblige us very much by taking it. My brother and Captain
Sedley both know what we are about. I am sure we shall feel happier in
letting you have this money than we should be made by anything it will
buy. It was a unanimous vote in our club."

"Noble little fellows!" exclaimed Mr. Munroe, with a fresh burst of
tears, as he grasped the hand of Tony.

The matter was argued for some time longer, and finally compromised by
Mr. Munroe's agreeing to accept the money as a loan.

The notes were drawn up and signed by the poor man, whose heart was
filled to overflowing with gratitude at this unexpected relief.

"Now you will let Paul come with us--won't you, Mr. Munroe?" asked Tony.

"Certainly; and I shall never cease to thank God that he has found such
noble and true friends," replied the poor man; and as they took their
leave, he warmly pressed the hands of each member of the committee.

"Cheer up, Paul; don't be downhearted. It is all right now," said Tony.

"I can't be lively," replied Little Paul, whose sadness cast a shade
upon the enjoyment of the others.

"Why not, Paul?"

"I feel so sad; and your goodness to my poor father overcomes me."

"Never mind that, Paul; cheer up, and we will have a glorious time."

But Little Paul's feelings were too strong and deep to be easily
subdued. His pride seemed to be wounded by the events of the day, and
when they reached Center Island, he told Tony how badly he felt about
his father being the recipient of their charity, as he called it.

"Charity, Paul!" exclaimed the noble little fellow. "Look here;" and he
pulled the note he had received from Mr. Munroe out of his pocket. "Do
you call this charity?"

"Perhaps he can never pay you; at least it will be a long time."

"No matter; it is a fair trade. We lent him the money."

And Tony argued the point with as much skill as a lawyer would have
done, and finally so far succeeded in convincing Paul, that his face
brightened with a cheerful smile, and he joined with hearty zest in the
preparations for the May-day picnic.

A long spruce pole, which had been prepared for the occasion by Uncle
Ben, was towed to the island by the Zephyr, and erected in a convenient
place. The brushwood in the grove was cleared from the ground, the large
stones were rolled out of the way, and were used in constructing a pier
for convenience in landing. When their labors were concluded it was
nearly dark, and the boats pulled for home, each member of the clubs
anticipating a glorious time on the approaching holiday, for such the
committee had decided the First of May should be.




CHAPTER XII.

FIRST OF MAY.


May day came--warm, bright, and beautiful. At six o'clock in the morning
the Zephyr and the Butterfly were manned, and the boys went over to the
island to trim the May-pole with evergreen and flowers. The Sylph was
degraded for the time into a "freighting vessel," and under command of
Uncle Ben conveyed to the island chairs and settees for the use of the
guests, tables for the feast, music stands for the band, and other
articles required for the occasion.

About nine o'clock the guests began to arrive, and were conveyed to the
island by the two club boats--the Sylph having gone down to Rippleton
after the band. The Sedleys, the Westons, Mr. Hyde, the parents of all
the members of the clubs who could attend, all the boys and girls of the
school, and a few gentlemen and ladies from the village who had
manifested a warm interest in the welfare of the two associations,
composed the party; and before ten they were all conveyed to the scene
of the festival.

"Have you got them all, Frank?" asked Captain Sedley, as the coxswain
was ordering his crew ashore.

"All but the Munroes, and the Butterflies are going for them by and by."

"Tom is hoisting the signal," added Captain Sedley, pointing to a blue
flag on the shore, which the gardener had been directed to hoist when
anyone wished to go to the Island.

"We will go, Frank," said Tony; and away dashed the boat towards the
main shore.

"Ah, my Butterflies," said a voice, as they approached the landing.

"Mr. Walker!" exclaimed Tony. "Ready--up! Now let us give him three
cheers. I was afraid he would not come."

The salute was given, and acknowledged by Mr. Walker.

"I am glad to see you again, my brave boy," said the gentleman, as he
grasped Tony's hand.

"I was afraid you would not deem our invitation worth accepting."

"I would not have missed of coming for the world, my young friend. Here
is Mrs. Walker; you know her."

Tony shook hands with the lady, and she said a great many very pretty
things to him, which made the gallant little hero blush like a rose in
June, and stammer so that he could hardly make them understand him.

"Shall I help you into the boat, Mrs. Walker?" said Tony.

"You shall, my little gallant; though I shall not be so glad to get into
it as I was the other day."

The boat put off again, and Mr. and Mrs. Walker were filled with
admiration of the excellent discipline of the rowers. They were warmly
greeted by the party at the island, and lustily cheered by the crew of
the Zephyr, which was again manned for the purpose of giving their
liberal friend this complimentary salute.

"Off again, my lads?" asked Mr. Walker, as the Butterflies prepared to
go for the Munroe family.

Captain Sedley explained to him the nature of their present errand; and,
of course, the warm-hearted gentleman found renewed occasion to applaud
the nobleness of Tony and his companions. He could hardly find terms
sufficiently strong to express his sense of admiration, especially when
he learned the sacrifice which they had made.

"A fleet of boats!" exclaimed he. "If it would raise up such boys as
these, it ought to be procured at the public expense. Thank God! I am
rich."

"I understand you, Mr. Walker," replied Captain Sedley; "but I beg you
will not let your generosity do anything more for the boys."

"Captain Sedley, I _love_ those boys! They are good boys, and good boys
are a scarcity nowadays. There is nothing too good for them."

"You are enthusiastic."

"But I tell you, sir, there are no such boys as those in the world!"
exclaimed Mr. Walker, with a gesture of earnestness.

"O, yes, sir; I presume, under the same discipline, other boys would be
the same."

"Then let them have the same discipline."

"It would cost a fortune. It is a very extravagant recreation, this
boating."

"But it makes men of them. I read the constitution of the clubs, and
Tony tells me it is carried out to the fullest extent."

"No doubt of it. There are boys among them, who, under other
circumstances, would be bad boys. I am satisfied the club keeps them
true to themselves and their duty."

"That's just my idea; and these noble-hearted little fellows have
bestowed the money I gave them in such a commendable manner, I mean to
give them as much more."

"That was my own feeling about the matter; but I do not think it is a
good plan to make good all they sacrifice. This fleet scheme was a
cherished project, and it was noble in them to give it up that they
might do a good deed."

"Noble! It was heroic--I was just going to use a stronger word."

"It is good for them to practise self-denial. That is all that makes the
deed a worthy one."

"Exactly so."

"Therefore, my friend, we will not say anything more about the fleet at
present."

"But if they bear it well, if they don't repent what they have done,
why, I should not value one or two thousand dollars. Besides, it might
be the means of bringing a large number of boys within the pale of good
influences."

"That is my own view; and by and by we will talk more of the matter."

Captain Sedley then introduced Mr. Walker to the company, and the
benevolent gentleman took a great deal of pains to inform himself in
relation to the influence of the boat clubs upon the boys. He asked a
great many questions of their parents, and of Mr. Hyde, the teacher.
They all agreed that the young men were the better for the associations;
that the discipline was very useful, and the physical exercise very
healthy; but some of them were afraid their sons would acquire such a
taste for the water as to create a desire to follow the seas. But few of
them considered boating, under the discipline of the clubs, a dangerous
recreation; so that the only real objection was the tendency to produce
longings for

  "A life on the ocean wave,
  A home on the rolling deep."

Mr. Walker tried to make the sceptical ones believe that Wood Lake was
so entirely different from the "rolling deep" as scarcely to suggest the
idea of a ship, or of the ocean. But the disadvantages were trivial
compared with the benefits which all acknowledged to have derived from
the associations, even independently of the libraries, the lectures, and
the debating societies at the halls.

Tony and his companions soon returned with the Munroe family, who were
cordially received by the guests. Captain Sedley expressed his sympathy
for the poor man, regretting that he had not known his situation before.

"I would have bought your place myself rather than have had you
sacrifice your property to the cupidity of such a man," said he.

"You are very good, sir," replied Mr. Munroe; "but I had not the courage
to state my circumstances to anybody. 'Squire Chase is a very hard man;
even when I paid him the money, which the kindness of the boys enabled
me to do, he was so angry that he could scarcely contain himself. He
swore at me, and vowed he would have vengeance."

"He must be a very disagreeable neighbor."

"He is, indeed."

"On with the dance!" shouted Frank, in the most exuberant spirits; and
the rich and the poor man dropped the subject.

The boys and girls had formed a line round the May-pole, and the band
commenced playing a very lively air. As the inspiring notes struck their
ears, they began to jump and caper about, taking all sorts of fantastic
steps, which it would have puzzled a French dancing master to define and
classify. Most of the boys and girls knew nothing of dancing, as an art;
but I venture to say they enjoyed themselves quite as much as though
they had been perfectly proficient in all the fashionable waltzes,
polkas, and redowas. Their hearts danced with gladness, and their steps
were altogether _impromptu_.

Then came the ceremony of crowning the Queen of May, in the person of
Mary Weston, which was performed in the most gallant style by Frank
Sedley. Another dance succeeded, and then came the feast. A great many
good things were eaten, a great many fine things said, and a great many
patriotic and complimentary toasts were drank. The band played "Hail
Columbia," "Yankee Doodle," and many other spirited tunes, and Mr.
Walker was very much astonished, as well as amused, to hear some of the
boys make speeches, flowery and fine, which had evidently been prepared
