"No," replied Paul, "to tell you the truth, Father Montigny, we've been
through so much and we've had to think so hard of other things that we've
lost count of the days. I'd scarcely know how to guess at it."

"It's the Holy Sabbath," said Father Montigny. "You, I have no doubt,
belong to a church other than mine, but the wilderness teaches us that
we're merely traveling by different roads to the same place. We six are
alone upon this little spot of ground in a great river flowing through a
vast desolation. Surely we can be comrades, too, and give thanks together
for the mercy that is taking us through such great dangers and
hardships."

"We're like Noah and his family after the ark landed," whispered Shif'less
Sol to Henry, in a tone that was far from irreverence. But Paul said
aloud:

"I'm sure that we're all in agreement upon that point, Father Montigny. We
do not have to hasten and we'll remain here on the island in a manner
proper to the day."

Father Montigny glanced at the five in turn and the rare, beautiful smile
lighted up his face. He read every thought of theirs in their open
countenances, and he knew that they were in thorough accord with him. But
Paul, as usual, appealed to him most of all--the deeply spiritual quality
in the lad was evident to the priest and reader of men.

Father Montigny took a little leather-bound book from under his black robe
and stood up. The others stood up also. Then the priest read a prayer. It
was in Latin and the five--Paul included--did not understand a word of it,
but not a particle of its solemnity and effect was lost on that account.

It was to Paul, in many ways, the most impressive scene in which he had
ever taken part, the noble, inspired face of the priest, the solemn words,
and no other sound except the peaceful murmur made by the flowing of the
great river. They seemed as much alone on their little hill as if they
stood on a coral island in the south seas.

Nature was in unison with the rite. A brilliant sun came out, the dripping
trees dried fast, and, under the blue sky, the yellow of the river took
on a lighter hue.

After the prayer they resumed their seats by the fire, which they left at
intervals only to get something from the boat or to bring the dryest wood
that they could find for the replenishing of the fire. Paul and Shif'less
Sol went together on one of the trips for firewood.

"He is shorely a good man," said the shiftless one nodding in the
direction of the priest, "but don't you think, Paul, he's undertook a
mighty big job, tryin' to convert Injuns?"

"Undoubtedly," replied Paul, "but that is the purpose to which he has
devoted his life. He does good, but it seems a pity to me too, Sol, that
he goes on such missions. In the end he'll find martyrdom among some cruel
tribe, and he knows it."

While Father Montigny, like others of his kind, expected martyrdom and
willingly risked it, his spirits were darkened by no shadow now. Not one
of the five was more cheerful than he, and he gave them all the news at
his command.

"And I am glad," he continued, "that you are going to New Orleans. You are
really messengers of peace and, unofficial heralds though you are, you may
save more than one nation from great trouble."

The five were deeply gratified by his words. If they had needed any
encouragement in their self-chosen task they would have received it now.

"Since you are returning to New Orleans, Father Montigny," said Paul,
"why don't you go with us in our big boat? It is far safer and more
comfortable than a canoe."

Father Montigny shook his head.

"It is a kind offer," he replied, "but I cannot accept it. I leave you
to-morrow at the mouth of a river on our right as we descend. There is a
small village of peaceful Indians several miles up that stream and I wish
to stay with them a day or two. I and my canoe have traveled many
thousands of miles together and we will continue."

They would have repeated the offer, but they saw that he was not to be
moved and they talked of other things. The rest was, in truth, welcome to
all, as the labors and dangers of the night had been a severe strain upon
their nerves and strength, and they luxuriated before the fire while the
peaceful day passed. Henry noticed that the water was still rising, and
that the mass of floating debris was also increasing.

"It's been a tremendous rain," he said, "and it's extended far up. It must
have been raining on all the great rivers that run into the Mississippi on
either side, away off there in the north. It's going to be a mighty big
flood, and this hill itself will go under."

"You're right," said Shif'less Sol. "It's a mighty big river any time but
is shorely gittin' to be like a sea now."

They walked back to the little party by the fire. The day had considerable
coolness in it after the rain, and the warmth was still welcome. Little
was left for them to do and they still luxuriated in rest. Like all
woodsmen in those times who were compelled to endure long and most
strenuous periods of toil and danger, they knew how to do nothing when the
time came, and let Nature recuperate the tired faculties.

The brilliant sun shone on the river, the muddy waters were gilded with
gold. The east turned to rose, then to red, and after that came the
shadows. The mellow voice of the priest was lifted in a solemn Latin hymn.
His song carried far over the darkening waters, and Paul, under its
influence, felt more deeply than ever the immense majesty of the scene.
Red light from the sunken sun still lingered over the longest of rivers,
but the shadows now covered all the eastern shore. Through the increasing
night the firelight on the little island twinkled like a beacon, but for
the time being, they were careless who saw it.

The hymn died away in a last long echo, the red light was wholly gone,
darkness was over everything, and they prepared for a long night of sleep.
The next morning they started together, the big boat and the little canoe.
Every one of the five offered to paddle the canoe for Father Montigny as
far as they were going together, but he smilingly declined.

"No," he said, "my good canoe and I have been closely associated too long
to be separated now, nor must I be spoiled. I see that you have put fresh
stores in the canoe, and I accept them. You have good hearts, as I knew
when I first saw you."

The five would not put up their sail while they were in company, and "The
Galleon" and the canoe drifted together until they reached the mouth of
the river up which the peaceful Indian village lay. There Father Montigny
gave them his blessing and bade them farewell. They held their own boat in
the current while they watched him paddle with strong arms up the
tributary stream. He stopped at the first curve, lifted his paddle in a
last salute, which they returned with their own lifted oars, and then he
passed out of sight.

"We may never see him again," said Paul--but Paul could not read the
future.

Then they set their sail, swung into the middle of the stream and swept
forward on their great journey. But the meeting with the priest had a
strong influence upon every one of them.

"He is sure to suffer a violent death some time or other," said Paul, "and
he knows it, but it never mikes him gloomy. There are other French priests
like him, too, boys, going thousands of miles, alone and unarmed, over
this vast continent."

"'Pears to me that we are wrong when we talk about the French bein'
dancin' masters an' sech like," said Shif'less Sol. "My father fit in the
great French war up thar along the Canady line an' in Canady, an' he says
the French wuz ez good fighters ez anybody. Besides, they took naterally
to the woods, makin' fust rate scouts an' hunters, an' ef that ain't proof
o' the stuff that's in people, nothin' is."

This day upon the waters was one of unbroken peace. The flood, as Henry
had predicted, continued to rise, spreading far into the woods and out of
sight. Now and then some portion of the shore, eaten into continually by
the powerful stream, would give way and fall with a sticky sigh into the
river. Uprooted trees floated in the current or became wedged in the
forest. But the sunlight remained undimmed and they began to grow familiar
with the river. It was a friend now, bearing them whither they would go.

About noon they saw two deer marooned on an island made by the flood, and
they shot one of them for the sake of the fresh meat.

Now ensued a long journey, unbroken by danger, but full of interest. They
came near enough once or twice to ascertain that the Spanish force was
just ahead of them, but they saw no chance to secure the precious maps and
plans or interfere in any other way with the dangerous project of Alvarez,
and they waited patiently.

The flood began to subside, but it was a mighty river yet, and would still
be so when all the flood was gone. They passed the mouths of great rivers
to right and to left, but they did not know their names, nor whence they
came. The air grew much warmer and they were very glad indeed now that
they had the sail, which, allied with the current, carried them on as fast
as they wished.

Shif'less Sol lay lazily under the sail, his limbs relaxed, and his face a
picture of content.

"I could float on an' on forever," he said sleepily, "an' I don't care how
long it takes to git to New Or-lee-yuns. I think I'm goin' to like that
place. I saw a trapper once who had been thar, an' he said you could be
jest ez lazy an' sleepy ez you wished an' nobody would blame you--they
kinder look upon it ez the right thing, an' that suits me. He said them
Spaniards an' French had orange trees about. You could lay in your bed,
reach a han' out o' the window, pull an orange off the tree, suck it, an'
then go back to sleep without ever havin' disturbed the cover. I never
seed an orange, but I know it's nice."

The same day they rowed the boat a few miles up a small but deep and very
clear river that emptied into the Mississippi from the east. Their object
was to fish, the greater river itself being too muddy for the succulent
kind that they wished. The incomparable "Galleon" had also been supplied
with fishing tackle, and in a short time they caught a splendid supply of
black bass and perch, which proved to be very fine and toothsome. As their
boat floated back from the smaller stream into the Mississippi, Shif'less
Sol heaved a deep sigh.

"What's the matter, Sol?" asked Paul.

"I wuz thinkin' o' Christopher Columbus," replied Shif'less Sol. "Ef it
wuzn't that I'd be dead now, I wish I'd been with him. I do enjoy sailin'
on an' discoverin' lands an' waters that ain't yet got no name to 'em. It
looks funny to me that we wuzn't discovered sooner, when we've always been
here, but Columbus has all my respeck an' admiration 'cause he done it
when the others didn't."

"That shorely wuz a man," said Tom Ross, his eyes lighting up. "I've heard
the tale how he kep' tryin' an' tryin' to git a ship, an' couldn't, an'
at last the Spanish lady pulled off her earrings an' finger rings an'
bracelets an' said: 'Here, Chris, these, these are my jewels, take 'em,
trade 'em fur the best ship thar is in the market, an' discover Ameriky.'
An' then he got his ship, an' kep' sailin' on an' on, an' the sailors they
began to git skeered an' then more skeered. They're afraid they're goin'
to drop off on the other side uv the world an' they go to Chris an' say:
'Thar ain't no sech continent ez Ameriky an' we ain't goin' to discover
it. We're goin' to turn right 'round an' go straight back to Spain.'

"Chris says in the knowin'est manner like a father talkin' to his child.
'Thar is sech a continent ez Ameriky, an' it's a big one, too. It's layin'
over thar straight to the west, an' it's full uv big lakes an' big rivers
an' big mountains an' red Injuns that fight with bows an' arrers, and
b'ars an' buffalers an' deer an' panthers an' all things fine, jest
waitin' fur us. Thar's whar we're goin'.' And the sailors say more uppish
than ever: No, we ain't, we ain't goin' to discover Ameriky, thar ain't no
sech place, we're goin' right back to Spain.' Then a kinder funny look
comes into Chris's eye. He reaches fur his long rifle, an' he draws a bead
on the foremost uv them sailors, the feller that speaks fur 'em all, an'
he says, droppin' that fatherly manner an' speakin' up sharp an' snappy:
'I reckin we're either goin' to discover Ameriky, or go right back to
Spain, which is it?'

"An' that foremost sailor, the one that speaks fur 'em all, sees the funny
look in Chris's eye, an' he thinks, too, he kin see clean down the barrel
uv that long rifle to whar the bullet is layin', an' he answers right off:
'We're goin' to discover Ameriky'; an' shore enough they did, this fine,
big continent, full uv big lakes an' big rivers an' big mountains an' red
Injuns that fight with bows an' arrers an' b'ars and buffalers an' deer
an' panthers an' all things fine."

"I didn't know Tom Ross had sech a gift o' gab," said Shif'less Sol. "He
stirs me all up, he makes me want to hev some lady buy a ship fur me an'
start me out to discoverin' continents. Do you think, Paul, thar's any
lady who would sell her earrings an' finger rings fur me ez that Spanish
one did fur Columbus?"

"But think, Sol, what a chance you've got whether there is or not," said
Henry Ware. "America is discovered but not much of it is explored. There's
enough here to keep you roaming about for the next fifty or sixty years."

"That's so," said the shiftless one brightening up. "What am I growlin'
about, when here's a river, mebbe ten thousand miles long that we know
next to nothin' 'bout, an' buffalers an' b'ars an' panthers an' deer to
shoot, an' red Injuns to fight ez long ez I live. After all, we're shorely
mighty lucky to live at the time we do, ez I've said before. Do you think
thar'll ever be any times hereafter as interestin' ez ourn, Paul?"

"I can't say," replied Paul with a smile, "but they're not likely to be as
interesting to us."

They went on their way, and the air became still warmer. Moreover, it
grew heavy and oppressive, and the spring rains were resumed with great
violence. They had worked meanwhile on their tarpaulin, enlarging and
strengthening it with skins which they had allowed to dry on the boat, and
they rested, sheltered and secure, as they floated along.

Although Frenchmen had gone up and down the river long before, they felt
like genuine explorers. So little was known of the mighty stream that they
regarded every stretch and turn with keen interest. It was not beautiful
now, a vast, brown flood flowing between low and changing shores, but in
its size and loneliness it had a majesty peculiarly its own.

Wild geese and wild ducks flew over the river in abundance, and they were
so little used to man that often they passed near "The Galleon." The
fowling pieces proved useful again, as the five were able to sit in
comfort on their boat and shoot geese and ducks for their needs. Some were
of kinds that they had never seen before, but all proved to be good
eating, and they were welcome.

Jim Hart also exercised his ingenuity in a very useful manner. In the prow
of the boat, but under the tarpaulin, he spread a layer of mud about two
inches thick. Protected from the rain, it soon dried, forming a hard,
impervious, brick-like covering for the bottom of the boat, and upon this
he built a small smothered fire of dry sticks, a supply of which they kept
in the boat. Here Jim, with all the skill and delicacy of a gastronomic
artist, would cook their wild ducks and wild geese, and, considering the
limited area and resources for the exercise of his favorite occupation,
he did extremely well. Nor was it any longer necessary for them to run in
to the shore and worry in the dripping forest with wet wood.

"It ain't like that stove we built the time we wuz on the ha'nted islan',"
Long Jim would say, "but it's a heap sight better than nothin."

"It shorely is," said Shif'less Sol. "You ain't much account for anything,
Jim, but you kin cook a leetle bit."

Long Jim smiled contentedly.




CHAPTER VIII

THE CHATEAU OF BEAULIEU


They noticed one day a high bluff shooting up on the eastern bank and
running along for some distance. It was clothed in dense green forest, and
it was rather a welcome break in the monotony of the low shores.

"A big city will be built there some day," said the prophetic Paul.[B]

"Now, Paul, why in tarnation do you say that?" exclaimed Tom Ross.

"Why, because it's such a good place. It's a high hill on a great river so
well suited to navigation, and it has a vast, rich country behind it."

But Tom Ross shook his head.

"Seems to me, Paul," he said, "that you're bitin' off a lot more'n you can
chaw. Things that are to happen a hundred years from now ain't never
happenin' fur me."

But Paul merely smiled and held to his opinion.

On the following day they tied up at a point, where the river began a
sharp and wide curve around a long, narrow peninsula. It was just about
dark when they stopped and, as usual, they were able to run the boat into
dense foliage at the margin, where not even the keenest eye could see it.

"We've got plenty of goose and duck left over from dinner," said Henry,
"so I'm thinking, Jim, that you'd better not light the fire on your bricks
to-night."

"All right," replied Jim, "I don't mind restin'. I feel about ez lazy ez
Sol Hyde looks."

But Henry Ware had another and more important thing in mind. His was the
keenest eye of them all, and just before landing he had noticed to the
southward and on the other side of the peninsula a faint, dark line
against the edge of the sunset. Few, even with an eye good enough to see
it, would have taken it for anything but a wisp of cloud, but the physical
sense of Henry Ware, so acute that it bordered upon intuition, was not
deceived.

"Sol," he said after they had eaten a little, "let's walk across this neck
of land and explore a bit."

"It's a dark night to be traveling," said Paul. But Henry only laughed.
Tom Ross may have had his suspicions, but he did not deem it worth while
to say anything. He knew that Henry and Shif'less Sol were quite competent
to achieve any task that they might be undertaking.

Henry and Sol strolled carelessly into the bush, but before they had gone
a dozen steps their whole manner changed. Each became eager and alert.
