Then taking a seat by Mrs. Reed, Alice began to examine the contents of
the new work-box, lifting out the articles one by one, and placing them
in her lap.

She then admired the beautiful lining which. Mrs. Reed had put in the
box, asking her where she got such pretty pieces of silk.

"That piece of silk at the top, Alice, is a bit of my wedding-dress; and
that on the sides, is a part of my wedding-sash. Those remind me of
happy days, Alice.

"I had plenty then: a good husband, a happy home, and never thought that
I should come to poverty."

"What is this from?" asked Alice, touching the silk lining at the
bottom of the box.

"O that was always in the box, Alice. It was there when my husband
received it, and must be a piece of India silk.

"Is any thing the matter with it?" continued Mrs. Reed, as she noticed
Alice picking at one corner of it.

"O nothing is the matter," replied Alice; "it only seemed to me to be a
little loose."

"Let me look," said Mrs. Reed. "I don't think it can be loose, or I
should have seen it when I was lining the box."

"It is actually quite loose," said Alice, as she examined it further,
and picked up one corner with, a pin; "and here is a little piece of
paper underneath it."

"That is remarkable," said Mrs. Reed, as she put on her spectacles and
drew up her chair a little closer to Alice.

"And there is some writing on it too," said Alice, as she drew it from
its hiding-place and handed it to Mrs. Reed.

"Why, it's my husband's writing!" exclaimed Mrs. Reed, as she closely
examined the faded letters. "What can it mean? I never saw it before.
Read it, Alice; your eyes are younger than mine."

Alice read: "'Look and ye shall find,' and underneath this," continued
Alice, "is a picture of a mantel-piece, and underneath that, it reads:
'A word to the wise is sufficient.'"

Mrs. Reed again took the paper. Her hand trembled and her face became a
little pale.

"Alice," said she, "this is a picture of the old tile mantel-piece in
the other room. There is some mystery about this. What can it mean?"

"Yes," said Alice, "the tiles in that mantel have quotations on them."

In an instant, Alice was on her feet and sprung into the other room,
leaving Mrs. Reed in a state of wonderment.

Hastily examining the tiles in the mantel, Alice cried out: "O Mrs.
Reed, do come! here is a tile with exactly the same words on it!"

Mrs. Reed hurried into the room, and had scarcely passed the threshold,
when the tile fell to the hearth and broke into a dozen pieces.


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Point out breathing-places in the last
paragraph.

Pronounce carefully the following words: _fortunate, adjoining,
clothes, hearth, sitting-room, wedding-dress_.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Let pupils use other words to express the meaning of
the following sentences.

    _Alice received a warm welcome_.

    _Mrs. Reed stepped into the adjoining room with a light heart_.

    _Her face lighted up with joy_.

    _Those things remind me of happy days_.

    "_A word, to the wise is sufficient_."

Change the _statements_ given above to _questions_.

Change the following _exclamations_ to complete _statements_.

    Do come!           Let me look!           Read it, Alice!

Model.--See my pocket-book! = I wish you would look at my pocket-book.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XXVIII.


be fall'en, _happened to_.

thrust, _move suddenly or with force_.

mis hap', _something which has occurred to cause pain or sorrow_.

ex cit'ed ly, _in a very earnest manner_.

min'gled, _joined closely; united_.

le'gal ly, _as the law requires_.

a bun'dant, _beyond one's need; plentiful_.

com'fort a ble, _having everything needed to keep one from pain or want_.

re la'tions, _the feelings or acts of people toward each other_.

charm'ing, _very pleasant_.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE HIDDEN TREASURE.

PART III.


"O what have I done! what have I done!" cried Alice. "O Mrs. Reed, I'm
so sorry--I have broken the tile!"

"How did it happen, Alice? Was it loose?"

"Why yes," replied Alice; "I put my hand on it, and thought it appeared
to move a little. Having my scissors with, me, I, through curiosity, ran
the points in between that tile and the next one."

"Never mind, child," said Mrs. Reed kindly, seeing that Alice was
feeling sad over the mishap; "perhaps the tile can be mended--let us
see."

As they both stooped down to pick up the pieces, Alice noticed that
there was a hollow space back of where the tile had been, and that it
contained something of a dingy white color.

"O Mrs. Reed!" cried she; "there is something in there! See, it looks
like a bag tied up! May I take it out?"

Mrs. Reed turned deadly pale. "Yes," she replied, scarcely knowing what
she expected or dared hope.

Alice thrust her hand into the hole to pull the hag out, but as it was
very old, it fell apart, and O wonder of wonders! as many as a hundred
pieces of gold coin fell with a jingle on the hearth and rolled every
way.

"My husband's money!" exclaimed Mrs. Reed, as she leaned on Alice to
keep from falling.

Alice was nearly wild and talked like a crazy person.

"O goody, goody!" she cried, clapping her hands and jumping up and down.
"Now you can have everything you want! you won't be poor any longer!"

But Mrs. Reed was too much overcome to hear what Alice said.

[Illustration]

She could scarcely realize the good fortune that had so suddenly
befallen her.

Presently, however, with the tenderness of a mother, she placed her arms
around Alice and said: "O you precious child! but for you, I should
never have known this!"

"And if you had not given me the work-box," said Alice, "perhaps no one
would ever have found it out.

"But," continued she, excitedly, "let us see if there is any thing more
in there."

Again reaching into the hole in the mantel-piece, she sprung back with a
look of amazement that frightened Mrs. Reed.

"Why, Alice, what is the matter?" inquired the old lady.

"Matter!" exclaimed Alice. "Why, dear me! Mrs. Reed, there are lots and
lots of bags in there yet!"

"Is it possible!" said Mrs. Reed hoarsely. Then reaching her hand into
the hole, she drew out bag after bag, handling them very carefully, so
that they would not fall to pieces as the first one had done.

In the meantime Alice had pushed a table up near the fire-place. The
bags were emptied upon it, until the glittering gold made a heap that
struck Mrs. Reed and Alice with greater amazement than ever.

"Alice," said Mrs. Reed, "this is a blessing from Heaven that I do not
deserve. I can not tell you how thankful I am for it. My happiness now
will be in doing for others."

Alice said nothing; her heart was too full. A look of sadness came over
her face.

She was wondering whether Mrs. Reed would continue to love her, and
thinking, with a mingled feeling of fear and dread, that now her friend
was rich, perhaps she, the poor orphan girl, might not be so welcome at
the cottage as before.

Mrs. Reed seemed to understand somewhat the nature of Alice's thoughts.
"Cheer up, Alice," said she; "this is not a time to be sad! Come, help
me put away this gold.

"By the way, Alice, now is the time to use your pocket-book; you know I
told you it was handy to have things in the house, they might be
needed," she continued, smilingly.

"Why, certainly, Mrs. Reed; do you want to borrow my pocket-book? here
it is."

"Yes, my dear," replied Mrs. Reed, "I shall want a new one myself, and I
want to see yours. I wonder how many pieces of gold it will hold."

Then Mrs. Reed crammed the pocket-book full of gold pieces.

"There!" said she, handing it to Alice; "that is the Christmas present I
wanted to give you this morning, but did not have it."

"What! this for me! O no, no! I do not deserve it!" cried Alice.

"But you must take it, Alice, and listen; for I have something to tell
you. I want you to be my daughter now. I will have abundant means to
make both of us comfortable and happy."

"O Mrs. Reed," said Alice, bursting into tears; "I would love to be your
daughter, nothing could make me happier."

In a very short time every thing was changed in the little cottage. Mrs.
Reed had legally adopted Alice as her daughter and was sending her to
school.

Fresh paint, inside and out, and many new comforts, made the old house
charming and bright. But nothing could change the happy relations
between the two friends, and a more contented and cheerful household
could not be found anywhere.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Tell the story in your own words, using the points
given in the following

Analysis.--1. Mrs. Reed's home. 2. Her talk with Alice. 3. Mrs. Reed
prepares a present for Alice. 4. Alice receives the work-box. 5. What
was found in it. 6. The broken tile and the discovery of the money. 7.
What happened after that.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XXIX.


dells, _small valleys_.

bow'ers, _covered places made of boughs_.

troupe, _a number of living beings; a company_.

daf'fo dils, _yellow flowers_.

sheen, _brightness; splendor_.

sprite, _an unreal person_.

sus pend'ed, _stopped for a time; hung_.

va'ries, _is different; changes_.

blue'bell, _a kind of flower_.

ram'bling, _wandering_.

rev'el, _play in a noisy manner_.


       *       *       *       *       *




LOOKING FOR THE FAIRIES.


  I've peeped in many a bluebell,
    And crept among the flowers,
  And hunted in the acorn cups,
    And in the woodland bowers;
  And shook the yellow daffodils,
    And searched the gardens round,
  A-looking for the little folk
    I never, never found.

  I've linger'd till the setting sun
    Threw out a golden sheen,
  In hope to see a fairy troupe
    Come dancing on the green;
  And marveled that they did not come
    To revel in the air,
  And wondered if they slept, and where
    Their hiding-places were.

  I've wandered with a timid step
    Beneath the moon's pale light,
  And every blazing dew-drop seemed
    To be a tiny sprite;
  And listened with suspended breath,
    Among the grand, old trees,
  For fairy music floating soft
    Upon the evening breeze.

  Ah me! those pleasant, sunny days,
    In youthful fancies wild,--
  Rambling through the wooded dells,
    A careless, happy child!
  And now I sit and sigh to think
    Age from childhood varies,
  And never more may we be found
    Looking for the fairies.


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Which one of the stanzas should be read more
slowly than the others?

Point out the _emphatic words_ in the last four lines of the lesson.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Which lines in each stanza end in similar sounds?

Let pupils explain the meaning of what is given below in dark type.

    I've hunted in the _acorn cups_.

    I've wandered with a _timid step_.

    _Age from childhood varies._


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XXX.


poi'son ous, _likely to do great harm or injury_.

sep'a rate, _apart from other things_.

con di'tion, _state; situation_.

nec'es sa ry, _really needed_.

dis a gree'a ble, _very unpleasant_.

sen'si ble, _wise; knowing what is proper_.

ac cus'tomed, _being used to_.

es pe'cial ly, _more than usual_.


       *       *       *       *       *




AIR.


We all know very well that we can not live without breathing.

What we do not all know, or do not all think of, is that we want not
only air, but good air. We are apt to take it for granted that any air
will do for us; stale air, dirty air, even poisonous air.

What makes the matter worse is, that we can not help spoiling air
ourselves by the very act of breathing.

If people are shut up in rooms where the bad air can not get out and the
good air can not get in at all, they are sure to be made ill.

Some people in Scotland thought they would have a merry Christmas party,
and invited their friends to come to a dance.

As it was very cold weather, they shut all the doors and windows tight,
and then they began to dance.

It was a small room with a low ceiling, and there were thirty-six people
dancing in it all night. By the time morning came the air was so bad
that it was really like poison; and very soon seven of the poor dancers
were seized with a terrible fever, and two of them actually died.

The air we breathe out is different from the air we take in. We send
away some things with our breath which were not in the air when we took
it in.

One of these is water. Sometimes you can see this for yourself. On a
cold, frosty day, you know we can see the clouds of steam coming out of
our mouths. This steam is only very fine particles of water.

In warm weather we do not see the steam, but the water is there all the
same; if you will breathe on a looking-glass at any time, you will make
