plodded from town to town, delighting the hearts and eyes of our
grandfathers and grandmothers when they were children just as we are
now.

Vladdok had killed two keepers, besides badly wounding a couple of
spectators in Memphis, when he yielded to one of his vicious moods.  He
had been fired upon and wounded more times than any one could remember,
and Mr. Blarcom, who always traveled with his show, had been on the
point more than once of ordering his destruction; but he was of such
large size and possessed such extraordinary intelligence, that he
constituted the main attraction of the exhibition and he hesitated,
well aware that sooner or later, the wicked fellow would die "with his
boots on."

It was after an afternoon performance in one of the Western States that
Vladdok indulged in his last rampage.  His sagacious keeper had come to
understand the animal so well, that he knew the outbreak was coming.
While Vladdok was unusually tractable and obedient, there was a
dangerous glitter in his small eyes, and an occasional nervous movement
of his head, which proved that he was only biding his time and waiting
for the grand chance to present itself.

Fortunately, he did not rebel until after the exhibition was over, and
the crowds had departed.  Then, with a fierce trumpeting and one vast
shiver of his enormous bulk, he made a dash which snapped his chains
like so much whip-cord and went through the side of the tent as though
it were cardboard.

On his wild charge, which set all the rest of the animals in a panic,
he reached for his keeper, who with prodding spear and shouts,
interposed himself in his path and tried to check him.  But the man's
inimitable dexterity and good fortune enabled him to dodge the beast
and escape by a hair's breadth.  The next minute, the elephant reached
the public highway, down which he swung awkwardly but swiftly, on an
excursion that was destined to be the most tragic in his whole career.

The first object on which he vented his wrath was a team of horses,
driven by a farmer, whose wife was sitting beside him on the front
seat.  Neither they nor the team knew their danger until the avalanche
of fury was upon them.  The animals screamed in an agony of fright, and
were rearing and plunging, when Vladdok grasped one with his trunk,
lifted him in the air and dashed him to death.  The other broke loose
and plunged off at such headlong speed, that the elephant followed him
only a few paces, when he turned to attack the man and woman.

But they were nowhere in sight, and, with a trumpet of disgust, he
wheeled about, and turning from the highway, took to the woods.

The couple were saved by a singular occurrence.  The violent rearing
and backing of the horses overturned the wagon body, and the farmer and
his better half were caught beneath it, before they could escape.  They
had sense enough to remain quiet, until the brute left, when they crept
out, none the worse for their mishap.

"Consarn his pictur!" exclaimed the husband; "if that don't beat all
creation!  I allers said that circuses and shows was a burnin' shame,
and now I _know_ it; I'll make the owner of that elephant pay ten
thousand dollars for the damage he done us, for he scart you and me so
bad Betsy, that we'll never grow another inch."

Meanwhile, the runaway kept things moving.  He knew his keeper and
attendants were hot on his trail, and his sudden change of course was
undoubtedly with a view of misleading them.  It is hardly to be
supposed that he expected to find any "game" in the woods, but
nevertheless he did.

It so happened that Jack Norton and Billy Wiggins, a couple of boys not
more than fourteen years of age, were engaged on a little hunt that
same afternoon.  The teachers had sent such bad reports home about them
that their parents inflicted the most awful kind of punishment; they
did not permit them to attend the circus, to which they had been
looking forward for weeks.  The father of Billy was specially stern,
and forbade his hopeful to take his gun, when he joined Jack on a
little hunting ramble in the woods.  Mr. Norton felt some slight
compunctions, when he noted how patiently his boy accepted his fate,
and relented to that degree that he permitted him to take his rifle,
though he knew there was little chance of his securing any game.

The boys had walked about a mile, and, coming to a fallen tree, sat
down to rest awhile, for the day was warm and the gun which they had
taken turns in carrying, was heavy.

"I guess this hunt ain't agoin' to amount to much," sighed Jack, as he
leaned the rifle against the prostrate trunk, on which they were seated.

"Why not?" asked Billy.

"'Cause there ain't nothin' to hunt; I heerd Budge Jones say that when
he was a boy, these woods used to be full of bears and deers and tigers
and lions and giraffes and that sort of thing."

"Yes, and the folks were so mean they killed 'em all, but I've the
idea, Jack, that maybe some of the lions or tigers has hid somewhere in
the woods and we might find 'em."

"Golly!  I don't know whether I'd want to find 'em or not," replied
Jack, looking about him, with a scared expression.

"Why not?  Hain't you got a gun?"

"Yes, but while I was killin' one the others might chaw me all to
pieces; but if there was only one, I wouldn't care, if he was an
elephant as big as a barn----"

"My gracious! there he comes!"

A terrific crashing of the undergrowth caused both lads to glance
affrightedly behind them, and there, sure enough, was Vladdok, the
fearful elephant, almost upon them.  They started to run, their courses
so diverging that the beast was forced to select one and let the other
alone for the moment.  He fixed upon Billy Wiggins, who had taken
barely twenty steps, when the trunk of the beast inclosed his waist and
he was lifted, as if he was a feather from the ground, and the next
instant he felt himself whizzing through space.

A marvelous providence saved him.  Instead of dashing him against a
tree, or upon the ground, the elephant, in one of his mad freaks, flung
him from him as though he was a ball.  He spun through the air, the
leaves and limbs whizzing against his face and body, and instinctively
clutching with both hands, succeeded in grasping enough branches to
support the weight of his body and check his descent.

Then, when he collected his senses and stared around, he found that he
was a dozen yards above the ground, with the elephant beneath, looking
up, and apparently waiting for him to fall within his reach, that he
might finish him.

"Not much," muttered Billy; "I'm going to stay here and I don't believe
you know how to climb a tree.  Helloa! how do you like _that_?"

Jack Norton had dashed only a few yards, when the terrified look he
cast over his shoulder told him the elephant was giving his whole
attention to Billy, and seemed to have forgotten all about him.
Instantly he was filled with alarm for his young friend, and started
back to the log to get his rifle, that neither had thought of in the
panic.

As he knelt behind the fallen tree, to make his aim sure, he descried a
queer object going through the limbs of a large oak, and did not
identify it, until it lodged fast, as his friend Billy Wiggins.

Jack had no more idea of the fatal point at which to aim his weapon
than you have, but knowing that he must do something, and, with a dread
that the elephant after all, might succeed in climbing the oak and
getting at his friend, he let fly.

Gordon Cumming himself could not have done better.  The tiny bullet
bored its way into the vast bulk, just back of the fore leg and went
directly through the heart.  The huge brute, as if conscious that he
was mortally hurt, swung part way round, so as to face the point whence
the shot had come.  Catching sight of the kneeling youngster, with the
muzzle of his rifle still smoking, he plunged toward him.  He took a
couple of steps, swayed to one side, moved uncertainly forward again,
then stopped, tried to steady himself, and finally went over sideways,
like a mountain, crashing the saplings and undergrowth near him, and
snapping one of his magnificent tusks into splinters.  He was dead.

When the boys fully comprehended what had taken place, they were not a
little alarmed and puzzled, and started home, wondering whether their
game was a descendant of the creatures that used to inhabit that
section, or whether he was a visitor to these parts.  They had not gone
far, however, when they met the attaches of the menagerie and circus to
whom they related what had occurred.

The proprietors were relieved on learning the whole truth, for there
could be little doubt that the sudden ending of the career of Vladdok
was the means of saving more than one person from death.

As for Jack Norton and Billy Wiggins, it was generally conceded that
they spoke the truth, when they declared:

"Our fathers wouldn't let us go to the circus that afternoon, but I
guess we had a bigger circus than any of you all to ourselves."




LOST IN THE SOUTH SEA.

Captain William Gooding was commander of the _Tewksbury Sweet_, of
Portland, Maine, and was lost in the South Pacific in the spring of
1889.  This fine American bark sailed from New Castle, New South Wales,
on the 17th of March, bound for Hong Kong.  Everything went well until
the 9th of the following month, when she encountered a severe gale.
Despite all that skillful seamanship could do, and in the face of the
most strenuous exertions, she struck the dangerous Susanne Reef, near
Poseat Island, one of the Caroline group of the South Sea.

The wreck was a total one.  The vessel broke up rapidly, and seeing
that nothing could be done, the captain and crew, numbering ten men in
all, took to one of the boats, carrying with them only a single
chronometer belonging to the ship.  Even after entering the small boat
they were still in great danger, and only succeeded after the utmost
difficulty in reaching a small islet some miles to the southward.  The
storm was still raging so violently that the shelter was a most welcome
one, though as there were no animals or vegetation, or even water upon
the island, their stay of necessity could be only temporary.  They had
saved nothing to eat or drink, and to remain where they were meant a
lingering death.

After several hours waiting, the tempest abated somewhat, and launching
their boat once more, they rowed toward the main island.

"The end is likely to be the same in either case," remarked the captain
to the second mate, George W. Harrison, as they approached the land.

"And why?" inquired the latter: "we shall find food and water there."

"True enough; but there are no fiercer savages on the South Sea than
those of this island, and I have never heard that they were
particularly friendly toward the crews of shipwrecked vessels."

"They may not discover us until we can signal some passing ship."

"There is no possibility of any such good fortune as that."

"Stranger things have happened, and--"

"Does that look like it?" interrupted the captain in some excitement,
pointing toward the island.

The sight that met the gaze of every one was startling.  Fully thirty
canoes, each filled with eight or ten natives, were putting off from
shore and heading toward them.  Several of the crew favored turning
about, and putting to sea; but that would have been not only hopeless,
but would have invited attack.  Nothing is so encouraging to an enemy
as flight on the part of his opponent.  It impels him to greater
exertions and gives him a bravery which otherwise he may not feel.

The savages, in their light, graceful craft, and with their great skill
in manipulating them, would have overhauled the white men "hand over
hand."  There was a faint hope that by presenting a bold front, and
acting as though they believed in the friendship of the savages that
they might spare the unfortunates.  At any rate, it was clear there was
no choice but to go ahead, and the white men did so, rowing leisurely
and calmly, though the chances in doing so were hastening their own
doom.

There could be no mistaking the ardor of the ferocious natives.  They
paddled with might and main, and fully a dozen, in their eagerness,
leaped into the sea and swam ahead of their canoes.  They were
magnificent swimmers, speeding through the water like so many dolphins.
The Americans, even in their frightful peril, could not repress their
admiration.

"Did you ever see anything like it?" asked first mate Watchman; "they
are like so many sharks."

"They are indeed," was the significant response of Captain Gooding,
"and I would like it better if they were real sharks."

"Here they are!"

Sure enough; they surrounded the boat in a twinkling, and shouting and
screeching like so many demons, clambered over the gunwales until there
was danger of swamping the craft.

Had our friends possessed firearms, they would have made a desperate
resistance, and possibly might have beaten off their assailants; but,
as it was, they acted the part of wisdom in offering no opposition to
the presence or actions of their unwelcome visitors.

The latter proved that they meant business from the first, for hardly
were they in the boat when they began stripping the officers and
sailors of their property.  When they ceased the men had nothing left
but their undershirts, their despoilers flinging the garments into the
canoes that now crowded around.

No more plunder being obtainable, the fleet headed for land, with their
captives in anything but a cheerful frame of mind.  The shore was lined
with women and children, who answered the shouts of their friends in
the boats by running back and forth, screeching and yelling and
dancing, as if unable to restrain themselves until the arrival of their
victims.

The sailors believed they would be speedily killed and eaten, the
latter horror might have been escaped had they known, what they
afterward learned, that the savages of those islands are not cannibals.

The poor fellows stepped from their boat upon the shore, where they
were immediately environed by the fierce men, women and children, half
naked, wild, boisterous, and seemingly impatient to rend them to
pieces.  The prisoners could do nothing but meekly await the next step
in the tragedy.

It was during these trying moments that the sailors were astounded to
hear, amid the babel of voices, several words spoken in English.
Staring about them to learn the meaning of such a strange thing, they
saw a man attired as were the others, that is with only a piece of
cloth about his hips, whose complexion and features showed that he
belonged to the same race with themselves.

He advanced in a cheery, hearty way, and shaking hands with the new
arrivals, said:

"I think you did not expect to find me here."

"Indeed we did not," was the reply; "you appear to be an Englishman."

"So I am, and I am anxious to give you all the help I can, for your
situation is anything but a desirable one."

"There can be no doubt of that.  But how is it that you are here?  Were
you shipwrecked like ourselves?"

"No; I may say I was deserted.  My name is Charles Irons, and I was
left at Poseat by a trading vessel four years ago."

"How came that?"

"I was to act as the agent of a company of traders on the Cocoanut
Islands.  Well, the vessel left me, as I first told you, and that was
the last of it.  They forgot all about me, or more likely, did not care
to keep their promise, for I have never seen anything of the vessel
since."

"What an outrage!"

"It was, and there couldn't have been a more wretched person than I was
for several months.  I looked longingly out to sea for the ship that
never came, and chafed like a man who is bound hand and foot.  But,"
added the Englishman with a smile, "there is nothing like making the
best of things.  You can accustom yourself almost to anything if you
will only make up your mind to do so.  I was among these people and
there was no help for it, so I decided to adopt their ways and become
one of them."

"You decided when in Rome to do as the Romans do," suggested the
captain, who, like his companions, was greatly cheered, not only by the
presence and friendship of the Englishman, but by the fact that the
savages, who watched the interview with interest, showed no disposition
to interfere.

"That's it.  There are a great many worse people in this world than
these.  They are not cannibals, as are many of their neighbors, and
they have never harmed me."

"But what about us?" was the anxious inquiry.

The Englishman looked grave.

"I cannot say what their intentions are, but I am afraid they are bad.
They have been used ill by some of the vessels that have stopped here,
and are naturally suspicious of all white people.  Then, too, they are
revengeful, and like all barbarians are satisfied, if aggrieved against
our race, to get their satisfaction out of any member of it, whether he
is the one who injured them, or is entirely innocent."

"You seem to be regarded with high favor here."

"I am.  I stand next to the chief in authority, so you see I have
reason to believe I may be of some service to you.  You may be sure
that I shall leave no stone unturned to help you."

The captain and his companions gave expression to their deep gratitude,
and Irons continued in his bluff, pleasant manner:

"I guess I am about as much a savage as any of them.  If I hadn't been
I never would have obtained any control over them.  I have seven native
wives, and find I am forgetting a great many details of civilization,
while my desire to return home is growing less every day.  After all,
what difference does it make where you are?  A man has only a few years
to live, and as long as he is contented, he is a fool to rebel."

There may have been good philosophy in all this, and the captain did
not attempt to gainsay it, but, all the same, it was hard for him to
understand how any one could be so placed as to lose his yearning for
his home and his native land.

It was several days afterward, when the captives had become somewhat
accustomed to their surroundings, that Captain Gooding found he and his
men were mixed in their reckoning.

"It is a question among us whether this is Thursday or Friday," said
he, addressing Irons; "can you settle it for us?"

The Englishman looked at the captain in an odd way and replied:

"I haven't the remotest idea of what day in the week it is, nor what is
the month.  It seems four years ago that I was left here, but I am not
sure of it.  Will you please give me the year and month?"

"This is April, 1889."

The Englishman bent his head for a few minutes in deep thought.  He was
recalling the past, with its singular incidents of his career.  When he
looked up he said:

"Yes; it is four years and more since I was abandoned, and if you stay
that long you will be content to remain all your lives."

The captain shook his head, and his eyes were dimmed as he replied:

"I never could forget the loved ones at home, Irons; I would prefer
death at once to a lingering imprisonment here."

"Well, I am going to help you all to leave just as soon as it can be
done.  I understand how you feel, and sympathize with you."

The Englishman proved himself the most valuable kind of a friend.  The
authority which he possessed over these savage South Sea Islanders was
stretched to the utmost, but he never hesitated to employ it.  But for
his presence the Americans would have been put to death within a few
hours at most of their arrival on the mainland, and without his aid it
would have been impossible for them ever to have gotten away.

When everything was in shape, Irons hired a canoe of the natives for
the use of his friends.  The craft was not large enough to contain all
the party, and since all real peril had passed, there was no fear in
following the course that had been agreed upon.

Captain Gooding, second mate Harrison; and one of the sailors left
Poseat in the canoe, first mate Watchman and his six companions
remaining on the island.  This was ten days after the loss of the
_Tewksbury Sweet_.

Captain Gooding and all the sailors were in the best of spirits, for
they were confident that their wearisome captivity was substantially
over.  The three made their way from island to island, stopping at
eight different points, sometimes for days, and even weeks.  Finally
they arrived at Ruk, where they found a missionary station, and
received the most hospitable treatment.

The good men owned a boat abundantly large enough to carry twenty
persons, and the captain asked its use with which to bring the rest of
his crew from Poseat.  This was asking more than would be supposed, for
the missionaries told them that they were surrounded by hostile
natives, who were liable to an outbreak at any hour, in which event the
only means of escape the white men possessed was the boat.

The missionaries, however, gave their consent, and Captain Gooding,
hoisting sail in the staunch centre-boarder, set sail for Poseat, where
