It was the first time that the once haughty Miriam had ever referred
publicly to past shortcomings, although from the time she and Grace had
settled their difficulties at the close of the sophomore year, she had
been a changed girl.

"Where are Anne and Jessica to-day?" asked Eva Allen.

"Anne and Jessica have refused point blank to honor us with their
presence during practice," announced Nora. "I asked Jessica to-day, and
she said that they didn't want to know how we intended to play, for then
they could wax enthusiastic and make a great deal more noise. It is
their ambition to become loud and loyal fans."

"What a worthy ambition," said Marian Barber, with a giggle. "They are
such noisy creatures already."

There was more laughing at this, as Anne and Jessica were by far the
quietest members of the sorority.

"Remember, we practise to-morrow after school," called Grace as she
separated from her team at her street.

As she walked slowly down the quiet street, deep in thought, her ear
caught the sound of an approaching automobile, and she looked up just in
time to see Eleanor drive by in her machine. Grace nodded to her, but
her salutation met with a chilly stare.

"How childish she is," thought Grace. "I suppose she thinks that hurts
me. Of course it isn't exactly pleasant, but I'm going to keep on
speaking to her, just the same. I am not angry, even if she is; although
I have far greater cause to be."

But before the close of the week Grace was destined to cross swords with
Eleanor in earnest, and the toleration she had felt was swallowed up in
righteous indignation.

During the winter, theatrical companies sometimes visited Oakdale for a
week at a time, presenting, at popular prices, old worn-out plays and
cheap melodramas. These companies gave daily matinees as well as
evening performances, and the more frivolous element of High School
girls had in time past occasionally "skipped school" to spend the
afternoon in the theatre. By the girls, this form of truancy was
considered a "lark," but Miss Thompson did not look at the matter in the
same light, and disciplined the culprit so severely whenever she found
this to be the cause of an afternoon's absence that the girls were slow
to offend in this respect.

All this Eleanor had heard, among other things, from Edna Wright, but
had paid little attention to it when Edna had told her. Directly after
cutting Grace Harlowe, she had turned her runabout into Main Street,
where a billboard had caught her eye, displaying in glaring red and blue
lettering the fact that the "Peerless Dramatic Company" would open a
week's engagement in Oakdale with daily matinees.

Eleanor's eyes sparkled. She halted her machine, scanning curiously the
list of plays on the billboard. "The Nihilist's Daughter" was scheduled
for Thursday afternoon, and Eleanor decided to go. She wasn't afraid of
Miss Thompson. Then, possessed with a sudden idea, she laughed
gleefully. At last she had found a way to effectually annoy the
principal.




CHAPTER XV

A WOULD-BE "LARK"


Eleanor Savell and the seven girls who formed their sorority were the
first to enter the study hall on Tuesday morning. As soon as a girl from
any of the three lower classes appeared she was approached by some of
the former and a great deal of whispering and subdued laughter went on.
A few girls were seen to shake their heads dubiously, and a number of
those termed "grinds" were not interviewed. The majority, however,
appeared to be highly delighted over what they heard, one group standing
near one of the windows, of which Eleanor was the center, laughed so
loudly that they were sent to their seats.

Among the number to whom nothing was said were the members of the Phi
Sigma Tau, and as the morning advanced they became fully aware that
something unusual was in the wind. Several times they caught sight of a
folded paper being stealthily passed from one desk to another, but as to
its contents they had no idea, as it was not handed to any one of them.

At recess there was more grouping and whispering, and Grace was puzzled
and not a little hurt over the way in which she and her friends were
ignored. Such a thing had not happened since the basketball trouble the
previous year.

"Eleanor started that paper, whatever it is," said Nora O'Malley to the
Phi Sigma Tau, who stood in a group around her desk. "She was here when
I came in this morning, and I was early, too. It is some masterpiece of
mischief on her part, or she wouldn't take the trouble to get here on
time."

"Here comes Mabel," said Jessica. "Maybe she has seen the paper. Mabel,
dear, did you see that paper that has been going the rounds this
morning?"

Mabel nodded.

"What was written on it, Mabel?" asked Grace curiously.

Mabel looked distressed for a moment then she said, "I wish I might
tell you all about it, but I gave my word of honor before I read it
that I wouldn't mention the contents to any one."

"Then, of course, we won't ask you," said Anne Pierson quickly. "But
tell us this much--is it about any of us?"

"No," replied Mabel. "It isn't. It is something I was asked to sign."

"And did you sign it?" asked Jessica.

"I certainly did not," responded Mabel. "It was----" she stopped, then
flushed. She had been on the point of telling. "I am sorry I ever saw
it," she continued. "I can't bear to have secrets and not tell you."

"That's all right, Mabel," said Marian Barber, patting her on the
shoulder. "We don't want you to tell. If it doesn't concern us we don't
care, do we, girls?"

"No, indeed," was the reply.

Just then the bell sounded and the girls returned to their seats with
the riddle still unsolved. Nothing more was seen of the mysterious
paper, and Grace came to the conclusion that it had been nothing
important, after all.

On Wednesday, aside from a little more whispering and significant
glances exchanged among the pupils, not a ripple disturbed the calm of
the study hall. It was therefore a distinct and not altogether pleasant
surprise when Miss Thompson walked into the room, dismissed the senior
class and requested the three lower classes to remain in their seats.

After the seniors had quietly left the study hall, Miss Thompson stood
gravely regarding the rows of girls before her. Her eyes wandered toward
where Eleanor sat, looking bored and indifferent, and then she looked
toward Grace, whose steady gray eyes were fixed on the principal's face
with respectful attention.

"I don't believe Grace is guilty, at any rate," thought Miss Thompson;
then she addressed the assembled girls.

"Something has come to my ears, girls," said the principal, "that I find
hard to credit, but before you leave here this afternoon I must know who
is innocent and who is guilty."

Miss Thompson paused and a number of girls stirred uneasily in their
seats, while a few glanced quickly toward Eleanor, who was looking
straight ahead, the picture of innocence.

"You all know," continued the principal, "that it is strictly forbidden
for any pupil to absent herself from school for the purpose of attending
a circus, matinee or any public performance of this nature. I have so
severely disciplined pupils for this offence that for a long time no one
has disobeyed me. I was, therefore, astonished to learn that a number of
girls, regardless of rules, have taken matters into their own hands and
have decided to absent themselves from school to-morrow in order to
attend the matinee to be given in the theatre. Such a decision is worse
than disobedience--it is lawlessness. Unless a severe example is made of
the offenders, the standard of the school will be lowered. Therefore,
I intend to sift this matter to the bottom and find out what mischievous
influence prompted this act of insubordination.

"Report says that this movement originated in the junior class, and that
a paper has been circulated and signed by certain pupils, who pledged
themselves to play truant and attend the matinee to-morrow."

The eyes of Grace and her chums turned questioningly toward Mabel
Allison, who nodded slightly in the affirmative.

So that was what all the whispering and mystery had meant. Grace
inwardly congratulated herself on having kept clear of the whole thing.
None of her friends were implicated, either. Even Mabel had refused to
sign.

"I have dismissed the senior class, because I have been assured of their
entire ignorance of the plot. What I insist upon knowing now, is who are
the real culprits, beginning with the girl who originated the paper to
the last one who signed it. I am going to put every girl on her honor,
and I expect absolutely truthful answers. The girls who signed the paper
I have mentioned will rise."

There was a moment of suspense, then Eleanor Savell proudly rose from
her seat. Her example was followed, until two thirds of the girls
present were standing. The principal stood silently regarding them with
an expression of severity that was decidedly discomfitting.

"That will do," she said curtly, after they had stood for what seemed
to them an age, but was really only a couple of minutes.

"You may be seated. The girl who composed and wrote that agreement will
now rise and explain herself."

Without hesitating, Eleanor rose and regarded the principal with an
insolent smile. "I wrote it, Miss Thompson," she said clearly. "I wrote
it because I wished to. I am sorry you found out about it, because it
has spoiled all our fun."

There was a gasp of horror at Eleanor's assertion. No one had ever
before spoken so disrespectfully to their revered principal.

"Miss Savell," said the principal quietly, although her flashing eyes
and set lips showed that she was very angry, "if you have that paper in
your possession, bring it to me at once, and never answer me again as
you did just now. You are both disrespectful and impertinent."

But Miss Thompson's anger toward Eleanor was nothing compared with the
tempest that the principal had aroused in Eleanor. The latter flushed,
then turned perfectly white with rage. Still standing, she reached down,
picked up a book from her desk and took from it a paper. "This," she
said, in a low tense voice, "is the paper you wish to see. I do not
choose to let you see it, therefore I shall destroy it."

[Illustration: "I Do Not Choose to Let You See This Paper."]

Then she deliberately tore the offending paper into shreds and scattered
them broadcast.

"I hope you understand that I am not afraid of you or any other teacher
in this school," she continued. "I have never been punished in my life,
therefore I am not liable to give you the first opportunity. I despise
you, because you are a ridiculous prig, and I am glad of an opportunity
to tell you so. As for the persons who told you about our plan, words
cannot express my contempt for them, and right here I accuse Grace
Harlowe and her sorority of getting the information from Mabel Allison
yesterday and carrying it to you. They are all tale-bearers and sneaks."

With these words, Eleanor angrily flung the book she held on the desk
and walked down the aisle toward the door, but Miss Thompson barred her
way.

"Stop, Miss Savell," she commanded. "You shall not leave this room until
you have apologized to the girls whom you have unjustly accused and to
me. I will not tolerate such behavior."

Eleanor glared at the principal, whose face was rigid in its purpose,
then sank into the nearest vacant seat, saying defiantly: "You may keep
me here all night if you like, but, I meant what I said, and I shall
retract nothing."

Nevertheless she did not again attempt to leave the room. She had met
with a will stronger than her own and she realized it.

Ignoring Eleanor's final remark, Miss Thompson once more turned her
attention to the matter in hand.

"Those girls who are not in any way implicated in this matter are
dismissed," she said.

About one third of the girls arose and prepared to leave the study hall,
the Phi Sigma Tau being among the number. Grace motioned the girls to
hurry. She wished to leave the room with her friends before Miss
Thompson noticed them. She knew the principal would insist on an apology
from Eleanor, and neither she nor her friends wished it. For the first
time since Eleanor had chosen to cut their acquaintance Grace was
thoroughly angry with her. She could not forgive Eleanor for having
accused her and her friends of carrying tales before almost the entire
school; therefore a forced apology would not appease her wounded pride.
She drew a breath of relief when the eight girls were safely outside the
study hall door.

"Hurry up," she said. "We'll talk when we get outside school. Don't stop
for a minute. If Miss Thompson notices that we are gone, she'll send
after us."

The girls silently donned their wraps and fled from the building like
fugitives from justice. Once on the street a lively confab ensued, all
talking at once.

"Let's take turns talking," cried Grace, laughing. "We shall understand
each other a little better."

"Now, what do you think of Miss Eleanor?" cried Nora. "She has certainly
shown her true colors this time."

"I never heard of anything more unjust than the way she accused us, when
we knew nothing about her old plan," said Marian Barber.

"It was abominable," said Eva Allen.

The other girls expressed their disapproval in equally frank terms.

"I suppose it did look as though I told you girls," said Mabel Allison,
who had joined them at the gate. "You know I was with you at recess,
right after the paper had been passed to me. I don't think Miss Savell
intended me to see it. It was passed to me by mistake."

"Very likely," agreed Grace. "I wonder who did tell Miss Thompson. I saw
several girls with the paper, but hadn't the remotest idea what it was
all about. You know Miss Thompson is awfully down on 'skipping school.'
She threatened last year to suspend Edna Wright for it."

"There will be weeping and wailing in the 'Skull and Crossbones'
crowd,'" exclaimed Nora. "They are all in this mix-up, and if they
aren't suspended, they'll be lucky."

"Are you going to stand up for Eleanor now, in the face of what she said
about all of us before those girls, Grace?" asked Marian Barber hotly.

"No," said Grace shortly. "She deserves to be punished. The things she
said to Miss Thompson were disgraceful, and I shall never forgive her
for the way she spoke of us."

"I wouldn't say that, Grace," remarked Anne. "You can never tell what
may happen to change your views."

"It will have to be something remarkable in this instance," replied
Grace grimly, as she bade the girls good-bye. "Remember, girls,
basketball practice again to-morrow, and the rest of the week. Miss
Thompson has promised me the gymnasium. Please make it a point to be on
hand."

"Good-bye, Grace," chorused her friends, and went on down the street
discussing the probable fate of the would-be truants.

       *       *       *       *       *

To return to those youthful transgressors. They were spending a most
uncomfortable half hour with Miss Thompson. She was merciless in her
denunciation of their conduct, and the terror of suspension arose in
more than one mind, as they listened to her scathing remarks. It had all
seemed a huge joke when they planned it, but there was nothing funny
about it now. When, with the exception of Eleanor, the principal
dismissed them, they filed decorously out, very uneasy in mind. Miss
Thompson had taken their names, but had not stated their punishment and
it was certain that they would be made to feel the full weight of her
displeasure.

When the last girl had disappeared the principal turned to Eleanor.
"I will listen to your apology, Miss Savell," she said coldly.

Eleanor looked scornfully at the principal, and was silent.

"Do you intend to obey me, Miss Savell?" asked Miss Thompson.

Still there was no answer.

"Very well," continued Miss Thompson. "Your silence indicates that you
are still insubordinate. You may, therefore, choose between two things.
You may apologize to me now, and to-morrow to the girls you have accused
of treachery, or you may leave this school, not to return to it unless
permitted to do so by the Board of Education."

Without a word Eleanor rose and walked haughtily out of the room.




CHAPTER XVI

THE JUNIORS FOREVER


When the four classes assembled Thursday morning, every girl, with the
exception of Eleanor, was in her seat. Her absence created considerable
comment, and it was a matter of speculation as to whether she had
