preached on that subject, and said that every enlightened Christian
must have discovered one master passion amongst the others of his
soul. She had tried so hard, and could only find a lot, none much
bigger or much less than the others. Some vanity, some selfishness,
some distrust and weariness, some peevishness, some indolence, and a
lapful of omissions. Since she married," continued my aunt, slowly
pulling her thick black eyelashes, after a fashion she had, "I believe
she has found the long-lost failing. It is impatience with Mr.
Rampant, she thinks."

I could not help laughing.

"However, Isobel, we may be sure of this, people of soft, gentle
temperaments have their own difficulties with their own souls which we
escape. Perhaps in the absence of such marked vices as bring one to
open shame one might be slower to undertake vigorous self-improvement.
You and I have no difficulty in seeing the sin lying at _our_ door."

"N--no," said I.

"Well, _have you_?" said Aunt Isobel, facing round. "Bless me," she
added impetuously, "don't say you haven't if you have. Never let any
one else think for you, child!"

"If you'll only have patience and let me explain--"

"I'm patience its very self!" interrupted my aunt, "but I do hate a No
that means Yes."

_My_ patience began to evaporate.

"There are some things, Aunt Isobel, _you know_, which can't be
exactly squeezed into No and Yes. But if you don't want to be bothered
I won't say anything, or I'll say yes or no, which ever you like."

And I kicked the shovel. (My aunt had shoved the poker with _her_
slipper.) She drew her foot back and spoke very gently:

"I beg your pardon, my dear. Please say what you were going to say,
and in your own way."

There is no doubt that good-humour--like bad--is infectious. I drew
nearer to Aunt Isobel, and fingered the sleeve of her dress
caressingly.

"You know, dear Aunt Isobel, that I should never think of saying to
the Rector what I want to say to you. And I don't mean that I don't
agree to whatever he tells us about right and wrong, but still I think
if one can be quite convinced in the depths of one's own head, too,
it's a good thing, as well as knowing that he must be right."

"Certainly," said Aunt Isobel.

"To begin with, I don't want you to think me any better than I am.
When we were very very little, Philip and I used to spit at each
other, and pull each other's hair out. I do not do nasty or unladylike
things now when I am angry, but, Aunt Isobel, my 'besetting sin' is
not conquered, it's only civilized."

"I quite agree with you," said Aunt Isobel; which rather annoyed me. I
gulped this down, however, and went on:

"The sin of ill-temper, _if it is a sin_," I began. I paused,
expecting an outburst, but Aunt Isobel sat quite composedly, and
fingered her eyelashes.

"Of course the Rector would be horrified if I said such a thing at the
confirmation-class," I continued, in a dissatisfied tone.

"Don't invent grievances, Isobel, for I see you have a real
stumbling-block, when we can come to it. You are not at the
confirmation-class, and I am not easily horrified."

"Well, there are two difficulties--I explain very stupidly," said I
with some sadness.

"We'll take them one at a time," replied Aunt Isobel with an
exasperating blandness, which fortunately stimulated me to
plain-speaking.

"Everybody says one ought to 'restrain' one's temper, but I'm not sure
if I think one ought. Isn't it better to _have things out_? Look at
Philip. He's going to be confirmed, and then he'll go back to school,
and when he and another boy quarrel, they'll fight it out, and feel
comfortable afterwards. Aunt Isobel, I can quite understand feeling
friendly after you've had it out, even if you're the one who is
beaten, if it has been a fair fight. Now _restraining_ your temper
means forcing yourself to be good outside, and feeling all the worse
inside, and feeling it longer. There is that utterly stupid little
schoolroom-maid, who is under my orders, that I may teach her. Aunt
Isobel, you would not credit how often I tell her the same thing, and
how politely she says 'Yes, miss!' and how invariably she doesn't do
it after all. I say, 'You _know_ I told you only yesterday. What _is_
the use of my trying to teach you?' and all kinds of mild things like
that; but really I quite hate her for giving me so much trouble and
taking so little herself, and I wish I might discharge her. Now, if
only it wasn't wrong to throw--what are those things hot-tempered
gentlemen always throw at their servants?"

"Don't ask me, my dear; ask Mr. Rampant."

"Oh, he throws everything. Bootjacks--that's it. Now, if only I might
throw a bootjack at her, it would waken her up, and be such a relief
to my feelings, that I shouldn't feel half so unforgiving towards her
all along. Then as to swearing, Aunt Isobel--"

"Swearing!" ejaculated my aunt.

"Of course swearing is very wrong, and all profane-speaking but I do
think it _would be_ a help if there was some innocent kind of strong
language to use when one feels strongly."

"If we didn't use up all our innocent strong language by calling
things awful and horrible that have not an element of awe or horror in
them, we should have some left for our great occasions," said Aunt
Isobel.

"Perhaps," said I, "but that's not exactly what I mean. Now do you
think it would be wrong to invent expletives that mean nothing bad? As
if Mr. Rampant were to say, 'Cockatoos and kingfishers! where are my
shooting-boots?' For you know I do think it would make him more
comfortable to put it in that way, especially if he had been kept
waiting for them."

I paused, and Aunt Isobel turned round.

"Let us carry your idea well forward, Isobel. Bootjacks and expletives
would no doubt be a relief to the thrower when hurled at servants or
some one who could not (or from principle would not) retaliate, and
the angry feelings that propelled them might be shortened by 'letting
off the steam,' so to speak. But imagine yourself to have thrown a
bootjack at Philip to relieve your feelings, and Philip (to relieve
his) flinging it back at you. This would only give fresh impetus to
_your_ indignation, and whatever you threw next would not be likely to
soothe _his_."

"Please don't!" said I. "Aunt Isobel, I could never throw a hatchet
again."

"You are bold to promise to stop short anywhere when relieving
passionate feelings by indulgence has begun on two sides. And, my
dear, matters are no better where the indulgence is in words instead
of blows. In the very mean and undignified position of abusing those
who cannot return your abuse it might answer; but 'innocent strong
language' would cease to be of any good when it was returned. If to
'Cockatoos and kingfishers! where are my shooting-boots?' an equally
violent voice from below replied, 'Bats and blackbeetles! look for
them yourself!' some stronger vent for the steam of hot temper would
have to be found, and words of any kind would soon cease to relieve
the feelings. Isobel, I have had long and hard experience, and your
ideas are not new ones to me. Believe me, child, the only real relief
is in absolute conquest, and the earlier the battle begins, the easier
and the shorter it will be. If one can keep irritability under, one
may escape a struggle to the death with passion. I am not cramming
principles down your throat--I say as a matter of personal practice,
that I do not know, and never hope to find a smoother or a shorter
way. But I can say also--after Victory comes Peace."

I gave a heavy sigh.

"Thank you, Aunt Isobel, I will try; but it makes my second difficulty
all the worse. I can fancy that I might possibly learn self-control; I
can fancy by main force holding my tongue, or compelling it to speak
very slowly and civilly: but one can't force one's feelings. Aunt
Isobel, if I had been very much insulted or provoked, I might keep on
being civil for years on the outside, but how I should hate! You can't
prevent yourself hating. People talk about 'forgive and forget.' If
forgiving means doing no harm, and forgetting means behaving quite
civilly, as if nothing had happened, one could. But of course it's
nonsense to talk of making yourself really _forget_ anything. And I
think it's just as absurd to talk of making yourself forgive, if
forgiveness means feeling really kindly and comfortable as you did
before. The very case in which I am most sure you are right about
self-control is one of the worst the other way. I ought to be ashamed
to speak of it--but I mean the hatchet-quarrel. If I had been very
good instead of very wicked, and had restrained myself when Philip
pulled all my work to pieces, and jeered at me for being miserable, I
_couldn't_ have loved him again as I did before. Forgive and forget!
One would often be very glad to. I have often awoke in the morning and
known that I had forgotten something disagreeable, and when it did
come back I was sorry; but one's memory isn't made of slate, or one's
heart either, that one can take a wet sponge and make it clean. Oh
dear! I wonder why ill-tempered people are allowed to live! They ought
to be smothered in their cradles."

Aunt Isobel was about to reply, but I interrupted her.

"Don't think me humble-minded, Aunt Isobel, for I'm not. Sometimes I
feel inclined to think that ill-tempered people have more sense of
justice and of the strict rights and wrongs of things--at least if
they are not very bad," I interpolated, thinking of Mr. Rampant--"than
people who can smile and look pleasant at everything and everybody
like Lucy Lambent, who goes on calling me darling when I know I'm
scowling like a horned-owl. Nurse says she's the 'sweetest tempered
young lady she ever did know!' Aunt Isobel, what a muddle life is!"

"After some years of it," said my aunt, pulling her lashes hard, "_I_
generally say, What a muddle my head is! Life is too much for it."

"I am quite willing to put it that way," sighed I, laying my
muddle-head on the table, for I was tired. "It comes to much the same
thing. Now--there is my great difficulty! I give in about the other
one, but you can't cure this, and the truth is, I am not fit to go to
a confirmation-class, much less to the Holy Communion."

"Isobel," said my aunt, folding her hands on her lap, and bending her
very thick brows on the fire, "I want you to clearly understand that I
speak with great hesitation, and without any authority. I can do
nothing for you but tell you what I have found myself in _my_
struggles."

"Thank you a thousand times," said I, "that's what I want. You know I
hear two sermons every Sunday, and I have a lot of good books. Mrs.
Welment sends me a little book about ill-temper every Christmas. The
last one was about saying a little hymn before you let yourself speak
whenever you feel angry. Philip got hold of it, and made fun of it. He
said it was like the recipe for catching a sparrow by putting salt on
its tail, because if you were cool enough to say a hymn, there would
then be no need for saying it. What do you think, Aunt Isobel?"

"My dear, I have long ago given up the idea that everybody's weak
points can all be strengthened by one plaster. The hymn might be very
useful in some cases, though I confess that it would not be in mine.
But prayer is; and I find a form of prayer necessary. At the same time
I have such an irritable taste, that there are very few forms of
devotion that give me much help but the Prayer-Book collects and
Jeremy Taylor. I do not know if you may find it useful to hear that in
this struggle I sometimes find prayers more useful, if they are not
too much to the sore point. A prayer about ill-temper might tend to
make me cross, when the effort to join my spirit with the
temptation-tried souls of all ages in a solemn prayer for the Church
Universal would lift me out of the petty sphere of personal vexations,
better than going into my grievances even piously. I speak merely of
myself, mind."

"Thank you," I said. "But about what I said about hating. Aunt Isobel,
did you ever change your feelings by force? Do you suppose anybody
ever did?"

"I believe it is a great mistake to trouble one's self with the
spiritual experiences of other people when one cannot fully know their
circumstances, so I won't suppose at all. As to what I am sure of,
Isobel, you know I speak the truth."

"Yes," said I; it would have been impertinence to say more.

"_I_ have found that if one fights for good behaviour, GOD
makes one a present of the good feelings. I believe you will find it
so. Even when you were a child, if you had tried to be good, and had
managed to control yourself, and had not thrown the hatchet, I am
quite sure you would not have hated Philip for long. Perhaps you would
have thought how much better Philip used to behave before your father
and mother died, and a little elder-sisterly, motherly feeling would
have mixed with your wrath at seeing him with his fat legs planted
apart, and his shoulders up, the very picture of wilful naughtiness.
Perhaps you might have thought you had repulsed him a little harshly
when he wanted to help, as you were his chief playmate and twin
sister."

"Please don't," said I. "How I wish I had! Indeed I don't know how I
can ever speak of hating one of the others when there are so few of
us, and we are orphans. But everybody isn't one's brother. And--oh,
Aunt Isobel, at the time one does get so wild, and hard, and twisted
in one's heart!"

"I don't think it is possible to overrate the hardness of the first
close struggle with any natural passion," said my aunt earnestly; "but
indeed the easiness of after-steps is often quite beyond one's
expectations. The free gift of grace with which GOD perfects
our efforts may come in many ways, but I am convinced that it is the
common experience of Christians that it does come."

"To every one, do you think?" said I. "I've no doubt it comes to you,
Aunt Isobel, but then you are so good."

"For pity's sake don't say I am good," said my aunt, and she kicked
down all the fire-irons; and then begged my pardon, and picked them up
again.

We were silent for awhile. Aunt Isobel sat upright with her hands
folded in her lap, and that look which her large eyes wear when she is
trying to see all the sides of a question. They were dilated with a
sorrowful earnestness when she spoke again.

"There _may_ be some souls," she said, "whose brave and bitter lot it
is to conquer comfortless. Perhaps some terrible inheritance of strong
sin from the father is visited upon the son, and, only able to keep
his purpose pure, he falls as fast as he struggles up, and still
struggling falls again. Soft moments of peace with GOD and
man may never come to him. He may feel himself viler than a thousand
trumpery souls who could not have borne his trials for a day. Child,
for you and for me is reserved no such cross and no such crown as
theirs who falling still fight, and fighting fall, with their faces
Zionwards, into the arms of the Everlasting Father. 'As one whom his
mother comforteth' shall be the healing of _their_ wounds."

There was a brisk knock at the door, and Philip burst in.

"Look here, Isobel, if you mean to be late for confirmation-class I'm
not going to wait for you. I hate sneaking in with the benches all
full, and old Bartram blinking and keeping your place in the catechism
for you with his fat forefinger."

"I am _very_ sorry, Philip dear," said I; "please go without me, and
I'll come on as quickly as I can. Thank you very much for coming to
remind me."

"There's no such awful hurry," said Philip in a mollified tone; "I'll
wait for you down-stairs."

Which he did, whistling.

Aunt Isobel and I are not demonstrative, it does not suit us. She took
hold of my arms, and I laid my head on her shoulder.

"Aunt Isobel, GOD help me, I will fight on to the very end."

"HE _will_ help you," said Aunt Isobel.

I could not look at her face and doubt it. Oh, my weak soul, never
doubt it more!




CHAPTER V.

CELESTIAL FIRE--I CHOOSE A TEXT.


We were confirmed.

As Aunt Isobel had said, I was spared perplexity by the unmistakable
nature of my weakest point. There was no doubt as to what I should
pray against and strive against. But on that day it seemed not only as
if I could never give way to ill-temper again, but as if the trumpery
causes of former outbreaks could never even tempt me to do so. As the
lines of that ancient hymn to the Holy Ghost--"_Veni Creator_"--rolled
on, I prayed humbly enough that my unworthy efforts might yet be
crowned by the sevenfold gifts of the Spirit; but that a soul which
sincerely longed to be "lightened with celestial fire" could be
tempted to a common fit of sulks or scolding by the rub of nursery
misdeeds and mischances, felt then so little likely as hardly to be
worth deprecating on my knees.

And yet, when the service was over, the fatigue of the mental strain
and of long kneeling and standing began to tell in a feeling that came
sadly near to peevishness. I spent the rest of the day resolutely in
my room and on my knees, hoping to keep up those high thoughts and
emotions which had made me feel happy as well as good. And yet I all
but utterly broke down into the most commonplace crossness because
Philip did not do as I did, but romped noisily with the others, and
teased me for looking grave at tea.

I just did not break down. So much remained alive of the "celestial
fire," that I kept my temper behind my teeth. Long afterwards, when I
learnt by accident that Philip's "good resolve" on the occasion had
been that he would be kinder to "the little ones," I was very glad
that I had not indulged my uncharitable impulse to lecture him on
indifference to spiritual progress.

That evening Aunt Isobel gave me a new picture for my room. It was a
fine print of the Crucifixion, for which I had often longed, a German
woodcut in the powerful manner of Albert Duerer, after a design by
Michael Angelo. It was neither too realistic nor too mediaeval, and the
face was very noble. Aunt Isobel had had it framed, and below on an
illuminated scroll was written--"What are these wounds in Thine
Hands? Those with which I was wounded in the house of My friends."

"I often think," she said, when we had hung it up and were looking at
it, "that it is not in our Lord's Cross and Passion that His patience
comes most home to us. To be patient before an unjust judge or brutal
soldiers might be almost a part of self-respect; but patience with the
daily disappointments of a life 'too good for this world,' as people
say, patience with the follies, the unworthiness, the ingratitude of
those one loves--these things are our daily example. For wounds in the
house of our enemies pride may be prepared; wounds in the house of our
friends take human nature by surprise, and GOD only can teach us to
bear them. And with all reverence I think that we may say that ours
have an element of difficulty in which His were wanting. They are
mixed with blame on our own parts."

"That is why you have put that text for me?" said I. My aunt nodded.

