
"You are a queer girl," said Aunt Maria. "But I believe you are the best
of them, and you certainly remind me of your mother when you speak in
that earnest fashion. Here, take the key, then, but be sure you lock the
door when you go in, and when you come out again in the morning. I trust
to you that that little wild, impertinent sister of yours doesn't
escape--now, remember."

"While I am there she will not," answered Helen. "Thank you, auntie. You
look very tired yourself, won't you go to bed now?"

"I will, child. I'm fairly beat out. Such a scene is enough to disturb
the strongest nerves. Only what about the other children? Are they still
carousing in that wicked way in the garret?"

"No. I am sure they have gone to bed, thoroughly ashamed of themselves.
But I will go and see to them."

"One thing more, child. Before I go to bed I should like to fill in a
telegraph form to Miss Grinsted. If she gets it the first thing in the
morning she can reach here to-morrow night. Well, Helen, again
objecting; you evidently mean to cross me in everything; now what is the
matter? Why has your face such a piteous look upon it?"

"Only this, Aunt Maria. Until father returns I am quite willing to obey
you, and I will do my best to make the others good and obedient. But I
do think he would be vexed at your getting Miss Grinsted until you have
spoken to him. Won't you wait until Monday before you telegraph for
her?"

"I'll sleep on it, anyhow," replied Mrs. Cameron. "Good night, child.
You remind me very much of your mother--not in appearance, but in the
curious way you come round a person, and insist upon having everything
done exactly as you like. Now, my dear, good night. I consider you all
the most demoralized household, but I won't be here long before matters
are on a very different footing."

The bedroom door really closed upon Aunt Maria, and Helen drew a long
breath.

Oh, for Monday to arrive! Oh, for any light to guide the perplexed child
in this crisis! But she had no time to think now. She flew to the
garret, to find only the wreck of the feast and one or two candles
flickering in their sockets. She put the candles out, and went next to
the children's bedrooms. Bob and Bunny, with flushed faces, were lying
once more in their cribs, fast asleep. They were dreaming and tossing
about, and Nurse stood over them with a perplexed and grave face.

"This means nightmare, and physic in the morning," said the worthy
woman. "Now, don't you fret and worry your dear head, Miss Helen, pet.
Oh, yes, I know all about it, and it _was_ a naughty thing to do, only
children will be children. Your aunt needn't expect that her old crabbed
head and ways will fit on young shoulders. You might go to Miss Firefly,
though, for a minute, Miss Helen, for she's crying fit to break her
heart."

Helen went off at once. Firefly was a very excitable and delicate child.
She found the little creature with her head buried under the clothes,
her whole form shaken with sobs.

"Lucy, darling," said Helen.

The seldom-used name aroused the weeping child; she raised her head, and
flung two thin arms so tightly round Helen's neck that she felt half
strangled.

"Oh, it's so awful, Nell; what will she do to poor Polly! Oh, poor
Polly! Will she half kill her, Nell?"

"No, Fly--how silly of you to take such an idea into your head. Fly,
dear, stop crying at once--you know you have all been naughty, and
Polly has hurt Aunt Maria, and hurt me, too. You none of you knew Aunt
Maria was coming, but I did not think you would play such a trick on me,
and when father was away, too."

"It wasn't Polly's fault," said Firefly, eagerly. "She was tempted, and
we were the tempters. We all came round her, and we did coax, so hard,
and Polly gave way, 'cause she wanted to make us happy. She's a darling,
the dearest darling in all the world, and if Aunt Maria hurts her and
she dies, I--I----"

The little face worked in a paroxysm of grief and agony.

"Don't, Fly," said Helen. "You are much too tired and excited for me to
talk calmly to you to-night. You have been naughty, darling, and so has
Polly, and real naughtiness is always punished, always, somehow or
another. But you need not be afraid that any real harm will happen to
Polly. I am going to her in a moment or two, so you need not be in the
least anxious. Now fold your hands, Fly, and say 'Our Father.' Say it
slowly after me."

Firefly's sobs had become much less. She now lay quiet, her little chest
still heaving, but with her eyes open, and fixed with a pathetic longing
on Helen's face.

"You're nearly as good as mother," she said. "And I love you. But Polly
always, always must come first. Nell, I'll say 'Our Father,' only not
the part about forgiving, for I can't forgive Aunt Maria."

"My dear child, you are talking in a very silly way. Aunt Maria has done
nothing but her duty, nothing to make you really angry with her. Now,
Fly, it is late, and Polly wants me. Say those dear words, for mother's
sake."

There was no child at Sleepy Hollow who would not have done anything for
mother's sake, so the prayer was whispered with some fresh gasps of pain
and contrition, and before Helen left the room, little Lucy's pretty
dark eyes were closed, and her small, sallow, excitable face was
tranquil.




CHAPTER XVI.

DR. MAYBRIGHT _versus_ SCORPION.


Dr. Maybright returned to his home on Monday evening in tolerably good
spirits. He had gone up to London about a money matter which caused him
some anxiety; his fears were, for the present at least, quite lulled to
rest, and he had taken the opportunity of consulting one of the greatest
oculists of the day with regard to his eyesight. The verdict was more
hopeful than the good Doctor had dared to expect. With care, total
blindness might be altogether avoided; at the worst it would not come
for some time. A certain regimen was recommended, overwork was
forbidden, all great anxiety was to be avoided, and then, and
then--Well, at least the blessed light of day might be enjoyed by the
Doctor for years to come.

"But you must not overwork," said the oculist, "and you must not worry.
You must read very little, and you must avoid chills; for should a cold
attack your eyes now the consequences would be serious."

On the whole this verdict was favorable, and the Doctor returned to
Sleepy Hollow with a considerable weight lifted from his mind. As the
train bore him homeward through the mellow, ripened country with the
autumn colors glorifying the landscape, and a rich sunlight casting a
glow over everything, his heart felt peaceful. Even with the better part
of him gone away for ever, he could look forward with pleasure to the
greeting of his children, and find much consolation in the love of their
young hearts.

"After all, there never were girls quite like Helen and Polly," he said
to himself. "They both in their own way take after their mother. Helen
has got that calm which was always so refreshing and restful in her
mother; and that little scapegrace of a Polly inherits a good deal of
her brilliancy. I wonder how the little puss has managed the
housekeeping. By the way, her week is up to-day, and we return to Nell's
and Mrs. Power's steadier regime. Poor Poll, it was shabby of me to
desert the family during the end of Indigestion week, but doubtless
matters have gone fairly well. Nurse has all her medicine bottles
replenished, so that in case of need she knew what to do. Poor Poll, she
really made an excellent cake for my supper the last evening I was at
home."

The carriage rolled down the avenue, and the Doctor alighted on his own
doorsteps; as he did so he looked round with a pleased and expectant
smile on his face. It was six o'clock, and the evenings were drawing in
quickly; the children might be indoors, but it seemed scarcely probable.
The little Maybrights were not addicted to indoor life, and as a rule
their gay, shrill voices might have been heard echoing all over the old
place long after sunset. Not so this evening; the place was almost too
still; there was no rush of eager steps in the hall, and no clamor of
gay little voices without.

Dr. Maybright felt a slight chill; he could not account for it. The
carriage turned and rolled away, and he quickly entered the house.

"Polly, where are you? Nell, Firefly, Bunny," he shouted.

Still there was no response, unless, indeed, the rustling of a silk
dress in the drawing-room, a somewhat subdued and half-nervous cough,
and the unpleasant yelping of a small dog could have been construed into
one.

"Have my entire family emigrated? And is Sleepy Hollow let to
strangers?" murmured the Doctor.

He turned in the direction of the rustle, the cough, and the bark, and
found himself suddenly in the voluminous embrace of his sister-in-law,
Mrs. Cameron.

"My dear Andrew, I am pleased to see you. You have been in the deep
waters of affliction, and if in my power I would have come to you
sooner. I had rheumatism and a natural antipathy to solitude. Still I
made the effort, although a damper or more lonely spot would be hard to
find. I don't wonder at my poor sister's demise. I got your letter,
Andrew, and it was really in reply to it that I am here. Down, Scorpion;
the dog will be all right in a moment or two, my dear brother, he is
only smelling your trousers."

"He has a very marked way of doing so," responded the Doctor, "as I
distinctly feel his teeth. Allow me, Maria, to put this little animal
outside the window--a dog's bite given even in play is not the most
desirable acquisition. Well, Maria, your visit astonishes me very much.
Welcome to Sleepy Hollow. Did you arrive to-day? How did you find the
children?"

"I came here on Friday evening, Andrew. The children are as well as such
poor neglected lambs could be expected to be."

Dr. Maybright raised his eyebrows very slightly.

"I was not aware they were neglected," he said. "I am sorry they strike
you so. I also have a little natural antipathy to hearing children
compared to sheep. But where are they? I have been away for four days,
and am in the house five minutes, and not the voice of a child do I
hear? Where is Helen--where is my pretty Poll? Don't they know that
their father has arrived?"

"I cannot tell you, Andrew. I have been alone myself for the last two or
three hours, but I ordered your tea to be got ready. May I give you
some? Shall we come to the dining room at once? Your family were quite
well three hours ago, so perhaps you and I may have a quiet meal
together before we trouble about them any further. I think I may claim
this little indulgence, as only properly respectful to your wife's
sister, Andrew."

"Yes, Maria, I will have tea with you," said the Doctor. The pleased,
bright look of anticipation had altogether now left his face; it was
careworn, the brow slightly puckered, and many lines of care and age
showed round the lips.

"I will just go upstairs and wash my hands," said Dr. Maybright. "Then I
will join you in the dining-room."

He ran up the low stairs to his own room; it was not only full of Aunt
Maria's possessions, but was guarded by the faithful Scorpion, who had
flown there in disgust, and now again attacked the Doctor's legs.

"There is a limit," he murmured, "and I reach it when I am bitten by
this toy terrier."

He lifted Scorpion by his neck, and administered one or two short slaps,
which sent the pampered little animal yelping under the bed; then he
proceeded down the passage in search of some other room where he might
take shelter.

Alice met him; her eyes glowed, and the color in her face deepened.

"We are all so glad you are back, sir," she said, with an affectionate
tone in her voice. "And Miss Helen has got the room over the porch
ready, if you'd do with it for a night or two, sir. I've took hot water
there, sir, for I saw the carriage coming up the drive."

"Thank you, Alice; the porch room will do nicely. By the way, can you
tell me where all the children are?"

But Alice had disappeared, almost flown down the passage, and the Doctor
had an uncomfortable half suspicion that he heard her sob as she went.

Dr. Maybright, however, was not a fanciful person--the children, with
the exception of baby, were all probably out. It was certainly rather
contrary to their usual custom to be away when his return was expected,
still, he argued, consistency in children was the last thing to be
expected. He went downstairs, therefore, with an excellent appetite for
whatever meal Mrs. Cameron might have provided for him, and once more in
tolerably good spirits.

There are some people who habitually, and from a strong sense of duty,
live on the shady side of life. Metaphorically speaking, the sunshine
may almost touch the very path on which they are treading, but they
shrink from and avoid it, having a strong preference for the shade, but
considering themselves martyrs while they live in it. Mrs. Cameron was
one of these people. The circumstances of her life had elected plenty of
sunshine for her; she had a devoted and excellent husband, an abundant
income, and admirable health. It is true she had no children, and it is
also true that she had brought herself by careful cultivation to a state
of chronic ill-temper. Every one now accepted the fact that Mrs. Cameron
neither wished to be happy, nor was happy; and when the Doctor sat down
to tea, and found himself facing her, it was with very somber and
disapproving eyes that she regarded him.

"Well, Andrew, I must say you look remarkably well. Dear, dear, there is
no constancy in this world, that is, amongst the male sex."

Here she handed him a cup of tea, and sighed lugubriously. The Doctor
accepted the tea with a slight frown; he was a peaceable man, but as he
said, when chastising Scorpion, "there are limits."

"If you have no objection, Maria," he said, curtly, "we will leave the
subject of my personal appearance and the moral question which you have
brought forward out of our conversation."

Then his voice and manner changed; he put on a company smile, and
continued, without any pause, "How is your husband? Is he as great an
antiquary as ever? And do you both continue to like living in Bath?"

Mrs. Cameron was a strong and determined woman, but she was no match for
the Doctor when he chose to have his own way. For the remainder of the
meal conversation was languid, and decidedly commonplace; once only it
brightened into animation.

"I wonder where Scorpion can be?" said the good lady; "I want to give
him his cream."

"I fear he is under punishment," said the Doctor. "If I judge of him
aright, Scorpion is something of a coward, and is not likely to come
into the same room where I am for some time."

"What do you mean? Surely you have not been cruel to him?"

"Cruel to be kind. Once again he attempted to eat my legs, and I was
obliged to administer one or two sharp slaps--nothing to hurt; you will
find him under your bed. And now I really must go to look for my
family."

Dr. Maybright left the room, and Mrs. Cameron sat still, scarlet with
annoyance and indignation.

"How could Helen have married such a man?" she said to herself. "I never
can get on with him--never. How cowardly it was of him to hurt the
little dog. If it was not for the memory of poor dear Helen I should
leave here by the first train in the morning; but as it is, I will not
stir until I have established Miss Grinsted over this poor, misguided
household. Ah, well! duty is ever hard, but those who know Maria Cameron
are well acquainted with the fact that she never shirked it. Yes, I will
stay; it will be very unpleasant, but I must go through it. What very
abrupt manners the Doctor has! I was just preparing to tell him all
about that wicked Polly when he jumped up and left the room. Now, of
course, he will get a wrong impression of the whole thing, for the other
