against the door. The end of the beam went right through the rotten
woodwork. Dick and Surajah fired their last musket shots with as
deadly effect as before. The next blow dashed the door from its
hinges, and, split and shattered by the former shocks, it fell forward
into the road, while a yell of triumph broke from the Mysoreans.

This died away, however, when they saw the three crossbars blocking
their entrance. Again two pistol shots carried death among them.

"Load your guns, Surajah."

But before Surajah had time to do so, the Mysoreans made a rush at the
door. The defenders stepped forward and fired between the crossbars,
and then, drawing their tulwars, ran the two men in front through the
body. As they dropped, those behind them drew back.

"The last pistols!" Dick shouted, and they fired two shots into the
crowd.

This completed the consternation of the enemy. It seemed to them that
the defenders possessed an unlimited supply of firearms. Already
twelve shots had been fired, and not one had failed to take effect.
With a cry of consternation they fled down the street, leaving the
ground in front of the fatal door strewn with bodies.

The defenders instantly set about the work of recharging their
firearms. They were not interrupted, but presently an irregular fire
opened upon them, from the jungle that had taken the place of the
garden between the opposite houses.

"We may as well lie down at full length," Dick said, setting the
example. "There is no use in running risks. You keep that side, and
listen attentively. It is likely enough that they will work round
behind, next time, and try the windows. By the way they are firing, I
fancy there are not more than five or six of them opposite."

Another half hour passed. Then Surajah exclaimed, "I can hear them on
this side."

Dick got up, and crossed at once.

"I will take the loophole under this window. You go to the one at the
end. I expect they will try both windows at once."

Dick placed the muzzle of his gun in the loophole, and, glancing
along, saw that something dark barred his view. He fired at once.
There was a loud cry and a fall, then a rush to the window, and a
moment later a hole appeared in the thatch. Dick discharged two
pistols through it, and as he did so Surajah fired.

The thatch was speedily pulled down, as the enemy had learned to avoid
the loopholes. A yell of rage rose, as the fallen thatch showed them
that the window was defended with crossbars, in the same way as the
door. Immediately afterwards, Dick had a narrow escape from a shot
fired through a loophole close to him.

"Stoop down," he cried, and, crouching below the level of the
loopholes, made his way to the end of the hut. "Recharge the guns
first, Surajah. They may fire away through the loopholes as long as
they like. It is lucky we made them so high, except the three under
the windows. We must be careful in keeping out of the line of those.

"You sit down where you can command the end window, and the one
behind--I will watch the front window and door. A bold fellow might
put his musket through, and pick one of us off, and that is what we
have to prevent. So keep your gun in readiness, and if you see a head
appear, don't miss it."

The enemy now kept up a constant fire through the loopholes at the end
and back of the house; but as these were shoulder high, and there was
no altering the elevation of the guns, the shots flew harmlessly over
the heads of the defenders. Several times, Dick went to one or other
of the loopholes, pistol in hand, and, standing close beside it,
waited until a shot was fired; and then, thrusting the barrel into the
loophole, fired before another gun could be inserted, the discharge
being generally followed by a sharp cry of pain.

After this had gone on for nearly an hour, the assailants evidently
became discouraged. The shots came from the loopholes less frequently,
and presently ceased altogether.

"I would give a good deal to know what they are up to," Dick said,
after a long pause.

"Shall I look through the loophole?" Surajah asked.

"Certainly not. There will be a man standing at each of them, waiting
in expectation of our taking a look out."

"But there are none in front," Surajah said.

"That is more than we can say. They have not been firing on that side,
but they may have men there now. No, we will leave well alone,
Surajah. The longer they delay, the better for us.

"Keep your eye on the top of the wall, as well as on the window. They
may have made some ladders by this time, and may intend to try a
shot."

"Perhaps they are gone?" Surajah suggested.

"It is quite possible. They must know that our troop comes up here
early, and as they have four miles to walk back to the fort, and
several wounded to carry with them, they certainly won't stay much
longer--if, as you say, they have not gone already."

It was indeed well that Surajah had not attempted to look out at one
of the loopholes; for, at the time he asked the question, a dark
figure was standing at each, looking along the barrel of his gun, in
readiness to fire the moment the light was obscured.

A few minutes later Dick exclaimed:

"How stupid! We can easily test whether there is any one there,
Surajah;" and, taking up a piece of thatch he pushed it suddenly
across one of the loopholes.

No shot followed the action, and he went round the hut, and repeated
the experiment at each of them.

"They have all gone," he said confidently. "Had they been outside,
they would certainly have fired directly the light was obscured."

Standing a short distance back from the end window, he looked out
between the crossbeams.

"Hurrah!" he shouted. "There they go up the road. They are a quarter
of a mile away. They are not more than half as strong as they were
when they came down. They are carrying eight or ten figures on their
shoulders, on litters, or doors."

"I don't see the cavalry," Surajah said, as he joined him.

"No. It is likely enough that they may be in hiding among the huts
opposite, and are waiting, in hopes that we may be foolish enough to
take it for granted that they are all gone, and pull down the bars of
the door. I expect they will stay until they see our troop coming up
the valley."

They continued to look out from the window, from which they had now
removed the bars. Half an hour later, Dick exclaimed:

"There they go, up that side of the valley. I have no doubt they see
our troop, and that in a few minutes we shall hear them coming."

It was not long before they heard a trampling of horses, and a moment
later the Rajah's voice exclaimed:

"Why, what is this? Here are a dozen dead bodies. They are Mysoreans,
by their dress."

"All right, Uncle," Dick shouted, "we will be out as soon as we get
these bars down. We have been standing a siege."

It did not take long to remove the bars. The Rajah and his men had
dismounted, as soon as some of the latter had gone round the hut, and
had brought back the report that there were five more dead on that
side. As Dick and his companion stepped out, the Rajah exclaimed:

"What, are you alone?"

"Yes; there is no one with us, Uncle."

"Do you mean to say that you two have defended this place alone, and
killed sixteen of the enemy, besides some I see lying farther up the
road?"

"Yes, Uncle. You see, it was a pretty strong position, and we had time
to block up the doors and windows, and to make loopholes to fire
through."

"What think you of that, Anwar?" the Rajah exclaimed to the captain of
the troop. "My nephew and Rajbullub's son have shown themselves brave
fighters, have they not?"

"It is wonderful," the captain said; and exclamations of admiration
broke from the men standing round.

"Tell us all about it, Dick," the Rajah went on.

"It is a long story, Uncle; but the real news is that Tippoo, with his
army, has left the head of the western passes, and has gone to
Seringapatam. He is going to march down one of the passes, this side,
at once. Provisions have been collected for his army to consume on the
march. No one knows yet which pass he will come down by; but it will
not be far from here, for they are buying up cattle in the villages at
the top of the ghauts."

"That is important, indeed, Dick, and we must ride off without delay;
but first, I must have a look at this fortress of yours."

He entered the hut, the soldiers crowding in after him, and examined
the defences at the windows, and the loopholes; while Dick explained
how the bars had been arranged to defend the door.

"We began on the other side, Uncle. We had a fight with four men who
came up with us there. Only one of them got away--and he left his gun
behind. It was lucky, for their guns and pistols were of immense use
to us. We could not have held out with only our own weapons.

"About twenty of their cavalry came up a few minutes afterwards. We
beat them off, and then they sent up to the fort for infantry, and
about fifty men came down and attacked us, just at sunrise. They kept
it up to within half an hour ago. Then the infantry marched back,
knowing, of course, that your troop generally got here about seven.

"The horsemen stayed here till within a few minutes of your arrival.
No doubt they thought that we should suppose they had all gone, and
might venture out, and let them get a shot at us."

"Why, it must have been a veritable battle, Dick."

"There was a good deal of noise, Uncle, though not much danger. So
long as we kept below the level of the loopholes and windows, and out
of the line of the door, there was no chance of our being hit."

"They must have made a strong attack on the door," the Rajah said. "I
see that the two lying next to it were both killed by sword thrusts."

"Yes, that was the most critical moment, Uncle. We had emptied nearly
all our barrels, and if they could have broken down the bars, which I
have no doubt they could have done, if they had stuck to it, they
would have made very short work of us."

"Now let us be going," the Rajah said. "You can tell me the whole
story, as we go along."

Two of the sowars were ordered to give up their horses to Dick and
Surajah, and to mount behind comrades. Then they started down the
valley, Dick riding between his uncle and the captain, while Surajah
took his place with the two other officers of the troop. They rode so
rapidly that Dick's story was scarcely concluded by the time they
reached the village where the troops were quartered.

"Well, you have done marvelously well, Dick," his uncle said. "Surajah
deserves the highest praise, too. Now I will write a note to the
British officer with the Nabob, giving the news of Tippoo's movements,
and will send it off by two of the troopers, at once. Where Colonel
Maxwell's force is, I have no idea. It marched to join General
Meadows, on the day we came up here.

"In the meantime you can have a wash, while breakfast is being cooked.
I have no doubt that you are ready for it."

"I am indeed, Uncle. We had nothing, yesterday, but a few cakes made
of flour and water; and have had nothing at all, since."

"All right, lad. I will be ready almost as soon as breakfast is."

After the meal was over, the Rajah lit his hookah, and said:

"You must go through the story again, this evening, Dick. You cut
short some of the details, as you told it to me on the road, and I
want to understand it all thoroughly. You had better turn in now for a
long sleep. You must want it badly enough, lad, after the work of the
two last nights."

Dick slept until his uncle roused him, at six o'clock.

"Dinner will be ready in ten minutes. It is just as well that you
should get up, for two or three hours. After that, you will be good
for another sleep till morning. We shall have to look out sharp now,
and keep a couple of vedettes always at that village; as, for all we
know, this may be the pass by which Tippoo is coming down."

Dick got up rather reluctantly, but he was not long in shaking off his
drowsiness, and after dinner was able to go through the story again,
with full details of his adventures.

"I don't know what I should have done without Surajah, Uncle. He is a
capital fellow, and if ever I go up by myself, into Mysore, to look
for my father, I hope that you will let me take him."

"That I will certainly do, Dick. Ever since I first heard of your
plans, I have quite decided that you ought not to go alone. I daresay
I should have chosen an older man to accompany you, but after what you
and the lad have done together, I don't think you could do better than
take him. Of course, such an affair would demand infinitely greater
caution and care, though not greater courage, than you had occasion to
use on this excursion. It is one thing to enter a village, to ask a
few questions, make a purchase or two, and be off again; but it is a
very different thing to be among people for weeks, or perhaps months,
and to live as one of themselves. However, we may hope that this war
will end in our army marching to Seringapatam, when we shall recover
many of the prisoners in Tippoo's hands.

"I do not say all. We know how many hundreds remained in his power
last time, in spite of his promise to deliver them all up; and maybe
something of the same sort will occur next time. Numbers may be sent
away, by him, to the hill fortresses dotted all over the country; and
we should never be able to obtain news of them. However, we must hope
for the best."

The next morning, the troopers arrived with a letter from the English
resident at Arcot. The Rajah glanced through it, and handed it to
Dick, with the remark:

"You will not get the honour you deserve, Dick."

The letter ran:

"Dear Rajah:

"Your news would be extremely valuable, were it correct; but
unfortunately it is not so, and doubtless the reports brought down by
your nephew were spread by Tippoo, for the purpose of deceiving us.
Or, possibly, he may have intended to have come that way, but
afterwards changed his mind. We have news that, just after Colonel
Maxwell effected his junction with General Meadows, near Caveripatam,
and was about to ascend the ghauts by the Tapour pass, Tippoo came
down by that very route, slipped past them, and is marching on to
Trichinopoly. That being the case, I see no further utility in your
remaining with your troop in the passes, but think it were best that
you should re-assemble them at once, and march here. There is no
chance of Tippoo capturing Trichinopoly before Meadows, who is
following him, can come up and force on a battle; so it is likely that
the Mysore army may continue their march in this direction, in which
case every fighting man will be of use, to defend this place until it
is relieved by the general."

Dick uttered an exclamation of disgust, as he laid the letter down.

"It does not matter about my news turning out wrong," he said, "but it
is very bad that General Meadows should have allowed Tippoo to pass
him, as he may do frightful damage to the country, before he can be
overtaken."

"He never can be overtaken, as long as he chooses to keep ahead. He is
hampered with no baggage train. He lives on the plunder of the country
he passes through; and the British army, with all its baggage and
provision train, has no more chance of overtaking him than it has of
flying."

Messengers were at once sent off, to call in the scattered portions of
the troop. These were assembled in twenty-four hours, and at once
started for Arcot, where they arrived after a two days' march. They
there learned that Tippoo had appeared before Trichinopoly, and after
pillaging and laying waste the sacred island of Seringham, had marched
north.

Day after day, news arrived of the devastation he was committing on
his march. At Thiagur, however, he met with a serious repulse. Great
numbers of the inhabitants from the surrounding country had crowded
into the town with their valuables, and Tippoo, expecting a rich
booty, attacked the town; but although its fortifications were
insignificant, the little garrison was commanded by Captain Flint, the
officer who had so bravely defended Wandiwash in the previous war, and
two assaults were repulsed with serious loss.

At Trinalee, thirty-five miles farther north, he was more successful,
capturing the town, and putting the inhabitants to the sword. Here
Tippoo changed his course, and marched for Pondicherry, capturing
Permacoil by the way.

The news that Tippoo had changed his course, to the southeast, was
received with great joy at Arcot. Although confident that this capital
would be able to resist any sudden attack, the belief had been general
that the whole territory would be laid waste, as it had been by Hyder;
and hopes were now entertained that the British army would arrive in
time to bar Tippoo's further progress.



Chapter 8: The Invasion Of Mysore.


For some time, there was a pause in the hostilities. Tippoo remained
with his army near Pondicherry, carrying on negotiations with the
French governor, and arranging for the despatch of an envoy to France,
with a request that the Republic would furnish him with six thousand
French troops. While he was thus wasting his time, General Meadows was
slowly moving, with the army, towards an encampment formed at Vellout,
some eighteen miles west of Madras.

On the 14th of December, a messenger arrived with the news that Lord
Cornwallis had arrived from Calcutta, two days before, with
considerable reinforcements, and that he was about to assume the
supreme command of the army. The news caused unbounded satisfaction.
By the extreme dilatoriness of his movements, and especially by the
manner in which he had allowed Tippoo to pass him near Caveripatam,
when he might easily have attacked him, while his army was still
struggling through the pass, General Meadows had disgusted his troops.
He had frittered away, without striking a single blow, the finest army
that the British had, up to that time, ever put into the field in
India; and had enabled Tippoo, unmolested, to spread destruction over
a large extent of country.

The only countervailing success that had been gained, by the British,
was a brilliant victory won by Colonel Hartley, who was in command of
a Bombay force, consisting of a European regiment and two battalions
of Sepoys. With these, he engaged Hossein Ali, who had been left by
Tippoo in Malabar, with a force of 9000 men, when the sultan first
retreated before General Meadows' advance. This force was defeated,
with a loss of 1000 men killed and wounded, 900, including Hossein
himself, taken prisoners on the field, and 1500 in the pursuit; the
total British loss being only 52 men. A few days after this victory,
General Abercrombie arrived from Madras with reinforcements, and the
whole of Tippoo's fortified places in Malabar were captured, one after
another, and the entire province conquered.

As soon as Lord Cornwallis reached the camp at Vellout, with a large
train of draught animals that had been brought by sea from Calcutta,
the Rajah and his troops received orders to join him. It was on the
29th of January, 1791, that the commander in chief arrived at Vellout,
and the Rajah arrived there on the 4th of February. As he was the
bearer of a letter from the Resident at Arcot, he was at once enabled
to have an interview with Lord Cornwallis. On finding that he could
speak English, the general received him with much courtesy.

"I am glad, indeed, to have a troop like yours with us, Rajah," he
said. "There are few of my officers who know anything of this part of
the country, and your local knowledge will be invaluable. Moreover, as
I do not speak the language myself, it will be a great advantage to
have someone with me through whom I can communicate freely with the
people of the country. There is no doubt that such communications are
much more effectual, when they come through one of their own princes,
than through English officers. I shall therefore order that, on the
march, a space be allotted for the encampment of your troop by the
side of that occupied by my own escort; and hope that, when not
employed on scouting or other duties, you will ride with my staff.

"Your mother, Rajah, was an English lady, I am told."

"She was, sir. My sister, who married an Englishman, is at present in
Madras with my family, and her son is with me.

"I beg to recommend him to your lordship. He speaks my language
perfectly, and having been brought up in his father's country,
naturally speaks English as well as Hindustani; and will understand,
far better than I can do, any orders that you may give. He has come
out, with his mother, in the hopes of finding his father, who has, if
alive, been a prisoner for several years in the hands of Tippoo.

"He is a fine young fellow. The other day, he made a most dangerous
reconnaissance into Mysore, in order to ascertain Tippoo's movements.
He had with him a young officer of mine, two or three years older than
himself; and when I tell you that the two young fellows held a ruined
hut, for hours, against the attack of some seventy of Tippoo's troops,
and beat them off with a loss of upwards of twenty killed, I need
hardly say that he has no lack of courage."

"You are right, indeed, Rajah. Let the lad ride beside you, with my
staff. Some day he will, perhaps, shorten a long day's march by giving
me details of this adventure of his."

On the 5th of February the army started on its march, and on the 11th
reached Vellore. Tippoo had, for two months, been wasting his time at
Pondicherry; but, upon hearing news that instead of, as he expected,
the English general having marched south from Vellout to meet him, he
had turned westward; and that Mysore, itself, was threatened with
invasion, he hastily broke up his camp, and marched at full speed for
the ghauts; and, reaching the table land, hurried to oppose the
British army, as it endeavoured to ascend the pass going from Vellore
through Amboor, by which he made sure he would come.

Lord Cornwallis encouraged him in the idea, by sending a battalion a
considerable distance up the pass; while he started north and entered
the easy pass of Mooglee, leading west from Chittoor to Moolwagle. He
pushed rapidly up the pass, and gained the summit before Tippoo could
reach the spot and oppose him. It took four days longer for the
battering train, baggage, and provisions to reach the top of the pass.
After a delay of a day or two, to rest the animals, which included
sixty-seven elephants which had been brought from Bengal, the army set
out for Bangalore, the second largest town in Mysore.

The Rajah's troops had been busily employed, from the time the army
moved from Vellout. The men, on their tireless little horses, carried
his messages to the various divisions and brigades, brought up news of
the progress of the train, or rode on ahead with the officers of the
quartermaster's department, whose duty it was to precede the army, to
decide on the camping ground, and to mark off the spots to be occupied
by the various corps. In this way, they saved the regular cavalry from
much fatiguing duty.

Surajah and Dick were generally with the party that went on with the
quartermasters, and, as soon as the camping ground was fixed upon,
aided them in the purchase of forage and food from the natives, as it
was most desirable that the forty days' provisions the army carried
with it should remain intact, until the army had passed up the ghauts.
Beyond that, it was expected that it would be harassed by the Mysore
horse, who would render it impossible for the cavalry to go out to
collect forage, or provisions, from the country through which it
marched.

So well did the Rajah's troop perform its duties, that Lord Cornwallis
ordered it to be taken on the strength of the army, and to receive the
pay and rations of native cavalry in the service. On the day after
leaving Vellore, the general sent an orderly to request the Rajah and
his nephew to ride with him.

"I have not had an opportunity of hearing of your scouting
expedition," he said to Dick, "and shall be glad if you will give me
full details of it."

Dick related the adventure, from the time they had started.

"You were wonderfully lucky, in getting back safely," the general
said, when he had finished. "At least, luck is not the proper word,
