his holding such opinions, and foolishly giving expression to them,
that Lord Grey thought fit to seize his estates I know not; nor,
indeed, do I care. Now, however, that the man has taken up arms, and by
force has dispossessed Lord Grey, the matter touches all of us who are
responsible for the keeping of peace in the Welsh marches.

"Were it only a quarrel between Lord Grey and this man, it would matter
but little; but, from all I hear, he exercises a strange influence over
his countrymen, who deem that he has mysterious powers, and can call up
spirits to aid him. For myself, I have never known an instance where
necromancy or spirits have availed, in any way, against stout arms and
good armour; but such is not, assuredly, the opinion of the unlearned,
either in this country or in Wales. But these mountaineers are
altogether without learning, and are full of superstitions. Even with
us, a man more learned than the commonalty is deemed, by them, to
dabble in the black art; and it may well be that this reputation
Glendower has obtained is altogether due to the fact that he has much
knowledge, whereas the people have none. However that may be, there is
no doubt that the Welsh people are mostly ignorant; and that, at the
call of this Glendower, men from all parts are hastening to join his
banner. Even on this side of the border there are complaints that the
Welsh servants are leaving, not openly and after a due termination of
service, but making off at night, and without a word of warning.

"All this would seem to show that there is trouble on hand, and it
behoves us to be watchful, and to hold ourselves in readiness; lest at
any time they should, as in the days of old, cross the border, and
carry fire and sword through Shropshire and Hereford. The royal castles
in Wales could, doubtless, hold out against all attacks; but the
garrisons would have to remain pent up within their walls, until
succour reached them. Fortunately, most of them are situated near the
sea, and could be relieved without the troops having to march through
places where a heavily armed man can scarce make his way, and where
these active and half-clad Welshmen can harass them, night and day,
without ever giving them a chance of coming to close quarters.

"A messenger from Lord Grey arrived here, yesterday. Indeed, since the
attack on his retainers, we have been in constant communication. At
first he made light of the matter, and said that he should like to have
the Welshman hanging from the battlements of his castle; but, during
the last week, his messages have been less hopeful. Glendower had
disappeared from the neighbourhood altogether, leaving a sort of
proclamation to Lord Grey affixed to the door of his house; saying
that, next time he heard of him, no mercy would be shown, and every man
would be slain. He now says that rumours reach him of large gatherings,
and that there are bonfires, nightly, on the hilltops. He doubts not
that the troubles will soon be suppressed, but admits that much blood
may have to be spilt, ere it is done.

"I can bear testimony to the bonfires, for from the top of the keep a
dozen can be seen, any night, blazing among the hills."

"Of course, sir, your messenger, asking Lord Percy to send a body of
men-at-arms here, was despatched before Glendower's attack on Lord
Grey?"

"Certainly; but it is three months, now, since Parliament refused
Glendower's appeal for justice against Lord Grey; and rumours have been
busy, ever since. Some said that he was travelling through the valleys,
accompanied by some of the harpers, who have always taken a leading
part in stirring up the Welsh to insurrection. Some avow that he has
retired to a fortress, and was there weaving designs for the overthrow
of Lord Grey, and even of the whole of the English castles. Some say
that he claims to be a descendant of Llewellyn, and the rightful king
of Wales.

"There is some foundation for this, for I have talked to some of the
better class of Welsh; who have, like Glendower, studied in our
universities. The Welsh are, above all things, fond of long pedigrees,
and can trace, or pretend to trace, the lineage of all their principal
families up to Noah; and some of them admit that there is some ground
for the claim Glendower is said to have made.

"Still, all these rumours make me feel uneasy. As we have had many
years of quiet here, it has not been necessary to keep up more than a
sufficient number of men-at-arms for the defence of this castle. I
might have increased the force, for the people of these parts bear a
deep animosity against the Welsh, and dread them greatly; as they may
well do, from the many wrongs and outrages they have suffered at their
hands. One reason why I have not taken on many men, since the talk of
coming troubles began, is that, close to the border as we are, many
have connections with the Welsh by business or marriage; and these, if
enrolled in the garrison, might serve as spies, and give warning of any
movement we might undertake. I had hoped that Percy could have spared
me a hundred good men-at-arms. I would rather have had his men than
others, because they have been trained in border warfare, by the
constant troubles in Scotland; and would, moreover, come to me with a
better heart than others, since Sir Henry's wife is my sister, and it
is, therefore, almost a family quarrel upon which they have entered.

"Had I known, when I wrote, that the king was on his way north, I
should have taken steps to raise my strength elsewhere, as of course
Percy would have occasion to use every lance he could muster. Lord Grey
has sent off a messenger to the king, begging him to denounce this
fellow as an outlaw; and should he be troublesome, he himself may,
after he has done with the Scots, send hither a force; for although we
may hope, with the aid of the levies of the border counties, to drive
back the Welsh in whatever force they may come, 'tis another thing to
march into the mountains. The matter has been tried, again and again,
and has always taxed the power of England to the utmost.

"'Tis of no use lamenting over spilt milk but, for my part, I regret
that Parliament did not give a fair hearing to Glendower's complaint
against Lord Grey. The refusal to do so was a high-handed one. It has
driven this man to desperation, and has enlisted the sympathies of all
Welshmen who have English neighbours; for they cannot but say, among
themselves, 'If he is to be plundered and despoiled, and his complaints
refused a hearing, what is to prevent our being similarly despoiled?
'Tis surely better to take up the sword, at once, and begin again the
fight for our independence.'

"As it is, it may cost thousands of lives, immense efforts, and vast
trouble before things are placed on their former footing.

"Doubtless, the captain of the men-at-arms you have brought is a good
soldier, since Percy says that he is captain of his garrison at
Alnwick!"

"He bears a high reputation in Northumberland, Sir Edmund. I may say
that he is my uncle, and 'tis from his recommendation that Lord Percy,
in the first place, took me into his household."

"I will go down and speak with him," the knight said. "I gave orders,
as soon as I heard who had arrived, that proper entertainment should be
given to all; yet it is but right that I should, myself, go down to
thank them for having come so far; and to welcome their captain, whose
experience will be of no small use to my own men, who have never been
engaged in border war. Some have fought in France, but under conditions
so different that their experience will aid them but little; save,
indeed, if the Welsh grow so strong and so bold that they venture to
attack this castle."

Percy's men, when the knight descended, had indeed sat down to supper
with the retainers of the castle, while Alwyn was being entertained by
the captain of his men-at-arms. All rose to their feet when Sir Edmund
entered, but he waved his hand to them, to be seated.

"Finish your meal," he said, "and afterwards, if you will muster in the
courtyard, I will inspect you, and see what stout Northumberland men
Lord Percy has sent me."

He then went up to the top of the keep with Oswald, pointed out the
distant hills, and told him what valleys and villages lay among them,
and the direction in which such roads as there were ran. By the time
they had descended, Percy's men were drawn up in the courtyard.

"This is my uncle, Captain Alwyn Forster," Oswald said, "of whom Lord
Percy has written to you."

"I am glad to see so stout a soldier here," the knight said, holding
out his hand to Alwyn; "and I am grateful to Lord Percy for sending, in
answer to my request, one in whom he has such perfect confidence; and I
specially thank you for having willingly relinquished so important a
post, to head so small a following."

"I was glad to come, Sir Edmund, for I had rested so long, at Alnwick,
that I longed for some brisk action, and fell gladly into my lord's
view, when he requested me to come hither. I can answer for my men, for
they are all picked, by myself, from among the stoutest of Sir Henry's
following."

"That I can well believe," the knight said, as he looked at the twenty
troopers. "Tall, strong men all; and as brave as they are strong, I
doubt not. I shall be glad to have so stout a band to ride behind me,
if these Welshmen break out.

"You are all accustomed to border warfare, but this differs a good deal
from that in Northumberland. While the northern forays are mostly made
by horsemen, it is rare that your Welshman adventures himself on
horseback. But they are as active as your wild ponies, and as swift;
and, if the trouble increases, they will give you plenty to do.

"I learn from your lord's letter that you will be, as usual, under pay
from him while you are with me. I shall pay you as much more. 'Tis meet
that, if you render me service, I should see that you are comfortable,
and well contented."

There was a murmur of satisfaction among the men and, after
recommending them to the care of the captain of the garrison, and
bidding Alwyn speak in the name of his men, fearlessly, for anything
that should be lacking, Sir Edmund left the courtyard.

The seneschal of the castle, Sir John Wyncliffe, requested Oswald to
follow him. He first showed him the chamber, in one of the turrets,
that he was to occupy; and then took him down to the hall, where two
other knights, four esquires, and two or three pages were assembled, in
readiness for the supper.

Mortimer, with his wife and two daughters, presently came down and took
his place at the head of the table; at which the others sat down, in
order of their rank. As a guest, Oswald was placed among the knights.
Before sitting down, Sir Edmund presented him to his wife and
daughters.

"This is one of Sir Henry Percy's esquires," he said, "and can give you
more news of Sir Percy's wife; of whom, beyond saying that she sends
her greetings to you all, Hotspur tells us nothing."

"Have you been long a member of Sir Henry Percy's household?"

"But a year, my lady."

"Hotspur speaks of him in very high terms, and says that he has
rendered him great services, and that he has the highest confidence in
him."

"To what family do you belong, sir?" the dame asked. "From my husband's
sister, who was staying here some months since, I learned much of your
northern families."

"I am the son of John Forster of Yardhope, who has the reputation of
being as hard a fighter as any on the border. He is not a knight,
though of fair estates; for, although Earl Percy offered him
knighthood, for his services at the battle of Otterburn, he said that
he preferred remaining plain John Forster, as his fathers had been
before him. My mother was a daughter of Sir Walter Gillespie, and my
uncle is captain of the garrison of Alnwick; and it was for his
goodwill towards him, and my father, that Sir Henry appointed me one of
his esquires, thinking, moreover, that I might be more useful than
some, because I know every foot of the border, having relations on the
Scottish side of it."

They now sat down to supper. After it was over, Sir Edmund took Oswald
with him to his wife's bower.

"There," he said, "you can talk at your ease, and tell us how my
sister, your mistress, is, and the children."

"Did you not say, Sir Edmund," his wife asked, "that it was the captain
of his men-at-arms that Sir Hotspur sent hither, in command of the
band?"

"That is so, dame."

"Then, surely, he should have been at our table."

"I asked him," Sir Edmund replied, "but he said that he would rather,
with my permission, lodge with John Baldry; who is, like himself, a
stout soldier, but who likes better his own society than that of the
high table. He said that, except upon rare and special occasions, he
always has been accustomed to take his meals alone, or with some
comrades whom he could take to his room. As this is also John Baldry's
habit, he prayed me to allow him to accept his invitation to share his
room."

"What he says about his habits is true, my lady. I can well understand
my uncle cares not for company where it would not be seemly for him to
raise his voice, or to enter into a hot argument, on some point of
arms."

"What were the services of which Sir Henry speaks?"

"It was a mission with which he charged me, and which involved some
danger."

"By the way," Dame Mortimer said, "my sister-in-law wrote to me, some
time since, telling us of a strange conflict that was held between one
of the squires, and another who had been newly appointed; and who, on
one of the mountain ponies, worsted his opponent, although the latter
was much older, and moreover clad in full armour, and riding a heavy
warhorse. Was it you who were the victor on that occasion?"

"I can scarce be said to have been the victor, my lady. It was, indeed,
hardly a combat. But I maintained that one accustomed to the exercises
in use among our border men, and mounted on one of our ponies,
accustomed to move with great rapidity, and to turn and twist at the
slightest movement of the rider's knee, would be a match for a
heavy-armed knight in single combat; although a number would have no
chance, against the charge of a handful of mailed knights; and Sir
Henry put it to the proof, at once."



Chapter 9: The Welsh Rising.


For a time the garrison at the castle had but little to do. Lord Grey
had taken no steps to recover the estates from which his retainers had
been so unceremoniously ejected. He had, indeed, marched a strong force
through them; but the Welsh had entirely withdrawn, and it would be
necessary to keep so large a force unemployed, were he to reoccupy the
land, that he abstained from taking any decisive action, prior to the
return of the messenger whom he had despatched to inform the king of
the forcible measures that Glendower had taken to recover the estate.
It would have been no trifling step to take, to carry his arms into
Wales, and so bring on a fresh struggle after so many years of peace;
and he would not move in the matter, until he had the royal authority.

Henry lost no time in replying. Glendower had been an open supporter of
Richard, and had retired from court rather than own his successor as
king. He had made his complaints against Lord Grey before Parliament,
and his appeal had been rejected by an overwhelming majority. His
attack upon Lord Grey was, therefore, viewed in the light of an insult
to the royal power; and, a fortnight after Oswald and his party arrived
at Sir Edmund's, a messenger arrived with a royal order, to all barons
holding castles on the border, to proclaim Owen Glendower an outlaw,
and to take all measures necessary to capture him.

Sir Edmund shook his head, as he read the proclamation, copies of which
were to be fixed to the castle gate, and in other conspicuous places.

"Lord Grey has stirred up a fire that it will be difficult to
extinguish. It were as wise to kick over a hive of bees, when naked to
the waist, as to set Wales in a ferment again. Had this proclamation
been sent to me, only, I would have taken it upon myself to hold it
over until I had, myself, made a journey north to see the king, and to
submit to him my views on the subject; and to point out how dire might
be the consequences, to the inhabitants of our marches, and how great
would be the effort required, if Glendower should be supported by the
whole of his countrymen, as I believe he will be. However, as it has
been sent to all the keepers of the marches this cannot be done; and I
shall, at once, send orders to the sheriffs of Shropshire, and
Hereford, to warn the militia that they may be called out at any
moment, and must hold themselves in preparedness, having every man his
arms and accoutrements in good condition, and fit for service,
according to the law. I shall also issue orders to my own tenants to be
ready to take up arms, and to drive their herds away, and bring their
wives and families into the castle, as soon as the beacon fire is
lighted on the summit of the keep."

This was said to Oswald, to whom Sir Edmund had taken a strong liking,
and to whom he spoke more freely than he might have done to his own
knights and officers, as being in Earl Percy's service, and having no
personal interest in the matters in debate.

"You yourself have heard the tales that have been brought in to me,
showing how greatly the people have been stirred by the belief in
Glendower's powers of necromancy; how blue flames have been seen to
issue from every window and loophole of his house; how red clouds, of
various strange shapes, hover over it; and mysterious sounds are heard
throughout the night. For myself, I believe not these tales, though I
would not take upon myself to say they are false, since everyone knows
that there are men who have dealings with the powers of darkness.
Still, I should have, myself, to see these things, before I gave
credence to them. That, however, makes no difference in the matter;
true or not, they seem to be believed by the Welsh, and cannot but
increase his power.

"Well, we shall soon hear what reply he makes to the proclamation, of
which he will certainly hear, within a few hours of its posting."

The answer, indeed, was not long in coming; for, within a week, a copy
of the reply sent by Glendower to the king appeared, side by side with
every proclamation put up, none knowing who were daring enough to affix
them. In this, Glendower no longer spoke of his grievance against Lord
Grey; but declared that, with the will of the people, he had assumed
the sovereignty of Wales, to which he was legally entitled, by his
descent from her kings. He called upon every Welshman in England to
resort, at once, to his standard.

"The die is cast, now," Sir Edmund said, as he read the paper affixed
to the castle gate. "It is no longer a question whether Glendower is
wrongfully treated by Lord Grey; it is a matter touching the safety of
the realm, and the honour of our lord the king. There is, I have now
learned, some foundation for Owen's claim to be the representative of
the kings of Wales, through his mother, Elinor. She was the eldest
daughter of Elinor the Red, who was daughter and heiress of Catharine,
one of the daughters of Llewellyn, the last Prince of Wales. For aught
I know, there may be others who have a better claim than he; but at
least he has royal blood in his veins.

"At present, that matters little. He has usurped the title of King of
Wales, and is evidently a most ambitious and dangerous fellow; and none
can doubt that this scheme has not just sprung from his brain, but has
long been prepared, and that his quarrel with Lord Grey has but
hastened the outbreak.

"I shall myself ride to Ruthyn, and consult with Lord Grey as to the
measures to be taken. It may be that our forces may be sufficient to
crush the movement, ere it gains strength; though I greatly doubt it.
Still, it would be well that we should act in concert.

"Sir John Burgon and Sir Philip Haverstone, do you take half a dozen
men-at-arms, and ride through the country, bidding all the tenants
assemble here, next Saturday, in their arms and harness, that I myself
may inspect them. You may tell them that a third of their number must
be in readiness tonight, and must ride hither by morning. The others
must, on an alarm being given, gather in strong houses, selected by
themselves as the most defensible in their district, with their wives
and families, so as to repel any attack the Welsh may make; leaving
behind them the boys and old men, to drive out their flocks and herds,
either towards the nearest castle, or to Hereford or Shrewsbury, as may
be nearest to them."

When the knights had left, messengers were sent out to all the owners
of castles in Radnor, Hereford, and Shropshire; bidding them assemble,
in four days' time, at Ludlow. On the day of the meeting, nearly three
hundred tenants and vassals presented themselves. To them Sir Edmund,
having first inspected them and their arms, explained the situation.
Then, each man was asked how many he could bring into the field, in
accordance with the terms of his holding, and it was found the total
amounted to nigh eight hundred men.

"I know not when the affair is likely to begin; and will, therefore,
call only for a quarter of your force. Send your sons and unmarried
men. At the end of a month they can return to you and, if needs be, you
can send as many more in their places. It may be that I shall not
require these; but, possibly, every man may have to come out; but you
must bear in mind it is not for the defence of this town and castle
that men are required, for the garrison and burghers can hold out
against any attack, but to save your homesteads from destruction."

The news had created a deep sensation. Although none of those present
had experienced the horrors of border warfare, there was not one but
had heard, from their fathers, tales of burning, massacre, and
wholesale destruction by the Welsh forays. But so long a time had
passed, since the last serious insurrection, that the news that Wales
might shortly be in arms, again, came as a terrible blow to them. All
agreed to send in their proportion of men, at once, and to see that the
rest were all ready to assemble, immediately the summons came.

The next day some forty knights, owners of the castles thickly
scattered through the border counties, assembled in Ludlow Castle.
There was a long consultation. Arrangements were made for the despatch
of messengers, by those nearest to the frontier, with news of any Welsh
raid. Points were fixed upon where each should assemble, with what
force he could gather; thence to march to any threatened place, or to
assemble at Ludlow Castle, Mortimer being the warden of the marches
along that line of the border.

On the following day Sir Edmund rode, with two of his knights, to hold
council with Lord Grey, at Ruthyn. The distance was considerable, and
he was absent six days from his castle. Before he returned, an event
happened that showed Glendower was in earnest, and intended to maintain
his pretensions by the sword.

At daybreak, on the third day after Mortimer had left, a messenger
arrived at the castle; with news that a large body of Welsh had, the
evening before, entered Radnor by the road across the hills from
Llanidloes, and were marching towards Knighton, burning the villages as
they went, and slaying all who fell into their hands.

The horn was at once sounded, and Sir John Wyncliffe and the other
knights hastily assembled in the courtyard. Here, after a short
consultation, it was determined that a mounted party should be, at
once, despatched to endeavour to harass the advance of the Welsh; the
troop consisting of Alwyn's men-at-arms, twenty men of the garrison,
and fifty mounted men who formed part of the new levy. Four hundred
footmen were to follow, at once.

Sir John Wyncliffe at first thought of taking the command himself, but
it was pointed out to him that his presence would be required, in
Ludlow, to marshal the forces that would speedily arrive from all the
country round. Sir John Burgon, therefore, a valiant knight, who had
greatly distinguished himself against the French, was unanimously
chosen by his companions as leader of the whole party; while with him
rode Sir Philip Haverstone, and Sir William Bastow.

"This reminds one of one's doings at home, Oswald," his uncle said, as
he formed up his little troop. "I trust the Welsh will not retreat,
until we have had a taste of their quality; but I doubt much if they
will prove as formidable foes as the Scotch borderers."

For a considerable portion of the distance, the roads led through
forests, which at that time covered the greater part of the country.
Oswald, at the invitation of the knights, rode with them at the head of
the cavalcade. The way was beguiled by anecdotes, that had been passed
down from mouth to mouth, of the last Welsh war.

They reached Knighton by nine o'clock. The enemy had not, as yet, come
within sight of the town; but, throughout the night, the sky to the
west had been red with the flames of the burning villages and
homesteads.

The male inhabitants were all under arms. Many had already sent their
