and bid me buy----"

"And you wouldn't buy, more than half the time," she laughed. "You
always were somewhat contrary, Harry. Is that what made you turn
Yankee?"

"I hardly think so. I want to see all the slaves set free."

"Is that all?"

"Isn't that enough?"

"Most Yankees want to see the South broken up and ruined."

"No! no! That is a mistake."

The summerhouse was soon gained, and she sat down, and without ceremony
he took a seat on the bench at her side.

"This takes me back ten or fifteen years," he declared, as he looked
around at the familiar surroundings. "There are the same old magnolias,
with the swing, and the same old rose bush, or new ones just like the
old. Marion, you ought to be happy here."

"I was--until the war broke out, and poor papa was killed."

"Yes, that was a shock, and I felt it too, when the news reached me. He
was a noble man, Marion."

"So they all say, Harry, but that does not give him back to us. And now
another danger threatens us."

"Another danger? You mean the presence of our troops here? Marion, no
harm shall come to you, if I can prevent it."

"But I do not mean that. It is concerning Jack."

"What of your brother?"

"Oh, Harry, he is just like a brother to me, and mamma thinks of him as
her son! Now a stranger has appeared on the scene, and he wants to take
Jack away from us."

"A stranger. Who?"

"A Confederate surgeon named Dr. Mackey. He claims that he is Jack's
father."

"But is he?"

"We do not believe that he is. But he says he can prove it."

"This is news certainly, Marion. Will you give me the particulars?"

"I will," and she did so, to which Harry Powell listened with keen
interest.

"Humph! And Jack does not like the man?"

"No, he despises him."

"That will make it awkward, if this doctor's story is true."

"He will have to bring strong proofs to make me believe the story, I can
tell you that."

"I do not blame you, Marion." The young surgeon mused for a moment. "It
runs in my mind that I have heard of this Dr. Mackey before."

"Where?"

"I cannot remember now. But I believe it was while I was practicing in
Philadelphia."

"Was he a doctor there?"

"It runs in my mind that he was connected with some bogus medical
institute which defrauded people through the mails. But I am not
certain."

"If there is truth in this, I wish you would look the matter up, Harry.
Mamma will want to know all she can of Dr. Mackey before she gives up
Jack to him."

"I will do my best for you, Marion. I love Jack, too--although he was
very young when I went away, if you will remember."

"You have been away a long time, Harry," she replied, and drew a long
breath.

"That is true, and I realize it now, although I did not before." He
gazed steadily into her face and suddenly caught her hand. "Dear cousin,
cannot you forgive me for going over to the enemy?" he pleaded.

She flushed up. "I ought not to, Harry, but--but----"

"You will, nevertheless?"

"I--I will think of it," she faltered.

"We were very intimate when I went away. I would not wish that intimacy
broken off."

"Were we intimate?" she murmured shyly.

"Yes, indeed. Don't you remember it? You used to sit in my lap."

"How shocking!" she cried. "Are you sure?"

"As if I could forget it."

"You seem to have an awfully good memory for some things," she said
slowly.

"I remember something more, Marion. We were like brother and sister in
those days, and you used to put your arms around my neck and kiss me."

"I don't believe I ever did anything so dreadful, Harry!"

"I remember it perfectly well."

"Don't you think we had better go into the house now?"

"Don't get angry, Marion. But--but--I always did think a lot of you, and
always shall--even if I have turned Yankee."

"Yankee or not, Harry, you will always be very dear to me as my cousin,"
she returned hastily.

"Speaking of cousins, does St. John come here often?"

"Yes, quite often."

"I suppose he comes to see you?"

"He comes to see mamma and me. He and Jack are not very good friends."

"What, doesn't Jack like him?"

"He considers St. John overbearing, and St. John thinks Jack an
intruder, and possibly of low parentage."

"Is St. John married yet?"

"No."

"And he comes here quite often, you say?"

"Yes."

"Perhaps he is going--that is, he would like to marry you, Marion,"
blurted out Harry Powell.

At this the girl flushed crimson.

"Well--he has spoken something of it," she replied, in a low voice.

"The dickens he has!"

"Cousin Harry!"

"I beg your pardon, Marion, but--but--this is not pleasant news."

"You mustn't get rough, Harry. St. John says there are no true gentlemen
among the Yankees. But I think differently--now I have met Colonel
Stanton."

"Oh, confound St. John! There are truer gentlemen among my fellow
officers than he will ever be." Harry Powell took a turn around the
summerhouse. "But I forgot. I ought not to have spoken so of your future
husband."

"Who said he was my intended husband?"

"Why, you intimated as much."

"I am sure I did not."

"It is the same thing. You said he had spoken of marriage to you."

"That is a very different matter."

Harry Powell took another turn around the summerhouse. "I suppose you
love him, though I don't understand how any girl could love such an
insufferable bore."

"Harry, aren't you prejudiced against St. John?"

"Perhaps I am. But seriously, Marion, what can you find to admire in St.
John?"

"He is a Ruthven."

"That is true."

"If I married him I would still remain a Ruthven."

"Then why not remain an old maid and likewise a Ruthven? It would be far
better, take my word on it."

"Then you don't advise me to marry?"

"I don't advise you to marry St. John."

"Oh!"

"Are you engaged to him?" he asked, coming closer.

"I am not."

"I am glad to hear it."

"Are you married, Cousin Harry?" she asked suddenly.

"Me? No, Marion--not yet."

"I suppose you'll marry some Yankee girl one of these days."

"I don't think so, unless----"

"Unless what?"

"Unless the girl I always did love goes back on me, Marion. Do you think
she will go back on me?" and he caught both of her hands in his own.

"Harry, you are a--a--Yankee."

"But that doesn't affect my feelings for you."

"A true Yankee ought not to care for a Southern girl."

"And why not?"

"Well, I don't know exactly. But it doesn't seem right."

"Do you mean to say that a Southern girl ought not to care for the man
who is fighting as his conscience dictates?" he demanded, turning a
trifle pale.

"No, no, Harry! I honor you for sticking to your principles. But we had
better say no more at present on this subject." She glanced down the
garden path. "See, St. John is coming. Let go my hands."

He dropped her hands and took a seat on the other side of the
summerhouse, and a moment later St. John Ruthven presented himself at
the doorway.




CHAPTER XVIII.

MEETING OF THE COUSINS.


St. John had come up the garden path quickly, and had failed to notice
Harry Powell, although he had caught sight of a well-known dress which
Marion wore.

Now, when he saw the young surgeon, his face fell, for he had calculated
upon seeing Marion alone.

"Excuse me, Marion," he said, "I did not know you had company."

"Come in, St. John," replied the girl. "Do you not recognize my visitor?
It is Dr. Harry Powell."

"Oh!" St. John was much surprised, and showed it. "How do you do?" he
continued stiffly.

"Shake hands. You are cousins," went on Marion, not liking the dark look
which had come to St. John's face.

"Excuse me, but I cannot shake hands with one who wears that uniform,"
returned the spendthrift, drawing back. "I am surprised, Marion, to see
you upon such intimate terms with your country's foe."

Marion's face flushed, and she bit her lip. Harry Powell set his teeth
and then smiled coldly.

"I perceive you wear no uniform at all, St. John," he remarked
pointedly.

"No. My duty to my mother keeps me at home," stammered St. John.

"If all who have mothers were to remain at home we would have few
soldiers."

"It is a very great trial to me to have to remain at home," went on the
hypocrite smoothly. "Yet, to my notion, a man is far better off at home
than to be wearing a Yankee uniform."

"That is for each man to decide for himself."

St. John turned to Marion.

"Does your mother know that Dr. Powell is here?"

"Yes; she has invited him to dine with us."

"To dine with you!" exclaimed the spendthrift.

"Yes, what is wrong about that?" questioned Harry Powell.

"I thought she was a true and loyal Southern woman."

"I do not follow you," answered Harry Powell hotly. "The ties of blood
count for something, even in war times."

"They do not count for as much as that--to me," said St. John sourly.

"Then I presume you will not care to stop and dine with us, St. John,"
put in Marion.

"Thank you, no. I will remain another time--when it is more agreeable,
Marion."

So speaking, St. John bowed low to the girl, nodded slightly to the
young surgeon, and hurried from the place.

Marion looked at Harry Powell with a face that was crimson.

"Forget the insult, Harry!" she cried.

"It is not your fault, Marion. But what a cad St. John is! I never liked
him much. I can easily understand how Jack cannot get along with him."

"I wish he would join the army. It might make a man of him."

"I believe he is too cowardly to don a uniform. But come, let us go into
the house, or your mother will wonder what is keeping us."

When they entered the homestead they found Colonel Stanton taking his
leave. The colonel was perfectly willing to allow the young surgeon to
remain.

"Have a good time, Powell," he said. "And try to convince your worthy
relatives that all Yankees are not the monsters they are painted."

"He's a downright good fellow!" cried Jack, when the Federal officer had
departed. "I don't wonder that you like him, Harry."

"He is a very nice man," said Marion, and to this Mrs. Ruthven nodded
affirmatively.

Dinner was almost ready to be served, and while they were waiting Marion
noticed that the young surgeon was studying Jack's face closely.

"What makes you look at Jack so?" she questioned, in a low voice, so
that our hero might not hear.

"I was studying his face," was the slow reply.

"Studying his face?"

"Yes. Marion, did you notice how Colonel Stanton looks?"

"I did, although not very closely."

"It seems to me that Jack bears a wonderful resemblance to the colonel."

"Now you speak of it, I must say you are right," answered Marion
thoughtfully. And then, after another pause, she continued: "Is the
colonel a married man?"

"I hardly think so. I have never heard him speak of a wife or children."

"Then it is likely that he is a bachelor." And there, for the time
being, the subject was dropped.

Despite the fact that the house was surrounded by Federal troops and
that a portion of the homestead was being used as a hospital, the dinner
passed off in a far from unpleasant manner. Mrs. Ruthven was glad to
meet her nephew once more, and made him tell the story of his service in
detail. Not only the lady of the house, but also Marion and Jack, hung
upon the young surgeon's words, and Jack's eyes glistened when he heard
about the hard fighting which had been witnessed.

"Oh, how I wish I had been there! I would have helped to beat the Yankee
troops back!" he cried.

"You're a born soldier, Jack!" answered Harry Powell. "And I must say I
like you the better for it. I can't stand such stay-at-homes as St.
John."

"Oh, St. John is a regular--a regular----"

"Hush, Jack!" interrupted Mrs. Ruthven reprovingly. "He says his mother
needs him at home."

"And our country needs him at the front," said Marion.

"We don't need cowards," finished Jack. "Harry, you don't have cowards
in your ranks, do you?"

"I am afraid all armies have more or less cowards in the ranks," laughed
the young surgeon. "Some fellows would never make soldiers if they
remained in the service a hundred years. Human nature is human nature
the world over, you know."

"I wonder if Dr. Mackey is a brave man," muttered Jack, but nobody paid
attention to this question.

The repast over, Harry Powell took his leave, but promised to come
again, if possible, before leaving the vicinity. Marion saw him go with
genuine regret, and blushed painfully when, on watching him hurry down
the road, he suddenly turned and waved his hand toward her.

"Dear, good cousin Harry," she murmured. "How different from St. John!"

Two days passed and nothing of importance occurred to disturb the
Ruthven homestead. On the second day St. John called to see Marion, but
she excused herself by saying she had a headache, which was true,
although the ache was not as severe as it might have been.
