
It was market-day, which gave but a slight agreeable stir to the drowsy
town. The ruddy faces and burly figures of farmers, whose imposing bulk
somehow did not decrease in keeping with the attenuated profits of
long-continued agricultural depression, were prominent on the pavement.
Little market carts, which closely shawled and bonneted elderly women,
laden with their market baskets, still found themselves disengaged
enough to drive, rattled over the cobble stones. An occasional farm
labourer in a well-nigh exploded smock frock, who had come in with a
bullock or two, or a small flock of sheep, to the slaughter-house,
trudging home with a straw between his teeth, and his faithful collie at
his heels, made a variety in the town population.

The latter consisted, at this hour, of shop boys and girls, boys from
the grammar school, a file of boarders from Miss Burridge's, who walked
as if "eyes right" and "eyes left" were the only motion permitted to
them, notwithstanding May's frantic signs to them to behold and admire
Tray's gambols; a professional man, or a tradesman, leisurely doing a
business errand; one or two ladies carrying the latest fashion in
card-cases, suggestive of afternoon calls.

Tray's devious path took him in the direction of "Robinson's," in the
windows of which the golden brown of sable furs, the silver gray of rare
foxes', and the commoner dim blue of long-haired goats', were beginning
to enrich the usual display of silk and woollen goods.

Following his own sweet will, Tray, considerably in advance of his
companions, darted into the shop.

"Oh, what shall we do, May?" cried Dora in dismay; "you ought really to
put that dog in a leash when he _will_ go into the town."

"Better say a chain at once," answered May indignantly, vexed by the
imputation on her pet. "I am sure he has been as good as gold to-day. He
has not chased a single thing, and he has only once run away from us.
Couldn't I go in and fetch him out? I should not stay above a minute."

"And I am to wait at the door while you hunt him round all the counters
and through the showrooms? I had much rather go in with you; but neither
do I care to enter the shop when I do not wish to buy anything. Really
Tray is too troublesome!"

"Oh! don't say that," exclaimed May in distress. "Don't reflect on him
in case anything should happen to him," as if Dora's speech were likely
to bring down the vengeance of Heaven on the heads of all three. "He
soon finds out all he wants when he goes on private expeditions, and
then he runs back and looks for us. I think if we walked _very_ slowly
his dear bright face, with one ear cocked up, would appear in the
doorway by the time we reached it."

"Or some shop-lad may ask him what his business is, and turn him out. It
will be a lesson for him in future," said Dora, severely.

Accordingly the sisters had to slacken their steps to a snail's pace as
they approached the great shop. They had a full view of the interior,
though it was a little dark, unless to the most modern taste. There was
an air of old-fashioned substantiality, comfort, and something like
modest dignity about the long-lasting, glossy brown roof and walls, in
harmony with the heavy counters and shelves, not too heavy for the bales
of every description, which with the contents of the innumerable boxes
had an established reputation of being "all of the best quality," not
figuratively but literally. The famous oak staircase, with the broad
shallow steps and the twisted balustrade, which would not have disgraced
a manor house, ran up right in the centre and terminated in a
gallery--like a musician's gallery--hung with Turkey carpets, Moorish
rugs, and "muslin from the Indies," and from the gallery various work
and show rooms opened. It was evident that "Robinson's" was considerably
older than the lifetime of the first Robinson--the silk-weaver and
wool-stapler who had used it as a mart for his wares. Though it was only
the product of a country town, it bore a resemblance to old London city
places of business. These were wont to have a Dutch atmosphere of
industry and sobriety, together with a fair share of the learning and
refinement of the times hanging about them, so that their masters
figured as honoured and influential citizens of the metropolis.
Belonging to the category were the linen shop of a certain Alexander
Pope's father, and the law-stationer's shop, from which issued, in his
day, a beautiful youth known as "Master John Milton."

There was the customary bustle of a market day at "Robinson's." Miss
Franklin was moving about in the women's department, seeing that
everybody there was served, and giving an occasional direction to the
women who served. She was, as Dora Millar had once described her, as
"fat as a pin-cushion," with what had been originally a fair
pink-and-white complexion, degenerated into the mottled "red all over,"
into which such complexions occasionally pass in middle life. But she
looked like a lady by many small traits--by her quiet, easy movements;
by the clear enunciation and pleasant tones, which could be ringing when
necessary, of a cultivated voice that reached the ears of the
bystanders. She did not wear the conventional black silk or cashmere of
a shop-woman. There might be a lingering protest or a lurking vanity in
the myrtle-green gown and the little lace cap, with its tiny _noeuds_
of dark green riband, which she wore instead. One might guess by their
dainty decorum and becomingness that Miss Franklin had thought a good
deal, and to purpose, about dress, in her day--had made a study of it,
and taken pleasure in its finer effects. In that light she was the right
woman in the right place--presiding over the shop-women in a
linen-draper's shop. At the same time she belonged as clearly to the
upper middle class as did the two girls advancing towards the shop, who,
in place of being studiously well and handsomely dressed, were just a
little shabby, and careless how they looked in their last year's gray
velveteens, with hats to match, which Dora in her conscientious economy
had re-trimmed not very nicely.

Lag as the girls might, they could not delay their progress much longer,
and their bosoms were torn with conflicting emotions. What were they to
do? Leave the truant Tray to his fate? Boldly halt before the next shop
window, and trust to his seeing and joining them there? Still more
boldly, enter and request "the body of the culprit" to be delivered up
to his owner? Before they could come to a decision, Tom Robinson himself
appeared in the foreground. He was speaking, or rather listening to a
giant of a farmer in a light overcoat and streaming cravat, who, in
place of treating the master of "Robinson's" as "a whipper-snapper of a
counter-jumper," was behaving to him with the most unsophisticated
deference. Yet Tom's under size and pale complexion looked more
insignificant than ever beside the mighty thews and sinews and perennial
bloom of his customer. In spite of that, Tom Robinson was as undeniably
a gentleman in the surroundings, as Miss Franklin was a lady, and the
big honest farmer recognized and accepted the fact. While the pair stood
there, and the farmer made an elaborate explanation of the matter in
hand--broadcloth or blankets probably--to which Tom attended
courteously, as courteously as he would have heard the deliverances of
the member of the county or the bishop, Tray flashed out of the mellow
obscurity of the background and sniffed vigorously at the trowser ankles
of the master of "Robinson's."

"Hallo!" cried Tom, looking down at his feet.

"A bit fine terrier-dawg, Mister Robinson, sir," remarked the farmer;
"but I'm thinking he's strayed."

At the same instant both Tray and Tom caught sight of May's anxious face
peering in at the shop door. Tray rushed to his mistress with a
boisterously gracious greeting, which did not include the slightest
self-consciousness or sense of wrongdoing in its affability. Tom took a
couple of steps after him.

"I'm afraid, Miss May, you're spoiling that dog," he said, in friendly
remonstrance, before he observed who was with May, and stopped and bowed
with some constraint.

"Oh! Mr. Robinson," replied May, in her volubility effacing any shy
attempt at greeting on Dora's part, "I am so sorry for Tray's rudeness
in going into your shop without being invited; but I do think he knew
you again, I am almost sure of it," she said eagerly, as if the
assurance were sufficient propitiation for any trifling lack of ceremony
where a reasonable human being was concerned.

"It might have been better if I had known a little more of him," said
Tom musingly, biting his moustache, as he took leave of the three.

Tray meandered down the street, followed hurriedly by his mistress and
Dora. Tom looked after them, and speculated into how many more scrapes
the brute would get the girls, wondered too if one of them would think
she had him to thank for the infliction, and that it was an odd instance
of the friendship which he had pressed her to give him in lieu of a
warmer feeling. That friendship was not progressing very rapidly, though
the world might consider the Millars more in need of friends than when
he had begged to make one of the number. But Tom Robinson knew better.
These girls were enough for themselves in any emergency. They would
never fall back on friends or depend upon them. Even Dora, who had
stayed at home with May, would suffer in silence and bear anything with
and for her family, before she would complain or ask help.

Tray's errant fancy finally took him down a lane leading to the Dewes
and to a sheltered walk between rows of yellowing elms by the side of
the river. The girls were at last able to enjoy themselves. They
sauntered along, talking at their ease, watching the bars of sunlight on
the water, and the crowds of flies in the golden mist which the approach
of sunset was drawing down over everything, and listening to a robin
singing on a bough, when their misadventures for one day culminated and
their worst apprehensions were fulfilled. A mongrel collie advancing in
the opposite direction, with no better qualified guardian than a young
servant girl, who had also a perambulator containing a couple of small
children to look after, aroused the warlike spirit of Tray. He growled
defiance and bristled in every hair, while Dora caught nervously at his
elegant morocco collar, which burst asunder in her grasp, and May
shrieked agitated soothing endearments to no purpose. What unmagnanimous
cur could resist such a challenge? In another instant the inequal combat
was raging furiously. The two dogs first stood on their hind legs,
grappled together, and glared at each other for a second, like two
pugilists trying a preliminary fall, or a couple of duellists pointing
their pistols. The next moment the dogs were rolling over and over each
other on the narrow path, worrying each other with the horrible
snarling noise that accompanies such a performance.

May danced a frantic dance round the combatants, screamed shrilly, and
made dangerous, ineffectual darts at Tray. The servant girl neither
danced, nor screamed, nor made darts; she stood stolidly still, with
something between a gape and a grin on her broad red face. She had not
the passion for dog-fights entertained by the _gamins_ of the streets,
such fights were simply immaterial trifles to her amidst the weightier
concerns of her life; and she had seen her master's dog get too many
kicks in the ribs--a discipline from which he rose up howling but not
greatly injured--to be troubled with any sensitive fears as to his
safety. Besides his enemy was a small beast, a lady's dog, whom Growler
could dispose of in a twinkling, if his temper were up.

"Oh! can you not call off your dog?" wailed May in her agony. "He will
kill Tray. Oh! my Tray, my Tray," and she made another rush to rescue
her pet.

"Don't, May, you'll be bitten," implored Dora.

"He don't mind me, miss, not one bit, our Growler don't," said the
composed damsel, as if Growler's indifference were rather a feather in
his cap.

Alas! for any attention that the victim paid to May's desperate
remonstrances. She had in fact no right to reproach the enemy's
temporary proprietress for her lack of authority over her four-footed
companion. But poor May in her misery was neither logical nor just. She
turned on the other with a passionate challenge, "What business have you
to bring out a horrid brute like that, which you cannot master, to kill
other people's dear little pets?"

"Hush, hush, May," besought Dora, "I think they are leaving off." There
was a slight cessation in the hostilities. "The noise you are making may
set them on again."

"It were your dog as begun it." Growler's sponsor defended both herself
and Growler defiantly.

"Oh!" screamed May, "they're at it again. Tray is down and the cruel
monster is at his throat. Will nobody help us? Will nobody save my poor
little dog?"

The girls were carrying neither sunshades nor umbrellas. They could not
reach the lower boughs of the trees to pull down a switch, but just as
May was springing forward to dare the worst herself, sooner than see
Tray perish unaided before her eyes, Dora caught sight of a large
half-loose stone in the path. "Stand back, May," she gasped, as she tore
it up. Dora's face was as white as paper; she was sick with fright and
distress; she would fain have shut her eyes if she had not known that
she needed every advantage which sight could give her to prevent her
hitting Tray, instead of his foe, as the two rolled over each other in
the struggle which was growing deadlier every second.

"Stop," cried a voice of command behind her, "you'll have the dog turn
upon you as soon as he has finished his present job," and a welcome
deliverer ran forward just in time. He seized the first tail he could
grasp--luckily for him it was Tray's and not Growler's--and hung on to
it like a vice. The "redder" of the combatants, regardless of "the
redder's lick," which was likely to be his portion, continued to hold
the tail of the now yelling Tray, and at the same time seized him by the
scruff of the neck with the other hand, and dragged both animals, still
locked together, with his whole force nearer and nearer to the edge of
the bank by the river.

A new terror beset May. "Take care, you'll have them in the water."

No sooner said than done. With a plunge the two dogs fell heavily into
the Dewes, while the man who had brought them to this pass kept his own
footing with difficulty.

"They'll both be drowned," cried May, clasping her hands in the last
depths of anguish.

"Not at all," said Tom Robinson, panting a little from his exertions
and wiping his hands with his handkerchief. "I did it on purpose--don't
you see? It was the only way to make the beggars lose their grip. Look
there, they are swimming like brothers down the stream--that small
spitfire of yours is not badly hurt. I told you that you were spoiling
him--you ought to make him obey and come to heel, or he will become the
torment of your life. The bank shelves a little a few yards further
down; you will find that he will come to shore shaking himself nothing
the worse. It may be a lesson to him; if not, I should like to give him
a bit of my mind."

True enough, Tray scrambled up the bank presently, bearing no more
alarming traces of the fray than were to be found in his limping on
three legs, and halting every other minute that he might ruefully attend
to the fourth.

Growler also landed, and after glancing askance at his antagonist and at
the champion who had suddenly interposed between Tray and his deserts,
wisely agreed with the small maid-servant on the judiciousness of
immediately taking themselves off, in company with the perambulator and
the babies, to avoid any chance of awkward inquiries.

May ran to Tray, clasped him all dripping in her arms, and prepared to
carry him tenderly home. But in spite of the injuries, for which he was
exceedingly sorry, he asserted his spirit of independence, and declined
to be made a baby of.

"I am afraid we have given you a great deal of trouble, Mr. Tom," said
Dora, while May was still devoting herself to her rescued treasure. Dora
spoke shyly, and inadvertently used the old familiar name, which he had
borne when his father was alive.

"Don't mention it," he said gravely, as shy as she was; "I feel
answerable for inflicting that wretched dog on you--that is, on your
sister. I was sure he would lead you a pretty dance after he was in the
shop this afternoon."

"Oh! Mr. Robinson," cried May, tearing herself away from the
contemplation of her darling in order to pour forth her sense of relief
and the depth of her gratitude, "what a good thing it was you came up to
us! What should we have done without you? Oh! you don't think dear
little Tray is lamed for life--do you? Of course that is ever so much
better than having him killed outright in our sight; still if he would
only let me pick him up and rest his poor hurt leg it might help him,"
protested May wistfully.

"Let him alone, he is all right," he said in his short stiff way. Then
he made a bantering amendment on his speech, because he was quick to see
that his want of sympathy vexed the young girl, perhaps rendered her
burden of gratitude more difficult to bear.

"At the worst, you know he would be as well off as Horatius Cocles, and
he is likely to escape the beating which he richly deserves."

"Oh! Mr. Robinson, beat him! when he meant no harm, when he has been all
but drowned or worried to death by that great, coarse, rough creature,"
cried May, opening large brown eyes of astonishment and indignation.

"I wonder what _he_ would call Tray if he could speak--an insolent
