
"And why will they be so indifferent, Monsieur Jean?" asked the
Countess curiously.

"They will be dead, mademoiselle, and their Emperor, too, unless God
preserve his life for some future use."

"Happy," said the young girl, "is the man who can inspire such
devotion, monsieur.  Although I have been trained differently I think
that----"

What the Countess thought was never said for at that instant the door
at the farther end of the great room was thrown open suddenly with a
violent crash, and into the apartment came crowding the score of
villains and scoundrels who had been imprisoned below stairs.  They had
managed to break out in some way and had returned to the great hall to
seize again their captives and to wreak their vengeance upon their
betrayer.  They had got at the wine and were inflamed with drink as
well as revenge and savage passion.  They had realized, of course, that
some enemies were outside but they had not clearly grasped the
situation.  All they thought of at the time were the people in the
great hall.  They came crowding through the big doorway, several of
them handling pistols and all of them shouting savage and fearsome
cries of revenge and triumph.

Instantly the pistols were presented, the triggers pressed and half a
dozen bullets swept through the room.  Marteau had seen the first
movement of the door.  He had divined what had happened.  Before the
pistols had been leveled he was by the side of the Countess.  The table
at which she sat was a huge and heavy one.  With one movement he hurled
her, chair and all, to the floor, with the other he threw the table on
its side in front of her.  One of the bullets grazed his cheek, the
others swept harmlessly through the room.  He seized from another table
two of his remaining pistols and discharged them squarely into the face
of the crowding mass at the other end of the room at point-blank range.
The sounds of the shots still echoed when he cried out:

"The knife, Countess.  Cut the bonds of the prisoners.  We must fight
here for our lives and your honor."

The Countess Laure was quick to understand.

"You are safe now.  They have no more shots.  Hasten," he urged,
reaching down a hand and assisting her to her feet.

He clutched the barrels of his pistols thereafter and hurled them
directly into the faces of the infuriated men.  Five of them were down
and his prompt action had given the people in the room a little respite.

"Gentlemen," cried Marteau, sweeping out his sword and stepping into
the open space between the prisoners and the overturned table on one
hand and the renegades on the other, "quick, take your swords for the
honor of the Countess and for your lives."

The man who led the renegades had some idea of military tactics.  He
spoke a few sharp words and half a dozen of them backed out of the
room, entered the outer hall and ran around to the door on the side of
the apartment which gave access to the great hall.  The little band of
defenders retreated into a corner near the fireplace, which was raised
a step or two above the floor of the room.

Meanwhile Laure had cut the lashings of the Russians, the Cossacks, and
the Englishman.  They staggered to their feet numb from their long
bondage, but inspired by the frightful imminence of their peril they
seized their swords and presented a bold front to the two-sided enemy.
There was one pistol left charged.  Marteau handed that to the girl.

"The last shot, mademoiselle," he said meaningly, "for yourself if----"

"I understand."

"If you could only get to the door," growled the Russian commander, "my
men outside would make short work of----"

"It is impossible until we have dealt with these villains," said
Marteau.  "On guard!" he cried as the marauders suddenly leaped forward.

The big Englishman, burly, tremendously powerful for all his advancing
years, dropped his sword for a moment, picked up one of the heavy oak
chairs and hurled it full into the face of the larger body at the
further end of the room.  One stumbled over it, two others fell.  The
next moment both parties were upon the little group.  In their haste,
in their drunken excitement, the marauders had not thought to recharge
their pistols.  With swords, scythes and clubs they fell on the six
men.  Their numbers worked to their disadvantage.  Three of the men
surrounding the woman, the Frenchman and the two Russian guardsmen,
were accomplished swordsmen.  The Cossacks were not to be disdained in
rough-and-tumble fighting and the Englishman was a valiant ally.  Their
racial antagonisms were forgot in their common danger and the deadly
peril of the woman.

The swords of the soldiers flashed as they thrust and parried.  The
Cossacks, less skillful, strove to beat down the attackers by sweeping
slashes--not the best method for such close fighting.  One Cossack was
pierced through the breast by a thrust from a renegade and another was
cut from his neck almost to his heart by a blow from a scythe.  One of
the Russian officers was wounded, fell to his knees and was dispatched.
The Englishman was hit by a billet of wood and dazed.  Marteau and the
other Russian were still unharmed.  But it was going hard with them.
In fact, a fierce blow on his blade from a bludgeon shivered the weapon
of the Frenchman.  A sword was aimed at his heart.  There was a
blinding flash, a detonation, and the man who held it staggered back.
The Countess, the last pistol almost touching the man's body, had
pulled the trigger.  Marteau seized the sword of the man who had
menaced him.  The next instant the chateau was shaken by a terrific
roar.  The Russians outside having constructed a rude bomb had blown up
the door.

For a second the combat ceased.  The hall was full of smoke.  From
outside came shots, shrieks, cries, loud curses and groans, cheers,
French and Russian voices, the galloping of horses, words of command.
The French were there.

"To me," shouted Marteau at the top of his voice.  "France!"

The first to heed the call was young Pierre.  He descended the hall,
watched the conflict a moment and, having possessed himself of a club,
battered down the man nearest him, unsuspecting an attack from the
rear, then ranged himself by the side of the surviving Russian and the
Frenchman.  He did not come through scathless, however, for one of the
renegades cut him fiercely as he passed.  He stood erect by an effort
of will but it was evident he could now add little to the defense.  The
Russian took the pistol from his hand.  The next second the great hall
was filled with shouting figures of soldiers.  Into the smoke and
confusion of the room came Napoleon.




CHAPTER XI

AN EMPEROR AND A GENTLEMAN

"The Emperor!" cried Marteau.

The Russian officer recognized Napoleon as quickly as the other.  The
Emperor advanced, the soldiers crowding after threw themselves upon the
renegades immediately, while the Emperor strode forward alone.  The
young Russian noble was a quicker witted man than his countrymen
ordinarily were.  He saw a chance to end everything then and there, to
do his country a great service, although his life would be forfeited
instantly in the doing of it.

"My chance," he shouted, raising Pierre's pistol.

The shot was an easy one.  It was impossible to miss.  Marteau had
stepped forward.  The thrill in the tones of the man's voice attracted
his attention.  One glance and he saw all.  He threw himself in front
of the Emperor just as the Russian pressed the trigger.  At the same
moment the Countess Laure, who stood nearest him, struck up the
Russian's arm.  The bullet buried itself in the ceiling above.

"Thank God!" cried Marteau as the sound died away and he saw the
Emperor standing unharmed.

Napoleon's keen eye had seen everything.

"It is this lady," said he gracefully, "to whom my safety is due.  And
I am not unmindful that you interposed your own body between the bullet
and your Emperor."

"Your Majesty," cried Marteau, now that his Emperor was safe, fain to
discharge his duty, "I have tidings of the utmost importance.  I have
held this chateau and detained this convoy the Russians had captured.
It contains powder, food, guns----"

"I know," said the Emperor.  "It comes in the nick of time."

"And I have to report, Sire, that the corps of Wittgenstein, Wrede and
of the Field-Marshal Bluecher, himself, are strung out at long intervals
to the eastward of Champaubert.  They have no idea of your proximity."

"Are the divisions in supporting distance of one another?"

"No, Sire.  Olsuvieff's division lies isolated at Champaubert.  As to
the divisions of Sacken and Yorck I think----"

"I have already received information concerning them," said the
Emperor, "from your friend, Bullet-Stopper.  He should be here."

"I am here, your Majesty," roared the grenadier, stepping forward, "and
saving your Imperial Presence I am glad to see the lad.  It was I,"
continued the grenadier, addressing Marteau and presuming on the
familiarity with which Napoleon sometimes treated his men, "that fired
the shot that brought the man down from the window."

"And that shot saved us," said young Marteau.  "This young peasant
here----" he bent over Pierre--"he is not dead, Sire, but sorely
wounded--he kept them out up there while we held the room here."

"But these?" asked Napoleon, looking at the prisoners.

"Renegades who had taken advantage of the absence of the Russians
pursuing the escort to the wagon-train to seize the castle."

"Why did you not impress them for the defense thereof?" asked the
Emperor.  "They were French undoubtedly----"

"I found them fighting against us."

Rapidly and in few words Marteau told the story of the night, touching
lightly upon his own part, but the Emperor was soldier enough to read
between the words of the narration and reconstruct the scene instantly.
He turned to one of his officers.

"Take those scoundrels out.  Put them up against the wall and shoot
them out of hand.  They disgrace the name of France.  Bid the surgeons
of the command come here to look to the wounded."

"They are past hope, except the French boy, your Majesty," said Yeovil,
who having recovered his own consciousness speedily had been examining
them meanwhile.  "I have some skill in wounds.  One Cossack is already
dead.  It would be a mercy to put that other out of his misery with
that horrible scythe slash."

"The Russian officer?"

"Gone, too."

"And who are you?"

"I am a barrister," answered the Englishman in bad but comprehensible
French.

"A man of the law.  You look it not," said the Emperor, smiling faintly.

"Necessity makes us all resort to the sword," said Sir Gervaise,
looking at his bloody blade, for he had fought valiantly with the rest
and would have been killed but he had been knocked senseless with that
billet of wood which had hit him on the head and felled him to the
floor.

"You are, by your language, an Englishman."

"I am, and proud of it."

"The English," said Napoleon slowly, "have been my bitterest enemies."

"Pardon, Sire," said the Russian bluntly, "we children of the white
Czar will dispute that honor with them."

"And you sought to kill me?" said the Emperor, turning upon the other.
"You are a brave man," he added.

"And I would have done so but for----"

"Bah!" interrupted Napoleon contemptuously.  "The bullet is not molded
that is destined for me.  My career is not to be cut short by the hand
of any young boy who wears the uniform of the Russian guard.  Silence,
monsieur!  Take him prisoner.  See that he be kept under close guard.
When we have taken Olsuvieff's division to-morrow and then Sacken's
there will be many of his comrades to bear him company to Paris.  Did
any of the men outside escape?"

"No, Sire," answered General Maurice, entering the room just in time to
hear the question.  "The wood around the chateau was completely filled
with my men.  Those we have not killed here we have taken prisoner.
Most of them were shot down as they strove to break through."

"That is well," said the Emperor.

"And the convoy?" asked General Maurice.

"Detach a regiment to escort it back to Sezanne.  Let it be distributed
to the regiments and divisions as they arrive."

"And those who have gone on ahead?"

"Their arms, equipment and provisions are in the hands of the
Prussians.  We shall march immediately.  As for you, mademoiselle, what
is your name?"

"I am the Comtesse Laure d'Aumenier."

"H'm, the daughter of the Comte Robert d'Aumenier, who made his
submission to the Empire and received back his estates, I believe?"

"The same, Sire."

"Where is he?"

"Dead, Sire, these two years."

"And you?"

"I went to my uncle in England."

"To the enemy!" exclaimed Napoleon sharply.

"To the enemy," answered the Countess, looking at him courageously.

"And you came back for what purpose?"

"The estates are to be sold.  There were certain papers of which I
alone knew the hiding place.  There was no way for me to reach them
save by the courtesy of the Czar Alexander.  He sent me to
Field-Marshal Bluecher with instructions to provide me with an escort to
this chateau.  The Field-Marshal did so, and the rest you know."

"And you propose to sell estates that have been in the hands of the
family for so long a period?  It seems to me that I visited them once
when I was a military student at Brienne.  Was not your uncle there at
the time, an officer in command?"

"I have heard him say so."

"I remember him very well now."

"And he you, your Majesty."

"And he intends now to sell the estates?"

"He did, Sire, but now that there is a possibility of the re--of
the----"

"The return of the Bourbons," said Napoleon, divining her thought as
the Countess paused in confusion, "There is no possibility of that,
mademoiselle.  In three weeks the armies opposing me will have been
hurled back beyond the frontier.  Your family has forfeited its rights
to any consideration at my hands.  Your uncle is an _emigre_ who has
never made his submission.  I find you, a Frenchwoman, in the company
of my enemies.  Your estates are forfeited.  Major Marteau, I make you
Comte d'Aumenier.  The domains are yours."

"I accept them, your Majesty."

"What!  Is it possible----" cried the Countess Laure, her face flaming.

"Silence, mademoiselle.  By the laws of war I could have you shot.  It
would be a fine example.  No Frenchman, however high in rank and
station, no Frenchwoman, however young or beautiful, can fight against
me and France with impunity.  Have you anything to say why I should not
mete out to you this well-deserved punishment?"

"Nothing," said the young woman with proud disdain.  "The revolution
has taken the lives of many of my people.  I am not better than they.
You are the very spirit of the revolution incarnate, Sire, and----"

"Your Majesty," interposed General Maurice.

"Well, sir?" said Napoleon.

General Maurice, a famous light horseman, otherwise known as the Count
de Vivonne, was an old friend and a devoted follower of the Emperor.
He had interfered before on occasion between Napoleon and his victims.
He knew the Emperor thoroughly and loved him.  He realized that it was
his time to interpose, or someone's, and he had intuition enough to
suspect that his interposition would be most welcome, that indeed
Napoleon was playing, as he sometimes loved to do, a little comedy.
With a wave of his hand the general checked Marteau, whom he knew
slightly, who had sprung forward to protest to the Emperor at the words
of the woman he loved.

