"No," Mr. Wilson agreed, "especially in his case. The young fellow
appears to me very much above his condition. Your daughter first
pointed it out to me, and I have since chatted with him several
times, and find him a very superior young fellow. Certainly his
education has been very different from that of most men in his
condition of life, and I should have taken him for a gentleman, who
had got into some scrape and run away, had it not been that he
seems to have been regularly apprenticed to his trade. Still, there
is something a little mysterious about him. I asked him casually
what part of the country he came from. He hesitated a moment, and
then said, 'From the south of England.' Of course, I did not ask
any further questions, as it was clear he did not care about naming
the precise locality, or he would not have given so vague an
answer. I feel as deeply indebted to him as you do."

Mr. Hudson nodded. Only the evening before arriving at Cape Town,
Captain Wilson had spoken to him on the matter of his affection for
his daughter, and had asked his permission to speak to Frances.
They had known each other in the colony, but had not been intimate
until thrown together on board the Paramatta. Seeing that she was
an only child, and that her father was considered one of the
wealthiest squatters in the colony, Captain Wilson had feared that
Mr. Hudson would not approve of him as a suitor; and had therefore
broached the subject to him, before speaking to her. Mr. Hudson,
however, had raised no objections.

"You have taken a manly and proper course, in speaking to me
first," he said; "just what I should have expected from you. I own
that, with the fortune the girl will have some day, I have always
looked for her making what they call a good match, and settling
down in the old country; but I may tell you that while she has been
in Europe she has had several opportunities of so doing, if she
would have taken them. She did not think fit to do so, and I have
always made up my mind not to influence her in any way, providing
she didn't fix her choice upon one whose character I disapproved.
Certainly I have no reasons for so doing, in the present case. Your
character stands high in the colony; and personally, as you are
well aware, I like you exceedingly.

"What Frances' feelings in the matter are, I have no means of
knowing. There is no doubt she likes you, but as to anything more,
it is for you to find out. You will have plenty of time, between
this and Sydney. Anyhow, you have my hearty approval of your
wooing.

"I think, between ourselves you know, you must not expect, at
first, any very cordial approval on the part of her mother. She had
an idea, you know, that Frances would marry a duke at least, and an
offer from a prince of the blood would not have surprised her. It
is a great disappointment, to her, that she should have returned
unmarried; and she has already been talking to me about our
returning to England, in another couple of years. So she will not
take quite kindly to it, at first; but you mustn't mind that. Fond
of Frances as she is, she will soon come round, if she finds that
the girl's happiness is really concerned in the matter.

"Take my advice, and don't push it till we get near the end of the
voyage. If Frances says yes, she is the sort of girl to stick to
it; and as I am with you, you may be quite sure it will come right
in the long run; but we might not have a very pleasant time of it
during the remainder of the voyage, you know, and as things have
gone on so pleasantly, it would be a pity to spoil them."

Thus it was that Mr. Hudson nodded, when the young officer of the
constabulary said that his indebtedness to Reuben was equal to his
own.

"Yes," he said, "if it had been one of the sailors, I could have
set the matter right by drawing a big cheque, and I shouldn't have
cared how big; but with this young fellow I do not quite see my
way. However, I will shift the responsibility, by leaving the
matter in Frances' hands--women are much better hands at things of
this sort, that require a light touch, than we are. I do not wonder
that she and Miss Furley are shaken. I feel shaken myself. I shall
never forget that scene, and the two girls standing there, and that
wild Malay rushing at them. My legs seemed to give way under me,
and I thought I should have fallen down."

"I felt bad myself, sir," Captain Wilson said. "I have been in some
tough fights, with bush rangers and natives; but I never had that
sort of feeling before.

"One ran, but one felt it was no use running, as all must be over
before we could get there. When it was over, I felt as weak as a
child."

"Don't let us talk any more about it," Mr. Hudson said, rising. "I
doubt whether I shall get a wink of sleep now; and I am sure I
sha'n't, if we go on talking any more about it. Let us take a turn,
and have a stiff glass of brandy and water afterwards, to settle
our nerves before turning in."

The passengers by the Paramatta were up early in the morning, for
the ship was to sail at nine. But early as they were, Reuben was
before them; and on Mr. Hudson inquiring about him, as he turned
out, he was informed that he had already gone on board the ship.

The two girls both looked pale, when they came down to their early
breakfast. Both declared, however, that they had slept well.

"You must give us time, dad, to get up our roses," Frances Hudson
said, in reply to her father's remarks as to their appearance. "I
have no doubt a few days at sea will do it; but of course, it is
only right and proper that young ladies should be pale, after going
through such an adventure as we had yesterday.

"But do not let us talk about it," she said, with a shudder. "I
should like not to be able to think about it, again, for six
months. You used to say, dad, that I was plucky, because I wasn't
afraid of wild cattle, and not very afraid of the natives or bush
rangers; but I am sure I cannot lay claim to any special courage in
future, for no one in the world could feel more frightened than I
did, yesterday."

"Well, my dear, you were no worse than anyone else, for everyone
else bolted at the first alarm. The way that street was cleared was
something marvellous."

"Yes, dad; but I was too frightened to run. Not that it would have
been any use if I had, for he was close to us before we knew what
was the matter; and if I could have run, I don't think Emma could."

"No, indeed," Miss Furley said. "I had no idea of running and, even
had there been plenty of time, I am sure I could not have got out
of the way. Somehow I seemed to lose all power to move. I had just
shut my eyes, and thought it was all over, when there was a shout
and a rush, and I saw the Malay roll over; and then I made a snatch
at Frances, and rolled over, too."

"It was a terrible moment," Mr. Hudson said. "But I agree, with
Frances, that it is better for you to try and think nothing more
about it, until you have perfectly recovered your health and
spirits."

"I hear, dad, that the young man that saved us has gone on board
ship. I asked, directly I was up, because I wanted to see him."

"And I expect, my dear, that he slipped away because he didn't want
to see you. It sounds rude, doesn't it? But I can perfectly
understand it."

"So can I," the girl agreed. "Did you see him this morning?"

"No, my dear. I came downstairs only a minute or two before you
did, and then found that he was gone."

"Have you thought over what you are going to do, dad, for him?"

"Wilson and I have talked it over, Frances, but at present we don't
see our way. It is too serious a matter to make up our minds in a
hurry. Your mother is in favour of giving him a handsome present;
but I don't think, myself, that that would do. Men who will do such
deeds as that are not the sort of men to be paid by money."

"Oh no, dad! Surely not that. Any other possible way, but not
money."

"No, my dear; so I thought. I have chatted it over with Wilson, and
we have agreed that the best plan is to leave it entirely in your
hands."

"I will think it over, dad," the girl said gravely. "It is a
serious thing. We owe him our lives, and the least we can do is not
to hurt his feelings, by the way in which we try to show our
gratitude."

Reuben had slept well; and on waking, soon after daylight, jumped
at once out of bed; and was glad to feel that, except for a certain
amount of weakness in the legs, and stiffness in his wounds, he was
all right again. He dressed quietly and, as soon as he heard
persons moving about in the hotel, made his way down to the shore,
and sat down there to wait for a boat from the ship; which was
lying some distance out, and would, he was sure, be sending off
early, as there would be many things to bring on board before she
sailed.

It was not long before he saw the men descending the gangway to the
boat alongside, which was soon rowing towards the shore. As she
approached, Reuben saw the steward and first mate, sitting in the
stern seats; and when the officer jumped ashore, his eye fell on
Reuben.

"Ah, Whitney," he said, "I am glad to see you about. When the
captain came off, last night, he told me all about your gallant
rescue of the two ladies. I am sorry to see you bandaged up so
much. The captain said you had some nasty cuts, but I didn't think
they were so bad."

"They are nothing to speak about, sir," Reuben replied, "although
you would think so, from seeing those bandages all over one side of
the face, and my arm in a sling; but they are no great depth, and
don't hurt to speak of. They were clean cuts with a sharp edge, and
don't hurt half as much as many a knock I have had, with a hammer."

"Well, we all feel proud of you, my lad. It isn't everyone who
would face a Malay running amuck, without weapons, I can tell you."

"I think any English sailor would do so, sir, if he saw the Malay
rushing down upon two ladies. There was no time to think about
danger, one way or the other. The only thing to be done was to rush
at him, and so I rushed, as anyone else would have done."

"Ah, it's all very well to say so, Whitney; but I have my doubts
about everyone else rushing. However, I mustn't stand talking about
it now, as I have my hands full of work. The sooner you get on
board the ship, the better.

"Row Whitney back to the ship, lads, and come back again in an
hour's time. None of the things will be down here before that."

Reuben stepped into the boat, which at once pushed off. The men
rowed easily, for they were anxious to hear the particulars of the
report which had circulated through the ship. Bill Hardy was rowing
the stroke oar, and did the questioning.

"You may try to make little of it," he said, "but I tell you,
Reuben, it were a right down good thing--a thing any man would have
right to be proud of.

"What do you say, mates?"

There was a general chorus of "Ay, ay."

"I took you in hand when you came on board, young un," Bill went
on, "and I looks upon you as my chick, and I tell you I feel proud
on you. I felt sure you would turn out a good un, some day, but I
didn't look to see it so quick.

"In oars!"

The boat ran up alongside the gangway, and Reuben was soon upon
deck. He was there met by the captain, who had just come up as the
boat rowed alongside. He shook Reuben's hand heartily.

"You are a fine young fellow, Whitney; and your mother, if you have
one, ought to be proud of you. I should be, if you were a son of
mine. It was a lucky day for us all, when I shipped you on board
the Paramatta; for it would have been a heavy day for us, if those
two young ladies had been killed by that madman, yesterday.

"You look pale, lad, as much as one can see of you, and you will
have to lie by for a bit. I hear you lost a great deal of blood.

"Steward, bring another cup of cocoa with mine, a large one, and
put plenty of milk in."

The captain insisted on Reuben coming to his cabin to drink his
cocoa.

"You had best knock off your allowance of spirits, till your wounds
have healed up, lad. I will tell the second mate to serve you out
port wine, instead."

Reuben now went forward, feeling very much the better for the
cocoa. He again had to receive the hearty congratulations of the
men; and then, rather to escape from this than because he felt he
needed it, he turned into his bunk, and was soon sound asleep.

Three hours later, he was awakened by the tramp of men overhead,
and knew that they were shortening the anchor chain, and preparing
to be off. Going out on to the deck, he saw that the courses had
been dropped, and the topsails were lying loose in their gaskets.
The crew were singing merrily, as they worked the capstan. Three of
the boats already hung from the davits, and two large boats were
bringing off the passengers, and were already within a hundred
yards of the ship; while the remaining ship's boat, with the
steward, crowded with fresh stores, was but a short way behind
them. As soon as the passengers were up, and the shore boats had
left, she came alongside.

"Hook on the falls at once," the first mate ordered, "and run her
up as she is. You can get the things out afterwards."

The anchor was, by this time, under the foot.

"Up with it, lads!" and the sailors again started, at full speed,
on the capstan.

The jibs were run up, the courses and topsails shaken out and
braced, and the Paramatta began to steal through the water again,
for the second portion of her voyage. Mr. Hudson and his friend
very soon made their way forward, and the ship was scarcely under
way when Reuben, who was gazing over the bulwark at the shore, felt
a hand laid on his shoulder.

"How are you today, Reuben? Better, I hope? It was too bad of you
to run off in that way, this morning."

"I am all right now, thank you, sir," Reuben answered. "I felt just
a little shaky at first, but the captain gave me a cup of cocoa
when I came on board, and I feel now as if I were fit for duty
again."

"Oh, nonsense," Mr. Hudson exclaimed, "you mustn't think of work,
for days yet. No, you must come aft with me. My daughter and Miss
Furley are most anxious to see you; and my wife, too, is longing to
add her thanks to mine."

"You are very good, sir, but really I would rather not, if you will
excuse me. It is horrid being thanked and made a fuss about, just
because, on the spur of the moment, one did one's duty."

"That's all very well, Reuben; but you see, it wouldn't be fair to
my daughter. If anyone did you a great service, you would want to
thank them, would you not?"

"Yes, I suppose so, sir," Reuben answered reluctantly; "but really,
I hate it."

"I can understand your feelings, my lad, but you must make up your
mind to do it. When anyone puts others under a vast obligation to
him, he must submit to be thanked, however much he may shrink from
it. Come along, it will not be very dreadful."

Reuben saw that there was no getting out of it, and followed Mr.
Hudson along the deck; feeling, however, more ashamed and
uncomfortable even than he did when standing in the dock, as a
criminal. Captain Wilson walked beside him. Hitherto he had not
spoken, but he now laid his hand quietly upon Reuben's shoulder.

"My lad," he said, "I am not a man to talk much; but believe me
that, henceforth, I am your friend for life."

Reuben looked up, with a little smile which showed that he
understood. He had often, indeed, watched the young officer and
Miss Hudson together, and had guessed that they were more than mere
acquaintances.

The passengers were, with the exception of the three ladies, all
gathered on the poop. But Frances had proposed to her mother that
they should see Reuben in the cabin alone, as she felt that it
would be a severe ordeal, to the lad, to be publicly thanked.
Captain Wilson ascended to the poop and joined the others there,
while Mr. Hudson went alone into the cabin.

The three ladies were awaiting him there. Frances came forward
first. The tears were standing in her eyes.

"You have saved my life," she said softly, "at the risk of your
own; and I thank you with all my heart, not only for my own sake,
but for that of my father and mother; who would have been
childless, today, had it not been for you."

"I need no thanks, Miss Hudson," Reuben said quietly.

His shyness had left him, as he entered the cabin.

"It will, all my life, be a source of pleasure and gratification to
me, that I have been able to have been of service to so bright and
kind a lady."

"I am not less grateful," Miss Furley said, advancing also. "I
shall never forget that dreadful moment, and the feeling which
darted through my mind, as you rushed past us and threw yourself
upon him, and I felt that I was saved almost by a miracle."

"And you must accept my thanks also," Mrs. Hudson said; "the thanks
of a mother, whose child you have saved from so dreadful a death.
Believe me that there is nothing that my husband or myself would
not do, to show how deeply and sincerely we are grateful to you."

Mrs. Hudson, indeed, felt rather aggrieved that she could not, at
once, take some active steps towards rewarding the young man for
saving her daughter's life; and she had been unable to understand
the scruples of her husband and daughter on the subject. It was
only, indeed, at their urgent entreaty that she had given way on
this point.

"I call it monstrous, Frances," she said, almost angrily. "Of
course the young man will expect something more substantial than
words. It is only natural that we should reward him for preserving
your life, and it would be a crime if we didn't do so. Of course,
he didn't do it for money at the time, but it is absurd to suppose
that a young carpenter like this, working his way out on board a
ship, will object to receive a handsome present for such a service
as this. Our feelings have a right to be considered, as well as
his; and a nice thing it will be, for people to say that Ralph
Hudson and his wife were so stingy, and ungrateful, that they did
nothing for the lad who had saved their daughter's life."

"There is no fear of their saying that, mother. Everyone in the
colony knows that there are no more open-handed people in New South
Wales than you and my father. Besides, I do not say that we are to
do nothing for him. On the contrary, I agree with you that it would
be wrong, indeed, if we did not. I only say, please don't let there
be a word said about reward, now. Let us thank him as one would
thank a gentleman, who had done us a great service."

"Of course, I will do as your father wishes, Frances, but I call it
nonsense. If he were a gentleman it would, of course, be different;
but he is a young carpenter and, though you won't see it, that
seems to me to make all the difference."

"From what I have seen of him, mother," Frances persisted, "I am
sure that he has the feelings of a gentleman; even if he is not one
by birth, about which I am not certain. Anyhow, I am much obliged
