fire to it in the cavern.  This we found to be an undertaking of no
small difficulty, but we accomplished it at last by the following means:
First, we made a torch of a very inflammable nature out of the bark of a
certain tree, which we cut into strips, and after twisting, cemented
together with a kind of resin or gum, which we also obtained from
another tree; neither of which trees, however, was known by name to
Jack.  This, when prepared, we wrapped up in a great number of plies of
cocoa-nut cloth, so that we were confident it could not get wet during
the short time it should be under water.  Then we took a small piece of
the tinder, which we had carefully treasured up lest we should require
it, as before said, when the sun should fail us; also, we rolled up some
dry grass and a few chips, which, with a little bow and drill, like
those described before, we made into another bundle and wrapped it up in
cocoa-nut cloth.  When all was ready we laid aside our garments, with
the exception of our trousers, which, as we did not know what rough
scraping against the rocks we might be subjected to, we kept on.

Then we advanced to the edge of the rocks--Jack carrying one bundle,
with the torch; I the other, with the things for producing fire.

"Now don't weary for us, Peterkin, should we be gone some time," said
Jack.  "We'll be sure to return in half-an-hour at the very latest,
however interesting the cave should be, that we may relieve your mind."

"Farewell!" said Peterkin, coming up to us with a look of deep but
pretended solemnity, while he shook hands and kissed each of us on the
cheek--"farewell!  And while you are gone I shall repose my weary limbs
under the shelter of this bush, and meditate on the changefulness of all
things earthly, with special reference to the forsaken condition of a
poor shipwrecked sailor-boy!"  So saying, Peterkin waved his hand,
turned from us, and cast himself upon the ground with a look of
melancholy resignation, which was so well feigned that I would have
thought it genuine had he not accompanied it with a gentle wink.  We
both laughed, and springing from the rocks together, plunged head first
into the sea.

We gained the interior of the submarine cave without difficulty, and on
emerging from the waves, supported ourselves for some time by treading
water, while we held the two bundles above our heads.  This we did in
order to let our eyes become accustomed to the obscurity.  Then, when we
could see sufficiently, we swam to a shelving rock, and landed in
safety.  Having wrung the water from our trousers, and dried ourselves
as well as we could under the circumstances, we proceeded to ignite the
torch.  This we accomplished without difficulty in a few minutes; and no
sooner did it flare up than we were struck dumb with the wonderful
objects that were revealed to our gaze.  The roof of the cavern just
above us seemed to be about ten feet high, but grew higher as it receded
into the distance until it was lost in darkness.  It seemed to be made
of coral, and was supported by massive columns of the same material.
Immense icicles (as they appeared to us) hung from it in various places.
These, however, were formed, not of ice, but of a species of limestone,
which seemed to flow in a liquid form towards the point of each, where
it became solid.  A good many drops fell, however, to the rock below,
and these formed little cones, which rose to meet the points above.
Some of them had already met, and thus we saw how the pillars were
formed, which at first seemed to us as if they had been placed there by
some human architect to support the roof.  As we advanced farther in we
saw that the floor was composed of the same material as the pillars, and
it presented the curious appearance of ripples such as are formed on
water when gently ruffled by the wind.  There were several openings on
either hand in the walls that seemed to lead into other caverns, but
these we did not explore at this time.  We also observed that the
ceiling was curiously marked in many places, as if it were the fretwork
of a noble cathedral; and the walls, as well as the roof, sparkled in
the light of our torch, and threw back gleams and flashes as if they
were covered with precious stones.  Although we proceeded far into this
cavern, we did not come to the end of it; and we were obliged to return
more speedily than we would otherwise have done, as our torch was nearly
expended.  We did not observe any openings in the roof, or any
indications of places whereby light might enter; but near the entrance
to the cavern stood an immense mass of pure-white coral rock, which
caught and threw back the little light that found an entrance through
the cave's mouth, and thus produced, we conjectured, the pale-green
object which had first attracted our attention.  We concluded, also,
that the reflecting power of this rock was that which gave forth the dim
light that faintly illumined the first part of the cave.

Before diving through the passage again we extinguished the small piece
of our torch that remained, and left it in a dry spot--conceiving that
we might possibly stand in need of it if, at any future time, we should
chance to wet our torch while diving into the cavern.  As we stood for a
few minutes after it was out, waiting till our eyes became accustomed to
the gloom, we could not help remarking the deep, intense stillness and
the unutterable gloom of all around us; and as I thought of the
stupendous dome above, and the countless gems that had sparkled in the
torchlight a few minutes before, it came into my mind to consider how
strange it is that God should make such wonderful and exquisitely
beautiful works never to be seen at all--except, indeed, by chance
visitors such as ourselves.

I afterwards found that there were many such caverns among the islands
of the South Seas, some of them larger and more beautiful than the one I
have just described.

"Now, Ralph, are you ready?" said Jack in a low voice, that seemed to
echo up into the dome above.

"Quite ready."

"Come along, then," said he; and plunging off the ledge of the rock into
the water, we dived through the narrow entrance.  In a few seconds we
were panting on the rocks above, and receiving the congratulations of
our friend Peterkin.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

STRANGE PECULIARITY OF THE TIDES--ALSO OF THE TWILIGHT--PETERKIN'S
REMARKABLE CONDUCT IN EMBRACING A LITTLE PIG AND KILLING A BIG SOW--SAGE
REMARKS ON JESTING--ALSO ON LOVE.

It was quite a relief to us to breathe the pure air and to enjoy the
glad sunshine after our long ramble in the Diamond Cave, as we named it;
for although we did not stay more than half-an-hour away, it seemed to
us much longer.  While we were dressing, and during our walk home, we
did our best to satisfy the curiosity of poor Peterkin, who seemed to
regret, with lively sincerity, his inability to dive.

There was no help for it, however, so we condoled with him as we best
could.  Had there been any great rise or fall in the tide of these seas,
we might perhaps have found it possible to take him down with us at low
water; but as the tide never rose or fell more than eighteen inches or
two feet, this was impossible.

This peculiarity of the tide--its slight rise and fall--had not
attracted our observation till some time after our residence on the
island.  Neither had we observed another curious circumstance until we
had been some time there.  This was the fact that the tide rose and fell
with constant regularity, instead of being affected by the changes of
the moon as in our own country, and as it is in most other parts of the
world--at least, in all those parts with which I am acquainted.  Every
day and every night, at twelve o'clock precisely, the tide is at the
full; and at six o'clock, every morning and evening, it is ebb.  I can
speak with much confidence on this singular circumstance, as we took
particular note of it, and never found it to alter.  Of course I must
admit we had to guess the hour of twelve midnight, and I think we could
do this pretty correctly; but in regard to twelve noon we are quite
positive, because we easily found the highest point that the sun reached
in the sky by placing ourselves at a certain spot whence we observed the
sharp summit of a cliff resting against the sky, just where the sun
passed.

Jack and I were surprised that we had not noticed this the first few
days of our residence here, and could only account for it by our being
so much taken up with the more obvious wonders of our novel situation.
I have since learned, however, that this want of observation is a sad
and very common infirmity of human nature, there being hundreds of
persons before whose eyes the most wonderful things are passing every
day who nevertheless, are totally ignorant of them.  I therefore have to
record my sympathy with such persons, and to recommend to them a course
of conduct which I have now for a long time myself adopted--namely, the
habit of forcing my attention upon all things that go on around me, and
of taking some degree of interest in them whether I feel it naturally or
not.  I suggest this the more earnestly, though humbly, because I have
very frequently come to know that my indifference to a thing has
generally been caused by my ignorance in regard to it.

We had much serious conversation on this subject of the tides; and Jack
told us, in his own quiet, philosophical way, that these tides did great
good to the world in many ways, particularly in the way of cleansing the
shores of the land, and carrying off the filth that was constantly
poured into the sea therefrom--which, Peterkin suggested, was remarkably
tidy of it to do.  Poor Peterkin could never let slip an opportunity to
joke, however inopportune it might be, which at first we found rather a
disagreeable propensity, as it often interrupted the flow of very
agreeable conversation--and, indeed, I cannot too strongly record my
disapprobation of this tendency in general; but we became so used to it
at last that we found it no interruption whatever.  Indeed, strange to
say, we came to feel that it was a necessary part of our enjoyment (such
is the force of habit), and found the sudden outbursts of mirth,
resulting from his humorous disposition, quite natural and refreshing to
us in the midst of our more serious conversations.  But I must not
misrepresent Peterkin.  We often found, to our surprise, that he knew
many things which we did not; and I also observed that those things
which he learned from experience were never forgotten.  From all these
things I came at length to understand that things very opposite and
dissimilar in themselves, when united, do make an agreeable whole; as,
for example, we three on this our island, although most unlike in many
things, when united, made a trio so harmonious that I question if there
ever met before such an agreeable triumvirate.  There was, indeed, no
note of discord whatever in the symphony we played together on that
sweet Coral Island; and I am now persuaded that this was owing to our
having been all tuned to the same key--namely, that of _love_!  Yes, we
loved one another with much fervency while we lived on that island; and,
for the matter of that, we love each other still.

And while I am on this subject, or rather the subject that just preceded
it--namely, the tides--I may here remark on another curious natural
phenomenon.  We found that there was little or no twilight in this
island.  We had a distinct remembrance of the charming long twilight at
home, which some people think the most delightful part of the day--
though, for my part, I have always preferred sunrise; and when we first
landed, we used to sit down on some rocky point or eminence, at the
close of our day's work, to enjoy the evening breeze, but no sooner had
the sun sunk below the horizon than all became suddenly dark.  This
rendered it necessary that we should watch the sun when we happened to
be out hunting; for to be suddenly left in the dark while in the woods
was very perplexing, as, although the stars shone with great beauty and
brilliancy, they could not pierce through the thick umbrageous boughs
that interlaced above our heads.

But to return.  After having told all we could to Peterkin about the
Diamond Cave under Spouting Cliff, as we named the locality, we were
wending our way rapidly homewards when a grunt and a squeal were borne
down by the land breeze to our ears.

"That's the ticket!" was Peterkin's remarkable exclamation as he started
convulsively and levelled his spear.

"Hist!" cried Jack; "these are your friends, Peterkin.  They must have
come over expressly to pay you a friendly visit, for it is the first
time we have seen them on this side of the island."

"Come along!" cried Peterkin, hurrying towards the wood; while Jack and
I followed, smiling at his impatience.

Another grunt and half-a-dozen squeals, much louder than before, came
down the valley.  At this time we were just opposite the small vale
which lay between the Valley of the Wreck and Spouting Cliff.

"I say, Peterkin!" cried Jack in a hoarse whisper.

"Well, what is't?"

"Stay a bit, man!  These grunters are just up there on the hillside.  If
you go and stand with Ralph in the lee of yon cliff I'll cut round
behind and drive them through the gorge, so that you'll have a better
chance of picking out a good one.  Now, mind you pitch into a fat young
pig, Peterkin!" added Jack as he sprang into the bushes.

"Won't I, just!" said Peterkin, licking his lips, as we took our station
beside the cliff.  "I feel quite a tender affection for young pigs in my
heart.  Perhaps it would be more correct to say in my tum--"

"There they come!" cried I as a terrific yell from Jack sent the whole
herd screaming down the hill.  Now Peterkin, being unable to hold back,
crept a short way up a very steep grassy mound in order to get a better
view of the hogs before they came up; and just as he raised his head
above its summit, two little pigs, which had outrun their companions,
rushed over the top with the utmost precipitation.  One of these brushed
close past Peterkin's ear; the other, unable to arrest its headlong
flight, went, as Peterkin himself afterwards expressed it, `bash' into
his arms with a sudden squeal, which was caused more by the force of the
blow than the will of the animal, and both of them rolled violently down
to the foot of the mound.  No sooner was this reached than the little
pig recovered its feet, tossed up its tail, and fled shrieking from the
spot.  But I slung a large stone after it, which, being fortunately well
aimed, hit it behind the ear and felled it to the earth.

"Capital, Ralph! that's your sort!" cried Peterkin, who, to my surprise
and great relief, had risen to his feet apparently unhurt, though much
dishevelled.  He rushed frantically towards the gorge, which the yells
of the hogs told us they were now approaching.  I had made up my mind
that I would abstain from killing another, as, if Peterkin should be
successful, two were more than sufficient for our wants at the present
time.  Suddenly they all burst forth--two or three little round ones in
advance, and an enormous old sow with a drove of hogs at her heels.

"Now, Peterkin," said I, "there's a nice little fat one; just spear it."

But Peterkin did not move; he allowed it to pass unharmed.  I looked at
him in surprise, and saw that his lips were compressed and his eyebrows
knitted, as if he were about to fight with some awful enemy.

"What is it?"  I inquired with some trepidation.

Suddenly he levelled his spear, darted forward, and with a yell that
nearly froze the blood in my veins, stabbed the old sow to the heart.
Nay, so vigorously was it done that the spear went in at one side and
came out at the other!

"Oh Peterkin!" said I, going up to him, "what have you done?"

"Done?  I've killed their great-great-grandmother, that's all," said he,
looking with a somewhat awestruck expression at the transfixed animal.

"Hallo! what's this?" said Jack as he came up.  "Why, Peterkin, you must
be fond of a tough chop.  If you mean to eat this old hog, she'll try
your jaws, I warrant.  What possessed you to stick _her_, Peterkin?"

"Why, the fact is, I want a pair of shoes."

"What have your shoes to do with the old hog?" said I, smiling.

"My present shoes have certainly nothing to do with her," replied
Peterkin; "nevertheless, she will have a good deal to do with my future
shoes.  The fact is, when I saw you floor that pig so neatly, Ralph, it
struck me that there was little use in killing another.  Then I
remembered all at once that I had long wanted some leather or tough
substance to make shoes of, and this old grandmother seemed so tough
that I just made up my mind to stick her--and you see I've done it!"

"That you certainly have, Peterkin," said Jack as he was examining the
transfixed animal.

We now considered how we were to carry our game home, for, although the
distance was short, the hog was very heavy.  At length we hit on the
plan of tying its four feet together, and passing the spear-handle
between them.  Jack took one end on his shoulder, I took the other on
mine, and Peterkin carried the small pig.

Thus we returned in triumph to our bower, laden, as Peterkin remarked,
with the glorious spoils of a noble hunt.  As he afterwards spoke in
similarly glowing terms in reference to the supper that followed, there
is every reason to believe that we retired that night to our leafy beds
in a high state of satisfaction.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

BOAT-BUILDING EXTRAORDINARY--PETERKIN TRIES HIS HAND AT COOKERY, AND
FAILS MOST SIGNALLY--THE BOAT FINISHED--CURIOUS CONVERSATION WITH THE
CAT, AND OTHER MATTERS.

For many days after this, Jack applied himself with unremitting
assiduity to the construction of our boat, which at length began to look
something like one.  But those only who have had the thing to do can
entertain a right idea of the difficulty involved in such an
undertaking, with no other implements than an axe, a bit of hoop-iron, a
sail-needle, and a broken penknife.  But Jack did it.  He was of that
disposition which _will_ not be conquered.  When he believed himself to
be acting rightly, he overcame all obstacles.  I have seen Jack, when
doubtful whether what he was about to do were right or wrong, as timid
and vacillating as a little girl; and I honour him for it!

As this boat was a curiosity in its way, a few words here relative to
the manner of its construction may not be amiss.

I have already mentioned the chestnut-tree with its wonderful buttresses
or planks.  This tree, then, furnished us with the chief part of our
material.  First of all, Jack sought out a limb of a tree of such a form
and size as, while it should form the keel, a bend at either end should
form the stem and stern-posts.  Such a piece, however, was not easy to
obtain; but at last he procured it by rooting up a small tree which had
a branch growing at the proper angle about ten feet up its stem, with
