different from those of the desert through which he has of late been
straying.

He lies thinking of the beautiful being who brought him thither, shaping
conjectures in regard to the strangeness of the situation.  He has no
idea how long he may have been unconscious; nor has the whole time been
like death--unless death have its dreams.  For he has had dreams, all
with a fair form and lovely face flitting and figuring in them.  It is
the wild huntress.

He has a fancy that the face seemed familiar to him; or, if not
familiar, one he has looked upon before.  He endeavours to recall all
those he had met in Mexico during his sojourn there; for if encountered
anywhere, it must have been there.  His female acquaintances had been
but few in that foreign land.  He can remember every one of them.  She
is not of their number.  If he has ever seen her before their encounter
on the Staked Plain, it must have been while passing along the street of
some Mexican city.

And this could scarcely be, in his silent reflection; for such a woman
once seen--even but for a moment--could never be forgotten.

He lies pondering on all that has passed--on all he can now recall.
Walt had got back, then, to the place where they parted.  He must have
found food and water, though it matters now no more.  Enough that he has
got back, and both are in an asylum of safety, under friendly
protection.  This is evident from the surroundings.

Still feeble as a child, the effort of thought very soon fatigues him;
and this, with the narcotic influence of the flower perfume, the songs
of the birds, and the soothing monotone of the waters, produces a
drowsiness that terminates in a profound slumber.  This time he sleeps
without dreaming.

How long he cannot tell; but once more he is awakened by voices.  As
before, two persons are engaged in conversation.  But far different from
those already heard.  The bird-music still swelling in through the
window is less sweet than the tones that now salute his ear.

As before, the speakers are invisible, outside the room.  But he can
perceive that they are close to the door, and the first words heard
admonish him of their design to enter.

"Now, Conchita!  Go get the wine, and bring it along with you.  The
doctor left directions for it to be given him at this hour."

"I have it here, senorita."

"_Vaya_! you have forgotten the glass.  You would not have him drink out
of the bottle?"

"_Ay Dios_! and so I have," responds Conchita, apparently gliding off to
possess herself of the required article, with which she soon returns.

"Ish!" cautions the other voice; "if he be still asleep, we must not
wake him.  Don Prospero said that.  Step lightly, _muchacha_!"

Hamersley is awake, with eyes wide open, and consciousness quite
restored.  But at this moment something--an instinct of dissembling--
causes him to counterfeit sleep; and he lies still, with shut eyelids.
He can hear the door turning upon its hinges of raw hide, then the soft
rustle of robes, while he is sensible of that inexpressible something
that denotes the gentle presence of woman.

"Yes, he is asleep," says the first speaker, "and for the world we may
not disturb him.  The doctor was particular about that, and we must do
exactly as he said.  You know, Conchita, this gentleman has been in
great danger.  Thanks to the good Virgin, he'll get over it.  Don
Prospero assures us he will."

"What a pity if he should not!  Oh, senorita, isn't he--"

"Isn't he what?"

"Handsome--beautiful!  He looks like a picture I've seen in the church;
an angel--only that the angel had wings, and no mustachios."

"Pif, girl; don't speak in that silly way, or I shall be angry with you.
_Vayate_! you may take away the wine.  We can come again when he
awakes.  _Guardate_!  Tread lightly."

Again there is the rustling of a dress; but this time as if only one of
the two were moving off.  The other seems still to linger by the side of
the couch.

The invalid queries which of the two it is.  There is an electricity
that tells him; and, for an instant, he thinks of opening his eyes, and
proclaiming consciousness of what has been passing.

A thought restrains him--delicacy.  The lady will know that he has been
awake all the while, and overheard the conversation.  It has been in
Spanish, but she is aware that he understands this, for he has no doubt
that the "senorita" is she who has saved him.

He remains without moving, without unclosing his eyelids.  But his ears
are open, and he hears a speech pleasanter than any yet spoken.

It is in the shape of a soliloquy--a few words softly murmured.  They
are, "_Ay de mil_ 'Tis true what Conchita says, and as Valerian told me.
_He is, indeed, handsome--beautiful_!"

More than ever Hamersley endeavours to counterfeit sleep, but he can
resist no longer.  Involuntarily his eyes fly open, and, with head
upraised, he turns towards the speaker.

He sees what he has been expecting, what he beheld in fancy throughout
his long, delirious dream--the fair form and beautiful face that so much
interested him, even in that hour when life seemed to be forsaking him.
It is the angel of the desert, no longer in huntress garb, but dressed
as a lady.

There is a red tinge upon her cheek, that appears to have flushed up
suddenly, as if suspecting her soliloquy has been heard.  The words have
but parted from her lips, and the thought is yet thrilling in her heart.

Can he have heard it?  He shows no sign.

She approaches the couch with a look of solicitude, mingled with
interrogation.  A hand is held out to her, and a word or two spoken to
say she is recognised.  Her eyes sparkle with joy, as she perceives in
those of the invalid that reason is once more seated on its throne.

"I am so happy," she murmurs, "we are all so happy, to know you are out
of danger.  Don Prospero says so.  You will now get well in a short
time.  But I forget; we were to give you something as soon as you should
awake.  It is only some wine.  Conchita, come hither!"

A young girl is seen stepping into the chamber.  A glance would tell her
to be the maid, if the overheard conversation had not already declared
it.  A little brown-skinned damsel, scarce five feet in height, with
raven hair hanging in double plait down her back, and black eyes that
sparkle like those of a basilisk.

Provident Conchila has brought the bottle and glass with her, and a
portion of the famed grape juice of El Paso is administered to the
invalid.

"How good and kind you've all been!" he says, as his head once more
settles down upon the pillow.  "And you especially, senorita.  If I
mistake not, I'm indebted to you for the saving of my life."

"Do not speak of that," she rejoins; "I've shown you no kindness in
particular.  You would not have one leave a fellow creature to perish?"

"Ah! but for you I should now have been in another world."

"No, indeed.  There you are mistaken.  If I had never come near you,
you'd have been saved all the same.  I have good news for you.  Your
comrade is safe, and here.  He returned to your trysting-place, with
both food and drink; so, as you see, I have no merit in having rescued
you.  But I must not talk longer.  Don Prospero has given instructions
for you to be kept quiet.  I shall bring the doctor at once.  Now that
you are awake it is necessary he should see you."

Without waiting for a reply, she glides out of the room, Conchita having
gone before.



CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

DON VALERIAN.

Hamersley lies pondering on what he has seen and heard, more especially
on what he has overheard--that sweet soliloquy.  Few men are insensible
to flattery.  And flattery from fair lips!  He must be indeed near death
whose heart-pulsations it does not affect.

But Don Prospero!  Who is he?  Is he the owner of the voice heard in
dialogue with Walt Wilder?  May he be the owner of all?  This thought
troubles the Kentuckian.

Approaching footsteps put a stop to his conjectures.  There are voices
outside, one of them the same late sounding so sweetly in his ears.  The
other is a man's, but not his who was conversing with Wilder.  Nor is it
that of the ex-Ranger himself.  It is Don Prospero, who soon after
enters the room, the lady leading the way.

A man of nigh sixty years of age, spare form and face, hair grizzled,
cheeks wrinkled; withal hale and hearty, as can be told by the pleasant
sparkle of his eye.  Dressed in a semi-military suit, of a subdued tint,
and facings that tell of the medical staff.

At a glance there is no danger in Don Prospero.  The invalid feels
easier, and breathes freely.

"Glad to see you looking so well," says Don Prospero, taking hold of his
patient's wrist and trying the pulse.  "Ah! much more regular; it will
be all right now.  Keep quiet, and we shall soon get you on your feet
again.  Come, senor!  A little more of this grape-juice will do you no
harm.  Nothing like our New Mexican wine for bringing back a sick man to
his appetite.  After that, we shall give you some wild-turkey broth and
a bone to pick.  In a day or two you'll be able to eat anything."

Other personages are now approaching the chamber.  The lady glides out,
calling,--

"Valerian!"

"Who is Valerian?" feebly interrogates the invalid.  Once more the name
of a man is making him unhappy.

"Don Valerian!" responds the doctor, in a tone that tells of respect for
the individual so designated; "you shall see, senor.  You are about to
make his acquaintance.  No; I am wrong about that.  I forgot.  You
cannot now."

"Cannot!  Why?"

"Because you have made it already.  _Mira_!  He is there!"

This as a tall, elegant man, under thirty years of age, steps inside the
chamber, while a still taller form appears in the doorway, almost
filling up the space between the posts.

The latter is Walt Wilder, but the former--who is he?  Don Valerian, of
course!

"Colonel Miranda!" exclaims Hamersley, starting up on his couch.  He has
already dismissed all suspicious fears of Don Prospero; and now he no
longer dreads Valerian.

"Colonel Miranda, is it you?"

"It is, _mio amigo_, myself, as you see.  And I need not tell you how
glad I am to meet you again.  So unexpected in this queer quarter, where
I little hoped to have the pleasure of entertaining an old friend.  Our
worthy doctor here informs us you will soon get strong again, and become
more of a tax on my hospitality than you have yet been.  No doubt, after
your illness, you'll have the appetite of an ostrich.  Well, in one way,
that will be fortunate, since we are living, as you may see, in a
somewhat Homeric fashion.  _Carrambo_! you will be deeming my manners
quite as rude as the roughest of Homer's heroes.  I am forgetting to
introduce you to one of whom you've heard me speak.  Though it don't so
much signify, since the lady has made your acquaintance already.  Permit
me to present my dear Adela."

It is the beautiful huntress who steps forward to be introduced, now
looking more beautiful than ever.

To Hamersley all is explained by her presence.  He remembers the
portrait upon the wall, which accounts for his fancy of having seen her
face before.

He sees it now; his wonder giving way to an intense, ardent admiration.

Soon, the young lady retiring, his curiosity comes back, and he asks his
host for an explanation.  How came Colonel Miranda there, and why?  By
what sinister combination of circumstances has the military commandant
of Albuquerque made his home in the midst of a howling wilderness, for
such is the Llano Estacado?

Despite the smiling oasis immediately surrounding it, it cannot have
been choice.  No.  Chance, or rather mischance, must have led to this
change in the affairs of his New Mexican acquaintance.  More than an
acquaintance--a friend who stood by him in the hour of danger, first
courageously protecting, then nobly volunteering to act as his second in
a duel; afterwards taking him on to his home and showing him
hospitality, kind as was ever extended to a stranger in a strange land.

No wonder Frank Hamersley holds him dear.  Dearer now, after seeing his
sister _in propria persona_--she whose portrait had so much impressed
his fancy--the impression now deepened by the thought that to her he has
been indebted for his life.

Naturally enough, the young Kentuckian is desirous of knowing all, and
is anxious about the fortunes of his Mexican friend, that for the time
seem adverse.

"No," is Colonel Miranda's response to his appeal.  "Not now, Senor Don
Francisco.  Our good doctor here places an embargo on any further
conversation for the present.  The tale I have to tell might too much
excite you.  Therefore let it rest untold till you are stronger and more
able to hear it rehearsed.  Now, _amigo_, we must leave you alone, or
rather, I should say, in the best of good company, for such has your
worthy comrade, the Senor Wilder, proved himself to be.  No doubt you'll
be anxious to have a word with one who, while your life was in danger,
would have sacrificed his own to save it.  Don Prospero permits him to
remain with you and give such explanations as you may need.  The rest of
us are to retire.  _Hasta luega_."  So saying, Miranda steps out of the
room.  "Keep perfectly quiet," adds the ex-army surgeon, preparing to
follow.  "Don't excite yourself by any act or thought that may cause a
return of the fever.  For in that lies your greatest danger.  Feel
confident, _caballero_, that you're in the company of friends.  Don
Gaulterio here will be able to convince you of that.  Ah! senor, you've
a nurse who feels a great interest in seeing you restored to health."

Pronouncing these last words in undertone and with an accent of
innuendo, accompanied by a smile which the invalid pleasantly
interprets, Don Prospero also retires, leaving his patient alone with
his old caravan guide.

Drawing one of the chairs up to the side of the bed, the ex-Ranger sits
down upon it, saying,--

"Wal, Frank, ain't it wonderful?  That we shed both be hyar, neested
snug an' comfortable as two doons in the heart of a hollow tree, arter
all the dangersome scrapes we've been passin' through.  Gheehorum!  To
think o' thar bein' sech a sweet furtile place lyin' plum centre in the
innermost recesses o' the Staked Plain, whar we purairey men allers
believed thar wun't nothin' 'ceptin' dry desert an' stinkin' sage-bush.
Instead, hyar's a sort o' puradise aroun' us, sech as I used read o'
when I war a youngster in the big Book.  Thar's the difference, that in
the Gardin o' Eeden thar's but one woman spoken of; hyar thar's two, one
o' which you yurself hev called a angel, an' ye hain't sayed anythin'
beyont the downright truth.  She air a angel, if iver thar was sech on
airth.  Now, not detractin' anythin' from her merits, thar's another
near hand--somewhat of a smaller sort, though jest as much, an' a little
bit more, to my likin'.  Ye won't mind my declarin' things that way.  As
they say in Mexican Spanish, _cadder uner a soo gooster_ (cada una a su
gusto), every one to his own way o' thinkin', so my belief air that in
this.  Gardin o' Eeden thar air two Eves, one o' which, not countin' to
be the mother o' all men, will yit, supposin' this chile to hev his way,
be the mother o' a large family o' young Wilders."

While Hamersley is still smiling at the grotesque prognostication, the
ex-Ranger, seizing hold of his hand, continues,--

"I'm so glad you're a goin' to rekiver.  Leavin' out the angels we love,
ther'll be some chance to git square wi' the devils we've sech reezun to
hate.  We may yit make them pay dear for the bloody deed they've done in
the murderin' o' our innercent companyuns."

"Amen to that," mutters Hamersley, returning the squeeze of his
comrade's hand with like determined pressure.  "Sure as I live, it shall
be so."



CHAPTER THIRTY.

THE RAIDERS RETURNING.

An Indian bivouac.  It is upon a creek called "Pecan," a confluent of
the Little Witchita river, which heads about a hundred miles from the
eastern edge of the Llano Estacado.

There are no tents in the encampment; only here and there a blanket or
buffalo robe extended horizontally upon upright poles--branches cut from
the surrounding trees.  The umbrageous canopy of the pecans protects the
encamped warriors from the fervid rays of a noonday sun, striking
vertically down.

That they are on the maraud is evidenced by the absence of tents.  A
peaceful party, in its ordinary nomadic passage across the prairies,
would have lodges along with it--grand conical structures of painted
buffalo skins--with squaws to set them up, and dogs or ponies to
transport them when struck for another move.

In this encampment on the Pecan are neither squaws, dogs, nor ponies;
only men, naked to the breech clout, their bodies brightly painted from
hip to head, chequered like a hatchment, or the jacket of a stage
harlequin, with its fantastic devices, some ludicrous, others grotesque;
still others of aspect terrible--showing a death's-head and cross-bones.

A prairie man on seeing them would at once say, "Indians on the war
trail!"

It does not need prairie experience to tell they are returning upon it.
If there are no ponies or dogs beside them, there are other animals in
abundance--horses, mules, and horned cattle.  Horses and mules of
American breed, and cattle whose ancestral stock has come from Tennessee
or Kentucky along with the early colonists of Texas.

And though there are no squaws or papooses in the encampment, there are
women and children that are white.  A group comprising both can be seen
near its centre.  It does not need the dishevelled hair and torn dresses
to show they are captives; nor yet the half-dozen savages, spear-armed,
keeping guard over them.  Their drooping heads, woeful and wan
countenances, are too sure signs of their melancholy situation.

What are these captives, and who their captors?  Two questions easily
answered.  In a general way, the picture explains itself.  The captives
are the wives and children, with sisters and grown-up daughters among
them, of Texan colonists.  They are from a settlement too near the
frontier to secure itself against Indian attack.  The captors are a
party of Comanches, with whom the reader has already made acquaintance;
for they are no other than the sub-tribe of Tenawas, of whom the Horned
Lizard is leader.

The time is two weeks subsequent to the attack on Hamersley's train;
and, judging by the spectacle now presented, we may conclude that the
Tenawa chief has not spent the interval in idleness.  Nearly three
hundred miles lie between the place where the caravan was destroyed and
the site of the plundered settlement, whose spoils are now seen in the
possession of the savages.

Such quick work requires explanation.  It is at variance with the
customs and inclinations of the prairie freebooter, who, having acquired
a booty, rarely strikes for another till the proceeds of the first be
squandered.  He resembles the anaconda, which, having gorged itself,
lies torpid till the craving of a fresh appetite stirs it to renewed
activity.

Thus would it have been with the Tenawa chief and his band, but for a
circumstance of a somewhat unusual kind.  As is known, the attack on the
prairie traders was not so much an affair of the Horned Lizard as his
confederate, the military commandant of Albuquerque.  The summons had
come to him unexpected, and after he had planned his descent on the
Texas settlement.  Sanguinary as the first affair was, it had been
short, leaving him time to carry out his original design, almost equally
tragical in its execution.  Here and there, a spear standing up, with a
tuft of light-coloured hair, blood-clotted upon its blade, is proof of
this.  Quite as successful, too.  The large drove of horses and horned
cattle, to say nothing of that crowd of despairing captives, proves the
proceeds of the later maraud worth as much, or perhaps more, than what
had been taken from the traders' waggons.

Horned Lizard is jubilant; so, also, every warrior of his band.  In loss
their late foray has cost them comparatively little--only one or two of
their number, killed by the settlers while defending themselves.  It
makes up for the severe chastisement sustained in their onslaught upon
the caravan.  And, since the number of their tribe is reduced, there are
now the fewer to share with, so that the calicoes of Lowell, the gaudy
prints of Manchester, with stripes, shroudings, and scarlet cloth to
bedeck their bodies, hand mirrors in which to admire themselves, horses
to ride upon, mules to carry their tents, and cattle to eat--with white
women to be their concubines, and white children their attendants--all
these fine things in full possession have put the savages in high
spirits--almost maddened them with delight.

A new era has dawned upon the tribe of which Horned Lizard is head.
Hitherto it has been a somewhat starving community, its range lying amid
sterile tracts, on the upper tributaries of the Red River and Canadian.
Now, before it is a plentiful future--a time of feasting and revelry,
such as rarely occurs to a robber band, whether amidst the forest-clad
mountains of Italy, or on the treeless steppes of America.

The Tenawa chief is both joyous and triumphant.  So, too, his second in
command, whose skin, with the paint cleansed from it, would show nearly
white.  For he is a Mexican by birth; when a boy made prisoner by the
Comanches, and long since matriculated into the mysteries of the
redman's life--its cunning, as its cruelties.

Now a man, he is one of the chiefs of the tribe, in authority only less
than the Horned Lizard himself, but equal to the latter in all the cruel
instincts that distinguish the savage.  "El Barbato" he is called, from
having a beard, though this he keeps clean shaven, the better to
assimilate himself to his beardless companions; while, with painted face
and hair black as their own, he looks as Indian as any of them.  But he
has not forgotten his native tongue, and this makes him useful to those
who have adopted him, especially when raiding in the Republic of Mexico.
It was through him the Tenawa chief was first brought to communicate
with the military robber, Uraga.

The Indian bivouac is down in the creek bottom in a little valley, on
both sides flanked by precipitous cliffs.  Above and below these
approach each other, so near as to leave only a narrow path along the
edge of the stream.

The savages are resting after a long, rapid march, encumbered with their
spoils and captives.  Some have lain down to sleep, their nude bodies
stretched along the sward, resembling bronze statues tumbled from their
pedestals.  Others squat around fires, roasting collops from cattle they
have killed, or eating them half raw.

A few stand or saunter by the side of the captives, upon these casting
covetous glances, as if they only waited for the opportunity to
appropriate them.  The women are all young; some of them scarce grown
girls, and some very beautiful.

A heart-harrowing sight it would be for their fathers, brothers,
husbands and sweethearts, could they but witness it.  These may not be
far off.

Some suspicion of this has carried the Horned Lizard and El Barbato up
to the crest of the cliff.  They have been summoned thither by a sign,
which the traveller on the prairies of Texas or the table plains of
Mexico never sees without stopping to scrutinise and shape conjecture
about its cause.  Before entering the canon through which runs Pecan
