happened soon after I came here.  The Governor invited me to a party of
pleasure.  The party consisted of himself, his daughters, some officers,
and others.  We were to go in boats to a favourite island resort,
several miles off.  I took one of my slaves with me, a lad that I kept
about my person.  As we were going along, this lad fell into the river.
He could not swim, and the tide was carrying him fast away to death.
Dressed as I was, in full uniform, I plunged in after him and saved him.
The wish alone to save the boy's life prompted me to risk my own.  And
for this I became the jest of the party; even the ladies tittered at my
folly.  Next evening the Governor had a large dinner-party.  I was
there.  Having caught cold, I coughed slightly; this drew attention to
me.  Remarks were made, and the Governor alluded in scoffing terms to my
exploit, which created much mirth.  `Were you drunk?' said one.  `Had
you lost your senses, to risk your life for a brute of a negro?' said
another.  `Rather than spoil my uniform, I would have knocked him on the
head with a pole,' said a third; and it was a long time before what they
termed my folly was forgotten or forgiven.  You think I am worse than
others.  I am not; but I do not condescend to their hypocrisy.  What I
am now, I have been made by this country and its associates."  [These
words are not fictitious.  The remarks of Senhor Gamba were actually
spoken by a Portuguese slave-owner, and will be found in _The Story of
the Universities' Mission to Central Africa_, pages 64-5-6.]

Senhor Gamba said this with the air of one who thinks that he has
nearly, if not quite, justified himself.  "I am no worse than others,"
is an excuse for evil conduct, not altogether unknown in more highly
favoured lands, and is often followed by the illogical conclusion,
"therefore I am not to blame," but although Harold felt pity for his
agreeable chance acquaintance, he could not admit that this explanation
excused him, nor could he get over the shock which his feelings had
sustained; it was, therefore, with comparatively little regret that he
bade him adieu on the following morning, and pursued his onward way.

Everywhere along the Shire they met with a more or less hospitable
reception from the natives, who regarded them with great favour, in
consequence of their belonging to the same nation which had sent forth
men to explore their country, defend them from the slave-dealer, and
teach them about the true God.  These men, of whom mention is made in
another chapter, had, some time before this, been sent by the Church of
England to the Manganja highlands, at the suggestion of Dr Livingstone,
and laid, we believe, the foundation-stone of Christian civilisation in
the interior of Africa, though God saw fit to arrest them in the raising
of the superstructure.

Among other pieces of useful knowledge conveyed by them to the negroes
of the Shire, was the fact that Englishmen are not cannibals, and that
they have no special longings after black man steaks!

It may perchance surprise some readers to learn that black men ever
entertain such a preposterous notion.  Nevertheless, it is literally
true.  The slavers--Arabs and Portuguese--find it in their interest to
instil this falsehood into the minds of the ignorant tribes of the
interior, from whom the slaves are gathered, in order that their
captives may entertain a salutary horror of Englishmen, so that if their
dhows should be chased by our cruisers while creeping northward along
the coast and run the risk of being taken, the slaves may willingly aid
their captors in trying to escape.  That the lesson has been well learnt
and thoroughly believed is proved by the fact that when a dhow is
obliged to run ashore to avoid capture, the slaves invariably take to
the woods on the wings of terror, preferring, no doubt to be re-enslaved
rather than to be roasted and eaten by white fiends.  Indeed, so
thoroughly has this been engrained into the native mind, that mothers
frequently endeavour to overawe their refractory offspring by
threatening to hand them over to the dreadful white monster who will eat
them up if they don't behave!



CHAPTER EIGHT.

RELATES ADVENTURES IN THE SHIRE VALLEY, AND TOUCHES ON ONE OR TWO PHASES
OF SLAVERY.

Everything depends upon taste, as the monkey remarked when it took to
nibbling the end of its own tail!  If you like a thing, you take one
view of it; if you don't like it, you take another view.  Either view,
if detailed, would be totally irreconcilable with the other.

The lower part of the river Shire, into which our travellers had now
entered, is a vast swamp.  There are at least two opinions in regard to
that region.  To do justice to those with whom we don't sympathise, we
give our opponent's view first.  Our opponent, observe, is an honest and
competent man; he speaks truly; he only looks at it in another light
from Harold Seadrift and Disco Lillihammer.

He says of the river Shire, "It drains a low and exceedingly fertile
valley of from fifteen to twenty miles in breadth.  Ranges of wooded
hills bound this valley on both sides.  After the first twenty miles you
come to Mount Morambala, which rises with steep sides to 4000 feet in
height.  It is wooded to the top, and very beautiful.  A small village
peeps out about half-way up the mountain.  It has a pure, bracing
atmosphere, and is perched above mosquito range.  The people on the
summit have a very different climate and vegetation from those on the
plains, and they live amidst luxuriant vegetation.  There are many
species of ferns, some so large as to deserve the name of trees.  There
are also lemon and orange trees growing wild, and birds and animals of
all kinds."  Thus far we agree with our opponent but listen to him as he
goes on:--

"The view from Morambala is extensive, but cheerless past description.
Swamp, swamp-reeking, festering, rotting, malaria-pregnant swamp, where
poisonous vapours for several months in the year are ever bulging up and
out into the air,--lies before you as far as the eye can reach, and
farther.  If you enter the river at the worst seasons of the year, the
chances are you will take the worst type of fever.  If, on the other
hand, you enter it during the best season, when the swamps are fairly
dried up, you have everything in your favour."

Now, our opponent gives a true statement of facts undoubtedly, but his
view of them is not cheering.

Contrast them with the view of Disco Lillihammer.  That sagacious seaman
had entered the Shire neither in the "best" nor the "worst" of the
season.  He had chanced upon it somewhere between the two.

"Git up your steam an' go 'longside," he said to Jumbo one afternoon, as
the two canoes were proceeding quietly among magnificent giant-reeds,
sedges, and bulrushes, which towered high above them--in some places
overhung them.

"I say, Mister Harold, ain't it splendid?"

"Magnificent!" replied Harold with a look of quiet enthusiasm.

"I _does_ enjoy a swamp," continued the seaman, allowing a thin cloud to
trickle from his lips.

"So do I, Disco."

"There's such a many outs and ins an' roundabouts in it.  And such
powerful reflections o' them reeds in the quiet water.  W'y, sir, I do
declare w'en I looks through 'em in a dreamy sort of way for a long time
I get to fancy they're palm-trees, an' that we're sailin' through a
forest without no end to it; an' when I looks over the side an' sees
every reed standin' on its other self, so to speak, an' follers the
under one down till my eyes git lost in the blue sky an' clouds _below_
us, I do sometimes feel as if we'd got into the middle of fairy-land,--
was fairly afloat on the air, an' off on a voyage through the univarse!
But it's them reflections as I like most.  Every leaf, an' stalk, an'
flag is just as good an' real _in_ the water as out of it.  An' just
look at that there frog, sir, that one on the big leaf which has swelled
hisself up as if he wanted to bust, with his head looking up hopefully
to the--ah! he's down with a plop like lead, but he wos sittin' on his
own image which wos as clear as his own self.  Then there's so much
variety, sir--that's where it is.  You never know wot you're comin' to
in them swamps.  It may be a openin' like a pretty lake, with islands of
reeds everywhere; or it may be a narrow bit like a canal, or a river; or
a bit so close that you go scrapin' the gun'les on both sides.  An' the
life, too, is most amazin'.  Never saw nothin' like it nowhere.  All
kinds, big an' little, plain an' pritty, queer an' 'orrible, swarms here
to sitch an extent that I've got it into my head that this Shire valley
must be the great original nursery of animated nature."

"It looks like it, Disco."

The last idea appeared to furnish food for reflection, as the two
friends here relapsed into silence.

Although Disco's description was quaint, it could scarcely be styled
exaggerated, for the swamp was absolutely alive with animal life.  The
principal occupant of these marshes is the elephant, and hundreds of
these monster animals may be seen in one herd, feeding like cattle in a
meadow.  Owing to the almost impenetrable nature of the reedy jungle,
however, it is impossible to follow them, and anxious though Disco was
to kill one, he failed to obtain a single shot.  Buffaloes and other
large game were also numerous in this region, and in the water
crocodiles and hippopotami sported about everywhere, while aquatic birds
of every shape and size rendered the air vocal with their cries.
Sometimes these feathered denizens of the swamp arose, when startled, in
a dense cloud so vast that the mighty rush of their wings was almost
thunderous in character.

The crocodiles were not only numerous but dangerous because of their
audacity.  They used to watch at the places where native women were in
the habit of going down to the river for water, and not unfrequently
succeeded in seizing a victim.  This, however, only happened at those
periods when the Shire was in flood, when fish were driven from their
wonted haunts, and the crocodiles were reduced to a state of starvation
and consequent ferocity.

One evening, while our travellers were proceeding slowly up stream, they
observed the corpse of a negro boy floating past the canoe; just then a
monstrous crocodile rushed at it with the speed of a greyhound, caught
it and shook it as a terrier does a rat.  Others dashed at the prey,
each with his powerful tail causing the water to churn and froth as he
tore off a piece.  In a few seconds all was gone.  [Livingstone's
_Zambesi and its Tributaries_, page 452.] That same evening Zombo had a
narrow escape.  After dusk he ran down to the river to drink.  He
chanced to go to a spot where a crocodile was watching.  It lay settled
down in the mud with its head on a level with the water, so that in the
feeble light it could not be seen.  While Zombo was busy laving the
water into his mouth it suddenly rushed at him and caught him by the
hand.  The limb of a bush was fortunately within reach, and he laid hold
of it.  There was a brief struggle.  The crocodile tugged hard, but the
man tugged harder; at the same time he uttered a yell which brought
Jumbo to his side with an oar, a blow from which drove the hideous
reptile away.  Poor Zombo was too glad to have escaped with his life to
care much about the torn hand, which rendered him _hors de combat_ for
some time after that.

Although Disco failed to get a shot at an elephant, his hopeful spirit
was gratified by the catching of a baby elephant alive.  It happened
thus:--

One morning, not very long after Zombo's tussle with the crocodile,
Disco's canoe, which chanced to be in advance, suddenly ran almost into
the midst of a herd of elephants which were busy feeding on palm-nuts,
of which they are very fond.  Instantly the whole troop scattered and
fled.  Disco, taken completely by surprise, omitted his wonted "Hallo!"
as he made an awkward plunge at his rifle, but before he could bring it
to bear, the animals were over the bank of the river and lost in the
dense jungle.  But a fine little elephant, at that period of life which,
in human beings, might be styled the toddling age, was observed to
stumble while attempting to follow its mother up the bank.  It fell and
rolled backwards.

"Give way for your lives!" roared Disco.

The boat shot its bow on the bank, and the seaman flew rather than
leaped upon the baby elephant!

The instant it was laid hold of it began to scream with incessant and
piercing energy after the fashion of a pig.

"Queek! come in canoe!  Modder come back for 'im," cried Jumbo in some
anxiety.

Disco at once appreciated the danger of the enraged mother returning to
the rescue, but, resolved not to resign his advantage, he seized the
vicious little creature by the proboscis and dragged it by main force to
the canoe, into which he tumbled, hauled the proboscis inboard, as
though it had been the bite of a cable, and held on.

"Shove off! shove off! and give way, lads!  Look alive!"

The order was promptly obeyed, and in a few minutes the baby was dragged
into the boat and secured.

This prize, however, was found to be more of a nuisance than an
amusement and it was soon decided that it must be disposed of.
Accordingly, that very night, much to the regret of the men who wanted
to make a meal of it, Disco led his baby squealing into the jungle and
set it free with a hearty slap on the flank, and an earnest
recommendation to make all sail after its venerable mother, which it did
forthwith, cocking its ears and tail, and shrieking as it went.

Two days after this event they made a brief halt at a poor village where
they were hospitably received by the chief, who was much gratified by
the liberal quantity of calico with which the travellers paid for their
entertainment.  Here they met with a Portuguese half-caste who was
reputed one of the greatest monsters of cruelty in that part of the
country.  He was, however, not much more villainous in aspect than many
other half-castes whom they saw.  He was on his way to the coast in a
canoe manned by slaves.  If Harold and Disco had known that this was his
last journey to the coast they would have regarded him with greater
interest.  As it was, having learned his history from the chief through
their interpreter, they turned from him with loathing.

As this half-caste's career illustrates the depths to which humanity may
fall in the hot-bed of slavery, as well as, to some extent, the state of
things existing under Portuguese rule on the east coast of Africa, we
give the particulars briefly.

Instead of the whip, this man used the gun, which he facetiously styled
his "minister of justice," and, in mere wantonness, he was known to have
committed murder again and again, yet no steps were taken by the
authorities to restrain, much less to punish him.  Men heard of his
murders, but they shrugged their shoulders and did nothing.  It was only
a wild beast of a negro that was killed, they said, and what was that!
They seemed to think less of it than if he had shot a hippopotamus.  One
of his murders was painfully notorious, even to its minutest
particulars.  Over the female slaves employed in a house and adjacent
lands there is usually placed a head-woman, a slave also, chosen for
such an office for her blind fidelity to her master.  This man had one
such woman, one who had ever been faithful to him and his interests, who
had never provoked him by disobedience or ill-conduct, and against whom,
therefore, he could have no cause of complaint.  One day when half drunk
he was lying on a couch in his house; his forewoman entered and made
herself busy with some domestic work.  As her master lay watching her,
his savage disposition found vent in a characteristic joke: "Woman,"
said he, "I think I will shoot you."  The woman turned round and said,
"Master, I am your slave; you can do what you will with me.  You can
kill me if you like; I can do nothing.  But don't kill me, master, for
if you do, who is there to look after your other women? they will all
run away from you."

She did not mean to irritate her master, but instantly the man's brutal
egotism was aroused.  The savage jest became a fearful reality, and he
shouted with rage:--

"Say you that! say you that! fetch me my gun.  I will see if my women
will run away after I have killed you."

Trained to implicit obedience, the poor woman did as she was bid.  She
brought the gun and handed him powder and ball.  At his command she
knelt down before him, and the wretch fired at her breast.  In his
drunken rage he missed his mark--the ball went through her shoulder.
She besought him to spare her.  Deaf to her entreaties, he ordered her
to fetch more powder and ball.  Though wounded and in agony, she obeyed
him.  Again the gun was loaded, again levelled and fired, and the woman
fell dead at his feet.  [The above narrative is quoted almost _verbatim_
from _The Story of the Universities' Mission to Central Africa_, pages
78 and 79, the author of which vouches for its accuracy.]

The facts of this case were known far and wide.  The Portuguese Governor
was acquainted with them, as well as the ministers of justice, but no
one put forth a hand to punish the monster, or to protect his slaves.

But vengeance overtook him at last.  On his way down the Zambesi he shot
one of his men.  The others, roused to irresistible fury, sprang upon
him and strangled him.

_Then_, indeed, the Governor and Magistrates were roused to administer
"justice!"  They had allowed this fiend to murder slaves at his will,
but no sooner had the slaves turned on and killed their master than
ceaseless energy and resolution were displayed in punishing those who
slew him.  Soldiers were sent out in all directions; some of the
canoe-men were shot down like wild beasts, the rest were recaptured and
publicly whipped to death!

Reader, this is "domestic slavery."  This is what Portugal and Zanzibar
claim the right to practise.  This is what Great Britain has for many
years declined to interfere with.  This is the curse with which Africa
is blighted at the present day in some of her fairest lands, and this is
what Portugal has decreed shall not terminate in what she calls her
African dominions for some years to come.  In other words, it has been
coolly decreed by that weakest of all the European nations, that
slavery, murder, injustice, and every other conceivable and
unmentionable vice and villainy shall still, for some considerable time,
continue to be practised on the men, women, and children of Africa!

Higher up the Shire river, the travellers saw symptoms of recent
distress among the people, which caused them much concern.  Chimbolo, in
particular, was rendered very anxious by the account given of the famine
which prevailed still farther up the river, and the numerous deaths that
had taken place in consequence.

The cause of the distress was a common one, and easily explained.
Slave-dealers had induced the Ajawa, a warlike tribe, to declare war
against the people of the Manganja highlands.  The Ajawa had done this
before, and were but too ready to do it again.  They invaded the land,
captured many of the young people, and slew the aged.  Those who escaped
to the jungle found on their return that their crops were destroyed.
Little seed remained in their possession, and before that was planted
and grown, famine began to reduce the ranks, already thinned by war.

Indications of this sad state of things became more numerous as the
travellers advanced.  Few natives appeared to greet them on the banks of
the river as they went along, and these few resembled living skeletons.
In many places they found dead bodies lying on the ground in various
stages of decomposition, and everywhere they beheld an aspect of settled
