
With eager expectation they gazed at their leader while he gave out a
hymn.

"You'll find little books on the table here, those of you who haven't
got 'em," he said, pointing to a little pile of red-covered booklets at
his side.  "We'll sing the 272nd.

  "`Sing them over again to me,
  Wonderful words of life!'"

Really, reader, it is not easy to convey in words the effect of the
singing of that congregation!  Nothing that we on land are accustomed to
can compare with it.  In the first place, the volume of sound was
tremendous, for these men seemed to have been gifted with leathern lungs
and brazen throats.  Many of the voices were tuneful as well as
powerful.  One or two, indeed, were little better than cracked
tea-kettles, but the good voices effectually drowned the cracked
kettles.  Moreover, there was deep enthusiasm in many of the hearts
present, and the hold was small.  We leave the rest to the reader's
imagination, but we are bound to say that it had a thrilling effect.
And they were sorry, too, when the hymn was finished.  This was obvious,
for when one of the singers began the last verse over again the others
joined him with alacrity and sang it straight through.  Even Gunter and
those like-minded men who had remained on deck were moved by the fervour
of the singing.

Then the sailor-missionary offered a prayer, as simple as it was
straightforward and short, after which a chapter was read, and another
hymn sung.  Then came the discourse, founded on the words, "Whosoever
will."

"There you have it, lads--clear as the sun at noonday--free as the
rolling sea.  The worst drunkard and swearer in the Short Blue comes
under that `whosoever'--ay, the worst man in the world, for Jesus is
able and willing to save to the uttermost."  ("Praise God!" ejaculated
one of the earnest listeners fervently.)

But fear not, reader, we have no intention of treating you to a
semi-nautical sermon.  Whether you be Christian or not, our desire is
simply to paint for you a true picture of life on the North Sea as we
have seen it, and, as it were unwise to omit the deepest shadows from a
picture, so would it be inexcusable to leave out the highest lights--
even although you should fail to recognise them as such.

The discourse was not long, but the earnestness of the preacher was very
real.  The effect on his audience was varied.  Most of them sympathised
deeply, and seemed to listen as much with eyes as ears.  A few, who had
not come there for religious purposes, wore somewhat cynical, even
scornful, expressions at first, but these were partially subdued by the
manner of the speaker as he reasoned of spiritual things and the world
to come.

On deck, Gunter and those who had stayed with him became curious to know
what the "preachin' skipper" was saying, and drew near to the
fore-hatch, up which the tones of his strong voice travelled.  Gradually
they bent their heads down and lay at full-length on the deck listening
intently to every word.  They noted, also, the frequent ejaculations of
assent, and the aspirations of hope that escaped from the audience.

Not one, but two or three hymns were sung after the discourse was over,
and one after another of the fishermen prayed.  They were very loath to
break up, but, a breeze having arisen, it became necessary that they
should depart, so they came on deck at last, and an animated scene of
receiving and exchanging books, magazines, tracts, and pamphlets ensued.
Then, also, Gunter got some salve for his shins, Ned Spivin had his cut
hand dressed and plastered.  Cuffs were supplied to those whose wrists
had been damaged, and gratuitous advice was given generally to all to
give up drink.

"An' don't let the moderate drinkers deceive you lads," said the
skipper, "as they're apt to do--an' no wonder, for they deceive
themselves.  Moderate drinkin' may be good, for all I know, for old folk
an' sick folk, but it's _not_ good for young and healthy men.  They
don't need stimulants, an' if they take what they don't need they're
sure to suffer for it.  There's a terrible _line_ in drinkin', an' if
you once cross that line, your case is all but hopeless.  I once knew a
man who crossed it, and when that man began to drink he used to say that
he did it in `moderation,' an' he went on in `moderation,' an' the evil
was so slow in workin' that he never yet knew when he crossed the line,
an' he died at last of what he called moderate drinkin'.  They all begin
in moderation, but some of 'em go on to the ruin of body, soul, an'
spirit, rather than give up their moderation!  Come now, lads, I want
one or two o' you young fellows to sign the temperance pledge.  It can't
cost you much to do it just now, but if you grow up drinkers you may
reach a point--I don't know where that point lies--to come back from
which will cost you something like the tearing of your souls out o' your
bodies.  You'll come, won't you?"

"Yes, I'll go," said a bright young fisherman with a frame like Hercules
and a face almost as soft as that of a girl.

"That's right!  Come down."

"And I've brought two o' my boys," said a burly man with a cast-iron
sort of face, who had been himself an abstainer for many years.

While the master of the mission smack was producing the materials for
signing the pledge in the cabin, he took occasion to explain that the
signing was only a help towards the great end of temperance; that
nothing but conversion to God, and constant trust in the living Saviour,
could make man or woman safe.

"It's not hard to understand," he said, looking the youths earnestly in
the eyes.  "See here, suppose an unbeliever determines to get the better
of his besettin' sin.  He's man enough to strive well for a time.  At
last he begins to grow a little weary o' the battle--it _is_ so awful
hard.  Better almost to die an' be done with it, he sometimes thinks.
Then comes a day when his temptation is ten times more than he is able
to bear.  He throws up the sponge; he has done his best an' failed, so
away he goes like the sow that was washed to his wallowing in the mire.
But he has _not_ done his best.  He has _not_ gone to his Maker; an'
surely the maker of a machine is the best judge o' how to mend it.  Now,
when a believer in Jesus comes to the same point o' temptation he falls
on his knees an' cries for help; an' he gets it too, for faithful is He
that has promised to help those who call upon Him in trouble.  Many a
man has fallen on his knees as weak as a baby, and risen up as strong as
a giant."

"Here," said a voice close to the speaker's elbow, "here, hand me the
pen, an' I'll sign the pledge."

"What, _you_, Billy Bright!" said the missionary, smiling at the
precocious manliness of the little fellow.  "Does your father want you
to do it?"

"Oh! you never mind what my father wants.  He leaves me pretty much to
do as I please--except smoke, and as he won't let me do that.  I mean to
spite him by refusin' to drink when he wants me to."

"But I'm afraid, Billy," returned the missionary, laughing, "that that's
not quite the spirit in which to sign the pledge."

"Did I say it was, old boy!" retorted Billy, seizing the pen, dabbing it
into the ink, and signing his name in a wild straggling sort of way,
ending with a huge round blot.

"There, that'll do instead of a full stop," he said, thrusting his
little hands into his pockets as he swaggered out of the cabin and went
on deck.

"He'll make a rare good man, or an awful bad 'un, that," said the
missionary skipper, casting a kindly look after the boy.

Soon afterwards the boats left the mission smack, and her crew began to
bustle about, making preparation to let down the gear whenever the
Admiral should give the signal.

"We carry two sorts of trawl-nets, Andrew," said the captain to his
mate, who was like-minded in all respects, "and I think we have caught
some men to-day with one of 'em--praise the Lord!"

"Yes, praise the Lord!" said the mate, and apparently deeming this, as
it was, a sufficient reply, he went about his work in silence.

The breeze freshened.  The shades of night gathered; the Admiral gave
his signal; the nets were shot and the Short Blue fleet sailed away into
the deepening darkness of the wild North Sea.

Note.  Since that day additional vessels have been attached to the
Mission-fleet, which now, 1886, consists of five smacks--and will
probably, ere long, number many more--all earning their own maintenance
while serving the Mission cause.  But these do by no means meet the
requirements of the various North Sea fleets.  There are still in those
fleets thousands of men and boys who derive no benefit from the Mission
vessels already sent out, because they belong to fleets to which
Mission-ships have not yet been attached; and it is the earnest prayer
of those engaged in the good work that liberal-minded Christians may
send funds to enable them not only to carry on, but to extend, their
operations in this interesting field of labour.



CHAPTER TEN.

A STRONG CONTRAST--A VICTIM OF THE COPER.

Birds of a feather flock together, undoubtedly--at sea as well as on
land.  As surely as Johnston, and Moore, and Jim Frost, and such men,
hung about the mission-ship--ready to go aboard and to have a little
meeting when suitable calms occurred, so surely did David Bright, the
Swab, and other like-minded men, find themselves in the neighbourhood of
the Coper when there was nothing to be done in the way of fishing.

Two days after the events narrated in the last chapter, the Swab--whose
proper name was Dick Herring, and who sailed his own smack, the _White
Cloud_--found himself in the neighbourhood of the floating grog-shop.

"Get out the boat, Brock," said Herring to his mate--who has already
been introduced to the reader as Pimply Brock, and whose nose rendered
any explanation of that name unnecessary; "take some fish, an' get as
much as you can for 'em."

The Swab did not name what his mate was to procure in barter with the
fish, neither did Brock ask.  It was an old-established order, well
understood.

Soon Brock and two hands were on their way to the floating
"poison-shop," as one of the men had named it.  He was affectionately
received there, and, ere long, returned to the _White Cloud_ with a
supply of fire-water.

"You're good at a bargain, Brock," said his master, with an approving
nod, tossing off a glass of the demon that held him as if in chains of
steel--chains that no man could break.  "I wish," he added, looking
round on the sea wistfully, "that some of our friends would come to join
us in a spree."

"So do I," said Brock, slightly inflaming his nasal pimples, by pouring
a glass of spirits down his throat.

There must be some strange, subtle sympathy between drunkards, for, at
the very time these two men expressed their wish, the master of the
_Evening Star_ said to Gunter, "Get out the boat.  I'll go cruisin'."

It must not be supposed that by this he meant to declare his intention
of going off on a lengthened voyage in his little boat.  David Bright
only meant that, having observed through his telescope the little
transaction between the _White Cloud_ and the Coper, his intention was
to pay that vessel a visit--to go carousing, or, as the North Sea
smacksmen have it, "cruisin'."

Gunter obeyed the order with satisfaction and alacrity.

"Jump in, Spivin, and you come too, Billy."

"I say, father," said the boy in a low voice, "are ye goin' to drink wi'
the Swab after what ye heard aboard the mission smack?"

"You clap a stopper on your jaw an' obey orders," replied the skipper
angrily.

Although full of light-hearted insolence, which his mates called cheek,
Billy was by no means a rebellious boy.  He knew, from sad experience,
that when his father made up his mind to "go in for a drinking-bout,"
the consequences were often deplorable, and fain would he have dissuaded
him, but he also knew that to persist in opposing him would only make
matters worse, and probably bring severe chastisement on himself.  With
an air of quiet gravity, therefore, that seemed very unnatural to him,
he leaped into the boat and took an oar.

"What cheer, David?" said the Swab, offering his rugged hand when the
former jumped on the deck of the _White Cloud_.  "I thought you'd come."

"You was right, Dick," returned David, shaking the proffered hand.

"Come below, an' wet your whistle.  Bring your men too," said Dick.
"This is a new hand?" pointing to Ned.

"Ay, he's noo, is Ned Spivin, but he can drink."

"Come down, then, all of 'ee."

Now, Ned Spivin was one of those yielding good-natured youths who find
it impossible to resist what may be styled good-fellowship.  If you had
tried to force Ned Spivin, to order him, or to frighten him into any
course, he would have laughed in your face and fought you if necessary;
but if you tempted Ned to do evil by kindly tones and looks, he was
powerless to resist.

"You're right, skipper, I can drink--sometimes."  They all went below,
leaving Billy on deck "to look after the boat," as his father said,
though, being made fast, the boat required no looking after.

Immediately the party in the little cabin had a glass round.  Ere long
it occurred to them that they might have another glass.  Of course they
did not require to be reminded of their pipes, and as nearly all the
crew was in the little cabin, besides the visitors, the fumes from pipes
and glasses soon brought the atmosphere to a condition that would have
failed to support any but the strongest kind of human life.  It
supported these men well enough, however, for they soon began to use
their tongues and brains in a manner that might have surprised a
dispassionate observer.

It is, perhaps, needless to say that they interlarded their conversation
with fearful oaths, to which of course we can do no more than make
passing reference.

By degrees the conversation degenerated into disputation, for it is the
manner of some men, when "in liquor," to become intensely pugnacious as
well as owlishly philosophical.  The subject-matter of dispute may be
varied, but the result is nearly always the same--a series of amazing
convolutions of the brain, which is supposed to be profound reasoning,
waxing hotter and hotter as the utterances grow thicker and thicker, and
the tones louder and louder, until the culminating point is reached when
the point which could not be proved by the mind is hammered home with
the fist.

To little Billy, who had been left in sole charge of the deck, and whose
little mind had been strangely impressed on board the mission-ship, the
words and sounds, to say nothing of the fumes, which proceeded from the
cabin furnished much food for meditation.  The babel of tongues soon
became incessant, for three, if not four or five, of the speakers had
become so impressed with the importance of their opinions, and so
anxious to give their mates the benefit, that they all spoke at once.
This of course necessitated much loud talking and gesticulation by all
of them, which greatly helped, no doubt, to make their meaning clear.
At least it did not render it less clear.  As the din and riot increased
so did the tendency to add fuel to the fire by deeper drinking, which
resulted in fiercer quarrelling.

At last one of the contending voices shouted so loud that the others for
a few moments gave way, and the words became audible to the little
listener on deck.  The voice belonged to Gunter.

"You said," he shouted fiercely, "that I--"

"No, I didn't," retorted Brock, breaking in with a rather premature
contradiction.

"Hear him out.  N-nothin' like fair play in ar-argiment," said an
extremely drunken voice.

"Right you are," cried another; "fire away, Gunter."

"You said," resumed Gunter with a little more of argument in his tone,
though still vehemently, "that I said--that--that--well, whativer it was
I said, I'll take my davy that I niver said anything o' the sort."

"That's a lie," cried Brock.

"You're another," shouted Gunter, and waved his hand contemptuously.

Whether it was accident or design we know not, but Gunter's hand knocked
the pipe out of Brook's mouth.

To Billy's ear the well-known sound of a blow followed, and he ran to
look down into the cabin, where all was instantly in an uproar.

"Choke him off," cried David Bright.  "Knock his brains out," suggested
Herring.  Billy could not see well through the dense smoke, but
apparently the more humane advice was followed, for, after a good deal
of gasping, a heavy body was flung upon the floor.

"All right, shove him into a bunk," cried the Swab.

At the same moment Ned Spivin sprang on deck, and, stretching himself
with his arms extended upwards, drew a long breath of fresh air.

"There, Billy," he said, "I've had enough of it."

"Of grog, d'ye mean?" asked the boy.

"No, but of the hell-upon-earth down there," replied the young man.

"Well, Ned, I should just think you _have_ had enough o' that," said
Billy, "an' of grog too--though you don't seem much screwed after all."

"I'm not screwed at all, Billy--not even half-seas-over.  It's more the
smoke an' fumes that have choked me than the grog.  Come, lad, let's go
for'ard an' git as far from it as we can."

The man and boy went to the bow of the vessel, and seated themselves
near the heel of the bowsprit, where the sounds from the cabin reached
