shortly after our guide returned with his knife clotted with blood.  He
had overtaken and slain the other negro.

I cannot convey to the reader the horror that filled me and my two
companions at this unexpected and melancholy termination of the affair.
Yet we felt that we were guiltless of rashly spilling human blood, for
Jack had no intention of killing the poor negro whom he tripped up; and
as to the other, we could not have prevented our guide from doing what
he did.  He himself deemed it justifiable, and said that if that man had
escaped to the village, and told who it was that frightened them out of
the cave, they would certainly have come back and murdered us all.
There was truth in this.  Still we could not but feel overwhelmed with
sadness at the incident.

We were now doubly anxious to get away from this cave, so we rapidly
finished the discussion of our plan, and Jack arranged that he should
accompany what may be termed the overland part of our expedition.  This
settled, we washed the charcoal off our persons, with the exception of
that on our faces, having been advised by King Jambai himself to hunt
with black faces, as wild animals were quicker to perceive our white
skins than their black ones.  Then we resumed our garments, and quitting
the haunted cavern, set out on our return journey to the camp.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

PETERKIN DISTINGUISHES HIMSELF, AND OKANDAGA IS DISPOSED OF, ETCETERA.

When within about three miles of the place where our men had been
ordered to haul the canoe out of the water and make the camp, we came to
a halt and prepared a spot for Okandaga to spend an hour or two in
sleep.  The poor creature was terribly exhausted.  We selected a very
sequestered place in a rocky piece of ground, where the light of the
small fire we kindled, in order to cook her some supper, could not be
seen by any one who might chance to pass by that way.

Jack remained with her, but the guide went on with us, in order to give
instructions to our men, who, when we arrived, seemed much surprised
that we had made such a bad hunt during the night.  Having pointed out
our route, Makarooroo then left us, and we lay down to obtain a few
hours' repose.

We had not lain more than an hour when one of our men awoke us, saying
that it was time to start; so we rose, very unwillingly, and embarked.

"I say, Ralph," observed Peterkin, as we glided up the stream, which in
this place was narrow and sluggish, "isn't it strange that mankind, as a
rule, with very few exceptions, should so greatly dislike getting up in
the morning?"

"It is rather curious, no doubt.  But I suspect we have ourselves to
thank for the disinclination.  If we did not sit up so late at night we
should not feel the indisposition to rise so strong upon us in the
morning."

"There you are quite wrong, Ralph.  I always find that the sooner I go
to bed the later I am in getting up.  The fact is, I've tried every
method of rousing myself, and without success.  And yet I can say
conscientiously that I am desirous of improving; for when at sea I used
to have my cot slung at the head with a block-tackle, and I got one of
the middies to come when the watch was changed and lower me, so that my
head lay on the deck below, and my feet pointed to the beams above.  And
would you believe it, I got so accustomed to this at last that, when
desperately sleepy, I used to hold on in that position for a few
minutes, and secure a short nap during the process of suffocation with
blood to the head."

"You must indeed have been incorrigible," said I, laughing.
"Nevertheless, I feel assured that the want of will lies at the root of
the evil."

"Of course you do," retorted Peterkin testily; "people always say that
when I try to defend myself."

"Is it not probable that people always say that just because they feel
that there is truth in the remark?"

"Humph!" ejaculated my friend.

"Besides," I continued, "our success in battling with the evil
tendencies of our natures depends often very much on the manner in which
we make the attack.  I have pondered this subject deeply, and have come
to the conclusion that there is a certain moment in the awaking hour of
each day which if seized and improved gains for us the victory.  You
know Shakespeare's judicious remark--`There is a tide in the affairs of
men which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune,' or something to
that effect.  I never feel quite sure of the literal correctness of my
quotations, although I am generally certain as to the substance.  Well,
there is a tide also in the affair of getting up in the morning, and its
flood-point is the precise instant when you recover consciousness.  At
that moment every one, I believe, has moral courage to leap violently
out of bed; but let that moment pass, and you sink supinely back, if not
to sleep, at least into a desperate condition of unconquerable
lethargy."

"You may be very correct in your reasoning," returned Peterkin; "but not
having pondered that subject quite so deeply as you seem to have done, I
shall modestly refrain from discussing it.  Meanwhile I will go ashore,
and stalk yonder duck which floats so comfortably and lazily in the cove
just beyond the point ahead of us, that I think it must be in the
condition of one who, having missed the flood-tide you have just
referred to, is revelling in the luxury of its second nap.--Ho, you
ebony-faced scoundrel!" he added, turning to the negro who steered our
canoe; "shove ashore, like a good fellow.--Come, Ralph, lend me your
fowling-piece, and do you carry my big rifle.  There is nothing so good
for breakfast as a fat duck killed and roasted before it has had time to
cool."

"And here is a capital spot on which to breakfast," said I, as we
landed.

"First-rate.  Now then, follow me, and mind your muzzle.  Better put the
rifle over your shoulder, Ralph, so that if it does go off it may hit
the sun or one of the stars.  A six-ounce ball in one's spine is not a
pleasant companion in a hunting expedition."

"But," retorted I, "you forget that I am particularly careful.  I always
carry my piece on half-cock, and _never_ put my finger on the trigger."

"Indeed: not even when you pull it?"

"Of course when I am about to fire; but you know well enough what I
mean."

"Hush, Ralph! we must keep silence now and step lightly."

In a few minutes we had gained the clump of bushes close behind which
the duck lay; and Peterkin, going down on all fours, crept forward to
get a shot.  I followed him in the same manner, and when he stopped to
take a deliberate aim, I crept up alongside.  The duck had heard our
approach, and was swimming about in a somewhat agitated manner among the
tall reeds, so that my companion made one or two unsuccessful attempts
to take aim.

"What an aggravating thing!" exclaimed Peterkin in a whisper.

At that moment I happened to cast my eyes across the river, and the
reader may judge of my surprise when I beheld two elephants standing
among the trees.  They stood so silently and so motionless, and were so
like in colour to the surrounding foliage, that we had actually
approached to within about thirty yards without observing them.  I
touched Peterkin on the shoulder, and pointed to them without saying a
word.  The expression of amazement that instantly overspread his
features showed that he also saw them.

"The rifle, Ralph," he said, in a low, excited whisper.

I handed it to him.  With careful deliberation he took aim, and fired at
the animal nearest to us.  The heavy ball entered its huge body just
behind the shoulder.  Both elephants tossed up their trunks, and
elevating their great ears they dashed furiously into the bush; but the
one that had been hit, after plunging head foremost down a low bank fell
to the ground with a heavy crash, quite dead.

It was a splendid shot.  The natives, who almost immediately after came
up screaming with delight, could scarcely believe their eyes.  They
dashed across the river in the canoe, while some of them, regardless of
the alligators that might be hidden there, sprang into the water and
swam over.

"I'm sorry we did not get the duck, however," observed Peterkin, as we
returned to the place where we had left the canoe.  "Elephant meat is
coarse, nasty stuff, and totally unfit for civilised mouths, though
these niggers seem to relish it amazingly."

"You forget the baked foot," said I.

"Well, so I did.  It was pretty good, certainly; but that's the only
part o' the brute that's fit to eat."

Soon after this the canoe came back and took us over the river; and we
breakfasted on the side where the elephant had fallen, in order to allow
the natives to cut off such portions of the meat as they required, and
to secure the tusks.  Then we continued our journey, and at night
encamped near a grove of palm-trees which Makarooroo had described to
us, and where we were soon joined by him and Jack, who told us that he
had got on well, during the day--that he had shot an antelope, and had
seen a zebra and a rhinoceros, besides a variety of smaller game.  He
also told us that Okandaga was encamped in a place of safety a few miles
to the right of our position, and that she had stood the journey well.

I was much interested by Jack's account of the zebra and the rhinoceros,
specimens of both of which animals I had seen in menageries, and felt
disposed to change places with him on the march; but reflecting that he
was much more likely than I successfully to hunt anything he might
pursue, I made up my mind to remain by the canoe.

Thus we travelled for several days without anything particular
occurring, and at length arrived at a native village which lay on the
banks of a noble stream.

Here Makarooroo introduced us to Mbango the chief, a fine-looking and
good-natured negro, who received us most hospitably, supplied us with
food, and urged us to remain and hunt with his people.  This, however,
we declined to do, telling our entertainer that we had come to his
country for the purpose of shooting that wonderful animal the gorilla,
but assuring him that we would come back without fail if we should be
spared.  We further assured him on this head by proposing to leave in
his charge a woman for whom we had a great respect and love, and whom we
made him promise faithfully to take care of till we returned.

Peterkin, who soon gave them a specimen of his powers as a marksman, and
contrived in other ways to fill the minds of the chief and his people
with a very exalted idea of his powers both of body and intellect,
endeavoured to make assurance doubly sure by working on their
superstitious fears.

"Tell Mbango," said he to our guide, "that though we be small in numbers
we are very powerful; that we can do deeds" (here he became awfully
solemn and mysterious) "such as no black man ever conceived of; and that
if a hair of the head of Okandaga is hurt, we will on our return--"

Instead of completing the sentence, Peterkin started up, threw himself
into violent contortions, rolled his eyes in a fearful manner, and, in
short, gave the chief and his people to understand that something quite
indescribable and unutterably terrible would be the result of their
playing us false.

"Send for Njamie," said Mbango to one of his retainers.

Njamie, who was the chief's principal wife, soon appeared.  She led a
sturdy little boy by the hand.  He was her only son, and a very fine
little fellow, despite the blackness of his skin and his almost total
want of clothing.

To this woman Mbango gave Okandaga in charge, directing her in our
presence how to care for her, and assuring her of the most terrible
punishment should anything befall the woman committed to her care.

Njamie was a mild, agreeable woman.  She had more modesty of demeanour
and humility of aspect than the most of the women of her tribe whom we
happened to see, so that we felt disposed to believe that Okandaga was
placed in as safe keeping as it was possible for us to provide for her
in our circumstances.  Even Makarooroo appeared to be quite at ease in
his mind; and it was evidently with a relieved breast and a light heart
that he bade adieu to his bride, and started along with us on the
following day on our journey into the deeper recesses of the wilderness.

Before entering upon these transactions with the people of this village,
we took care to keep our crew in total ignorance of what passed by
sending them on in advance with the canoe under Jack's care, a few hours
before we brought Okandaga into the village, or even made mention of her
existence; and we secured their ready obedience to our orders, and total
indifference as to our motives in these incomprehensible actions, by
giving them each a few inches of tobacco--a gift which rendered them
supremely happy.

One day, about a week after the events above narrated, we met with an
adventure which well-nigh cost Jack his life, but which ultimately
resulted in an important change in our manner of travelling.  We were
traversing an extremely beautiful country with the goods on our
shoulders, having, in consequence of the increasing turbulence of the
river as well as its change of direction, been compelled to abandon our
canoe, and cut across the country in as straight a line as its nature
would permit.  But this was not easy, for the grass, which was bright
green, was so long as to reach sometimes higher than our shoulders.

In this species of country Jack's towering height really became of great
use, enabling him frequently to walk along with his head above the
surrounding herbage, while we were compelled to grope along, ignorant of
all that was around us save the tall grass at our sides.  Occasionally,
however, we came upon more open ground, where the grass was short, and
then we enjoyed the lovely scenery to the full.  We met with a great
variety of new plants and trees in this region.  Many of the latter were
festooned with wild vines and other climbing plants.  Among others, I
saw several specimens of that curious and interesting tree the banyan,
with its drop-shoots in every state of growth--some beginning to point
towards the earth, in which they were ultimately destined to take root;
some more than half-way down; while others were already fixed, forming
stout pillars to their parent branches--thus, as it were, on reaching
maturity, rendering that support which it is the glory as well as the
privilege of youth to accord to age.  Besides these, there were wild
dates and palmyra trees, and many others too numerous to mention, but
the peculiar characteristics of which I carefully jotted down in my
note-book.  Many small water-courses were crossed, in some of which Mak
pointed out a number of holes, which he said were made by elephants
wading in them.  He also told us that several mud-pools, which seemed to
have been recently and violently stirred up, were caused by the
wallowing of the rhinoceros; so we kept at all times a sharp lookout for
a shot.

Lions were also numerous in this neighbourhood, and we constantly heard
them roaring at night, but seldom saw them during our march.

Well, as I have already remarked, one day we were travelling somewhat
slowly through the long grass of this country, when, feeling oppressed
by the heat, as well as somewhat fatigued with my load, I called to
Jack, who was in advance, to stop for a few minutes to rest.

"Most willingly," he replied, throwing down his load, and wiping away
the perspiration which stood in large drops on his brow.  "I was on the
point of calling a halt when you spoke.--How do you get on down there,
Peterkin?"

Our friend, who had seated himself on the bale he had been carrying, and
seemed to be excessively hot, looked up with a comical expression of
countenance, and replied--

"Pretty well, thank'ee.  How do _you_ get on _up there_?"

"Oh, capitally.  There's such a nice cool breeze blowing, I'm quite
sorry that I cannot send a little of it down."

"Don't distress yourself, my dear fellow; I'll come up to snuff it."

So saying, Peterkin sprang nimbly upon Jack's shoulders, and began to
gaze round him.

"I say, Peterkin," said Jack, "why are you a very clever fellow just
now?"

"Don't know," replied Peterkin.  "I give it up at once.  Always do.
Never could guess a riddle in all my life."

"Because," said Jack, "you're `_up to snuff_.'"

"Oh, oh! that certainly deserves a _pinch_; so there's for you."

Jack uttered a roar, and tossed Peterkin off his shoulders, on receiving
the punishment.

"Shabby fellow!" cried Peterkin, rubbing his head.  "But, I say, do let
me up again.  I thought, just as you dropped me, that I saw a place
where the grass is short.  Ay, there it is, fifty yards or so ahead of
us, with a palmyra tree on it.  Come, let us go rest there, for I
confess that I feel somewhat smothered in this long grass."

We took up our packs immediately, and carried them to the spot
indicated, which we found almost free from long grass.  Here we lay down
to enjoy the delightful shade of the tree, and the magnificent view of
the country around us.  Our negroes also seemed to enjoy the shade, but
they were evidently not nearly so much oppressed with the heat as we
were, which was very natural.  They seemed to have no perception of the
beautiful in nature, however, although they appreciated fully the
agreeable influences by which they were surrounded.

While I lay at the foot of that tree, pondering this subject, I observed
a very strange-looking insect engaged in a very curious kind of
occupation.  Peterkin's eye caught sight of it at the same instant with
mine.

"Hollo!  Jack, look here!" he cried in a whisper.  "I declare, here's a
beast been and shoved its head into a hole, and converted its tail into
a trap!"

We all three lay down as quietly as possible, and I could not but smile
