could catch glimpses of persons drinking tea, and of Brown handing round
biscuits and cake.  The sight of this was too much to be borne.  It was
at least worth an effort to retrieve their fatal mistake.

"I say," said Telson, looking for his friend round the skirts of a
stately female, "hadn't we better go and help Brown, Parson?"

Luckless youth!  The lady in question, hearing the unexpected voice at
her side, backed a little and caught sight of the speaker.

"What, dear?" she said, benevolently, taking his hand and sitting down
on the sofa; "and who are you, my little man?"

"My little man" was fairly trapped; there was no escaping this seizure.
Parson got away safely to the tea-room, and the sight of him dodging
about among the cakes and cups only added to the misery of the hapless
Telson.

"Who are you, my little dear?" said the lady, who was no other than Miss
Stringer herself.

Telson, fortunately for him, was ignorant of the fact--as ignorant,
indeed, as Miss Stringer was of the fact that the little dear she was
addressing was a Willoughbite.

"Telson, ma'am," said Telson, following Parson with longing eyes.

"Johnny?" said the lady.

"No--Augustus," replied the proud bearer of the name.

Miss Stringer surveyed him benevolently.  He was a nice-looking boy, was
Telson--and the lady thought so too.

"And will you give me a kiss, Augustus dear?" she said, with her most
winning smile.

What could Augustus do?  A hundred desperate alternatives darted through
his mind.  He would bolt into the tea-room; he would shout for help; he
would show fight; he would-- But while he was making up his mind what he
would do, he found himself being kissed on the cheek in the most
barefaced manner, before everybody, by this extraordinary female; and,
more than that, being actually set down on the sofa beside her!  He only
hoped Parson or Brown had not seen it.

Well for Miss Stringer she did not guess the wrath that boiled in the
bosom of her small companion!

"And do you live here, dear?" inquired she, pleased to have this
opportunity of studying the juvenile human nature in which she was so
much interested.

"No, I don't," said Telson, surlily; then, suddenly recollecting he was
in polite though disagreeable company, he added, "ma'am."

"And where do you go to school, pray?" inquired the spinster.

"Oh, Willoughby," replied Telson, who had gradually given up all hope of
tea, and was making up his mind to his fate.

Miss Stringer gave a little start at this piece of information, and was
on the point of betraying her identity, but she forbore.  "After all,"
thought she, "he might be more constrained if I were to enlighten him on
that subject."

"So you go to Willoughby," she said, with interest.  "And how do you
like it?"

"Oh, well enough," said Telson, relenting somewhat towards his companion
as she showed no further signs of kissing him.  "Nice lot of fellows,
you know, on the whole."

"Indeed?  Let me see, who is the head master?" inquired the lady.

"Oh, Paddy--that old boy there by the fire.  And that's Mrs Paddy there
with the curls."

Miss Stringer appeared to receive another shock at this piece of
information, which, however, Telson, flattered by her evident interest
in his remarks, did not take to heart.

"And," said she, presently, with a slight nervousness in her voice, "I
hope you like them?"

"Oh," blurted out Telson, "Paddy's not so bad, but the dame's an old
beast, you know--at least, so fellows say.  I say," added he, "don't you
tell her I said so!"

Miss Stringer regarded him with a peculiar smile, which the boy at once
took to mean a promise.  So he rattled on.  "And she's got a sister, or
somebody hangs about the place, worse than any of them.  Why, when old
Wynd--"

"And," said Miss Stringer, suddenly--"and which house are you in--in the
schoolhouse?"

"Hullo, then! you know Willoughby?" demanded Telson sharply.

Miss Stringer looked confused, as well she might, but replied, "Ah! all
public schools have a schoolhouse, have they not?"

"I suppose so," said Telson.  "Yes, I'm a schoolhouse fellow.  I'm the
captain's fag, you know--old Riddell."

"Mr Riddell is the captain, then?"

"Rather!  Do you know him?"

Poor Miss Stringer!  How sad it is, to be sure, when once we go astray.
She, the Griffin of Willoughby, was as much at the mercy of this honest
unconscious fag as if he had caught her in the act of picking a pocket.
For how could she reveal herself now?

"I--I think I met him once," she said.

"Where? at his home, was it?" asked Telson, who seemed to be urged by a
most fiendish curiosity on the subject.

"No," faltered the lady; "it was--er--I think it was at Dr Patrick's."

"Very likely," said Telson.  "He was up there to tea, I know, just
before he was made captain.  But I didn't know any one else was there
except Paddy and his hyenas."

"His what, sir!" exclaimed Miss Stringer, in a voice which nearly
startled Telson off the sofa.

"I mean, you know, the fellows--?"

"And where do you live at home?" asked Miss Stringer, determined to
steer clear of this awkward topic.

"Oh, London," said Telson; "do you know London?"

"Yes--it is indeed a wonderful place," said Miss Stringer, "and
whereabouts does your father live?"

"Oh, my governor's in India," began Telson.

"Your who?" said Miss Stringer, with a feeble attempt at severity.

"My dad, you know; and I live with my grandfather.  Jolly old boy.  He
was at Willoughby when he was a boy.  Did you know him then?  I expect
he'll recollect you, you know."

"I do not think," said Miss Stringer, with a very ruffled countenance,
"that your grandfather and I ever met."

"Oh, I don't know.  He recollects most of the old people down here, you
know.  I say, there's Parson beckoning; he's my chum, you know.  I
expect he wants me to help with some of the things."

And so saying off he went, leaving Miss Stringer, so to speak, fairly
doubled up, and in a state of mind which may be more easily imagined
than described.

Every one observed how singularly silent and retiring Miss Stringer was
all that evening.  Some attributed it to the heat of the room, others
feared she might not be well, others guessed she found the Browns'
entertainment very slow; but no one, least of all Telson himself, had a
suspicion of the true reason.

That young gentleman and his ally, after finding out that there was not
much chance of their services being required to "look after the
things"--the greengrocer being quite able to deal with the business
single-handed--found themselves once more stranded in the drawing-room,
and gradually getting edged back by the skirts, when an unlooked-for
distinction rescued them from their perilous situation.

The distinction was none other than a sign of recognition from the
doctor and a friendly signal to approach.

Like a pair of small well-trained circus ponies the two friends obeyed
the summons and climbed over the intervening skirts.

"Well, Telson and Parson," said the doctor, shaking hands, "I'd no idea
you were here--how are you?"

"We got a captain's permit.  Quite well, thank you, sir."

"My dear, these are two of our boys, Telson and Parson."

Mrs Patrick regarded the two boys in her usual precise way, and said,--

"Among so many boys under our roof, I find it impossible to remember
every face.  And which is Master Telson?"

"This is Telson," said Parson.  "He's in the schoolhouse, you know--"

"I do not know," said Mrs Patrick, severely.

"Don't you?" said Parson, with genuine astonishment.  "He's captain's
fag, you know."

"I must repeat I do not know," reiterated Mrs Patrick.

"Oh, well, he's only been that a little time, since the sports, you
know, when old Wyndham left.  I say, ma'am, are you going to be at the
race on Wednesday?"

Mrs Patrick looked somewhat baffled as she replied,--

"I think it very possible."

"It'll be a jolly good race," said Telson.  "Old Parson is coxing
Parrett's, and it looks like a win for them.  Only we aren't so bad, and
now Gilks is out of the boat and Riddell's settled as cox we ought to
make a race of it.  Fairbairn's quite as long a reach as Bloomfield,
only he doesn't kick his stretcher so hard--does he, Parson?"

"Rather not," said Parson.  "That's where we get the pull of you;
besides, I'm a lighter weight than Riddell, though he's boiled down a
good bit since he went into training."

"Good deal depends on who gets the inside berth," said Telson,
delightfully oblivious of the bewildered Mrs Paddy's presence.  "It's a
jolly long swing round Willow Point for the outsiders--half a length at
least."

"Yes; but it's just as bad round the corner at the finish the other
way."

"Ah! talking about the race, I see," said the doctor, returning to the
group at this point.  "So, Telson, Riddell's to steer your boat after
all."

"Yes, sir," said Telson; "it's settled now."

"So that the schoolhouse boat is still the captain's boat, eh?  Ah!
Parson, though, I suppose, wants the Parrett's boat to win."

"Parson coxes for Parrett's," said Telson.

"Parrett--I mean Mr Parrett--stopped my river-play a week, sir," said
Parson, by way of explaining the circumstance; "but I've had captain's
leave to row out since, so they kept me in the boat."

This sporting conversation went on for some time longer, Mrs Patrick
not venturing again to join in.  At last the doctor broke up the
conference of his own accord, and our two heroes, once more adrift, went
out for a lounge in the hall, as they explained, to cool themselves, but
really to be at hand for a bolt into the supper-room whenever the happy
moment should arrive.

It did arrive after what seemed to be a week's suspense and then the
hardships and perils of the evening were fully compensated for.  The two
friends got into a snug corner, "far from the madding crowd," where, to
put it mildly, they spent a very busy half-hour.  They managed it well.
Neither boy helped himself--he wouldn't be so greedy; but each helped
the other.  When Telson saw Parson's plate getting empty of sandwiches,
he most attentively fetched him a clean one with a trifle on it; and
when Telson had finally got through his jellies (for he had more than
one) it was Parson's brotherly hand which assisted him to an ice!

As they sat there they positively wished Brown's "pa and ma" gave a
party once a week!

But all good things come to an end, and so did this grand party.  Guests
began to depart, and among the earliest were the doctor and his ladies.
The doctor came up to the boys, and said, kindly, "We're driving up; you
two had better come with us, there's plenty of room on the box.  Now, my
love--now, Miss Stringer."

Miss Stringer!  Telson nearly fainted as he saw who it was who answered
to the name.

"Let's walk up," he said, entreatingly, to Parson.

"I don't mind, only Paddy--"

"Now then, boys," cried the doctor, "there's room for one inside.
Telson, will you come?"

Telson bounded up on to the box without another word, and Parson beside
him, and the fly drove off.

"Oh, Parson, old man, I'm a gone coon!" exclaimed Telson, in tones of
abject misery, as soon as they were clear of the Browns' premises.

"Why, what's up?"

"Miss Stringer!"

"What about her?  Isn't she a cad, eh?"

"Yes, and _I told her so_," groaned Telson; "I didn't know who she was,
and I said--"

"Hullo, I say, look there!" exclaimed Parson, suddenly catching his
friend by the arm.

They were passing the Aquarium, which at that moment was disgorging its
visitors.  Among those who emerged exactly as the doctor's fly passed
were three boys, whom Telson and Parson recognised in a moment.

They were Silk and Gilks and another younger boy, who seemed to shrink
from observation, and whose head was turned another way as the fly
passed.  The three, immediately on gaining the street, started to run
towards Willoughby ahead of the fly.

The two boys on the box pulled their caps over their eyes, and said not
a word till the truants were clear.  Then Telson said, "That was young
Wyndham!"

"I know.  I wonder if Paddy saw them?"

"Shouldn't think so.  And they didn't see us.  I say, will they get in
before us?"

"It'll be a shave if they do.  What a row there'll be if they don't!"

It was a curious thing that almost immediately after this short dialogue
Telson's cap fell off into the road, and the fly had to be pulled up
while he and Parson got down and looked for it.  It was a dark night,
and the cap took some time to find.  When finally it was recovered, and
progress was resumed, full five minutes had been lost over the search,
by which time the truants had got a clear half-mile to the good, and
were safe.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE BOAT-RACE.

The few days that intervened between the Saturday of Brown's party and
the Wednesday of the great race were days of restless suspense in
Willoughby.  Even Welch's caught the contagion, and regretted at the
last hour that they had withdrawn from the all-important contest.  As to
the other two Houses, there never had been a year when the excitement
ran so high or the rivalry grew so keen.  Somehow the entire politics of
Willoughby appeared to be mixed up in the contest, and it seemed as if
the result of this one struggle was to decide everything.

The crews had worked hard up to the last, watched morning and evening by
anxious spectators from the bank.  The trials had been carefully noted
and times compared, the variations in style had been eagerly criticised,
the weights of the rowers had become public property, and in short every
detail likely to influence the result was a subject of almost painful
interest to the eager partisans on either side.

And every hour seemed to promise a closer race.  Not that Parrett's had
fallen off.  On the contrary, they still remained what they had been all
along, the smartest and strongest crew that Willoughby had ever put upon
the river.  But the schoolhouse boat had made wonderful strides.  It was
long since it had ceased to be the laughingstock of the hostile juniors,
and it was some time since its appearance and work had begun to cause a
shade of uneasiness in the minds of a few of the rival house.
Fairbairn, far from Bloomfield's match in physique or style, had yet
displayed an amount of steady, determined work which had astonished most
fellows, and inspired with confidence not only his partisans on the
bank, but the three oarsmen at his back.  By dint of patient, untiring
practice he had worked his crew up to a pitch of training scarcely hoped
for, and every day the schoolhouse boat had gained in style and speed.

Had the race been a fortnight or three weeks later few boys would have
cared to prophesy definitely as to the result.  As it was, though
Parrett's was morally bound to win, it was clear the race would be a
fierce one, and hardly fought every foot.

Such was the general opinion in Willoughby that Tuesday evening after
the last practice had come to an end, and when the boats were finally
housed for the night only to reappear next day in racing trim.

Young Wyndham, as he sat in Riddell's study with his books before him,
could as soon have done a stroke of work as fly over the schoolhouse
elms.  Indeed, it was such a farce for him even to make the attempt that
he shut up his books and gave up the idea.

"I say, Riddell," he said, presently, addressing the captain, who,
though excited too after his own fashion, was poring determinedly over
his work.

"Well?" asked he, looking up.

"I say, _do_ you think there's any chance of our boat winning?"

The boy asked the question so anxiously that one might have supposed his
whole happiness in life depended on the answer.

"It's very hard to say," said Riddell.  "I think we have some chance, at
any rate."

"You did the course in as good time as Parrett's yesterday, didn't you?"
said Wyndham.

"Yes, but we had a better tide," said Riddell.

Wyndham's face clouded, for he knew it was true.

"You _must_ win, I say," said he, almost fiercely.

Riddell smiled.

"I mean to oblige you if I can, for one," said he.

"If they win," said Wyndham, "it'll be--"

But what it would be the youthful enthusiast lacked words to express.

Riddell turned again to his writing.

"Hadn't you better finish your work?" said he.

"Oh, I can't!" exclaimed Wyndham.  "Who could work just before the
race?"

So saying, he got up and gathered together his things.

Riddell was sorry for this.  He had hoped the boy would stay.  Amid all
his fresh duties the new captain had kept his eye on his old friend's
brother, and of late he had seen things which made him uneasy.  Wyndham
was on friendly terms again with his two undesirable patrons, and
simultaneously his work in the library and his visits to Riddell's own
study had become less regular.  It all meant something, Riddell knew;
and he knew, too, that that something was not any good.  He made one
attempt to detain the boy.

"You aren't going?" he said kindly.

"Yes.  It's really no use grinding, to-night, Riddell."

"Won't you stop and keep me company, though?" asked the captain.

"You're working," said the boy.  "I'll come to-morrow.  Good-night."

And he went, leaving Riddell very uncomfortable.  Why should he be so
eager to go?  Why should he always seem so restless now whenever he was
in that study?  Why should he always avoid any reference to--

Ah! here he was back again.  A gleam of hope shot through Riddell's
breast as he saw the door open and Wyndham re-enter.  Perhaps, after
all, the boy was going to stay and give him a chance.  But no, Wyndham
had come back for his knife, which Riddell had borrowed for sharpening a
pencil.  That was all he wanted; and having recovered it he departed
quickly.

Riddell spent the rest of that evening in low spirits.  He had been
baulked, and worse than that, he felt other hands were playing their
game more successfully, and that amongst them all young Wyndham was
going wrong.

So the eve of the great boat-race was anything but a cheerful evening
for the new captain.

But with the morning even Riddell could hardly harbour any thoughts
outside the event of the day.  Morning school that Wednesday was a farce
all over Willoughby.  Even the doctor seemed absent-minded, while one or
two of the junior masters gave up the attempt in despair.

The race was fixed for three o'clock, when the tide would be running up
at its fastest, and long before that hour every advantageous point of
view on the banks was secured by eager spectators.  These were by no
means all Willoughby boys, for the school boat-race was always more or
less of an event in Shellport itself, whose inhabitants flocked in large
numbers to the scene of the contest.

Carnages lined the banks on either side for a considerable distance, and
as usual the doctor's party assembled in great force on Willow Point.
The towing-path was jealously kept clear for the schoolboys, who trooped
down in force the moment after lunch, and took possession of their
places along the course.  Some crowded at the starting-point.  These
were chiefly the more athletic heroes of the school, whose flannels and
running-shoes bespoke their intention of following the race on foot.
Others, less actively inclined, massed at various critical points along
the course, some at the finish, but more opposite Willow Point, which
being just three-quarters of the way down, and almost within view of the
goal, was generally considered the most advantageous point of view of
the whole race.

At this point, in a snug corner above the path, with a fine view of the
sharp bend of the river, and of the reaches up and down stream which met
there, sat Gilks and Silk.  They knew probably as well as any one that
the crisis of the race was pretty sure to be played out at Willow
Corner, and not a few late comers looked up at their commanding perch
with envy.

"Where's the young 'un?" said Silk.

"Running with the race," said Gilks.  "I couldn't dissuade him.  He's
gone daft over the thing."

Silk laughed.

"I'm afraid it'll be a blow to him, then.  Young fool.  I say, he was at
his father confessor's last night.  I wonder if he'll let out about
Saturday night?"

"Not he.  That is," said Gilks, viciously, "I don't think he will."

"Well, it might be warmish for him if he did."

"Very warmish," said Gilks, with a scowl, which it was just as well for
Wyndham's comfort he did not see.

There was a silence, during which Gilks whistled to himself, and Silk
regarded his ally with a smile.

"You are a nice boy!" he broke out presently.  And the laugh which
greeted this very unoriginal observation closed the conversation for a
time.

Meanwhile, down at the boat-house things were getting very lively.

Telson, Philpot, Pilbury, Cusack, King, and other of our juvenile
friends, who, with their usual modesty, proposed to run along with the
race, and now formed part of the crowd which awaited the start, kept up
a boisterous chorus of shouts, some of defiance, some of derision, some
of applause, addressed alternately to foe and friend.

The young Welchers especially, having no personal interest in the race,
felt themselves delightfully free to make themselves objectionable to
all parties, and took full advantage of the circumstance.

They howled at everybody and everything.  Whenever King and Bosher
greeted the appearance of the Parrett's boat with a friendly cheer they
hooted; and no sooner did Telson sing out to welcome the crew of his
house, but they caterwauled derisively in the same direction.

"Jolly lot _they_ know about rowing!" yelled Cusack.

"Why don't you give them some lessons?" retorted Telson, hotly.

"Boo--hoo!  Who got kicked out his boat!  Young muller, couldn't steer a
tub."

"I'll tub you, young Pilbury, see if I don't, presently," replied
Telson.

"Never mind them," shouted King, "can't even make up a boat; pack of
funks, all of them!"

"Hullo! who are you?" cried Philpot, rounding on these new assailants.
"We'd have a boat, never fear, if there was any chance of fair play."

"Lot of fair play you'd want, to turn the boat round and round and catch
crabs every other second!"

"There are our fellows!" cried Wyndham, raising a loud cheer as
Fairbairn, Coates, Porter, Crossfield, and Riddell appeared on the
landing stage.

"Hurrah! schoolhouse, hurrah!"

