Even in those savage times warriors were not above taking counsel,
occasionally, with women.  The king went to consult on the situation
with the queen, the princess, and Bladud; while Gunrig sought advice and
consolation from his mother.  Of course neither of these men would for a
moment have admitted that he needed advice.  They only condescended to
let their women-folk know what had occurred, and hear what they had to
say!

"Why, do you think, has the ungrateful child fled?" asked the king in
some indignation.

"I cannot imagine," answered the queen.  "We have all been so kind to
her, and she was so fond of us and we of her.  Besides, her visit was
not half over, and her father would not be pleased if she were to return
home so soon and so unexpectedly."

Of course Hafrydda knew the cause, but she maintained a discreet
silence.

"Return home!" echoed the king in contempt, "how can a little delicate
thing like her return home through miles and miles of forest swarming
with wild beasts and not a few wilder men?  Impossible!  My hunters must
go out again, every day, till she is found.  I will lead them myself
since they seem to have lost the power of their craft."

"Is this `little delicate thing' as beautiful as my sister describes her
to be?" asked Bladud, somewhat amused by his father's tone and manner.

"Ay, that she is," answered the king.  "Beautiful enough to set not a
few of my young men by the ears.  Did you not see her on the platform at
the games--or were you too much taken up with the scowling looks of
Gunrig?"

"I saw the figure of a young woman," answered the prince, "but she kept
a shawl so close round her head that I failed to see her face.  As to
Gunrig, I did not think it worth my while to mind him at all, so I saw
not whether his looks were scowling or pleased."

"Ha! boy--he gave you some trouble, notwithstanding."

"He has gone away in anger at present, however, so we will let him be
till he returns for another fight."

Gunrig, meanwhile, having reached his town or village, went straight to
the hut in which his mother dwelt and laid his troubles before her.  She
was a calm, thoughtful woman, very unlike her passionate son.

"It is a bad business," she remarked, after the chief had described the
situation to her, and was striding up and down the little room with his
hands behind his back, "and will require much care in management, for
King Hudibras, as you know, is very fierce when roused, and although he
is somewhat afraid of you, he is like to be roused to anger when he
comes to understand that you have jilted his daughter."

"But I have not jilted her," said Gunrig, stopping abruptly in his walk,
and looking down upon his parent.  "That ass Bladud won her, and
although he does turn out to be her brother, that does not interfere
with his right to break off the engagement if so disposed.  Besides, I
do not want to wed the princess now.  I have quite changed my mind."

"Why have you changed your mind, my son?"

"Because I never cared for her much; and since I went to visit her
father I have seen another girl who is far more beautiful; far more
clever; more winning, in every way."

The woman looked sharply at the flushed countenance of her son.

"You love her?" she asked.

"Ay, that do I, as I never loved woman before, and, truly, as I think I
never shall love again."

"Then you must get her to wife, my son, for there is no cure for love."

"Oh, yes, there is, mother," was the light reply of the chief, as he
recommenced to pace the floor.  "Death is a pretty sure and sharp cure
for love."

"Surely you would not kill yourself because of a girl?"

Gunrig burst into a loud laugh, and said, "Nay, truly, but death may
take the girl, or death may take me--for, as you know, there is plenty
of fighting among the tribes, and my day will surely come, sooner or
later.  In either case love will be cured."

"Can you guess why this girl has fled?" asked the woman.

Gunrig's brows contracted, and a grim smile played on his lips as he
replied, after a brief pause--

"Well, I am not quite sure, mother.  It may be that she is not too fond
of me--which only shows her want of taste.  But that can be cured when
she finds out what a fine man I am!  Anyhow, I will have her, if I
should have to hunt the forest for a hundred moons, and fight all the
tribes put together."

"And how do you propose to go about it, my son?"

"That is the very thing I want you to tell me.  If it were fighting that
had to be done I would not trouble you--but this is a matter that goes
beyond the wisdom of a plain warrior."

"Then, if you would gain your end, my son, I should advise you to send a
message to King Hudibras by one of your most trusty men; and let the
message be that you are deeply grieved at the loss of his daughter's
hand; that--"

"But I'm nothing of the kind, mother, so that would not be true."

"What does it matter whether true or not, if the king only believes it
to be true?"

"I don't quite agree, mother, with your notions about truth.  To my mind
a warrior should always be straightforward and say what he means."

"Then go, my son, and tell the king what you have just told me, and he
will cut your head off," replied the dame in a tone of sarcasm.

"If I act on that advice, I will take my warriors with me and carry my
sword in my hand, so that his head would stand as good a chance of
falling as mine," returned Gunrig with a laugh.  "But go on with your
advice, mother."

"Well, say that you feel in honour bound to give up all claim to his
daughter's hand, but that, as you want a wife very much to keep your
house as your mother is getting too old, you will be content to take his
visitor, Branwen, and will be glad to help in the search for her.  Will
you send that message?"

"It may be that I will.  In any case I'll send something like it."

So saying the chief turned abruptly on his heel and left the room.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

A TERRIBLE CALAMITY.

It may be imagined that the return home of Prince Bladud was the cause
of much rejoicing in the whole district as well as in his father's
house.  At _first_ the king, being, as we have said, a very stern man,
felt disposed to stand upon his dignity, and severely rebuke the son who
had run away from home and remained away so long.  But an undercurrent
of tenderness, and pride in the youth's grand appearance, and great
prowess, induced him to give in with a good grace and extend to him
unreserved forgiveness.

As for the queen, she made no attempt to conceal her joy and pride, and
the same may be said of the princess.

There was instituted a series of fetes and games in honour of the return
of the prodigal, at which he was made--not unwillingly--to show the
skill which he had acquired from practising with the competitors at the
Olympic games, about which the islanders had heard from Phoenician
traders from time to time, and great was the interest thus created,
especially when he showed them, among other arts, how to use their fists
in boxing, and their swords in guarding so as to enable them to dispense
with a shield.  But these festivities did not prevent him from taking an
interest in the search that his father and the hunters were still making
for Branwen.

When many days had passed, however, and no word of her whereabouts was
forthcoming, it was at last arranged that a message regarding her
disappearance should be sent to her father's tribe by a party of
warriors who were to be led by the prince himself.

"I will go gladly," he said to his sister, a day or two before the party
was to set out.  "For your sake, Hafrydda, I will do my best to clear up
the mystery; and I think it highly probable that I shall find the
runaway safely lodged in her father's house."

"I fear not," returned Hafrydda, with a sad look.  "It seems impossible
that she could have made her way so far alone through the wild forests."

"But she may not have been alone.  Friends may have helped her."

"She had no friends in the town, having been here but a short time,"
objected the princess.  "But do your best to find her, Bladud, for I
feel quite sure that you will fall in love with her when you see her."

The youth laughed.

"No fear of that," he said, "many a pretty girl have I seen in the East;
nevertheless I have, as you see, left them all without a thought of ever
returning again."

"But I did not say you would fall in love with Branwen because she is
pretty.  I feel sure that you will, because she is sweet, and merry, and
good--yet thoughtful--wonderfully thoughtful!"

"Ay, and you may add," said the queen, who came into the room just then,
"that she is sometimes thoughtless and wonderfully full of mischief."

"Nay, mother, you are not just," returned the princess.  "Her mischief
is only on the surface, her thoughtfulness lies deep down."

"Well, well, whatever may be the truth regarding her, I shall not
trouble my head about her; for I have never yet felt what men call love,
and I feel sure I never shall."

"I like to hear you say that, brother," rejoined Hafrydda; "for I have
noticed, young though I am, that when men say they will never fall in
love or marry, they are always pretty near the point of doing one or
both."

But poor Bladud was destined to do neither at that time, for an event
was hanging over him, though he knew it not, which was to affect very
seriously the whole of his after life.

For several days previous to the above conversation, he had felt a
sensation that was almost new to him--namely, that of being slightly
ill.  Whether it was the unwonted exertions consequent on his efforts at
the games, or the excitement of the return home, we cannot say, but
headache, accompanied by a slight degree of fever, had troubled him.
Like most strong men in the circumstances, he adopted the Samsonian and
useless method of "shaking it off"!  He went down into the arena and
performed feats of strength and agility that surprised even himself; but
the fever which enabled him to do so, asserted itself at last, and
finally compelled him to do what he should have done at first--pocket
his pride and give in.

Of course we do not suggest that giving in to little sensations of
ailment is either wise or manly.  There are duties which call on men to
fight even in sickness--ay, in spite of sickness--but "showing off" in
the arena was not one of these.

Be this as it may, Bladud came at last to the condition of feeling
weak--an incomprehensible state of feeling to him.  He thereupon went
straight home, and, flinging himself half petulantly on a couch,
exclaimed--"Mother, I am ill!"

"My son, I have seen that for many days past, and have waited with some
anxiety till you should come to the point of admitting it."

"And now that I have admitted it," returned the youth with a languid
smile, "what is to be done?"

The answer to that question was not the simple one of modern days, "Send
for the doctor," because no doctors worthy of the name existed.  There
was, indeed, a solemn-visaged, long-headed, elderly man among King
Hudibras' followers who was known as the medicine-man to the royal
household, but his services were not often in request, because people
were seldom ill, save when they were going to die, and when that time
came it was generally thought best to let them die in peace.  This
medicine-man, though a quack in regard to physic, was, however, a true
man, as far as his knowledge went in surgery--that is to say, he was
expert at the setting of broken bones, when the fractures were not too
compound; he could bandage ordinary wounds; he had even ventured into
the realm of experimental surgery so far as to knock out a decayed back
tooth with a bronze chisel and a big stone.  But his knowledge of drugs
was naturally slight, and his power of diagnosis feeble.  Still,
unworthy though he may be of the title, we will for convenience style
him the doctor.

"My poor boy," said the queen, in answer to his question, and laying her
hand on his hot brow, "I am so sorry that we cannot have the services of
our doctor, for he is away hunting just now--you know he is very fond of
the bow and line.  Perhaps he may--"

"Oh, never mind the doctor, mother," said Bladud impatiently, with that
slighting reference to the faculty which is but too characteristic of
youth; "what do _you_ think ought to be done?  You were always doctor
enough for me when I was little; you'll do equally well now that I am
big."

"Be not hasty, my son.  You were always hot-headed and--"

"I'm hot-headed _now_, at all events, and argument won't tend to cool
it.  Do what you will with it, for I can stand this no longer.  Cut it
off if you like, mother, only use a sharp knife and be quick about it."

In those days, far more than in this our homeopathic era, it was the
habit of the mothers of families to keep in store certain herbs and
roots, etcetera, which, doubtless, contained the essences now held in
modern globules.  With these they contrived decoctions that were
unquestionably more or less beneficial to patients when wisely applied.
To the compounding of something of this sort the queen now addressed
herself.  After swallowing it, the prince fell asleep.

This was so far well; but in the morning he was still so far from well,
that the visit to Branwen's father had to be postponed.  Several days
elapsed before the doctor returned from his hunting expedition.  By that
time the fever had left the prince.  He began to get somewhat better,
and to go about, but still felt very unlike his old self.  During this
what we may style semi-convalescent period, Captain Arkal and little
Maikar proved of great use and comfort to him, for they not only brought
him information about the games--which were still kept up--but cheered
him with gossipy news of the town in general, and with interesting
reminiscences of their late voyage and the Eastern lands they had so
recently left.

One day these faithful friends, as well as the queen and princess, were
sitting by Bladud's couch--to which unaccountable fits of laziness
confined him a good deal--when the medicine-man was announced.

He proceeded at once to examine the patient, while the others stood
aside and looked on with that profound respect which ignorance
sometimes, though not always, assumes in the presence of knowledge.

The doctor laid his hand on Bladud's brow, and looked earnestly into his
eyes.  Then he tapped his back and chest, as if to induce some one in
his interior to open a door and let him in--very much as doctors do
now-a-days.  Then he made him remove his upper garments, and examined
his broad and brawny shoulders.  A mark, or spot, of a whitish
appearance between the left shoulder and the elbow, at once riveted his
attention, and caused an almost startled expression on his grave
countenance.  But the expression was momentary.  It passed away and left
the visage grave and thoughtful--if possible, more thoughtful than
before.

"That will do," he said, turning to the queen.  "Your treatment was the
best that could have been applied.  I must now see his father, the
king."

"Alone?" asked the queen.

"Alone," replied the doctor.

"Well, what think ye of Bladud?" asked the king, when his physician
entered his chamber, and carefully shut the door.

"He is smitten with a fatal disease," said the doctor in a low, earnest
voice.

"Not absolutely fatal?" cried the king, with sudden anxiety.

"As far as I know it is so.  There is no cure that I ever heard of.
Bladud is smitten with leprosy.  It may be years before it kills him,
but it will surely do so at last."

"Impossible--impossible!" cried the king, becoming fierce and
unbelieving in his horror.  "You are too confident, my medicine-man.
You may, you must, be mistaken.  There is a cure for everything!"

"Not for leprosy," returned the doctor, with sad but firm emphasis.  "At
least I never heard of a cure being effected, except by some of the
Eastern wise men."

"Then, by all the gods that protect our race and family, my son shall
return to the East and one of these wise men shall cure him--else--
else--Have ye told the queen?"

"Not yet."

"That is well.  I will myself tell her.  Go!"  This summary dismissal
was nothing new to the doctor, who understood the king well, and
sympathised with his obvious distress.  Pausing at the door, however, he
said--

