  The she-wolf?

(_Exeunt dancing_.)

Scene II.

The Same.  Six Years Later.

_Enter Romulus and Remus, fighting with boxing-gloves.  The wolf
knitting and looking on and encouraging_.

  _Wolf_.
  Your little hands were never made
  To black each other's eyes,
  And yet you do it very well
  For youngsters of your size.
  Keep down your guard.  Good!  Hit out fair,
  That's one for Remus' nose!
  Ha, Romulus, you caught it there
  (Keep steady with your toes!).
  Don't lose your tempers--it's not right.

The author's motive in thus lightly treating the opening scenes of his
hero's career is to postpone the gloom of the tragedy to a later period.

  Time!  Let 'em blow a bit.
  My! how I like to see 'em fight!
  It sends me, in a fit.

  (_Has a fit and suddenly exit_)

  _Rom.  (discovering her absence_).
  Alas, my brother! orphans once again,
  We're left in this lone world of woe and pain.
  Our step-dame's gone, and left us no address.
  What's to be done?  We're in a pretty mess.

  _Rem_.
  Let's sit and howl, and howl till some one hears.
  You do the howling, and I'll do the tears.

  (_They sit and howl for twenty minutes_)

  _Enter Faustulus (an old, old policeman_).

  _Faust._.
  Oh dear, what can the matter be?
  Romulus, Remus, _what_ can the matter be?
  Remus, Romulus, what _can_ the matter be?
  Why do you sit there and howl?
  You really do make such a horrible noise,
  You naughty, bad, dirty-faced blubbering boys!
  Why don't you run home to your ma and your toys?
  Come, clear out of this, and move on.

  _Rom.  (screwing his knuckles into his eyes_).
  We 'ain't got no home and we 'ain't got no ma,
  We 'ain't got no notion whose childer we are,
  And our old nuss has sloped without saying "Ta ta."
  Bo-ho and bo-hoo and bo-how!

  _Faust, (starts and drops his truncheon_).
  Why, these are the lost 'uns!  My eyes and my stars!
  Wasn't Ilia your ma's name, and your pa's name was Mars?
  There's a dollar reward for who finds you, my dears!
  Hurra and hurroo and hooray!

  (_They all rejoice and sing_.)

It will be perceived that in addressing a policeman Romulus adopts a
mode of speech which a person accustomed to deal with the lower orders
would more readily understand than classical English.

  _Chorus_.  Oh, what a surprise!
  Won't they open their eyes?
  To see us two back?  Oh, and won't they look black?
  Oh, what a surprise!

_Faust_.  The fact is, young gents, if you'll excuse me addressing you
in prose, which I ain't a heddicated cove myself, but my gal's 'usband's
uncle was a schoolmaster, only he caught cold in 'is eyes and went on
the pension; very comfortable his place is in the harmsouses, which they
do keep them neat and tidy enough to make one afeared to step over the
door, and being long steps, 'tain't so easy for an old chap as 'as spent
forty-three years come next Michaelmas in the country's service, bar six
months for the dropsy and four for a broken leg, all on account of a
homblibus slipping to the horf side and ketching me--

_Rem_.  Never mind about all that.  What is the fact?

_Faust_.  Ah, I forgot.  The fact is, young gents, if you'll--

_Rom_.  Go on, go on, or we'll kick you.

_Faust_.  The fact is, young gents, as I was saying when you threatened
to kick me, you've been rather shabbily used.  There's a chap of the
name of Amulius.  Know him?

_Rom. and Rem_.  What, our uncle?  Rather.

_Faust.  Well_--[you'll find all about it in Smith's Classical
Dictionary]--the fact is, it's 'im as done it.  It's 'im as chucked yer
into the river.  I 'elped 'im--no, no, I don't mean that--I was passing
by and see 'im at it.

_Rom.  (kicking him_).  You did?  Why didn't you get us out?

_Faust, (rubbing his leg_).  Don't do that; it hurts.  Why, it was this
way.  When I married my old woman about forty years ago, I said to
myself, says I, if ever I grow up to be a man, I shall either go into
the force or else take to the sheep-farming.  Oh, young gentleman, if
you kick me again I shall arrest you for assault.  Really I will.

_Rom. and Rem._.  Cut your story short.  What about Amulius?

_Faust_.  Only he's collared your crowns--that's all.  Don't mention it.
Take my advice and go and crack his.  _Rom. and Rem_.  Certainly.
We'll do it at once.

(_They do it at once_)

Act II.

Scene I.

On the Banks of the Tiber.  Ten Years Later.

_Enter Romulus, Remus, bricklayers, maidens, and others_.

  _Rom._.,
  'Tis done.  The proud usurper bites the dust.
  _Rem_.
  (It's took us ten good years to do it.  That's the wust.)
  _Rom_.
  The tyrant's ashes moulder on the plain.
  _Rem_.  (You've said that once before.  Say it again.)
  _Rom_.  Remus, my blackguard brother, hold thy tongue.
  _Rem_.  Romulus, may I be spared to see thee hung.
  _Maidens_.
  Alas! to see two brothers bicker thus is sad,
  Let's laugh and sport and turn to something glad.
  _Mary Ann (blushing_).
  I'll sing you a simple ballad if you like.
  (_All shuddering_).  Good gracious!  (_Aside_) Certainly, by all
  means.
  _Mary Ann_.
  How doth each naughty little lad
  Delight to snarl and bite,
  And kick and scratch, It's very bad,
  It isn't at all right.
  Oh, don't do this; oh, don't do that,
  Don't tear each other's hair,
  But shout and play with ball and bat,
  Or dance with maidens fair;
  Play tennis, cricket, kiss-in-the-ring,
  Rounders or golf or catch,
  Play baseball, rounders--anything, But please don't fight and scratch.

  Run quarter miles, or hurdle race,
  Jump high or low or wide;
  Try football tricks, both drop and place,
  Join us in seek and hide.
  But _please_ don't squabble, dear boys,
  It isn't nice to squall;
  It looks so bad, makes such a noise,
  It quite upsets us all.

  _All_.
  Enough, dear Mary Ann, enough, enough;
  (Did ever mortal hear such stupid stuff?)
  Who's going to fight?  We're here to play,
  Reserve your lectures for some other day.

  (_Athletic sports begin.  The crowd looks on, as Chorus_)

  _Chorus_.
  Clear the course, ring the bell,
  Toe the line, start them well.
  Go it, cripples! on you go!
  This man's gaining, that's dropped slow!
  Mind the corner! keep your side!
  Save your wind!  Well run! well tried!
  One more lap!  Stick to it there!
  Now for a spurt!  He's leading clear--
  No, neck-and-neck!  No, leader's done!
  The best man wins!  Well run! well run!
  Now for the jump--four feet, all clear.
  Up inch by inch.  Ah, very near!
  Another try.  What, missed again?
  He's not the winning man, that's plain.
  Up, four foot six!  Bravo!  Well jumped!
  See, number four is getting pumped.
  Good, number six!  He's all on springs!
  Another inch!  The tug begins!
  Up, up, and up!  Three men still in -
  Now only two!  Which is to win?  Up higher!
  Ah, there's one miss more!  Well jumped!
  Dead heat at five-feet-four.

(_During the song Romulus and Remus run and jump.  Romulus wins the
race, but the high jump is a dead heat_.)

  _Romulus (in a temper_).
  Remus is a sharper,
  Remus is a cheat,
  Remus collared my side,
  And made it a dead heat.
  I'll collar Remus' side,
  Whether he likes or no;
  I'll not be done by him -
  At least, without a row.

  _Remus (derisively_).
  Romulus, he makes a fuss
  Because he's been licked by his brother.
  Let him alone, and he'll go home;
  Who cares for his noise and his bother?

  _Chorus (reproachfully_).
  This is the way they always go, always go, always go,
  Quarrel and kick up no end of a row,
  From the time they get up in the morning.
  Leave them alone and let them be, let them be, let them be;
  If they can't be civil, let us agree On this beautiful May-day
  morning.

(_Exeunt dancing, leaving Romulus and Remus fighting_.)

Scene II.

On the Site of Rome.

Four Years Later.

_Enter Romulus and Remus lovingly, with their arms round each other's
necks_.

  _Rom_.
  Good old Remus, ain't I fond of you!
  Oh, what a brick you are!  I love you so!

  _Rem_.
  I never knew a chap I liked like Romly,
  So gentle, kind, good-looking, bold and comly.

  _Rom_.
  You make me blush, my Remy; _you're_ the brick,
  Through thick and thin I vow to you I'll stick.

  _Rem_.
  Thank you.  Suppose, to mark our vows,
  We raise a monument or build a house.

  _Rom_.
  Why, while we're at it, let us build a city,
  The greatest in the world!
  List to my ditty:
  (_Sings_).

This is the town that Romulus and Remus built.

These are the walls that go round the town that Romulus and Remus built.

These are the boys that built the walls that go round the town that
Romulus and Remus built.

These are the poets who sing of the boys that built the walls that go
round the town that Romulus and Remus built.

These are the scholars who read the poets who sing of the boys who built
the walls that go round the town that Romulus and Remus built.

These are the schoolboys who learn from the scholars who read the poets
who sing of the boys who built the walls that go round the town that
Romulus and Remus built.

This is the book which is read by the schoolboys who learn from the
scholars who read the poets who sing of the boys who built the walls
that go round the town that Romulus and Remus built.

  _Rem_.
  Bravo, Romly.  Let's start work at once.
  You build the walls, I'll manage the finance.

  _Enter Chorus of Boys derisively_.

  Remus and Romulus built up a wall.

  Romulus and Remus, mind you don't fall.
  (_Strophe_) Romulus and Remus, nice pair of
  schemers,
  How does your city grow?
  Bricks and cabbages, sticks and rubbishes,
  And mud pies all anyhow.

1.  The author is not quite sure what strophe and antistrophe mean, but
they appear to come in tragically here.

2.  Rubbishes is apparently the nearest rhyme to cabbages which the
chorus can lay hands on for the moment.

  (_Antistrophe_)
  Hee-haw, Remus can saw,
  Romulus tries to make plaster.
  They shall have a penny a day,
  What a pity they cannot work faster!

  _Rom.  (throwing stones_).
  Aroint thee!  Hold your row!  Shut up!  Go home.
  Don't interfere with men who are building Rome.

  _Rem.  (sings_).
  'Mid damp clay and sandy chalk, and blue slate and loam,
  Be it ever so Roman, there'll be no town like Rome.
  So all do your worst, we care not who come,
  There's no town like Rome, there's no town like Rome.
  Rome!  Rome!  Great, great Rome!
  There's no town like Rome, there's no town like Rome.

  _Chorus, disgusted_.
  How do these busy little lads
  Delight to toil and fag,
  And swagger like a pair of cads,
  And boast and crow and brag.
  (_Exeunt with their noses in the air_.)
