father was not a man to forgive a slow messenger any more than a slow
cook.

"I understand," he muttered.  "Squaws not stay in valley.  Go among
trees and rocks.  Bears catch 'em some day.  Eat 'em all up.  Not
afraid of anything."

So he was really anxious about them, and afraid they would run into
danger?

Certainly.

The red man's family affection does not always show itself in the same
way with ours, but there is plenty of it.  All the more in the case of
a young brave like Red Wolf, with every reason to be proud as well as
fond of his sister.

And of Rita?

He was thinking of her now, and wondering if she had learned anything
more about the cavalry from her talking leaves.

It was, for all the world, just as if he had been a young white man
from "one of the first families."  He galloped onward, keenly eying the
fringes of the forest and the broken bases of the ledges, until he came
to the broad opening below the gap, and here he suddenly stopped and
sprung to the ground at a place where the green sod was soft and deeply
marked with the prints of horses' hoofs.

"The blue-coat horsemen came out into the valley here.  Their tracks
are old.  Ugh!  Those are fresh.  Ni-ha-be and Rita."

He was on his horse again in an instant, galloping up the not very
steep slope of the pass.

The two girls had been in no hurry, and it was not long before Red Wolf
came in sight of them.

He put his hand to his mouth and gave a long, peculiar whoop that
meant: "I am after you.  Come back!"

They understood it well enough, and Rita might have obeyed at once if
she had been left to herself; but there was more than a little mischief
behind the black eyes of Ni-ha-be.

"Let him catch us.  He won't do anything worse than scold.  I'm not
afraid of Red Wolf."

Rita was, just a little, but she rode on beside her sister without
turning her head.

"We shall not read any out of the leaves this morning."

"Read?  What is that?"

"Just the same as a warrior when he finds the trail of a deer.  Just
like the trail of the blue-coat cavalry.  Father and the gray-heads
read it."

"Is that the way the leaves talk to you?  I guessed it was.  It is all
signs, like tracks in the mud."

Rita had used the only Apache word she could think of that came at all
near to meaning what she wanted, but there was no word for "book," or
for any kind of book.

Again they heard the shout of Red Wolf behind them.  It was nearer now,
and a little angry.

"He is coming, Ni-ha-be.  Don't let us ride fast."

"He is saying ugly things.  But we will laugh at him, and tell him he
cannot whoop loud enough to be heard."

Red Wolf was proud of his powerful voice, and that would be a sure way
to tease him.

"Rita!  The great chief is angry!  He calls for you!"

He was close upon them by this time, and they reined in their horses.
Teasing Red Wolf was one thing, but disobeying Many Bears was quite
another.

They had seen squaws beaten for smaller offences than that.

"We have done wrong, Ni-ha-be."

"Oh, not much.  We can ride back as fast as our ponies can carry us.
Turn and meet him."

It had been a very little bit of a "runaway" on the part of the two
girls, but it threatened to have serious consequences.

There was no time even for Red Wolf to scold them before the
consequences began to come.

They had ridden just to the end of the spot where the rocks and bushes
at the roadside were so thick-set and made so perfect a cover for
anybody hiding among them.

"Look, Red Wolf!  look!"

"Oh, who are they?  Enemies!"

The young brave pulled in his mustang so sharply that he almost tumbled
him over, and turned his head.

"Pale-faces!  How came they here?"

He could hardly have been more astonished if one of the granite
bowlders near him had stood up and said, "Good-morning."  So far as he
could have guessed, the nearest white man was many hundreds of miles
away, and his nation was at peace with them for the time; but here were
three of the hated race standing in the road to cut oft his retreat and
that of his sisters.

Three tall, brawny, evil-looking pale-faces, with rifles in their
hands, and the foremost of them was levelling his gun straight at Red
Wolf, and shouting, "Surrender, you red-skinned coyote, or I'll put a
pill into ye."

An Indian brave, like the son of Many Bears, might deem it an honor to
be named after the large, dangerous "wolf" he had killed in single
fight with only his knife, but to be called a coyote, a miserable
prairie wolf, jackal, was a bitter insult, and that was what it was
meant for.  He had left his carbine in the camp, but his long lance was
in his hand, and his knife and revolver were in his belt.

What could one young brave do against three such powerful and
well-armed white men?

"Ni-ha-be!" exclaimed Rita.

"I am an Apache girl!  I can fight!  You are a pale-face!"

Rita was stung to her very heart by her sister's scornful reply, for
she had also brought her bow and arrows.  They never stirred from camp
without them, and squaws were not permitted to carry firearms.

Ni-ha-be had an arrow already on the string, and Rita followed her
example like a flash.

"Red Wolf is a warrior.  He is not a coyote.  He will show the
pale-faces--"

Twang!

The sound of Ni-ha-be's bow-string cut Red Wolf's haughty reply in two
in the middle, and it was well for the miner "Bill" that he was quick
in dodging.  As it was, he dropped his rifle, for there was an arrow
through his right arm above the elbow, and Ni-ha-be was fitting another.

Twang!

But the man at whom Rita aimed her arrow was an old Indian fighter, and
he parried it easily.

"Red Wolf, your pistol!"

"Boys," exclaimed Bill, "they're a lot of young wild-cats!  We'll jest
have to shoot.  Pick on the redskin, quick, and knock over the two
girls before they make a hole into ye."

The two parties were hardly twenty yards apart, and all this had
happened in a few seconds; but just then Red Wolf was exclaiming,

"Two more!"

And Rita said, excitedly,

"Stop, Ni-ha-be!  See!  They are fighting other.  These two are
friends.  Don't shoot!"




CHAPTER XII

During one part of the journey Steve Harrison and Murray had found the
ledge along the mountain side pretty rough travelling, but their horses
were used to picking their way along bad roads, and after a while they
succeeded in getting out on to the comparatively smooth slope of the
pine-forest.

"Our only risk now is that we may meet some of their hunters up here
after game.  We'll push right on."

"I'll fight if it can't be helped, Murray, but I'd a good deal rather
not meet anybody."

"Well, so had I.  Our business, just now, is scouting, not killing."

"I'll scout all day," said Steve.

"We must find a hiding-place for the horses, and creep down into the
valley on foot.  I'll show you some new tricks to-day."

The trees were large and the forest open, and no proper place was found
for the concealment of such large animals, until they made their way at
last to the very edge of the pass, at the point where it left the
rugged cliffs of the "gap" and entered the more gentle slope of the
forest.

"This'll do, Steve.  I could hide a company in here; and no one squad
need know where the next one was lying."

That was true enough, but it was of more importance to them that day
than any one would have expected.

They tethered their horses between two rocks, where the thickly woven
vines overhead made almost a dark stable for them.

"Now, Steve, a good look up and down, and we're off."

Between them and what could be called "the road" were many yards of
tangled growth, and before they had gotten through it Steve felt his
arm gripped hard.

"Listen!  Horses coming!  Lie still."

A minute more and they were both willing to lie as still as mice, for
that was the very cover chosen by Bill and his two comrades in which to
wait for their intended prisoners.

They and their horses were hardly twenty feet from Steve and Murray,
and every loud word they said was distinctly heard.

Moreover, Murray and his young friend were on higher ground, and they,
too, could look down the pass, and see who was coming.

"Two young squaws," whispered Murray.  "The foolish young things are
coming right into the trap."

"Can't we help 'em?"

"They're Apache squaws, Steve."

"I don't care.  I'm white!"

"So am I.  Tell you what, Steve--Ha!  I declare!"

"What's the matter, Murray?"

"One of 'em's white!  Sure's you live.  They sha'n't touch a hair of
their heads!"

"White or red?" whispered Steve, and he was not speaking of the color
of Ni-ha-be's hair or of Rita's.

The expression of Murray's face astonished Steve.  It was ghastly
white, under all its tan and sunburn, and the wrinkles seemed twice as
deep as usual, while the fire in his sunken eyes was fairly blazing.
It was likely to be a bad time for anybody to cross the temper of "No
Tongue," and Steve felt that his own blood was getting a little warm.

"There's an Indian coming."

"Apache.  After the squaws.  Don't you hear his whoop?  I suppose
they'll shoot him first thing, but they won't send a bullet at the
girls.  They're a bad crowd.  Worse than Apache Indians."

"I don't consider them white men."

"Not inside, they ain't.  I'd rather be a Lipan!"

The two merry, laughing girls rode by, in happy ignorance of the danger
that was lurking in the thicket, and Red Wolf galloped swiftly on to
join them.

Then the three miners, with Bill at their head, sprung out of their
cover.

"Look out, boys.  Don't use your rifles.  Thar must be plenty more
within hearin'."

"We'll have to kill the brave."

"Of course.  Git close to him, though.  No noise.  I'd like not to give
him a chance to so much as whoop."

They never dreamed of looking behind to see if any one were following
them out of the cover, but it would have been better for them to have
done so.

"They've start enough now," growled Murray.  "Come on, Steve.  Step
like a cat.  We must take them unawares.  Have your tie-up ready."

The buckskin thongs which hang from the belt or shoulder or knee of an
Indian warrior are not all put there for ornament.  They are for use in
tying things, and they are terribly strong.  No human hand can break
one, and they are always there and ready, only needing to be cut off.

Steve's face was almost as pale as Murray's in his excitement.  He had
looked in the bright faces of the two "young squaws" as they rode by,
and it seemed to him as if he could fight those three miners all alone.

They saw Red Wolf join his sisters; they heard the startled cries of
Rita and Ni-ha-be, the demand for their surrender, and Red Wolf's reply.

"Now, Steve, quick!  Do just as I tell you!"

Twang went Ni-ha-be's bow at that instant, and the man next to Bill was
raising his rifle to fire, when his arms were suddenly seized by a
grasp of iron and jerked behind him.

"Right at the elbows, Steve.  Draw the loop hard.  Quick!"

As the next of the miners turned in his tracks he was astonished by a
blow between the eyes that laid him flat, and saw a powerful-looking
