but succeeded in restraining himself, and went on:--

"It's quite plain that the island is too small to let every man have an
equal bit of land, so I propose that it should be divided among those
who have strength and knowledge to work it, and--"

"_You_ ain't one o' them," shouted the irate tailor.

"Come, come, Buxley--let him speak," said Joe Binney, "fair play, ye
know.  That's what you sticks up for, ain't it?  Let 'im speak."

"Anyhow," continued Malines, sharply, "_I_ mean to keep the bit o'
ground I've staked off whether you like it or no--"

"An' so do I," cried Welsh, who was what may be styled a growly man.

"Sure, an' so does myself," said Teddy Malone, "for I've staked off a
bit about six feet long an' two broad, to plant mesilf in whin I give up
the ghost."

This mild pleasantry seemed to calm a little the rising wrath of
contending parties, much to Dominick's satisfaction, for he was
exceedingly anxious to keep in the background and avoid interference.
During the week that had passed, he had more than once been forced to
have sharp words with Malines, and felt that if he was to act as a
peacemaker--which he earnestly wished to do--he must avoid quarrelling
with him if possible.

The hopes of those who wished to settle matters amicably, however, were
dashed by the fiery tailor, who, still smarting under the contemptuous
tones and words of the mate, suddenly sprang to his feet and suggested
that, as Malines knew nothing about agriculture, no land at all should
be apportioned to him, but that he should be set to fishing, or some
such dirty work, for the benefit of the community.

This was too much for Malines, who strode towards Buxley with clenched
fists and furious looks, evidently intending to knock him down.  To the
surprise and amusement of every one, Buxley threw himself into a
pugilistic attitude, and shouted defiantly, "Come on!"  There is no
saying how the thing would have ended, if Dominick had not quickly
interposed.

"Come, Mr Malines," he said, "it is not very creditable in you to
threaten a man so very much smaller than yourself."

"Out of my road," shouted the mate, fiercely, "we don't want _gentlemen_
to lord it over us."

"No, nor yet _blackguards_," growled a voice in the crowd.

This so angered Malines, that he dealt Dominick a sounding slap on the
cheek.

For a moment there was dead silence, as the two men glared at each
other.  If it had been a blow the youth might have stood it better, but
there was something so stinging, as well as insulting, in a slap, that
for a moment he felt as if his chest would explode.  Before he could
act, however, Joe Binney thrust his bulky form between the men.

"Leave'm to me, master," he said, quietly turning up his wristbands,
"I'm used to this sort o' thing, an'--"

"No, no," said Dominick, in a deep, decided voice, "listen."

He grasped Joe by the arm, and whispered a few words in his ear.  A
smile broke over the man's face, and he shook his head doubtfully.

"Well, it may be so," he remarked, "an' no doubt it would have a good
effect."

"Now, then, stand aside," said Dominick, as he retreated a few paces and
threw off his coat, while Malines still stood in a threatening attitude,
with an expression of contempt on his face.  "My friends," he said, as
he slowly rolled up his shirt-sleeves, showing a pair of arms which,
although not bulky, displayed an amount of sinews and muscle that was
suggestive of knotted ropes under a fair skin--

"My friends," he said, "somewhere in the Bible it is written, `Smite a
scorner, and the simple will beware.'  I have done my best to conciliate
_this_ scorner without success; I shall now try to smite him."

"An' brother David an' me will see fair play," remarked Joe Binney.

If the combatants had been more equally matched, the spectators would
probably have encouraged Dominick with a cheer, but the difference in
size was so apparent, that astonishment kept them silent.  Dominick was
indeed fully as tall as his opponent, and his shoulders were nearly as
broad, but the massive weight of Malines's figure seemed to render the
chance of Dominick's success highly improbable.

The youth sprang at him, however, like lightning, and, hitting him a
violent blow on the forehead, leapt back out of his reach.

The blow had the effect that was intended; it roused the mate's wrath to
the utmost pitch, causing him to rush at his opponent, striking right
and left with all his force.  Dominick, however, leapt about with such
activity, that only a few of the blows reached him, and these not with
their full force.  The result was that the mate became what is styled
winded in a few minutes, and was compelled to pause to recover himself,
but Dominick had no intention of allowing him time to recover himself.
Without a moment's hesitation, he sprang in again and planted a severe
left-hander between his opponent's eyes.  This roused the mate once more
to white heat, and he sought to close with his foe, but the latter
prevented that by leaping aside, tripping him up, and causing him to
plunge forward on his hands and knees--assisting him to that position
with a stiff rap on the right temple as he passed.

Then it was that Malines discovered that he had drawn on himself the
wrath of one who had been the champion boxer in a large public school,
and was quite as tough as himself in wind and limb, though not so strong
or so heavy.

Now, it is not our intention to give a graphic account of that
pugilistic encounter.  Yet is it needful to point out briefly how, being
a man of peace, as well as a man of science, Dominick managed to bring
this fight to as speedy a close as possible.  Instead, then, of striking
his foe in all directions, and producing a disgusting scene of
bloodshed, he confined his practice chiefly to one spot, between the
eyes, close above the bridge of the nose--varying it a little with a
shot now and then under each eye.  This had the effect, owing to
constant repetition, of gradually shutting up both Malines's eyes so
that he could not easily see.  When in this condition, Dominick suddenly
delivered first a left and then a right hander into what is sometimes
called the breadbasket, and stretched his adversary on the sand.

Dominick was not boastful or ungenerous.  He did not crow over his
fallen foe.  On the contrary, he offered to assist that smitten scorner
to rise, but Malines preferred in the meantime to lie still.

It is scarcely necessary to say that the emigrants watched this short
but sharp encounter with keen interest, and when it was ended gave vent
to a cheer, in which surprise was quite as clearly expressed as
satisfaction.

"Now, I tell 'ee what it is, lads," said Joe Binney, striking his great
right fist into the palm of his left hand enthusiastically, "I never
seed the likes o' that since I was a leetle booy, and I've got a motion
for to propose, as they say at meetin's.  It's this, that we makes
Master Dom'nik Riggundy capting over us all."

Up started Teddy Malone, with a slap of his thigh.  "And it's mesilf
as'll second that motion--only we should make him governor of the whole
island, if not king!"

"Hear! hear!" shouted a decided majority of the party.  "Let him be
king!"

When silence had been partially restored Dominick politely but firmly
declined the honour, giving it as his opinion that the fairest way would
be to have a republic.

"A republic!  No; what we wants is a despotism," said David Binney, who
had up to this point remained silent, "a regular despot--a howtocrat--is
what we wants to keep us in order."

"Hump!" exclaimed Hugh Morris, contemptuously, "if you'd on'y let
Malines have his way you'd soon have a despot an' a howtocrat as 'ud
keep yer noses to the grindstone."

"Mrs Lynch," whispered Otto, who had hitherto stood beside the widow
watching the proceedings with inexpressible glee, "you get up an'
propose that Pina should be _queen_!"

That this suggestion came upon the widow with a shock of surprise, as
well as approval, was obvious from the wide-eyed stare, with which for a
moment she regarded the boy, and from her subsequent action.  Taking a
bold and masculine stride to the front of the disputers, she turned
about and faced them.

"Howld yer tongues now, boys, all of you, and listen to what your
grandmother's got to say."

A shout of laughter cut her short for a few seconds.

"That's right, old 'ooman, out with it."

"Sure, if ye'd stop your noise I'd out wid it fast enough.  Now, then,
here ye are, nivver a man of ye able to agree wid the others; an' the
raisin's not far to seek--for yer all wrong togither.  It would nivver
do to make wan o' you a king--not even Joe here, for he knows nixt to
nothin', nor yet Mister Rig Gundy, though he can fight like a man, for
it's not a king's business to fight.  No, take my word for it; what ye
want is a _queen_--"

A loud explosion of mirth drowned the rest.  "Hurrah! for Queen Lynch,"
cried one.  "The Royal blood of owld Ireland for ivver!" shouted Malone.

"I wouldn't," said the widow indignantly, "condescind to reign over
sitch a nation o' pigs, av ye was to go down on yer bare knees an'
scrape them to the bone.  No, it's English blood, or Spanitch, I don't
rightly know which, that I'm drivin' at, for where could ye find a
better, or honester, or purtier queen than that swate creetur, Miss
Pauline Rig Gundy?"

The idea seemed to break upon the assembly as a light in a dark place.
For a moment they seemed struck dumb; then there burst forth such a
cheer as showed that the greater part of those present sympathised
heartily with the proposal.

"I know'd ye'd agree to it.  Sure, men always does when a sensible woman
spakes.  You see, Queen Pauline the First--"

"Hurrah! for Queen Pauline the First," yelled the settlers, with mingled
cheers and laughter.

"Queen Pauline the First, ye may be sure," continued the widow, "would
nivver try to kape order wid her fists, nor yit wid shoutin' or
swearin'.  An' then, av coorse, it would be aisy to make Mister Duminick
or Joe Binney Prime Minister, an' little Buxley Chancler o' the
Checkers, or whatever they calls it.  Now, think over it, boys, an' good
luck be wid ye."

They did think over it, then and there, in real earnest, and the
possibility of an innocent, sensible, gentle, just, sympathetic, and
high-minded queen reigning over them proved so captivating to these
rough fellows, that the idea which had been at first received in jest
crystallised into a serious purpose.  At this point Otto ventured to
raise his voice in this first deliberation of the embryo State.

"Friends," he said, with an air of modesty, which, we fear, was foreign
to his nature, "although I can only appear before you as a boy, my big
brother has this day proved himself to be so much more than an ordinary
man that I feel somehow as if I had a right to his surplus manhood,
being next-of-kin, and therefore I venture to address you as a sort of
man."  (Hear, hear!) "I merely wish to ask a question.  May I ask to be
the bearer of the news of this assembly's determination to--the--the
_Queen_?"

"Yes--yes--of course--av course," were the immediate replies.

Otto waited not for more, but sped to their new hut, in which the Queen
was busy preparing dinner at the time.

"Pina," exclaimed the boy, bursting in, "will you consent to be the
Queen of Big Island?"

"Come, Otto; don't talk nonsense.  I hope Dom is with you.  Dinner is
much overdone already."

"No, but I'm not talking nonsense," cried Otto.  "I say, will you
consent to be a queen--a _real_ queen--Pina the First, eh?"

Hereupon he gave his wondering sister a graphic account of the recent
meeting, and fight, and final decision.

"But they don't really mean it, you know," said Pauline, laughing.

"But they do really mean it," returned Otto; "and, by the way, if _you_
become a queen won't that necessarily make me and Dom princes?"

As Dominick entered the hut at that moment he joined in the laugh which
this question created, and corroborated his brother's statement.

In this cheerful frame of mind the new Royal Family sat down to dinner.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

THE CORONATION--CROWN-MAKING DELIBERATIONS, CEREMONIALS, AND
CATASTROPHES.

There came a day, not many weeks later in the history of our emigrants,
when great preparations were made for an important and unusual event.

This was neither more nor less than the coronation of Queen Pauline the
First.

The great event had been delayed by the unfortunate illness of the elect
queen herself--an illness brought on by reckless exposure in the pursuit
of the picturesque and beautiful among the islets of the lagoon.  In
other words, Otto and she, when off on a fishing and sketching excursion
in the dinghy of the wreck, had been caught in a storm and drenched to
the skin.  The result to Otto was an increase of appetite; to Pauline, a
sharp attack of fever, which confined her for some time to the palace,
as their little hut was now styled.  Here the widow Lynch--acting the
united parts of nurse, lady of the bedchamber, mistress of the robes,
maid of honour, _chef de cuisine_, and any other office that the reader
may recollect as belonging to royalty--did so conduct herself as to gain
not only the approval but the affection and gratitude of her royal
mistress.

During the period of Pauline's convalescence considerable changes had
taken place in the circumstances and condition of the community.  The
mere fact that a government had been fixed on, the details of which were
being wrought out by a committee of leading men appointed by the people,
tended to keep the turbulent spirits pretty quiet, and enabled the
well-disposed to devote all their strength of mind and body to the
various duties that devolved upon them and the improving of their
circumstances.  Busy workers are usually peaceful.  They have no time to
quarrel.  It is only when turbulent idlers interfere with or oppress
them that the industrious are compelled to show their teeth and set up
their backs.

During these weeks the appearance of the shores of Big Island began to
change materially.  All round the edge of Silver Bay a number of bright
green patches were enclosed by rough but effective fences.  These were
the gardens of the community, in which sweet potatoes, yams, etcetera,
grew spontaneously, while some vegetables of the northern hemisphere had
already been sown, and were in some cases even beginning to show above
ground.  In these gardens, when the important work of planting had been
finished, the people set about building huts of various shapes and
sizes, according to their varying taste and capacity.

Even at this early stage in the life of the little community the
difficulties which necessarily surround a state of civilisation began to
appear, and came out at one of the frequent, though informal, meetings
of the men on the sands of Silver Bay.  It happened thus:--

It was evening.  The younger and more lively men of the community,
having a large store of surplus energy unexhausted after the labours of
the day, began, as is the wont of the young and lively, to compete with
one another in feats of agility and strength, while a group of their
elders stood, sat, or reclined on a bank, discussing the affairs of the
nation, and some of them enjoying their pipes--for, you see, everything
in the wreck having been saved, they had, among other bad things, plenty
of tobacco.

Dr Marsh sat among the elders, for, although several weeks on shore had
greatly restored his health, he was still too weak to join in the
athletics.  A few of the women and children also looked on, but they
stood aside by themselves, not feeling very much interested in the
somewhat heated discussions of the men.

By degrees these discussions degenerated into disputes, and became at
last so noisy that the young athletes were attracted, and some of them
took part in the debates.

"I tell 'ee what it is," exclaimed Nobbs, the blacksmith, raising his
powerful voice above the other voices, and lifting his huge fist in the
air, "something'll have to be done, for I can't go on workin' for
nothin' in this fashion."

"No more can I, or my mates," said Abel Welsh, the carpenter.

"Here comes the Prime Minister," cried Teddy Malone.

"To _be_--he ain't Prime Minister yet," growled Jabez Jenkins, who,
being a secret ally of Hugh Morris, was one of the disaffected, and had,
besides, a natural tendency to growl and object to everything.

"He _is_ Prime Minister," cried the fiery little Buxley, starting up and
extending his hand with the air of one who is about to make a speech.
"No doubt the Queen ain't crowned yet, an' hasn't therefore appointed
any one to be her Minister, but we know she means to do it and we're all
