  Little breezes dusk and shiver
  Thro' the wave that runs for ever
  By the island in the river
      Flowing down to Camelot.
  Four gray walls, and four gray towers,
  Overlook a space of flowers,
  And the silent isle embowers
      The Lady of Shalott.

  By the margin, willow-veil'd,
  Slide the heavy barges trail'd
  By slow horses; and unhail'd
  The shallop flitteth silken-sail'd
      Skimming down to Camelot:
  But who has seen her wave her hand?
  Or at the casement seen her stand?
  Or is she known in all the land,
      The Lady of Shalott?

  Only reapers, reaping early
  In among the bearded barley,
  Hear a song that echoes cheerly
  From the river winding clearly,
      Down to tower'd Camelot:
  And by the moon the reaper weary,
  Piling sheaves in uplands airy,
  Listening, whispers "'Tis the fairy
      Lady of Shalott."


PART II

  There she weaves by night and day
  A magic web with colours gay.
  She has heard a whisper say,
  A curse is on her if she stay
      To look down to Camelot.
  She knows not what the curse may be,
  And so she weaveth steadily,
  And little other care hath she,
      The Lady of Shalott.

  And moving thro' a mirror clear
  That hangs before her all the year,
  Shadows of the world appear.
  There she sees the highway near
      Winding down to Camelot:
  There the river eddy whirls,
  And there the surly village-churls,
  And the red cloaks of market girls,
      Pass onward from Shalott.

  Sometimes a troop of damsels glad,
  An abbot on an ambling pad,
  Sometimes a curly shepherd-lad,
  Or long-hair'd page in crimson clad,
      Goes by to tower'd Camelot;
  And sometimes thro' the mirror blue
  The knights come riding two and two:
  She hath no loyal knight and true,
      The Lady of Shalott.

  But in her web she still delights
  To weave the mirror's magic sights,
  For often thro' the silent nights
  A funeral, with plumes and lights
      And music, went to Camelot:
  Or when the moon was overhead,
  Came two young lovers lately wed;
  "I am half sick of shadows," said
      The Lady of Shalott.


PART III

  A bow-shot from her bower-eaves,
  He rode between the barley-sheaves,
  The sun came dazzling thro' the leaves,
  And flamed upon the brazen greaves
      Of bold Sir Lancelot.
  A red-cross knight for ever kneel'd
  To a lady in his shield,
  That sparkled on the yellow field,
      Beside remote Shalott.

  The gemmy bridle glitter'd free,
  Like to some branch of stars we see
  Hung in the golden Galaxy.
  The bridle bells rang merrily
      As he rode down to Camelot:
  And from his blazon'd baldric slung
  A mighty silver bugle hung,
  And as he rode his armour rung,
      Beside remote Shalott.

  All in the blue unclouded weather
  Thick-jewell'd shone the saddle-leather,
  The helmet and the helmet-feather
  Burn'd like one burning flame together,
      As he rode down to Camelot.
  As often thro' the purple night,
  Below the starry clusters bright,
  Some bearded meteor, trailing light,
      Moves over still Shalott.

  His broad clear brow in sunlight glow'd;
  On burnished hooves his war-horse trode;
  From underneath his helmet flow'd
  His coal-black curls as on he rode,
      As he rode down to Camelot.
  From the bank and from the river
  He flash'd into the crystal mirror,
  "Tirra lirra," by the river
      Sang Sir Lancelot.

  She left the web, she left the loom,
  She made three paces thro' the room,
  She saw the water-lily bloom,
  She saw the helmet and the plume,
      She look'd down to Camelot.
  Out flew the web and floated wide;
  The mirror crack'd from side to side;
  "The curse is come upon me," cried
      The Lady of Shalott.


PART IV

  In the stormy east-wind straining,
  The pale yellow woods were waning,
  The broad stream in his banks complaining,
  Heavily the low sky raining
      Over tower'd Camelot;
  Down she came and found a boat
      Beneath a willow left afloat,
  And round about the prow she wrote
      _The Lady of Shalott_.

  And down the river's dim expanse
  Like some bold seer in a trance,
  Seeing all his own mischance--
  With a glassy countenance
      Did she look to Camelot.
  And at the closing of the day
  She loosed the chain and down she lay;
  The broad stream bore her far away,
      The Lady of Shalott.

  Lying, robed in snowy white
  That loosely flew to left and right--
  The leaves upon her falling light--
  Thro' the noises of the night
      She floated down to Camelot:
  And as the boat-head wound along
  The willowy hills and fields among,
  They heard her singing her last song,
      The Lady of Shalott.

  Heard a carol, mournful, holy,
  Chanted loudly, chanted lowly,
  Till her blood was frozen slowly,
  And her eyes were darken'd wholly,
      Turn'd to tower'd Camelot.
  For ere she reach'd upon the tide
  The first house by the water-side,
  Singing in her song she died,
      The Lady of Shalott.

  Under tower and balcony,
  By garden-wall and gallery,
  A gleaming shape she floated by,
  Dead-pale between the houses high,
      Silent into Camelot.
  Out upon the wharfs they came,
  Knight and burgher, lord and dame,
  And round the prow they read her name,
      _The Lady of Shalott_.

  Who is this? and what is here?
  And in the lighted palace near
  Died the sound of royal cheer;
  And they cross'd themselves for fear,
      All the knights at Camelot:
  But Lancelot mused a little space;
  He said, "She has a lovely face;
  God in his mercy lend her grace,
      The Lady of Shalott."

      --_Alfred Tennyson_


  PREPARATORY.--Compare the poet's treatment of the story
  of _The Lady of Shalott_ with that given in _Lancelot
  and Elaine_.

  Combine the smaller pictures in this poem into a number
  of larger ones.

  Give to the larger pictures titles which suggest the
  different stages in the development of the story.

  Exercises in Articulation. (Appendix A. See Examples)


  PART I

  Stanza i, ll. 1 and 4. Where is the Pause in each line?
  Why? (Introduction, p. 11.)

  Stanza iii, ll. 1 and 2. Account for the change in Time.
  (Introduction, p. 13.)

  2. Where is the Pause?

  6-9. What is the Inflection in these questions?
  (Introduction, p. 19.)

  Stanza iv, l. 3. HEAR. With what word should this be
  connected? How? (Introduction, p. 16.) Note the Shading.

  6. Where are the Pauses in this line? Account for them.

  8-9. In what Quality of voice are these lines read?
  (Introduction, p. 6.) Compare from this standpoint the
  last lines of Parts II, III, and IV.


  Part II

  Stanza i, ll. 3-5. Note the spontaneous imitation.
  (Introduction, pp. 5 and 6.)

  AND THERE THE SURLY ... TWO AND TWO. Note the three
  separate groups of passers-by. Which group has the most
  significance in its bearing on the rest of the poem? How
  does the voice indicate this relative significance?
  (Introduction, pp. 24 and 30.)

  Stanza iii, l. 8. How is the transition made effective?
  (Introduction, pp. 8, 9, and 25.)

  Stanza iv. FOR OFTEN ... CAMELOT. Observe the Shading.
  (Introduction, p. 33.)


  PART III

  HIS SHIELD, RODE DOWN, ARMOUR RUNG, SADDLE-LEATHER,
  COAL-BLACK CURLS. (Appendix A, 6.)

  Stanza i, l. 4. Observe the Grouping.

  Stanza ii, l. 2. Where is the Pause? Explain. What is
  the Inflection on STARS?

  Compare the Shading in ll. 6 and 7.

  Stanza iii. What are the central ideas of ll. 2 and 3?
  How does the reader make them stand out?

  6-8. Note the continuous Inflection. (Introduction, p.
  17.)

  Stanza iv, ll. 3 and 4. How does the Grouping here
  affect the Pause and the Inflection?

  Stanza v, ll. 1-4. What change in the voice indicates
  the abrupt transition? What atmosphere does the voice
  create as a preparation for the climax of the last four
  lines?

  1. What is the central idea of this line?

  6-7. What change in Force, Pitch, and Stress expresses
  the sudden disaster?


  PART IV

  Compare the atmosphere of the first four and a half
  stanzas of this Part with the first four of Part III,
  and also with the remainder of Part IV. What is the
  difference in Pitch, Force, and Time? (Introduction, pp.
  22, 26, and 13.)

       *       *       *       *       *


HOME THEY BROUGHT HER WARRIOR DEAD

From "The Princess"


  Home they brought her warrior dead:
  She nor swoon'd, nor utter'd cry:
  All her maidens, watching, said,
  "She must weep or she will die."

  Then they praised him, soft and low,
  Call'd him worthy to be loved,
  Truest friend and noblest foe;
  Yet she neither spoke nor moved.

  Stole a maiden from her place,
  Lightly to the warrior stept,
  Took the face-cloth from the face;
  Yet she neither moved nor wept.

  Rose a nurse of ninety years,
  Set his child upon her knee--
  Like summer tempest came her tears--
  "Sweet my child, I live for thee."

      --_Alfred Tennyson_


  See Introduction, p. 6.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SKY

From "Modern Painters"


1. It is a strange thing how little in general people know about the
sky. It is the part of creation in which nature has done more for the
sake of pleasing man, more for the sole and evident purpose of talking
to him and teaching him, than in any other of her works, and it is
just the part in which we least attend to her.

2. There are not many of her other works in which some more material
or essential purpose than the mere pleasing of man is not answered by
every part of their organization; but every essential purpose of the
sky might, so far as we know, be answered, if once in three days, or
thereabouts, a great ugly black rain-cloud were brought up over the
blue, and everything well watered, and so all left blue again till
next time, with perhaps a film of morning and evening mist for dew.

3. And instead of this, there is not a moment of any day of our lives,
when nature is not producing scene after scene, picture after picture,
glory after glory, and working still upon such exquisite and constant
principles of the most perfect beauty, that it is quite certain it is
all done for us, and intended for our perpetual pleasure. And every
man, wherever placed, however far from other sources of interest or of
beauty, has this doing for him constantly.

4. The noblest scenes of the earth can be seen and known but by few;
it is not intended that man should live always in the midst of them,
he injures them by his presence, he ceases to feel them if he be
always with them; but the sky is for all; bright as it is, it is not
"too bright, nor good, for human nature's daily food"; it is fitted in
all its functions for the perpetual comfort and exalting of the heart,
for the soothing it and purifying it from its dross and dust.
Sometimes gentle, sometimes capricious, sometimes awful, never the
same for two moments together; almost human in its passions, almost
spiritual in its tenderness, almost divine in its infinity, its appeal
to what is immortal in us, is as distinct, as its ministry of
chastisement or of blessing to what is mortal, is essential.

5. And yet we never attend to it, we never make it a subject of
thought, but as it has to do with our animal sensations; we look upon
all by which it speaks to us more clearly than to brutes, upon all
which bears witness to the intention of the Supreme, that we are to
receive more from the covering vault than the light and the dew which
we share with the weed and the worm, only as a succession of
meaningless and monotonous accidents too common and too vain to be
worthy of a moment of watchfulness, or a glance of admiration. If in
our moments of utter idleness and insipidity, we turn to the sky as a
last resource, which of its phenomena do we speak of?

6. One says it has been wet, and another it has been windy, and
another it has been warm. Who, among the whole chattering crowd, can
tell me of the forms and the precipices of the chain of tall white
mountains that girded the horizon at noon yesterday? Who saw the
narrow sunbeam that came out of the south, and smote upon their
summits until they melted and mouldered away in a dust of blue rain?
Who saw the dance of the dead clouds when the sunlight left them last
night, and the west wind blew them before it like withered leaves?

7. All has passed, unregretted as unseen; or if the apathy be ever
shaken off, even for an instant, it is only by what is gross, or what
is extraordinary; and yet it is not in the broad and fierce
manifestations of the elemental energies, not in the clash of the
hail, nor the drift of the whirlwind, that the highest characters of
the sublime are developed. God is not in the earthquake, nor in the
fire, but in the still, small voice.

8. They are but the blunt and the low faculties of our nature, which
can only be addressed through lamp-black and lightning. It is in
quiet and subdued passages of unobtrusive majesty, the deep, and the
calm, and the perpetual,--that which must be sought ere it is seen,
and loved ere it is understood,--things which the angels work out for
us daily, and yet vary eternally, which are never wanting, and never
repeated, which are to be found always yet each found but once; it is
through these that the lesson of devotion is chiefly taught, and the
blessing of beauty given.

      --_John Ruskin_

     (_By arrangement with George Allen, Publisher_)


  SPIRITUAL, PRECIPICES, SUMMITS, UNOBTRUSIVE. (Appendix
