"Oh, _please_ don't let it get over you. What can the pawnbroker do to
you? Most people call him uncle, so I expect he's awfully good-natured."

"Uncle, indeed," exclaimed Mrs. Martin, tossing her head; "it's a word
you shouldn't know, Miss Annie Forest."

"But why shouldn't I? I never heard that uncles were wicked, except the
one who killed the babes in the wood. Now you will go; you will be an
angel! I know this special uncle who is to lend money on my ring will be
delightful!"




CHAPTER XII.

THE LAND OF PERHAPS.


There are some people who always get their way in life. They are by no
means the best people, nor the most amiable, nor the most thoughtful.
Sometimes, and not a very rare sometimes either, the poor, thoughtful
people go to the wall, when the thoughtless and impulsive and careless
come triumphantly out of their difficulties.

There never was a girl who got into a greater number of scrapes than
Annie Forest; but neither was there ever a girl who managed to right
herself more quickly. She knew the art of twisting other people round
her little finger. Having performed this feat to perfection on Mrs.
Martin, alias Patty, alias nursey, she went happily to bed, knowing that
all would be right for the present, and never giving a thought to the
evil but still distant hour when she must return her mother's ring to
Mrs. Willis.

Annie rose in good time in the morning, and took upon herself the
preparing of Mrs. Martin's breakfast. She lit a fire in the old lady's
sitting-room, and toasted her bread with her own fair hands, and made
the tea for her to drink.

Mrs. Martin started on her journey to Nortonbury with many fervent
blessings from Annie, who then returned in a high state of content to
her own room.

The parcel of cambric arrived in due time, and Annie cut out the first
of the three frocks that morning.

In order to keep their secret quite to themselves, Nora and Annie
decided to keep the door of the library locked while they were at work.
This arrangement was delightful to Nora, but it irritated Molly not a
little. When she came to see her sister, to be greeted by a locked
door--and to hear Annie's clear voice singing out from within, "Oh,
we're so busy, you darling of a Molly asthore. Don't disturb us for the
present, there's a love," and when this remark was followed by silvery
laughter from Nora--poor Molly felt herself decidedly out in the cold.

Jealousy was for the first time fiercely stirred in her gentle breast
and she shed some tears in secret over the change in Nora, who had
hitherto clung to her and loved her better than anyone else in the
world.

But what will not a rather frivolous little heart do for the sake of a
pretty dress?

Nora in her own way was as thoughtless as Annie, and it never occurred
to either of them as even possible that Molly should be pained by the
fact of the locked door.

A fortnight passed away. The pink dress and the white were both finished
and the blue was rapidly approaching completion, when one day the whole
party at the Grange were considerably electrified and their attention
turned into a completely new quarter by a letter which arrived for
Hester from Sir John Thornton.

After writing on various subjects, he concluded his lengthy epistle as
follows:--

     "I shall not be home for another week. For some reasons I am sorry
     for this delay; but when I explain matters to you, my dear Hester,
     on the occasion of my return, you will, I am sure, agree with me
     that my absence from home is, under the circumstances, allowable.
     In the meantime, I have not forgotten that Nan's birthday is on the
     15th of August, and that that date is only a week distant. If in
     any way possible, I shall return either on the fifteenth or the
     evening of the day before; but, meanwhile, I give you _carte
     blanche_ to celebrate the auspicious event in any manner you like.
     You need spare no expense to make the day as truly festive to
     yourself and your young friends as you possibly can. I enclose in
     this letter a blank cheque to which I have affixed my signature.
     You may fill it in for any sum within reason, and then if you take
     it to the bank at Nortonbury it will be cashed for you. Buy Nan a
     handsome present from me, and please choose presents for Annie
     Forest and all the Lorrimer children. I am sorry to hear bad
     rumours with regard to the Squire, and that there is a possibility
     of the Towers being soon in the market; but I trust these rumours
     are either grossly exaggerated or without any foundation. I am
     sorry, also, to hear that Nora Lorrimer has met with an accident,
     but am glad that you are taking care of her, as I know by
     experience that no one could have a kinder nurse than my good
     little Hetty. Get every possible thing you can want, my love, for
     Nan's birthday. Make it a festival to be long remembered by you
     all. Set your wits to work to make the day a really brilliant one,
     and expect your loving father, if not to share in the whole of the
     festivity, at least to be present at a portion of it.

     "Now good-bye, my dear Hester; give my love to Nan, and remember me
     kindly to your young friend, Miss Forest.--Believe me, your
     affectionate father,

                              "JOHN THORNTON."

Hester received this letter at breakfast time. She read it through
gravely--not once, but twice. Annie's gay voice, her peals of merry
laughter, and her gay and irresistibly funny speeches were diverting the
attention of Molly, and to a certain extent of Nan; but Nan knew the
handwriting on the envelope. She was also well aware of the fact that
the birthday, when she would have the glorious privilege of counting
nine years as her own, was close at hand. When Hester, therefore, folded
up the letter, she called to her from the other end of the table.

"Toss it over, Hetty," she said. "I know it's from the Dad; let us hear
what he says."

"Yes, it is from father," replied Hester in a grave voice.

"May not I read what he says?"

"The beginning part is business."

"Well, I'll skip the business; you can point out where the fun begins.
What are you looking so mysterious and solemn about? Why may not I read
the letter?"

Nan looked almost cross; Hester was disturbed. She showed this by
slipping the letter into her pocket. This fact aroused Annie's
curiosity, who looked at her with sparkling eyes full of mischief.

"You are a cross-patch," exclaimed Nan in her most spoilt tone. "I never
knew such a thing. Is not a father's letter meant for one child as well
as for another?"

"No, Nan, dear, not on this occasion," said Hester in a firm tone. "Now,
try not to be silly; finish your breakfast, and I will speak to you
afterwards."

Nan pouted.

"When is Sir John coming back, Hester?" inquired Molly.

"In about a week," replied Hester.

"A week," shouted Nan suddenly recovering her good humour. "Hurrah! my
birthday will be in a week. My dear, good girls all of you, I am getting
elderly as fast as possible. I'll be nine in a week; isn't that
scrumptious? Did Dad say anything about my birthday in that mysterious
letter, Hetty?"

"He is coming home for your birthday," replied Hester.

"Good, kind, considerate old gentleman," responded Nan in her most
flippant voice. "Did he say anything more about that great and
auspicious event, Hetty?"

"He said a great deal more about it; in fact, the largest part of his
letter was about it; but I'm not going to talk it over now. I propose
that we all go to Nora's room after breakfast and discuss the letter.
There is a good deal to discuss, and it is very exciting," continued
Hester, a flush of brilliant colour coming into her cheeks.

The news that there was a good deal to discuss of an exciting character
restored even Nan's good humour. Breakfast was hurried over, and Annie
Forest and Nan rushed off to Nora's room to prepare her for the fact
that she was soon expected to hold a _levee_, and that the subject under
discussion was likely to be of a very rousing character.

Molly lingered behind in the breakfast-room; she looked anxiously at
Hester, who avoided her eyes. Hester did not wish to say anything to
make Molly unhappy, and she knew that her father's allusion to the
possible sale of the Towers would fill the poor little girl's heart with
the most acute misery.

Making a great effort, therefore, to fight down a nameless apprehension
on her own account, for what important business could be keeping Sir
John so long away from home, she said in a cheerful voice--

"Now, Molly, we're not going to croak, nor spend the day imagining all
kinds of unpleasant things. Father has written me a long letter, and
there are some things in it which I don't quite like; but I am not going
to talk them over at present. All the end of the letter is taken up with
Nan's birthday, and that is the matter we have to discuss just now. Come
along now to the library, and let's get it over."

Nora was still lying flat on her back; but all pain had long left her,
and she was practically quite well.

The subject of the letter was therefore discussed with intense animation
by the five eager girls.

Unlimited money, any amount of presents, and _carte blanche_ how to
spend the birthday in the most agreeable way was surely enough to turn
the brains of most people.

Many and wild were the plans which Nan proposed.

They would start for a picnic at six in the morning. They would order
ices from Nortonbury to arrive by special messenger at some impossible
place at an unearthly hour. They would have bonfires on the top of every
hill within a reasonable distance. Although it was not Christmas time,
they would end up with the largest Christmas tree ever seen, and it
should stand in the centre of the lawn, and every poor child for miles
round should be invited to see it and to share the wonderful presents
which should hang from every branch and twig.

Nan's cheeks were flushed and her eyes bright while she made these
suggestions; but, after all, it was Annie's proposal in the end which
carried the day.

"Let's have the picnic by all means," she said; "and let all who will go
to it. If Nan wishes to be charitable, and to think of others rather
than herself, let her do so; and let all the school children be taken in
waggons and waggonettes to Friar's Wood or any other beautiful place in
the neighbourhood, and let Nan herself give them presents before they go
home. All that, of course, will be very delightful; although, of course,
neither Nora nor I can be present."

"What do you mean by _your_ not being present?" asked Molly, her brown
eyes growing dark with anger. "I suppose if anyone is to stay with Nora,
it ought to be me."

"No, it oughtn't," said Nora. "I wish for Annie; she's more fun."

"And I can't do without you, Molly, darling," interrupted Hester. "You
always are my right hand when anything important is going on; and then
you know all the school children by name, which, frankly, I do not."

"Well, now, _do_ hear me out," said Annie; "I have not half done. What I
say is this, that as Sir John Thornton is so generous, and as he wishes
everyone in the house to be happy on the day of Nan's birthday, I think
something should be done to make it up to Nora and me. Now, why
shouldn't we have a real glorious time in the evening? You have a
billiard-room in this house, haven't you?"

"Yes."

"Can't we have a ball there?"

"What are we to do with the table?" said Hester.

"Oh," exclaimed Nora, her eyes sparkling, "we have such a heavenly
ball-room at the Towers; a great enormous room, never used and full of
rubbish, which can easily be turned out."

"Is there a gallery to that room?" interrupted Annie.

"Yes, at one end."

"Then the whole thing is complete," continued Annie. "We'll have a
children's fancy ball in the evening, and Nora shall look on from the
gallery. Nora shall be, in a sort of way, princess of the ceremonies.
We'll make her up the sweetest dress, and everyone shall come up and
talk to her; and if presents are to be given away at the end, she shall
give them. What do you say, girls? Could anything be more perfectly
lovely than a children's fancy ball in the old ball-room at the Towers?
Oh, I hope it will be a moonlight night, and the whole place will look
like fairyland!"

This suggestion was so daring and brilliant that it carried Nora away on
a storm of enthusiasm immediately. Nan clapped her hands and screamed
with glee; and even the more sober Hester and Molly could find no
objections to raise. The ball-room was certainly at the Towers; it
contained a gallery where the musicians could be, and where, if
necessary, Nora might rest; it contained what seemed to the children
like unlimited space, and if to unlimited space unlimited money could
be added, what brilliant results must be produced!

"If I consent to this," said Hester--"and I think my consent is
essential--it must be on condition that not a single Lorrimer is put to
even a shilling's worth of expense. The ball must be Nan's ball; the
Lorrimers will most kindly give her a room to hold it in, all the rest
will be our affair. Do you clearly understand, Molly? Do you, Nora?"

"Oh, I understand fast enough," said Nora quickly.

"Yes, I understand," replied Molly in a graver tone.

"Do you agree?"

"Yes," answered Molly.

"Well, your consent being obtained," continued Hester, "I will go with
you to the Towers this morning, Molly, and look at the ball-room, and
see Mrs. Lorrimer on the subject."

"The worst of it is," continued Annie, "that we have such a very short
time to prepare--only one week to make all our fancy dresses and to see
to all the other arrangements!"

"Fancy dresses!" exclaimed Nora from her sofa. "What am I to wear?"

"You are to be dressed as Queen of the Fairies. You shall lie on a bed
of rose-leaves, and have gossamer, cloudy sort of drapery all around
you. Never fear, Nora, you will look lovely--leave it to me."

Nora's eyes sparkled.

"Annie, you're a darling!" she exclaimed, with enthusiasm.

"And what character am I to be, Annie?" cried Nan, pouting her full
lips. "I'm not jealous, and I don't mind Nora being Queen of the
Fairies; but please remember that it's my party, and I am really the
queen of the day."

"So you are, you sweet!" exclaimed Annie. "Don't think for a moment that
I'll forget you; but you must really give me a little time to think the
characters over. Suppose I consider everything carefully and jot down a
few ideas, and suppose we discuss them to-night; and then to-morrow we
can go to Nortonbury to buy the materials for the dresses."

"But we can't possibly make our own dresses," exclaimed Hester.

"Oh, yes, we can; they'll be twice as original. If you can get in a
couple of good workwomen to help us, the dresses can easily be made at
home," exclaimed Annie, her eyes sparkling.

"Hester!" cried Molly, suddenly springing to her feet, "if we are to go
to the Towers this morning, don't you think we had better start?"

Hester stood up.

"The day is such a delightful one," she said, "that I think we will just
