These were points of information communicated by Norman as the canoe was
paddled along the shore; for Norman, although troubling himself but
little about the causes of things, possessed a good practical knowledge
of things as they actually were.  He was tolerably well acquainted with
the routes, their portages, and distances.  Some of them he had
travelled over in company with his father, and of others he had heard
the accounts given by the voyageurs, traders, and trappers.  Norman knew
that Lake Winnipeg was muddy,--he did not care to inquire the cause.  He
knew that there was a hilly country on its eastern and a low level land
on its western shores, but it never occurred to him to speculate on this
geological difference.  It was the naturalist Lucien who threw out some
hints on this part of the subject, and further added his opinion, that
the lake came to be there in consequence of the wearing away of the
rocks at the junction of the stratified with the primitive formation,
thus creating an excavation in the surface, which in time became filled
with water and formed the lake.  This cause he also assigned for the
existence of a remarkable "chain of lakes" that extends almost from the
Arctic Sea to the frontiers of Canada.  The most noted of these are
Martin, Great Slave, Athabasca, Wollaston, Deer, Lake Winnipeg, and the
Lake of the Woods.  Lucien further informed his companions, that where
primitive rocks form the surface of a country, that surface will be
found to exhibit great diversity of aspect.  There will be numerous
lakes and swamps, rugged steep hills with deep valleys between, short
streams with many falls and rapids.  These are the characteristics of a
primitive surface.  On the other hand, where secondary rocks prevail the
surface is usually a series of plains, often high, dry, and treeless, as
is the case upon the great American prairies.

Upon such topics did Lucien instruct his companions, as they paddled
their canoe around the edge of the lake.  They had turned the head of
their little vessel westward--as it was their design to keep along the
western border of the lake until they should reach the mouth of the
Saskatchewan.  They kept at a short distance from the shore, usually
steering from point to point, and in this way making their route as
direct as possible.  It would have been still more direct had they
struck out into the open lake, and kept up its middle; but this would
have been a dangerous course to pursue.  There are often high winds upon
Lake Winnipeg, that spring up suddenly; and at such times the waves, if
not mountains high, at least arrive at the height of houses.  Among such
billows the little craft would have been in danger of being swamped, and
our voyageurs of going to the bottom.  They, therefore, wisely resolved
not to risk such an accident, but to "hug the shore," though it made
their voyage longer.  Each night they would land at some convenient
place, kindle their fire, cook their supper, and dry their canoe for the
next day's journey.

According to this arrangement, a little before sunset of the first day
they came to land and made their camp.  The canoe was unloaded,
carefully lifted out of the water, and then set bottom upward to drip
and dry.  A fire was kindled, some of the dry meat cooked, and all four
sat down and began to eat, as only hungry travellers can.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

WAPITI, WOLVES, AND WOLVERENE.

The spot where our voyageurs had landed was at the bottom of a small
bay.  The country back from the lake was level and clear of timber.
Here and there, nearer the shore, however, its surface was prettily
interspersed with small clumps of willows, that formed little copse-like
thickets of deep green.  Beside one of these thickets, within a hundred
yards of the beach, the fire had been kindled, on a spot of ground that
commanded a view of the plain for miles back.

"Look yonder!" cried Francois, who had finished eating, and risen to his
feet.  "What are these, captain?"  Francois pointed to some objects that
appeared at a great distance off upon the plain.

The "captain" rose up, placed his hand so as to shade his eyes from the
sun, and, after looking for a second or two in the direction indicated,
replied to the other's question by simply saying--

"Wapiti."

"I'm no wiser than before I asked the question," said Francois.  "Pray,
enlighten me as to what a wapiti may be!"

"Why, red deer; or elk, if you like."

"Oh! elk--now I understand you.  I thought they were elk, but they're so
far off I wasn't sure."

Lucien at this moment rose up, and looking through a small telescope,
which he carried, confirmed the statement of the "captain," and
pronounced it to be a herd of elk.

"Come, Luce," demanded Francois, "tell us what you know of the elk.  It
will pass the time.  Norman says it's no use going after them out there
in the open ground, as they'd shy off before one could get within shot.
You see there is not a bush within half-a-mile of them."

"If we wait," interrupted Norman, "I should not wonder but we may have
them among the bushes before long.  They appear to be grazing this way.
I warrant you, they'll come to the lake to drink before nightfall."

"Very well then: the philosopher can tell us all about them before
that."

Lucien, thus appealed to, began:--

"There are few animals that have so many names as this.  It is called in
different districts, or by different authors, _elk, round-horned elk,
American elk, stag, red deer, grey moose, le biche, wapiti_, and
_wewaskish_.  Naturalists have given not a _few of_ their designations,
as _Cervus Canadensis, Cervus major, Cervus alces, Cervus
strongylocerus, etcetera_.

"You may ask, Why so many names?  I shall tell you.  It is called `elk'
because it was supposed by the early colonists to be the same as the elk
of Europe.  Its name of `grey moose' is a hunter appellation, to
distinguish it from the real moose, which the same hunters know as the
`black moose.'  `Round-horned elk' is also a hunter name.  `Wewaskish,'
or `waskesse,' is an Indian name for the animal.  `Stag' comes from the
European deer so called, because this species somewhat resembles the
stag; and `red deer' is a name used by the Hudson Bay traders.  `Le
biche' is another synonyme of French authors.

"Of all these names I think that of `wapiti,' which our cousin has
given, the best.  The names of `elk,' `stag,' and `red deer,' lead to
confusion, as there are other species to which they properly belong, all
of which are entirely different from the wapiti.  I believe that this
last name is now used by the best-informed naturalists.

"In my opinion," continued Lucien, "the wapiti is the noblest of all the
deer kind.  It possesses the fine form of the European stag, while it is
nearly a third larger and stronger.  It has all the grace of limb and
motion that belongs to the common deer, while its towering horns give it
a most majestic and imposing appearance.  Its colour during the summer
is of a reddish brown, hence the name red deer; but, indeed, the reddish
tint upon the wapiti is deeper and richer than that of its European
cousin.  The wapiti, like other deer, brings forth its fawns in the
spring.  They are usually a male and female, for two is the number it
produces.  The males only have horns; and they must be several years old
before the antlers become full and branching.  They fall every year, but
not until February or March, and then the new ones grow out in a month
or six weeks.  During the summer the horns remain soft and tender to the
touch.  They are covered at this time with a soft membrane that looks
like greyish velvet, and they are then said to be `in the velvet,' There
are nerves and blood-vessels running through this membrane, and a blow
upon the horns at this season gives great pain to the animal.  When the
autumn arrives the velvet peels off, and they become as hard as bone.
They would need to be, for this is the `rutting' season, and the bucks
fight furious battles with each other, clashing their horns together, as
if they would break them to pieces.  Very often a pair of bucks, while
thus contending, `lock' their antlers, and being unable to draw them
apart, remain head to head, until both die with hunger, or fall a prey
to the prowling wolves.  This is true not only of the elk, but also of
the reindeer, the moose, and many other species of deer.  Hundreds of
pairs of horns have been found thus `locked,' and the solitary hunter
has often surprised the deer in this unpleasant predicament.

"The wapiti utters a whistling sound, that can be heard far off, and
often guides the hunter to the right spot.  In the rutting season the
bucks make other noises, which somewhat resemble the braying of an ass,
and are equally disagreeable to listen to.

"The wapiti travel about in small herds, rarely exceeding fifty, but
often of only six or seven.  Where they are not much hunted they are
easily approached, but otherwise they are shy enough.  The bucks, when
wounded and brought to bay, become dangerous assailants; much more so
than those of the common deer.  Hunters have sometimes escaped with
difficulty from their horns and hoofs, with the latter of which they can
inflict very severe blows.  They are hunted in the same way as other
deer; but the Indians capture many of them in the water, when they
discover them crossing lakes or rivers.  They are excellent swimmers,
and can make their way over the arm of a lake or across the widest
river.

"They feed upon grass, and sometimes on the young shoots of willows and
poplar-trees.  They are especially fond of a species of wild rose (_Rosa
blanda_), which grows in the countries they frequent.

"The wapiti at one time ranged over a large part of the continent of
North America.  Its range is now restricted by the spread of the
settlements.  It is still found in most of the Northern parts of the
United States, but only in remote mountainous districts, and even there
it is a rare animal.  In Canada it is more common; and it roams across
the continent to the shores of the Pacific.  It is not an animal of the
tropical countries, as it is not found in Mexico proper.  On the other
hand, wapiti do not go farther north than about the fifty-seventh
parallel of latitude, and then they are not in their favourite habitat,
which is properly the temperate zone."

Lucien was interrupted by an exclamation from Basil, who stood up
looking out upon the prairie.  They all saw that he had been observing
the wapiti.

"What is it?" cried they.

"Look yonder!" replied Basil, pointing in the direction of the herd.
"Something disturbs them.  Give me your glass, Luce."

Lucien handed the telescope to his brother, who, drawing it to the
proper focus, pointed it towards the deer.  The rest watched them with
the naked eye.  They could see that there was some trouble among the
animals.  There were only six in the herd, and even at the distance our
voyageurs could tell that they were all bucks, for it was the season
when the does secrete themselves in the woods and thickets to bring
forth their young.  They were running to and fro upon the prairie, and
doubling about as if playing, or rather as if some creature was chasing
them.  With the naked eye, however, nothing could be seen upon the
ground but the bucks themselves, and all the others looked to Basil, who
held the glass, for an explanation of their odd manoeuvres.

"There are wolves at them," said Basil, after regarding them for a
second or two.

"That's odd," rejoined Norman.  "Wolves don't often attack full-grown
wapiti, except when wounded or crippled somehow.  They must be precious
hungry.  What sort of wolves are they?"

To you, boy reader, this question may seem strange.  You, perhaps, think
that a wolf is a wolf, and there is but one kind.  Such, however, is not
the exact truth.  In America there are two distinct species of wolves,
and of these two species there are many varieties, which differ so much
in colour and other respects, that some authors have classed them as so
many distinct species instead of considering them mere varieties.
Whether they may be species or not is still a question among
naturalists; but certain it is that _two_ well-defined species do exist,
which differ in size, form, colour, and habits.  These are the _large_
or _common wolf (Canis lupus_), and the barking or prairie wolf (_Canis
latrans_).  The first species is the American representative of the
common wolf of Europe; and although an animal of similar nature and
habits, it differs very much from the latter in form and appearance.  It
is, therefore, not the _same_, as hitherto supposed.  This American wolf
is found in greater or less numbers throughout the whole continent; but
in the Northern regions it is very common, and is seen in at least five
different varieties, known by the characteristic names of _black, pied,
white, dusky_, and _grey_ wolves.  Of these the grey is the most
numerous kind; but as I shall have occasion to speak of the large wolves
hereafter, I shall say no more of them at present, but direct your
attention to the second and very different species, the _prairie
wolves_.

These are a full third smaller than the common kind.  They are swifter,
and go in larger packs.  They bring forth their young in burrows on the
open plain, and not among the woods, like the other species.  They are
the most cunning of American animals, not excepting their kindred the
foxes.  They cannot be trapped by any contrivance, but by singular
manoeuvres often themselves decoy the over-curious antelope to approach
too near them.  When a gun is fired upon the prairies they may be seen
starting up on all sides, and running for the spot in hopes of coming in
for a share of the game.  Should an animal--deer, antelope, or buffalo--
be wounded, and escape the hunter, it is not likely to escape them also.
They will set after it, and run it down if _the wound has been a mortal
one_.  On the other hand, if the wound has been only slight, and is not
likely in the end to cripple the animal, the wolves will not stir from
the spot.  This extraordinary sagacity often tells the hunter whether it
is worth his while to follow the game he has shot at; but in any case he
is likely to arrive late, if the wolves set out before him, as a dozen
of them will devour the largest deer in a few minutes' time.  The
prairie wolves as well as the others follow the herds of buffaloes, and
attack the gravid cows and calves when separated from the rest.
Frequently they sustain a contest with the bulls, when the latter are
old or wounded, but on such occasions many of them get killed before the
old bull becomes their prey.

They resemble the common grey wolf in colour, but there are varieties in
this respect, though not so great as among the larger species.  Their
voice is entirely different, and consists of three distinct barks,
ending in a prolonged howl.  Hence the specific and usual name
"barking-wolf" (_Canis latrans_).  They are found only in the Western or
prairie half of the continent, and thence west to the Pacific.  Their
Northern range is limited to the fifty-fifth parallel of latitude--but
they are met with southward throughout Mexico, where they are common
enough, and known by the name of "coyote."

Their skins are an article of trade with the Hudson's Bay Company.  The
fur is of about the same quality with that of other wolves, and consists
of long hairs, with a thick wool at the base.  In commerce they are
termed "cased wolves," because their skins, on being removed, are not
split open as with the large wolf-skins, but are stript off after the
manner of rabbits, and then turned inside out, or "cased," as it is
termed.

So much for the _Canis latrans_.

"Prairie wolves!" said Basil, in answer to the question put by his
cousin.

"There must be something the matter with one of the bucks, then,"
remarked Norman, "or else there's a good big pack of the wolves, and
they expect to tire one down.  I believe they sometimes do try it that
way."

"There appears to be a large pack," answered Basil, still looking
through the glass; "fifty at least--See! they have separated one of the
bucks from the herd--it's running this way!"

Basil's companions had noticed this as soon as himself, and all four now
leaped to their guns.  The wapiti was plainly coming towards them, and
they could now distinguish the wolves following upon his heels, strung
out over the prairie like a pack of hounds.  When first started, the
buck was a full half-mile distant, but in less than a minute's time he
came breasting forward until the boys could see his sparkling eyes and
the play of his proud flanks.  He was a noble animal to look at.  His
horns were full-grown, but still "in the velvet," and as he ran with his
snout thrown forward, his antlers lay along both sides of his neck until
their tips touched his shoulders.  He continued on in a direct line
until he was within less than an hundred paces of the camp; but,
perceiving the smoke of the fire, and the figures crouching around it,
he swerved suddenly from his course, and darted into the thicket of
willows, where he was for the moment hidden from view.  The wolves--
fifty of them at least--had followed him up to this point; and as he
entered the thicket several had been close upon his heels.  The boys
