
Just as Baxmore concluded, the rattle of a returning engine was heard.
Next moment it dashed up to the door, and the firemen, leaping off,
streamed into the station, where; amid much comment and some laughter at
the scene they had so recently witnessed, they hung up their helmets and
crowded round the fire.

"So it _was_ in Brompton, after all," said Jack Williams, stirring the
coals; "but it was a small affair in a baker's shop, and we soon got it
out."

"Is the other engine back?" inquired Moxey.

"Here she comes to answer for herself," said Mason, as the second engine
dashed up to the station, and the men were joined by their comrades.

"We've got it out," said Dale, sitting down before the desk to enter the
particulars in his diary; "it was a private house, and well alight when
we got there, but the Paddington engine was playing on it, and we soon
got it under."

"Faix, it's well them stutterers didn't kape us longer, else the whole
house would have bin burnt out intirely," observed Joe Corney, binding
up a slight wound in his thumb, which he had received from a splinter.

Most of the men were more or less begrimed with charcoal and smoke, and
otherwise bore marks of their recent sharp though short skirmish, but
none of them deemed it necessary to remove these evidences of devotion
to duty until they had refreshed themselves with a pipe.

"Were there people in the house?" inquired Frank.

"Ay, but Pickford was there with the escape, an' got 'em all out before
we came up," said one.

"Pickford said he couldn't help laughing after he got 'em out, at the
remembrance o' their faces.  When he first went in they was all sound
asleep in the top floor, for the smoke was only beginnin' to show there,
an' the surprise they got when he jump in among 'em an' shouted was
wonderful to behold."

"Not so wonderful," observed Bill Moxey, "as the surprise I seed a whole
man-o'-war's crew get by consequence o' the shout o' one of her own
men."

"When was that?  Let's hear about it, Bill," said Corney, stuffing down
the tobacco in his pipe, and firing a battery of cloudlets into the air.

"We was in the Red Sea at the time," said Moxey, clearing his throat,
"layin' at anchor, and a precious hot time we had of it.  There was
never a cloud a'most in the sky, and the sun was nigh hot enough to fry
the decks off the ship.  Cook said he'd half a mind to try to roast a
junk o' beef at it, but I never heard that he managed that.  We slep' on
deck o' nights, 'cause you might as well have tried to sleep in a
baker's oven as sleep below.  The thing that troubled us most at that
time was a tiger we had on board.  It did kick up such a shindy
sometimes!  We thought it would break its cage an make a quid o' some of
us.  I forget who sent it to us--p'raps it was the Pasha of Egypt;
anyhow we weren't sorry when the order was given to put the tiger
ashore.

"Well, the same day that we got rid o' the tiger we was sent aboard a
Malay ship to flog one o' the men.  He'n bin up to some mischief, an'
his comrades were afraid, I s'pose, to flog him; and as the offence he
had committed was against us somehow (I never rightly understood it
myself), some of us went aboard the Malay ship, tied him up, an' gave
him two dozen.

"That night the whole ship's company slep' on deck as usual--officers as
well--all but the cap'n, who had gone ashore.  It was a _tremendous_ hot
night, an' a good deal darker than usual.  There was one man in the ship
named Wilson; but we called him Bob Roarer, because of a habit he had of
speakin' an' sometimes roarin' in his sleep.  Bob lay between me an' the
purser that night, an' we slep' on all right till it was getting pretty
late, though there was two or three snorers that got their noses close
to the deck an' kep' up a pretty fair imitation of a brass band.
Suddenly Bob began to dream, or took a nightmare or somethin', for he
hit straight out with both fists, givin' the purser a tap on the nob
with his left, an' diggin' his right into my bread-basket with such good
will that he nearly knocked all the wind out o' me, at the same time he
uttered a most appallin' yell.

"The confusion that followed is past description.

"Some of us thought it was the tiger had broke loose,--forgettin' that
it had been sent ashore.  Bob sneaked off the moment he found what he'd
done, and the purser, thinkin' it was pirates, grabbed the first he
could lay hold of by the throat, and that was me, so to it we went tooth
an' nail, for I had no notion who was pitchin' into me, it was so dark.
Two of the men in their fright sprang up the main shrouds.  Two others,
who were asleep in the main-top, were awoke by the row, looked down on
the starboard side, an' saw the two comin' up.  Thinking it was the
friends of the Malay who had been flogged coming to be revenged, they
ran down the port shrouds like mad, and one o' them rushed along the
port-deck, stickin' his feet into the bread-baskets of all the sleepers
that hadn't been woke by the yell, rousin' them up an' causin' them to
roar like bo'suns.  The row woke the cook, who was a nigger; he,
thinkin' it was a sudden jollification, seized one o' the coppers an'
began to beat it with an iron spoon.  This set up the quartermaster, who
rushed along the starboard deck, trampin' upon the breasts and faces of
all and sundry.  The gunner thought it was the tiger, and took to the
top of the awning; while the doctor and bo's'n's-mate they jumped over
the side, and hung on by ropes up to their waists in water!

"At the worst o' the confusion the cap'n came aboard.  We didn't see
him, but he ordered silence, an' after a while we discovered that there
was no reason whatever for the shindy.  It wasn't till a long time
afterwards that we found out the real cause of the false alarm; but the
only man that got no fright that night, and kep' quite cool, was the man
who set it all agoin'--Bob Roarer."

"_What_ a feller you are, Bill, to talk blarney," said Corney, rising
and knocking the ashes out of his pipe; "sure, aither yer father or yer
mother must have bin an Irishman."

"Blarney or no blarney, them's the facts," said Moxey, yawning, "an' I'm
off to bed."

"Ditto," said Frank, stretching himself.

The two tressels, which were always removed from the room during the
day, had been brought in, and were by this time occupied by Mason and
Williams, whose duty it was to keep watch that night.  Baxmore, the
sub-engineer of the station, sat down at the desk to read over the
events of the day, and the others rose to leave.

"By the way, Baxmore," said Dale, "what was that false alarm at 2 p.m.
when I was down at Watling Street?"

"Only a chemist in Kensington, who, it seems, is mad after makin'
experiments, and all but blew the roof off his house with one of 'em."

"Ah! only smoke, I suppose," said Dale.

"That was all," said Baxmore, "but there was sitch a lot of it that some
fellows thought it was a fire, an' came tearin' down here wi' the news,
so we had a ride for nothing."

"If I'm not mistaken you'll have a ride for something ere long,"
observed Dale, turning his head aside, while he listened attentively.
"Hold on, lads, a minute!"

There was a sound of wheels in the distance, as if some vehicle were
approaching at a furious pace.  On it came, louder and louder, until it
turned the corner of the street, and the horses' feet rattled on the
stones as they were pulled up sharp at the station.  Instantly the bell
was rung violently, and a severe kicking was bestowed on the door.

It is needless to say that the summons was answered promptly.  Some of
the men quietly resumed the helmets they had just hung up, well knowing
that work lay before them.

A cabman darted through the door the instant it was opened, shouting--

"Fire!"

"Where?" asked Dale.

"Forth Street, Holborn, sir!" cried the cabman.  Again, for the third
time that night, the order was given to "get her out."  While this was
being done, Baxmore took a leathern purse from the cupboard, and gave
the cabman a shilling for being first to "give the call."

As the men were already accoutred, the engine left the station on this
occasion in less than five minutes.  The distance was short, so the pace
was full speed, and in an incredibly short space of time they drew up in
front of a large, handsome shop, from the first-floor windows of which
thick smoke and a few forked flames were issuing.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

WILD DOINGS AND DARING DEEDS.

Quick though they were, however, in reaching the scene of the fire, the
escape was there before them.  It had a shorter way to travel, and was
already pitched, with its head resting against a window of the second
floor, and the fly ladder raised to the third.

The people who had crowded round the building at the first alarm of
fire, were looking on as if in suspense, and the firemen knew that
Conductor Forest, or one of his lion-hearted comrades, was inside, doing
his noble and dangerous work.  But they had no time to pay attention to
what was going on.

While some of the firemen got the engine into play, the others ran in a
body to the front-door of the burning house, the lower part of which was
a coach-builder's warehouse.  It was a heavy double door, locked and
barred, and the owner had not yet arrived with the key.  It was evident
that the fire had originated in one of the upper floors, for there was
no light in the wareroom.

"Get the pole-axe," said Dale, as soon as he found the door was fast.

Frank Willders sprang off at the word, and returned with an axe of the
largest size attached to a handle nearly four feet long.

"Drive it in, Willders," said Dale.

Frank's powerful blows at once thundered on the massive door; but they
fell on it in vain, for it was unusually strong.  Seeing this, Dale ran
back to the engine, and got out the pole.

"Come, lay hold some of you!" said he.  Immediately eight firemen, Frank
and Dale being at the front, charged the door like a thunderbolt with
this extemporised battering-ram.  It gave way with a prodigious crash,
and the whole party fell over each other into the warehouse.

There was a burst of laughter from themselves, as well as from the
crowd; but in another moment they were up and swarming through the
premises among the smoke, searching for a point of attack.

"Send the branch up here," cried Mason, coughing violently.

"Sure, my peepers is out entirely!" gasped Corney, rushing to the window
for air; while showers of water fell on his head, for the engine was
already in full play.

Just then there was a noise outside, as if men were disputing violently.
Dale guessed at once what it was, and ran down the staircase, calling
out as he passed: "Here, Willders, Corney, Baxmore, lend a hand, will
you?"

On reaching the engine, they found about a dozen roughs of the lowest
character, disputing fiercely as to which of them was to pump the
engine!  As each man received one shilling an hour for this work, it
became a desirable means of earning a good night's wages to these
broad-shouldered rascals; who, in their anger, and in spite of the
police, and the solitary fireman who superintended the engine, had
actually caused the men already at work to cease pumping.

We may remark in passing, that this would not have been the case, but
for the police force, from some unknown cause, being not very strong at
that fire, and having an excited and somewhat turbulent crowd to keep in
order.  As a general rule, the police of London are of the most
essential service at fires; and not a few of them have obtained the
medals of the Society for the protection of life from fire, and other
rewards for gallantry displayed in saving life at the risk of their own
lives.

On the present occasion, however, the few policemen present could barely
hold their ground against such a band of stalwart desperadoes, so the
firemen came to the rescue.  In the front of the roughs stood a man who
was stronger made and better dressed than the others.  He had not been
pugnacious at first; but having got involved in the riot, he struck out
with the rest.  Dale sprang at this man, who was none other than the
half-nautical individual already introduced to the reader by the name of
Gorman, and launched a left-hander at his head; but Gorman stepped
aside, and one of his comrades was felled instead.  At this, the others
made a rush in a body at Dale; but Frank, Corney, and Baxmore come up at
the moment, and each knocked down a man.  Instantly Dale seized an
instrument from the engine, named a "preventer," like a large boat-hook,
and, raising it at the full stretch of his powerful arms, he brought it
swoop down on the heads of the roughs--six of whom, including Gorman,
measured their length on the ground.

Meanwhile, Bill Moxey and Jack Williams, who had charge of the branch--
which is considered the post of honour at a fire--had paid no attention
whatever to this little episode; but the instant the order was given,
had conveyed their branch into the building, and up to the first floor,
where they thought they could reach the fire more directly; for it is an
axiom in fire brigades to get into a burning building _without delay_,
and attack the fire at its heart.

They got the hose up a staircase, and began to play through a doorway at
the head of it; but, to their surprise, did not make any impression
whatever.  Two other engines, however, were at work by this time--so the
fire was kept in check.

"Something wrong here," said Moxey, speaking with difficulty, owing to
the dense smoke.

Owing to the same cause, it was impossible to see what was wrong.

"I'll go in an' see," said Mason, dropping on his hands and knees, and
creeping into the room with his mouth as close to the ground as
possible.  This he did, because in a room on fire there is always a
current of comparatively fresh air at the floor.

Presently the sound of Mason's small hatchet was heard cutting up
woodwork, and in a few seconds he rushed out almost choking.

"There," said he, "stick the branch through that hole.  You've bin
playin' all this time up agin' a board partition!"

Moxey and Williams advanced, put the branch through the partition, and
the result was at once obvious in the diminution of smoke and increase
of steam.

While these incidents were occurring outside and inside the building,
the crowd was still waiting in breathless expectation for the
re-appearance of Conductor Forest of the fire-escape; for the events
just narrated, although taking a long time to tell, were enacted in a
few minutes.

Presently Forest appeared at the window of the second floor with two
infants in his arms.  Instead of sending these down the canvas trough of
the escape in the usual way--at the risk of their necks, for they were
very young--he clasped them to his breast, and plunging into it himself
head-foremost, descended in that position, checking his speed by
spreading out his knees against the sides of the canvas.  Once again he
sprang up the escape amid the cheers of the people, and re-entered the
window.

At that moment the attention of the crowd was diverted by the sudden
appearance of a man at one of the windows of the first floor.

He was all on fire, and had evidently been aroused to his awful position
unexpectedly, for he was in such confusion that he did not observe the
fire-escape at the other window.  After shouting wildly for a few
seconds, and tossing his arms in the air, he leaped out and came to the
ground with stunning violence.  Two policemen extinguished the fire that
was about him, and then, procuring a horse-cloth lifted him up tenderly
and carried him away.

It may perhaps surprise the reader that this man was not roused sooner
by the turmoil and noise that was going on around him, but it is a fact
that heavy sleepers are sometimes found by the firemen sound asleep, and
in utter ignorance of what has been going on, long after a large portion
of the houses in which they dwell have been in flames.

When Forest entered the window the second time he found the smoke
thicker than before, and had some difficulty in groping his way--for
smoke that may be breathed with comparative ease is found to be very
severe on the eyes.  He succeeded, however, in finding a woman lying
insensible on the floor of the room above.  In carrying her to the
window he fell over a small child, which was lying on the floor in a
state of insensibility.  Grasping the latter with his left hand, he
seized its night-dress with his teeth, and, with the woman on his
shoulder, appeared on the top of the fly-ladder, which he descended in
safety.

The cheers and shouts of the crowd were deafening as Forest came down;
but the woman, who had begun to recover, said that her brother was in a
loft above the room in which she had been found.

The Conductor, therefore, went up again, got on the roof of the house,
broke through the tiles, and with much difficulty pulled the man through
the aperture and conveyed him safely to the ground.  [See note 1].

The firemen were already at Forest's heels, and as soon as he dragged
the man through the hole in the roof, Frank and Baxmore jumped into it
with the branch, and immediately attacked the fire.

By this time all the engines of the district in which the fire had
occurred, and one from each of the two adjoining districts, had arrived,
and were in full play, and one by one the individual men from the
distant stations came dropping in and reported themselves to Dale, Mr
Braidwood not being present on that occasion.  There was thus a strong
force of fresh firemen on the ground, and these, as they came up, were
sent--in military parlance--to relieve skirmishers.  The others were
congregated in front of the door, moving quietly about, looking on and
chatting in undertones.

Such of the public as arrived late at the fire no doubt formed a very
erroneous impression in regard to these men, for not only did they
appear to be lounging about doing nothing, but they were helped by one
of their number to a glass of brandy--such of them at least as chose to
