"Good.  When will you start?"

"To-night.  The moon is clear and will not set till morning.  I shall be
well on my way by that time."

"Will you ride alone?"

"No, there may be bad Indians about.  I will ask Okematan or Fergus
McKay to ride with me.  Why did you not speak to Fergus instead of to
me?"

"Because he has not been spoken to by any one," answered Dechamp; "and I
would not be the first to put suspicion into his head about his own
brother.  Besides, your head is clearer; and your interest in Duncan,
for Elspie's sake, is greater than his, no doubt."

"Well, you may be right, Antoine.  At all events if I take Fergus with
me I shall send him back before reaching the Settlement, and say nothing
whatever about my reason for going there.  `Pressing business,' you
know, will be sufficient."

"I'm not so sure of that," returned Dechamp with a laugh.  "Men are apt
to want to know the nature of `pressing business.'  However, it may be
as well to take Fergus.  At any rate you cannot have Okematan, for he is
not in camp, he left soon after we pitched, and I know has not yet
returned."

"It matters not.  Fergus will do better.  He is more companionable."

Returning to camp, Dan Davidson made the proposal to Fergus McKay.  That
worthy was, as he said, ready for anything, and the two were soon
mounted.  They were also well armed, for the risk of meeting a party of
hostile Indians was not altogether out of the question, though
improbable.  Each horseman carried his blanket and provision wallet, his
gun, a long knife almost equal to an ancient Roman sword, and a cavalry
pistol--revolvers not having been invented at that time: at least they
had not come into general use.  Thus provided for all contingencies,
they set forth.

As we have said, the night was clear and fine, so that the plains were
open to view in all directions, save where a few scattered clumps of
willows and small trees grew like islets in the ocean.

"It iss this that I like better than farming," said Fergus, as the fresh
horses carried them swiftly and lightly over the prairie waves, and down
into the grassy hollows, now swerving to avoid a badger-hole, or
clearing a small shrub with a little bound.  "I do think that man wass
intended to live in the wilderness, an' not to coop himself up in the
cities like rabbits in their holes."

"Why, Fergus, you should have been born a savage," said Dan.

"Ay, it iss savitch I am that I wass not born a savitch," returned
Fergus with a grim smile.  "What in all the world iss the use of
ceevilisation if it will not make people happy?  A man wants nothing
more than a goot supper an' a goot bed, an' a goot shelter over him, an'
it is a not five hunderd pound a year that we will want to buy that--
whatever."

"But surely man wants a little more than that, Fergus.  He wants
breakfast and dinner usually, as well as supper, and a few comforts
besides, such as tea and sugar--at least the women do--besides pipes an'
baccy--to say nothing of books."

"Oo ay, I will not be denyin' that.  But we've no need for wan half the
luxuries o' ceevilisation.  An' ye know ferry weel, Tan, that my sister
Elspie would be content to live wi' you in a ferry small hoose, and the
bare necessaries of life, but here you are forced to put off the
merritch because our hooses wass burnt, and you are obleeged to wait
till you get a sort o' palace built, I suppose, and a grand farm set
a-goin'."

"Indeed, Fergus, you touch me on a sore point there, but with all your
scorn of luxury, I'm sure you'd be the last man to let his sister marry
a fellow who could take her only to a hut or a wigwam."

"You are right, Tan.  Yet I hev spent many a comfortable night in a hut
an' a wigwam since I came to Red River.  I wish the place wass more
peaceable."

"It will never be more peaceable as long as there are two rival
companies fighting for the furs," said Davidson; "but there's worse than
that goin' on, for some of the Indians, it seems, are mad at the
agreement made between them and Lord Selkirk."

"Wow! that iss a peety.  Where heard ye that?"

"I heard it from La Certe, whose wife Slowfoot, you know, is a Cree
Indian.  It seems that the Crees have always claimed Red River as their
lands; but when Lord Selkirk came to make a treaty with the natives he
found some Saulteaux livin' on the soil, an' his lordship, in ignorance,
gave them an interest in the treaty, though they were mere visitors--an'
indeed don't even claim to be owners of the soil--their lands lying far
to the east of Red River."

"Well," continued Dan, guiding his horse carefully down the next hollow,
for the moon had gone behind a cloud just then, "when the Crees found
out what had been done, they were naturally very angry--an' I don't
wonder--an' they threaten now to expel the Saulteaux from Red River
altogether, an' the white men along wi' them, unless the names of the
Saulteaux chiefs are wiped out o' the contract, an' the annual payment
made to the Crees alone."

"That iss bad, Taniel, ferry bad," said Fergus, as they reached the
bottom of the hollow and began to ascend the succeeding undulation, "an'
I am all the more sorry to hear it because our goot frund Okematan is a
Cree."

"Ay, Fergus, he is a great chief of the Crees, and a man of considerable
influence among his people.  I should not like to have him for an
enemy."

"Stop!" said Fergus in a whisper at that moment, laying his hand on
Davidson's arm.

Dan drew rein at once and looked at his friend, but could not clearly
see his face, for the moon was still behind thick drifting clouds.

They had just risen high enough on the prairie wave, which they had been
ascending, to be able to see over it, and Dan could perceive by the
outstretched neck of his companion that he was gazing intently at
something directly in front.

"What do you see, Fergus?" he asked in a low voice.

"Do you see nothin', Taniel?" was the Highlander's reply.

"Why, yes.  I see the plains stretching away to the horizon--an' dark
enough they are, too, at this moment.  I also see a few small clumps
that look like bushes here an' there."

"Don't you see the clump that's nearest to you--right foment your nose?"
said the other.

"Of course I do," and he stopped abruptly, for at that moment he saw a
spark in the clump referred to--a spark so small that it might have been
taken for a glow-worm, had such a creature existed there.

"Savitches!" whispered the Highlander.  "Let's get into the hollow as
fast as we can."

This retrograde movement was soon effected, and the friends dismounted.

"Now, Fergus, what's the best thing to be done?"

"I will be leavin' that to you, Taniel, for you've a clearer head than
mine."

"We dare not ride forward," said Dan, as if communing with himself, "an'
it would be foolish to make a long detour to escape from something until
we know there is something worth escaping from.  My notion is that we
hobble or picket our horses here, and go cautiously forward on foot to
see what it is."

"You'll be doin' what ye think best, Captain Taniel, an' you will find
that private Fergus will back you up--whatever."

This being settled, the two men picketed their steeds in the hollow,
fastened their guns to the saddles, as being too cumbrous for a creeping
advance, and, armed only with their long knives and pistols, reascended
the prairie wave.  With feet clothed in soft moccasin, and practised by
that time in the art of stealthy tread, they moved towards the summit
noiseless as ghosts.

On gaining the ridge they sank slowly down into the tall grass and
disappeared.

After a prolonged and somewhat painful creep on hands and knees the two
men reached the edge of the clump of bushes already referred to.

Before reaching it they discovered, from the sound of voices, that a
party of some kind was encamped there; but, of course, as they knew not
who, it became needful to proceed with extreme caution.  When they
gained the edge of the clump, and raised their heads over a low
bush-covered bank, they beheld a sight which was not calculated to cheer
them, for there, in the centre of the bush, encircling a very small
fire, sat a war-party of about fifty painted and befeathered braves of
the Cree Indians.  They were engaged in council at the moment.

A creeping sensation about their scalps was experienced by the two
eavesdroppers on observing that they had passed not a hundred yards from
a sentinel who occupied a low knoll on their left.

Neither Dan nor Fergus dared to speak--not even to whisper.  Still less
did they dare to move; for a few moments after they reached the bank
just referred to, the moon came out from behind the clouds and flooded
the whole scene as with the light of day.

There was nothing left for it, therefore, except to lie still and
listen.  But this gave them small comfort; for, although quite within
earshot of the war-party, the language spoken was utterly unintelligible
to either of them.

Their eyes, however, were not so useless as their ears, for they could
clearly see each warrior as he rose to harangue his comrades, and, from
the vindictive expression of their faces as well as their frequent
pointing in the direction of the buffalo-hunters it was abundantly
evident that an attack upon them was being discussed.

At last, after many braves had spoken, a chief of tall and noble mien
arose.  His back was towards the two spies, but the moment they heard
his voice they turned their heads and gazed at each other in speechless
amazement, for the voice was quite familiar.

No word did they dare to utter, but Fergus made formations with his lips
of a most extravagant nature, which, however, clearly spelt "Okematan."
When he had finished, he nodded and turned his gaze again on the Crees.

Both men now understood that treachery was in the wind, and that a night
attack was highly probable; and, of course, they felt desperately
anxious to jump up and fly back to the camp to warn their comrades--for
their only fear was a surprise.  The half-breeds being far more numerous
than the Indians, and well entrenched, there could be no fear for them
if prepared.

Just then, as if to favour them, the moon retired behind a huge black
cloud.

Without a moment's hesitation Dan began to creep away back, closely
followed by Fergus.  They gave a wide berth of course to the sentinel,
and soon regained the hollow where the horses had been left.  Here they
breathed more freely.

"Who would have thought this of Okematan?" muttered Dan, as he hastily
tightened his saddle-girths.

"The _rascal_!" exclaimed Fergus, in deep tones of indignation.

"You must gallop back to camp at once, Fergus," said Dan, as they
mounted.  "I will go on to Red River alone."

"What! will you not be coming with me?" asked the Highlander, in some
surprise.

"There is no need, for there will be no fighting," returned the other.
"Our fellows far outnumber the Red-skins, and when the latter find that
we have been warned, and are on our guard, they won't attack us, depend
on it.  But you'll have to ride fast, for when such fellows make up
their minds to strike they don't usually waste time in delivering the
blow.  My business presses, I _must_ go on."

A minute later, and Dan Davidson was galloping towards the Settlement
alone, while Fergus made the best of his way back to the camp of the
buffalo runners.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A FRIEND IN NEED IS A FRIEND INDEED.

Whether or not Okematan was as thorough a rascal as Fergus McKay thought
him will be best shown by harking back, and setting down a little of
what was said by some of the Cree braves at the time that Fergus and Dan
were eavesdropping.

Standing in a dignified attitude worthy of an ancient Roman, with his
blanket thrown toga-fashion over one shoulder, one of the braves looked
round on the warrior band with a dark scowl before he began.  His
comrades were evidently impressed by his looks.  Whether owing to a
freak of fancy, a spice of eccentricity, or simple vanity, we know not,
but this brave had, among other ornamental touches to his visage,
painted his nose bright red.  The effect on his brother braves was
solemnising.  It was not so impressive to his white observers, as it
suggested to them the civilised toper.

"The great white chief," began Rednose, with a slow deliberation that
was meant to convey a settled and unalterable conviction, "is a fool!"

"Waugh!" exclaimed the audience with emphasis, for the language was
strong, and uttered with intense vigour, and that quite accorded with
their tastes, so they agreed with the sentiment without regard to its
signification.  This species of rhetoric, and its effects, are sometimes
observed in connection with civilised gatherings.

The great white chief thus irreverently referred to, we regret to say,
was Lord Selkirk.

"The great white chief," continued Rednose, availing himself of the
force of emphatic repetition, "is a fool!  He is a child!  He knows
nothing!  He comes across the great salt lake from the rising sun, with
the air and aspect of an owl, thinking to teach us--the great Cree
nation--wisdom!"

"Waugh!" from the audience, one of whom, having a cold in his head,
sneezed inadvertently, and was scowled at by the orator for full two
minutes in absolute silence.  If that Cree warrior--he was on his first
war-path--possessed anything akin to the feelings of the Paleface he
must have suffered martyrdom.

"Every one knows," continued the orator, resuming, "that the Crees are
wise.  They can tell a fox from a buffalo.  They understand the
difference between fire and water.  No Paleface sage needs to come from
the rising sun to tell them to eat when they are hungry--to drink when
they are dry.  But this Paleface chief comes with the eyes of the great
northern owl, and says he comes to do us good.  And how does he begin to
do us good?"

Here there was a very decided "Waugh!" as though to say, "Ay, that's the
question," and then a solemn pause for more--during which the man with
the cold drew the reins very tight.

"How does he begin to do us good?" proceeded the orator.  "By entering
into an agreement with _us_ for the use of _our_ lands--and asking our
enemies the Saulteaux to take part in that agreement!"

The sounds of indignation and ferocity that followed this statement are
not translatable.  After a gaze of unutterable meaning round the circle
Rednose went on--

"This, _this_ is the way in which the owl-eyed chief of the Palefaces
begins to do us good!  If this is the way he begins, in what way will he
continue, and,"--here his voice deepened to a whisper--"_how will he
end_?"

The ideas suggested by his question were so appalling that for some
minutes the orator appeared unable to find words to go on, and his
audience glared at him in dread anticipation, as though they expected
him to explode like a bomb-shell, but were prepared to sit it out and
take the consequences.  And he did explode, after a fashion, for he
suddenly raised his voice to a shout that startled even the sentinel on
the distant knoll, and said--

"I counsel war to the knife!  The great white chief--the owl-eyed
fool!--will not blot from our agreement the names of the Saulteaux
chiefs--chiefs! there are no Saulteaux chiefs.  All their braves are
cowards, on the same dead level of stupidity, and their women are--are
nothing, fit for nothing, can do nothing, and must soon come to nothing!
What then?  The duty of Cree warriors lies before us.  We will drive
the Saulteaux into Lake Winnipeg and the Palefaces off the face of the
earth altogether!  Waugh!"

Having thus given vent to the opinions and feelings that consumed him,
Rednose sat down, his audience breathed freely, the distant sentinel
recovered his composure, and the young novitiate brave with the cold in
his head sneezed with impunity.

It would be tedious to recount all that was said at that council of war.
The next brave that rose to "address the house" very much resembled the
first speaker, both in sentiment and personal appearance, except that he
had chosen sky-blue for his nose instead of red.  The only additional
matter that he contributed worth noting was the advice that they should
begin their bloody work by an immediate attack, in the dead of night, on
the camp of the buffalo runners.

This advice was hailed with a good many "Waughs," as well as approving
nods and looks, and it seemed as if the plan were about to be carried
into action without delay, when, as we have seen, Okematan arose to
address the assemblage.

Okematan was a great chief--much greater in the estimation of his tribe
than the whites with whom he had been associating in Red River were
aware of.  He had purposely reserved his address till near the
conclusion.

"The Cree warriors," he said, with an air of quiet dignity that was far
more effective than the more energetic tones and gestures of the
previous speakers, "know very well that the Cree nation considers itself
the wisest in creation.  Far be it from Okematan to say otherwise, for
he does not know.  Okematan is a child!  His eyes are only beginning to
open!"

He paused at this point, and looked round with solemn dignity; and the
braves, unaccustomed to such self-depreciative modes of address, gazed
at him with equal solemnity, not unmingled with surprise, though the
latter feeling was carefully concealed.

"When the last great palaver of the Cree braves was held on the
Blue-Pine Ridge," continued Okematan, "the chiefs chose me to go to Red
River, and learn all that I could find out about the Palefaces and their
intentions.  I went, as you know.  I attached myself to a family named
Daa-veed-sin, and I have found out--found out much about the Palefaces--
