struggle that followed I do not understand. For how was he to know but
that this idea would eventually prove as hopeless and unprofitable as
had so many others to which he had devoted his energy? Beyond Mr.
Bell's own magnetic personality there was only slender foundation for
his faith for in spite of the efforts of both men the harmonic
telegraph failed to take form. Instead, like a tantalizing sprite, it
danced before them, always beckoning, never materializing. In theory it
was perfectly consistent but in practise it could not be coaxed into
behaving as it logically should. Had it but been possible for those
working on it to realize that beyond their temporary failure lay a
success glorious past all belief, think what the knowledge would have
meant. But to always be following the gleam and never overtaking it,
ah, that might well have discouraged prophets of stouter heart!"

"Were these transmitters and receivers made from electromagnets and
strips of flat steel, as you told us the other day?" asked Ted.

"Yes, their essential parts comprised just those elements--an
electromagnet and a scrap of flattened clock spring which, as I have
explained, was clamped by one end to the pole of the magnet and left
free at the other to vibrate over the opposite pole. In addition the
transmitter had make-and-break points such as an ordinary telephone
bell has, and when these came in contact with the current, the springs
inside continually gave out a sort of wail keyed to correspond with the
pitch of the spring. As Mr. Bell had six of these instruments tuned to
as many different pitches--and six receivers to answer them--you may
picture to yourself the hideousness of the sounds amid which the
experimenters labored."

"I suppose when each transmitter sent out its particular whine its own
similarly tuned receiver spring would wriggle in response," Laurie
said.

"Exactly so."

"There must have been lovely music when all six of them began to sing!"
laughed Ted.

"Mr. Watson wrote once that it was as if all the miseries of the world
were concentrated in that workroom, and I can imagine it being true,"
answered the tutor. "Well, young Watson certainly did all he could to
make the harmonic telegraph a reality. He made the receivers and
transmitters exactly as Mr. Bell requested; but on testing them out,
great was the surprise of the inventor to find that his idea, so
feasible in theory, refused to work. Nevertheless, his faith was not
shaken. He insisted on trying to discover the flaw in his logic and
correct it, and as Watson had now completed some work that he had been
doing for Moses Farmer, the two began a series of experiments that
lasted all winter."

"Jove!" ejaculated Laurie.

"Marvels of science are not born in a moment," answered Mr. Hazen. "Yet
I do not wonder that you gasp, for think of what it must have meant to
toil for weeks and months at those wailing instruments! It is a miracle
the men did not go mad. They were not always able to work together for
Mr. Bell had his living to earn and therefore was compelled to devote a
good measure of his time to his college classes and his deaf pupils. In
consequence, he did a portion of his experimental work at Salem while
Watson carried on his at the shop, fitting it in with other odd jobs
that came his way. Frequently Mr. Bell remained in Boston in the
evening and the two worked at the Williams's shop until late into the
night."

"Wasn't it lucky there were no labor unions in those days?" put in Ted
mischievously.

"Indeed it was!" responded Mr. Hazen. "The shop would then have been
barred and bolted at five o'clock, I suppose, and Alexander Graham Bell
might have had a million bright ideas for all the good they would have
done him. But at that golden period of our history, if an ambitious
fellow like Watson wished to put in extra hours of work, the more
slothful ones had no authority to stand over him with a club and say he
shouldn't. Therefore the young apprentice toiled on with Mr. Bell,
unmolested; and Charles Williams, the proprietor of the shop, was
perfectly willing he should. One evening, when the two were alone, Mr.
Bell remarked, 'If I could make a current of electricity vary in
intensity precisely as the air varies in density during the production
of sound, I should be able to transmit speech telegraphically.' This
was his first allusion to the telephone but that the idea of such an
instrument had been for some time in his mind was evident by the fact
that he sketched in for Watson the kind of apparatus he thought
necessary for such a device and they speculated concerning its
construction. The project never went any farther, however, because Mr.
Thomas Saunders and Mr. Gardiner Hubbard, who were financing Mr. Bell's
experiments, felt the chances of this contrivance working
satisfactorily were too uncertain. Already much time and money had been
spent on the harmonic telegraph and they argued this scheme should be
completed before a new venture was tried."

"I suppose that point of view was quite justifiable," mused Ted. "But
wasn't it a pity?"

"Yes, it was," agreed Mr. Hazen. "Yet here again we realize how man
moves inch by inch, never knowing what is just around the turn of the
road. He can only go it blindly and do the best he knows at the time.
Naturally neither Mr. Hubbard nor Mr. Saunders wanted to swamp any more
money until they had received results for what they had spent already;
and those results, alas, were not forthcoming. Over and over again poor
Watson blamed himself lest some imperceptible defect in his part of the
work was responsible for Mr. Bell's lack of success. The spring of 1875
came and still no light glimmered on the horizon. The harmonic
telegraph seemed as far away from completion as ever. Patiently the men
plodded on. Then on a June day, a day that began even less auspiciously
than had other days, the heavens suddenly opened and Alexander Graham
Bell had his vision!"

"What was it?"

"Tell us about it!" cried both boys in a breath.

"It was a warm, close afternoon in the loft over the Williams's shop
and the transmitters and receivers were whining there more dolefully
than usual. Several of them, sensitive to the weather, were out of
tune, and as Mr. Bell had trained his ear to sounds until it was
abnormally acute, he was tuning the springs of the receivers to the
pitch of the transmitters, a service he always preferred to perform
himself. To do this he placed the receiver against his ear and called
to Watson, who was in the adjoining room, to start the current through
the electromagnet of the corresponding transmitter. When this was done,
Mr. Bell was able to turn a screw and adjust the instrument to the
pitch desired. Watson admits in a book he has himself written that he
was out of spirits that day and feeling irritable and impatient. The
whiners had got on his nerves, I fancy. One of the springs that he was
trying to start appeared to stick and in order to force it to vibrate
he gave it a quick snap with his finger. Still it would not go and he
snapped it sharply several times. Immediately there was a cry from Mr.
Bell who rushed into the hall, exclaiming, 'What did you do then? Don't
change anything. Let me see.'

"Watson was alarmed. Had he knocked out the entire circuit or what had
he done in his fit of temper? Well, there was no escape from confession
now; no pretending he had not vented his nervousness on the mechanism
before him. With honesty he told the truth and even illustrated his
hasty action. The thing was simple enough. In some way the
make-and-break points of the transmitter spring had become welded
together so that even when Watson snapped the instrument the circuit
had remained unbroken, while by means of the piece of magnetized steel
vibrating over the pole of the magnet an electric current was
generated, the type of current that did exactly what Mr. Bell had
dreamed of a current doing--a current of electricity that varied in
intensity precisely as the air within the radius of that particular
spring was varying in density. And not only did that undulatory current
pass through the wire to the receiver Mr. Bell was holding, but as good
luck would have it the mechanism was such that it transformed that
current back into a faint but unmistakable echo of the sound issuing
from the vibrating spring that generated it. But a fact more fortunate
than all this was that the one man to whom the incident carried
significance had the instrument at his ear at that particular moment.
That was pure chance--a Heaven-sent, miraculous coincidence! But that
Mr. Bell recognized the value and importance of that whispered echo
that reached him over the wire and knew, when he heard it, that it was
the embodiment of the idea that had been haunting him--that was not
chance; it was genius!"

The room had been tensely still and now both boys drew a sigh of
relief.

"How strange!" murmured Ted in an awed tone.

"Yes, it was like magic, was it not?" replied the tutor. "For the
speaking telephone was born at that moment. Whatever practical work was
necessary to make the invention perfect (and there were many, many
details to be solved) was done afterward. But on June 2, 1875, the
telephone as Bell had dreamed it came into the world. That single
demonstration on that hot morning in Williams's shop proved myriad
facts to the inventor. One was that if a mechanism could transmit the
many complex vibrations of one sound it could do the same for any
sound, even human speech. He saw now that the intricate paraphernalia
he had supposed necessary to achieve his long-imagined result was not
to be needed, for did not the simple contrivance in his hand do the
trick? The two men in the stuffy little loft could scarcely contain
their delight. For hours they went on repeating the experiment in order
to make sure they were really awake. They verified their discovery
beyond all shadow of doubt. One spring and then another was tried and
always the same great law acted with invariable precision. Heat,
fatigue, even the dingy garret itself was forgotten in the flight of
those busy, exultant hours. Before they separated that night, Alexander
Graham Bell had given to Thomas Watson directions for making the first
electric speaking telephone in the world!"




CHAPTER X

WHAT CAME AFTERWARD


"Was that first telephone like ours?" inquired Ted later as, their
lunch finished, they sat idly looking out at the river.

"Not wholly. Time has improved the first crude instrument," Mr. Hazen
replied. "The initial principle of the telephone, however, has never
varied from Mr. Bell's primary idea. Before young Watson tumbled into
bed on that epoch-making night, he had finished the instrument Bell had
asked him to have ready, every part of it being made by the eager
assistant who probably only faintly realized the mammoth importance of
his task. Yet whether he realized it or not, he had caught a sufficient
degree of the inventor's excitement to urge him forward. Over one of
the receivers, as Mr. Bell directed, he mounted a small drumhead of
goldbeater's skin, joined the center of it to the free end of the
receiver spring, and arranged a mouthpiece to talk into. The plan was
to force the steel spring to answer the vibrations of the voice and at
the same time generate a current of electricity that should vary in
intensity just as the air varies in density during the utterance of
speech sounds. Not only did Watson make this instrument as specified,
but in his interest he went even farther, and as the rooms in the loft
seemed too near together, the tireless young man ran a special wire
from the attic down the two flights of stairs to the ground floor of
the shop and ended it near his workbench at the rear of the building,
thus constructing the first telephone line in history.

"Then the next day Mr. Bell came to test out his invention and, as you
can imagine, there was great excitement."

"I hope it worked," put in Laurie.

"It worked all right although at this early stage of the game it was
hardly to be expected that the instrument produced was perfect.
Nevertheless, the demonstration proved that the principle behind it was
sound and that was all Mr. Bell really wanted to make sure of. Watson,
as it chanced, got far more out of this initial performance than did Mr.
Bell himself for because of the inventor's practical work in phonics the
vibrations of his voice carried more successfully than did those of the
assistant. Yet the youthful Watson was not without his compensations.
Nature had blessed him with unusually acute hearing and as a result he
could catch Bell's tones perfectly as they came over the wire and could
almost distinguish his words; but shout as he would, poor Mr. Bell could
not hear _him_. This dilemma nevertheless discouraged neither of them
for Watson had plenty of energy and was quite willing to leap up the two
flights of stairs and repeat what he had heard; and this report greatly
reassured Mr. Bell, who outlined a list of other improvements for
another telephone that should be ready on the following day."

"I suppose they kept remodelling the telephones all the time after
that, didn't they?" inquired Ted.

"You may be sure they did," was Mr. Hazen's response. "The harmonic
telegraph was entirely sidetracked and the interest of both men turned
into this newer channel. Mr. Bell, in the meantime, was giving less and
less energy to his teaching and more and more to his inventing. Before
many days the two could talk back and forth and hear one another's
voices without difficulty, although ten full months of hard work was
necessary before they were able to understand what was said. It was not
until after this long stretch of patient toil that Watson unmistakably
heard Mr. Bell say one day, '_Mr. Watson, please come here, I want
you._' The message was a very ordinary, untheatrical one for a moment
so significant but neither of the enthusiasts heeded that. The
thrilling fact was that the words had come clear-cut over the wire."

"Gee!" broke in Laurie.

"It certainly must have been a dramatic moment," Mr. Hazen agreed. "Mr.
Bell, now convinced beyond all doubt of the value of his idea, hired
two rooms at a cheap boarding-house situated at Number 5 Exeter Place,
Boston. In one of these he slept and in the other he equipped a
laboratory. Watson connected these rooms by a wire and afterward all
Mr. Bell's experimenting was done here instead of at the Williams's
shop. It was at the Exeter Place rooms that this first wonderful
message came to Watson's ears. From this period on the telephone took
rapid strides forward. By the summer of 1876, it had been improved
until a simple sentence was understandable if carefully repeated three
or four times."

"Repeated three or four times!" gasped Laurie in dismay.

The tutor smiled at the boy's incredulousness.

"You forget we are not dealing with a finished product," said he
gently. "I am a little afraid you would have been less patient with the
imperfections of an infant invention than were Bell and Watson."

"I know I should," was the honest retort.

"The telephone was a very delicate instrument to perfect," explained
Mr. Hazen. "Always remember that. An inventor must not only be a man
who has unshaken faith in his idea but he must also have the courage to
cling stubbornly to his belief through every sort of mechanical
vicissitude. This Mr. Bell did. June of 1876 was the year of the great
Centennial at Philadelphia, the year that marked the first century of
our country's progress. As the exhibition was to be one symbolic of our
national development in every line, Mr. Bell decided to show his
telephone there; to this end he set Watson, who was still at the
Williams's shop, to making exhibition telephones of the two varieties
they had thus far worked out."

"I'll bet Watson was almighty proud of his job," Ted interrupted.

"I fancy he was and certainly he had a right to be," answered Mr.
Hazen. "I have always been glad, too, that it fell to his lot to have
this honor; for he had worked long and faithfully, and if there were
glory to be had, he should share it. To his unflagging zeal and
intelligence Mr. Bell owed a great deal. Few men could so
whole-heartedly have effaced their own personality and thrown
themselves with such zest into the success of another as did Thomas
Watson."

The tutor paused.

"Up to this time," he presently went on, "the telephones used by Bell
and Watson in their experiments had been very crude affairs; but those
