

XXVI

WHY THE ALLIGATOR'S BACK IS ROUGH


The night after the violent flirtation between Daddy Jack and 'Tildy,
the latter coaxed and bribed the little boy to wait until she had
finished her work about the house. After she had set things to rights in
the dining-room and elsewhere, she took the child by the hand, and
together they went to Uncle Remus's cabin. The old man was making a
door-mat of shucks and grass and white-oak splits, and Daddy Jack was
dozing in the corner.

"W'at I tell you, Brer Jack?" said Uncle Remus, as 'Tildy came in. "Dat
gal atter you, mon!"

"Fer de Lord sake, Unk' Remus, don't start dat ole nigger. I done
promise Miss Sally dat I won't kill 'im, en I like ter be good ez my
word; but ef he come foolin' longer me I'm des nat'ally gwine ter
onj'int 'im. Now you year me say de word."

But Daddy Jack made no demonstration. He sat with his eyes closed, and
paid no attention to 'Tildy. After awhile the little boy grew restless,
and presently he said:--

"Daddy Jack, you know you promised to tell me a story to-night."

"He wukkin' wid it now, honey," said Uncle Remus, soothingly. "Brer
Jack," he continued, "wa'n't dey sump'n' n'er 'bout ole man Yalligater?"

"Hi!" exclaimed Daddy Jack, arousing himself, "'e 'bout B'er 'Gater fer
true. Oona no bin see da' B'er 'Gater?"

The child had seen one, but it was such a very little one he hardly
knew whether to claim an acquaintance with Daddy Jack's 'Gater.

"Dem all sem," continued Daddy Jack. "Big mout', pop-eye, walk on 'e
belly; 'e is bin got bump, bump, bump 'pon 'e bahk, bump, bump, bump
'pon 'e tail. 'E dife 'neat' de water, 'e do lif 'pon de lan'.

"One tam Dog is bin run B'er Rabbit, tel 'e do git tire; da' Dog is bin
run 'im tel him ent mos' hab no bre't' in 'e body; 'e hide 'ese'f by de
crik side. 'E come close 'pon B'er 'Gater, en B'er 'Gater, 'e do say:--

"'Ki, B'er Rabbit! wut dis is mek you blow so? Wut mekky you' bre't'
come so?'

"'Eh-eh! B'er 'Gater, I hab bin come 'pon trouble. Dog, 'e do run un-a
run me.'

"'Wey you no fetch 'im 'long, B'er Rabbit? I is bin git fat on all da'
trouble lak dem. I proud fer yeddy Dog bark, ef 'e is bin fetch-a me
trouble lak dem.'

"'Wait, B'er 'Gater! Trouble come bisitin' wey you lif; 'e mekky you'
side puff; 'e mekky you' bre't' come so.'

"'Gater, he do flup 'e tail un 'tretch 'ese'f, un lahff. 'E say:--

"'I lak fer see dem trouble. Nuddin' no bodder me. I ketch-a dem swimp,
I ketch-a dem crahb, I mekky my bed wey de sun shiuen hot, un I do 'joy
mese'f. I proud fer see dem trouble.'

"''E come 'pon you, B'er 'Gater, wun you bin hab you' eye shed; 'e come
'pon you fum de turrer side. Ef 'e no come 'pon you in da' crik, dun 'e
come 'pon you in da' broom-grass.'

"'Dun I shekky um by de han', B'er Rabbit; I ahx um howdy.'

"'Eh-eh, B'er 'Gater! you bin-a lahff at me; you no lahff wun dem
trouble come. Dem trouble bin ketch-a you yit.'"

Daddy Jack paused to wipe his face. He had reported the dialogue between
Brother Rabbit and Brother Alligator with considerable animation, and
had illustrated it as he went along with many curious inflections of the
voice, and many queer gestures of head and hands impossible to describe
here, but which added picturesqueness to the story. After awhile he went
on:--

"B'er Rabbit, 'e do blow un 'e do ketch urn bre't'. 'E pit one year wey
Dog is bin-a bark; 'e pit one eye 'pon B'er 'Gater. 'E lissen, 'e look;
'e look, 'e lissen. 'E no yeddy Dog, un 'e comforts come back. Bumbye
B'er 'Gater, 'e come drowsy; 'e do nod, nod, un 'e head sway down, tel
ma'sh-grass tickle 'e nose, un 'e do cough sem lak 'e teer up da' crik
by da' root. 'E no lak dis place fer sleep at, un 'e is crawl troo da'
ma'sh 'pon dry lan'; 'e is mek fer da' broom-grass fiel'. 'E mek 'e bed
wid 'e long tail, un 'e is 'tretch 'ese'f out at 'e lenk. 'E is shed 'e
y-eye, un opun 'e mout', un tek 'e nap.

"B'er Rabbit, 'e do hol' 'e y-eye 'pon B'er 'Gater. Him talk no wud; him
wallup 'e cud; him stan' still. B'er 'Gater, 'e do tek 'e nap; B'er
Rabbit 'e do watch. Bum-bye, B'er 'Gater bre't', 'e do come _loud_; 'e
is bin sno' _hard!_ 'E dream lilly dream; 'e wuk 'e fut un shek 'e tail
in 'e dream. B'er Rabbit wink 'e y-eye, un 'e do watch. B'er 'Gater, he
do leaf 'e dream bahine, un 'e sleep soun'. B'er Rabbit watch lil, wait
lil. Bumbye, 'e do go wey fier bu'n in da' stump, un 'e is fetch some.
'E say, 'Dis day I is mek you know dem trouble; I is mek you know dem
well.' 'E hop 'roun' dey-dey, un 'e do light da' broom-grass; 'e bu'n,
bu'n--bu'n, bu'n; 'e do bu'n smaht.

"B'er 'Gater, 'e is dream some mo' lilly dream. 'E do wuk 'e fut, 'e do
shek 'e tail. Broom-grass bu'n, bu'n; B'er 'Gater dream. 'E dream da'
sun is shiuen' hot; 'e wom 'e back, 'e wom 'e belly; 'e wuk 'e fut, 'e
shek 'e tail. Broom-grass bu'n high, 'e bu'n low; 'e bu'n smaht, 'e bu'n
hot. Bumbye, B'er 'Gater is wek fum 'e dream; 'e smell-a da' smoke, 'e
feel-a da' fier. 'E run dis way, 'e run turrer way; no diffran' wey 'e
is run, dey da' smoke, dey da' fier. _Bu'n, bu'n, bu'n!_ B'er 'Gater
lash 'e tail, un grine 'e toof. Bumbye, 'e do roll un holler:--

"'Trouble, trouble, trouble! _Trouble, trouble!_'

"B'er Rabbit, 'e is stan' pas' da' fier, un 'e do say:--

"'Ki! B'er 'Gater! Wey you fer l'arn-a dis talk 'bout dem trouble?'

"B'er 'Gater, 'e lash 'e tail, 'e fair teer da' ye't,[24] un 'e do
holler:--

"'Oh, ma Lord! Trouble! _Trouble, trouble, trouble!_'

"'Shekky um by de han', B'er 'Gater. Ahx um howdy!'

"'Ow, ma Lord! _Trouble, trouble, trouble!_'

"'Lahff wit' dem trouble, B'er 'Gater, lahff wit' dem! Ahx dem is dey
he'lt' bin well! You bin-a cry fer dey 'quaintun',[25] B'er 'Gater; now
you mus' beer wit' dem trouble!'

"B'er 'Gater come so mad, 'e mek dash troo da' broom-grass; 'e fair teer
um down. 'E bin scatter da' fier wide 'part, un 'e do run un dife in da'
crik fer squinch da' fier 'pon 'e bahk. 'E bahk swivel, 'e tail swivel
wit' da' fier, un fum dat dey is bin stan' so. Bump, bump 'pon 'e tail;
bump, bump 'pon 'e bahk, wey da' fier bu'n."

"Hit's des lak Brer Jack tell you, honey," said Uncle Remus, as Daddy
Jack closed his eyes and relapsed into silence. "I done seed um wid my
own eyes. En deyer mighty kuse creeturs, mon. Dey back is all ruffed up
en down ter dis day en time, en mo'n dat, you ain't gwineter ketch Brer
Rabbit rackin' 'roun' whar de Yallergaters is. En de Yallergaters
deyse'f, w'en dey years any crackin' en rattlin' gwine on in de bushes,
dey des makes a break fer de creek en splunges in."

"Enty!" exclaimed Daddy Jack, with momentary enthusiasm. "'E do tu'n go
da' bahnk, un dife 'neat' da' crik. 'E bin so wom wit' da' fier, 'e mek
de crik go si-z-z-z!"

Here Daddy Jack looked around and smiled. His glance fell on 'Tildy, and
he seemed suddenly to remember that he had failed to be as polite as
circumstances demanded.

"Come-a set nex' em, lilly gal. I gwan tell you one tale."

"Come 'long, Pinx," said 'Tildy, tossing her head disdainfully, and
taking the little boy by the hand. "Come 'long, Pinx; we better be
gwine. I done say I won't kill dat ole nigger man. Yit ef he start atter
me dis blessid night, I lay I roust de whole plantation. Come on, honey;
less go."

The little boy was not anxious to go, but Uncle Remus seconded 'Tildy's
suggestion.

"Better let dat gal mosey 'long, honey, 'kaze she mout start in fer ter
cut up some 'er capers in yer, en I hate mighty bad ter bus' up dis yer
axe-helve, w'ich I'm in needs un it eve'y hour er de day."

Whereupon the two old negroes were left sitting by the hearth.


FOOTNOTES:

[24] Tear the earth.

[25] Acquaintance.




XXVII

BRER WOLF SAYS GRACE


'Tildy, the house-girl, made such a terrible report of the carryings on
of Daddy Jack that the little boy's mother thought it prudent not to
allow him to visit Uncle Remus so often. The child amused himself as
best he could for several nights, but his play-things and picture-books
finally lost their interest. He cried so hard to be allowed to go to see
Uncle Remus that his mother placed him under the care of Aunt Tempy,--a
woman of large authority on the place, and who stood next to Uncle Remus
in the confidence of her mistress. Aunt Tempy was a fat, middle-aged
woman, who always wore a head-handkerchief, and kept her sleeves rolled
up, displaying her plump, black arms, winter and summer. She never
hesitated to exercise her authority, and the younger negroes on the
place regarded her as a tyrant; but in spite of her loud voice and
brusque manners she was thoroughly good-natured, usually good-humored,
and always trustworthy. Aunt Tempy and Uncle Remus were secretly jealous
of each other, but they were careful never to come in conflict, and, to
all appearances, the most cordial relations existed between them.

"Well de goodness knows!" exclaimed Uncle Remus, as Aunt Tempy went in
with the little boy. "How you come on, Sis Tempy? De rainy season ain't
so mighty fur off w'en you come a-sojourneyin' in dis house. Ef I'd
a-know'd you'd a-bin a-comin' I'd a-sorter steered 'roun' en bresh'd de
cobwebs out'n de cornders."

"Don't min' me, Brer Remus. Luck in de house whar de cobwebs hangs low.
I 'uz des a-passin'--a-passin' 'long--en Miss Sally ax me ef I kin come
fur ez de do' wid dat chile dar, but bless you, 't ain't in my manners
ter tu'n back at de do'. How you come on, Brer Remus?"

"Po'ly, Sis Tempy; en yit I ain't complainin'. Pain yer, en a ketch
yander, wid de cramps th'ow'd in, ain't no mo' dan ole folks kin 'speck.
How you is, Sis Tempy?"

"I thank de Lord I'm able to crawl, Brer Remus, en dat's 'bout all. Ef I
wa'n't so sot in my ways, deze yer niggers would er run me 'stracted
d'reckly."

Daddy Jack was sitting in the corner laughing and talking to himself,
and the little boy watched him not without a feeling of awe. After a
while he said:--

"Uncle Remus, won't Daddy Jack tell us a story to-night?"

"Now, den, honey," responded the old man, "we ain't got ter push Brer
Jack too closte; we ull des hatter creep up on 'im en ketch 'im fer er
tale wence he in de humors. Sometimes hoss pull, sometime he ain't pull.
You ain't bin down yer so long, hit sorter look lak it my tu'n; 'kaze it
done come 'cross my 'membunce dat dey wuz one time w'en Brer Wolf kotch
Brer Rabbit, w'ich I ain't never gun it out ter you yit."

"Brother Wolf caught Brother Rabbit, Uncle Remus?" exclaimed the little
boy, incredulously.

"Yasser! dat's de up en down un it, sho'," responded the old man with
emphasis, "en I be mighty glad ef Sis Tempy yer will 'scuze me w'iles I
runs over de tale 'long wid you."

"Bless yo' soul, Brer Remus, don't pay no 'tention ter me," said Aunt
Tempy, folding her fat arms upon her ample bosom, and assuming an
attitude of rest and contentment. "I'm bad ez de chillun 'bout dem ole
tales, 'kaze I kin des set up yer un lissen at um de whole blessid
night, un a good part er de day. Yass, Lord!"

"Well, den," said Uncle Remus, "we ull des huddle up yer en see w'at
'come er Brer Rabbit, w'en ole Brer Wolf kotch 'im. In dem days," he
continued, looking at Daddy Jack and smiling broadly, "de creeturs wuz
constant gwine a-courtin'. Ef 't wa'n't Miss Meadows en de gals dey wuz
flyin' 'roun', hit 'uz Miss Motts. Dey wuz constant a-courtin'. En 't
wa'n't none er dish yer 'Howdy-do-ma'm-I-'speck-I-better-be-gwine,'
n'er. Hit 'uz go atter brekkus en stay twel atter supper. Brer Rabbit,
he got tuk wid a-likin' fer Miss Motts, en soon one mawnin', he tuck'n
slick hisse'f up, he did, en put out ter call on 'er. W'en Brer Rabbit
git ter whar Miss Motts live, she done gone off some'rs.

"Some folks 'ud er sot down en wait twel Miss Motts come back, en den
ag'in some folks 'ud er tuck der foot in der han' en went back; but ole
Brer Rabbit, he ain't de man fer ter be outdone, en he des tuck'n go in
de kitchen en light he seegyar, en den he put out fer ter pay a call on
Miss Meadows en de gals.

"W'en he git dar, lo en beholes, he fine Miss Motts dar, en he tipped
in, ole Brer Rabbit did, en he galanted 'roun' 'mungs um, same lak one
er dese yer town chaps, w'at you see come out ter Harmony Grove
meetin'-house. Dey talk en dey laff; dey laff en dey giggle. Bimeby,
'long todes night, Brer Rabbit 'low he better be gwine. De wimmen folks
dey all ax 'im fer ter stay twel atter supper, 'kaze he sech lively
comp'ny, but Brer Rabbit fear'd some er de yuther creeturs be hidin'
out fer 'im; so he tuck'n pay his 'specks, he did, en start fer home.

"He ain't git fur twel he come up wid a great big basket settin' down by
de side er de big road. He look up de road; he ain't see nobody. He look
down de road; he ain't see nobody. He look befo', he look behime, he
look all 'roun'; he ain't see nobody. He lissen, en lissen; he ain't
year nothin'. He wait, en he wait; nobody ain't come.

"Den, bimeby Brer Rabbit go en peep in de basket, en it seem lak it half
full er green truck. He retch he han' in, he did, en git some en put it
in he mouf. Den he shet he eye en do lak he studyin' 'bout sump'n'.
Atter w'ile, he 'low ter hisse'f, 'Hit look lak sparrer-grass, hit feel
lak sparrer-grass, hit tas'e lak sparrer-grass, en I be bless ef 't
ain't sparrer-grass.'

"Wid dat Brer Rabbit jump up, he did, en crack he heel tergedder, en he
fetch one leap en lan' in de basket, right spang in 'mungs de
sparrer-grass. Dar whar he miss he footin'," continued Uncle Remus,
rubbing his beard meditatively, "'kaze w'en he jump in 'mungs de
sparrer-grass, right den en dar he jump in 'mungs ole Brer Wolf, w'ich
he wer' quile up at de bottom."

"Dar now!" exclaimed Aunt Tempy, enthusiastically. "W'at I tell you?
W'at make him pester t'er folks doin's? I boun' Brer Wolf nail't 'im."

"Time Brer Wolf grab 'im," continued Uncle Remus, "Brer Rabbit knowed he
'uz a gone case; yit he sing out, he did:--

"'I des tryin' ter skeer you, Brer Wolf; I des tryin' ter skeer you. I
know'd you 'uz in dar, Brer Wolf, I know'd you by de smell!' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee.

"Ole Brer Wolf grin, he did, en lick he chops, en up'n say:--

"'Mighty glad you know'd me, Brer Rabbit, 'kaze I know'd you des time
you drapt in on me. I tuck'n tell Brer Fox yistiddy dat I 'uz gwine take
a nap 'longside er de road, en I boun' you 'ud come 'long en wake me
up, en sho' nuff, yer you come en yer you is,' sez Brer Wolf, sezee.

"Oh-ho, Mr. Rabbit! How you feel now?" exclaimed Aunt Tempy, her
sympathies evidently with Brother Wolf.

"W'en Brer Rabbit year dis," said Uncle Remus, paying no attention to
the interruption, "he 'gun ter git mighty skeer'd, en he whirl in en beg
Brer Wolf fer ter please tu'n 'im loose; but dis make Brer Wolf grin
wusser, en he toof look so long en shine so w'ite, en he gum look so
red, dat Brer Rabbit hush up en stay still. He so skeer'd dat he bref
come quick, en he heart go lak flutter-mill. He chune up lak he gwine
cry:--

"'Whar you gwine kyar me, Brer Wolf?'

"'Down by de branch, Brer Rabbit.'

"'W'at you gwine down dar fer, Brer Wolf?'

"'So I kin git some water ter clean you wid atter I done skunt you, Brer
Rabbit.'

"'Please, sir, lemme go, Brer Wolf.'

"'You talk so young you make me laff, Brer Rabbit.'

"'Dat sparrer-grass done make me sick, Brer Wolf.'

"'You'll be sicker'n dat 'fo' I git done wid you, Brer Rabbit.'

"'Whar I come fum nobody dast ter eat sick folks, Brer Wolf.'

"'Whar I come fum dey ain't dast ter eat no yuther kin', Brer Rabbit.'"

"Ole Mr. Rabbit wuz a-talkin', mon," said Aunt Tempy, with a chuckle
that caused her to shake like a piece of jelly.

"Dey went on dis a-way," continued Uncle Remus, "plum twel dey git ter
de branch. Brer Rabbit, he beg en cry, en cry en beg, en Brer Wolf, he
'fuse en grin, en grin en 'fuse. W'en dey come ter de branch, Brer Wolf
lay Brer Rabbit down on de groun' en hilt 'im dar, en den he study how
he gwine make way wid 'im. He study en he study, en w'iles he studyin'
Brer Rabbit, he tuck'n study some on he own hook.

"Den w'en it seem lak Brer Wolf done fix all de 'rangerments, Brer
Rabbit, he make lak he cryin' wusser en wusser; he des fa'rly blubber."

Uncle Remus gave a ludicrous imitation of Brother Rabbit's wailings.

"'Ber--ber--Brer Wooly--ooly--oolf! Is you gwine--is you gwine ter
sakerfice-t me right now--ow--ow?'

"'Dat I is, Brer Rabbit; dat I is.'

"'Well, ef I blee-eedz ter be kilt, Brer Wooly--ooly--oolf, I wants ter
be kilt right, en ef I blee-eedz ter be e't, I wants ter be e't
ri--ight, too, now!'

"'How dat, Brer Rabbit?'

"'I want you ter show yo' p'liteness, Brer Wooly--ooly--oolf!'

"'How I gwine do dat, Brer Rabbit?'

"'I want you ter say grace, Brer Wolf, en say it quick, 'kaze I gittin'
mighty weak.'

"'How I gwine say grace, Brer Rabbit?'

"'Fol' yo' han's und' yo' chin, Brer Wolf, en shet yo' eyes, en say:
"Bless us en bine us, en put us in crack whar de Ole Boy can't fine us."
Say it quick, Brer Wolf, 'kaze I failin' mighty fas'.'"

"Now ain't dat des too much!" exclaimed Aunt Tempy, as delighted as the
little boy. Uncle Remus laughed knowingly and went on:--

"Brer Wolf, he put up he han's, he did, en shot he eyes, en 'low, 'Bless
us en bine us;' but he ain't git no furder, 'kaze des time he take up he
han's, Brer Rabbit fotch a wiggle, he did, en lit on he foots, en he des
nat'ally lef a blue streak behime 'im."

"Ah-yi-ee!" exclaimed Daddy Jack, while Aunt Tempy allowed her arms to
drop helplessly from her lap as she cried "Dar now!" and the little boy
clasped his hands in an ecstasy of admiration.

"Oh, I just knew Brother Rabbit would get away," the child declared.

    [Illustration: BRER RABBIT FOTCH A WIGGLE, HE DID, EN LIT ON HE FOOTS]

"Dat's right, honey," said Uncle Remus. "You put yo' pennunce in Brer
Rabbit en yo' won't be fur out er de way."

There was some further conversation among the negroes, but it was mostly
plantation gossip. When Aunt Tempy rose to go she said:--

"Goodness knows, Brer Remus, ef dis de way you all runs on, I'm gwine
ter pester you some mo'. Hit come 'cross me like ole times, dat it do."

"Do so, Sis Tempy, do so," said Uncle Remus, with dignified hospitality.
"You allers fine a place at my h'a'th. Ole times is about all we got
lef'."

"Trufe, too!" exclaimed Aunt Tempy; and with that she took the child by
the hand and went out into the darkness.




XXVIII

SPIRITS, SEEN AND UNSEEN


It was not many nights before the same company was gathered in Uncle
Remus's cabin,--Daddy Jack, Aunt Tempy, and the little boy. The
conversation took a turn that thrilled the child with mingled fear and
curiosity. Uncle Remus had inquired as to the state of Aunt Tempy's
health, when the latter came in, and her response was:--

"I feelin' mighty creepy, Brer Remus, sho'. Look like I bleedz ter hunt
comp'ny. W'en I come 'long down I felt dat skittish twel ef a leaf had
blow'd 'crost de paff, I'd 'a' des about drapt in my tracks."

"How come dat, Sis Tempy?" Uncle Remus inquired.

"You know dat little gal er Riah's? Well, I 'uz settin' up dar in my
house 'w'ile ergo, w'en, bless gracious! fus' news I know, I year dat
chile talkin' in the yuther room. I 'low ter myse'f, she ain't talkin'
ter Riah, 'kaze Riah ain't come yit, un den I crope up, dar wuz de
chile settin' right flat in de middle er de flo', laffin' un talkin' un
makin' motions like she see somebody in de cornder. I des stood dar un
watch 'er, un I ain't a livin' human ef she don't do like dey 'uz
somebody er n'er in dar wid 'er. She ax um fer ter stay on dey own side,
un den, w'en it seem like dey come todes 'er, den she say she gwine git
a switch un drive um back. Hit make me feel so cole un kuse dat I des
tuck'n come 'way fum dar, un ef dey's sump'n' n'er dar, hit'll be dem un
Riah fer't."

"'E do talk wid ghos'; 'e is bin larf wit' harnt," exclaimed Daddy Jack.

