of his journey to England. His manner convinced De Montford that it was
unsafe to remain in Paris, and he secretly made his escape. Fifteen days
afterwards the peers gave judgment in favour of Charles of Blois. The
Dukes of Normandy, Burgundy, and Bourbon, the Counts of Alencon, Eu, and
Guisnes, and many other French nobles, prepared to lead an army into
the field to support Charles, and the king added a body of 3000 Genoese
mercenaries in his pay.

"Knowing the storm that was preparing to break upon him, De Montford put
every town and castle in a state of defence. He himself, confiding in
the affection of the inhabitants of Nantes, remained in that city, while
his wife repaired to Rennes.

"The Duke of Normandy advanced from Angiers with an army of 5000
men-at-arms and a numerous infantry, and after capturing the castle of
Chantoceaux marched to Nantes and laid siege to the city. A sortie was
made by the besieged, led by Henry de Leon, but, being attacked by the
whole of the French army, they were driven back into the town, a great
many of the citizens being killed. A warm altercation took place between
Henry de Leon and De Montford, who attributed to him the evil result
of the sortie. The result was that a large number of the citizens whose
friends had been captured by the French conspired to deliver up the
place to Charles of Blois, and Henry de Leon also entered into private
negotiations with the Duke of Normandy. De Montford, finding that he
could rely neither upon the citizens nor the soldiers, surrendered to
the duke on condition that his life was spared. He was sent to Paris,
where he still remains a prisoner. Winter was coming on, and after
putting Nantes in a fresh state of defence and leaving Charles of Blois
there, the Duke of Normandy dismissed his forces, engaging them to
reassemble in the spring. Had he pushed on at once he would have
experienced no resistance, so great was the panic which the surrender
of Nantes and the capture of De Montford had caused among the latter's
partisans.

"In Rennes, especially, the deepest despondency was felt. The countess,
however, showed the greatest courage and firmness. Showing herself,
with her infant in her arms, she appealed to the citizens, and by her
courageous bearing inspired them with new hopes. Having restored
heart at Rennes she traveled from garrison to garrison throughout the
province, and filled all with vigour and resolution. Feeling, however,
the hopelessness of her struggle against all France, she despatched Sir
Almeric de Clisson, who had lately joined her party, to England, to ask
the aid which the king had promised. He arrived a month since, and, as
you see, our brave king has not been long in despatching us to her aid;
and now, youngsters, to bed, for methinks that the sea is rougher than
it was and that the wind is getting up."

"Aye, that is it," the captain, who heard the knight's closing words,
exclaimed. "We are in for a storm, and a heavy one, or my name is not
Timothy Martin, and though with plenty of sea-room the Kitty makes not
much ado about a storm more or less, it's a very different thing in the
middle of a fleet of lubberly craft, which may run one down at any time.
I shall edge out of them as soon as I can, you may be sure."

Before morning a serious gale was blowing, and for the next three or
four days Walter and his companions knew nothing of what was going on.
Then the storm abated, and they staggered out from their cabin. The sea
was still high, but the sun shone brightly overhead. In front of them
the land was visible. They looked round, but to their astonishment not a
sail was in sight.

"Why, where is the fleet?" Walter exclaimed in astonishment.

"Snug in the Thames, I reckon," the captain said. "Soon after the storm
came on one of the sailors pretended he saw the lights of recall on the
admiral's ship; but I was too busy to look that way, I had enough to do
to look after the safety of the ship. Anyhow, I saw no more of them."

"And what land is that ahead?" Walter asked.

"That is Brittany, young sir, and before nightfall we shall be in the
port of Hennebon; as to the others, it may be days and it may be weeks
before they arrive."

The lads were not sorry at the chance which had taken them to their
destination before their companions and had given them a chance of
distinguishing themselves. Late in the afternoon the ship dropped anchor
off the castle of Hennebon, and Sir John Powis and his following were
conveyed in the ship's boats to shore. The countess received them most
graciously, and was delighted at the news that so strong a force was on
its way to her aid.

"In the absence of Sir Walter Manny, madam, I place myself and my men at
your orders. Our horses will be landed the first thing in the morning,
and we will then ride whithersoever you may bid us."

"Thanks, Sir John," the countess replied. "In that case I would that
you ride by Rennes, towards which the army of the Duke of Normandy is
already advancing. The garrison there is commanded by Sir William of
Caddoudal, a good and valiant knight."

The horses were landed on the following morning, and accompanied by
the four young squires and the men-at-arms, and followed by the twenty
archers on foot, Sir John Powis set out for Rennes. They arrived there,
but just in time, for the assailants were closing round the city. They
were received with the greatest cordiality by the governor, who assigned
apartments to Sir John and the squires, and lodged the men-at-arms and
archers near them.


In a day or two the whole of the French army came up, and the siege
commenced. Sir John Powis, at his own request, was posted with his men
for the defence of a portion of the wall which was especially open to
the assaults of the enemy. These soon commenced in earnest, and the
Genoese and Spanish mercenaries endeavoured to carry the place by
assault. Sometimes one point would be attacked, at others points far
distant. Covered by the fire of the French crossbowmen, the Spaniards
and Germans came on to the assault, carrying ladders, with which they
strove to climb the walls, but the defenders plied them so vigorously
with quarrels from their cross-bows and flights of arrows that they
frequently desisted before reaching the walls. When they pushed on, and
strove to ascend, their luck was no better. Great stones were hurled
down, and boiling oil poured upon them. The ladders were flung back, and
many crushed by the fall, and in none of the assaults did they gain any
footing in the town. Machines were used, but these were not sufficiently
powerful to batter down the walls, and at the end of April the city was
as far from being captured as it was on the day of the commencement of
the siege.

Walter bore his full share in the fighting, but he had no opportunity
of especially distinguishing himself, although Sir John several times
commended him for his coolness when the bolts of the crossbow-men and
the stones from the machines were flying most thickly. But although as
yet uninjured by the enemy's attacks, the prospect of the city holding
out was not bright. The burghers, who had at first fought valiantly,
were soon wearied of the strife, and of the hardships it entailed upon
them. The siege had continued but a short time when they began to murmur
loudly. The force under the command of the governor was but a small
one, and it would have been impossible for him to resist the will of
the whole population. For a time his exhortations and entreaties were
attended with success, and the burghers returned to their positions on
the walls; but each time the difficulty became greater, and it was
clear to Caddoudal and Sir John Powis that ere long the citizens would
surrender the place in spite of them. The English knight was furious at
the cowardliness of the citizens, and proposed to the governor to summon
twenty of the leading burghers, and to hang them as a lesson to the
others; but the governor shook his head.

"I have but two hundred men on whom I can rely, including your
following, Sir John. We could not keep down the inhabitants for an hour;
and were we to try to do so, they would open the gates and let in the
French. No; I fear that we must await the end."

The following morning Sir John was awoke with the news that in the night
Caddoudal had been seized and thrown into prison by the burghers, and
that a deputation of citizens had already gone out through the gate to
treat with the Duke of Normandy for the surrender of the city.

The English knight was furious, but with his little band he could do
nothing, especially as he found that a strong guard of burghers had been
placed at the door of the apartments occupied by him and the esquires,
and he was informed that he must consider himself a prisoner until the
conclusion of the negotiations.

Cowardly and faithless as the burghers of Rennes showed themselves to
be, they nevertheless stipulated with the Duke of Normandy, as one of
the conditions of the surrender, that Caddoudal, Sir John Powis, and the
troops under them should be permitted to pass through the French lines
and go whithersoever they would. These terms were accepted. At mid-day
the governor was released, and he with his men-at-arms and the band of
Englishmen filed out from the city gate, and took their way unmolested
through the lines of the French army to Hennebon.

They had been for a month in ignorance of all that had passed outside
the walls, and had from day to day been eagerly looking for the arrival
of Sir Walter Manny with his army to their relief. Once past the French
lines they inquired of the peasantry, and heard to their surprise that
the English fleet had not yet arrived.

"We were in luck indeed," Walter said to his companions, "that Captain
Timothy Martin was in a hurry to get back to his tradings with the
Flemings. Had he not been so, we should all this time have been kicking
our heels and fretting on board a ship."

On nearing Hennebon, Sir William Caddoudal, with Sir John Powis and the
squires, rode forward and met the countess. They were the first bearers
of the news of the surrender of Rennes, and the countess was filled with
consternation at the intelligence. However, after her first burst of
indignation and regret had passed, she put a brave face on it.

"They shall meet with another reception at Hennebon," she said. "This
is but a small place, and my garrison here, and the soldiers you have
brought, will well-nigh outnumber the burghers; and we need have no fear
of such faintheartedness as that which has given Nantes and Rennes into
the hands of my enemy. The English aid cannot tarry long. Until it come
we can assuredly hold the place."

All was now bustle in Hennebon. Sir John Powis took charge of a part of
the walls, and busied himself with his men in placing the machines in
position, and in preparing for defence. The countess, attired in armour,
rode through the streets haranguing the townspeople. She urged the men
to fight till the last, and bade the women and girls cut short their
dresses so that they could the better climb the steps to the top of the
walls, and that one and all should carry up stones, chalk, and baskets
of lime to be cast down upon the assailants. Animated by her words and
gestures, the townspeople set to work, and all vied with each other,
from the oldest to the youngest, in carrying up stores of missiles to
the walls. Never did Hennebon present such a scene of life and bustle.
It seemed like an ant-hill which a passer-by has disturbed.

Absorbed in their work, none had time to think of the dangers which
threatened them, and a stranger would rather have thought from their
cheerful and animated countenances that they were preparing for a
great fete than for a siege by an army to which the two chief towns in
Brittany had succumbed.

Ere long the French army was seen approaching. The soldiers, who had
been labouring with the rest, buckled on their armour. The citizens
gathered on the walls to hurl down the piles of stones which had been
collected, and all prepared for the assault.

"Sir John Powis," the countess said, "I pray you to grant me one of your
esquires, who may attend me while I ride about, and may bear my messages
for me. He will not be idle, nor will he escape his share of the
dangers; for, believe me, I do not intend to hide myself while you and
your brave soldiers are fighting for me.

"Willingly, lady," Sir John answered. "Here is Walter Somers, the son of
a good knight, and himself brave and prudent beyond his years; he will,
I am sure, gladly devote himself to your service."

The French, encouraged by their successes, thought that it would be a
comparatively easy task to capture so small a place as Hennebon, and as
soon as their camp was pitched they moved forward to the attack.

"Come with me, Master Somers," the countess said. "I will mount to one
of the watch-towers, where we may see all that passes."

Walter followed her, and marvelled to see the lightness and agility with
which the heroic countess, although clad in armour, mounted the rickety
ladders to the summit of the watch-tower. The French bowmen opened
a heavy fire upon the walls, which was answered by the shafts of the
little party of English bowmen. These did much execution, for the
English archers shot far harder and straighter than those of France,
and it was only the best armour which could keep out their cloth-yard
shafts. So small a body, however, could not check the advance of so
large a force, and the French swarmed up to the very foot of the walls.

"Well done, my men!" the countess exclaimed, clapping her hands, as a
shower of heavy rocks fell among the mass of the assailants, who were
striving to plant their ladders, crushing many in their fall; "but you
are not looking, Master Somers. What is it that you see in yonder camp
to withdraw your attention from such a fight?"

"I am thinking, Countess, that the French have left their camp
altogether unguarded, and that if a body of horse could make a circuit
and fall upon it, the camp, with all its stores, might be destroyed
before they could get back to save it."

"You are right, young sir," the countess exclaimed, "and it shall be
done forthwith."

So saying, she descended the stairs rapidly and mounted her horse,
which stood at the foot of the tower; then riding through the town, she
collected a party of about three hundred men, bidding all she met mount
their horses and join her at the gate on the opposite side to that on
which the assault was taking place. Such as had no horses she ordered
to take them from those in her own stables. Walter was mounted on one of
the best of the count's chargers. Immediately the force was collected,
the gate was opened and the countess rode forth at their head. Making a
considerable detour, the party rode without being observed into the rear
of the French camp. Here only a few servants and horse-boys were found,
these were at once killed or driven out; then all dismounting, set fire
to the tents and stores; and ere the French were aware of what was going
on, the whole of their camp was in flames. As soon as the conflagration
was perceived, the French commanders drew off their men from the attack,
and all ran at full speed towards the camp.

"We cannot regain the town," the countess said; "we will ride to Auray
at full speed, and re-enter the castle when best we may."

Don Louis of Spain, who with a considerable following was fighting
in the French ranks, hearing from the flying camp followers that the
countess herself was at the head of the party which had destroyed the
camp, instantly mounted, and with a large number of horsemen set off in
hot pursuit. A few of the countess's party who were badly mounted were
overtaken and slain, but the rest arrived safely at Auray, when the
gates were shut in the face of their pursuers.

The blow was a heavy one for the besiegers, but they at once proceeded
to build huts, showing that they had no intention of relinquishing the
siege. Spies were sent from Auray, and these reported that the new
camp was established on the site of the old one, and that the French
evidently intended to renew the attack upon the side on which they had
first commenced, leaving the other side almost unwatched.

Accordingly, on the fifth day after leaving the town, the countess
prepared to return. Except Walter, none were informed of her intention,
as she feared that news might be taken to the French camp by friends of
Charles of Blois; but as soon as it was nightfall, and the gates were
shut, the trumpet sounded to horse. In a few minutes the troop assembled
in the market-place, and the countess, accompanied by Walter, placing
herself at their head, rode out from the town. The strictest silence was
observed. On nearing the town all were directed to dismount, to tear
up the horse-cloths, and to muffle the feet of their horses. Then the
journey was resumed, and so careless was the watch kept by the French
that they passed through the sentries unobserved, and reached in
safety the gate from which they had issued. As they neared it they were
challenged from the walls, and a shout of joy was heard when Walter
replied that the countess herself was present. The gates were opened
and the party entered. The news of their return rapidly ran through the
town, and the inhabitants, hastily attiring themselves, ran into the
streets, filled with joy. Much depression had been felt during her
absence, and few had entertained hopes that she would be able to
re-enter the town. She had brought with her from Auray two hundred men,
in addition to the party that had sallied out.



CHAPTER IX: THE SIEGE OF HENNEBON


The besiegers of Hennebon were greatly discouraged at the success of the
enterprise of the countess. They had already attempted several desperate
assaults, but had each time been repulsed with very heavy loss. They
now sent to Rennes for twelve of the immense machines used in battering
walls, which had been left behind there on a false report of the
weakness of Hennebon. Pending the arrival of these, Charles of Blois,
with one division of the army, marched away to attack Auray, leaving Don
Louis to carry on the siege with a force considered amply sufficient to
compel its surrender after the arrival of the battering machines.

In a few days these arrived and were speedily set to work, and immense
masses of stone were hurled at the walls.

Walter continued to act as the countess's especial squire. She had
informed Sir William Caddoudal and Sir John Powis that it was at his
suggestion that she had made the sudden attack upon the French camp, and
he had gained great credit thereby.

The effect of the new machines was speedily visible. The walls crumbled
under the tremendous blows, and although the archers harassed by their
arrows the men working them, the French speedily erected screens which
