owned to herself a perilous pleasure in being dazzling, even to a
couple of dear humdrum old people like Mr. and Mrs. Cobb. Aunt Sarah
flew to the pantry or cellar whenever Rebecca's slim little shape first
appeared on the crest of the hill, and a jelly tart or a frosted cake
was sure to be forthcoming. The sight of old uncle Jerry's spare figure
in its clean white shirt sleeves, whatever the weather, always made
Rebecca's heart warm when she saw him peer longingly from the kitchen
window. Before the snow came, many was the time he had come out to sit
on a pile of boards at the gate, to see if by any chance she was
mounting the hill that led to their house. In the autumn Rebecca was
often the old man's companion while he was digging potatoes or shelling
beans, and now in the winter, when a younger man was driving the stage,
she sometimes stayed with him while he did his evening milking. It is
safe to say that he was the only creature in Riverboro who possessed
Rebecca's entire confidence; the only being to whom she poured out her
whole heart, with its wealth of hopes, and dreams, and vague ambitions.
At the brick house she practiced scales and exercises, but at the
Cobbs' cabinet organ she sang like a bird, improvising simple
accompaniments that seemed to her ignorant auditors nothing short of
marvelous. Here she was happy, here she was loved, here she was drawn
out of herself and admired and made much of. But, she thought, if there
were somebody who not only loved but understood; who spoke her
language, comprehended her desires, and responded to her mysterious
longings! Perhaps in the big world of Wareham there would be people who
thought and dreamed and wondered as she did.

In reality Jane did not understand her niece very much better than
Miranda; the difference between the sisters was, that while Jane was
puzzled, she was also attracted, and when she was quite in the dark for
an explanation of some quaint or unusual action she was sympathetic as
to its possible motive and believed the best. A greater change had come
over Jane than over any other person in the brick house, but it had
been wrought so secretly, and concealed so religiously, that it
scarcely appeared to the ordinary observer. Life had now a motive
utterly lacking before. Breakfast was not eaten in the kitchen, because
it seemed worth while, now that there were three persons, to lay the
cloth in the dining-room; it was also a more bountiful meal than of
yore, when there was no child to consider. The morning was made
cheerful by Rebecca's start for school, the packing of the luncheon
basket, the final word about umbrella, waterproof, or rubbers; the
parting admonition and the unconscious waiting at the window for the
last wave of the hand. She found herself taking pride in Rebecca's
improved appearance, her rounder throat and cheeks, and her better
color; she was wont to mention the length of Rebecca's hair and add a
word as to its remarkable evenness and lustre, at times when Mrs.
Perkins grew too diffuse about Emma Jane's complexion. She threw
herself wholeheartedly on her niece's side when it became a question
between a crimson or a brown linsey-woolsey dress, and went through a
memorable struggle with her sister concerning the purchase of a red
bird for Rebecca's black felt hat. No one guessed the quiet pleasure
that lay hidden in her heart when she watched the girl's dark head bent
over her lessons at night, nor dreamed of her joy it, certain quiet
evenings when Miranda went to prayer meeting; evenings when Rebecca
would read aloud Hiawatha or Barbara Frietchie, The Bugle Song, or The
Brook. Her narrow, humdrum existence bloomed under the dews that fell
from this fresh spirit; her dullness brightened under the kindling
touch of the younger mind, took fire from the "vital spark of heavenly
flame" that seemed always to radiate from Rebecca's presence.

Rebecca's idea of being a painter like her friend Miss Ross was
gradually receding, owing to the apparently insuperable difficulties in
securing any instruction. Her aunt Miranda saw no wisdom in cultivating
such a talent, and could not conceive that any money could ever be
earned by its exercise, "Hand painted pictures" were held in little
esteem in Riverboro, where the cheerful chromo or the dignified steel
engraving were respected and valued. There was a slight, a very slight
hope, that Rebecca might be allowed a few music lessons from Miss
Morton, who played the church cabinet organ, but this depended entirely
upon whether Mrs. Morton would decide to accept a hayrack in return for
a year's instruction from her daughter. She had the matter under
advisement, but a doubt as to whether or not she would sell or rent her
hayfields kept her from coming to a conclusion. Music, in common with
all other accomplishments, was viewed by Miss Miranda as a trivial,
useless, and foolish amusement, but she allowed Rebecca an hour a day
for practice on the old piano, and a little extra time for lessons, if
Jane could secure them without payment of actual cash.

The news from Sunnybrook Farm was hopeful rather than otherwise. Cousin
Ann's husband had died, and John, Rebecca's favorite brother, had gone
to be the man of the house to the widowed cousin. He was to have good
schooling in return for his care of the horse and cow and barn, and
what was still more dazzling, the use of the old doctor's medical
library of two or three dozen volumes. John's whole heart was set on
becoming a country doctor, with Rebecca to keep house for him, and the
vision seemed now so true, so near, that he could almost imagine his
horse ploughing through snowdrifts on errands of mercy, or, less
dramatic but none the less attractive, could see a physician's neat
turncut trundling along the shady country roads, a medicine case
between his, Dr. Randall's, feet, and Miss Rebecca Randall sitting in a
black silk dress by his side.

Hannah now wore her hair in a coil and her dresses a trifle below her
ankles, these concessions being due to her extreme height. Mark had
broken his collar bone, but it was healing well. Little Mira was
growing very pretty. There was even a rumor that the projected railroad
from Temperance to Plumville might go near the Randall farm, in which
case land would rise in value from nothing-at-all an acre to something
at least resembling a price. Mrs. Randall refused to consider any
improvement in their financial condition as a possibility. Content to
work from sunrise to sunset to gain a mere subsistence for her
children, she lived in their future, not in her own present, as a
mother is wont to do when her own lot seems hard and cheerless.



XVII

GRAY DAYS AND GOLD

When Rebecca looked back upon the year or two that followed the
Simpsons' Thanksgiving party, she could see only certain milestones
rising in the quiet pathway of the months.

The first milestone was Christmas Day. It was a fresh, crystal morning,
with icicles hanging like dazzling pendants from the trees and a glaze
of pale blue on the surface of the snow. The Simpsons' red barn stood
out, a glowing mass of color in the white landscape. Rebecca had been
busy for weeks before, trying to make a present for each of the seven
persons at Sunnybrook Farm, a somewhat difficult proceeding on an
expenditure of fifty cents, hoarded by incredible exertion. Success had
been achieved, however, and the precious packet had been sent by post
two days previous. Miss Sawyer had bought her niece a nice gray
squirrel muff and tippet, which was even more unbecoming if possible,
than Rebecca's other articles of wearing apparel; but aunt Jane had
made her the loveliest dress of green cashmere, a soft, soft green like
that of a young leaf. It was very simply made, but the color delighted
the eye. Then there was a beautiful "tatting" collar from her mother,
some scarlet mittens from Mrs. Cobb, and a handkerchief from Emma Jane.

Rebecca herself had fashioned an elaborate tea-cosy with a letter "M"
in outline stitch, and a pretty frilled pincushion marked with a "J,"
for her two aunts, so that taken all together the day would have been
an unequivocal success had nothing else happened; but something else
did.

There was a knock at the door at breakfast time, and Rebecca, answering
it, was asked by a boy if Miss Rebecca Randall lived there. On being
told that she did, he handed her a parcel bearing her name, a parcel
which she took like one in a dream and bore into the dining-room.

"It's a present; it must be," she said, looking at it in a dazed sort
of way; "but I can't think who it could be from."

"A good way to find out would be to open it," remarked Miss Miranda.

The parcel being untied proved to have two smaller packages within, and
Rebecca opened with trembling fingers the one addressed to her.
Anybody's fingers would have trembled. There was a case which, when the
cover was lifted, disclosed a long chain of delicate pink coral
beads,--a chain ending in a cross made of coral rosebuds. A card with
"Merry Christmas from Mr. Aladdin" lay under the cross.

"Of all things!" exclaimed the two old ladies, rising in their seats.
"Who sent it?"

"Mr. Ladd," said Rebecca under her breath.

"Adam Ladd! Well I never! Don't you remember Ellen Burnham said he was
going to send Rebecca a Christmas present? But I never supposed he'd
think of it again," said Jane. "What's the other package?"

It proved to be a silver chain with a blue enamel locket on it, marked
for Emma Jane. That added the last touch--to have him remember them
both! There was a letter also, which ran:--

    Dear Miss Rebecca Rowena,--My idea of a Christmas present is
    something entirely unnecessary and useless. I have always
    noticed when I give this sort of thing that people love it,
    so I hope I have not chosen wrong for you and your friend.
    You must wear your chain this afternoon, please, and let me
    see it on your neck, for I am coming over in my new sleigh to
    take you both to drive. My aunt is delighted with the soap.

    Sincerely your friend,

    Adam Ladd.

"Well, well!" cried Miss Jane, "isn't that kind of him? He's very fond
of children, Lyddy Burnham says. Now eat your breakfast, Rebecca, and
after we've done the dishes you can run over to Emma's and give her her
chain--What's the matter, child?"

Rebecca's emotions seemed always to be stored, as it were, in adjoining
compartments, and to be continually getting mixed. At this moment,
though her joy was too deep for words, her bread and butter almost
choked her, and at intervals a tear stole furtively down her cheek.

Mr. Ladd called as he promised, and made the acquaintance of the aunts,
understanding them both in five minutes as well as if he had known them
for years. On a footstool near the open fire sat Rebecca, silent and
shy, so conscious of her fine apparel and the presence of aunt Miranda
that she could not utter a word. It was one of her "beauty days."
Happiness, excitement, the color of the green dress, and the touch of
lovely pink in the coral necklace had transformed the little brown wren
for the time into a bird of plumage, and Adam Ladd watched her with
evident satisfaction. Then there was the sleigh ride, during which she
found her tongue and chattered like any magpie, and so ended that
glorious Christmas Day; and many and many a night thereafter did
Rebecca go to sleep with the precious coral chain under her pillow, one
hand always upon it to be certain that it was safe.

Another milestone was the departure of the Simpsons from Riverboro, bag
and baggage, the banquet lamp being their most conspicuous possession.
It was delightful to be rid of Seesaw's hateful presence; but otherwise
the loss of several playmates at one fell swoop made rather a gap in
Riverboro's "younger set," and Rebecca was obliged to make friends with
the Robinson baby, he being the only long-clothes child in the village
that winter. The faithful Seesaw had called at the side door of the
brick house on the evening before his departure, and when Rebecca
answered his knock, stammered solemnly, "Can I k-keep comp'ny with you
when you g-g-row up?" "Certainly NOT," replied Rebecca, closing the
door somewhat too speedily upon her precocious swain.

Mr. Simpson had come home in time to move his wife and children back to
the town that had given them birth, a town by no means waiting with
open arms to receive them. The Simpsons' moving was presided over by
the village authorities and somewhat anxiously watched by the entire
neighborhood, but in spite of all precautions a pulpit chair, several
kerosene lamps, and a small stove disappeared from the church and were
successfully swapped in the course of Mr. Simpson's driving tour from
the old home to the new. It gave Rebecca and Emma Jane some hours of
sorrow to learn that a certain village in the wake of Abner Simpson's
line of progress had acquired, through the medium of an ambitious young
minister, a magnificent lamp for its new church parlors. No money
changed hands in the operation; for the minister succeeded in getting
the lamp in return for an old bicycle. The only pleasant feature of the
whole affair was that Mr. Simpson, wholly unable to console his
offspring for the loss of the beloved object, mounted the bicycle and
rode away on it, not to be seen or heard of again for many a long day.

The year was notable also as being the one in which Rebecca shot up
like a young tree. She had seemingly never grown an inch since she was
ten years old, but once started she attended to growing precisely as
she did other things,--with such energy, that Miss Jane did nothing for
months but lengthen skirts, sleeves, and waists. In spite of all the
arts known to a thrifty New England woman, the limit of letting down
and piecing down was reached at last, and the dresses were sent to
Sunnybrook Farm to be made over for Jenny.

There was another milestone, a sad one, marking a little grave under a
willow tree at Sunnybrook Farm. Mira, the baby of the Randall family,
died, and Rebecca went home for a fortnight's visit. The sight of the
small still shape that had been Mira, the baby who had been her special
charge ever since her birth, woke into being a host of new thoughts and
wonderments; for it is sometimes the mystery of death that brings one
to a consciousness of the still greater mystery of life.

It was a sorrowful home-coming for Rebecca. The death of Mira, the
absence of John, who had been her special comrade, the sadness of her
mother, the isolation of the little house, and the pinching economies
that went on within it, all conspired to depress a child who was so
sensitive to beauty and harmony as Rebecca.

Hannah seemed to have grown into a woman during Rebecca's absence.
There had always been a strange unchildlike air about Hannah, but in
certain ways she now appeared older than aunt Jane--soberer, and more
settled. She was pretty, though in a colorless fashion; pretty and
capable.

Rebecca walked through all the old playgrounds and favorite haunts of
her early childhood; all her familiar, her secret places; some of them
known to John, some to herself alone. There was the spot where the
Indian pipes grew; the particular bit of marshy ground where the
fringed gentians used to be largest and bluest; the rock maple where
she found the oriole's nest; the hedge where the field mice lived; the
moss-covered stump where the white toadstools were wont to spring up as
if by magic; the hole at the root of the old pine where an ancient and
honorable toad made his home; these were the landmarks of her
childhood, and she looked at them as across an immeasurable distance.
The dear little sunny brook, her chief companion after John, was sorry
company at this season. There was no laughing water sparkling in the
sunshine. In summer the merry stream had danced over white pebbles on
its way to deep pools where it could be still and think. Now, like
Mira, it was cold and quiet, wrapped in its shroud of snow; but Rebecca
knelt by the brink, and putting her ear to the glaze of ice, fancied,
where it used to be deepest, she could hear a faint, tinkling sound. It
was all right! Sunnybrook would sing again in the spring; perhaps Mira
too would have her singing time somewhere--she wondered where and how.
In the course of these lonely rambles she was ever thinking, thinking,
of one subject. Hannah had never had a chance; never been freed from
the daily care and work of the farm. She, Rebecca, had enjoyed all the
privileges thus far. Life at the brick house had not been by any means
a path of roses, but there had been comfort and the companionship of
other children, as well as chances for study and reading. Riverboro had
not been the world itself, but it had been a glimpse of it through a
tiny peephole that was infinitely better than nothing. Rebecca shed
more than one quiet tear before she could trust herself to offer up as
a sacrifice that which she so much desired for herself. Then one
morning as her visit neared its end she plunged into the subject boldly
and said, "Hannah, after this term I'm going to stay at home and let
you go away. Aunt Miranda has always wanted you, and it's only fair you
should have your turn."

Hannah was darning stockings, and she threaded her needle and snipped
off the yarn before she answered, "No, thank you, Becky. Mother
couldn't do without me, and I hate going to school. I can read and
write and cipher as well as anybody now, and that's enough for me. I'd
die rather than teach school for a living. The winter'll go fast, for
Will Melville is going to lend me his mother's sewing machine, and I'm
going to make white petticoats out of the piece of muslin aunt Jane
sent, and have 'em just solid with tucks. Then there's going to be a
singing-school and a social circle in Temperance after New Year's, and
I shall have a real good time now I'm grown up. I'm not one to be
lonesome, Becky," Hannah ended with a blush; "I love this place."

Rebecca saw that she was speaking the truth, but she did not understand
the blush till a year or two later.



XVIII

REBECCA REPRESENTS THE FAMILY

There was another milestone; it was more than that, it was an "event;"
an event that made a deep impression in several quarters and left a
wake of smaller events in its train. This was the coming to Riverboro
of the Reverend Amos Burch and wife, returned missionaries from Syria.

The Aid Society had called its meeting for a certain Wednesday in March
of the year in which Rebecca ended her Riverboro school days and began
her studies at Wareham. It was a raw, blustering day, snow on the
ground and a look in the sky of more to follow. Both Miranda and Jane
had taken cold and decided that they could not leave the house in such
weather, and this deflection from the path of duty worried Miranda,
since she was an officer of the society. After making the breakfast
table sufficiently uncomfortable and wishing plaintively that Jane
wouldn't always insist on being sick at the same time she was, she
decided that Rebecca must go to the meeting in their stead. "You'll be
better than nobody, Rebecca," she said flatteringly; "your aunt Jane
shall write an excuse from afternoon school for you; you can wear your
rubber boots and come home by the way of the meetin' house. This Mr.
Burch, if I remember right, used to know your grandfather Sawyer, and
stayed here once when he was candidatin'. He'll mebbe look for us
there, and you must just go and represent the family, an' give him our
respects. Be careful how you behave. Bow your head in prayer; sing all
the hymns, but not too loud and bold; ask after Mis' Strout's boy; tell
everybody what awful colds we've got; if you see a good chance, take
your pocket handkerchief and wipe the dust off the melodeon before the
meetin' begins, and get twenty-five cents out of the sittin' room
match-box in case there should be a collection."

Rebecca willingly assented. Anything interested her, even a village
missionary meeting, and the idea of representing the family was rather
intoxicating.

The service was held in the Sunday-school room, and although the Rev.
Mr. Burch was on the platform when Rebecca entered, there were only a
dozen persons present. Feeling a little shy and considerably too young
for this assemblage, Rebecca sought the shelter of a friendly face, and
seeing Mrs. Robinson in one of the side seats near the front, she
walked up the aisle and sat beside her.

"Both my aunts had bad colds," she said softly, "and sent me to
represent the family."

"That's Mrs. Burch on the platform with her husband," whispered Mrs.
Robinson. "She's awful tanned up, ain't she? If you're goin' to save
souls seems like you hev' to part with your complexion. Eudoxy Morton
ain't come yet; I hope to the land she will, or Mis' Deacon Milliken'll
pitch the tunes where we can't reach 'em with a ladder; can't you
pitch, afore she gits her breath and clears her throat?"

Mrs. Burch was a slim, frail little woman with dark hair, a broad low
forehead, and patient mouth. She was dressed in a well-worn black silk,
and looked so tired that Rebecca's heart went out to her.

"They're poor as Job's turkey," whispered Mrs. Robinson; "but if you
give 'em anything they'd turn right round and give it to the heathen.
His congregation up to Parsonsfield clubbed together and give him that
gold watch he carries; I s'pose he'd 'a' handed that over too, only
heathens always tell time by the sun 'n' don't need watches. Eudoxy
ain't comin'; now for massy's sake, Rebecca, do git ahead of Mis'
Deacon Milliken and pitch real low."

The meeting began with prayer and then the Rev. Mr. Burch announced, to
the tune of Mendon:--

  "Church of our God I arise and shine,
  Bright with the beams of truth divine:
  Then shall thy radiance stream afar,
  Wide as the heathen nations are.

  "Gentiles and kings thy light shall view,
  And shall admire and love thee too;
  They come, like clouds across the sky,
  As doves that to their windows fly."

"Is there any one present who will assist us at the instrument?" he
asked unexpectedly.

Everybody looked at everybody else, and nobody moved; then there came a
voice out of a far corner saying informally, "Rebecca, why don't you?"
It was Mrs. Cobb. Rebecca could have played Mendon in the dark, so she
went to the melodeon and did so without any ado, no member of her
family being present to give her self-consciousness.

The talk that ensued was much the usual sort of thing. Mr. Burch made
impassioned appeals for the spreading of the gospel, and added his
entreaties that all who were prevented from visiting in person the
peoples who sat in darkness should contribute liberally to the support
of others who could. But he did more than this. He was a pleasant,
earnest speaker, and he interwove his discourse with stories of life in
a foreign land,--of the manners, the customs, the speech, the point of
view; even giving glimpses of the daily round, the common task, of his
own household, the work of his devoted helpmate and their little group
of children, all born under Syrian skies.

Rebecca sat entranced, having been given the key of another world.
Riverboro had faded; the Sunday-school room, with Mrs. Robinson's red
plaid shawl, and Deacon Milliken's wig, on crooked, the bare benches
and torn hymn-books, the hanging texts and maps, were no longer
visible, and she saw blue skies and burning stars, white turbans and
gay colors; Mr. Burch had not said so, but perhaps there were mosques
and temples and minarets and date-palms. What stories they must know,
those children born under Syrian skies! Then she was called upon to
play "Jesus shall reign where'er the sun."

The contribution box was passed and Mr. Burch prayed. As he opened his
eyes and gave out the last hymn he looked at the handful of people, at
the scattered pennies and dimes in the contribution box, and reflected
