
Marian stood silently looking from one girl to the other, then she said
with a mixture of hurt pride, anger and obstinacy in her voice:

"I don't need your help. In fact, I think the less we see of each other
in future the better it will be for us all. The past three months have
caused me to have an entirely different opinion than I used to have of
you girls. You are all very nice as long as things go your way, but if
one happens to make a friend or hold an opinion contrary to your views,
then the Phi Sigma Taus feel bound to step in and interfere.

"Here is my sorority pin, and I sincerely hope you will elect another
girl to my place. She is welcome to both the pin and your friendship. I
am thankful that this is my last year in High School."

"You are a foolish girl, Marian Barber," cried Nora, "and you'll wake up
some morning and find yourself awfully sorry for what you've just said.
You are the last person I should have suspected of being so ridiculous.
Why we've all played together since we were kiddies."

Marian tried to look dignified and unrelenting, but for an instant her
lip quivered suspiciously.

Anne seeing that Marian showed signs of wavering, crossed over to her
side, and slipping her arm around the obstinate girl, said gently:

"Better think it over before you do any thing rash, dear. We are not
trying in the least to interfere in your affairs. You know the primary
object of the Phi Sigma Tau is to help one another. We thought that you
would be glad to have us coach you in astronomy. You know how thankful
Grace was for your help in trigonometry last year."

Marian hesitated as though at loss for an answer to this direct appeal
to her common sense. The girls watched her anxiously, hoping that Anne's
words had bridged the difficulty.

"Come on, Marian," said Nora O'Malley briskly. "Here's your sorority
pin. Put it on and forget that you ever took it off. You are too
sensible to nurse an imaginary grievance. Don't behave as Eleanor
Savelli did. You know--"

But Nora was not allowed to finish the sentence, for Marian whirled upon
her with flashing eyes, her temporary softness disappearing entirely.

"I don't wish to hear one word against Eleanor Savelli," she cried
wrathfully. "She is my friend, and I shall stand up for her."

"Your friend?" was the united exclamation.

"Yes, my friend," reiterated Marian stormily, "and she is a true friend,
too. Last year she was initiated into your sorority, and then
deliberately slighted and left out of all your plans until in justice to
herself she resigned.

"This year you are behaving in the same way with me. You began it by
criticizing my friend, Henry Hammond, and invited him to the judge's
house party for the express purpose of humiliating and insulting him.
The boys of your crowd gave him the cold shoulder when he tried to be
friendly and Grace was insufferably rude to him on two different
occasions.

"Then you criticized my gowns and made fun of me behind my back, when in
reality I was the only one of you who was properly dressed. You left Mr.
Hammond and I both out of the pantomime, and made us last in everything.

"I tried to forgive and forget it all, and be just the same to you, but
the first thing that Nora did when we reached Oakdale was to invite part
of the crowd to her house and leave the rest of us out, and I am
surprised that neither Miriam nor Eva resented the slight."

Here Grace and Miriam could not refrain from exchanging amused glances,
but to Marian, who intercepted their glances, this was the last straw.

Dashing the sorority pin which Nora had previously shoved into her hand
to the floor, with a sob of mingled anger and chagrin she exclaimed:

"How dare you ridicule me to my very face! I never want to speak to any
of you again, and I shall not stay here to be laughed at."

With these words she fairly ran out of the room, and before any one
could expostulate with her, she had for the second time in three months
rushed out of the house and away from her real friends.

"She is hopeless," sighed Grace, as they heard the outer door of the
hall close noisily.

"Can you blame her?" said Anne earnestly. "She has been influenced all
along by that Henry Hammond, and now she has fallen into Eleanor's
hands. We know Eleanor's state of mind toward us, but why Henry Hammond
should encourage Marian to break with her sorority is harder to
understand. Yet he has undoubtedly used his influence against us for
some purpose of his own. Marian's accusations are foolish and unjust.
You all know that she was so engrossed with that miserable old trouble
maker that she repeatedly refused to take part in the different things
we planned."

"Of course, we know that," agreed Grace. "I don't even feel hurt at her
outburst to-night. I wouldn't think of accepting her resignation from
the Phi Sigma Tau, either. We won't try to make up with her, but we'll
all keep a starboard eye upon her, and see that she doesn't come to
grief."

"I had almost reduced her to reason," remarked Anne, with a rueful
smile, "when Nora unfortunately mentioned Eleanor."

"Wasn't I an idiot, though?" asked Nora. "I forgot for the moment about
having seen them together."

"I am going to turn detective," announced Grace.

"Are you going to detect or deduct?" asked Nora solemnly.

"Both," replied Grace confidently. "I am going to become a combination
of Nick Carter and Sherlock Holmes, and my first efforts will be
directed toward finding out who and what Mr. Henry Hammond really is."




CHAPTER XVI

THE UNEXPECTED HAPPENS


Grace lost no time in putting her resolution into practice, and left no
stone unturned regarding the object of her distrust. But her efforts met
with no better success than the first time she had instituted inquiry.

"Why are you so bitter against that young man, daughter?" asked her
father rather curiously when she interviewed him as to the best means of
finding out something of Henry Hammond's past. "He seems to be a good
straight-forward young fellow."

"He's a villain, I know he is," asserted Grace, "but he's too sharp for
me."

"Nonsense," laughed her father. "Having no basketball this winter you
are bound to devote that surplus energy of yours to something. Are you
making Hammond your victim?"

"You may tease me if you like," replied Grace with dignity, "but some
day you'll acknowledge that I was right."

"All right, girlie," smiled her father. "Shall I say so, now?"

"You're a dear," laughed Grace, rubbing her soft cheek against his.
"Only you will tease."

Since the evening that Marian Barber had repudiated her sorority, none
of the members had spoken to her. She had studiously avoided going
within speaking distance of them and had divided her time after school
equally between Eleanor Savelli and Henry Hammond.

Eleanor had kept her word in reference to Edna Wright, and the two girls
exchanged only the barest civilities whenever they chanced to meet.
Eleanor had, however, gained considerable popularity with a number of
the senior class, and wielded a tremendous influence over them. She had
dropped her annoying tactics toward the teachers, and her conduct during
the year had been irreproachable.

Anne Pierson's assertion that Eleanor would be better off away from Edna
had proved true, and unconsciously the spoiled, temperamental girl was
receiving great benefit from her High School associations. She stood
next to Anne Pierson in her classes, and her aptitude for study and
brilliant recitations evoked the admiration of the entire class.

But despite these changes for the better, Eleanor still nursed her
grudge against the Phi Sigma Tau, and held to her unrelenting resolve to
be revenged upon them, individually or collectively, whenever the
opportunity should arise.

In cautioning her friends the previous year against placing themselves
in a position liable to put them at a disadvantage with Eleanor, Grace
had unwittingly divined the former's intentions.

Now that Marian had strayed away from the Phi Sigma Tau and straight to
their common enemy, Grace felt uneasy as to the result.

"I don't know what to think about Marian's sudden intimacy with
Eleanor," she confided to Anne, one day at the beginning of the new
term.

"So far nothing startling has happened," replied Anne. "Really, Eleanor
happened along at a good time for Marian."

"Why did she?" asked Grace quickly.

"Because I understand that she coached Marian in astronomy and just
simply made her cut out Henry Hammond for her books. It's due to Eleanor
that she passed," answered Anne.

"I hadn't heard that," said Grace. "Isn't Eleanor a wonder in her
studies? It's a pleasure to hear her recite."

"I do admire her ability," agreed Anne. "Perhaps she will see through
Henry Hammond and persuade Marian to drop him."

"I don't know about that," said Grace dubiously. "I saw him with Eleanor
in the run-about the other day. He was at the wheel, and they seemed to
be having a very interesting session without Marian."

"He never did give me the impression of being a very constant swain,"
laughed Anne.

"I'm so glad that mid-year exams are over," sighed Grace. "I'm a sure
enough graduate now, unless something serious happens."

"So am I," replied Anne. "If I could get clerical work to do this term
I'd recite in the morning only and give my afternoons to earning a
little money. It seems as though everything is against me. Did you know
that Mrs. Gray has postponed coming home until March?"

"Yes," answered Grace. She understood Anne's growing despair as time
went on, and the prospect of earning enough money to defray her college
expenses grew less.

"I'm afraid I'll have to give it all up for next year at least, Grace,"
Anne's voice trembled a little. "But perhaps I can enter the year after.
I can't give up the idea of being in the same college with you."

"Don't give up yet, dear," Grace pressed Anne's hand. "Maybe the
unexpected will happen."

The girls separated at the corner and went their separate ways, Anne
with the conviction that there was no use in wishing for the impossible
and Grace deploring the fact that Anne was too proud to accept any help
from her friends.

As Grace was about to curl herself up in a big chair before the fire
that night with "Richard Carvel" in one hand and a box of peanut brittle
in the other, she was startled by a loud ringing of the bell. Going to
the door she beheld Anne who was fairly wriggling with excitement. Her
cheeks were flushed and her dark eyes were like stars.

"Oh, Grace," she cried. "The unexpected has happened!"

"What are you talking about, Anne?" exclaimed Grace laughing. "Stop
dancing up and down out there. Come in and explain yourself. That is if
you can stand still long enough to do it."

"I have had the surprise of my life to-night, Grace," said Anne, as she
entered the hall, while Grace unfastened her fur collar and pulled the
pins from her hat. "I just couldn't wait until to-morrow to tell you
about it. It's so wonderful I can't believe that it has happened to
insignificant me."

"I know just as much now as I did at first, and perhaps a trifle less,"
said Grace.

Then taking Anne by the shoulders she marched her into the sitting room,
shoved her into the easy-chair opposite her own and said, "Now, begin at
the beginning, and don't leave out any details."

"Well," said Anne, drawing a long breath, "when I reached home after
leaving you, I found a letter for me postmarked New York City. For an
instant I thought it was from my father, but the hand writing was not
his. I opened it, and who do you suppose it was from?"

"I don't know, and I'm a poor guesser, so tell me," responded Grace.

"It was from Mr. Everett Southard."

"No! Really?" cried Grace. "How nice of him to write to you."

"But I haven't told you the nicest part," continued Anne. "He wants me
to go to New York to play a six-weeks' engagement in his company."

"Anne Pierson, you don't mean it," ejaculated Grace in intense
astonishment.

"Grace Harlowe, I do mean it," retorted Anne. "Why it's the very
opportunity that I've been yearning for, but never expected to get. Let
me read you his letter."

Unfolding the letter that she had been holding in one hand, Anne read:

     "MY DEAR MISS PIERSON:

     "Remembering your exceptionally fine work as 'Rosalind' in the
      production of 'As You Like It,' given at your High School last
      year, I now write to offer you the same part in a six weeks'
      revival of the same play about to be presented in New York. Your
      acceptance will be a source of gratification to me, as it is very
      hard to engage actors who are particularly adapted to Shakespearian
      roles. The salary will be one hundred dollars per week with all
      traveling expenses paid.

     "My sister extends a cordial invitation to you to make our home
      yours during your stay in New York, and will write you at once.
      I have already written Miss Tebbs regarding my offer. Hoping to
      receive an affirmative answer by return mail, with best wishes,
      I remain

     "Yours sincerely,

     "EVERETT SOUTHARD."

"Well, I should say the unexpected had happened," said Grace, as Anne
finished reading. "One hundred dollars a week for six weeks! Why, Anne,
think of it! You will have six hundred dollars for six weeks' work. I
had no idea they paid such salaries."

"They pay more than that in companies like Mr. Southard's," replied
Anne. "If I had acquired fame I could command twice that sum. I can't
imagine why he ever chose me. Suppose I should fail entirely."

"Nonsense," retorted Grace. "You couldn't fail if you tried. The only
thing that I am afraid of is that you'll be so carried away with the
stage that you'll forget to come back to us again."

"Don't say that, Grace," said Anne quickly. "I never shall. I am wild to
play this engagement, because it means that I am sure of at least two
years in college, and I think if I can get tutoring to do, I can pull
through the whole four. Aside from that, the stage is the last career in
the world that I should choose. You know my views on that subject."

"I was only jesting, dear," Grace assured her, seeing the look of
anxiety that crept into Anne's eyes. "I know you'll come back. We
couldn't graduate without you. When shall you write to Mr. Southard?"

"I have already written," replied Anne gravely. "I knew that nothing
could induce me to refuse, so I settled the matter at once."

"Confess, you bad child," said Grace, rising and putting one finger
under Anne's chin. "Look me straight in the face and tell the truth. You
thought I'd be shocked."

Anne colored, laughed a little and then said frankly, "Yes, I was afraid
you wouldn't look at the matter in the same light. Now, I must go,
because it is after nine and sister worries if I stay out late."

"Wait, I'll go to the corner with you," said Grace.

Slipping into her coat, and throwing a silk scarf over her head. Grace
accompanied Anne into the street.

"Come as far as the next corner," begged Anne, and the two girls walked
