
"That Faith and Una stayed home from Sunday School last Sunday and
CLEANED HOUSE."

"We didn't," cried Faith and Una, in passionate denial.

Mary looked haughtily at them.

"I didn't suppose you'd deny it, after the way you've combed ME down for
lying," she said. "What's the good of saying you didn't? Everybody knows
you DID. Elder Clow and his wife saw you. Some people say it will break
up the church, but _I_ don't go that far. You ARE nice ones."

Nan Blythe stood up and put her arms around the dazed Faith and Una.

"They were nice enough to take you in and feed you and clothe you when
you were starving in Mr. Taylor's barn, Mary Vance," she said. "You are
VERY grateful, I must say."

"I AM grateful," retorted Mary. "You'd know it if you'd heard me
standing up for Mr. Meredith through thick and thin. I've blistered
my tongue talking for him this week. I've said again and again that
he isn't to blame if his young ones did clean house on Sunday. He was
away--and they knew better."

"But we didn't," protested Una. "It was MONDAY we cleaned house. Wasn't
it, Faith?"

"Of course it was," said Faith, with flashing eyes. "We went to Sunday
School in spite of the rain--and no one came--not even Elder Abraham,
for all his talk about fair-weather Christians."

"It was Saturday it rained," said Mary. "Sunday was as fine as silk. I
wasn't at Sunday School because I had toothache, but every one else was
and they saw all your stuff out on the lawn. And Elder Abraham and Mrs.
Elder Abraham saw you shaking rugs in the graveyard."

Una sat down among the daisies and began to cry.

"Look here," said Jem resolutely, "this thing must be cleared up.
SOMEBODY has made a mistake. Sunday WAS fine, Faith. How could you have
thought Saturday was Sunday?"

"Prayer-meeting was Thursday night," cried Faith, "and Adam flew into
the soup-pot on Friday when Aunt Martha's cat chased him, and spoiled
our dinner; and Saturday there was a snake in the cellar and Carl caught
it with a forked stick and carried it out, and Sunday it rained. So
there!"

"Prayer-meeting was Wednesday night," said Mary. "Elder Baxter was to
lead and he couldn't go Thursday night and it was changed to Wednesday.
You were just a day out, Faith Meredith, and you DID work on Sunday."

Suddenly Faith burst into a peal of laughter.

"I suppose we did. What a joke!"

"It isn't much of a joke for your father," said Mary sourly.

"It'll be all right when people find out it was just a mistake," said
Faith carelessly. "We'll explain."

"You can explain till you're black in the face," said Mary, "but a lie
like that'll travel faster'n further than you ever will. I'VE seen more
of the world than you and _I_ know. Besides, there are plenty of folks
won't believe it was a mistake."

"They will if I tell them," said Faith.

"You can't tell everybody," said Mary. "No, I tell you you've disgraced
your father."

Una's evening was spoiled by this dire reflection, but Faith refused to
be made uncomfortable. Besides, she had a plan that would put everything
right. So she put the past with its mistake behind her and gave herself
over to enjoyment of the present. Jem went away to fish and Walter came
out of his reverie and proceeded to describe the woods of heaven. Mary
pricked up her ears and listened respectfully. Despite her awe of
Walter she revelled in his "book talk." It always gave her a delightful
sensation. Walter had been reading his Coleridge that day, and he
pictured a heaven where

    "There were gardens bright with sinuous rills
        Where blossomed many an incense bearing tree,
    And there were forests ancient as the hills
        Enfolding sunny spots of greenery."

"I didn't know there was any woods in heaven," said Mary, with a long
breath. "I thought it was all streets--and streets--AND streets."

"Of course there are woods," said Nan. "Mother can't live without
trees and I can't, so what would be the use of going to heaven if there
weren't any trees?"

"There are cities, too," said the young dreamer, "splendid
cities--coloured just like the sunset, with sapphire towers and rainbow
domes. They are built of gold and diamonds--whole streets of diamonds,
flashing like the sun. In the squares there are crystal fountains kissed
by the light, and everywhere the asphodel blooms--the flower of heaven."

"Fancy!" said Mary. "I saw the main street in Charlottetown once and I
thought it was real grand, but I s'pose it's nothing to heaven. Well, it
all sounds gorgeous the way you tell it, but won't it be kind of dull,
too?"

"Oh, I guess we can have some fun when the angels' backs are turned,"
said Faith comfortably.

"Heaven is ALL fun," declared Di.

"The Bible doesn't say so," cried Mary, who had read so much of the
Bible on Sunday afternoons under Miss Cornelia's eye that she now
considered herself quite an authority on it.

"Mother says the Bible language is figurative," said Nan.

"Does that mean that it isn't true?" asked Mary hopefully.

"No--not exactly--but I think it means that heaven will be just like
what you'd like it to be."

"I'd like it to be just like Rainbow Valley," said Mary, "with all you
kids to gas and play with. THAT'S good enough for me. Anyhow, we can't
go to heaven till we're dead and maybe not then, so what's the use of
worrying? Here's Jem with a string of trout and it's my turn to fry
them."

"We ought to know more about heaven than Walter does when we're the
minister's family," said Una, as they walked home that night.

"We KNOW just as much, but Walter can IMAGINE," said Faith. "Mrs.
Elliott says he gets it from his mother."

"I do wish we hadn't made that mistake about Sunday," sighed Una.

"Don't worry over that. I've thought of a great plan to explain so that
everybody will know," said Faith. "Just wait till to-morrow night."



CHAPTER XII. AN EXPLANATION AND A DARE

The Rev. Dr. Cooper preached in Glen St. Mary the next evening and
the Presbyterian Church was crowded with people from near and far. The
Reverend Doctor was reputed to be a very eloquent speaker; and, bearing
in mind the old dictum that a minister should take his best clothes
to the city and his best sermons to the country, he delivered a very
scholarly and impressive discourse. But when the folks went home that
night it was not of Dr. Cooper's sermon they talked. They had completely
forgotten all about it.

Dr. Cooper had concluded with a fervent appeal, had wiped the
perspiration from his massive brow, had said "Let us pray" as he was
famed for saying it, and had duly prayed. There was a slight pause. In
Glen St. Mary church the old fashion of taking the collection after the
sermon instead of before still held--mainly because the Methodists had
adopted the new fashion first, and Miss Cornelia and Elder Clow would
not hear of following where Methodists had led. Charles Baxter and
Thomas Douglas, whose duty it was to pass the plates, were on the point
of rising to their feet. The organist had got out the music of her
anthem and the choir had cleared its throat. Suddenly Faith Meredith
rose in the manse pew, walked up to the pulpit platform, and faced the
amazed audience.

Miss Cornelia half rose in her seat and then sat down again. Her pew was
far back and it occurred to her that whatever Faith meant to do or say
would be half done or said before she could reach her. There was no use
making the exhibition worse than it had to be. With an anguished glance
at Mrs. Dr. Blythe, and another at Deacon Warren of the Methodist
Church, Miss Cornelia resigned herself to another scandal.

"If the child was only dressed decently itself," she groaned in spirit.

Faith, having spilled ink on her good dress, had serenely put on an
old one of faded pink print. A caticornered rent in the skirt had
been darned with scarlet tracing cotton and the hem had been let down,
showing a bright strip of unfaded pink around the skirt. But Faith was
not thinking of her clothes at all. She was feeling suddenly nervous.
What had seemed easy in imagination was rather hard in reality.
Confronted by all those staring questioning eyes Faith's courage almost
failed her. The lights were so bright, the silence so awesome. She
thought she could not speak after all. But she MUST--her father MUST be
cleared of suspicion. Only--the words would NOT come.

Una's little pearl-pure face gleamed up at her beseechingly from the
manse pew. The Blythe children were lost in amazement. Back under the
gallery Faith saw the sweet graciousness of Miss Rosemary West's smile
and the amusement of Miss Ellen's. But none of these helped her. It was
Bertie Shakespeare Drew who saved the situation. Bertie Shakespeare sat
in the front seat of the gallery and he made a derisive face at Faith.
Faith promptly made a dreadful one back at him, and, in her anger over
being grimaced at by Bertie Shakespeare, forgot her stage fright. She
found her voice and spoke out clearly and bravely.

"I want to explain something," she said, "and I want to do it now
because everybody will hear it that heard the other. People are saying
that Una and I stayed home last Sunday and cleaned house instead of
going to Sunday School. Well, we did--but we didn't mean to. We
got mixed up in the days of the week. It was all Elder Baxter's
fault"--sensation in Baxter's pew--"because he went and changed the
prayer-meeting to Wednesday night and then we thought Thursday was
Friday and so on till we thought Saturday was Sunday. Carl was laid up
sick and so was Aunt Martha, so they couldn't put us right. We went to
Sunday School in all that rain on Saturday and nobody came. And then we
thought we'd clean house on Monday and stop old cats from talking about
how dirty the manse was"--general sensation all over the church--"and we
did. I shook the rugs in the Methodist graveyard because it was such
a convenient place and not because I meant to be disrespectful of the
dead. It isn't the dead folks who have made the fuss over this--it's the
living folks. And it isn't right for any of you to blame my father for
this, because he was away and didn't know, and anyhow we thought it was
Monday. He's just the best father that ever lived in the world and we
love him with all our hearts."

Faith's bravado ebbed out in a sob. She ran down the steps and flashed
out of the side door of the church. There the friendly starlit, summer
night comforted her and the ache went out of her eyes and throat. She
felt very happy. The dreadful explanation was over and everybody knew
now that her father wasn't to blame and that she and Una were not so
wicked as to have cleaned house knowingly on Sunday.

Inside the church people gazed blankly at each other, but Thomas Douglas
rose and walked up the aisle with a set face. HIS duty was clear; the
collection must be taken if the skies fell. Taken it was; the choir sang
the anthem, with a dismal conviction that it fell terribly flat, and Dr.
Cooper gave out the concluding hymn and pronounced the benediction with
considerably less unction than usual. The Reverend Doctor had a sense of
humour and Faith's performance tickled him. Besides, John Meredith was
well known in Presbyterian circles.

Mr. Meredith returned home the next afternoon, but before his coming
Faith contrived to scandalize Glen St. Mary again. In the reaction from
Sunday evening's intensity and strain she was especially full of what
Miss Cornelia would have called "devilment" on Monday. This led her to
dare Walter Blythe to ride through Main Street on a pig, while she rode
another one.

The pigs in question were two tall, lank animals, supposed to belong to
Bertie Shakespeare Drew's father, which had been haunting the roadside
by the manse for a couple of weeks. Walter did not want to ride a pig
through Glen St. Mary, but whatever Faith Meredith dared him to do must
be done. They tore down the hill and through the village, Faith bent
double with laughter over her terrified courser, Walter crimson with
shame. They tore past the minister himself, just coming home from the
station; he, being a little less dreamy and abstracted than usual--owing
to having had a talk on the train with Miss Cornelia who always wakened
him up temporarily--noticed them, and thought he really must speak to
Faith about it and tell her that such conduct was not seemly. But he had
forgotten the trifling incident by the time he reached home. They passed
Mrs. Alec Davis, who shrieked in horror, and they passed Miss Rosemary
West who laughed and sighed. Finally, just before the pigs swooped into
Bertie Shakespeare Drew's back yard, never to emerge therefrom again, so
great had been the shock to their nerves--Faith and Walter jumped off,
as Dr. and Mrs. Blythe drove swiftly by.

"So that is how you bring up your boys," said Gilbert with mock
severity.

"Perhaps I do spoil them a little," said Anne contritely, "but, oh,
Gilbert, when I think of my own childhood before I came to Green Gables
I haven't the heart to be very strict. How hungry for love and fun I
was--an unloved little drudge with never a chance to play! They do have
such good times with the manse children."

"What about the poor pigs?" asked Gilbert.

Anne tried to look sober and failed.

"Do you really think it hurt them?" she said. "I don't think anything
could hurt those animals. They've been the plague of the neighbourhood
this summer and the Drews WON'T shut them up. But I'll talk to
Walter--if I can keep from laughing when I do it."

Miss Cornelia came up to Ingleside that evening to relieve her feelings
over Sunday night. To her surprise she found that Anne did not view
Faith's performance in quite the same light as she did.

"I thought there was something brave and pathetic in her getting up
there before that churchful of people, to confess," she said. "You could
see she was frightened to death--yet she was bound to clear her father.
I loved her for it."

"Oh, of course, the poor child meant well," sighed Miss Cornelia, "but
just the same it was a terrible thing to do, and is making more talk
than the house-cleaning on Sunday. THAT had begun to die away, and this
has started it all up again. Rosemary West is like you--she said last
night as she left the church that it was a plucky thing for Faith to do,
but it made her feel sorry for the child, too. Miss Ellen thought it all
a good joke, and said she hadn't had as much fun in church for years.
Of course THEY don't care--they are Episcopalians. But we Presbyterians
feel it. And there were so many hotel people there that night and scores
of Methodists. Mrs. Leander Crawford cried, she felt so bad. And Mrs.
Alec Davis said the little hussy ought to be spanked."

"Mrs. Leander Crawford is always crying in church," said Susan
contemptuously. "She cries over every affecting thing the minister says.
But you do not often see her name on a subscription list, Mrs. Dr. dear.
Tears come cheaper. She tried to talk to me one day about Aunt Martha
being such a dirty housekeeper; and I wanted to say, 'Every one knows
that YOU have been seen mixing up cakes in the kitchen wash-pan, Mrs.
Leander Crawford!' But I did not say it, Mrs. Dr. dear, because I have
too much respect for myself to condescend to argue with the likes of
her. But I could tell worse things than THAT of Mrs. Leander Crawford,
if I was disposed to gossip. And as for Mrs. Alec Davis, if she had said
that to me, Mrs. Dr. dear, do you know what I would have said? I would
have said, 'I have no doubt you would like to spank Faith, Mrs. Davis,
but you will never have the chance to spank a minister's daughter either
in this world or in that which is to come.'"
