               Line-Art Drawing


ive knowledge would have proved of little use to me had I remained a tiny,
insignificant insect."

"I didn't know before," said Tip, looking at the



154
Woggle-Bug with a puzzled expression, "that insects wore clothes."

"Nor do they, in their natural state," returned the stranger. "But in the
course of my wanderings I had the good fortune to save the ninth life of a
tailor--tailors having, like cats, nine lives, as you probably know. The
fellow was exceedingly grateful, for had he lost that ninth life it would
have been the end of him; so he begged permission to furnish me with the
stylish costume I now wear. It fits very nicely, does it not?" and the
Woggle-Bug stood up and turned himself around slowly, that all might examine
his person.

"He must have been a good tailor," said the Scarecrow, somewhat enviously.

"He was a good-hearted tailor, at any rate," observed Nick Chopper.

"But where were you going, when you met us?" Tip asked the Woggle-Bug.

"Nowhere in particular," was the reply, "although it is my intention soon to
visit the Emerald City and arrange to give a course of lectures to select
audiences on the 'Advantages of Magnification.'"

"We are bound for the Emerald City now," said the Tin Woodman; "so, if it
pleases you to do so, you are welcome to travel in our company."



155

The Woggle-Bug bowed with profound grace.

"It will give me great pleasure," said he "to accept your kind invitation;
for nowhere in the Land of Oz could I hope to meet with so congenial a
company."

"That is true," acknowledged the Pumpkinhead. "We are quite as congenial as
flies and honey."

"But--pardon me if I seem inquisitive--are you not all rather--ahem!
rather unusual?" asked the Woggle-Bug, looking from one to another with
unconcealed interest.

"Not more so than yourself," answered the Scarecrow. "Everything in life is
unusual until you get accustomed to it."

"What rare philosophy!" exclaimed the Woggle-Bug, admiringly.

"Yes; my brains are working well today," admitted the Scarecrow, an accent
of pride in his voice.

"Then, if you are sufficiently rested and refreshed, let us bend our steps
toward the Emerald City," suggested the magnified one.

"We can't," said Tip. "The Saw-Horse has broken a leg, so he can't bend his
steps. And there is no wood around to make him a new limb from. And we can't
leave the horse behind because the Pumpkinhead is so stiff in his Joints
that he has to ride."



156

"How very unfortunate!" cried the Woggle-Bug. Then he looked the party over
carefully and said:

"If the Pumpkinhead is to ride, why not use one of his legs to make a leg
for the horse that carries him? I judge that both are made of wood."

"Now, that is what I call real cleverness," said the Scarecrow, approvingly.
"I wonder my brains  did not think of that long ago! Get to work, my dear
Nick, and fit the Pumpkinhead's leg to the Saw-Horse."

Jack was not especially pleased with this idea; but he submitted to having
his left leg amputated by the Tin Woodman and whittled down to fit the left
leg of the Saw-Horse. Nor was the Saw-Horse especially pleased with the
operation, either; for he growled a good deal about being "butchered," as he
called it, and afterward declared that the new leg was a disgrace to a
respectable Saw-Horse.

"I beg you to be more careful in your speech," said the Pumpkinhead,
sharply. "Remember, if you please, that it is my leg you are abusing."

"I cannot forget it," retorted the Saw-Horse, "for it is quite as flimsy as
the rest of your person."

"Flimsy! me flimsy!" cried Jack, in a rage. "How dare you call me flimsy?"

"Because you are built as absurdly as a jumping-



157
jack," sneered the horse, rolling his knotty eyes in a vicious manner. "Even
your head won't stay straight, and you never can tell whether you are
looking backwards or forwards!"

"Friends, I entreat you not to quarrel!" pleaded the Tin Woodman,
anxiously." As a matter of fact, we are none of us above criticism; so let
us bear with each others' faults."

"An excellent suggestion," said the Woggle-Bug, approvingly. "You must have
an excellent heart, my metallic friend."

"I have," returned Nick, well pleased. "My heart is quite the best part of
me. But now let us start upon our Journey.

They perched the one-legged Pumpkinhead upon the Saw-Horse, and tied him to
his seat with cords, so that he could not possibly fall off.

And then, following the lead of the Scarecrow, they all advanced in the
direction of the Emerald City.


               Line-Art Drawing



158               Full page line-art drawing.



159               Old Mombi indulges in Witchcraft


They soon discovered that the Saw-Horse limped, for his new leg was a trifle
too long. So they were obliged to halt while the Tin Woodman chopped it down
with his axe, after which the wooden steed paced along more comfortably. But
the Saw-Horse was not entirely satisfied, even yet.

"It was a shame that I broke my other leg!" it growled.

"On the contrary," airily remarked the Woggle-Bug, who was walking
alongside, "you should consider the accident most fortunate. For a horse is
never of much use until he has been broken."

"I beg your pardon," said Tip, rather provoked, for he felt a warm interest
in both the Saw-Horse and his man Jack; "but permit me to say that your joke
is a poor one, and as old as it is poor."



160

"Still, it is a Joke," declared the Woggle-Bug; firmly, "and a Joke derived
from a play upon words is considered among educated people to be eminently
proper."

"What does that mean?" enquired the Pumpkinhead, stupidly.

"It means, my dear friend," explained the Woggle-Bug, "that our language
contains many words having a double meaning; and that to pronounce a joke
that allows both meanings of a certain word, proves the joker a person of
culture and refinement, who has, moreover, a thorough command of the
language."

"I don't believe that," said Tip, plainly; "anybody can make a pun."

"Not so," rejoined the Woggle-Bug, stiffly. "It requires education of a high
order. Are you educated, young sir?"

"Not especially," admitted Tip.

"Then you cannot judge the matter. I myself am Thoroughly Educated, and I
say that puns display genius. For instance, were I to ride upon this Saw-
Horse, he would not only be an animal he would become an equipage. For he
would then be a horse-and-buggy."

At this the Scarecrow gave a gasp and the Tin



161
Woodman stopped short and looked reproachfully at the Woggle-Bug. At the
same time the Saw-Horse loudly snorted his derision; and even the
Pumpkinhead put up his hand to hide the smile which, because it was carved
upon his face, he could not change to a frown.

But the Woggle-Bug strutted along as if he had made some brilliant remark,
and the Scarecrow was obliged to say:

"I have heard, my dear friend, that a person can become over-educated; and
although I have a high respect for brains, no matter how they may be
arranged or classified, I begin to suspect that yours are slightly tangled.
In any event, I must beg you to restrain your superior education while in
our society."

"We are not very particular," added the Tin Woodman; "and we are exceedingly
kind hearted. But if your superior culture gets leaky again--" He did not
complete the sentence, but he twirled his gleaming axe so carelessly that
the Woggle-Bug looked frightened, and shrank away to a safe distance.

The others marched on in silence, and the Highly Magnified one, after a
period of deep thought, said in an humble voice:

"I will endeavor to restrain myself."



162

"That is all we can expect," returned the Scarecrow pleasantly; and good
nature being thus happily restored to the party, they proceeded upon their
way.

When they again stopped to allow Tip to rest--the boy being the only one
that seemed to tire--the Tin Woodman noticed many small, round holes in
the grassy meadow.

"This must be a village of the Field Mice," he said to the Scarecrow." I
wonder if my old friend, the Queen of the Mice, is in this neighborhood."

"If she is, she may be of great service to us," answered the Scarecrow, who
was impressed by a sudden thought. "See if you can call her, my dear Nick."

So the Tin Woodman blew a shrill note upon a silver whistle that hung around
his neck, and presently a tiny grey mouse popped from a near-by hole and
advanced fearlessly toward them. For the Tin Woodman had once saved her
life, and the Queen of the Field Mice knew he was to be trusted."

"Good day, your Majesty, said Nick, politely addressing the mouse; "I trust
you are enjoying good health?"

"Thank you, I am quite well," answered the Queen, demurely, as she sat up
and displayed the tiny golden crown upon her head. "Can I do anything to
assist my old friends?"



163

"You can, indeed," replied the Scarecrow, eagerly. "Let me, I intreat you,
take a dozen of your subjects with me to the Emerald City."

"Will they be injured in any way?" asked the Queen, doubtfully.

"I think not," replied the Scarecrow. "I will carry them hidden in the straw
which stuffs my body, and when I give them the signal by unbuttoning my
jacket, they have only to rush out and scamper home again as fast as they
can. By doing this they will assist me to regain my throne, which the Army
of Revolt has taken from me."

"In that case," said the Queen, "I will not refuse your request. Whenever
you are ready, I will call twelve of my most intelligent subjects."

"I am ready now" returned the Scarecrow. Then he lay flat upon the ground
and unbuttoned his jacket, displaying the mass of straw with which he was
stuffed.

The Queen uttered a little piping call, and in an instant a dozen pretty
field mice had emerged from their holes and stood before their ruler,
awaiting her orders.

What the Queen said to them none of our travelers could understand, for it
was in the mouse language; but the field mice obeyed without hesitation,



164
running one after the other to the Scarecrow and hiding themselves in the
straw of his breast.

When all of the twelve mice had thus concealed themselves, the Scarecrow
buttoned his Jacket securely and then arose and thanked the Queen for her
kindness.

"One thing more you might do to serve us," suggested the Tin Woodman; "and
that is to run ahead and show us the way to the Emerald City. For some enemy
is evidently trying to prevent us from reaching it."

"I will do that gladly," returned the Queen. "Are you ready?"

The Tin Woodman looked at Tip.

"I'm rested," said the boy. "Let us start."

Then they resumed their journey, the little grey  Queen of the Field Mice
running swiftly ahead and then pausing until the travelers drew near, when
away she would dart again.

Without this unerring guide the Scarecrow and his comrades might never have
gained the Emerald City; for many were the obstacles thrown in their way by
the arts of old Mombi. Yet not one of the obstacles really existed--all
were cleverly contrived deceptions. For when they came to the banks of a
rushing river that threatened to bar their way the



165
little Queen kept steadily on, passing through the seeming flood in safety;
and our travelers followed her without encountering a single drop of water.

Again, a high wall of granite towered high above their heads and opposed
their advance. But the grey Field Mouse walked straight through it, and the
others did the same, the wall melting into mist as they passed it.

Afterward, when they had stopped for a moment to allow Tip to rest, they saw
forty roads branching off from their feet in forty different directions; and
soon these forty roads began whirling around like a mighty wheel, first in
one direction and then in the other, completely bewildering their vision.

But the Queen called for them to follow her and darted off in a straight
line; and when they had gone a few paces the whirling pathways vanished and
were seen no more.

Mombi's last trick was the most fearful of all. She sent a sheet of
crackling flame rushing over the meadow to consume them; and for the first
time the Scarecrow became afraid and turned to fly.

"If that fire reaches me I will be gone in no time!" said he, trembling
until his straw rattled. "It's the most dangerous thing I ever encountered."

"I'm off, too!" cried the Saw-Horse, turning and



166
prancing with agitation; "for my wood is so dry it would burn like
kindlings."

"Is fire dangerous to pumpkins?" asked Jack, fearfully.

"You'll be baked like a tart--and so will I!"


               Line-Art Drawing


answered the Woggle-Bug, getting down on all fours so he could run the
faster.

But the Tin Woodman, having no fear of fire, averted the stampede by a few
sensible words.

"Look at the Field Mouse!" he shouted. "The fire does not burn her in the
least. In fact, it is no fire at all, but only a deception."



167

Indeed, to watch the little Queen march calmly through the advancing flames
restored courage to every member of the party, and they followed her without
