
"No, Mr. Smith, I didn't put it in," answered Ben, indignantly.

"None of your impudence, sir!" said the schoolmaster, irritated.

"I merely answered your question and defended myself," answered Ben.

There was a little murmur among the pupils, showing that their sympathy
was with the boy who had been so causelessly accused by the principal.

"Silence!" exclaimed Socrates, annoyed. "Now," he continued, turning
to Ben, "since you know who put the wallet into Roscoe's pocket--a very
remarkable statement, by the way--will you deign to inform me who did
it?"

"James Smith did it!" said Ben, looking over to the principal's nephew,
who was half expecting such an attack.

"It's a base lie!" cried Jim, but his face was blanched, his manner was
nervous and confused, and he looked guilty, if he were not so.

"My nephew?" asked Socrates, flurried.

"Yes, sir."

"It isn't so, Uncle Socrates," said Jim, excited. "I'll lick you, Ben
Platt, when we get out of school."

"You forget yourself, James," said Socrates, with a mildness he would
not have employed with any other pupil.

"I beg your pardon, Uncle Socrates," said Jim, with contrition, "but I
can't be silent when I am accused of things I don't do."

"To be sure, you have some excuse, but you should remember the respect
you owe to me. Then you did not do it?"

"Certainly not, sir."

"So it appears, Platt, that you have brought a false charge against
your fellow-pupil," said Mr. Smith, severely. "I can conceive of nothing
meaner."

"Mr. Smith," said Hector, "what right have you to say that the charge is
false? Is it the denial of your nephew? If he took the wallet he would,
of course, deny it."

"So would you!" retorted Socrates.

"No one saw me conceal it," said Hector, significantly.

Then Wilkins rose.

"Mr. Smith," he said, "I have some evidence to offer."

"Out with it, sir," said the principal, angrily, for he was fighting
against an inward conviction that his nephew was really the guilty
party.

"I was walking along the corridor about the time Platt speaks of Smith's
visit to Roscoe's room, and I met your nephew walking in the opposite
direction. When I entered the room, Platt told me that, half-concealed
by the closet door, he had seen Jim Smith enter and thrust the wallet
into Roscoe's pocket. Soon after, you and Mrs. Smith came into the
room, guided by your nephew, who let you know just where the wallet was
hidden. He had very good reasons for knowing," added Wilkins.

If a look would have annihilated Wilkins, the look directed towards him
by Jim Smith would have had that effect.

"It's a conspiracy against me, Uncle Socrates," said Jim, intent upon
brazening it out. "They're all in league together."

"The testimony of Wilkins doesn't amount to much!" said Mr. Smith. "He
may have seen James in the corridor, but that is by no means a part of
his complicity in this affair."

"Just so!" said Jim, eagerly.

"Ben Platt's evidence ought to count for something," said Hector. "He
saw your nephew putting the wallet into the pocket of my pants."

Socrates was clearly perplexed. In spite of his partiality for his
nephew, the case against him certainly looked very strong.

Hector, however, determined to make his defense even stronger.

"I would like to ask Platt," he said, "at what time this took place?"

"At three o'clock."

"How do you know it was three?" asked the principal, sharply.

"Because I heard the clock on the village church strike three."

"I would like to ask another boy--Frank Lewis--if he heard the clock
strike three?"

Lewis answered in the affirmative.

"Where were you at the time?"

"In the playground."

"What were you doing?"

"Playing ball."

"Was I in the game?"

"Yes."

"How long had the game been going on?"

"Half an hour."

"How long had the game been going on, do you know?"

"From half to three-quarters of an hour."

"Can you remember whether I was with you all the time?"

"You were."

"Now, Platt, will you tell me how long after the wallet was put into my
pocket before Mr. Smith appeared in search of it?"

"Not over half an hour."

"I submit, then," said Hector, in a matter-of-fact manner, "that I was
absent in the playground during the entire time when it was found in
my room. I believe this is what lawyers call an alibi that I have,
fortunately, been able to prove."

"You are a very smart lawyer!" sneered the principal.

The boys were by this time so incensed at Mr. Smith's evident effort to
clear his nephew at the expense of Roscoe, that there was a very audible
hiss, in which at least half a dozen joined.

"Is this rebellion?" asked Socrates, furiously.

"No, sir," said Ben Platt, firmly. "We want justice done; that is all."

"You shall have justice--all of you!" exclaimed Socrates, carried beyond
the limits of prudence.

"I am glad to hear that, sir," said Hector. "If you do not at once
exonerate me from this charge, which you know to be false, and write to
my guardian retracting it, I will bring the matter before the nearest
magistrate."

This was more than Socrates had bargained for. He saw that he had gone
too far, and was likely to wreck his prospects and those of the school.

"I will look into the matter," he said, hurriedly, "and report to the
school hereafter. You may now apply yourselves to your studies."




CHAPTER XXI. THE USHER IS DISCHARGED.



Among the boys of Smith Institute there was but one opinion on the
subject of the principal's wallet. All acquitted Roscoe of having any
part in the theft, and they were equally unanimous in the belief that
Jim Smith had contrived a mean plot against the boy whom he could not
conquer by fair means. There was a little informal consultation as
to how Jim should be treated. It was finally decided to "send him to
Coventry."

As this phrase, which is well understood in English schools, may not be
so clear to my readers, I will explain that Jim was to be refused notice
by his schoolfellows, unless he should become aggressive, when he was to
be noticed in a manner far from agreeable.

Jim could not help observing the cold looks of the boys, who but lately
were glad enough to receive notice from him, and he became very angry.
As to being ashamed of the exposure, he was not sensitive, nor did
he often have any feeling of that kind. Naturally vindictive, he
felt especially angry with the two boys, Ben Platt and Wilkins, whose
testimony had proved so uncomfortable for him.

"I'll thrash those boys if I never thrash another," he said to himself.
"So they have turned against me, have they? They're only fit to black my
boots anyway. I'll give 'em a lesson."

Platt and Wilkins were expecting an attack. They knew that Jim would
seize the opportunity of attacking them singly, and in the absence of
Hector, of whom he was afraid, and with good reason. They concerted
measures, accordingly, for defeating the common enemy.

Jim was stalking about the next day, looking sullen and feeling ugly.
He could not help observing that whenever he approached a group of boys
they immediately scattered and walked away in various directions. This
naturally chafed him, for, having no intellectual resources, he found
solitude oppressive. Besides, he had been accustomed to the role of
boss, and where is a boss without followers?

Tired of the schoolroom precincts, Jim went to walk. In a rustic lane,
much to his delight, he saw approaching him one of the boys who had so
seriously offended him.

It was Ben Platt.

Ben was sauntering along in idle mood when he came face to face with the
dethroned boss.

"So it's you, Platt, is it?" said Jim, grimly.

"I believe it is," answered Ben, coolly.

"I've got a word or two to say to you," said Jim, significantly.

"Say them quick," said Ben, "for I'm in a hurry."

"I'm not," said Jim, in his old tone, "and it makes no difference
whether you are or not."

"Indeed! you are as polite as usual," returned Ben.

"Look here, you young whelp!" Jim broke forth, unable any longer to
restrain his wrath, "what, did you mean by lying about me last evening?"

"I didn't lie about you," said Ben, boldly.

"Yes, you did. What made you say you saw me put that wallet into
Roscoe's pocket?"

"I can't think of any reason, unless because it was true," said Ben.

"Even if it were, how dared you turn against me? First you play the spy,
and then informer. Paugh!"

"I see you admit it," said Ben. "Well, if you want an answer I will give
you one. You laid a plot for Hector Roscoe--one of the meanest, dirtiest
plots I ever heard of, and I wasn't going to see you lie him into a
scrape while I could prevent it."

"That's enough, Platt!" exclaimed Jim, furiously. "Now, do you know what
I am going to do?"

"I don't feel particularly interested in the matter."

"You will be, then. I am going to thrash you."

"You wouldn't if Hector Roscoe were here," said Ben, not appearing to be
much frightened.

"Well, he isn't here, though if he were it wouldn't make any difference.
I'll whip you so you can't stand."

Ben's reply was to call "Wilkins!"

From a clump of bushes, where he had lurked, unobserved hitherto, sprang
Wilkins, and joined his friend.

"There are two of us, Smith!" said Ben Platt.

"I can thrash you both," answered Jim, whose blood was up.

Before the advent of Hector no two boys would have ventured to engage
Jim in combat, but his defeat by a boy considerably smaller had lost him
his prestige, and the boys had become more independent. He still fancied
himself a match for both, however, and the conflict began. But both of
his antagonists were in earnest, and Jim had a hard time.

Now, it so happened that Mr. Crabb, the usher, was taking a solitary
walk, and had approached the scene of conflict unobserved by any of the
participants. He arrived at an opportune time. Jim had managed to draw
Wilkins away, and by a quick movement threw him. He was about to deal
his prostrate foe a savage kick, which might have hurt him seriously,
when the usher, quiet and peaceful as he was by nature, could restrain
himself no longer. He rushed up, seized him by the collar, dragged him
back and shook him with a strength he did not suppose he possessed,
saying:

"Leave that boy alone, you brute!"

Jim turned quickly, and was very much surprised when he saw the meek
usher, whom he had always despised, because he looked upon him as a Miss
Nancy.

"So it's you, is it?" he said, with a wicked glance.

"Yes, it is I," answered the usher, manfully; "come up just in time to
stop your brutality."

"Is it any of your business?" demanded Jim, looking as if he would like
to thrash the usher.

"I have made it my business. Platt and Wilkins, I advise you to join
me, and leave this fellow, who has so disgraced himself as to be beneath
your notice."

"We will accompany you with pleasure, sir," said the boys.

They regarded the usher with new respect for this display of courage,
for which they had not given him credit.

"I'll fix you, Crabb," said Jim Smith, insolently, "and don't you forget
it!"

Mr. Crabb did not deign to answer him.

Jim Smith was as good as his word.

An hour later Mr. Crabb was summoned to the presence of the principal.

Socrates received him with marked coldness.

"Mr. Crabb," he said, "I cannot conceal the amazement I feel at a
complaint which has just been made by my nephew."

"Well, sir?"

Mr. Crabb had nerved himself for the worst, and did not cower or show
signs of fear, as Socrates expected he would.

"James tells me that you attacked him savagely this afternoon when he
was having a little sport with two of his schoolfellows."

"Is that what he says, Mr. Smith?"

"Yes, sir, and I require an explanation."

"You shall have it. The sport in which your nephew was engaged was
attempting to thrash Wilkins. He had him down, and was about to deal him
a savage kick when I fortunately came up."

"And joined in the fight," sneered Socrates.

"Yes, if you choose to put it so. Would you have had me stand by, and
see Wilkins brutally used?"

"Of course, you color the affair to suit yourself," said Socrates,
coldly. "The fact is that you, an usher, have lowered yourself by taking
part in a playful schoolboy contest."

"Playful!" repeated Mr. Crabb.

"Yes, and I shall show how I regard it by giving you notice that I no
longer require your services in my school. I shall pay you up at the end
of the week and then discharge you."

"Mr. Smith," said the usher, "permit me to say that anything more
disgraceful than your own conduct within the last twenty-four hours I
have never witnessed. You have joined your nephew in a plot to disgrace
an innocent boy, declining to do justice, and now you have capped the
climax by censuring me for stopping an act of brutality, merely because
your nephew was implicated in it!"

"This to me?" exclaimed Socrates Smith, hardly crediting the testimony
of his ears.

"Yes, sir, and more! I predict that the stupid folly which has
characterized your course will, within six months, drive from you every
scholar you have in your school!"

"Mr. Crabb," gasped Socrates, never more surprised in his life than
he was at the sudden spirit exhibited by the usher, "I will not be so
insulted. Leave me, and to-morrow morning leave my service."

"I will, sir. I have no desire to remain here longer."

But when Mr. Crabb had walked away his spirit sank within him. How was
he to obtain another situation? He must consult immediately with Hector
Roscoe, in whose judgment, boy as he was, he reposed great confidence.




CHAPTER XXII. THE WELCOME LETTER.



"Hector," said Mr. Crabb, nervously, "I am going to leave the institute
at the end of the week."

"Have you secured another situation, Mr. Crabb?" asked Hector,
hopefully.

"No," answered the usher, shaking his head. "I have been discharged."

"For what reason?"

"For interfering with Mr. Smith's nephew when he was brutally abusing
Wilkins."

"Did Mr. Smith fully understand the circumstances?"

"Yes; but he stands by his nephew right or wrong. He blamed me for
checking his nephew's brutality."

"This is shameful!" said Hector, warmly. "May I ask, Mr. Crabb, if you
have formed any plans?"

