"Old Crabby is going to get married!" came in a shout.  "Come on,
let us go along!"

And pell-mell went the boys after the carriage, which had just
turned from the horse-block with the teacher and Mrs. Stanhope
inside, and a farmhand named Borgy on the front seat.




CHAPTER XIV

JOSIAH CRABTREE IN DIFFICULTY


Dora Stanhope had witnessed the approach of the boys, and now she
came out into the garden again and confronted them.  She blushed
prettily upon seeing Dick and several others with whom she was
acquainted.

"I understand that Mr. Crabtree is about to be married," said Dick
in a low tone.

"Yes, he insists on marrying my mother this afternoon.  He has
been at her about this for several months," answered Dora between
her sobs.

"Evidently you oppose the marriage."

"I--I hate Mr. Crabtree!" came almost fiercely.  "He is--is
nothing like my poor dead papa was."

"I believe you, Dora," answered Dick.  "I don't see what your
mother can find in him to like.  We hate him at the academy."

"I know it--and I imagine Captain Putnam is preparing to get rid of
him, for I heard he was corresponding with a teacher in Buffalo--one
who has been head master in a military academy out in that vicinity."

"Indeed!  I hope we do get clear of him--and I wish you could
get clear of him too."

"It doesn't seem as if I could," sighed Dora.  "He has wound my
mother right around his finger, so to speak.  But what are those
other boys going to do?"  And she pointed to the balance of the
cadets, who were following closely upon the wheels of the
carriage, which had turned into the highway leading to Cedarville.

"I'll go after them and see," said Dick, and turned to leave.
Then he came to a halt and turned back.  "Dora, I am awfully sorry
for you," he whispered.  "If I can ever do anything for you, don't
hesitate to call on me."

"I'll remember that, Dick," she replied gratefully, but never
dreamed of how much she would one day require his aid.

When Dick joined the crowd he found it on all sides of the
carriage, shouting and hurrahing wildly.  At first Josiah Crabtree
pretended to pay no attention, but presently he spoke to the
driver, and the turnout came to a halt.

"Students, what does this unseemly conduct mean?" he demanded
harshly.

"Why, Mr. Crabtree, is that you!" exclaimed Frank Harrington in
pretended surprise.

"Yes, Harrington.  I say, what does it mean?"

"We are out playing hare and hounds, sir."

"But you are following this carriage."

"Oh, no, sir, we are following the paper scent, sir," answered
Larry Colby, and pointed to the pieces of paper, which Fred
Harrison was slyly dropping just in front of the horses.

"Then our carriage is on the trail," sighed Josiah Crabtree.  "It
is very annoying."

"Oh, it doesn't bother us much, sir," answered Frank coolly.

"Bother you!  It is myself and Mrs. Stanhope to whom I referred.
Make the hares take another course."

"Can't do that, sir, until we catch them."

"But why must you keep so close to this carriage?"

"I don't know, sir.  Perhaps it is the carriage which is keeping
close to us."

Josiah Crabtree looked more angry than ever.  He spoke to the
driver, with a view to increasing the speed of the team, but Borgy
had entered into the spirit of the fun at hand, and he was,
moreover, a great friend of Dora, and he shook his head.
"Couldn't do it sir," he said.  "I wouldn't want to run the risk
of winding them."

"Do you mean to say they cannot outrun these boys?" demanded the
head assistant at Putnam Hall.

"Hardly, sir--the lads is uncommonly good runners," answered
Borgy meekly.

"I will show you how to manage them!" ejaculated Josiah Crabtree,
and stepped over to the front seat.

"Oh, Josiah, be careful!" pleaded Mrs. Stanhope.

"I know how to drive horses, so don't worry," answered Crabtree,
and took up both reins and whip.  Before Borgy could stop him he
had given one of the horses a smart cut on the flank.

The steed was a spirited one and not used to the whip, and
scarcely had the lash landed than he gave a wild leap into the
air, came down, and broke into a mad run, dragging his mate with
him.  A second later the carriage struck a stone, bounced up, and
Borgy was pitched out, to land in the midst of some bushes growing
by the roadside.

The bolting of the team proved almost fatal to the boys in front,
who scattered just in time to let horses and carriage pass them
with lightning-like speed.  Then the cadets gathered together and
stared blankly at one another.

"It's a runaway!"

"Serves old Crabby right, for hitting the horse!"

"Yes, but he and the lady may be killed!"

Such were some of the cries.  As soon as they could recover, the
whole party made after the carriage, now disappearing around a
bend.

"They'll never get around the next turn alive!" said Captain Harry
Blossom, who was running beside Tom.  Soon Dick joined the pair.

In the meantime Josiah Crabtree was filled with terror over the
sudden turn of affairs.  He dropped the whip and tugged first at
one rein and then the other.

"Whoa! whoa!" he cried in a hoarse whisper.  "Whoa!"

But instead of slackening their speed, the team moved on faster
than ever, the carriage rocking violently from side to side.

"We will be killed!" moaned Mrs. Stanhope.  "Oh, why did I not
take Dora's advice and have a regular wedding, as she proposed!"

"I will--will stop them!" panted Crabtree.  "Whoa, you brutes,
whoa!"

"Whoa, Peter; whoa, Jack!" added Mrs. Stanhope timidly.

For an instant the horses seemed to take notice of the lady's
voice, but only for an instant; then they went on as fast as ever,
around another bend, and down a rocky stretch, lined on either
side with trees and bushes.

Suddenly there came a crash, as a wheel came off the carriage.
Then came a second crash and Mrs. Stanhope was hurled forth among
some bushes.  But the turnout continued on its way, Josiah
Crabtree clinging to the wreck, until at last he too was hurled
forth, to fly up among some tree branches and remain there for the
best part of ten minutes.

When the crowd of cadets reached Mrs. Stanhope they found the lady
unconscious and evidently suffering from a broken arm.  Several of
them, including Dick, Tom, and Sam, did what they could for her,
while others ran off to find Josiah Crabtree and to summon a
doctor.

It was several minutes before the head assistant at Putnam Hall
could be helped out of the tree.  He came down in fear and
trembling, so overcome he could scarcely stand.

"How--how is Mrs. Stanhope?" was his, first question.

"We don't know," answered several of the cadets, and Josiah
Crabtree hobbled back to find out.

The shades of night had long fallen when Mrs. Stanhope was
conveyed to her home, and a doctor was brought from Cedarville and
the Lanings were informed of what had happened.  The doctor said
that a rib as well as the left arm had been fractured, and that
the lady must be kept quiet for at least two months.  At once Dora
set about doing what she could for her mother, and Nellie Laning
remained at the homestead to assist her.  No one seemed to care
about Josiah Crabtree, and he was allowed to hobble back to Putnam
Hall on foot.

"It was the fault of those boys," he muttered to himself.  "I'll
get even with them, see if I don't!"

But his chances of "getting even" while at the academy were
speedily nipped in the bud by Captain Putnam, who did not say
anything on Sunday, but interviewed the head assistant early on
the day following.

"It is perhaps needless for us to go into the details of what has
occurred, Mr. Crabtree," said the owner of the Hall.  "Your
contract with me comes to an end next month.  I will pay you in
full tomorrow and then I wish you to remove yourself and your
belongings from this place."

"You--you discharge me!" cried the teacher in astonishment.

"I do.  I have long been dissatisfied with your conduct toward my
pupils, and I am now satisfied that you are not worthy of the
position with which I entrusted you."

At this Josiah Crabtree's face fell, for he had hoped to keep his
place at Putnam Hall until his marriage to Mrs. Stanhope was
assured.  Now there was no telling when that marriage would occur,
and in the meantime it was not likely he could get another
position.

"I think I ought to have more notice than this."

"You deserve no notice--since you were about to marry on the
sly, so to speak, and, most likely, leave me when your contract
came to an end without allowing me time to make other
arrangements."

"I would have given you at least two weeks time."

"And I am giving you three weeks pay, which you do not deserve.  I
do not think we need to prolong the discussion," and Captain
Putnam turned away.

The departure of Josiah Crabtree was hailed with satisfaction by
all of the pupils excepting Dan Baxter.  Strange to say, a strong
friendship had sprung up between the bully and the hot-tempered
school teacher.  Baxter was the only one who shook hands when
Crabtree left.

"I hope we meet again, Mr. Crabtree," he said.  "I like you, even
if the others don't."

"And I like you, Baxter," answered Josiah Crabtree.  "I shall
remember you."

And Josiah Crabtree did remember the bully in a manner which was
strange in the extreme.




CHAPTER XV

DAN BAXTER'S MONEY


After the departure of Josiah Crabtree from Putnam Hall, George
Strong became the leading assistant, and another teacher named
Garmore took second place.

Garmore was a Yale man, and soon became as favorably known as
Strong, so the pupils had nothing more to find fault with, so far
as their instructors went.

As has been noted before, there were several baseball teams among
the boys.  As it grew too cold for baseball, these teams gave up
this sport, and a good number of the lads took up football.

In this sport, Sam, being a good runner, felt very much at home,
and soon he was at the head of one of the teams, playing center.
Tom was also on the team, playing quarterback.

Not far from Putnam Hall was another academy kept by a certain
gentleman named Pornell. The pupils at Pornell's were also great
football players, and one day they sent over a challenge that the
Putnams, as they were dubbed, should play them a match for the
championship of the township in which both seats of learning were
located.

The challenge was brought, by Peleg Snuggers, who had gone over to
Pornell's on an errand for Captain Putnam.

"It's for you," said Snuggers, handing the communication to Sam.
The youthful captain of the eleven broke open the letter and read
it aloud:

"PORNELL ACADEMY, November 18, 189-

"To the Putnam Hall Football Team:  We hereby challenge you to a
game of football for the championship of the township of
Cedarville, the game to be played Thanksgiving afternoon next at
two o'clock, at our grounds or at your own, as you may elect.  We
would prefer to play on our grounds, as we have a  grandstand,
one-half of which will be reserved for your friends, if you
will come over.

"PORNELL FOOTBALL TEAM,

"Per Harry Ackerson, Capt. and Secy."

"They certainly mean business," said Tom, who was in the crowd,
listening to the reading of the challenge.  "I go in for accepting
it."

"So do I," said Larry, who played halfback.

"And I," put in Fred, who was on the right end.

The members of the football team were all at hand, and it did not
take long to find out each was in favor of the game, and then the
matter was laid before Captain Putnam.

"Want to play football with Mr. Pornell's lads, eh?" smiled the
captain.  "All right, I know of no healthier sport, rightly
conducted.  You shall play them, and on their grounds if you wish.
But, mind you, no neglecting lessons for the sake of practicing
between now and Thanksgiving!"

The pupils promised to neglect nothing, and went off with a
hurrah.

Soon Peleg Snuggers was on his way to the rival academy with the
following answer to the challenge:

"PUTNAM HALL, November 19, 189-

"Pornell Football Team: We hereby accept your challenge to play a
game of football for the championship of the township on
Thanksgiving afternoon next at two o'clock.  As you have a
grandstand we will play on your grounds.  In return for the use of
half of your stand on this occasion the senior class of our
academy will put up a silver cup as a trophy, said trophy to go to
the club winning the game, and to belong to that club which shall
during matches to be arranged in the future win the cup three
times.

"THE PUTNAM HALL FOOTBALL TEAM,

"Per Fred Harrison, Secy and Treas."

Dick had suggested giving the cup, and all of the senior class
"chipped in"  willingly, raising ten dollars, with which a very
neat trophy was secured through a pupil whose father was a
silversmith in New York.  I say all the senior class contributed.
I must correct this.  There was one exception, and that was Dan
Baxter.

"I haven't got anything for you or your brothers," growled the
bully when Dick spoke of the matter before the class.  "Let 'em
furnish their own silver cups if they want 'em."

"All right, Baxter; I guess Sam and Tom will be just as well
satisfied if you don't chip in," had been Dick's ready answer.  "I
only wanted to give everyone a chance to own an equal share in the
gift, if it was desired."

"Our football team can't play for a sour apple, Dick Rover.
They'll be whipped out of their boots."

"If I was a betting boy, I'd bet you a dollar on the result,"
answered Dick coldly.

"I'll bet you ten dollars we win!" put in Fred Garrison
impulsively.

"I'll cover that bet," sneered Baxter, and drew from his pocket a
roll of bills.

"Gracious, Baxter, where did you get that wad?" questioned several
in chorus, for the supply of pocket money among most of the pupils
was limited.

"Never mind--I have it, and that's enough," answered Baxter, but
he lost no time in putting all of the money but the ten-dollar
bill away.

It was all Fred Garrison could do to scrape up an equal sum, and
even at that he had to borrow a dollar from Dick.  But he was
"game," and the money went to another pupil, who became
stakeholder until the contest should be decided.

"It's a shame!" cried Sam, when he heard of the transaction.  "To
bet against his own school!  I'm like Dick--I don't believe in
betting, and yet I am glad Fred took him up.  If it is in my
power, Baxter shall lose his wager."

Thanksgiving was but a week off, so the football team had to work
hard to get into proper condition.  Moreover, studies must not be
neglected, for Captain Putnam was strict, and would have canceled
the game had his cadets become unmindful of their school duties.
But the team got permission to get up an hour earlier than usual
every morning, and this time was spent in the hardest kind of
practice with the ball.

