"You can ask Mr. Melville, sir."

Ebenezer regarded George Melville with an inquiring look.

"Yes, I pay Herbert six dollars a week," said he, smiling.

"Well, I never!" ejaculated Ebenezer. "That's the strangest thing I
ever heard. How in the name of conscience can a boy earn so much money
trampin' round?"

"Perhaps it would not be worth as much to anyone else," said Melville,
"but Herbert suits me, and I need cheerful company."

"You ain't goin' to keep him long at that figger, be you, Mr. Melville?"
asked Mr. Graham, bluntly.

"I think we shall be together a considerable time, Mr. Graham. If,
however, you should be willing to pay Herbert a larger salary, I might
feel it only just to release him from his engagement to me."

"Me pay more'n six dollars a week!" gasped Ebenezer. "I ain't quite
crazy. Why, it would take about all I get from the post office."

"You wouldn't expect me to take less than I can earn elsewhere, Mr.
Graham," said Herbert.

"No-o!" answered the storekeeper, slowly. He was evidently nonplused by
the absolute necessity of getting another clerk, and his inability to
think of a suitable person.

"If Tom Tripp was with me, I might work him into the business," said
Ebenezer, thoughtfully, "but he's bound out to a farmer."

An inspiration came to Herbert. He knew that his mother would be glad to
earn something, and there was little else to do in Wayneboro.

"I think," he said, "you might make an arrangement with my mother, to
make up and sort the mail, for a time, at least."

"Why, so I could; I didn't think of that," answered Ebenezer, relieved.
"Do you think she'd come over to-morrow mornin'?"

"If she can't, I will," said Herbert. "I don't meet Mr. Melville till
nine o'clock."

"So do! I'll expect you. I guess I'll come over and see your mother this
evenin', and see if I can't come to some arrangement with her."

It may be added that Mr. Graham did as proposed, and Mrs. Carr agreed
to render him the assistance he needed for three dollars a week. It
required only her mornings, and a couple of hours at the close of the
afternoon, and she was very glad to convert so much time into money.

"It makes me feel more independent," she said. "I don't want to
feel that you do all the work, Herbert, and maintain the family
single-handed."

The same evening Herbert broached the plan of traveling with Mr.
Melville. As might have been expected, his mother was at first startled,
and disposed to object, but Herbert set before her the advantages, both
to himself and the family, and touched upon the young man's need of a
companion so skillfully and eloquently that she was at last brought to
regard the proposal favorably. She felt that George Melville was one to
whom she could safely trust her only boy. Moreover, her own time would
be partly occupied, owing to the arrangement she had just made to assist
in the post office, so that Herbert carried his point.

The tenth of October arrived, the date which George Melville had fixed
upon for his departure. Mrs. Carr had put Herbert's wardrobe in order,
and he had bought himself a capacious carpetbag and an umbrella, and
looked forward with eagerness to the day on which their journey was to
commence. He had long thought and dreamed of the West, its plains and
cities, but had never supposed that it would be his privilege to make
acquaintance with them, at any rate, until he should have become twice
his present age. But the unexpected had happened, and on Monday he and
George Melville were to start for Chicago.




CHAPTER XX. AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE IN CHICAGO.



In due time our travelers reached Chicago, and put up at the Palmer
House. Herbert was much impressed by the elegance of the hotel, its
sumptuous furniture, and luxurious table. It must be considered that he
was an inexperienced traveler, though had he been otherwise he might be
excused for his admiration.

"I have some business in Chicago, and shall remain two or three days,"
said George Melville.

Herbert was quite reconciled to the delay, and, as his services were not
required, employed his time in making himself familiar with the famous
Western city. He kept his eyes open, and found something new and
interesting at every step. One day, as he was passing through the lower
portion of the city, his attention was called to a young man wheeling a
barrow of cabbages and other vegetables, a little in advance of him.
Of course, there was nothing singular about this, but there seemed
something familiar in the figure of the young man. Herbert quickened his
step, and soon came up with him.

One glance was enough. Though disguised by a pair of overalls, and
without a coat, Herbert recognized the once spruce dry-goods clerk, Eben
Graham.

Eben recognized Herbert at the same time. He started, and flushed with
shame, not because of the theft of which he had been guilty, but because
he was detected in an honest, but plebeian labor.

"Herbert Carr!" he exclaimed, stopping short.

"Yes, Eben; it is I!"

"You find me changed," said Eben, dolefully.

"No, I should recognize you anywhere."

"I don't mean that. I have sunk very low," and he glanced pathetically
at the wheelbarrow.

"If you refer to your employment, I don't agree with you. It is an
honest business."

"True, but I never dreamed when I stood behind the counter in Boston,
and waited on fashionable ladies, that I should ever come to this."

"He seems more ashamed of wheeling vegetables than of stealing," thought
Herbert, and he was correct.

"How do you happen to be in this business, Eben?" he asked, with some
curiosity.

"I must do it or starve. I was cheated out of my money soon after I came
here, and didn't know where to turn."

Eben did not explain that he lost his money in a gambling house.
He might have been cheated out of it, but it was his own fault, for
venturing into competition with older and more experienced knaves than
himself.

"I went for thirty-six hours without food," continued Eben, "when I fell
in with a man who kept a vegetable store, and he offered to employ me. I
have been with him ever since."

"You were fortunate to find employment," said Herbert.

"Fortunate!" repeated Eben, in a tragic tone. "How much wages do you
think I get?"

"I can't guess."

"Five dollars a week, and have to find myself," answered Eben,
mournfully. "What would my fashionable friends in Boston say if they
could see me?"

"I wouldn't mind what they said as long as you are getting an honest
living."

"How do you happen to be out here?" asked Eben.

His story was told in a few words.

"You are always in luck!" said Eben, enviously. "I wish I had your
chance. Is Mr. Melville very rich?"

"He is rich; but I don't know how rich."

"Do you think he'd lend me money enough to get home?"

"I don't know."

"Will you ask him?"

"I will tell him that you made the request, Eben," answered Herbert,
cautiously. "Have you applied to your father?"

"To the old man? Yes. He hasn't any more heart than a grindstone," said
Eben, bitterly. "What do you think he wrote me?"

"He refused, I suppose."

"Here is his letter," said Eben, drawing from his pocket a greasy half
sheet of note paper. "See what he has to say to his only son."

This was the letter:

"EBEN GRAHAM: I have received your letter, and am not surprised to hear
that you are in trouble. 'As a man sows, so also shall he reap.' A young
man who will rob his father of his hard earnings is capable of anything.
You have done what you could to ruin me, and deserve what you have got.
You want me to send you money to come home, and continue your wicked
work--I shall not do it. I wash my hands of you; I have already given
notice, through the country paper that I have given you your time, and
shall pay no more debts of your contracting.

"I am glad to hear that you are engaged in an honest employment. It is
better than I expected. I would not have been surprised if I had heard
that you were in jail. My advice to you is to stay where you are and
make yourself useful to your employer. He may in time raise your wages.
Five years hence, if you have turned over a new leaf and led an honest
life, I may give you a place in my store. At present, I would rather
leave you where you are.

"EBENEZER GRAHAM."

"What do you say to that? Isn't that rather rough on an only son, eh?"
said Eben.

It occurred to Herbert that Eben hardly deserved very liberal treatment
from his father, notwithstanding he was an only son.

"Oh, the old man is awfully mean and close-fisted," said Eben. "He cares
more for money than for anything else. By the way, how does Melville
treat you?"

"Mr. Melville," said Herbert, emphasizing the Mr., "is always kind and
considerate."

"Pays you well, eh?"

"He pays me more than I could get anywhere else."

"Pays all your hotel and traveling expenses, eh?"

"Of course."

"And a good salary besides?"

"Yes."

"Herbert," said Eben, suddenly, "I want you to do me a favor."

"What is it?"

"You've always known me, you know. When you was a little chap, and came
into the store, I used to give you sticks of candy."

"I don't remember it," answered Herbert, truthfully.

"I did, all the same. You were so young that you don't remember it."

"Well, Eben, what of it?"

"I want you to lend me ten dollars, Herbert, in memory of old times."

Herbert was generously inclined, on ordinary occasions, but did not feel
so on this occasion. He felt that Eben was not a deserving object, even
had he felt able to make so large a loan. Besides, he could not forget
that the young man who now asked a favor had brought a false charge of
stealing against him.

"You will have to excuse me, Eben," he answered. "To begin with, I
cannot afford to lend so large a sum."

"I would pay you back as soon as I could."

"Perhaps you would," said Herbert, "though I have not much confidence
in it. But you seem to forget that you charged me with stealing only a
short time since. I wonder how you have the face to ask me to lend you
ten dollars, or any sum."

"It was a mistake," muttered Eben, showing some signs of confusion.

"At any rate, I won't say anything more about it while you are in
trouble. But you must excuse my declining to lend you."

"Lend me five dollars, then," pleaded Eben.

"What do you want to do with it?"

"To buy lottery tickets. I am almost sure I should win a prize, and then
I can pay you five dollars for one."

"I wouldn't lend any money for that purpose to my dearest friend," said
Herbert "Buying lottery tickets is about the most foolish investment you
could make."

"Then I won't buy any," said Eben. "Lend me the money and I will use it
to buy clothes."

"You will have to excuse me," said Herbert, coldly.

"I didn't think you'd be so mean," whined Eben, "to a friend in
distress."

"I don't look upon you as a friend, and for very good reasons," retorted
Herbert, as he walked away.

Eben looked after him with a scowl of hatred.

"I'd like to humble that boy's pride," he muttered, as he slowly resumed
his march.




CHAPTER XXI. COL. WARNER.



When Herbert returned to the hotel he found George Melville in the
reading room in conversation with a tall and dignified-looking stranger.

"Is that your brother, Mr. Melville?" asked the latter, as Herbert came
forward and spoke to Melville.

"No, Colonel, he is my young friend and confidential clerk, Herbert
Carr."

"Glad to make your acquaintance, Mr. Carr," said the colonel, affably,
extending his hand as he spoke.

"This is Col. Warner, Herbert," explained George Melville.

Herbert, who was naturally polite, shook hands with the colonel, and
said he was glad to make his acquaintance.

"I have been talking with Mr. Melville," said the colonel. "I am sorry
to hear that he is traveling in search of health."

"Yes, sir; I hope he will find his journey beneficial."

"Oh, not a doubt of it! Not a doubt of it! I've been there myself. Do
you know, when I was twenty-five, which I take to be about the age of
your employer, I thought I should die of consumption?"

"I shouldn't have supposed it, sir," said Herbert, and Melville, too,
felt surprised, as he noticed the stalwart proportions of the former
consumptive.

"Ha! ha! I dare say not," said the colonel, laughing. "I don't look much
like it now, eh?"

"No, you certainly don't, colonel," said Melville. "I am curious to know
how you overcame the threatened danger."

"I did what you are doing, sir; I came West."

"But the mere coming West did not cure you, did it?"

"No, sir; it was the life I lived," returned Col. \Varner. "I didn't
stay in the cities; I went into the wilderness. I lived in a log-cabin.
I bought a horse, and rode every day. I kept in the open air, and, after
a while, I found my strength returning and my chest expanding, and in a
twelvemonth I could afford to laugh at doctors."

"And you have never had a return of the old symptoms?" asked Melville,
with interest.

"Never, except four years afterwards, when I went to New York and
remained nearly a year. I am now fifty, and rather hale and hearty for
my years, eh?"

"Decidedly so."

"Let me advise you to follow my example, Mr. Melville."

"It was my intention when I started West to live very much as you
indicated," said Melville. "Now that I have heard your experience, I am
confirmed in my resolve."

"Good! I am glad to hear it. When do you leave Chicago?"

"To-morrow, probably."

"And how far West do you intend to go?"

"I have thought of Colorado."

"Couldn't do better. I know Colorado like a book. In fact, I own some
valuable mining property there, up in--ahem! Gilpin County. By the
way--I take it you are a rich man--why don't you invest in that way?
Perhaps, however, you have it in view?"

"No, I haven't thought of it," answered Melville. "The fact is, I am not
anxious to become richer, having enough for all my present needs."

"Just so," said the colonel. "But you might marry."

"Even if I did--"

"You would have money enough," said Col. Warner, finishing the sentence
for him. "Well, I am delighted to hear it. I am very well fixed
myself--in fact, some of my friends call me, ha! ha!--the nabob. But,
as I was saying I am rich enough and to spare, and still--you may be
surprised--still I have no objection to making a little more money."

Col. Warner nodded his head vigorously, and watched George Melville to
see the effect upon him of this extraordinary statement.

"Very natural, colonel," said Melville. "I believe most people want to
be richer. Perhaps if I had vigorous health I might have the same wish.
At present my chief wish is to recover my health."

"You'll do it, sir, you'll do it--and in short order, too! Then you can
