so as to baffle any pursuit.

You may imagine the rapture with which the Queen received the daughter
she had given up for lost, as well as the amiable Prince who had rescued
her. The Fairy entered with them, and warned the Queen that the Wizard
King would shortly arrive, infuriated by his loss, and that nothing
could preserve the Prince and Princess from his rage and magic unless
they were actually married.

The Queen hastened to inform the King her husband, and the wedding took
place on the spot.

As the ceremony was completed the Wizard King arrived. His despair at
being so late bewildered him so entirely that he appeared in his natural
form and attempted to sprinkle some black liquid over the bride and
bridegroom, which was intended to kill them, but the Fairy stretched out
her wand and the liquid dropped on the Magician himself. He fell down
senseless, and the Princess's father, deeply offended at the cruel
revenge which had been attempted, ordered him to be removed and locked
up in prison.

Now as magicians lose all their power as soon as they are in prison, the
King felt himself much embarrassed at being thus at the mercy of
those he had so greatly offended. The Prince implored and obtained his
father's pardon, and the prison doors were opened.

No sooner was this done than the Wizard King was seen in the air under
the form of some unknown bird, exclaiming as he flew off that he would
never forgive either his son or the Fairy the cruel wrong they had done
him.

Everyone entreated the Fairy to settle in the kingdom where she now was,
to which she consented. She built herself a magnificent palace, to which
she transported her books and fairy secrets, and where she enjoyed the
sight of the perfect happiness she had helped to bestow on the entire
royal family.




 THE NIXY(15)

(15) From the German. Kletke.

There was once upon a time a miller who was very well off, and had as
much money and as many goods as he knew what to do with. But sorrow
comes in the night, and the miller all of a sudden became so poor
that at last he could hardly call the mill in which he sat his own. He
wandered about all day full of despair and misery, and when he lay down
at night he could get no rest, but lay awake all night sunk in sorrowful
thoughts.

One morning he rose up before dawn and went outside, for he thought his
heart would be lighter in the open air. As he wandered up and down on
the banks of the mill-pond he heard a rustling in the water, and when he
looked near he saw a white woman rising up from the waves.

He realised at once that this could be none other than the nixy of the
mill-pond, and in his terror he didn't know if he should fly away or
remain where he was. While he hesitated the nixy spoke, called him by
his name, and asked him why he was so sad.

When the miller heard how friendly her tone was, he plucked up heart and
told her how rich and prosperous he had been all his life up till now,
when he didn't know what he was to do for want and misery.

Then the nixy spoke comforting words to him, and promised that she would
make him richer and more prosperous than he had ever been in his life
before, if he would give her in return the youngest thing in his house.

The miller thought she must mean one of his puppies or kittens, so
promised the nixy at once what she asked, and returned to his mill full
of hope. On the threshold he was greeted by a servant with the news that
his wife had just given birth to a boy.

The poor miller was much horrified by these tidings, and went in to
his wife with a heavy heart to tell her and his relations of the fatal
bargain he had just struck with the nixy. 'I would gladly give up all
the good fortune she promised me,' he said, 'if I could only save my
child.' But no one could think of any advice to give him, beyond taking
care that the child never went near the mill-pond.

So the boy throve and grew big, and in the meantime all prospered with
the miller, and in a few years he was richer than he had ever been
before. But all the same he did not enjoy his good fortune, for he could
not forget his compact with the nixy, and he knew that sooner or later
she would demand his fulfilment of it. But year after year went by, and
the boy grew up and became a great hunter, and the lord of the land took
him into his service, for he was as smart and bold a hunter as you would
wish to see. In a short time he married a pretty young wife, and lived
with her in great peace and happiness.

One day when he was out hunting a hare sprang up at his feet, and ran
for some way in front of him in the open field. The hunter pursued it
hotly for some time, and at last shot it dead. Then he proceeded to
skin it, never noticing that he was close to the mill-pond, which from
childhood up he had been taught to avoid. He soon finished the skinning,
and went to the water to wash the blood off his hands. He had hardly
dipped them in the pond when the nixy rose up in the water, and seizing
him in her wet arms she dragged him down with her under the waves.

When the hunter did not come home in the evening his wife grew very
anxious, and when his game bag was found close to the mill-pond she
guessed at once what had befallen him. She was nearly beside herself
with grief, and roamed round and round the pond calling on her husband
without ceasing. At last, worn out with sorrow and fatigue, she fell
asleep and dreamt that she was wandering along a flowery meadow, when
she came to a hut where she found an old witch, who promised to restore
her husband to her.

When she awoke next morning she determined to set out and find the
witch; so she wandered on for many a day, and at last she reached the
flowery meadow and found the hut where the old witch lived. The poor
wife told her all that had happened and how she had been told in a dream
of the witch's power to help her.

The witch counselled her to go to the pond the first time there was a
full moon, and to comb her black hair with a golden comb, and then to
place the comb on the bank. The hunter's wife gave the witch a handsome
present, thanked her heartily, and returned home.

Time dragged heavily till the time of the full moon, but it passed at
last, and as soon as it rose the young wife went to the pond, combed
her black hair with a golden comb, and when she had finished, placed the
comb on the bank; then she watched the water impatiently. Soon she heard
a rushing sound, and a big wave rose suddenly and swept the comb off the
bank, and a minute after the head of her husband rose from the pond and
gazed sadly at her. But immediately another wave came, and the head sank
back into the water without having said a word. The pond lay still and
motionless, glittering in the moonshine, and the hunter's wife was not a
bit better off than she had been before.

In despair she wandered about for days and nights, and at last, worn out
by fatigue, she sank once more into a deep sleep, and dreamt exactly the
same dream about the old witch. So next morning she went again to the
flowery meadow and sought the witch in her hut, and told her of her
grief. The old woman counselled her to go to the mill-pond the next
full moon and play upon a golden flute, and then to lay the flute on the
bank.

As soon as the next moon was full the hunter's wife went to the
mill-pond, played on a golden flute, and when she had finished placed it
on the bank. Then a rushing sound was heard, and a wave swept the flute
off the bank, and soon the head of the hunter appeared and rose up
higher and higher till he was half out of the water. Then he gazed sadly
at his wife and stretched out his arms towards her. But another rushing
wave arose and dragged him under once more. The hunter's wife, who had
stood on the bank full of joy and hope, sank into despair when she saw
her husband snatched away again before her eyes.

But for her comfort she dreamt the same dream a third time, and betook
herself once more to the old witch's hut in the flowery meadow. This
time the old woman told her to go the next full moon to the mill-pond,
and to spin there with a golden spinning-wheel, and then to leave the
spinning-wheel on the bank.

The hunter's wife did as she was advised, and the first night the moon
was full she sat and spun with a golden spinning-wheel, and then left
the wheel on the bank. In a few minutes a rushing sound was heard in the
waters, and a wave swept the spinning-wheel from the bank. Immediately
the head of the hunter rose up from the pond, getting higher and higher
each moment, till at length he stepped on to the bank and fell on his
wife's neck.

But the waters of the pond rose up suddenly, overflowed the bank where
the couple stood, and dragged them under the flood. In her despair the
young wife called on the old witch to help her, and in a moment the
hunter was turned into a frog and his wife into a toad. But they were
not able to remain together, for the water tore them apart, and when the
flood was over they both resumed their own shapes again, but the hunter
and the hunter's wife found themselves each in a strange country, and
neither knew what had become of the other.

The hunter determined to become a shepherd, and his wife too became a
shepherdess. So they herded their sheep for many years in solitude and
sadness.

Now it happened once that the shepherd came to the country where the
shepherdess lived. The neighbourhood pleased him, and he saw that the
pasture was rich and suitable for his flocks. So he brought his sheep
there, and herded them as before. The shepherd and shepherdess became
great friends, but they did not recognise each other in the least.

But one evening when the moon was full they sat together watching their
flocks, and the shepherd played upon his flute. Then the shepherdess
thought of that evening when she had sat at the full moon by the
mill-pond and had played on the golden flute; the recollection was too
much for her, and she burst into tears. The shepherd asked her why she
was crying, and left her no peace till she told him all her story. Then
the scales fell from the shepherd's eyes, and he recognised his wife,
and she him. So they returned joyfully to their own home, and lived in
peace and happiness ever after.




THE GLASS MOUNTAIN(16)

(16) From the Polish. Kletke.

Once upon a time there was a Glass Mountain at the top of which stood
a castle made of pure gold, and in front of the castle there grew an
apple-tree on which there were golden apples.

Anyone who picked an apple gained admittance into the golden castle, and
there in a silver room sat an enchanted Princess of surpassing fairness
and beauty. She was as rich too as she was beautiful, for the cellars of
the castle were full of precious stones, and great chests of the finest
gold stood round the walls of all the rooms.

Many knights had come from afar to try their luck, but it was in vain
they attempted to climb the mountain. In spite of having their horses
shod with sharp nails, no one managed to get more than half-way up, and
then they all fell back right down to the bottom of the steep slippery
hill. Sometimes they broke an arm, sometimes a leg, and many a brave man
had broken his neck even.

The beautiful Princess sat at her window and watched the bold knights
trying to reach her on their splendid horses. The sight of her always
gave men fresh courage, and they flocked from the four quarters of the
globe to attempt the work of rescuing her. But all in vain, and for
seven years the Princess had sat now and waited for some one to scale
the Glass Mountain.

A heap of corpses both of riders and horses lay round the mountain, and
many dying men lay groaning there unable to go any farther with their
wounded limbs. The whole neighbourhood had the appearance of a vast
churchyard. In three more days the seven years would be at an end,
when a knight in golden armour and mounted on a spirited steed was seen
making his way towards the fatal hill.

Sticking his spurs into his horse he made a rush at the mountain, and
got up half-way, then he calmly turned his horse's head and came down
again without a slip or stumble. The following day he started in the
same way; the horse trod on the glass as if it had been level earth,
and sparks of fire flew from its hoofs. All the other knights gazed in
astonishment, for he had almost gained the summit, and in another moment
he would have reached the apple-tree; but of a sudden a huge eagle rose
up and spread its mighty wings, hitting as it did so the knight's horse
in the eye.

The beast shied, opened its wide nostrils and tossed its mane, then
rearing high up in the air, its hind feet slipped and it fell with its
rider down the steep mountain side. Nothing was left of either of them
except their bones, which rattled in the battered golden armour like dry
peas in a pod.

And now there was only one more day before the close of the seven years.
Then there arrived on the scene a mere schoolboy--a merry, happy-hearted
youth, but at the same time strong and well-grown. He saw how many
knights had broken their necks in vain, but undaunted he approached the
steep mountain on foot and began the ascent.

For long he had heard his parents speak of the beautiful Princess who
sat in the golden castle at the top of the Glass Mountain. He listened
to all he heard, and determined that he too would try his luck. But
first he went to the forest and caught a lynx, and cutting off the
creature's sharp claws, he fastened them on to his own hands and feet.

Armed with these weapons he boldly started up the Glass Mountain.

The sun was nearly going down, and the youth had not got more than
half-way up. He could hardly draw breath he was so worn out, and his
mouth was parched by thirst. A huge black cloud passed over his head,
but in vain did he beg and beseech her to let a drop of water fall on
him. He opened his mouth, but the black cloud sailed past and not as
much as a drop of dew moistened his dry lips.

His feet were torn and bleeding, and he could only hold on now with his
hands. Evening closed in, and he strained his eyes to see if he could
behold the top of the mountain. Then he gazed beneath him, and what a
sight met his eyes! A yawning abyss, with certain and terrible death at
the bottom, reeking with half-decayed bodies of horses and riders! And
this had been the end of all the other brave men who like himself had
attempted the ascent.

It was almost pitch dark now, and only the stars lit up the Glass
Mountain. The poor boy still clung on as if glued to the glass by his
blood-stained hands. He made no struggle to get higher, for all his
strength had left him, and seeing no hope he calmly awaited death.
Then all of a sudden he fell into a deep sleep, and forgetful of his
dangerous position, he slumbered sweetly. But all the same, although he
slept, he had stuck his sharp claws so firmly into the glass that he was
quite safe not to fall.

Now the golden apple-tree was guarded by the eagle which had overthrown
the golden knight and his horse. Every night it flew round the Glass
Mountain keeping a careful look-out, and no sooner had the moon emerged
from the clouds than the bird rose up from the apple-tree, and circling
round in the air, caught sight of the sleeping youth.

Greedy for carrion, and sure that this must be a fresh corpse, the bird
swooped down upon the boy. But he was awake now, and perceiving the
eagle, he determined by its help to save himself.

The eagle dug its sharp claws into the tender flesh of the youth, but he
bore the pain without a sound, and seized the bird's two feet with his
hands. The creature in terror lifted him high up into the air and began
to circle round the tower of the castle. The youth held on bravely. He
saw the glittering palace, which by the pale rays of the moon looked
like a dim lamp; and he saw the high windows, and round one of them a
balcony in which the beautiful Princess sat lost in sad thoughts. Then
the boy saw that he was close to the apple-tree, and drawing a small
knife from his belt, he cut off both the eagle's feet. The bird rose up
in the air in its agony and vanished into the clouds, and the youth fell
on to the broad branches of the apple-tree.

Then he drew out the claws of the eagle's feet that had remained in his
flesh, and put the peel of one of the golden apples on the wound, and
in one moment it was healed and well again. He pulled several of the
beautiful apples and put them in his pocket; then he entered the castle.
The door was guarded by a great dragon, but as soon as he threw an apple
at it, the beast vanished.

At the same moment a gate opened, and the youth perceived a courtyard
full of flowers and beautiful trees, and on a balcony sat the lovely
enchanted Princess with her retinue.

As soon as she saw the youth, she ran towards him and greeted him as her
husband and master. She gave him all her treasures, and the youth became
a rich and mighty ruler. But he never returned to the earth, for only
the mighty eagle, who had been the guardian of the Princess and of the
castle, could have carried on his wings the enormous treasure down to
the world. But as the eagle had lost its feet it died, and its body was
found in a wood on the Glass Mountain.

. . . . . . .

One day when the youth was strolling about in the palace garden with the
Princess, his wife, he looked down over the edge of the Glass Mountain
and saw to his astonishment a great number of people gathered there. He
blew his silver whistle, and the swallow who acted as messenger in the
golden castle flew past.

'Fly down and ask what the matter is,' he said to the little bird, who
sped off like lightning and soon returned saying:

'The blood of the eagle has restored all the people below to life. All
those who have perished on this mountain are awakening up to-day, as
it were from a sleep, and are mounting their horses, and the whole
population are gazing on this unheard-of wonder with joy and amazement.'




 ALPHEGE, OR THE GREEN MONKEY

Many years ago there lived a King, who was twice married. His first
wife, a good and beautiful woman, died at the birth of her little son,
and the King her husband was so overwhelmed with grief at her loss that
his only comfort was in the sight of his heir.

When the time for the young Prince's christening came the King chose
as godmother a neighbouring Princess, so celebrated for her wisdom and
goodness that she was commonly called 'the Good Queen.' She named the
baby Alphege, and from that moment took him to her heart.

Time wipes away the greatest griefs, and after two or three years the
King married again. His second wife was a Princess of undeniable beauty,
but by no means of so amiable a disposition as the first Queen. In due
time a second Prince was born, and the Queen was devoured with rage at
the thought that Prince Alphege came between her son and the throne. She
took care however to conceal her jealous feelings from the King.

At length she could control herself no longer, so she sent a trusty
servant to her old and faithful friend the Fairy of the Mountain, to beg
her to devise some means by which she might get rid of her stepson.

The Fairy replied that, much as she desired to be agreeable to the Queen
in every way, it was impossible for her to attempt anything against the
young Prince, who was under the protection of some greater Power than
her own.

The 'Good Queen' on her side watched carefully over her godson. She was
obliged to do so from a distance, her own country being a remote one,
but she was well informed of all that went on and knew all about the
Queen's wicked designs. She therefore sent the Prince a large and
splendid ruby, with injunctions to wear it night and day as it would
protect him from all attacks, but added that the talisman only retained
its power as long as the Prince remained within his father's dominions.
The Wicked Queen knowing this made every attempt to get the Prince out
of the country, but her efforts failed, till one day accident did what
she was unable to accomplish.

The King had an only sister who was deeply attached to him, and who was
married to the sovereign of a distant country. She had always kept up
a close correspondence with her brother, and the accounts she heard of
Prince Alphege made her long to become acquainted with so charming a
nephew. She entreated the King to allow the Prince to visit her, and
after some hesitation which was overruled by his wife, he finally
