at that moment, and encountered the full gaze of the large dark-blue
eyes swimming in tears.

"Oh, nothing. I'll be all right in a moment," was the answer, and then
the sunshine broke all over the girl's charming face; and before they
reached the railway station Nora was chatting to her mother as if she
had not a care in the world.

Her first visit to Dublin and the excitement of getting really pretty
dresses made the next two or three days pass like a flash. Mrs.
O'Shanaghgan with money in her pocket was a very different woman from
Mrs. O'Shanaghgan without a penny. She enjoyed making Nora presentable,
and had excellent taste and a keen eye for a bargain. She fitted up
her daughter with a modest but successful wardrobe, bought her a proper
trunk to hold her belongings, and saw her on board the steamer for
Holyhead.

The crossing was a rough one, but the Irish girl did not suffer from
seasickness. She stood leaning over the taffrail chatting to the
captain, who thought her one of the most charming passengers he ever had
to cross in the _Munster_; and when they arrived at the opposite side,
Mr. Hartrick was waiting for his niece. He often said since that he
would never forget his first sight of Nora O'Shanaghgan. She was wearing
a gray tweed traveling dress, with a little gray cap to match; the
slender young figure, the rippling black hair, and the brilliant face
flashed for an instant on the tired vision of the man of business; then
there came the eager outstretching of two hands, and Nora had kissed him
because she could not help herself.

"Oh, I am so glad to see you, Uncle George!" The words, the action, the
whole look were totally different from what his daughters would have
said or done under similar circumstances. He felt quite sure that his
sister's description of Nora was right in the main; but he thought her
charming. Drawing her hand through his arm, he took her to the railway
station, where the train was already waiting to receive its passengers.
Soon they were flying in _The Wild Irish Girl_ to Euston. Nora was
provided with innumerable illustrated papers. Mr. Hartrick took out a
little basket which contained sandwiches, wine, and different cakes,
and fed her with the best he could procure. He did not ask her many
questions, not even about the Castle or her own life. He was determined
to wait for all these things. He read something of her story in her
clear blue eyes; but he would not press her for her confidence. He was
anxious to know her a little better.

"She is Irish, though, and they all exaggerate things so dreadfully,"
was his thought. "But I'll be very good to the child. What a contrast
she is to Terence! Not that Terence is scarcely Irish; but anyone
can see that this child has more of her father than her mother in her
composition."

They arrived at Euston; then there were fresh changes; a cab took them
to Waterloo, where they once again entered the train.

"Tired, my dear niece?" said her uncle as he settled her for the final
time in another first-class compartment.

"Not at all. I am too excited to be tired," was her eager answer. And
then he smiled at her, arranged the window and blind to her liking, and
they started once more on their way.

Mr. Hartrick lived in a large place near Weybridge, and Nora had her
first glimpse of the lovely Surrey scenery. A carriage was waiting for
the travelers when they reached their destination--a carriage drawn by
a pair of spirited grays. Nora thought of Black Bess, and secretly
compared the grays to the disadvantage of the latter. But she was
determined to be as sweet and polite and English as her mother would
desire. For the first time in her whole existence she was feeling a
little shy. She would have been thoroughly at home on a dog cart, or on
her favorite outside car, or on the back of Black Bess, who would have
carried her swift as the wind; but in the landau, with her uncle seated
by her side, she was altogether at a loss.

"I don't like riches," was her inward murmur. "I feel all in silken
chains, and it is not a bit pleasant; but how dear mammy--oh, I must
think of her as mother--how mother would enjoy it all!"

The horses were going slowly uphill, and now they paused at some
handsome iron gates. These were opened by a neatly dressed woman, who
courtesied to Mr. Hartrick, and glanced with curiosity at Nora. The
carriage bowled rapidly down a long avenue, and drew up before a front
door. A large mastiff rose slowly, wagged his tail, and sniffed at
Nora's dress as she descended.

"Come in, my dear; come in," said her uncle. "We are too late for
dinner, but I have ordered supper. You will want a good meal and then
bed. Where are all the others? Where are you, Molly? Where are you,
Linda? Your Irish cousin Nora has come."

A door to the left was quickly opened, and a graceful-looking lady, in
a beautiful dress of black silk and quantities of coffee lace, stood on
the threshold.

"Is this Nora?" she said. "Welcome, my dear little girl." She went up
to Nora, laid one hand on her shoulder, and kissed her gravely on the
forehead. There was a staid, sober sort of solemnity about this kiss
which influenced Nora and made a lump come into her throat.

This gracious English lady was very charming, and she felt at once that
she would love her.

"The child is tired, Grace," said her husband to Mrs. Hartrick. "Where
are the girls? Why are they not present?"

"Molly has been very troublesome, and I was obliged to send her to her
room," was her reply; "but here is Terence. Terence, your sister has
come."

"Oh, Terry!" cried Nora.

The next moment Terence, in full evening dress, and looking extremely
manly and handsome, appeared upon the scene. Nora forgot everything else
when she saw the familiar face; she ran up to her brother, flung her
arms round his neck, and kissed him over and over.

"Oh, it is a sight for sore eyes to see you!" she cried. "Oh, Terry, how
glad, how glad I am that you are here!"

"Hush! hush! Nonsense, Nora. Try to remember this is an English house,"
whispered Terence; but he kissed her affectionately. He was glad to see
her, and he looked at her dress with marked approval. "She will soon
tame down, and she looks very pretty," was his thought.

Just then Linda was seen coming downstairs.

"Has Nora come?" called out her sweet, high-bred voice. "How do you do,
Nora? I am so glad to see you. If you are half as nice as Terence, you
will be a delightful addition to our party."

"Oh, but I am not the least bit like Terence," said Nora. She felt
rather hurt; she did not know why.

Linda was a very fair girl. She could not have been more than fifteen
years of age, and was not so tall as Nora; but she had almost the
manners of a woman of the world, and Nora felt unaccountably shy of her.

"Now take your cousin up to her room. Supper will be ready in a quarter
of an hour," said Mrs. Hartrick. "Come, George; I have something to say
to you."

Mr. and Mrs. Hartrick disappeared into the drawing-room. Linda took
Nora's hand. Nora glanced at Terence, who turned on his heel and went
away.

"See you presently, sis," he called out in what he considered a very
manly tone; and Nora felt her heart, as she expressed it, sink down into
her boots as she followed Linda up the richly carpeted stairs. Her feet
sank into the velvety pile, and she hated the sensation.

"It is all a sort of feather-bed house," she said to herself, "and I
hate a feather-bed house. Oh, I can understand my dad better than ever
to-night; but how mother would enjoy this!"




CHAPTER XIII.


"THERE'S MOLLY."

As they were going upstairs Linda suddenly turned and looked full at her
cousin.

"How very grave you are! And why have you that little frown between your
brows? Are you vexed about anything?"

"Only I thought Terry would be more glad to see me," replied Nora.

"More glad!" cried Linda. "I saw you hugging him as I ran downstairs.
He let you. I don't know how any one could show gladness more. But
come along; this is your room. It is next to Molly's and mine. Isn't it
pretty? Molly and I chose it for you this morning, and we arranged those
flowers. You will have such a lovely view, and that little peep of the
Thames is so charming. I hope you will like your room."

Nora entered one of the prettiest and most lovely bedrooms she had ever
seen in her life. Never in her wildest dreams had she imagined anything
so cozy. The perfectly chosen furniture, the elegant appointments of
every sort and description, the view from the partly opened windows, the
view of winding river and noble trees--all looked rich and cultivated
and lovely; and the Irish girl, as she gazed around, found suddenly a
great, fierce hatred rising up in her heart against what she called the
mere prettiness. She turned and faced Linda, who was watching her with
curiosity in her somewhat small blue eyes Linda was essentially English,
very reserved and quiet, very self-possessed, quite a young lady of the
world. She looked at Nora as if she meant to read her through.

"Well, don't you think the view perfect?" she said.

"Have you ever been in Ireland?" was Nora's answer.

"Never. Oh, dear me! have you anything as pretty as this in Ireland?"

"No," said Nora fiercely--"no." She left the window, turned back, and
began to unpin her hat.

"You look as if you did not care for your room."

"It is a very, very pretty room," said Nora, "and the view is very, very
pretty, but I am tired to-night. I did not know it; but I am. I should
like to go to bed soon."

"So you shall, of course, after you have had supper. Oh, how awfully
thoughtless of me not to know that you must be very tried and hungry!
Molly and I are glad you have come."

"But where is Molly? I should like to see her."

Linda went up to Nora and spoke in a low whisper.

"She is in disgrace."

"In disgrace? Has she done anything naughty?"

"Yes, fearfully naughty. She is in hot water as usual."

"I am sorry," said Nora. She instantly began to feel a strong sensation
of sympathy for Molly. She was sure, in advance, that she would like
her.

"But is she in such dreadful disgrace that I may not see her?" she asked
after a pause.

"Oh, I don't know. I don't suppose so."

Just then there was heard at the room door a gay laugh and a kind of
scamper. A knock followed, but before Nora could answer the door was
burst open, and a large, heavily made, untidy-looking girl, with a dark
face and great big black eyes, bounded into the apartment.

"I have burst the bonds, and here I am," she said. "How do you do, Nora?
I'm Molly. I am always and always in hot water. I like being in hot
water. Now, tell-tale-tit, you can go downstairs and acquaint mother
with the fact that I have burst the bonds, for kiss little Irish Nora I
will."

"Oh, I am glad to see you," said Nora. Her depression vanished on the
spot. She felt that, naughty as doubtless Molly was, she could get on
with her.

"Come, let's take a squint at you," said the eldest Miss Hartrick; "come
over here to the light."

Molly took Nora by both hands over to the window.

"Now then, let's have a category of your charms. Terence has been
telling us that you are very pretty. You are. Come, Linda; come and look
at her. Did you ever see such black hair? And it's as soft as silk."

Molly put up a rather large hand and patted Nora somewhat violently on
the head.

"Oh, don't!" said Nora, starting back.

"My dear little cousin, I am a very rough specimen, and you must put up
with me if you mean to get on at The Laurels. We are all stiff and
staid here; we are English of the English. Everything is done by rule
of thumb--breakfast to the minute, lunch to the minute, afternoon tea
to the minute, dinner to the minute, even tennis to the minute. Oh! it's
detestable; and I--I am expected to be good, and you know there's not a
bit of goodness in me. I am all fidgets, and you can never be sure of me
for two seconds at a time. I am a worry to mother and a worry to father;
and as to Terence--oh, my dear creature, I am so truly thankful you are
not like Terence! Here I drop a courtesy to his memory. What an awfully
precise man he will make by and by! I did not know you turned out that
kind of article in Ireland."

Nora's face, over which many emotions had been flitting, now looked
grave.

"You know that Terence is my brother?" she said slowly.

Molly gazed at her; then she burst into a fit of hearty laughter.

"You and I will get on," she said. "I like you for sticking up for your
brother. But now, my dear, I must go back. I am supposed to stay in my
bedroom until to-morrow morning. Linda, if you tell--well, you'll have
to answer to me when we are going to bed, that's all. By-by, Nora. I'll
see you in the morning. Do get her some hot water, Linda. She's worth
waiting on; she's a very nice sort of child, and very, very pretty. If
that is the Irish sort of face, I for one shall adore it. Good-by, Nora,
for the present."

Molly banged herself away--her mode of exit could scarcely be called by
any other name. As soon as the door had closed behind her Linda laughed.

"I ought to tell, you know," she said in her precise voice; "it is very,
very wrong of Molly to leave her bedroom when mother is punishing her."

"But what has she done wrong?" asked Nora.

"Oh, went against discipline. She is at school, you know, and she would
write letters during lessons. It is really very wrong of her, and Miss
Scott had to complain; so mother said she should stay in her room,
instead of being downstairs to welcome you. She is a good soul enough;
but we none of us can discipline her. She is very funny; you'll see a
lot of her queer cranks while you are here."

"How old is she?" asked Nora.

"Between sixteen and seventeen; too old to be such a romp."

"Only a little older than I am," said Nora. "And how old are you,
Linda?"

"Fifteen; they all tell me I look more."

"You do; you look eighteen. You are very old for your age."

"Oh, thank you for the compliment. Now, then, do brush your hair and
wash your hands; there's the supper-gong. Mother will be annoyed if we
are not down in a jiffy. Now, do be quick."

Nora washed her hands, brushed her hair, and ran downstairs with her
cousin. As she ate during the somewhat stiff meal that followed she
thought many times of Molly. She felt that, naughty as Molly doubtless
was, she would make the English house tolerable. Terence sat near her
at supper, by way of extending to her brotherly attentions; but all the
time he was talking on subjects of local interest to his aunt and uncle.

Mr. Hartrick evidently thought Terence a very clever fellow, and
listened to his remarks with a deference which Nora thought by no means
good for him.

"He wants one of the dear old dad's downright snubs," was her inward
comment. "I must have a talk with him to-morrow. If he progresses
at this rate toward English refinement he will be unbearable at
O'Shanaghgan when he returns; quite, quite unbearable. Oh, for a sniff
of the sea! oh, for the wild, wild wind on my cheeks! and oh, for
my dear, darling, bare bedroom! I shall be smothered in that heavily
furnished room upstairs. Oh, it is all lovely, I know--very lovely; but
I'm not made to enjoy it. I belong to the free, and I don't feel free
here. The silken chains and the feather-bed life won't suit me; of that
I am quite sure. Thank goodness, however, there's Molly; she is in a
state of rebellion, too. I must not sympathize with her; but I am truly
glad she is here."




CHAPTER XIV.


BITS OF SLANG.

Early the next morning Nora was awakened from a somewhat heavy sleep by
someone pulling her violently by the arm.

"Wake up! wake up!" said a voice; and then Nora, who had been dreaming
of her father, and also of Andy Neil, started up, crying as she did so,
"Oh, don't, Andy! I know father will let you stay a little longer in the
cot. Don't, don't, Andy!"

"Who, in the name of fortune, is Andy?" called the clear voice of Molly
Hartrick. "Do wake up, Nora, and don't look so dazed. You really are a
most exciting person to have staying in the house. Who is Andy, and what
cot are you going to turn him out of? Is he a baby?"

Nora now began to laugh.

"I quite forgot that I was in England," she said. "Am I really in
England? Are you--are you----Oh, now I remember everything. You are
Molly Hartrick. What is the hour? Is it late? Have I missed breakfast?"

"Bless you, child! lie down and keep quiet; it's not more than six
o'clock. I wanted to see some more of you all by myself. I am out of
punishment now; it ended at midnight, and I am as free as anybody else;
