
It was no use saying 'We flew up', so Cyril said:

'We got up - and then we found the door was locked and we couldn't
get down.  Let us out - do.'

'How many of you are there?' asked the keeper.

'Only four,' said Cyril.

'Are you armed?'

'Are we what?'

'I've got my gun handy - so you'd best not try any tricks,' said
the keeper.  'If we open the door, will you promise to come quietly
down, and no nonsense?'

'Yes - oh YES!' said all the children together.

'Bless me,' said the Vicar, 'surely that was a female voice?'

'Shall I open the door, Sir?' said the keeper.  Andrew went down a
few steps, 'to leave room for the others' he said afterwards.

'Yes,' said the Vicar, 'open the door.  Remember,' he said through
the keyhole, 'we have come to release you.  You will keep your
promise to refrain from violence?'

'How this bolt do stick,' said the keeper; 'anyone 'ud think it
hadn't been drawed for half a year.'  As a matter of fact it
hadn't.

When all the bolts were drawn, the keeper spoke deep-chested words
through the keyhole.

'I don't open,' said he, 'till you've gone over to the other side
of the tower.  And if one of you comes at me I fire.  Now!'

'We're all over on the other side,' said the voices.

The keeper felt pleased with himself, and owned himself a bold man
when he threw open that door, and, stepping out into the leads,
flashed the full light of the stable lantern on to the group of
desperadoes standing against the parapet on the other side of the
tower.

He lowered his gun, and he nearly dropped the lantern.

'So help me,' he cried, 'if they ain't a pack of kiddies!'

The Vicar now advanced.

'How did you come here?' he asked severely.  'Tell me at once.  '

'Oh, take us down,' said Jane, catching at his coat, 'and we'll
tell you anything you like.  You won't believe us, but it doesn't
matter.  Oh, take us down!'

The others crowded round him, with the same entreaty.  All but
Cyril.  He had enough to do with the soda-water syphon, which would
keep slipping down under his jacket.  It needed both hands to keep
it steady in its place.

But he said, standing as far out of the lantern light as possible:

'Please do take us down.'

So they were taken down.  It is no joke to go down a strange
church-tower in the dark, but the keeper helped them - only, Cyril
had to be independent because of the soda-water syphon.  It would
keep trying to get away.  Half-way down the ladder it all but
escaped.  Cyril just caught it by its spout, and as nearly as
possible lost his footing.  He was trembling and pale when at last
they reached the bottom of the winding stair and stepped out on to
the flags of the church-porch.

Then suddenly the keeper caught Cyril and Robert each by an arm.

'You bring along the gells, sir,' said he; 'you and Andrew can
manage them.'

'Let go!' said Cyril; 'we aren't running away.  We haven't hurt
your old church.  Leave go!'

'You just come along,' said the keeper; and Cyril dared not oppose
him with violence, because just then the syphon began to slip
again.

So they were all marched into the Vicarage study, and the Vicar's
wife came rushing in.

'Oh, William, are you safe?' she cried.

Robert hastened to allay her anxiety.

'Yes,' he said, 'he's quite safe.  We haven't hurt him at all.  And
please, we're very late, and they'll be anxious at home.  Could you
send us home in your carriage?'

'Or perhaps there's a hotel near where we could get a carriage
from,' said Anthea.  'Martha will be very anxious as it is.'

The Vicar had sunk into a chair, overcome by emotion and amazement.

Cyril had also sat down, and was leaning forward with his elbows on
his knees because of that soda-water syphon.

'But how did you come to be locked up in the church-tower?' asked
the Vicar.

'We went up,' said Robert slowly, 'and we were tired, and we all
went to sleep, and when we woke up we found the door was locked, so
we yelled.'

'I should think you did!' said the Vicar's wife.  'Frightening
everybody out of their wits like this!  You ought to be ashamed of
yourselves.'

'We are,' said Jane gently.

'But who locked the door?' asked the Vicar.

'I don't know at all,' said Robert, with perfect truth.  'Do please
send us home.'

'Well, really,' said the Vicar, 'I suppose we'd better.  Andrew,
put the horse to, and you can take them home.'

'Not alone, I don't,' said Andrew to himself.

'And,' the Vicar went on, 'let this be a lesson to you ...'  He
went on talking, and the children listened miserably.  But the
keeper was not listening.  He was looking at the unfortunate Cyril.
He knew all about poachers of course, so he knew how people look
when they're hiding something.  The Vicar had just got to the part
about trying to grow up to be a blessing to your parents, and not
a trouble and a disgrace, when the keeper suddenly said:

'Arst him what he's got there under his jacket'; and Cyril knew
that concealment was at an end.  So he stood up, and squared his
shoulders and tried to look noble, like the boys in books that no
one can look in the face of and doubt that they come of brave and
noble families and will be faithful to the death, and he pulled out
the soda-water syphon and said:

'Well, there you are, then.'

There was a silence.  Cyril went on - there was nothing else for
it:

'Yes, we took this out of your larder, and some chicken and tongue
and bread.  We were very hungry, and we didn't take the custard or
jam.  We only took bread and meat and water - and we couldn't help
its being the soda kind -just the necessaries of life; and we left
half-a-crown to pay for it, and we left a letter.  And we're very
sorry.  And my father will pay a fine or anything you like, but
don't send us to prison.  Mother would be so vexed.  You know what
you said about not being a disgrace.  Well, don't you go and do it
to us - that's all!  We're as sorry as we can be.  There!'

'However did you get up to the larder window?' said Mrs Vicar.

'I can't tell you that,' said Cyril firmly.

'Is this the whole truth you've been telling me?' asked the
clergyman.

'No,' answered Jane suddenly; 'it's all true, but it's not the
whole truth.  We can't tell you that.  It's no good asking.  Oh, do
forgive us and take us home!'  She ran to the Vicar's wife and
threw her arms round her.  The Vicar's wife put her arms round
Jane, and the keeper whispered behind his hand to the Vicar:

'They're all right, sir - I expect it's a pal they're standing by.
Someone put 'em up to it, and they won't peach.  Game little kids.'

'Tell me,' said the Vicar kindly, 'are you screening someone else?
Had anyone else anything to do with this?'

'Yes,' said Anthea, thinking of the Psammead; 'but it wasn't their
fault.'

'Very well, my dears,' said the Vicar, 'then let's say no more
about it.  Only just tell us why you wrote such an odd letter.'

'I don't know,' said Cyril.  'You see, Anthea wrote it in such a
hurry, and it really didn't seem like stealing then.  But
afterwards, when we found we couldn't get down off the
church-tower, it seemed just exactly like it.  We are all very
sorry -'

'Say no more about it,' said the Vicar's wife; 'but another time
just think before you take other people's tongues.  Now - some cake
and milk before you go home?'

When Andrew came to say that the horse was put to, and was he
expected to be led alone into the trap that he had plainly seen
from the first, he found the children eating cake and drinking milk
and laughing at the Vicar's jokes.  Jane was sitting on the Vicar's
wife's lap.

So you see they got off better than they deserved.

The gamekeeper, who was the cook's cousin, asked leave to drive
home with them, and Andrew was only too glad to have someone to
protect him from the trap he was so certain of.

When the wagonette reached their own house, between the
chalk-quarry and the gravel-pit, the children were very sleepy, but
they felt that they and the keeper were friends for life.

Andrew dumped the children down at the iron gate without a word.
'You get along home,' said the Vicarage cook's cousin, who was a
gamekeeper.  'I'll get me home on Shanks' mare.'

So Andrew had to drive off alone, which he did not like at all, and
it was the keeper that was cousin to the Vicarage cook who went
with the children to the door, and, when they had been swept to bed
in a whirlwind of reproaches, remained to explain to Martha and the
cook and the housemaid exactly what had happened.  He explained so
well that Martha was quite amiable the next morning.

After that he often used to come over and see Martha; and in the
end - but that is another story, as dear Mr Kipling says.

Martha was obliged to stick to what she had said the night before
about keeping the children indoors the next day for a punishment.
But she wasn't at all snarky about it, and agreed to let Robert go
out for half an hour to get something he particularly wanted.
This, of course, was the day's wish.

Robert rushed to the gravel-pit, found the Psammead, and presently
wished for - But that, too, is another story.



CHAPTER 6
A CASTLE AND NO DINNER


The others were to be kept in as a punishment for the misfortunes
of the day before.  Of course Martha thought it was naughtiness,
and not misfortune - so you must not blame her.  She only thought
she was doing her duty.  You know grown-up people often say they do
not like to punish you, and that they only do it for your own good,
and that it hurts them as much as it hurts you - and this is really
very often the truth.

Martha certainly hated having to punish the children quite as much
as they hated to be punished.  For one thing, she knew what a noise
there would be in the house all day.  And she had other reasons.

'I declare,' she said to the cook, 'it seems almost a shame keeping
of them indoors this lovely day; but they are that audacious,
they'll be walking in with their heads knocked off some of these
days, if I don't put my foot down.  You make them a cake for tea
to-morrow, dear.  And we'll have Baby along of us soon as we've got
a bit forrard with our work.  Then they can have a good romp with
him out of the way.  Now, Eliza, come, get on with them beds.
Here's ten o'clock nearly, and no rabbits caught!'

People say that in Kent when they mean 'and no work done'.

So all the others were kept in, but Robert, as I have said, was
allowed to go out for half an hour to get something they all
wanted.  And that, of course, was the day's wish.
He had no difficulty in finding the Sand-fairy, for the day was
already so hot that it had actually, for the first time, come out
of its own accord, and it was sitting in a sort of pool of soft
sand, stretching itself, and trimming its whiskers, and turning its
snail's eyes round and round.

'Ha!' it said when its left eye saw Robert; 'I've been looking out
for you.  Where are the rest of you?  Not smashed themselves up
with those wings, I hope?'

'No,' said Robert; 'but the wings got us into a row, just like all
the wishes always do.  So the others are kept indoors, and I was
only let out for half-an-hour - to get the wish.  So please let me
wish as quickly as I can.'

'Wish away,' said the Psammead, twisting itself round in the sand.
But Robert couldn't wish away.  He forgot all the things he had
been thinking about, and nothing would come into his head but
little things for himself, like toffee, a foreign stamp album, or
a clasp- knife with three blades and a corkscrew.  He sat down to
think better, but it was no use.  He could only think of things the
others would not have cared for - such as a football, or a pair of
leg-guards, or to be able to lick Simpkins minor thoroughly when he
went back to school.

'Well,' said the Psammead at last, 'you'd better hurry up with that
wish of yours.  Time flies.'

'I know it does,' said Robert.  'I can't think what to wish for.
I wish you could give one of the others their wish without their
having to come here to ask for it.  Oh, DON'T!'

But it was too late.  The Psammead had blown itself out to about
three times its proper size, and now it collapsed like a pricked
bubble, and with a deep sigh leaned back against the edge of its
sand-pool, quite faint with the effort.

'There!' it said in a weak voice; 'it was tremendously hard - but
I did it.  Run along home, or they're sure to wish for something
silly before you get there.'

They were - quite sure; Robert felt this, and as he ran home his
mind was deeply occupied with the sort of wishes he might find they
had wished in his absence.  They might wish for rabbits, or white
mice, or chocolate, or a fine day to-morrow, or even - and that was
most likely - someone might have said, 'I do wish to goodness
Robert would hurry up.'  Well, he WAS hurrying up, and so they
would have their wish, and the day would be wasted.  Then he tried
to think what they could wish for - something that would be amusing
indoors.  That had been his own difficulty from the beginning.  So
few things are amusing indoors when the sun is shining outside and
you mayn't go out, however much you want to.  Robert was running as
fast as he could, but when he turned the corner that ought to have
brought him within sight of the architect's nightmare - the
ornamental iron-work on the top of the house - he opened his eyes
so wide that he had to drop into a walk; for you cannot run with
your eyes wide open.  Then suddenly he stopped short, for there was
no house to be seen.  The front-garden railings were gone too, and
where the house had stood - Robert rubbed his eyes and looked
again.  Yes, the others HAD wished - there was no doubt about that
- and they must have wished that they lived in a castle; for there
the castle stood black and stately, and very tall and broad, with
battlements and lancet windows, and eight great towers; and, where
the garden and the orchard had been, there were white things dotted
like mushrooms.  Robert walked slowly on, and as he got nearer he
saw that these were tents) and men in armour were walking about
among the tents - crowds and crowds of them.

'Oh, crikey!' said Robert fervently.  'They HAVE!  They've wished
for a castle, and it's being besieged!  It's just like that
Sand-fairy!  I wish we'd never seen the beastly thing!'

At the little window above the great gateway, across the moat that
