what its nature was to be. That it was something beyond the ordinary was
certain by the number of barons and knights that were bidden to attend. A
dais was erected in the courtyard of the palace, and on this a table
covered with a cloth was placed.

"I don't like this business," Wulf said to Beorn, as with the other Saxons
they took their place near the dais. "There is something very mysterious
about it, and I believe that at last we are going to see what William's
full intentions are."

A religious ceremony was first held, and then the duke rose to his feet and
addressed the barons. He first recalled to them the promise that Edward of
England had made to him, and then went on: "The saints have worked in my
favour," he said, "by sending here as my guest my well-beloved
brother-in-arms, the great Earl of Wessex. Between us there is the closest
friendship, and to cement and make even closer the bonds between us, he has
become betrothed to my daughter, and through the lands I shall bestow upon
her he will become a baron of Normandy. Relying upon his affection and
friendship, I have called you here together to hear him swear in public
that which he has already told me privately--that he will be my faithful
feudatory, and will in all ways aid me to gain my lawful rights."

Harold changed colour. The matter had come upon him as a surprise.
Doubtless he had in a vague way when discussing his future relations as
son-in-law to the duke, expressed his warm friendship and a general
willingness to be of service to him, but to be called upon to take an oath
publicly was a different matter. Most of those present had taken oaths of
allegiance to William and had broken them again and again, and William
himself had not less frequently broken his feudal oaths to his suzerain,
the King of France. But Harold was a man with a deep sense of religion, and
did not esteem as lightly as these Norman barons an oath thus sworn; but he
felt that he had fallen into a trap, and that resistance would but consign
him to a prison, if not a grave.

He at once understood how hollow had been the pretended friendship of his
host; but he was in William's power, and unless as a friend the duke would
never permit so formidable a rival to quit his shores. As he hesitated he
saw a movement on the part of the Norman knights near the dais, and
understood that they had been previously informed of William's intentions,
and were there to enforce them. Their brows were bent on him angrily as he
hesitated, and more than one hand went to the hilt of the wearer's sword.
There was no drawing back, and placing his hand on the table he swore the
oath William had dictated. When he concluded William snatched the cloth
from the table, and below it were seen a number of bones and sacred relics
that had been brought from the cathedral.

Enlightened as Harold was, he was not altogether free from the
superstitions of the age. For a moment he shuddered slightly and grew paler
than before, then he drew himself up to his full height, and looked calmly
into the exulting face of William.

"I call you all to witness," the duke said in a loud voice, "that Harold,
Earl of Wessex, has taken a solemn oath upon the holy relics to be my
faithful feudatory."

The shout that answered him was by no means universal, for there were many
among the Norman nobles who were shocked at the base trick that the duke
had played upon a guest for whom he had professed the warmest friendship.
The Saxon thanes could scarce contain their expressions of indignation, but
Harold as he sat down among them made a gesture commanding silence.

"We sail for England to-morrow night," he said in low tones. "The duke told
me so as we came hither. The two ships will be in readiness for us to
embark in the morning. I did not understand then the price I was to pay.
Restrain yourselves now; when we are free men we can talk this over."

An hour later they returned to the palace, where there was a brief and
formal interview between Harold and the duke. Both dissembled their real
feelings. The duke said that he regretted that the King of England's wishes
forced his guest to start so suddenly, and that he much regretted his
departure. Harold thanked him for the hospitality he had shown him, but
neither made any allusion whatever to the scene that had taken place in the
courtyard. Wulf rode over to say good-bye to Guy and his father. The latter
was walking up and down the hall with a gloomy face.

"I blush for what has taken place to-day, Wulf," he said. "Tell the earl
that had we known what was going to occur there are few indeed who would
have attended at the ceremony, and that I for one shall hold him in no way
dishonoured if he breaks the vow that has thus been dishonourably extorted
from him. It was a trick and a base one, and I would tell Duke William so
to his face. What will men think of Norman faith when guests are thus
tricked to their disadvantage?"

For an hour Wulf remained talking with the baron and his family.

"I hope to see you again, Wulf," De Burg said, as the lad rose to take
leave. "Guy regards you as a brother, and though assuredly no Saxon will
set foot on Norman soil after to-day's doings, we may yet meet again."

"I shall come over to England to see you, Wulf, if you come not here," Guy
said. "I begin to think that I shall get over this, although I may never be
really strong again. We shall often think and talk of you, Agnes and I; and
I should like, of all things, to come and stay in your Saxon home."

"No one would be so welcome, Guy. If we are never to be brothers-in-arms as
we once talked of, we shall surely be brothers in heart, whether absent or
present."

A few more words and Wulf took leave of them all and rode back to Rouen. In
the morning the duke accompanied Harold to the river bank and there took a
courteous farewell of him. It is not probable that he thought for a moment
that Harold would observe the oath, but he saw that its breach would be
almost as useful to him as its fulfilment, for it would enable him to
denounce his rival as a perjured and faithless man, and to represent any
expedition against England as being a sort of crusade to punish one who had
broken the most solemn vows made on the holy relics. Harold himself
preserved his usual calmness of demeanour, and stood talking quietly to the
duke while the latter's presents of hawks and hounds were taken on board
the ship, and the Saxons, silent and sullen, had passed over the gangway.
Then an apparently affectionate embrace was exchanged between the two
rivals. Harold crossed on to the ship, the great sails were hoisted, and
the two vessels proceeded down the river.




CHAPTER VIII.


TROUBLE WITH WALES.

Harold took his place on the poop as the vessel started, and remained
looking fixedly at the duke, until the latter with the group of barons
turned and entered the town.

"Farewell, William of Normandy," he said; "false friend and dishonoured
host. How shall we meet next time, I wonder, and where?"

Hitherto the presence of the Norman attendants had prevented any private
converse between Harold and his followers, but having the poop to
themselves they now broke out into angry exclamations against the duke.

"It was an unworthy and unknightly trick," Harold said calmly; "but let us
not talk of it now; it will be for the English people to decide the
question some day, and for English bishops to determine whether I am bound
by a vow thus extorted. Better at all events that I should be held for all
time to have been false and perjured, than that the English people should
fall under the Norman yoke. But maybe there will be no occasion for the
oath ever to come in question, William of Normandy or I may die before the
king, and then there will be an end of it. Let us talk of other things.
Thank God we are free men again, and our faces are set towards England,
where, from what I hear, we may have to meet open foes instead of false
friends, and may have to teach the Welsh, once and for all, that they and
their king cannot with impunity continually rise in rebellion against
England.

"Well, Wulf, you are the only one among us who has brought back aught from
Normandy, at least you and Beorn, for you have your horses and chains, and
the promise of the duke to grant you a boon. But these are small things.
You have gained great credit, and have shown yourself a gallant fighter,
and have further promises from the duke."

"I care not for his promises," Wulf said hotly. "I hold him to be a
dishonoured noble, and I would take naught from his hands."

"You are young yet, Wulf," Harold smiled, "and the duke's promise, made
before his nobles, will be held binding by him if ever the time should come
for you to claim it. Do not refuse benefits, lad, because you do not like
the hands that grant them. You rendered him a service, and need feel no
shame at receiving the reward for it. As soon as we return I shall take
steps to raise you and Beorn to the full dignity of thanes, with all rights
and privileges. My brother and my friends here can all testify to the
service you rendered to us, for much as I may have to complain of the
ending of my visit, it has at least been vastly better than our lot would
have been had we remained in the hands of Conrad of Ponthieu. You are both
very young to be placed in the position of rulers of your people, and in
ordinary cases you would not have been sworn to thane's services for some
years to come; but, as Earl of Wessex, I see good reason for departing from
the rule on this occasion, and I think that my thanes here will all be of
that opinion." There was a warm expression of approval from the Saxons.
"Then as soon as we set foot on English soil we will hold a court, and
invest you with your full rank."

They started from the mouth of the Seine, and as there was no nearer port
than that from which they had sailed, Harold directed the masters of the
ships to make for Bosham.

"It is like to be a fairer voyage than the last," he said, as with a light
breeze blowing behind them they sailed out from the mouth of the Seine. "It
will be longer, but assuredly more pleasant."

No incident whatever marked the voyage. The Saxons gave a shout of joy when
they first made out the outline of the hills of the Isle of Wight, some
twelve hours after leaving the mouth of the river; but it was not until
eight hours afterwards that they entered the harbour of Bosham. As soon as
the two Norman vessels were seen sailing up the quiet sheet of water,
everywhere fringed with forest, boats put out to meet them, to ascertain
the reason of their coming and to inquire for news of Harold and his
companions. As soon as his figure was made out standing on the poop, one of
the boats rowed off with the news, and by the time the vessels dropped
anchor off Bosham the whole of the inhabitants had gathered on the shore,
with loud shouts of joy and welcome.

As soon as they landed Harold and his companions proceeded at once to the
church, where a solemn service of thanksgiving was held for their
preservation from the dangers of the sea and for their safe return to
England. As soon as the service was over Harold sent off two horsemen to
bear to the king the news of his return, and to state that he himself would
ride to London on the following day. Then the earl bestowed handsome
presents upon the masters and crews of the ships that had brought them
over, and gave into their charge hawks and hounds, rich armour, and other
presents for the Duke of Normandy, and jewelled cups and other gifts to the
principal barons of his court.

The gifts were indeed of royal magnificence; but Harold's wealth was vast,
and, as he said to his brother, "We will at least show these Normans, that
in point of generosity an English earl is not to be outdone by a Norman
duke." As soon as these matters were attended to Harold held a court in the
great hall of Bosham, and there received the oaths of fealty from Wulf and
Beorn, and confirmed to them the possessions held by their fathers, and
invested them with the gold chains worn by thanes as the sign of their
rank. He afterwards bestowed a purse of gold upon Osgod, equal in value to
the one he had received from the Duke of Normandy.

"Should aught ever happen to your master," he said, "come you to me and you
shall be one of my own men, and shall not lack advancement in my service."

"In faith, Master Wulf," Osgod said after the ceremony, "my father warned
me that the trade of a soldier was but a poor one, and that a good
handicraftsman could gain far more money. He will open his eyes when I
jingle these purses before him, for I might have hammered armour for years
before I gained as much as I have done in the three months since I left
England. I have enough to buy a farm and settle down did it so please me,
and I have clothes enough to last me well-nigh a lifetime, and rings enough
to set up a goldsmith's shop. For scarce one of the duke's barons and
knights but followed his example, and gave me a present for my share in
that little fight with the Bretons."

"As for the clothes, they will always be useful, Osgod; but were I you I
would get a stout leathern bag and put the purses and rings into it, and
bury them in some place known only to yourself, and where none are ever
likely to light upon them. You have no occasion for money now, and we may
hope that ere long all occasion for fighting will be over, and then, as you
say, you can buy a farm and marry."

"I am going always to remain your man," Osgod said in an aggrieved tone.

"Certainly, Osgod, I should wish for nothing else. You will always be my
friend, and shall have any post on the estates or in the house that you may
prefer. There will be no occasion for you to farm your land yourself, you
can let it, receiving the value of half the produce, and so taking rank as
a landowner, for which you yourself may care nothing, but which will enable
your wife to hold her head higher."

"I am not thinking of wives, my lord."

"Nonsense, Osgod, I want not to be called my lord."

"But you are a thane now and must be called so," Osgod said sternly; "and
it would be ill-becoming indeed if I your man did not so address you. But I
will take your advice about the gold, and when I get down to Steyning will
bury it deeply under the roots of a tree. It will be safer there than if I
buried it in my father's forge, for London is ever the centre of troubles,
and might be sacked and burnt down should there ever be war between Mercia
or Northumbria and Wessex."

"Heaven forbid that we should have more civil wars, Osgod."

"Amen to that, but there is never any saying. Assuredly Edwin and Morcar
love not our earl, and as to Tostig, though he is his brother, he is
hot-headed and passionate enough to play any part. And then there are the
Normans, and there is no doubt the duke will have to be reckoned with.
Altogether methinks my money will be safer under an oak-tree down at
Steyning than at Westminster."

"You are right enough there, Osgod; by all means carry out your ideas. But
there is the bell for supper, and I must go."

The next morning the party started at daybreak, and late that night arrived
at Westminster. There were great rejoicings in London and throughout the
south of England when it was known that the great earl had returned from
Normandy. Much uneasiness had been felt at his long absence, and although
accounts had come from time to time of the honour with which he had been
treated by Duke William, many felt that his prolonged stay was an enforced
one, and that he was a prisoner rather than a guest of the duke.

The king himself was as rejoiced as his subjects at Harold's return.
Although in the early years of his reign he had been bitterly opposed to
the powerful family of Earl Godwin, to whom he owed his throne, he had of
late years learnt to appreciate the wisdom of Harold; and although still
Norman in his tastes as in his language, he had become much more English at
heart, and bitterly regretted the promise that he had years before rashly
given to the Duke of Normandy.

Harold too had relieved him of all the cares of government, which he hated,
and had enabled him to give his whole time and thought to religious
exercises, and to the rearing of the splendid abbey which was his chief
pleasure and pride. In his absence Edward had been obliged to attend to
state business. He was worried with the jealousies and demands of the Earl
of Mercia, with the constant complaints of the Northumbrians against their
harsh and imperious master Tostig, and by the fact that the Welsh were
taking advantage of the absence of Harold to cause fresh troubles. It was
just Christmas when Harold returned, and the snow fell heavily on the night
of his arrival at Westminster.

"It was lucky it did not come a few hours earlier, Beorn," Wulf said, as he
looked out of the casement. "We had a long and heavy ride yesterday, and we
could not have done it in one day had the snow been on the ground. I
suppose there will be a number of court festivities over Harold's return.
We have had enough of that sort of thing in Normandy, and I hope that
Harold will let us return at once to our estates."

"Speak for yourself, Wulf; for myself I love the court, and now that I am a
thane I shall enjoy it all the more."

"And I all the less," Wulf said. "Fifteen months ago we were but pages and
could at least have some fun, now we shall have to bear ourselves as men,
and the ladies of the court will be laughing at us and calling us the
little thanes, and there will be no getting away and going round to the
smithy to watch Osgod's father and men forging weapons. It will be all very
stupid."

In a short time an attendant summoned them to breakfast, and here they sat
down with the other thanes, Harold's wing of the palace being distinct from
that of the king. The earl sat at the head of the table, and talked in
undertones to his brother Gurth and two or three of his principal thanes.
The personal retainers of the nobles stood behind their seats and served
them with food, while Harold's pages waited on him and those sitting next
to him.

"We were a merrier party in the pages' room," Beorn whispered to Wulf, for
but few words were spoken as the meal went on.

"I think there is something in the air," Wulf said, "the earl looks more
serious than usual. Generally the meals are cheerful enough."

As soon as it was finished Harold said, "The king will receive you all in
half an hour, he desires to express to you his pleasure at your return
home. After that I beg that you will again gather here, as I have occasion
to speak to you."

The court was a more formal one than usual, the king's Norman functionaries
were all present as were several ecclesiastics. Among them the Bishop of
London, behind whom stood Wulf's old adversary, Walter Fitz-Urse. Earl
Harold introduced his companions in captivity, the king receiving them very
graciously.

"I am glad to see that you have all returned safely," he said. "The earl
tells me that you have all borne yourselves well in the battles you have
fought under the banner of my friend and ally Duke William of Normandy, and
that you have proved to his countrymen that the English are in no whit
inferior to themselves in courage. The earl specially recommended to me his
newly-made thanes, Wulf of Steyning and Beorn of Fareham, who did him the
greatest service by effecting their escape from the castle of Beaurain, and
at great risk bearing the news of his imprisonment to Duke William. Wulf
of Steyning, he tells me, gained the highest approval of the duke and his
knights by a deed of bravery when their camp was surprised by the Bretons.
The earl has informed me that in consideration of these services he has
advanced them to the rank of thanes, and confirmed them in their father's
possessions, and as service rendered to him is service rendered to me, I
thus bestow upon them a token of my approval;" and beckoning to the young
thanes to advance, he took two heavy gold bracelets from his arm, and
himself fastened them on those of the kneeling lads.

When the ceremony was over, Harold's party returned to the room where they
had breakfasted. It was an hour before the earl joined them.

"I have been in council with the king," he said, "and have thus been forced
to keep you waiting. We heard when abroad that the Welsh were again
becoming troublesome, but I find that matters are much worse than I had
supposed. Griffith has broken out into open rebellion; he has ravaged all
the borders, has entered the diocese of Wulfstan, the new Bishop of
Worcester, and carried his arms beyond the Severn, laying waste part of my
own earldom of Hereford. Edwin, who has just succeeded his father in the
earldom of Worcester, is young and new to his government, and, moreover,
his father was an ally of Griffith's. In any case, he needs far larger
forces than those at his command to undertake a war with the Welsh. This
time we must finish with them; treaties are of no avail they are ever
broken on the first opportunity, and a blow must be dealt that will render
them powerless for harm for generations to come.

"Therefore the king has commissioned me forthwith to act in the matter, not
only as Lord of Hereford but as Earl of the West Saxons. Winter is upon us,
and it will be impossible to undertake a regular campaign. Still a blow
must be struck, and that quickly and heavily in order to stop the
depredation and ruin they are spreading in the west counties. The
preparations must be secret and the blow sudden. There is no time for
calling out levies, that must be done in the spring. I must act only with
mounted men. I have already sent off a messenger to Bosham to bid my
housecarls mount and ride to Salisbury. They will number two hundred. I
pray you all to leave at once for your estates, or to send an order by a
swift messenger for your housecarls to ride to Salisbury, whither I myself
shall proceed in three days. Will each of you give me the tale of the
number of armed men who can take horse at an hour's notice."

Each of those present gave the number of housecarls in his service, and
they all expressed their willingness to ride themselves, in order to get
them ready the more speedily. The total mounted to three hundred and fifty
men.

"That with my own two hundred will be well-nigh sufficient," Harold said;
"but I will send off messengers at once to some of the thanes of Dorset and
Somerset to join us at Gloucester with their men, so that we shall be fully
a thousand strong, which will be ample for my purpose. I need not impress
upon you all to preserve an absolute silence as to the object for which you
are calling out your men. News spreads fast, and an incautious word might
ruin our enterprise. There is no occasion for you all to accompany your
men. Those of you who have been with me in Normandy will doubtless desire
to stay for a while with your wives and families, and you may do equally
good service by making preparations there for a more serious campaign in
the spring. I beg these to send with their housecarls a trusted officer,
and bid him place himself and his men under my orders."

The meeting at once broke up.

"I suppose you young warriors will bring your own men to Salisbury?" Harold
said, as Wulf and Beorn came up to take their leave of him.

"Certainly, my lord," Beorn said. "We have neither family nor relations to
keep us at home, and even if we had it would not suffice to keep us from
following your banner."

"It will be a warfare like that in which you have been engaged across the
sea," Harold said. "The Bretons you there fought with are kinsfolk of the
Welsh, speaking the same language, and being alike in customs and in
fighting. They trust to surprises, and to their speed of foot and
knowledge of their wild country, rather than to hard fighting in the open
plain. They have few towns to capture, and it is therefore hard to execute
reprisals upon them. Like the Bretons they are brave, and fight savagely
until the last, neither giving nor asking for quarter. They believe that
their country, which is so wild and hilly as to be a great natural
fortress, is unconquerable, and certainly neither Saxon nor Dane has ever
succeeded in getting any foothold there. But when the spring comes I hope
to teach them that even their wild hills are no defence, and that their
habits of savage plundering must be abandoned or we will exterminate them
altogether. But I have no thought of undertaking such a campaign now. Of
course you will take that tall follower of yours with you, Wulf."

"I fear that he would not stay behind even if I ordered him to do so," Wulf
laughed. "He will be overjoyed when I tell him there is a prospect of
