"Certainly. He was a native of this place."

"You never told me this before. This is wonderful. You have not a name
like the people here. What was your father's name?"

"What was his name? It was Henrico Trevillo."

Mrs. Menotti sprang up from the seat as if she had had a shock.

"What did you say, Rico?" she cried out. "What did you say just now?
Tell me again."

"I told you my father's name."

Mrs. Menotti was not listening: she ran towards the door.

"Stineli, bring me a kerchief," she cried. "I must go to the priest at
once: I am trembling all over."

In great surprise, Stineli brought out the kerchief.

"Come with me a few steps, Rico," said the good woman, as she went
through the garden. "I must ask you something more."

Rico had to repeat his father's name twice over; and when they had
fairly reached the door of the priest's house, for a third time Mrs.
Menotti asked,--

"What did you say it was? Are you quite sure?"

She hurried into the priest's house, and left Rico wondering what could
have happened to put her into such a way.

Rico had brought his violin with him, for he knew that Stineli was
particularly pleased to hear it. When he reached Silvio's room, he
found the little boy and his companion in the best of humor. Stineli
had fulfilled her promise about the story of Peterli's funny doings,
and this had amused Silvio exceedingly. When the latter espied the
violin, he cried out at once, "Now let us sing; let us sing the
'Lambkins' with Stineli."

Stineli had never heard her song since it was composed that day on the
mountain, for now Rico played such beautiful airs that she had quite
forgotten the old ones. But she was astonished to hear Silvio asking
for the German song, for she had no idea of the hundred times the two
boys had repeated it during the three years that were past. She was
much pleased to hear the old song again, and, above all, to sing it
with Rico; and so they began. Silvio sang with all his might,--without
understanding a single word, to be sure, but the tune was quite
correct. It was the girl's turn to laugh now; for Silvio's
pronunciation was most wonderful, and she could not join in for
laughter, and it was contagious; for the child could not resist the
merry expression of her face, and joined her in laughing, and sang
again still more queerly and louder; and all the while Rico played his
accompaniment without stopping.

And thus Mrs. Menotti's ears were greeted with laughter and song as she
drew near the house on her return, and she could not understand how they
could be so light-hearted and merry on such a momentous occasion. She
came hastily through the garden, and into the room, and sank upon the
nearest seat; for the shock and the joy, and the anticipation of what
was to follow, had overpowered her, and she needed to recover herself a
little. The sight of her agitation silenced the singers, and they gazed
at her in surprise. At last she recovered, and said,--

"Rico,"--and her voice was quite solemn,--"Rico, listen to me. Look
about you. This house, this garden, that field,--all, all that you can
see, and much that you cannot see, belongs to you: it is all yours. You
are the owner; it is your inheritance from your father; your home is
here; your name stands in the baptismal record; you are the son of
Henrico Trevillo, and he was my husband's dearest friend."

Stineli had understood the whole story at the first word, and her face
beamed with unspeakable happiness.

Rico sat as if turned to stone, and made no sound; but Silvio broke out
into shouts of delight,--it was all a play to him.

"Oh! now the house belongs to Rico, where is he going to sleep?"

"He can sleep in any room he chooses, Silvio. He can sleep in them all
if he wishes to. He can turn us all out-of-doors if he has a mind to,
and stay all sole alone in this house."

"I am sure I should much prefer to go away with you, then," said Rico.

"Oh, you good Rico!" cried Mrs. Menotti. "If you will let us stay here,
we shall be so glad to remain. I have thought it out as I came along
towards home, and know how we can arrange it so that we shall be happy.
I will take half of the house of you, and the same with the garden and
all the land; so one half will be yours, and the other Silvio's."

"I shall give my half to Stineli," said the child.

"So shall I," said Rico.

"Oh, ho! now the whole thing belongs to her,--the garden, and the house,
and all that is in them; and Rico and his fiddle, and I too. Now let us
go on with our song."

But Rico did not take the same view of the affair as his little friend.
He had thought over Mrs. Menotti's words, and now asked, anxiously,--

"I do not understand how Silvio's house can belong to me because our
fathers were friends."

It now occurred to Mrs. Menotti for the first time that Rico did not
know any thing about the circumstances; and she told him the whole
story, with all the particulars, even more minutely than she had told it
to Stineli; and when she had finished they all understood perfectly how
it was, and were at liberty to rejoice without restraint; for since the
house and all belonged partly to Rico, there was no reason why he should
not take possession at once, and never leave them again; and their
rejoicing was great.

In the midst of their merry-making Rico said, suddenly,--

"Since things have turned out this way, Mrs. Menotti, do not let any of
the arrangements be disturbed in the house; but every thing go on as
usual. I will simply come here to live, and you shall be our mother."

"O Rico! to think that it is yours, that it is you who are the _master_.
How good God is to let it all turn out in this way,--that I can give it
all to you, and yet stay here myself with a clear conscience. I will be
a mother to you, Rico; and indeed you have long been as dear to me as if
you were my own child. Now you must call me 'mother,' and so must
Stineli; and we shall be the happiest household in all Peschiera."

"Well, now let us finish our song," cried little Silvio; for he was so
excited and glad that he felt that singing was the only way to express
his joy; and the others were not unwilling to join him, and they did
finish their song; then Stineli said,--

"Now will you not sing one other song with me, Rico? You know which
one I mean."

And they sang the grandmother's hymn piously, and in beautiful accord,
especially the favorite verses at the end,--

  "He never yet has done amiss;
  And, perfect in His sight,
  All that He does or orders is
  Sure to be finished right.

  "Now only let His 'will be done,'
  Nor clamor constantly,
  Peace to the heart on earth will come,
  And joy eternally."

The next day Rico did not go to Riva. Mother Menotti advised him to go
at once to the landlady, to explain to her the change in his
circumstances, and to order another fiddler to be sent to Riva, while he
at once entered upon his possessions. Well pleased with these
suggestions, the youth hastened to carry them out.

The landlady heard his wonderful story with great interest, and at the
end she called out to her husband and told it all over to him, and
testified real pleasure at the good fortune that had befallen her young
friend, and was sincere in what she said. She certainly was sorry to
lose him; but she had suspected for some time that the hostess of the
"Three Crowns" was making advances to Rico in the hope of enticing him
away from her; and that would have been dreadful to the "Golden Sun."
Now any danger of that misfortune was averted, and she was glad to hear
that Rico was a house and land holder himself, for he was a great
favorite with her. Her husband was particularly well pleased; for he had
been a friend of Rico's father, and did not now understand why he had
not earlier noticed that the lad was the exact image of the man.

So the farewells were all spoken in good feeling, and the landlady took
his hand at parting, and asked for his patronage if ever there was
occasion for her services in his house.

That very evening the news was known in all Peschiera, with all the true
details, and a great many more; and everybody expressed pleasure, and
said that Rico looked exactly as if he owned an estate, and would grace
the position.

Mother Menotti did not know how she could do enough to make Rico
comfortable in his own house. She arranged the big room for him--the
one that had two windows overlooking the garden, and with a view over
the lake--with beautiful marble statuettes adorning the walls; and on
the table she placed a vase of flowers, and the whole room was most
prettily furnished, so that Rico stood still on the threshold when, at
Mrs. Menotti's request, Stineli led him up there. And when the kind,
motherly woman took his hand and led him to the window, and he looked
down in the shimmering lake, and over at the purple mountains in the
distance, his heart filled to overflowing with thankfulness, and he
could only murmur, softly,--

"Oh, how beautiful! And this is my home!" And now day after day the four
happy friends lived their peaceful life in the comfortable room looking
on the garden, where Silvio lay, and never perceived how the time was
speeding away.

In the daytime Rico went about with his whistling servant lad through
the fig-trees and over the fields planted with corn, for he wanted to
learn the care of it all.

Now the servant naturally thought, "I know much more than my new
master," and felt sensible of his superiority over Rico; but when, in
the evening, beautiful and heart-stirring music came forth upon the
evening breeze from the well-lighted room, where they all sat
together, the boy leaned against the hedge and listened for long
hours; for music was his greatest delight, and he said to himself, "My
master knows more than I do, after all;" and he could not help feeling
a great respect for Rico.




CHAPTER XXI.

SUNSHINE ON THE LAKE OF GARDA.


Two years have passed, every day bringing more enjoyment than the last.

To Stineli came the knowledge that it was time for her to return to her
home, and she had many a hard battle with herself to keep up her courage
and cheerfulness; for to go away, and probably never return, was the
most dreadful prospect that ever presented itself to the young girl's
imagination. Rico also knew what was before them, and sometimes he would
only speak when it became absolutely necessary. And a strange, unnatural
feeling took possession of mother Menotti, and she tried to discover the
secret cause; for she had quite forgotten that Stineli was to go home
again to be confirmed. When at last the cause of the trouble came out,
she said, "Oh! you can put that off for another year;" and so things
fell back into their old comfort again.

On the third year, however, a message came from Bergamo (some one came
down there from the mountain) that Stineli was wanted at home, and must
go. Now there was no help for it. Silvio might fight against it like one
possessed: it did no good. Against fate it is useless to struggle.

Mother Menotti said, day after day, towards the end, "Only promise to
come back, Stineli. You may tell your father I will do any thing he
wishes, if he will only let you come back soon."

Rico said nothing at all. And Stineli went off; and day after day it
seemed as if a big black cloud lay over the household, and as if the
very sun outside had ceased to shine.

And so it went on from November to Easter, when everybody was rejoicing;
but it was still sad in Rico's house. After the Easter festival was
over, and every thing was beginning to be more beautiful than ever
before in the garden, and flowers and sweet odors were spread all
abroad, Rico sat by Silvio's bedside, and played every sad melody that
he could remember, until the little fellow was in a most melancholy
mood, when suddenly from the garden a merry voice called out,--

"Rico, Rico! have you no more cheerful welcome for me than this?"

Silvio screamed as if beside himself. Rico threw his violin on the bed,
and ran out; and mother Menotti came in, half frightened.

On the threshold stood Rico with Stineli; and so in Silvio's room there
was the long-lost sunshine back again, and they were as merry as ever
again, and happy as they had never believed would be possible during
their long separation. There they all sat at table by Silvio's bedside,
and questioned and answered, and told all that had happened, and ever
and again broke out into rejoicing over their reunion. Who would have
thought, to see them there, that any thing could be wanting to the
perfect happiness of these four people? But Rico knew another tale. In
the midst of all the merriment, he became absent-minded, and fell into
one of his old dreamy moods. It did not last as long as formerly,
however. He must have reached a satisfactory conclusion pretty soon; for
suddenly his reverie was over, and he said these words, with the utmost
decision, "Stineli must be my wife this very moment, or else she will
have to go away again directly; and that we could not endure."

This decision pleased Silvio mightily; and in a short time they were
all of the same way of thinking, that the sooner the marriage took
place the better.

On the very most beautiful May morning that ever shone over Peschiera, a
long procession started from the church towards the "Golden Sun."

At the head, tall and well-proportioned, came Rico with his stately
mien; and at his side walked Stineli, looking happy and pretty, her
smooth braids crowned with the fresh bridal wreath. Next in the
procession, in a well-upholstered little wagon, drawn by two merry
Peschiera urchins, Silvio might be seen, beaming with satisfaction like
a triumphant victor; and last of all followed mother Menotti, very much
moved and affected, in a rustling wedding-dress; behind her the servant
lad, with a nosegay that covered his whole shirt-front; and after them
streamed all Peschiera, with the very noisiest kind of participation,
for they all wanted to look at the handsome couple, and to do them
honor. It was almost like a great family festival, in which they all
joined to help the strayed and lost Peschiera boy to found his own home
in his native town.

The joy of the landlady of the "Golden Sun," when she saw the procession
coming towards her house, is quite indescribable. Whenever the question
arose concerning any wedding, low or high, she always said, with
emphasis,--

"That is nothing at all in comparison with Rico's wedding in the
'Golden Sun.'"

The house in the garden never again lost its sunshine, and Stineli took
good care "Our Father" was never forgotten again; and on every Sunday
evening the grandmother's hymn was sung in the garden in full chorus.





HOW WISELI WAS PROVIDED FOR.




CHAPTER I.

COASTING.


On one of the hills surrounding the city of Bern a little village is
perched which shall be nameless in this story; but if you are curious,
and go there in your travels, perhaps you may recognize it from the
following description. On the very top of the hill stands one solitary
house, with a beautiful garden about it. It is called "On the Height,"
and is the property of Colonel Ritter. The descent to the little square,
where the church and parsonage stand, is sharp (in the parsonage the
colonel's wife passed her happy days of childhood); and somewhat farther
down is the schoolhouse, amid a little cluster of houses; while on the
left, as you still descend, you see a lonely cottage with a pretty,
well-kept garden, surrounded by currant-bushes, and adorned with
mignonette and pinks, and a few roses amidst its chiccory and spinach.
This is the last house on the road, which, from here on, makes one long
stretch downward to the highway that goes far out into the country,
parallel with the river Aar.

This long, unbroken descent forms, in winter, the most perfect
coasting-ground imaginable; for once you are past the steep bit by the
colonel's house, you may go on without interruption quite down to the
road by the river; that is, always supposing that you make a fair start
at the beginning.

This coast was an endless source of pleasure to the army of children who
daily poured out of the door of the old schoolhouse when lesson hours
were over, ran to the yard where they had piled their sleds on entering,
took each his own from the heap, and scampered off in wild haste to
begin their afternoon amusement. How the hours passed no one could
imagine: down flew the sleds in a twinkling, and nobody felt the trouble
of climbing up the hill, so full were all the little heads of the
pleasure of going down again; and so the night, and the time for
returning to their homes for supper, always took them by surprise.

This usually occasioned a stormy scene before they left the
coasting-ground; for everybody wished to go down "once more," and then
"just _once_ more," and then "one single turn more,"--so that everybody
hurried and jumped onto the sleds, and flew down and ran up again in a
regular hurry-scurry.

A rule had been established to the end that no one should go down the
coast while the others were still climbing up, but that all should go
down one after the other in good order, to prevent confusion or
accidents. Notwithstanding this good rule, there were often many
lawless proceedings, especially towards the close of the day, when
nobody wished to be the last, and when they all crowded onto the coast
very closely together.

This was the state of affairs on a clear evening in January, when the
snow fairly crackled under the children's feet as they mounted the hill,
and the fields in every direction were frozen so firmly that you could
have gone anywhere over them in a sleigh as if they were the highway.
The children were all rosy and glowing with their exertions, for they
