"Is this true?" inquired the Scarecrow, turning to the Munchkin boy.

"Yes," said Ojo, and told how the Woozy had set fire to the fence.

"Have you any other accomplishments?" asked the Scarecrow.

"I have a most terrible growl--that is, sometimes," said the Woozy, as
Scraps laughed merrily and the Shaggy Man smiled. But the Patchwork
Girl's laugh made the Scarecrow forget all about the Woozy. He said to
her:

"What an admirable young lady you are, and what jolly good company! We
must be better acquainted, for never before have I met a girl with such
exquisite coloring or such natural, artless manners."

"No wonder they call you the Wise Scarecrow," replied Scraps.

"When you arrive at the Emerald City I will see you again," continued
the Scarecrow. "Just now I am going to call upon an old friend--an
ordinary young lady named Jinjur--who has promised to repaint my left
ear for me. You may have noticed that the paint on my left ear has
peeled off and faded, which affects my hearing on that side. Jinjur
always fixes me up when I get weather-worn."

"When do you expect to return to the Emerald City?" asked the Shaggy
Man.

"I'll be there this evening, for I'm anxious to have a long talk with
Miss Scraps. How is it, Sawhorse; are you equal to a swift run?"

"Anything that suits you suits me," returned the wooden horse.

So the Scarecrow mounted to the jeweled saddle and waved his hat, when
the Sawhorse darted away so swiftly that they were out of sight in an
instant.




Chapter Fourteen

Ojo Breaks the Law


"What a queer man," remarked the Munchkin boy, when the party had
resumed its journey.

"And so nice and polite," added Scraps, bobbing her head. "I think he
is the handsomest man I've seen since I came to life."

"Handsome is as handsome does," quoted the Shaggy Man; "but we must
admit that no living scarecrow is handsomer. The chief merit of my
friend is that he is a great thinker, and in Oz it is considered good
policy to follow his advice."

"I didn't notice any brains in his head," observed the Glass Cat.

"You can't see 'em work, but they're there, all right," declared the
Shaggy Man. "I hadn't much confidence in his brains myself, when first
I came to Oz, for a humbug Wizard gave them to him; but I was soon
convinced that the Scarecrow is really wise; and, unless his brains
make him so, such wisdom is unaccountable."

"Is the Wizard of Oz a humbug?" asked Ojo.

"Not now. He was once, but he has reformed and now assists Glinda the
Good, who is the Royal Sorceress of Oz and the only one licensed to
practice magic or sorcery. Glinda has taught our old Wizard a good many
clever things, so he is no longer a humbug."

They walked a little while in silence and then Ojo said:

"If Ozma forbids the Crooked Magician to restore Unc Nunkie to life,
what shall I do?"

The Shaggy Man shook his head.

"In that case you can't do anything," he said. "But don't be
discouraged yet. We will go to Princess Dorothy and tell her your
troubles, and then we will let her talk to Ozma. Dorothy has the
kindest little heart in the world, and she has been through so many
troubles herself that she is sure to sympathize with you."

"Is Dorothy the little girl who came here from Kansas?" asked the boy.

"Yes. In Kansas she was Dorothy Gale. I used to know her there, and she
brought me to the Land of Oz. But now Ozma has made her a Princess, and
Dorothy's Aunt Em and Uncle Henry are here, too." Here the Shaggy Man
uttered a long sigh, and then he continued: "It's a queer country, this
Land of Oz; but I like it, nevertheless."

"What is queer about it?" asked Scraps.

"You, for instance," said he.

"Did you see no girls as beautiful as I am in your own country?" she
inquired.

"None with the same gorgeous, variegated beauty," he confessed. "In
America a girl stuffed with cotton wouldn't be alive, nor would anyone
think of making a girl out of a patchwork quilt."

"What a queer country America must be!" she exclaimed in great
surprise. "The Scarecrow, whom you say is wise, told me I am the most
beautiful creature he has ever seen."

"I know; and perhaps you are--from a scarecrow point of view," replied
the Shaggy Man; but why he smiled as he said it Scraps could not
imagine.

As they drew nearer to the Emerald City the travelers were filled with
admiration for the splendid scenery they beheld. Handsome houses stood
on both sides of the road and each had a green lawn before it as well
as a pretty flower garden.

"In another hour," said the Shaggy Man, "we shall come in sight of the
walls of the Royal City."

He was walking ahead, with Scraps, and behind them came the Woozy and
the Glass Cat. Ojo had lagged behind, for in spite of the warnings he
had received the boy's eyes were fastened on the clover that bordered
the road of yellow bricks and he was eager to discover if such a thing
as a six-leaved clover really existed.

Suddenly he stopped short and bent over to examine the ground more
closely. Yes; here at last was a clover with six spreading leaves. He
counted them carefully, to make sure. In an instant his heart leaped
with joy, for this was one of the important things he had come for--one
of the things that would restore dear Unc Nunkie to life.

He glanced ahead and saw that none of his companions was looking back.
Neither were any other people about, for it was midway between two
houses. The temptation was too strong to be resisted.

"I might search for weeks and weeks, and never find another six-leaved
clover," he told himself, and quickly plucking the stem from the plant
he placed the prized clover in his basket, covering it with the other
things he carried there. Then, trying to look as if nothing had
happened, he hurried forward and overtook his comrades.

The Emerald City, which is the most splendid as well as the most
beautiful city in any fairyland, is surrounded by a high, thick wall of
green marble, polished smooth and set with glistening emeralds. There
are four gates, one facing the Munchkin Country, one facing the Country
of the Winkies, one facing the Country of the Quadlings and one facing
the Country of the Gillikins. The Emerald City lies directly in the
center of these four important countries of Oz. The gates had bars of
pure gold, and on either side of each gateway were built high towers,
from which floated gay banners. Other towers were set at distances
along the walls, which were broad enough for four people to walk
abreast upon.

This enclosure, all green and gold and glittering with precious gems,
was indeed a wonderful sight to greet our travelers, who first observed
it from the top of a little hill; but beyond the wall was the vast city
it surrounded, and hundreds of jeweled spires, domes and minarets,
flaunting flags and banners, reared their crests far above the towers
of the gateways. In the center of the city our friends could see the
tops of many magnificent trees, some nearly as tall as the spires of
the buildings, and the Shaggy Man told them that these trees were in
the royal gardens of Princess Ozma.

They stood a long time on the hilltop, feasting their eyes on the
splendor of the Emerald City.

"Whee!" exclaimed Scraps, clasping her padded hands in ecstacy,
"that'll do for me to live in, all right. No more of the Munchkin
Country for these patches--and no more of the Crooked Magician!"

"Why, you belong to Dr. Pipt," replied Ojo, looking at her in
amazement. "You were made for a servant, Scraps, so you are personal
property and not your own mistress."

"Bother Dr. Pipt! If he wants me, let him come here and get me. I'll
not go back to his den of my own accord; that's certain. Only one place
in the Land of Oz is fit to live in, and that's the Emerald City. It's
lovely! It's almost as beautiful as I am, Ojo."

"In this country," remarked the Shaggy Man, "people live wherever our
Ruler tells them to. It wouldn't do to have everyone live in the
Emerald City, you know, for some must plow the land and raise grains
and fruits and vegetables, while others chop wood in the forests, or
fish in the rivers, or herd the sheep and the cattle."

"Poor things!" said Scraps.

"I'm not sure they are not happier than the city people," replied the
Shaggy Man. "There's a freedom and independence in country life that
not even the Emerald City can give one. I know that lots of the city
people would like to get back to the land. The Scarecrow lives in the
country, and so do the Tin Woodman and Jack Pumpkinhead; yet all three
would be welcome to live in Ozma's palace if they cared to. Too much
splendor becomes tiresome, you know. But, if we're to reach the Emerald
City before sundown, we must hurry, for it is yet a long way off."

The entrancing sight of the city had put new energy into them all and
they hurried forward with lighter steps than before. There was much to
interest them along the roadway, for the houses were now set more
closely together and they met a good many people who were coming or
going from one place or another. All these seemed happy-faced, pleasant
people, who nodded graciously to the strangers as they passed, and
exchanged words of greeting.

At last they reached the great gateway, just as the sun was setting and
adding its red glow to the glitter of the emeralds on the green walls
and spires. Somewhere inside the city a band could be heard playing
sweet music; a soft, subdued hum, as of many voices, reached their
ears; from the neighboring yards came the low mooing of cows waiting to
be milked.

They were almost at the gate when the golden bars slid back and a tall
soldier stepped out and faced them. Ojo thought he had never seen so
tall a man before. The soldier wore a handsome green and gold uniform,
with a tall hat in which was a waving plume, and he had a belt thickly
encrusted with jewels. But the most peculiar thing about him was his
long green beard, which fell far below his waist and perhaps made him
seem taller than he really was.

"Halt!" said the Soldier with the Green Whiskers, not in a stern voice
but rather in a friendly tone.

They halted before he spoke and stood looking at him.

"Good evening, Colonel," said the Shaggy Man. "What's the news since I
left? Anything important?"

"Billina has hatched out thirteen new chickens," replied the Soldier
with the Green Whiskers, "and they're the cutest little fluffy yellow
balls you ever saw. The Yellow Hen is mighty proud of those children, I
can tell you."

"She has a right to be," agreed the Shaggy Man. "Let me see; that's
about seven thousand chicks she has hatched out; isn't it, General?"

"That, at least," was the reply. "You will have to visit Billina and
congratulate her."

"It will give me pleasure to do that," said the Shaggy Man. "But you
will observe that I have brought some strangers home with me. I am
going to take them to see Dorothy."

"One moment, please," said the soldier, barring their way as they
started to enter the gate. "I am on duty, and I have orders to execute.
Is anyone in your party named Ojo the Unlucky?"

"Why, that's me!" cried Ojo, astonished at hearing his name on the lips
of a stranger.

The Soldier with the Green Whiskers nodded. "I thought so," said he,
"and I am sorry to announce that it is my painful duty to arrest you."

"Arrest me!" exclaimed the boy. "What for?"

"I haven't looked to see," answered the soldier. Then he drew a paper
from his breast pocket and glanced at it. "Oh, yes; you are to be
arrested for willfully breaking one of the Laws of Oz."

"Breaking a law!" said Scraps. "Nonsense, Soldier; you're joking."

"Not this time," returned the soldier, with a sigh. "My dear
child--what are you, a rummage sale or a guess-me-quick?--in me you
behold the Body-Guard of our gracious Ruler, Princess Ozma, as well as
the Royal Army of Oz and the Police Force of the Emerald City."

"And only one man!" exclaimed the Patchwork Girl.

"Only one, and plenty enough. In my official positions I've had nothing
to do for a good many years--so long that I began to fear I was
absolutely useless--until to-day. An hour ago I was called to the
presence of her Highness, Ozma of Oz, and told to arrest a boy named
Ojo the Unlucky, who was journeying from the Munchkin Country to the
Emerald City and would arrive in a short time. This command so
astonished me that I nearly fainted, for it is the first time anyone
has merited arrest since I can remember. You are rightly named Ojo the
Unlucky, my poor boy, since you have broken a Law of Oz.

"But you are wrong," said Scraps. "Ozma is wrong--you are all
wrong--for Ojo has broken no Law."

"Then he will soon be free again," replied the Soldier with the Green
Whiskers. "Anyone accused of crime is given a fair trial by our Ruler
and has every chance to prove his innocence. But just now Ozma's orders
must be obeyed."

With this he took from his pocket a pair of handcuffs made of gold and
set with rubies and diamonds, and these he snapped over Ojo's wrists.




Chapter Fifteen

Ozma's Prisoner


The boy was so bewildered by this calamity that he made no resistance
at all. He knew very well he was guilty, but it surprised him that Ozma
also knew it. He wondered how she had found out so soon that he had
picked the six-leaved clover. He handed his basket to Scraps and said:

"Keep that, until I get out of prison. If I never get out, take it to
the Crooked Magician, to whom it belongs."

The Shaggy Man had been gazing earnestly in the boy's face, uncertain
whether to defend him or not; but something he read in Ojo's expression
made him draw back and refuse to interfere to save him. The Shaggy Man
was greatly surprised and grieved, but he knew that Ozma never made
mistakes and so Ojo must really have broken the Law of Oz.

The Soldier with the Green Whiskers now led them all through the gate
and into a little room built in the wall. Here sat a jolly little man,
richly dressed in green and having around his neck a heavy gold chain
to which a number of great golden keys were attached. This was the
Guardian of the Gate and at the moment they entered his room he was
playing a tune upon a mouth-organ.

"Listen!" he said, holding up his hand for silence. "I've just composed
a tune called 'The Speckled Alligator.' It's in patch-time, which is
much superior to rag-time, and I've composed it in honor of the
Patchwork Girl, who has just arrived."

"How did you know I had arrived?" asked Scraps, much interested.

"It's my business to know who's coming, for I'm the Guardian of the
Gate. Keep quiet while I play you 'The Speckled Alligator.'"

It wasn't a very bad tune, nor a very good one, but all listened
respectfully while he shut his eyes and swayed his head from side to
side and blew the notes from the little instrument. When it was all
over the Soldier with the Green Whiskers said:

"Guardian, I have here a prisoner."

"Good gracious! A prisoner?" cried the little man, jumping up from his
chair. "Which one? Not the Shaggy Man?"

"No; this boy."

"Ah; I hope his fault is as small as himself," said the Guardian of the
Gate. "But what can he have done, and what made him do it?"

"Can't say," replied the soldier. "All I know is that he has broken the
Law."

"But no one ever does that!"

"Then he must be innocent, and soon will be released. I hope you are
right, Guardian. Just now I am ordered to take him to prison. Get me a
prisoner's robe from your Official Wardrobe."

The Guardian unlocked a closet and took from it a white robe, which the
soldier threw over Ojo. It covered him from head to foot, but had two
holes just in front of his eyes, so he could see where to go. In this
attire the boy presented a very quaint appearance.

As the Guardian unlocked a gate leading from his room into the streets
of the Emerald City, the Shaggy Man said to Scraps:

"I think I shall take you directly to Dorothy, as the Scarecrow
advised, and the Glass Cat and the Woozy may come with us. Ojo must go
to prison with the Soldier with the Green Whiskers, but he will be well
treated and you need not worry about him."

"What will they do with him?" asked Scraps.

"That I cannot tell. Since I came to the Land of Oz no one has ever
been arrested or imprisoned--until Ojo broke the Law."

"Seems to me that girl Ruler of yours is making a big fuss over
nothing," remarked Scraps, tossing her yarn hair out of her eyes with a
jerk of her patched head. "I don't know what Ojo has done, but it
couldn't be anything very bad, for you and I were with him all the
time."

The Shaggy Man made no reply to this speech and presently the Patchwork
Girl forgot all about Ojo in her admiration of the wonderful city she
had entered.

They soon separated from the Munchkin boy, who was led by the Soldier
with the Green Whiskers down a side street toward the prison. Ojo felt
very miserable and greatly ashamed of himself, but he was beginning to
grow angry because he was treated in such a disgraceful manner. Instead
of entering the splendid Emerald City as a respectable traveler who was
entitled to a welcome and to hospitality, he was being brought in as a
criminal, handcuffed and in a robe that told all he met of his deep
disgrace.

Ojo was by nature gentle and affectionate and if he had disobeyed the
Law of Oz it was to restore his dear Unc Nunkie to life. His fault was
