when the time had come, then he had become parson in Upper Wood. First
'Lizebeth had served the grandfather, then the father and now the son,
and she had long since elected Edi as the future minister, and intended
to look after his house when he should be the master here.



CHAPTER II

_A Call in the Village_


The friendly village Upper Wood lay on the top of the hill close by the
fir wood; it had a beautiful white church with a high, slender tower. At
a distance of three-quarters of an hour's walk, down in the valley, lay
Lower Wood, a small community which, however, did not wish to be
considered smaller. They had a new schoolhouse and a church of their
own, but the church had no tower, only a little red dome. Therefore the
people of Upper Wood were a little proud, because their church was much
prettier and also because they learned much more in the old schoolhouse
in Upper Wood than in the new one of Lower Wood; but that was the
children's fault, not the teacher's. In the middle, between the two
villages lay a hamlet consisting of a few farms and some small houses of
little pretense. It was called the Middle Lot, and its people the Middle
Lotters. They had the choice to what church and school they wished to
belong, whether to Lower Wood or Upper Wood, and according to their
choice they were judged by the people of Upper Wood; for whoever wanted
to learn much and be decent, he must, according to the Upper Wooders,
strive to belong to them. This was a fixed and general idea of the
people on the top of the hill. In the Middle Lot there lived only two
families who were generally respected; the Justice of Peace, who was
obliged to live there because otherwise he would have to be called
there, and that would have been inconvenient. This peace-making man was
Kaetheli's father. And the other was old Marianne, who lived in her own
house and pulled horse-hair for a living, and never did harm to anyone.

When on the next morning the three children of the parsonage passed
Marianne's house on their way to school, Sally said: "It is fun to go to
school to-day for the strange boy of yesterday will come too; if we only
knew his name. Kaetheli described him to me; he wears velvet pants. Of
course he will come to Upper Wood to school."

"Of course," said Edi with a dignified air; "who would think of going to
Lower Wood to School?"

"Of course, who would go there to school?" observed Ritz.

Then the three in perfect harmony entered the schoolhouse. But no
strange face was to be seen in the whole schoolroom; everything went on
in the usual way to the end of the morning. Then everyone hurried away
in different directions. Sally was standing there, somewhat undecided;
she would like to have heard something new of the strange boy and his
mother, for she loved to hear news, and now not even Kaetheli, with whom
she talked things over, had been in school. But now she saw Edi soaring
along like an arrow into the midst of a crowd of boys, and they all
acted so strangely and they shouted so strangely that Sally thought that
something particular must be in preparation there, and no doubt
concerned the new-comers. Then she could hear something from Edi. She
went slowly on and kept on turning round, but Edi did not come, and only
after Sally had long since greeted the mother and was about to call her
father out of his study for dinner, did the two brothers come running
along, their faces red as fire, and breathless, for they had lingered to
the last moment. The father was just leaving his study when both rushed
toward him and now it began: "We have--the Middle Lotters--with the
Lower Wooders--"

"Hush, hush," said the father. "First get your breath, then relate, one
after the other; but before anything, first the soup." With these words
the father took Ritz's hand, and Sally and Edi followed them into the
dining-room. Sally pulled Edi a little back and whispered:

"Tell me quickly, what did they tell about the strange boy?"

"About him?" returned Edi in a somewhat scornful tone. "I had forgotten
all about him! We have something else to do than to talk about a strange
boy, of whom one does not even know whether he will come to Upper Wood
to school."

This answer was somewhat unexpected to Sally and had a saddening effect;
but she always could find a way out of an unpleasant situation. So she
sat as still as a mouse during the whole time the soup was eaten, and
her thoughts were hard at work.

Now the father turned to Edi and said: "Now you can relate your
adventure, while Ritz remains quiet, and afterwards his turn will come."
Ritz looked quite obedient for he had two large noodles on his plate to
work with.

But Edi, in a moment, put down knife and fork and quickly began: "Just
think, Papa, we have made three songs, one for each parish. First, the
Lower Wooders began. The sixth class were angry because we laughed at
them, that they only now have to _make_ sentences, and we in the fourth
class have begun to _write_ them already. They made a song about us
which runs:

    "'Of Upper Wood the boys
     They in their minds rejoice
     Because they think that they the cleverest are,
     But if ever they must fight
     They are in sorry plight
     And they turn round and run for ever so far.'

"How do you like that song, Papa?"

"Well, that is such as Lower Wooders would make," said the father.

"And then," Edi continued, "we have made a song for an answer, that goes
thus:

    "'And of Lower Wood the crowd
     They always yell so loud
     That they never, never stay within their den,
     For all dispute and strife
     They are much alive
     For they use their fists when they ought to use their pen.'

"How do you like this one, Papa?"

"Just about the same. And who has sung about the Middle Lot?" asked the
father.

"The Lower Wooders and we together; they too had to have a song, but the
shortest, as it ought to be. It runs so:

    "'And they of Middle Lot
     They all together plot
     That they are striving zealously for peace,
     But with quarrelling they never cease.'

"And how do you like that, Papa?"

"They are, all three of them, kind of fighting songs, Edi," answered the
father, "and I should prefer that you keep busy with your history
studies, instead of taking sides in these party-fights. One never knows
where one comes out, and such poetry usually ends with lumps on the
heads."

Edi seemed much disappointed as he attacked his noodles with a visibly
spoiled appetite.

"And what has been your experience, Sally? Why are you so pensive?" the
father continued.

"Kaetheli was not at school," reported Sally, "and I had so much to talk
over with her. Perhaps she is sick; may I go to see her this afternoon?
We have no school, you know."

"Aha, Sally wants to see the strange boy," the sharp-witted Edi
remarked.

"You may go, Sally," the mother said, answering a questioning look from
the father. "But you will not go into any house where you have no
business, just to look at strangers. I know you are capable of doing
such things. You can start soon after dinner."

Sally was very happy. She quickly fetched her straw hat and took leave.
But outside she did not run straight through the passage-way as she
usually did in similar cases, but went to the kitchen door and peeped
in, and when she saw 'Lizebeth at the sink, where the latter was
scraping her pans, she went in very close to the old woman and said
somewhat mysteriously: "'Lizebeth, does Edi or Ritz perhaps have a torn
mattress on their bed?"

'Lizebeth stopped scraping and turned round. She looked at Sally from
head to foot, put her hands on her hips and said very slowly and
importantly: "May I ask what you mean by that question, Sally? Do you
think this household is so carried on that one lies about on ragged
mattresses and sleeps, until a little one, who is far from old enough to
turn a mattress, thinks of coming to ask 'does not this one or that one
have a ragged mattress' on his bed? Yes, Sally, what cobwebs you do have
in your head."

"I do not care about the mattress, it is on account of Marianne that I
ask," Sally explained. "Do you know, she now has some new people in her
house and I should so much like to see them, and therefore I wanted so
much to know whether you could not sacrifice a mattress so that Marianne
could pull the horsehair for a mattress, for Mother will not let me go
into the house without a good excuse."

"Oh, so! that is different," said 'Lizebeth quite mildly, for she had
also been wondering what kind of people her old friend had taken into
her home, and now, perhaps, she could learn something about them through
Sally.

"I can help you, Sally," she said. "You go to Marianne and tell her that
I send my greetings, and I have long since intended to come and see her,
but the likes of us cannot get away when we want to; we never know what
may happen if we are out of the house for five minutes; but tell her
that I will surely come some fine Sunday. Now then go, and give my
message."

Sally ran with a joyous heart, first through the garden, then away over
the meadow and down the hill as far as the fir wood, where the dry road
lay for a long stretch in the shade. Here Sally slackened her pace a
little. It was so beautiful to walk along in shade of the trees, where
above in their tops the wind rustled so delightfully and all the birds
sang in confusion. She also had to consider how she would arrange her
calls, whether she would go first to Kaetheli or to Marianne; but this
time old Marianne had a stronger attraction than Kaetheli and Sally felt
that she must go there first and give her message. Now her thoughts fell
on the strange people and she had to imagine how they looked and what
she was going to say, and what they would say when she knocked and asked
for Marianne. Thus she thought everything well out, for Sally had a
great power of imagining things.

In this way she came to the first houses of Middle Lot. She turned away
from the road and went toward Marianne's house, which stood a little way
from the road and lay almost hidden behind a hedge. As Sally had been
accustomed to do, she now ran right into the house, although the house
door was also the kitchen door. After entering the front door she stood
in the small kitchen and was at once before another door which led into
the living-room. This door stood wide open and Sally found herself
suddenly in the presence of a lady dressed in black, who sat in that
room sewing and who lifted her head at Sally's noisy entrance, and with
large sad eyes she looked at the child in silence.

Sally grew as red as fire and in her embarrassment remained standing
near the door like one rooted to the floor.

Now the lady held out her hand and said in a friendly tone, "Come here,
dear child, what brings you to me?"

Sally was quite confused. She did not remember why she had come, for she
had really not come to see Marianne. She had invented that--to get into
the house where she had arrived now so unexpectedly. She approached the
lady and wanted to say something, but nothing came out. Sally grew
crimson and stood there more helpless than ever before in her life.

The lady took the child's hand and stroked her glowing cheeks.

"Come, sit down beside me, dear child," she then said, with a voice so
sweet that it went deep into Sally's heart. "Come, we shall come
gradually to know each other a little."


[Illustration: _Now the lady held out her hand and said in a friendly
tone, "Come here, dear child."..._]


Now there came from out of a corner a quick noise of moving; Sally did
not know what it was, for until now she had not dared to look around the
room, but now she looked up.

A boy, a little taller than she, was carrying a small easy chair and
placed it before Sally. He looked at her with such a merry face as the
restrained laughter came so visibly out of his eyes, that the sight
brought a complete reversion in Sally's feelings, and she, all at once,
laughed right out; upon which, the boy too, relieved his feelings by a
bright peal of laughter, for the rushing in and then the confusion of
the unexpected guest had long since tempted him to laugh; but he was too
well trained to dare to break out.

"Well, my child," said the mother with that winning voice, "and what has
brought you to me?"

"I have--I ought to--I wanted," Sally began hesitatingly, "I wanted to
give a message to Marianne--" Sally could not stop at half the truth.
The sad, friendly eyes of the lady were penetratingly resting on hers,
so everything had to come out as it was.

"That is lovely and friendly of you, that you want to see us, dear
little girl. How did you hear of us?" asked the lady, and took off
Sally's straw hat, while she put the question to the child. She placed
the hat on the table and smoothed her hair with a mother's touch.

Now Sally related all in full confidence how it had happened, and that
she and her two brothers had wanted to come yesterday to find out who
was coming to live with Marianne, and to find out how the piano and all
the other things could find room in the little house. Sally now, for the
first time, looked around the room and she had to wonder a little, for
she saw only the piano and four bare walls, and then there were the two
easy chairs on which she and the lady were sitting, and the small table.
She knew that besides this room there was a very small bedroom, where
two beds could hardly find room. Sally could not set herself to rights;
all was so different from what she had imagined. She had expected to see
strange and foreign things standing about everywhere and now she saw
nothing besides an old piano. And yet the lady who sat before her in a
black silken dress looked more aristocratic than Sally could ever have
imagined; and the boy in his velvet suit looked quite like the old
knights in Edi's beautiful picture book, and he had brought her a seat
without anyone telling him, and was more refined and courteous than she
had ever before seen a boy.

When Sally turned her surprised eyes again to the lady, she saw such a
painful expression in her face that it came involuntarily into her mind
how the mother had said, that of course "she would not go there for the
sake of staring at the people," and she felt that she was doing
something very much like it. Sally rose. All at once she remembered to
whom she really wanted to go, so she said hastily: "I must go to
Kaetheli; she may be sick." With these words she quickly offered her
hand to the lady.

The lady, too, had risen; she took the proffered hand, held it between
both of hers, and looked once more so lovingly into the child's eyes,
that her little heart was moved. Then she kissed her forehead and said:
"You dear child, you were a friendly picture in our quiet room."

Then she let go of her hand, and Sally went through the open door into
the small kitchen. The boy, meanwhile, had opened the house door and now
he stood outside quite courteously, like a doorkeeper, to bid Sally
good-bye.

"Are you not coming to school tomorrow?"

"Yes, indeed," was the answer.

That pleased Sally very much and she at once decided that he must become
Edi's friend, for she had taken a great liking to the boy and when he
was Edi's friend then he would be hers too, and he must come every
Sunday afternoon and spend it with them and they would teach him all
kinds of games; and many undertakings passed through her brain, for with
this friend everything could be carried out; he was so entirely
different from other boys and girls in the school. "Then you are coming
to-morrow?" she asked with happy expectation.

"Where shall I come?" he questioned in return.

"To school, of course."

"Yes, indeed, I'll come to school."

"Well, then, good-bye," said Sally, giving her hand, "but I do not know
your name."

"Erick--and yours?"

"Sally."

Now they shook hands, and Erick remained standing in the doorway until
Sally had turned round the hedge, then he shut the door and Sally ran
toward the house of the Justice of Peace. Before she reached it, old
Marianne met her, panting under the large bundle of horsehair which she
was carrying on her head. Sally was delighted to see her, for she had
just remembered that she had not given 'Lizebeth's message. She rushed
so quickly toward the old woman and with such force, that the latter
went back some steps and almost lost her balance, and Sally cried out:
"Marianne, you have such nice people in your rooms. Do you talk much
with them? Do you cook for them? Do you buy the things they need? Have
they no maid? Do you make their beds?"

"Gently, gently," said Marianne, who had recovered her balance, "else I
lose my breath. But tell me, how did you get into the people's room? I
hope you know how I am to be found."

Sally told her that she, for the shorter way, had not gone round the
house, where, in the woodshed, a narrow stair went up to Marianne's
small room; but that she had wanted to run in the front way, through the
kitchen, and out the back door; but that she had stood suddenly before
the open door of the room and under the eyes of the lady.

"You must never do that again," Marianne interrupted Sally, raising her
finger warningly. "Do you hear that, Sally? Never do that again. They
are not people into whose home you can rush, as if they were living on
the highway."

"But the lady was quite friendly, Marianne," soothed Sally, "she was not
at all offended."

"That makes no difference, she is always so, she could not be otherwise,
and just on that account, and on account of many other things, do you
hear, Sally? Promise that you never again go that way when you want to
come to me. Will you promise?"

"Yes, indeed I will. I do not intend to do it again. Good night,
Marianne! Now I have forgotten the main thing: 'Lizebeth sends her
greetings and she will come to see you on a fine Sunday."

The last words came from some distance, for Sally had already started on
a run while she gave the message, and when Marianne wanted to send her
greetings, Sally was already far away. After a few more jumps Sally
arrived at the house of the Justice of Peace, in front of which stood a
large apple tree which shaded the stone well. Here stood Kaetheli who
did not look sick at all, but splashed with two fat, red arms about the
water in which she seemed to clean some object eagerly.

"Then you are not sick. Why didn't you come to school then?" Sally
called out when she saw her.

"Oh, it is you? Good evening! I could not make out who was jumping
about, and I hadn't the time to look," Kaetheli said with some
importance. "That is also the reason why I did not go to school. I
hadn't the time, for Mother has gone away today to see sick Grandmother,
and then we got young chickens, twelve quite small ones, and that is why
I have to wash a stocking, for I have run after the chicks everywhere
and near the barn I stepped in the dirt quite deep. But come, I will
show you the chickens. Never mind if I have only one stocking on."

But Sally had only very little time left and besides, her head was full
of quite different things and she wanted to hear Kaetheli tell of
something else than the new chickens, so she said quite decisively: "No,
Kaetheli, I haven't time enough to see the chickens. I only wanted to
know whether you were ill and I want to tell you something. I have seen
the strange lady and the boy whom you know. He does look nice. Do you
know his name?"

"He?" said Kaetheli, shrugging her shoulders. "Of course I know. His
name is Erick and just think, he goes to school at Lower Wood; I have
seen him myself today, with his school sack, going there."

That was a blow for Sally. He went to school at Lower Wood. What was now
to come of her beautiful plans? Of all the planned Sundays which were to
be so full of joy and delight, and the whole friendship with the
prepossessing Erick? For how could Edi ever be brought to making friends
with a fellow who went to Lower Wood to school, when he just as well
might have gone to Upper Wood? Sally was very downcast, but she did not
easily give up a pleasant intention. On the way home she wanted to think
what could be done, therefore she stretched out her hand to the
astonished Kaetheli, and this time the invitation, to at least come into
the room and eat a piece of bread and butter, was not accepted; nor
would she go with Kaetheli behind the barn where they could fetch down
ripe cherries from the large cherry tree--it was all of no use.

"Another time, Kaetheli, it is already so late I must go home," and
Sally ran away. Kaetheli stood there much surprised and looked after
her, and in her bright mind she thought: "Sally has something new in her
head, else I could have brought her to the cherry tree, for she is not
always so anxious to go home; but I will find out what it is."

Meanwhile Sally ran for a long stretch, then she began to walk slower,
for she had to think over so many things and she was so lost in her
plans that she forgot when she arrived at the garden which stretched
from her home far into the meadows. Ritz stood on the low wall and
beckoned with wild gestures, for Sally had not seen him at first.

"Do come a little quicker so that you can tell something, else we will
