classroom, announced the project in the following words:--

                            "NOTICE."
        "A meeting will be held in the 'old lab' directly
         after dinner to-day, to make plans for starting a
         magazine in opposition to _The Ronleian_.
         All members of the Third Form are specially requested
         to attend."

                                    "FLETCHER II."
                                    "J. A. BIBBS."

"You must come," said "Rats" to Diggory; "it'll be an awful lark."

"But what's it all about?"

"Oh, you'll hear when you get there.  It's Fletcher's idea; he wants to
start a new magazine.  Eastfield, who edits _The Ronleian_, is Maxton's
cousin; so Maxton's going to interrupt and get some other fellows to do
the same.  I'm going to be part of the opposition," added the youthful
"Rats," beaming with delight, "and I have got a whole heap of paper bags
I'm going to burst while Fletcher's speaking."

The "old lab," as it was called, was a small brick building which stood
on one side of the asphalt playground.  A new laboratory having recently
been fitted up elsewhere, the former one was, for the time being,
unused.  It was not more than about fifteen feet long by seven or eight
feet wide; and as "The Happy Family" mustered in force, the place was
crowded to overflowing.  The door having been closed, Fletcher Two
mounted a low stone sink which ran along the end wall, and from this
ready-made platform commenced to address the assembly :--

"Gentlemen,--We've met here, as you know, to talk over starting a fresh
magazine.  _The Ronleian_ is a beastly swindle, and it's high time we
had something different."  (A voice, "No, 'tisn't," and the bursting of
a paper bag.)  "You shut up there!  I say it is a swindle: they didn't
give any account of that fourth eleven match against Robertson's second,
and they made fun of us in the 'Quad Gossip,' and said that in
'The Happy Family' there was a preponderance of monkey."  ("So there is,
and you're it!"  Laughter and another explosion.)

"What I propose is that we start a manuscript magazine for the Third
Form, and that every fellow promise to take that, and never to buy a
copy of the other.  We might pass it round, and charge a penny each to
look at it.  Will you all subscribe?"

No one spoke, the silence only being broken by the sound of "Rats"
blowing up another bag, which caused a fresh burst of laughter.

"Will you all subscribe?" once more demanded the speaker.

There were mingled cries of "Yes!" and "No!" and a stentorian yell of
"No, you cuckoo! of course we won't," from Maxton, and another
explosion.

"Look here, young 'Rats,' if you burst any more of those bags I'll come
down and burst your head.--I forgot to say, gentlemen, that Mr. Bibbs
has promised to assist in editing the paper; and I will now call upon
him to give you an account of what it will contain."

Bibbs, the Third Form genius, was regarded by every one as a huge joke,
and the very mention of his name caused a fresh burst of merriment.
He was a sad-faced, untidy-looking boy, quick and clever enough in some
things, and equally dull and stupid in others.  The announcement that he
would address the meeting had no sooner been made than half a dozen
willing pairs of hands seized and hoisted him on to the platform; though
no sooner had he attained this exalted position than two or three voices
ordered him in a peremptory manner to "Come down!"

The greater part of the audience not caring the toss of a button whether
Fletcher started his magazine or not, but thinking that it was rather
good fun to interrupt the proceedings, now joined the opposition, and
the unfortunate Bibbs was subjected to a brisk fire of chaff.
One facetious class-mate, standing close to the sink, offered to sell
him by auction; and hammering on the stones with the fragment of a bat
handle, knocked him down for threepence to another joker, who said he'd
do for a pen-wiper.

"Sing a song, Bibbs!" cried one voice; "Where's your neck-tie?" asked
another; "What are you grinning at?" demanded a third; while the object
of these pleasantries stood, with a vacant smile upon his face,
nervously fumbling with his watch-chain.

"Go on!" cried Fletcher, who had descended from the platform to make
room for his colleague; "say something, you fool!"

"The magazine is to be written on exercise-book paper," began Bibbs, and
had only got thus far when he was interrupted by a perfect salvo of
paper bags which little "Rats" discharged in quick succession.

With an exclamation of wrath Fletcher made a dive in the direction of
the offender, and in a moment the whole gathering was in a state of
confusion.  The majority of those present siding with "Rats," began to
hustle Fletcher, while two gentlemen having dragged Bibbs from his
perch, jumped up in his stead, and began to execute a clog-dance.

In the midst of this commotion Maxton elbowed his way through the crush,
and having pushed the two boys off the sink, mounted it himself,
crying,--

"Look here, I'm going to speak; just you listen a minute.  The reason
why Bibbs wants to start a new magazine is because he wrote a novel
once, and sent it to _The Ronleian_ to come out so much each month,
and they wouldn't have it."

"Shut up, Maxton!" cried Fletcher, rushing to the spot; "you've only
come here on purpose to interrupt.  Let's turn him out!"

"Yes, turn him out!" echoed the audience, who by this time were just in
the spirit for "ragging," and would have ejected friend or foe alike for
the sport of the thing--"turn him out!"

The two clog-dancers being quite ready to avenge the interruption of
their performance, formed themselves into a storming-party, and carried
the platform by assault.  Maxton, struggling all the way, was dragged to
the door, and cast out into the playground.  Most of the restless
spirits in the audience requiring a short breathing-space to recover
their wind after the tussle, there followed a few moments' quiet, which
Fletcher immediately took advantage of to mount the sink and resume the
business of the meeting.

"The magazine," he began, "is going to be written on exercise-book
paper.  Any one who likes can contribute, and it's going to be more
especially a paper for the Third Form."

The speaker went on to show that the periodical was destined to supply a
long-felt want.  _The Ronleian_ ignored the doings of boys in the lower
half of the school, and returned their contributions with insulting
suggestions, pencilled on the margins, that the authors should devote
some of their spare time and energy to the study of their English
grammars and spelling-books.  _The Third Form Chronicle_, as it was to
be called, would recognize the fact that junior boys had as much right
to be heard as seniors, and would afford them the opportunity of airing
their views on any subject they chose to bring forward.

Fletcher had barely time to proceed thus far with his speech when an
alarming interruption occurred, which put an immediate stop to his
further utterance.  Nearly at the top of the end wall there had formerly
been a ventilator; this, for one reason or another, had been removed,
and in the brickwork an open space about a foot square had been left.
A hissing noise was suddenly heard outside, and the next moment a stream
of water shot through the aperture, and descended in a perfect deluge on
the heads of the company.

The fact was that Maxton, ever a reckless young villain, had discovered
a hose fixed to one of the mains close to the building, and had
immediately seized upon it as an instrument wherewith to wreak vengeance
on his companions for having turned him out of the meeting.

Words cannot describe the uproar and confusion which followed.  As one
man the whole assembly made for the door, but only to find it fastened
on the outside.  The water flew all over the small building, drenching
every one in turn.  Some howled, some laughed, and only Bibbs had
sufficient presence of mind to creep under the sink, which afforded a
certain amount of shelter from the falling flood.

The deluge ceased as suddenly as it had begun, and an instant later the
door was flung open, and the figure of a Sixth Form boy was seen barring
the exit.

"Now, then," he demanded, "what are you youngsters making this awful
row for?  I've a jolly good mind to take all your names."

There was a moment's silence.  Then Fletcher's voice was heard
exclaiming,--

"Oh! it's only old 'Thirsty;' he's all right."

"Here, not so fast," answered the prefect, blocking up the doorway as
some boys tried to escape; "what are you chaps doing in here? I thought
you'd been told to keep out."

The originator of the meeting pushed his way through the crowd, and
taking hold of the big fellow's arm in a familiar manner, said,--

"Oh, it's all right, 'Thirsty,' old chap.  We just came inside, and some
one squirted water all over us, and that's why we shouted.  But we won't
do it again."

"Oh, but it isn't all right," returned the other.  "If I find any of you
in here again, I'll help you out with the toe of my boot.  Go on! I'll
let you off this once."

The crowd rushed forth and quickly dispersed.

"That Thurston seems an awful decent chap," said Diggory; "I didn't
think he'd let us off so easily."

"He's all right as long as you don't cross him," answered Carton.
"He used to be pretty strict, but he doesn't seem to care now what
fellows do.  He's very thick with Fletcher's brother--that's one reason
why he didn't do anything just now; but I can tell you he's a nasty chap
to deal with when he's in a wax."

The prefect locked the empty building, and turning on his heel caught
sight of our three friends, who were standing close by waiting for
"Rats."

"Hullo, you new kids! what are you called?"

The usual answer was given, and Thurston passed on, little thinking what
good cause he would have before the end of the year for remembering the
names of the trio, and altogether unaware of the prominent part which
the Triple Alliance was destined to play in his own private affairs as
well as in the fortunes of Ronleigh College.



CHAPTER IX.


A HOLIDAY ADVENTURE.

The weeks slipped away, and the Triple Alliance soon got over their
new-boy trials, and began to enjoy all the rights and privileges of
Ronleigh College boys.  They wrote letters to Miss Eleanor and to their
former schoolfellows, and received in reply the latest news from The
Birches.

"The Philistines are quite friendly now," wrote Acton.  "We had a match
against them last week on their ground, and they gave us tea after.
It's awfully slow; I almost wish that chap Noaks was back."

"So do I," added Diggory, as he finished the sentence; "we could very
well spare him."

"Oh, he's all right," answered Jack Vance; "that row's blown over now.
As long as we leave him alone he won't interfere with us."

"Won't he!" returned the other; "you take my word for it, he hasn't
forgotten what you said about his father, and he's only waiting for a
chance to pay us out.  Whenever I go near him he looks as black as ink."

It was customary at Ronleigh to have what was called a half-term
holiday.  This was usually given on a Monday, to enable those boys who
lived within a short distance of the school to spend the week end
at home; while, in the winter or spring terms, the boarders who remained
at the school usually devoted the greater portion of the day to a
paper-chase.

"I shall go home," said Jack Vance to his two chums; "Todderton's only
about half an hour's ride from here on the railway.  And, I say, I've
got a grand idea: I'm going to write and get my mater to invite you
fellows to come too!  It would be jolly to have a meeting there of the
Triple Alliance, and I'm sure old Denson would let you go if we came
back on Monday night."

Both Mugford and Diggory were charmed with the idea.  "But d'you really
think your mater would have us?" they asked.

"Of course she will, if I ask her," answered Jack, and straightway sat
down to write the letter.

By Wednesday evening everything, including the formal invitation and the
doctors permission to accept the same, had been obtained, and for the
two following days the Triple Alliance could talk or think of little
else besides their projected excursion.  At length Saturday came, and as
soon as morning school was over they rushed upstairs to change into
their best clothes; and having crammed their night-shirts, brushes and
combs, etc., into a hand-bag, hurried off to the railway station, in
order that they might, as Jack put it, "be home in time for dinner."

Just as they were getting into the train, who should come out of the
booking-office but young Noaks.

"Hullo!" said Jack.  "He must be going home too; I hope he won't come in
here."

The new-comer, however, had no intention of making another attempt to
force his society on the Triple Alliance; he passed them with a surly
nod, and entered a compartment at the other end of the train.

Jack Vance lived in the suburbs of Todderton, about twenty minutes' walk
from the railway; but for all that he managed to carry out his intention
of being home in time for dinner; and the three boys, after receiving a
hearty welcome, were soon seated down to a repast which came very
acceptable after seven weeks of school fare.

"Jack," said Mr. Vance, "you know that house that was to let just on the
other side of The Hermitage?  Who d'you think's taken it?"

"I don't know, father."

"Why, that man Simpson, the uncle of your friend what's-his-name."

"He isn't my friend," answered Jack.  "You mean Noaks.  Fancy his coming
to live so near to us as that! We saw him in the train just now.
He's here for the holiday."

"I ought to tell you," continued Mr. Vance, turning to Diggory, "that
our next-door neighbour is called 'The Hermit.'  He's a queer old
fellow, who lives by himself, and never makes friends or speaks to any
one.  He's supposed to be very clever, and I've heard it said that he's
got a very valuable collection of coins, and is quite an authority on
the subject; it's one of his hobbies."

"I suppose," said Mugford thoughtfully, "that as he's a hermit that's
why his place is called The Hermitage."

"Well done, Mug!" said Jack, speaking with his mouth pretty full;
"you're getting quite sharp."

