Forcing their way into the centre of this they began to examine it.

"It'll do," said Joe.

"De very ting," remarked Henri.

"Come here, Crusoe."

Crusoe bounded to his master's side, and looked up in his face.

"Look at this place, pup; smell it well."

Crusoe instantly set off all round among the willows, in and out,
snuffing everywhere, and whining with excitement.

"Come here, good pup; that will do. Now, lads, we'll go back." So
saying, Dick and his friends left the bluff, and retraced their steps
to the camp. Before they had gone far, however, Joe halted, and
said,--

"D'ye know, Dick, I doubt if the pup's so cliver as ye think. What if
he don't quite onderstand ye?"

Dick replied by taking off his cap and throwing it down, at the same
time exclaiming, "Take it yonder, pup," and pointing with his hand
towards the bluff. The dog seized the cap, and went off with it at
full speed towards the willows, where it left it, and came galloping
back for the expected reward--not now, as in days of old, a bit of
meat, but a gentle stroke of its head and a hearty clap on its shaggy
side.

"Good pup! go now an' fetch it."

Away he went with a bound, and in a few seconds came back and
deposited the cap at his master's feet.

"Will that do?" asked Dick, triumphantly.


"Ay, lad, it will. The pup's worth its weight in goold."

"Oui, I have said, and I say it agen, de dog is _human_, so him is. If
not, fat am he?"

Without pausing to reply to this perplexing question, Dick stepped
forward again, and in half-an-hour or so they were back in the camp.

"Now for _your_ part of the work, Joe. Yonder's the squaw that owns
the half-drowned baby. Everything depends on her."

Dick pointed to the Indian woman as he spoke. She was sitting beside
her tent, and playing at her knee was the identical youngster who had
been saved by Crusoe.

"I'll manage it," said Joe, and walked towards her, while Dick and
Henri returned to the chief's tent.

"Does the Pawnee woman thank the Great Spirit that her child is
saved?" began Joe as he came up.

"She does," answered the woman, looking up at the hunter. "And her
heart is warm to the Pale-faces."

After a short silence Joe continued,--

"The Pawnee chiefs do not love the Pale-faces. Some of them hate
them."

"The Dark Flower knows it," answered the woman; "she is sorry. She
would help the Pale-faces if she could."

This was uttered in a low tone, and with a meaning glance of the eye.

Joe hesitated again--could he trust her? Yes; the feelings that filled
her breast and prompted her words were not those of the Indian just
now--they were those of a _mother_, whose gratitude was too full for
utterance.

"Will the Dark Flower," said Joe, catching the name she had given
herself, "help the Pale-face if he opens his heart to her? Will she
risk the anger of her nation?"

"She will," replied the woman; "she will do what she can."

Joe and his dark friend now dropped their high-sounding style of
speech, and spoke for some minutes rapidly in an undertone. It was
finally arranged that on a given day, at a certain hour, the woman
should take the four horses down the shores of the lake to its lower
end, as if she were going for firewood, there cross the creek at the
ford, and drive them to the willow bluff, and guard them till the
hunters should arrive.

Having settled this, Joe returned to the tent and informed his
comrades of his success.

During the next three days Joe kept the Indians in good-humour by
giving them one or two trinkets, and speaking in glowing terms of the
riches of the white men, and the readiness with which they would part
with them to the savages if they would only make peace.

Meanwhile, during the dark hours of each night, Dick managed to
abstract small quantities of goods from their pack, in room of which
he stuffed in pieces of leather to keep up the size and appearance.
The goods thus taken out he concealed about his person, and went off
with a careless swagger to the outskirts of the village, with Crusoe
at his heels. Arrived there, he tied the goods in a small piece of
deerskin, and gave the bundle to the dog, with the injunction, "Take
it yonder, pup."

Crusoe took it up at once, darted off at full speed with the bundle in
his mouth, down the shore of the lake towards the ford of the river,
and was soon lost to view. In this way, little by little, the goods
were conveyed by the faithful dog to the willow bluff and left there,
while the stuffed pack still remained in safe keeping in the chiefs
tent.

Joe did not at first like the idea of thus sneaking off from the camp,
and more than once made strong efforts to induce San-it-sa-rish to let
him go; but even that chief's countenance was not so favourable as it
had been. It was clear that he could not make up his mind to let slip
so good a chance of obtaining guns, powder and shot, horses, and
goods, without any trouble; so Joe made up his mind to give them the
slip at once.

A dark night was chosen for the attempt, and the Indian woman went off
with the horses to the place where firewood for the camp was usually
cut. Unfortunately, the suspicion of that wily savage Mahtawa had been
awakened, and he stuck close to the hunters all day--not knowing what
was going on, but feeling convinced that something was brewing which
he resolved to watch, without mentioning his suspicions to any one.

"I think that villain's away at last," whispered Joe to his comrades.
"It's time to go, lads; the moon won't be up for an hour. Come along."

"Have ye got the big powder-horn, Joe?"

"Ay, ay, all right."

"Stop! stop! my knife, my couteau. Ah, here I be! Now, boy."

The three set off as usual, strolling carelessly to the outskirts
of the camp; then they quickened their pace, and, gaining the lake,
pushed off in a small canoe.

At the same moment Mahtawa stepped from the bushes, leaped into
another canoe, and followed them.

"Ha! he must die," muttered Henri.

"Not at all," said Joe; "we'll manage him without that."

The chief landed and strode boldly up to them, for he knew well that
whatever their purpose might be they would not venture to use their
rifles within sound of the camp at that hour of the night. As for
their knives, he could trust to his own active limbs and the woods to
escape and give the alarm if need be.

"The Pale-faces hunt very late," he said, with a malicious grin. "Do
they love the dark better than the sunshine?"

"Not so," replied Joe, coolly; "but we love to walk by the light of
the moon. It will be up in less than an hour, and we mean to take a
long ramble to-night."

"The Pawnee chief loves to walk by the moon, too; he will go with the
Pale-faces."

"Good!" ejaculated Joe. "Come along, then."

The party immediately set forward, although the savage was a little
taken by surprise at the indifferent way in which Joe received his
proposal to accompany them. He walked on to the edge of the prairie,
however, and then stopped.

"The Pale-faces must go alone," said he; "Mahtawa will return to his
tent."

Joe replied to this intimation by seizing him suddenly by the throat
and choking back the yell that would otherwise have brought the Pawnee
warriors rushing to the scene of action in hundreds. Mahtawa's hand
was on the handle of his scalping-knife in a moment, but before he
could draw it his arms were glued to his sides by the bear-like
embrace of Henri, while Dick tied a handkerchief quickly yet firmly
round his mouth. The whole thing was accomplished in two minutes.
After taking his knife and tomahawk away, they loosened their gripe
and escorted him swiftly over the prairie.

Mahtawa was perfectly submissive after the first convulsive struggle
was over. He knew that the men who walked on each side of him grasping
his arms were more than his match singly, so he wisely made no
resistance.

Hurrying him to a clump of small trees on the plain which was so far
distant from the village that a yell could not be heard, they removed
the bandage from Mahtawa's mouth.

"_Must_ he be kill?" inquired Henri, in a tone of commiseration.

"Not at all," answered Joe; "we'll tie him to a tree and leave him
here."

"Then he vill be starve to deat'. Oh, dat is more horrobell!"

"He must take his chance o' that. I've no doubt his friends'll find
him in a day or two, an' he's game to last for a week or more. But
you'll have to run to the willow bluff, Dick, and bring a bit of line
to tie him. We can't spare it well; but there's no help."

"But there _is_ help," retorted Dick. "Just order the villain to climb
into that tree."

"Why so, lad?"

"Don't ask questions, but do what I bid ye."

The hunter smiled for a moment as he turned to the Indian, and ordered
him to climb up a small tree near to which he stood. Mahtawa looked
surprised, but there was no alternative. Joe's authoritative tone
brooked no delay, so he sprang into the tree like a monkey.

"Crusoe," said Dick, "_watch him!_"

The dog sat quietly down at the foot of the tree, and fixed his eyes
on the savage with a glare that spoke unutterable things. At the same
time he displayed his full complement of teeth, and uttered a sound
like distant thunder.

Joe almost laughed, and Henri did laugh outright.

"Come along; he's safe now," cried Dick, hurrying away in the
direction of the willow bluff, which they soon reached, and found that
the faithful squaw had tied their steeds to the bushes, and, moreover,
had bundled up their goods into a pack, and strapped it on the back of
the pack-horse; but she had not remained with them.

"Bless yer dark face!" ejaculated Joe, as he sprang into the saddle
and rode out of the clump of bushes.


He was followed immediately by the others, and in three minutes they
were flying over the plain at full speed.

On gaining the last far-off ridge, that afforded a distant view of the
woods skirting the Pawnee camp, they drew up; and Dick, putting his
fingers to his mouth, drew a long, shrill whistle.

It reached the willow bluff like a faint echo. At the same moment the
moon arose and more clearly revealed Crusoe's cataleptic glare at the
Indian chief, who, being utterly unarmed, was at the dog's mercy. The
instant the whistle fell on his ear, however, he dropped his eyes,
covered his teeth, and, leaping through the bushes, flew over the
plains like an arrow. At the same instant Mahtawa, descending from
his tree, ran as fast as he could towards the village, uttering the
terrible war-whoop when near enough to be heard. No sound sends such a
thrill through an Indian camp. Every warrior flew to arms, and vaulted
on his steed. So quickly was the alarm given that in less than ten
minutes a thousand hoofs were thundering on the plain, and faintly
reached the ears of the fugitives.

Joe smiled. "It'll puzzle them to come up wi' nags like ours. They're
in prime condition, too--lots o' wind in' em. If we only keep out o'
badger holes we may laugh at the red varmints."

Joe's opinion of Indian horses was correct. In a very few minutes the
sound of hoofs died away; but the fugitives did not draw bridle during
the remainder of that night, for they knew not how long the pursuit
might be continued. By pond, and brook, and bluff they passed, down
in the grassy bottoms and over the prairie waves--nor checked their
headlong course till the sun blazed over the level sweep of the
eastern plain as if it arose out of the mighty ocean.

Then they sprang from the saddle, and hastily set about the
preparation of their morning meal.



CHAPTER XI.


_Evening meditations and morning reflections--Buffaloes, badgers,
antelopes, and accidents--An old bull and the wolves--"Mad
tails"--Henri floored, etc._

There is nothing that prepares one so well for the enjoyment of rest,
both mental and physical, as a long-protracted period of excitement
and anxiety, followed up by bodily fatigue. Excitement alone banishes
rest; but, united with severe physical exertion, it prepares for it.
At least, courteous reader, this is our experience; and certainly this
was the experience of our three hunters as they lay on their backs
beneath the branches of a willow bush and gazed serenely up at the
twinkling stars two days after their escape from the Indian village.

They spoke little; they were too tired for that, also they were too
comfortable. Their respective suppers of fresh antelope steak, shot
that day, had just been disposed of. Their feet were directed towards
the small fire on which the said steaks had been cooked, and which
still threw a warm, ruddy glow over the encampment. Their blankets
were wrapped comfortably round them, and tucked in as only hunters and
mothers know _how_ to tuck them in. Their respective pipes delivered
forth, at stated intervals, three richly yellow puffs of smoke, as if
a three-gun battery were playing upon the sky from that particular
spot of earth. The horses were picketed and hobbled in a rich grassy
bottom close by, from which the quiet munch of their equine jaws
sounded pleasantly, for it told of healthy appetites, and promised
speed on the morrow. The fear of being overtaken during the night was
now past, and the faithful Crusoe, by virtue of sight, hearing, and
smell, guaranteed them against sudden attack during the hours of
slumber. A perfume of wild flowers mingled with the loved odours of
the "weed," and the tinkle of a tiny rivulet fell sweetly on their
ears. In short, the "Pale-faces" were supremely happy, and disposed to
be thankful for their recent deliverance and their present comforts.

"I wonder what the stars are," said Dick, languidly taking the pipe
out of his mouth.

"Bits o' fire," suggested Joe.

"I tink dey are vorlds," muttered Henri, "an' have peepels in dem. I
have hear men say dat."

A long silence followed, during which, no doubt, the star-gazers were
working out various theories in their own minds.

"Wonder," said Dick again, "how far off they be."

"A mile or two, maybe," said Joe.

Henri was about to laugh sarcastically at this, but on further
consideration he thought it would be more comfortable not to, so he
lay still. In another minute he said,--

"Joe Blunt, you is ver' igrant. Don't you know dat de books say de
stars be hondreds, tousands--oh! milleryons of mile away to here, and
