doing everything in his power to help Salo. He wanted to further his
friend's plan to found a home for himself and his sister as soon as
possible. That was something much more important than his disinclination
to DC with the Knippel boys.

"Now I shall not think about anything but what you can do to make your
plan come true," he said at the conclusion of his meditation. "If there
are two of us who are so set on finding a way we are sure to succeed
somehow."

"It seems so wonderful to me," said Salo, quite overcome by Bruno's warm
sympathy. "I have various friends in boarding school, but there isn't
one to whom I could have told what I am always thinking about, as I have
told you. You are so different from them. Will you be my friend?"

Bruno firmly grasped Salo's proffered hand and cried out with beaming
eyes, "Yes, Salo, I will be your friend my whole life long. I wish I
could do you a favor, too, as you have done me."

"But I have not done anything for you," Salo said with surprise.

"Oh, yes, you have. Now that I know I have a friend I have lost my dread
of living with the Knippel boys. I know that I can let them do as they
please, for I'll know that I have a friend who thinks as I do and would
have the same feeling about their actions, I'll be able to tell you
everything, and you will tell me what you think. I can let them alone
and think of you."

"Do you know, Bruno, the way I feel a real friendship ought to be?" Salo
said with glowing eyes, for this had made him happy, too. "I think it
ought to be this way: if we have to hear of anything that is ugly, mean
or rough, we ought to think right away: I have a friend who would never
do such a thing. If we hear of something though that pleases us, because
it is fine, noble and great, we should think again: My friend would do
the same. Don't you agree with me?"

Bruno judged himself very severely, because his mother had held up his
own faults to him so that he knew them very well. He replied
hesitatingly, "I wish one could always be the way one wants to be. Would
you give up trusting a friend right away if he did not act the way you
expected him to?"

"No, no," Salo said quickly, "such a friend could not trust me any more
either. I mean it differently. The friend ought to hate to do wrong and
ought to want to do right. He ought to be most sorry if he did not come
up to the best."

Bruno could now gladly and joyfully assent. Suddenly the two boys heard
their names called out loudly. Turning round they saw Kurt and Lippo
hurrying towards them and the uncle following with Mea at a slower pace.

"Wait, wait!" Kurt cried out so loudly that the echo sounded back again
from the castle, "Wait, wait!"

The two friends were doing just what had been asked of them, for they
were sitting quietly on the turf. The brothers had now reached them, and
Mea soon followed with the uncle, whose face showed signs of
perturbation.

"I hope you have not run up to the castle with Salo, Bruno," he cried out
with agitation.

"Oh, no, uncle," Bruno replied, "we sat down here on the way up. I just
wanted to show Salo the castle that belonged to his uncle, but he does
not know anything about it. He thinks that it has been sold long ago
because he never heard about it."

"Good!" said Uncle Philip with satisfaction. "Now let us quickly go
home. It is not right to starve a guest on his first visit; he might
never come again."

"Oh, I certainly shall, Mr.--," here Salo hesitated, "I do not remember
the name," he added, quite concerned.

"My name here is Uncle Philip," the kind gentleman answered, "just Uncle
Philip, nothing else!"

"Am I allowed to call you Uncle, too? That makes me feel so much at
home!" Salo exclaimed after nodding cordially. "Well, Uncle Philip, I
mean to come to you again with the keenest pleasure every time I am
invited. I would even come with the greatest joy if you never gave me
anything to eat."

"No, no, we don't have institutions for starving people," Uncle Philip
replied. "We are returning home now to a little feast I have told Kathy
to get ready. It will consist mostly of country dishes. Our guest must
know he has been received by friends."

"Oh, Uncle Philip, I felt that the first moment I met you," Salo
exclaimed.

The little group now strolled happily down the incline towards the house.

Maezli was standing in the doorway with eyes as big as saucers. She had
received the news from Kathy that they were to have omelette
apple-souffle, ham-pudding, sour milk and sweet biscuits for supper in
honour of a charming guest and Uncle Philip, who had come back. So Maezli
looked out at them, and as soon as they were near enough, studied Salo
very carefully.

He must have pleased her, for she quickly ran towards him and, reaching
out her hand, said, "Won't you stay with us for a while?"

Salo laughed: "Yes, I should love to."

Taking him by the hand, Maezli led him into the house and to the room
where the inviting table was already set. Kathy had been so many years
in the house that she knew exactly how things ought to be. Everyone sat
down now and Uncle Philip was amusingly talking. Everything he had
ordered for the meal tasted so delightfully that it seemed like a feast
to them and Salo said, "I should never have been able to conceive such a
wonderful end of my holidays, if I had imagined the most marvellous thing
in the world."

"If Salo could only stay here a few days, if only _one_ day more," Bruno
urged. All the rest were of the same opinion and they loudly begged
Uncle Philip to persuade him to spend the next day with them. They
thought that even one day together would be perfect for everyone.

"Yes, and for me most of all," said Salo, "but I cannot. My teacher and
comrades are coming to fetch me at Sils to-morrow at ten o'clock. This
is absolutely settled and there is not the slightest chance for my
staying here, even if I wished it more than anything in the world."

"That is right, Salo, that is the way to talk," Uncle Philip said. "What
has to be, has to be, even if we don't like it. Please do not beg him
any more to stay. Let us play a nice game now and let us enjoy ourselves
while he is with us."

Uncle Philip soon started the game, and their merry mood returned with
the fun.

At the exact time when their mother always called the little ones for bed
Lippo cried, "Uncle Philip, we must sing the evening song now and after
that Maezli and I must go to bed."

This did not suit Maezli at all, however, for she was full of the game
just then. Salo, who was sitting beside her, had been so funny, that it
suited her better to stay here than to go to bed, Quickly climbing up the
uncle's chair from behind, she put both round arms caressingly about his
neck and whispered in his ear, "Oh, darling Uncle Philip, to-day is a
feast-day, isn't it? Can't we stay up a little longer? The game is such
fun and it's so tiresome to go to bed."

"Yes, yes, it is a feast-day," the uncle assented; "the little ones can
stay up a little longer. Let us all keep on playing."

Maezli joyfully skipped back to her place, and the merriment was resumed.
The game, which was very amusing, was made more so by Uncle Philip's
funny remarks. Nobody had noticed therefore how quiet Maezli had grown.

Salo suddenly remarked, "Oh, look! Maezli is sound asleep. She is nearly
tumbling from her chair." And the little girl would have dropped had not
Salo held her by quickly putting his arm about her.

Uncle Philip went to her.

"Come, Maezli, come," he said encouragingly, "open your eyes quickly and
Mea will take you to bed."

"No, no," Maezli lamented, and would not move.

"But you must! Just look, we are all going," the uncle said vigorously.
"Do you want to stay behind?"

"No, no, no," Maezli moaned, full of misery.

"Mea, give her some cake," the uncle ordered, "then she'll wake up."

"We have no cake, uncle," Mea replied.

"What, you don't have a thing so necessary as that in a house full of
children! Well, I shall get some to-morrow," he said, quite agitated.
"Do you want a candy, Maezli? Come, just taste how sweet it is."

"No, no, no," Maezli moaned again in such sorrowful tones as no one had
ever heard from the energetic little child.

Suddenly a most disturbing thought shot through the uncle's brain:
"Suppose the child has already caught the fever? What should I do? What
ought one to do?" he cried out with growing anxiety.

Kathy had entered the room in the meantime to see if anything more was
needed.

"That is the way, Mr. Falcon," she said, going up to Maezli, and quickly
lifting her in her strong arms, she carried her upstairs. Despite all
her lamenting the child was then undressed and put to bed. In the
shortest time she was sound asleep again without a trace of fever.

"Well, that's over now," Uncle Philip said, quite relieved when Kathy
came back with the news. "I really think that the time has come for us
all to seek our beds. Lippo actually looks as if he could not stand on
his little legs."

The boy was as white as chalk from staying up so late. From time to time
he tried to open his eyes, but they always fell shut again. The uncle,
taking his hand, wanted to lead him away, but he fought against it.

"Uncle Philip, we have not sung the evening song yet," he said, clutching
the piano.

"Mercy!" the uncle cried out disturbed. "Is this going to start now? No,
no, Lippo, it is much too late to-night. You can sing two songs
to-morrow, then everything will be straightened out."

"Then we shall have sung two songs to-morrow, but none to-day," Lippo
began in a complaining voice, holding on to the piano and pulling his
uncle towards him.

"Nothing can be done, we have to do it," Uncle Philip said with
resignation, for he knew the obstinacy of his godson in regard to all
customs.

"Kurt, you can tell me about the songs; please find the shortest in the
song-book, or we shall have to sing till to-morrow morning. Please spare
us such a miserable scene. But wait, Kurt! The song must have a tune I
can sing, for as nobody plays the piano, I have to set the tune. Do you
want to sing with us, too, Salo, or is it too late for you? You can
retire if you prefer. You go upstairs to the room at the right corner."

"Oh, no, I want to stay as long as anybody is left," Salo replied. "I
shall enjoy singing and doing everything with you. It is all so funny
and strange."

Kurt had chosen a suitable song and Uncle Philip began it so vigorously
that everybody could join and a full-voiced chorus was formed. Lippo's
voice sounded dreadfully weak, but he sang every note to the last word,
fighting mightily against his growing sleepiness. Now the little company
could wander upstairs to their respective rooms without further obstacle.

"Oh," Uncle Philip breathed relieved when they had reached the top. "At
least we are as far as this. It really is an undertaking to keep in
order a handful of children where one always differs from the last. Now
I have luckily gotten through for today. What? Not yet? What is the
matter, Bruno?"

The latter, approaching his uncle with clear signs that he wanted him for
something, had pulled him aside.

"I want to ask you for something," said Bruno. "I wonder if you will do
me a great favor, Uncle Philip. Salo and I have so much to talk about
still and he must leave to-morrow, I wanted to ask you if Kurt can sleep
beside you in the guest room and Salo could sleep in Kurt's bed in my
room."

"What are you thinking of," the uncle said irritably. "You should hear
what your mother would say to that. The idea of having a Wallerstaetten
for a guest and offering him a bed which has been used already. That
would seem a real crime in her eyes. That can't be; no, it mustn't. I
hope you can see it, too, don't you?"

"Yes," Bruno said, much depressed, for he had to agree. But Uncle could
not stand such downcast spirits.

"Listen, Bruno," he said, "you realize that we can't do it that way. But
an uncle knows how to arrange things and that is why he is here. This is
the way we'll do. I'll sleep in your bed, and Salo and you can sleep in
the guest-room. Will that suit?"

"Oh, thank you, Uncle Philip! There is no other uncle like you," Bruno
cried out in his enthusiasm.

So Uncle Philip's last difficulty was solved for to-day and everybody was
willing to go to bed. Soon the house lay in deep quiet: even the sick
child in the highest story lay calmly sleeping on her cool pillows. She
did not even notice when Mrs. Maxa stepped up once more to her bedside
with a little lamp. Before herself retiring she wanted to listen once
more to the child's breathing. Only the two new friends were still
talking long after midnight.

They understood each other so thoroughly and upon all points that Bruno
had proposed in his enthusiasm that they would not waste one minute of
the night in sleep. Salo expressed his wish over and over again that
Bruno might become his comrade in the boarding school. But finally
victorious sleep stole unperceived over the two lads and quietly closed
their eyes.



CHAPTER VII

THE MOTHER'S ABSENCE HAS CONSEQUENCES

Next morning Salo was allowed to go into his sister's room in order to
say good-bye to her. She looked at him so cheerfully that he asked with
eager delight, "Do you feel so much better already, Leonore?"

"Oh, yes, I feel as if I were at home," she replied with shining eyes.
"I feel as if our mother had come down from heaven to take care of me."

"When you can get up and go downstairs you will be happier still. I know
how much you will enjoy meeting the whole family," said Salo. "Then you
will feel as if you were in a real home that belongs to you."

"It is such a shame that you have to go," Leonore sighed, but this time
the tears did not come quite so urgently. How things had changed since
yesterday--how different it was now to stay behind!

At this moment Mrs. Maxa entered the room.

She had left it as she wanted to give brother and sister an opportunity
to see each other alone, but the time had come for Salo to depart, and he
was obliged to leave his sister. To-day it seemed harder for him to go
away than leave Leonore behind.

"I can't even say that I wish you to come soon. I have to hope that you
can remain here a long while," he said cheerily, while Leonore was
smiling bravely. Uncle Philip, ready for the journey, stood beside the
carriage. All the children ran towards Salo as soon as he appeared, and
when he said good-bye, he was treated like a friend of the family of many
years' standing. Each of the children showed his grief in a special
manner. Maezli cried loudly over and over again, "Oh, Salo, please come
soon again, please come soon again."

When the carriage was rolling away and the handkerchiefs that fluttered
him last greetings were all Salo could see from the distance, he rapidly
brushed away a few tears. He had never felt so thoroughly at home
anywhere in the world before. How happy he had been! The thought of
going far away and possibly never coming back gave him a little pang of
grief.

When the children returned at noon from school they were still full of
their vivid impression of Salo's sudden appearance and departure. They
were all anxious to tell their mother about it, because they knew that
they could always count on her lively sympathy. One or the other of the
children kept forgetting that the mother must not be sought and would
absent-mindedly make an attempt to go upstairs, but they were always met
by unexpected resistance. Lippo on his arrival home from school had
posted himself there to see that his mother's orders were strictly kept.
He also had missed her desperately, but he had nevertheless remembered
her injunctions and was quite certain that the others might forget and
act contrary to her orders. Placing himself on the first step, he would
hold any of his brothers or sisters with both hands when they came
towards him as they dashed upstairs. When he cried out loudly, "We
mustn't do it, we mustn't do it," they ran away again, quite frightened,
for his horrified shrieks might have penetrated into the sick-room.
Kathy was the only one who appreciated Lippo's worth. She had received
orders to remind the children of the strict command, and she knew quite
well from previous experiences that she could never have succeeded as
effectively as he. Maezli, meanwhile, was sitting at Apollonie's table,
gayly eating a snow-white milk-pudding which Apollonie knew so well how
to prepare. Whenever Maezli came to a meal at her house, she always set
this favorite dish before the child.

The days when Maezli came for a visit here were happy days for Loneli.
There was always something funny going on at meal-time, because Maezli had
so many amusing things to speak about. On those days she was never
obliged to tell her grandmother exactly what lessons she had known in
school and which she had not. Usually Apollonie was dreadfully anxious
to hear how punctually she had fulfilled her duties, and she always chose
lunch-time for that purpose because then no other affair interfered with
talking. Beaming with joy, Loneli now sat beside Maezli, who was telling
uninterruptedly about Salo. She told them that he was friendlier and
nicer than any boy she had ever seen, and she quoted Bruno, Mea and Kurt
as saying exactly the same thing. Usually they disagreed on such points.
Apollonie was quite absorbed in listening, too, and nodding her head once
in a while, she seemed to say: "Yes, yes, I know that he couldn't be
called Salo for nothing." This interesting subject of conversation kept
her longer than usual to-day.

"Suddenly she started up, quite frightened. Oh, is it possible? It is
nearly one o'clock. Hurry up, Loneli, or you'll be late for school.
Maezli, you and I have something to do, too, this afternoon. I shall take
you on a walk and I'll tell you where we are going as soon as we start."

As the dishes had to be washed first, Apollonie thought that Maezli might
