
The man hesitated.

"I belong to the Fifth Pennsylvania," said Harry, pointing to the name
on the canteen, still visible in the twilight.  The man's eyes
brightened and he replied:

"Down there," pointing toward the southwest.

"I've a message for him and I don't want to run into any of the rebel
raiders."

"Then you keep away from there," he said, pointing due west.

"What's the trouble in that direction?"

"Jim Hurley was here about an hour ago.  The whole country is terribly
excited about these big armies marching over it, and he said that our
cavalry was riding on fast.  A lot of it was ahead of the rebel army,
but straight there in the west some of the rebel horsemen had spread
out on their own flank.  If you went that way in the night you'd be
sure to run right into a nest of 'em."

"So the Johnnies are west of us, your friend Hurley said.  Tell me
again what particular point I have to watch in order to keep away from
them."

"Almost as straight west as you can make it.  A valley running east and
west cuts in there and it's full of the rebels.  It's the only place
all along here where they are."

"And consequently the only place for me to avoid.  Thanks.  Your
information may save me from capture.  Good night."

"Good night and good luck."

Harry rode toward the southwest until a dip in the valley hid him from
possible view of the man at the house.  Then he turned and rode due
west, determined to reach as soon as possible those "rebel raiders" in
the valley, but fully aware that he must yet use every resource of
skill, courage and patience.

The twilight turned into night, clear, dry and bright.  Unless it was
raining in the mountains the flood in the Potomac could not be
increasing.  Here, at last, the conditions were all that he wished. The
captured haversack still contained plenty of food, and, as he rode, he
ate.  He had learned long ago that food was as necessary as weapons to
a soldier, and that one should eat when one could.  Moreover, he was
always hungry.

He kept among trees wherever possible, and, as the night grew, and the
stars came out in the dusky blue, he enjoyed the peace.  Even though he
searched with his glasses he could not see soldiers anywhere, although
he knew they were in the hollows and the forests.  A pleasant breeze
blew, and an owl, reckless of armies, sent forth its lonesome hoot.

But he kept his horse's head straight for the narrow valley where the
"rebel raiders" rode.  He met presently a small detachment of
Connecticut men, but the sight of his canteen and letter was sufficient
for them. Again he rode southwest, merely to turn due west once more,
after he had passed from their sight, and near the head of the valley
he encountered two men in blue on horseback watching.  They were alert,
well-built fellows and examined Harry closely, a process to which long
usage had reconciled him.

"I hear that the rebels are down in that valley, comrade," he said.

"So they are," replied the elder and larger of the men.  "We've got to
ask you who you are and which way you're going."

"John Haskell, Fifth Pennsylvania, with dispatches from General Meade
to General Pleasanton.  They're tremendously important, too, and I've
got to be in a hurry."

"More haste less speed.  You know the old saying.  In a time like this
it's sometimes better for a man to know where he's going than it is to
get there, 'cause he may arrive at the wrong place."

"Good logic, comrade, but I must hurry just the same.  Which is my best
way to find General Pleasanton?"

"Southwest.  But I'm bound to tell you a few things first."

"All right.  What are they?"

"You and I must be kinsfolk."

"How do you make that out?"

"Because my name is William Haskell, and I belong to the Fifth
Pennsylvania, the same regiment that you do."

"Is that so?  It's strange that we haven't met before.  But funny
things happen in war."

"So they do.  Awfully funny.  Now my brother's name is John Haskell,
and you happen to be carrying his canteen, but you've changed looks a
lot in the last few days, Brother John."

Haskell's voice had been growing more menacing, and Harry, with native
quickness, was ready to act.  When he saw the man's pistol flash from
his belt he went over the side of his horse and the bullet whistled
where his body had been.  His own rifle cracked in reply, but Haskell's
horse, not he, took the bullet, and, screaming with pain and fright,
ran into the woods as the rider slipped from his back.

Harry, realizing that his peril was imminent and deadly, fired one of
his pistols at the second man, who fell from his horse, too badly
wounded in the shoulder to take any further part in the fight.

But Harry found in Haskell an opponent worthy of all his skill and
courage.  The Union soldier threw himself upon the ground and fired at
Harry's horse, which instantly jerked the bridle from his hand and fled
as the other had done.  Harry dropped flat in the grass and leaves and
listened, his heart thumping.

But luck had favored him again.  He lay in a slight depression and any
bullet fired at him would be sure to go over him unless he raised his
head.  He could not see his enemies, but he could depend upon his
wonderful power of hearing, inherited and cultivated, which gave him an
advantage over his opponents.

He heard the wounded man groan ever so lightly, and then the other
whisper to him, "Are you much hurt, Bill?"  The reply came in a moment:
"My right shoulder is put out for the time, and I can't help you now."
Presently he heard the slight sound of the other crawling toward him.
Evidently this Haskell was a fearless fellow, bound to get him, and he
called from the shadow in which he lay.

"You'd better stop, Haskell!  I've got the best pair of ears in all
this region, and I hear you coming!  Crawl another step and you meet a
bullet! But I want to tell you first that your interesting brother John
is all right.  I didn't kill him.  I merely robbed him."

"Robbed him of what?"

"Oh, of several things."

"What things?"

"They don't concern you, Haskell.  These are matters somewhat above
you."

"They are, are they?  Well, maybe they are, but I'm going to see that
you don't get away with the proceeds of your robbery."

Harry didn't like his tone.  It was fierce and resolute, and he
realized once more that he had a man of quality before him.  If Haskell
had behaved properly he would have withdrawn with his wounded comrade.
But then he was an obstinate Yankee.

He raised up ever so little and glanced across the intervening space,
seeing the muzzle of a rifle not many yards away.  There could be no
doubt that Haskell was watchful and would continue watching.  He drew
his head back again and said:

"Let's call it a draw.  You go back to your army, Mr. Haskell, and I'll
go back to mine."

"Couldn't think of it.  As a matter of fact, I'm with my army now; that
is, I'm in its lines, while you can't reach yours.  All I've got to do
is to hold you here, and in the course of time some of our people will
come along and take you."

"Do you think I'm worth so much trouble?"

"In a way it's a sort of personal affair with me.  You admit having
robbed my brother, and I feel that I must avenge him.  He has been
acting as a dispatch rider, and I can make a pretty shrewd guess about
what you took from him.  So I think I'll stay here."

Harry blamed himself bitterly for his careless and unfortunate
expressions.  He did not fear the result of a duel with this man, being
the master of woodcraft that he was, but he was losing time, valuable
time, time more precious than gold and diamonds, time heavy with the
fate of armies and a nation.  He grew furiously angry at everything,
and angriest at Haskell.

"Mr. Haskell," he called, "I'm getting tired of your society, and I
make you a polite request to go away."

"Oh, no, you're not tired.  You merely think you are, and I couldn't
consider conceding to your request.  It's for your good more than mine.
My society is elevating to any Johnny Reb."

"Then I warn you that I may have to hurt you."

"How about getting hurt yourself?"

Harry was silent.  His acute ears brought him the sound of Haskell
moving a little in his own particular hollow.  The lonesome owl hooted
twice more, but there was no sound to betoken the approach of Union
troops in the forest.  The duel of weapons and wits would have to be
fought out alone by Haskell and himself.

He went over everything again and again and he concluded that he must
rely upon his superior keenness of ear.  He could hear Haskell, but
Haskell could not hear him, and there was Providence once more taking
him into favor.  Summer clouds began to drift before the moon, and many
of the stars were veiled.  It was possible that Haskell's eyes also
were not as keen as his own.

When the darkness increased, he began to crawl from the little shallow.
Despite extreme precautions he made a slight noise.  A pistol flashed
and a bullet passed over him.  It made his muscles quiver, but he
called in a calm voice:

"Why did you do such a foolish thing as that?  You wasted a perfectly
good bullet."

"Weren't you trying to escape?  I thought I heard a movement in the
grass."

"Wasn't thinking of such a thing.  I'm just waiting here to see what
you'll do.  Why don't you come on and attack?"

"I'm satisfied with things as they are.  I'll hold you until morning
and then our men will be sure to come and pick you up."

"Maybe it will be our men who will come and pick you up."

"Oh, no; they're too busy leaving Gettysburg behind 'em."

Harry nevertheless had succeeded in leaving the shallow and was now
lying on its farther bank.  Then he resumed the task of crawling
forward on his face, and without making any noise, one of the most
difficult feats that a human being is ever called upon to do.

At the end of a dozen feet, he paused both to rest and to listen. His
acute ears told him that Haskell had not moved from his own place, and
his eyes showed him that the darkness was increasing.  Those wonderful,
kindly clouds were thickening before the moon, and the stars in troops
were going out of sight.

But he did not relax his caution.  He knew that he could not afford to
make any sound that would arouse the suspicions of Haskell, and it was
a quarter of an hour before he felt himself absolutely safe.  Then he
passed around a big tree and arose behind its trunk, appreciating what
a tremendous luxury it was to be a man and to stand upon one's own feet.

He had triumphed again!  The stars surely were with him.  They might
play little tricks upon him now and then to tantalize him, but in the
more important matters they were on his side.  He stretched himself
again and again to relieve the terrible stiffness caused by such long
and painful crawling, and then, unable to resist an exultant impulse,
he called loudly:

"Good-by, Haskell!"

There was a startled exclamation and a bullet fired at random cut the
leaves twenty yards away.  Harry, making no reply, fled swiftly through
the forest toward the valley where the rebel raiders rode.




CHAPTER VII

IN THE WAGON


He ran at first, reckless of impediments, and there was a sound of
crashing as he sped through the bushes.  He was not in the least afraid
of Haskell.  He had his rifle and pistols and in the woods he was
infinitely the superior.  He did not even believe that Haskell would
pursue, but he wanted to get far beyond any possible Federal sentinels
as soon as possible.

After a flight of a few hundred yards he slackened speed, and began to
go silently.  The old instincts and skill of the forester returned to
him. He knew that he was safe from immediate pursuit and now he would
approach his own lines carefully.  He was grateful for the chance or
series of chances that always took him toward Lee.  It seemed now that
his enemies had merely succeeded in driving him at an increased pace in
the way he wanted to go.

He was descending a slope, thickly clothed with undergrowth.  A few
hundred yards farther his knees suddenly crumpled under him and he sank
down, seized at the same time with a fit of nervous trembling.  He had
passed through so many ordeals that strong and seasoned as he was and
high though his spirits, the collapse came all at once.  He knew what
was the matter and, quietly stretching himself out, he lay still that
the spell might pass.

The lonesome owl, probably the same one that he had heard earlier,
began to hoot, and now it was near by.  Harry thought he could make out
its dim figure on a branch and he was sure that the red eyes, closed by
day, were watching him, doubtless with a certain contempt at his
weakness.

"Old man, if you had been chased by the fowler as often as I have,"
were the words behind his teeth, addressed to the dim and fluffy
figure, "you wouldn't be sitting up there so calm and cocky.  Your
tired head would sink down between your legs, your feathers would be
wet with perspiration and you'd be so tired you'd hardly be able to
hang on to the tree."

Came again the lonesome hoot of the owl, spreading like a sinister omen
through the forest.  It made Harry angry, and, raising himself up a
little, he shook his fist again at the figure on the branch, now
growing clearer in outline.

"'Bird or devil?'" he quoted.

The owl hooted once more, the strange ominous cry carrying far in the
silence of the night.

"Devil it is," said Harry, "and quoth your evil majesty 'never more.' I
won't be scared by a big owl playing the part of the raven.  It's not
'nevermore' with me.  I've many a good day ahead and don't you dare
tell me I haven't."

Came the solemn and changeless hoot of the owl in reply.

Harry's exertions and excitement had brought too much blood to his head
and he was seeing red.  He raised himself upon his elbows and stared at
the owl which stared back from red rimmed eyes, cold, emotionless,
implacable.  He had been terribly shaken, and now a superstitious
fright overcame him.  The raven and the albatross were in his mind and
he murmured under his breath passages from their ominous poems.  The
scholar had his raven, the mariner had his albatross and now he alone
in the forest had his owl, to his mind the most terrible bird of the
three.

Came again that solemn and warning cry, the most depressing of all in
the wilderness, while the changeless and sinister eyes stared steadily
at him.  Then Harry remembered that he had a rifle, and he sat up.  He
would slay this winged monster.  There was light enough for him to draw
a bead, and he was too good a marksman to miss.

He dropped the muzzle of the rifle in a sudden access of fear as he
remembered the albatross.  A shiver ran through every nerve and muscle,
and so heavily was he oppressed that he felt as if he had just escaped
committing murder.  He rubbed his hand across his damp forehead and the
act brought him out of that dim world in which he had been living for
the last ten or fifteen minutes.

"Bird of whatever omen you may be, I'll not shoot you.  That's
certain," he said, "but I'll leave you to your melancholy predictions
just as soon as I can."

He stood up somewhat unsteadily, and renewed the descent of the slope.
Near its foot he came to a brook and bathing his face plentifully in
the cool water he felt wonderfully refreshed.  All his strength was
flowing back swiftly.

Then he entered the valley, pressing straight toward the west, and soon
heard the tread of horses.  He knew that they must be the cavalry of
his own army, but he withdrew into the bushes until he was assured.  A
dozen men riding slowly and warily came into view, and though the
moonlight was wan he recognized them at once.  When they were opposite
him he stepped from his ambush and said:

"A happy night to you, Colonel Talbot."

Colonel Leonidas Talbot was a brave man, but seldom in his life had he
been so shaken.

"Good God, Hector!" he cried.  "It's Harry Kenton's ghost!"

Lieutenant-Colonel Hector St. Hilaire turned pale.

