
** A Chinese Outdoor Game [176]

The accompanying illustration shows the "grand whirl," or the
Chinese students' favorite game. This game is played by five
persons, four of them turning around the fifth or central figure

[Illustration: Chinese Doing the Grand Whirl]

with their arms locked about each other and the two outside
persons swinging in midair with their bodies almost horizontal.



** Home-Made Photograph of a Lightning Flash [176]

How many times has each amateur photographer tried to photograph
the lightning's flash? Some good pictures have been obtained by a
ceaseless effort on the part of the operator. Here is a method by
which you can make a picture of a streak of lightning on a clear
night in your own house. Paste two strips of black paper on a
piece of glass that is 10 in. square so as to leave a clear space
through the center 2-in. or more in width. Smoke this uncovered
space over a candle's flame until the soot is thick enough to
prevent light passing through. Take a sharp lead pencil and
outline a flash of lightning upon the smoked surface, using a fine
needle to make the smaller lines, and then set the glass up
against the back of two boxes which are set to have a space
between them of 4 or 5 in.

A lighted candle is held behind the glass so the light will shine
through for focusing the camera. After darkening the room set your
camera ready for the exposure and burn a small quantity of flash
light powder in the same place in which the candle was held. This
will make an impression upon the plate of the flash drawn on the
smoked glass.

[Illustration: Lightning Flash]



** How to Make a Static Machine [177]

Static electricity is produced by revolving glass plates upon
which a number of sectors are cemented; these sectors, passing
through neutralizing brushes, distribute electric charges

[Illustration: Details of a Homemade Static Machine]

to collecting combs attached to discharging rods. The glass
selected for the plates must be clear white glass, free from
wrinkles, and of a uniform thickness. Two plates are necessary to
make this machine, and the glass should be of sufficient size to
cut a circular plate 16-in. in diameter. A hole must be made
exactly in the center of each plate, and this should be done
before cutting the circle. One of the best ways to make the hole
is to drill the glass with a very hard-tempered drill, the cutting
edge of which should be kept moistened with 2 parts turpentine and
1 part sweet oil while drilling. The hole is to be made 3/4 in. in
diameter. The circle is then marked on each plate and cut with a
glass cutter. The plates are trued up, after they are mounted, by
holding a piece of emery wheel to the edges while they are
turning. Water should be applied to the edges while doing the
work.

The sectors are cut from tinfoil, 1-1/2 in. wide at one end, 3/4
in. at the other, and 4 in. long. A thin coat of shellac varnish
is applied to both sides of the plates, and 16 sectors put on one
side of each plate, as shown in Fig. 1. The divisions can be
marked on the opposite side of the plate and a circle drawn as a
guide to place the sectors at proper intervals.

The sectors should lie flat on the glass with all parts smoothed
out so that they will not be torn from their places as the plates
revolve. The shellac should be tacky when the pieces of tinfoil
are put in place.

The collectors are made, as shown in Fig. 2, from about 1/4-in.
copper wire with two brass balls soldered to the ends. The fork
part is 6 in. long and the shank 4 in. Holes are drilled on the
inside of the forks, and pins inserted and soldered. These pins,
or teeth, should be long enough to be very close to the sectors
and yet not scratch them when the plates are turning.

The frame of the machine is made from any kind of finished wood
with dimensions shown in Fig. 3, the side pieces being 24 in. long
and the standards 3 in. wide. The two pieces, C C, Fig. 3, are
made from solid, close grained wood turned in the shape shown,
with the face that rests against the plate 4 in. in diameter, and
the outer end 1-1/2 in. in diameter, the smaller end being turned
with a groove for a round belt. Before turning the pieces a hole
is bored through each piece for the center, and this hole must be
of such a size as to take a brass tube that has an internal
diameter of 3/4 in. The turned pieces are glued to the glass
plates over the center holes and on the same side on which the
sectors are fastened. Several hours' time will be required for the
glue to set. A fiber washer is then put between the plates and a
brass tube axle placed through the hole. The plates, turned wood
pieces, and brass axle turn on a stationary axle, D.

The drive wheels, EE, are made from 7/8-in. material 7 in. in
diameter, and are fastened on a round axle cut from a broom
handle. This wood axle is centrally bored to admit a metal rod
tightly, and extends through the standards with a crank attached
to one end.

Two solid glass rods, GG, Fig. 4, 1 in. in diameter and 15 in.
long, are fitted in holes bored into the end pieces of the frame.
Two pieces of 1-in. brass tubing and the discharging rods, RR, are
soldered into two hollow brass balls 2 or 2-1/2 in. in diameter.
The shanks of the collectors are fitted in these brass balls with
the ends extending, to which insulating handles are attached.
Brass balls are soldered to the upper ends of the discharging
rods, one having a 2-in. ball and the other one 3/4 in. in
diameter.

Caps made from brass are fitted tightly on the ends of the
stationary shaft, D, and drilled through their diameter to admit
heavy copper rods, KK, which are bent as shown. Tinsel or fine
wire such as contained in flexible electric wire are soldered to
the ends of these rods, and the brushes thus made must be adjusted
so they will just touch the plates. The caps are fitted with
screws for adjusting the brushes. These rods and brushes are
called the neutralizers. A little experimenting will enable one to
properly locate the position of the neutralizers for best results.
--Contributed by C. Lloyd Enos, Colorado City, Colo.



** A Concrete Swimming Pool [178]

[Illustration: Home-Made Swimming Pool]

Several boys from a neighborhood in the suburbs of a large city
concluded to make for themselves a swimming tank of concrete. The
money was raised by various means to purchase the cement, and the
work was done by themselves. The ground was selected in a secluded
spot in a neighbor's back yard and a hole dug to a depth of 4 ft.,
12 ft. wide and 22 ft. long. The concrete was made by mixing 1
part cement, 4 parts sand and 10 parts gravel together and the
bulk moistened with water. The bottom was made the same as laying
a sidewalk, and forms were only used for the inside of the
surrounding wall. The tank may be hidden with shrubbery or vines
planted to grow over a poultry wire fence.



** Old-Time Magic-Part IV [179]

Cutting a Thread Inside of a Glass Bottle [179]

This is a trick which can only be performed when the sun shines,
but it

[Illustration: The Glass Directs the Sun's Rays]

is a good one. Procure a clear glass bottle and stick a pin in the
lower end of the cork. Attach a thread to the pin and tie a small
weight to the end of the thread so it will hang inside the bottle
when the cork is in place. Inform your audience that you will
sever the thread and cause the weight to drop without removing the
cork.

All that is required to perform the feat is to hold a magnifying
glass so as to direct the sun's rays on the thread. The thread
will quickly burn and the weight fall.



** Removing a Key from a Double String [179]

Tie the ends of a 5-ft. string together, making a double line on
which a key is placed and the string held as shown by the dotted
lines in the sketch. Turn the palms of the hands toward you and
reach over with the little finger of the right hand and take hold
of the inside line near the left-hand thumb.

[Illustration: "The Key Will Drop from the String"]

Reverse the operation and take hold of the inside line near
right-hand thumb with the little finger of the left hand. You will
then have the string as it appears in the sketch. Quickly let
loose of the string with a little finger on one hand and a thumb
on the other and pull the string taut. The key will drop from the
string.



** How to Bore a Square Hole [179]

You would not consider it possible to bore a square hole in a
piece of cardboard, yet such a thing can be done. Take a cardboard
or a thin piece of wood, fold and place it between two pieces of
board with the fold up; the boards are then put in a vise as
shown. Start the bit with the screw point in the fold, using a
1-in. bit, and bore a

[Illustration: Boring a Square Hole]

hole 1/2 in. deep. When the cardboard is taken from the vise it
will appear as shown at B and when unfolded, as at A.



** HOW TO MAKE COPPER TRAYS [180]

Copper trays such as are shown in the accompanying illustration
are very useful as well as ornamental about the house. They can be
used to keep pins and needles, pens and pencils, or cigar ashes,
etc. They are easily made, require no equipment in the way of
tools except what are usually found about the house, unless it
would be the metal shears, and when the decorations are well
designed and the metal nicely colored, they make attractive little
pieces to have about.

The first thing to do in preparation for making them is to prepare
the design. Simple designs work out better than fussy ones and are
more likely to be within the ability of the amateur. Having
determined the size of the tray, draw on paper an oblong to
represent it. Inside this oblong, draw another one to represent
the lines along which the metal is to be bent up to form the
sides. Inside this there should be drawn still another oblong to
represent the margin up to which the background is to be worked.
The trays shown are 5-3/4 by 6-3/4 in., the small ash tray 4 by 4
in., the long pen and pencil tray 4-3/4 by 9-1/2 in. The second
oblong was 3/4 in. inside the first on all, and the third one 1/4
in. inside the second on all.

If the decoration is to have two parts alike--symmetrical--divide
the space with a line down the middle. Draw one-half the design
free hand, then fold along this line and trace the second half
from this one. If the lines have been drawn with soft pencil,
rubbing the back of the paper with a knife handle will force
enough of the lead to the second side so that the outline can be
determined. Four-part symmetry will require two lines and two
foldings, etc.

For the metal working there will be needed a pair of tin shears,
two spikes, file, flat and round-nosed pliers, screw-driver and
sheet copper of No. 23 gauge. Proceed as follows: 1. Cut off a
piece of copper so that it shall have 1/2 in. extra metal on each
of the four sides. 2. With a piece of carbon paper trace upon the
copper lines that

[Illustration: Articles Made from Copper]

shall represent the margin of the tray proper and the lines along
which the upturned sides of the tray are to be bent; also trace
the decorative design. 3. With a nail make a series of holes in
the extra margin, about 3/4-in. apart and large enough to take in
a 3/4-in. slim screw. 4. Fasten the metal to a thick board by
inserting screws in these holes. 5. With a 20-penny wire nail that
has the sharpness of its point filed off, stamp the background
promiscuously. By holding the nail about 1/4 in. above the work
and striking it with the hammer, at the same time striving to keep
it at 1/4 in. above the metal, very rapid progress can be made.
This stamping lowers the background and at the same time raises
the design. 6. Chase or stamp along the border of the design and
background, using a nail filed to chisel edge. This is to make a
clean, sharp division between background and design. 7. When the
stamping is completed, remove the screws and the metal from the
board and cut off the extra margin with the metal shears. File the
edges until they are smooth to the touch. 8. With the flat pliers
"raise" one side of the tray, then the other side. 9. Raise the
ends, adjusting the corners as shown in the illustration. Use the
round-nosed pliers for this purpose.

Copper is frequently treated chemically to give it color. Very
pretty effects may be obtained by covering the tray with
turpentine, then moving it about over a flame such as a bunsen
burner until the turpentine burns off. The copper will "take on"
almost all the colors of a rainbow, and the effect will be most
pleasing.



** Photograph of a Clown Face [181]

At first glance the accompanying photograph will appear as if the
person photographed is wearing a false face or has his face
painted like a clown. On close observation you will notice that
the face is made on the bald head of the person sitting behind the
table. The eyes, nose and mouth are cut from black paper and
pasted on the bald spot. The subject's face is horizontal and
resting upon his hands.

[Illustration: A Bald Head Photographed]



** Finger Mathematics [181]
By Charles C. Bradley

All machinists use mathematics. Ask a machinist what would be the
product of 9 times 8 and his ready reply would be 72, but change
the figures a little and say 49 times 48 and the chances are that
instead of replying at once he will have to figure it out with a
pencil. By using the following method it is just as easy to tell
at a glance what 99 times 99 are as 9 times 9. You will be able to
multiply far beyond your most sanguine expectations.

In the first numbering, begin by holding your hands with the palms
toward the body and make imaginary numbers on the thumbs and
fingers as follows: Thumbs, 6; first fingers, 7; second fingers,
8; third fingers, 9, and fourth fingers, 10. Suppose you desire to
multiply 8 by 9, put the eighth finger on one hand against the
ninth finger of the other hand as shown.

[Illustration: "8 Times 9"]

The two joined fingers and all the fingers above them (calling the
thumbs fingers) are called the upper fingers and each has a value
of ten, which tens are added. All the fingers below the joined
fingers are termed the lower fingers, and each of the lower
fingers represents a unit value of one. The sum of the units on
one hand should be multiplied by the sum of the units on the other
hand. The total tens added to this last named sum will give the
product desired. Thus: Referring to above picture or to your hands
we find three tens on the left hand and four tens on the right,
which would be 70. We also find two units on the left hand and one
on the right. Two times one are two, and 70 plus 2 equals 72, or
the product of 8 times 9.

Supposing 6 times 6 were the figures. Put your thumbs together;
there are no fingers above, so the two thumbs represent two tens
or 20; below the thumbs are four units on each hand, which would
be 16, and 20 plus 16 equals 36, or the product of 6 times 6.

[Illustration: "6 Times 6"   "10 Times 7"]

Supposing 10 times 7 is desired. Put the little finger of the left
hand against the first finger of the right hand. At a glance you
see seven tens or 70. On the right hand you have three units and
on the left nothing. Three times nothing gives you nothing and 70
plus nothing is 70.

In the second numbering, or numbers above 10, renumber your
fingers; thumbs, 11; first fingers, 12, etc. Let us multiply 12 by
12.

Put together the tips of the fingers labeled 12. At a glance you
see four tens or 40. At this point we leave the method explained
in Case 1 and ignore the units (lower fingers) altogether. We go
back to the upper fingers again

[Illustration: "12 Times 12"]

and multiply the number of upper fingers used on the one hand by
the number of upper fingers used on the other hand, viz., 2 times
2 equals 4. Adding 4 to 40 gives us 44. We now add 100 (because
anything over 10 times 10 would make over 100) and we have 144,
the product of 12 times 12.

The addition of 100 is arbitrary, but being simple it saves time
and trouble. Still, if we wish, we might regard the four upper
fingers in the above example as four twenties, or 80, and the six
lower fingers as six tens, or 60; then returning to the upper
fingers and multiplying the two on the right hand by the two on
the left we would have 4; hence 80 plus 60 plus 4 equals 144;
therefore the rule of adding the lump sum is much the quicker and
easier method.

Above 10 times 10 the lump sum to add is 100; above 15 times 15 it
is 200; above 20 times 20, 400; 25 times 25, 600, etc., etc., as
high as you want to go.

In the third numbering to multiply above 15 renumber your fingers,
beginning the thumbs with 16, first finger 17, and so on. Oppose
the proper finger tips as before, the upper fingers representing a
value of 20. Proceed as in the first numbering and add 200. Take
For example 18 times 18.

At a glance we see six twenties plus 2 units on left hand times 2
units on right hand plus 200 equals 324.

In the fourth numbering the fingers are marked, thumbs, 21, first
fingers 22, etc., the value of the upper fingers being 20. Proceed
as in the second lumbering, adding 400 instead of 100.

[Illustration: "18 Times 18"]

Above 25 times 25 the upper fingers represent a value of 30 each
and after proceeding as in the third numbering you add 600 instead
of 200.

This system can be carried as high as you want to go, but you must
remember that for figures ending in 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 proceed as in
the second numbering. For figures ending in 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 the
third numbering applies.

Determine the value of the upper fingers whether they represent
tens, twenties, thirties, forties, or what. For example, any two
figures between 45 and 55, the value of the upper fingers would be
50, which is the half-way point between the two fives. In 82 times
84 the value of the upper fingers would be 80 (the half-way point
between the two fives, 75 and 85, being 80). And the lump sum to
add.

Just three things to remember:

Which numbering is to follow, whether the one described in second
or third numbering; the value which the upper fingers have; and,
lastly, the lump sum to add, and you will be able to multiply
faster and more accurately than you ever dreamed of before.



** Optical Illusions [183]

If a person observes fixedly for some time two balls hanging on
the end of cords which are in rapid revolution, not rotation,
about a vertical axis, the direction of revolution will seem to
reverse. In some experiments two incandescent "pills" of platinum
sponge, such as an used for lighting gas-burners, were hung in
tiny aluminum bells from a mica vane wheel which was turned
constantly and rapidly in one direction by hot air from a gas
flame to keep the platinum in a glow. The inversion and reversion
did not take place, as one might suppose, at the will of the
observer, but was compulsory and followed regular rules. If the
observer watches the rotating objects from the side, or from above
or from below, the inversion takes place against his will; the
condition being that the image on the retina shall be eccentric.
It takes place also, however, with a change in the convergence of
the optical axes, whether they are parallel to each other or more
convergent. Also when the image on the retina is made less
distinct by the use of a convex or concave lens, the revolution
seems to reverse; further, in the case of a nearsighted person,
when he removes his spectacles,

[Illustration: Illusions Shown by Revolving Platinum Sponge
"Pills" and Hat Pins]

inversion results every time that the image on the retina is not
sharp. But even a change in the degree of indistinctness causes
inversion.

The cause of this optical illusion is the same where the wings of
windmills are observed in the twilight as a silhouette. It is then
not a question of which is the front or the back of the wheel, but
whether one of the wings or the other comes towards the observer.
The experiment is made more simple by taking a hat pin with a
conspicuous head, holding it firmly in a horizontal position, and
putting a cork on the point. Looking at it in semi-darkness, one
seems to see sometimes the head of the pin, sometimes the point
towards him, when he knows which direction is right. The inversion
will be continued as soon as one observes fixedly a point at the
side. Here it is a question of the perception of depth or
distance; and this is the same in the case of the rotating balls;
the direction of seeming revolution depends on which one of them
one considers to be the front one and which the rear one.

From the foregoing the following conclusion may be reached: When,
in the case of a perception remitting two appearances, one fixedly
observes one of these and then permits or causes change in the
sharpness of the image on the retina, the other appearance asserts
itself.



** Steam Engine Made from Gas Pipe and Fittings [184]

Almost all the material used in the construction' of the parts for
the small steam engine illustrated herewith was made from gas pipe
and fittings. The cylinder consists of a 3-in. tee, the third
opening being threaded and filled with a cast-iron plug turned to
such a depth that when the interior was bored out on a lathe the
bottom of the plug bored to the same radius as the other part of
the tee. The outside end of the plug extended about 1/4-in. and
the surface was made smooth for the valve seat. A flat slide valve
was used.

The ports were not easy to make, as

[Illustration: The Engine Is About 20 Inches High]

they had to be drilled and chipped out. The steam chest is round,
as it had to be made to fit the round tee connection. The
crosshead runs in guides made from a piece of gas pipe with the
sides cut out and threads cut on both ends. One end is screwed
into a rim turned on the cylinder head and the other is fitted
into an oblong plate. Both ends of this plate were drilled and
tapped to receive 1-1/2-in. pipe.

The main frame consists of one 1-1/2in. pipe 10 in. long and one
made up from two pieces of pipe and a cross to make the whole
length 10 in. These pipes were then screwed into pipe flanges that
served as a base. The open part of the cross was babbitted to
receive the main shaft. The end of the shaft has a pillow block to
take a part of the strain from the main bearing. The eccentric is
constructed of washers. While this engine does not give much
power, it is easily built, inexpensive, and anyone with a little
mechanical ability can make one by closely following out the
construction as shown in the illustration.
--Contributed by W. H. Kutscher, Springfield, Ill.



** How to Make a Copper Bowl [185]

To make a copper bowl, such as is shown in the illustration,
secure a piece of No. 21 gauge sheet copper of a size sufficient
to make a circular disk 6-1/2 in. in diameter.

Cut the copper to the circular form and size just mentioned, and
file the edge so that it will be smooth and free from sharp
places. With a pencil compass put on a series of concentric rings
about 1/2 in. apart. These are to aid the eye in beating the bowl
to form.

The tools are simple and can be made easily. First make a
round-nosed mallet of some hard wood, which should have a diameter
of about 1-1/4 in, across the head. If nothing better is at hand,
saw off a section of a broom handle, round one end and insert a
handle into a hole bored in its middle. Next take a block of wood,
about 3 by 3 by 6 in., and make in one end a hollow, about 2 in.
across and 1/2 in. deep. Fasten the block solidly, as in a vise,
and while holding the copper on the hollowed end of the block,
beat with the mallet along the concentric rings.

Begin at the center and work along the rings--giving the copper a
circular movement as the beating proceeds--out toward the rim.
Continue the circular movement and work from the rim back toward
the center. This operation is to be continued until the bowl has
the shape desired, when the bottom is flattened by placing the
bowl, bottom side up, on a flat surface and beating the raised
part flat. Beating copper tends to harden it and, if continued too
long without proper treatment, will cause the metal to break. To
overcome this hardness, heat the copper over a bed of coals or a
Bunsen burner to a good heat. This process is called annealing, as
it softens the metal.

The appearance of a bowl is greatly enhanced by the addition of a
border. In the illustration the border design shown was laid out
in pencil, a small hole was drilled with a band drill in each
space and a small-bladed metal saw inserted and the part sawed
out.

To produce color effects on copper, cover the copper with
turpentine and

[Illustration: Shaping the Bowl and Sawing the Lace]

hold over a Bunsen burner until all parts are well heated.



** Cleaning Furniture [185]

After cleaning furniture, the greasy appearance may be removed by
adding some good, sharp vinegar to the furniture polish. Vinegar,
which is nothing else than diluted acetic acid, is one of the best
cleansers of dirty furniture.



** Melting Lead in Tissue Paper [185]

Take a buckshot, wrap it tightly in one thickness of tissue paper,
and, holding the ends of the paper in the fingers of each hand,
place the part that holds the shot over the flame of a match just
far enough away from the flame not to burn the paper. In a few
seconds unfold the paper and you will find that the shot has
melted without even scorching the paper.
--Contributed by W. O. Hay, Camden, S. C.



** The Principles of the Stereograph [185]

Each of our eyes sees a different picture of any object; the one
sees a trifle more to the right-hand side, the other to the left,
especially when the object is near to the observer. The
stereoscope is the instrument which effects this result by
bringing the two pictures together in the senses. The stereograph
produces this result in another way than by prisms as in the
stereoscope. In the first place there is

[Illustration: Looking Through the Colored Gelatine]

only one picture, not two mounted side by side. The stereograph
consists of a piece of card, having therein two circular openings
about 1-1/4 in. diameter, at a distance apart corresponding to the
distance between the centers of the pupils. The openings are
covered with transparent gelatine, the one for the left eye being
blue, that for the right, orange. The picture is viewed at a
distance of about 7 in. from the stereograph. As a result of
looking at it through the stereograph, one sees a colorless black
and white picture which stands out from the background. Try
looking at the front cover of Popular Mechanics through these
colored gelatine openings and the effect will be produced.

If one looks at the picture first with the right eye alone through
the orange glass, and then with the left eye through the blue
glass, one will understand the principle on which the little
instrument works. Looking through the blue glass with the left
eye, one sees only those portions which are red on the picture.
But they seem black. The reason is that the red rays are absorbed
by the blue filter. Through the orange gelatine all the white
portions of the picture seem orange, because of the rays coming
from them, and which contain all the colors of the spectrum; only
the orange rays may pass through. The red portions of the picture
are not seen, because, although they pass through the screen, they
are not seen against the red ground of the picture. It is just as
though they were not there. The left eye therefore sees a black
picture on a red background.

In the same way the right eye sees through the orange screen only
a black picture on a red background; this black image consisting
only of the blue portions of the picture. Any other part of
complementary colors than blue and orange, as for instance red and
green, would serve the same purpose.

The principle on which the stereograph works may be demonstrated
by a very simple experiment. On white paper one makes a picture or
mark with a red pencil. Looking at this through a green glass it
appears black on a green ground; looking at it through a red glass
of exactly the same color as the picture, it, however, disappears
fully.

Through the glass one will see only a regular surface of the color
of the glass itself, and without any picture. Through a red glass
a green picture will appear black.

So with the stereograph; each eye sees a black picture
representing one of the pictures given by the stereoscope; the
only difference being that in the case of the stereograph the
background for each eye is colored; while both eyes together see a
white background.

In the pictures the red and the green lines and dots must not
coincide; neither can they be very far apart in order to produce
the desired result. In order that the picture shall be "plastic,"
which increases the sense of depth and shows the effect of
distance in the picture, they must be a very trifle apart. The
arrangement of the two pictures can be so that one sees the
pictures either in front of or on the back of the card on which
they are printed. In order to make them appear before the card,
the left eye sees through a blue screen, but the red picture which
is seen by it is a black one, and lies to the right on the
picture; and the right eye sees the lefthand picture. The further
apart the pictures are, the further from the card will the
composite image appear.

In the manufacture of a stereoscope the difficulty is in the
proper arrangement of the prisms; with the stereograph, in the
proper choice of colors.



** Mercury Make-and-Break Connections for    Induction Coils [187]

Induction coils operating on low voltage have a make-and-break
connection called the "buzzer" to increase the secondary
discharge. Two types of make-and-break connection are used, the
common "buzzer" operated by the magnetism of the core in the coil
and the mercury break operated by a small motor. The sketch
herewith shows how to make the motor-operated break. Two blocks of
wood are nailed together in the shape of an L and a small motor
fastened to the top of the vertical piece. The shaft of the motor
is bent about 18 in. in the shape of a crank, so that in turning
it will describe a circle 1/4 in. in diameter. A small connecting
bar is cut from a piece of brass 1/8 in. thick, 1/4 in. wide and 1
in. long and a hole drilled in each end; one hole to fit the motor
shaft and the other to slip on a No. 12 gauge wire. Two L-shaped
pieces of brass are fastened to the side of the block and drilled
with holes of such a size that a No. 12 gauge wire will slip
through snugly. Place a NO.12 gauge wire in these holes and bend
the top end at right angles.

[Illustration: Motor-Driven Make-and-Break]

Put the connecting brass bar on the motor shaft with washers
fitted tight on each side and slip the other end over the bent end
of the wire. Have the wire plenty long so it can be cut to the
proper length when the parts are all in place. A small round
bottle about 1/2 in. in diameter is now fitted in a hole that has
been previously bored into the middle of the bottom block and
close up to the vertical piece. This should only be bored about
half way through the block. The wire is now cut so at the length
of the stroke the end will come to about one-half the depth, or
the middle of the bottle.

Fill the bottle with mercury to a point so that when the motor is
running, the end of the wire will be in the mercury for about
one-half of the stroke. Cover the mercury over with a little
alcohol. A No. 14 gauge iron wire is bent and put into the side of
the bottle with the end extending to the bottom. The other end of
this wire is attached to one binding-post placed at the end of the
bottom block. The other binding-post is connected to a small brass
brush attached to the side of the vertical piece, which is placed
with some pressure on the moving wire. The motor can be run with a
current from a separate course or connected as shown on the same
batteries with the coil. The proper height of the mercury can be
regulated for best results. The motor must run continuous if the
coil is used for writing code signals, wireless, etc.
--Contributed by Haraden Pratt, San Francisco, Cal.



** How to Make a Barometer [188]

Atmospheric pressure is measured by the barometer. The weight of
the air in round numbers is 15 lb. to the square inch and will
support a column of water 1 in. square, 34 ft. high, or a column
of mercury (density 13.6) 1 in. square, 30 in. high. The parts
necessary to make a simple barometer are, a glass tube 1/8 in.
internal diameter and about 34 in. long, a bottle 1 in. inside
diameter and 2 in. high. Seal one end of the tube by holding it in
the flame of a gas burner, which will soon soften the glass so it
can be pinched together with pliers. Put a little paraffin in the
bottle and melt it by holding the bottle over a small flame. When
cool the paraffin should cover the bottom about 1/16 in. thick.
The tube is now to be filled with mercury. This may be
accomplished with a paper funnel, but before attempting to put in
the mercury, place a large dish or tray beneath the tube to catch
any mercury that may accidentally be spilled. Only redistilled
mercury should be used, and the tube should be perfectly clean
before filling. When the tube is filled to

[Illustration: Barometer]

within 1 in. of the open end place the forefinger over the hole
and tilt the tube up and down so all the air will gather at the
finger end. The filling is continued until the tube is full of
mercury. The glass bottle containing the wax covered bottom is now
placed over the end of the tube and pressed firmly to insure an
airtight fit with the tube. The bottle and tube are inverted and
after a few ounces of mercury are put in the bottle the tube may
be raised out of the wax, but be careful not to bring its edge
above the surface of the mercury.

The instrument is put aside while the base is being made, or, if
you choose, have the base ready to receive the parts just
described when they are completed. Cut a base from a piece of
7/8-in. pine 3 in. wide and 40 in. long. In this base cut a groove
to fit the tube and the space to be occupied by the bottle is
hollowed out with a chisel to a depth of 3/4 in., so the bottle
rests on one-half of its diameter above the surface of the board
and one-half below. The instrument is made secure to the base with
brass strips tacked on as shown in the sketch. After the
instrument is in place put enough mercury in the bottle so the
depth of the mercury above the bottom end of the tube will be
about 1/2 in.

The scale is made on a piece or cardboard 2 in. wide and 4 in.
long. The 4 in. are marked off and divided into sixteenths, and
the inches numbered 27 up to 31. The scale is fastened to the base
with glue or tacks and in the position behind the tube as shown in
the sketch. Before fastening the scale, the instrument should be
compared with a standard barometer and the scale adjusted so both
readings are the same. But if a standard barometer is not
available, the instrument, if accurately constructed, will
calibrate itself.

In general, a drop in the mercury indicates a storm and bad
weather, while a rise indicates fair weather and in winter a
frost. Sudden changes in the barometer are followed by like
changes in weather. The slow rise of the mercury predicts fair
weather, and a slow fall, the contrary. During the frosty days the
drop of the mercury is followed by a thaw and a rise indicates
snow.



** Home-Made Post or Swinging Light [189]

Remove the bottom from a round bottle of sufficient size to admit
a wax or tallow candle. This can be done with a glass cutter or a
hot ring; the size of the outside of the bottle, which is slipped
quickly over the end. Procure a metal can cover, a cover from a
baking powder can will do, a lid fit it on the end where the
bottom was removed. The cover is punched full of holes to admit
the air and a cross cut in the center with the four wings thus
made by the cutting turned up to form a place to insert the
candle. The metal cover is fastened to the bottle with wires as
shown in the sketch. This light can be used on a post or hung from
a metal support.

[Illustration: Swinging Light]



** A Checker Puzzle [189]

Cut a block from a board about 3 in. wide and 10 in. long.
Sandpaper all the surfaces and round the edges slightly. Mark out
seven 1-in. squares on the surface to be used for the top and
color the squares alternately white and black. Make six men by
sawing a curtain roller into pieces about 3/8 in. thick. Number
the pieces 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7, and place them as shown in Fig. 1.
The puzzle is to make the first three change places with the last
three and

[Illustration: Position of the Men]

move only one at a time. This may be done as follows:

    Move 1-Move No. 3 to the center.
    Move 2-Jump No. 5 over No. 3.
    Move 3-Move No. 6 to No. 5's place.
    Move 4-Jump No, 3 over No. 6.
    Move 5-Jump No. 2 over No. 5.
    Move 6-Move No. 1 to No. 2's place.
    Move 7-Jump No. 5 over No. 1.
    Move 8-Jump No. 6 over No. 2.
    Move 9-Jump No. 7 over No. 3.
    Move 10-Move No. 3 into No. 7's place.
    Move ll-Jump No. 2 over No. 7.
    Move 12-Jump No, l over No. 6.
    Move 13-Move No. 6 into No. 2's place.
    Move 14-Jump No. 7 over No. 1.
    Move 15-Move No. 1 into No, 5's place.

After the 15 moves are made the men will have changed places. This
can be done on a checker board, as shown in Fig. 2, using checkers
for men, but be sure you so situate the men that they will occupy
a row containing only 7 spaces.
--Contributed by W. L. Woolson, Cape May Point, N.J.



** Gold Railroad Signals [189]

Covering railroad signals with gold leaf has taken the place of
painting on some roads. Gold leaf will stand the wear of the
weather for 15 or 20 years, while paint requires recovering three
or four times a year.



** How to Make a Bell Tent [190]

A bell tent is easily made and is nice for lawns, as well as for a
boy's camping outfit. The illustrations show a plan of a tent
14-ft. in diameter. To make such a tent, procure unbleached tent
duck, which is the very best material for the purpose, says the
Cleveland Plain Dealer. Make 22 sections, shaped like Fig. 3, each
10 ft. 6 in. long and 2 ft. 2 in. wide at the bottom, tapering in
a straight line to a point at the top. These dimensions allow for
the laid or lapped seams, which should be

[Illustration: An Inexpensive Home-Made Tent]

double-stitched on a machine. The last seam sew only for a
distance of 4 ft. from the top, leaving the rest for an opening.
At the end of this seam stitch on an extra gusset piece so that it
will not rip. Fold back the edges of the opening and the bottom
edge of the bell-shaped cover and bind it with wide webbing, 3 in.
across and having eyelets at the seams for attaching the stay
ropes. Near the apex of the cover cut three triangular holes 8 in.
long and 4 in. wide at the bottom and hem the edges. These are
ventilators. Make the tent wall of the same kind of cloth 2 ft. 2
in. high. Bind it at the upper edge with webbing and at the bottom
with canvas. Also stitch on coarse canvas 6 in. wide at the
bottom, and the space between the ground and the wall when the
tent is raised, fill with canvas edging. Stitch the upper edge of
the wall firmly to the bell cover at the point indicated by the
dotted line, Fig. 2.

For the top of the tent have the blacksmith make a hoop of 1/4-in.
round galvanized iron, 6-in. diameter. Stitch the canvas at the
apex around the hoop and along the sides. Make the apex into a
hood and line it with stiff canvas. Have the tent pole 3 in. in
diameter, made in two sections, with a socket joint and rounded at
the top to fit into the apex of the tent.

In raising the tent, fasten down the wall by means of loops of
stout line fastened to its lower edge and small pegs driven
through them into the ground, Fig. 5. Run the stay ropes from the
eyelets in the circular cover to stakes (Fig. 5) stuck in the
ground. Use blocks, as in Fig. 6, on the stay ropes for holding
the ends and adjusting the length of the ropes.



** Simple X-Ray Experiment [190]

The outlines of the bones of the hand may be seen by holding a
piece of rice paper before the eyes and placing the spare hand
about 12 in. back of the rice paper and before a bright light. The
bony structure will be clearly distinguishable.
--Contributed by G.J. Tress, Emsworth, Pa.



** How to Make a Candle Shade [191]

Layout the pattern for the shade on a thin piece of paper, 9 by 12
in., making the arcs of the circle with a pencil compass. As shown
in the sketch, the pattern for this particular shade covers a half
circle with 2-3/4 in. added. Allowance must be made for the lap
and as 1/4 in. will do, a line is drawn parallel 1/4 in. from the
one drawn through the center to the outside circle that terminates
the design.

Nail a thin sheet of brass, about 9 in. wide by 12 in. long, to a
smooth board of soft wood, then trace the design on the brass by
laying a piece of carbon paper between the pattern and the brass.
After transferring the design to the brass, use a small awl to
punch the holes in the brass along the outlines of the figures
traced. Punch holes in the brass in the spaces around the outlined
figures, excepting the 1/4-in. around the outside of the pattern.
When all the holes are punched, remove the brass sheet from the
board and cut it along the outer lines as traced from the pattern,
then bend the brass carefully so as not to crease the figures
appearing in relief. When the edges are brought together by
bending, fasten them with brass-headed nails or brads.

If a wood-turning lathe is at hand, the shade can be made better
by turning a cone from soft wood that will fit the sheet-brass
shade after it is shaped and the edges fastened together. The
pattern is traced as before, but before punching the holes, cut
out the brass on the outside lines, bend into shape, fasten the
ends together and place on the wood cone. The holes are now
punched on the outlines traced from the pattern and the open
spaces made full of holes. The holes being punched after the shade
is shaped, the metal will stay and hold the perfect shape of a
cone much better.

The glass-beaded fringe is attached on the inside of the bottom
part with small brass rivets or brads placed about 3/4 in. apart.
The thin sheet brass may be procured from the local hardware

[Illustration: Punching the Holes; Completed Shade; Pattern]

dealer and sometimes can be purchased from general merchandise
stores.
--Contributed by Miss Kathryn E. Corr, Chicago.



** A Putty Grinder [191]

Having a large number of windows to putty each week, I found it
quite a task to prepare the putty. I facilitated the work by using
an ordinary meat cutter or sausage grinder. The grinder will
soften set putty and will quickly prepare cold putty. It will not,
however, grind old putty or make putty from whiting and oil.
--Contributed by H. G. Stevens; Dunham, Que.



** Home-Made Small Churn [192]

Many people living in a small town or in the suburbs of a city own
one

[Illustration: Making Butter]

cow that supplies the family table with milk and cream. Sometimes
the cream will accumulate, but not in sufficient quantities to be
made into butter in a large churn. A fruit jar usually takes the
place of a churn and the work is exceedingly hard, the jar being
shaken so the cream will beat against the ends in the process of
butter-making. The accompanying sketch shows clearly how one boy
rigged up a device having a driving wheel which is turned with a
crank, and a driven wheel attached to an axle having a crank on
the inner end. This crank is connected to a swinging cradle with a
wire pitman of such a size as to slightly bend or spring at each
end of the stroke. The cradle is made with a cleat fastened to
each end, between which is placed the fruit jar, partially filled
with cream. The jar is wedged in between the cleats and the
churning effected by turning the crank.
--Contributed by Geo. E. Badger, Mayger, Oregon.



** Home-Made Round Swing [192]

Gas pipe and fittings were used wherever possible in the making of
the swing as shown in the photograph. The d i a g ram drawing
shows the construction. A 6-in. square cedar post is set in the
ground about 3 ft., allowing 2 ft. to remain above the ground and
a 7/8-in. piece of shafting is driven into the top part of this
post for an axle. A cast-iron ring, or, better still, a heavy
wheel with four spokes of such a size as to be drilled and tapped
for 1/2-in. pipe is used for the hub, or center on which the frame
swings. If a wheel is selected, the rim must be removed and only
the spokes and hub used. The hole in the hub must be 7/8 in. or
less, so the hub can be fitted to the shafting that is driven in
the post. A large washer is placed on top of the post and the hub
or cast-iron ring set on the washer.

The drilled and tapped holes in the four spokes are each fitted
with a 4-1/2 length of 1/2-in. pipe. These pipes are

[Illustration: The Merry-Go-Round Complete]

each fitted with a tee on the end and into this tee uprights of
1/2-in. pipe in suitable lengths are screwed, and also short
lengths with a tee and axle for the 6-in. wheel are fitted in the
under side of the tee. The uprights at their upper ends are also
fitted with tees and each joined to the center pipe with 1/2-in.
pipe flattened on the inner end and fastened with bolts to a
flange.

The bottom part of the cloth covering is held in place by a
1/2-in. pipe, bent to the desired circle. Four braces made from
1/2-in. pipe connect each spoke and seat to the flange on the
center pipe. An extra wheel 18 in. in diameter is fitted in
between two seats and used as the propelling wheel. This wheel has
bicycle cranks and pedals and carries a seat or a hobby horse. The
four seats are fastened to the four pipes with 1/2-in. pipe
clamps.

[Illustration: Details of the Swing]

Small miniature electric lights are fastened to the overhead
