mountains with a green film along their slopes that they knew to be
forests of oak and pine; and such was the nature of man that they looked
at them regretfully. Obed White, glancing at Ned, caught Ned glancing at
him, and both laughed.

"That's it," said Obed. "How precious is the thing that slips away. When
we were in the forest we wanted the open country, but now in the open
country we want the forest. But we're making progress, Ned. Don't forget
that."

"I don't," said Ned. "But when we get further North into the vast
stretches of the arid plateau, we must have something more to
carry--water bottles."

"That's so. We can't do without them. Maybe, too, Ned, we can pick up a
couple of good horses. They'd be a wonderful help."

"We'll hope for everything we need," said Ned cheerfully. "Now I wonder,
Obed, if the attack has been made on Texas. Do you think we can yet get
there in time?"

"I hope so," replied Obed thoughtfully. "You were a long time in San
Juan de Ulua, but armies move slowly, and they have plenty of troubles
of their own here in Mexico. I would wager almost anything that no
Mexican force in great numbers has yet crossed the Rio Grande."

"Then we may be in time. Obed, we'll push for the north with every ounce
of strength we have."

"That's just what we'll do. Courage defeats a multitude of sins."

They traveled now for nearly a week in a direction north slightly by
west, suffering at times from heat, and once from a tropical rain storm
that deluged them. While the rain poured upon them, they kept their
serapes wrapped around their powder, and let their bodies take the
worst. The rain, for a while, was very cold, but the powder was
precious, and after a while the sun came out, drying and warming them
again. They were compelled to swim two narrow but deep rivers, a most
difficult task, as they had arms, ammunition and food to carry with
them.

They noticed stretches of forest again, and passed both scattered houses
and villages. Their knowledge of Spanish and their rifles were their
protection. But in some places the people seemed to care nothing either
about Santa Anna or those who might oppose him. They were content to
lead lives in a region which furnished food almost of its own accord.
Just before approaching one of these villages Ned shot another jaguar.
It was not black like the first, nor so large. It was about five feet in
length, and yellowish in color, with a splendid skin, which, at Obed's
suggestion, they removed for purposes of barter. It was a wise idea, as
they traded it in the village for two large water bottles. The people
there were so indifferent to their identity that they sat in the plaza
in the evening, and watched the young people dance the fandango.

It was only a crude little village in the Mexican wilderness. The people
were more Indian than Mexican. There was not much melody in their music,
and not much rhythm in their dance, but they were human beings, enjoying
themselves after labor and without fear. Both Ned and Obed, sitting
outside the circle of light with their rifles across their knees, felt
it. The sense of human companionship, even of strangers, was very
pleasant. The music and the glowing faces appealed very strongly to the
boy. Silent, thoughtful, and compelled by circumstances to live a hard
life, he was nevertheless young with all the freshness of youth. Obed
saw, and he felt a deep sympathy for this lad who had wrapped himself
like a younger brother around his heart.

"Just you wait, Ned," he said, "until we reach our own people across the
Rio Grande. Then we'll have lots of friends and they'll be friends all
the stronger, because you will be the first to bring them news of the
treacherous attack that is to be made upon them."

"If we get there in time," said Ned, "and, Obed, I am beginning to
believe that we will get there in time."

They passed for hunters, and that night they slept in the village, where
they received kindness, and departed again the next morning on the long,
long journey that always led to the north.




CHAPTER X

CACTUS AND MEXICANS


They now came upon bare, wind-swept plains, which alternated with
blazing heat and bitter cold. Once they nearly perished in a Norther,
which drove down upon them with sheets of hail. Fortunately their
serapes were very thick and large, and they found additional shelter
among some ragged and mournful yucca trees. But they were much shaken by
the experience, and they rested an entire day by the banks of a shallow
little brook.

"Oh, for a horse, two horses!" said Obed. "I'd give all our castles in
Spain for two noble Barbary steeds to take us swiftly o'er the plain."

"I think we'll keep on walking," said Ned.

"At any rate, we're good walkers. We must be the very best walkers in
the world judging from the way we've footed it since we left the castle
of San Juan de Ulua."

They refilled their water bottles, despite the muddiness of the stream,
and went on for three or four days over the plain, having nothing for
scenery save the sandy ridges, the ragged yuccas, dwarfed and ugly
mesquite bushes, and the deformed cactus.

It was an ugly enough country by day, but, by night, it had a sort of
weird charm. The moonlight gave soft tints to the earth. Now and then
the wind would pick up the sand and carry it away in whirling gusts. The
wind itself had a voice that was almost human and it played many notes.
Lean and hungry wolves now appeared and howled mournfully, but were
afraid to attack that terrible creature, man.

They saw sheep herders several times, but the herders invariably
disappeared over the horizon with great speed. Neither Ned nor Obed
meant them any harm, and they would have liked to exchange a few words
with human beings.

"They think of course that we're brigands," said Obed. "It's what
anybody would take us for. Evil looks corrupt good intentions."

The next day Obed was lucky enough to shoot an antelope, and they had
fresh food. It was a fine fat buck, and they jerked and dried the
remainder of the body in the sun, taking a long rest at the same time.
Obed was continually restraining Ned's eagerness to hurry on.

"The race is to the swift if he doesn't break down," he said, "but
you've got to guard mighty well against breaking down. I think we're
going to enter a terrible long stretch of dry country, and we want our
muscles to be tough and our wind to be good."

Obed was partially right in his prediction as they passed for three days
through an absolutely sterile region. It was not sandy, however, but the
soil was hard and baked like a stone. Then they saw on their left high
but bare and desolate mountains, and soon they came to a little river of
clear water, apparently flowing down from the range. The stream was not
over twenty feet wide and two feet deep, but its appearance was
inexpressibly grateful to both. They sat down on its banks and looked at
each other.

"Ned," said Obed, "how much dust of the desert do you think I am
carrying upon me? Let your answer be without prejudice. Friendship in
this case must not stand in the way of truth."

"Do you mean by weight or by area?"

"Both."

"Answering by guess I should say about three square yards, or about
three pounds. Wouldn't you say about the same for me?"

"Just about the same. I should say, too, that we carry at least twelve
or fifteen kinds of dirt. It is well soaked in our hair and also in our
clothes, and, as we may not get another good chance for a bath in a
month, we'd better use our opportunity."

They reveled in the cool waters. They also washed out all their
clothing, including their serapes, and let the garments dry in the sun.
It was the most luxurious stop that they had made and they enjoyed it to
the full. Ned, scouting a little distance up the stream, shot a fine fat
deer among the bushes, and that night they had a feast of tender steaks.
Obed had obtained flint and steel at the Indian village, at which they
had seen the fandango, and he could light a fire with them, a most
difficult thing to do. Their fire was of dried cactus, burning rapidly,
but it lasted long enough for their cooking. After the heartiest meal
that they had eaten in a long time, they stretched out by the river,
listening to its pleasant flow. The remainder of the deer they had hung
high in the branches of a myrtle oak about forty yards away.

"We haven't got our horses," said Obed, "but we're making progress. Time
and tide will carry man with them if he's ready with his boat."

"Perhaps we've been lucky, too," said Ned, "in passing through what is
mostly a wilderness."

"That's so. The desert is a hard road, but in our case it keeps enemies
away."

They were lying on their serapes, the waters sang softly, the night was
dark but very cool and pleasant, and they were happy. But Ned suddenly
saw something that made him reach out and touch his companion.

"Look!" he whispered, pointing a finger.

They saw a dark figure creep on noiseless feet toward the tree, from a
bough of which hung their deer. It was only a shadow in the night, but
they knew that it was a cougar, drawn by the savor of the deer.

"Don't shoot," whispered Obed. "He can't get our meat, but we'll watch
him try."

They lay quite still and enjoyed the joke. The cougar sprang again and
again, making mighty exertions, but always the rich food swung just out
of his reach. Once or twice his nose nearly touched it, but the two or
three inches of gulf which he could never surmount were as much as two
or three miles. He invariably fell back snarling, and he became so
absorbed in the hopeless quest that there was no chance of his noticing
the man and boy who lay not far away.

The humor of it appealed strongly to Ned and Obed. The cougar, after so
many vain leaps, lay on the ground for a while panting. Then he ran up
the tree, and as far out on the bough as he dared. He reached delicately
with a forefoot, but he could not touch the strips of bark with which
the body was tied. Then he lay flat upon the bough and snarled again and
again.

"That's a good punishment for a rascally thief," whispered Obed. "I
don't blame him for trying to get something to eat, but it's our deer.
Let him go away and do his own hunting."

The cougar came back down the tree, but his descent was made with less
spirit than his ascent. Nevertheless he made another try at the jumping.
Ned saw, however, that he did not do as well as before. He never came
within six inches of the deer now. At last he lay flat again on the
ground and panted, staying there a full five minutes. When he got up he
made one final and futile jump, and then sneaked away, exhausted and
ashamed.

"Now, Ned," said Obed, "since the comedy is over I think we can safely
go to sleep."

"Especially as we know our deer is safe," said Ned.

Both slept soundly throughout the remainder of the night. Toward morning
the cougar came back and looked longingly at the body of the deer
hanging from the bough of the tree. He thought once or twice of leaping
for it again, but there was a shift of the wind and he caught the human
odor from the two beings who lay forty yards away. He was a large and
strong beast of prey, but this odor frightened him, and he slunk off
among the trees, not to return.

Ned and Obed stayed two days beside the little river, taking a complete
rest, bathing frequently in the fresh waters, and curing as much of the
deer as possible for their journey. Then, rather heavily loaded, they
started anew, always going northward through a sad and rough land. Now
they entered another bare and sterile region of vast extent, walking for
five days, without seeing a single trace of surface water. Had it not
been for their capacious water bottles they would have perished, and,
even with their aid, it was only by the strictest economy that they
lived. The evaporation from the heat was so great that after a mouthful
or two of water they were invariably as thirsty as ever, inside of five
minutes.

They passed from this desert into a wide, dry valley between bare
mountains, and entered a great cactus forest, one of the most wonderful
things that either of them had ever seen. The ground was almost level,
but it was hard and baked. Apparently no more rain fell here than in the
genuine desert of shifting sand, and there was not a drop of surface
water. Ned, when he first saw the mass of green, took it for a forest of
trees, such as one sees in the North, but so great was his interest that
he was not disappointed, when he saw that it was the giant cactus.

The strange forest extended many miles. The stems of the cactus rose to
a height of sixty feet or more, with a diameter often reaching two feet.
Sometimes the stems had no branches, but, in case they did, the branches
grew out at right angles from the main stem, and then curving abruptly
upward continued their growth parallel to the parent stock.

The stems of these huge plants were divided into eighteen or twenty
ribs, within which at intervals of an inch or so were buds, with
cushions, yellow and thick, from which grew six or seven large, and many
smaller spines.

Most of the cactus trees were gorgeous with flowers, ranging from a deep
rich crimson through rose and pink to a creamy white.

The green of the plants and the delicate colors of the flowers were
wonderfully soothing to the two who had come from the bare and burning
desert. There their eyes had ached with the heat and glare. They had
longed for shade as men had longed of old for the shadow of a rock in a
weary land. In truth they found little shade in the cactus forest, but
the green produced the illusion of it. They expected to find flowing or
standing water, but they went on for many miles and the soil remained
hard and baked, as it can bake only in the rainless regions of high
plateaus.

They found the forest to be fully thirty miles in length and several
miles in width. Everywhere the giant cactus predominated, and on its
eastern border they found two Indian men and several women and children
gathering the fruit, from which they made an excellent preserve. The
Indians were short in stature and very dark. All started to run when
they saw the white man and boy, both armed with rifles, approaching, but
Ned and Obed held up their hands as a sign of amity and, after some
hesitation, they stopped. They spoke a dialect which neither Ned nor
Obed could understand, but by signs they made a treaty of peace.

They slept that night by the fire of their new friends and the next day
they were fortunate enough to shoot a deer, the greater part of which
they gave to the Indians. The older of the men then guided them out of
the forest at the northern end, and indicated as nearly as he could, by
the same sign language, the course they should pursue in order to reach
Texas. They had gone too far to the west, and by coming back toward the
east they would save distance, as well as pass through a better country.
Then he gravely bade them farewell and went back to his people.

Ned and Obed now crossed a low but rugged range of mountains, and came
into good country where they were compelled to spend a large part of
their time, escaping observation. It was only the troubled state of the
people and the extreme division of sentiment among them that saved the
two from capture. But they obtained news that filled both with joy.
Fighting had occurred in Texas, but no great Mexican army had yet gone
into the north.

Becoming bold now from long immunity and trusting to their Mexican
address and knowledge of Spanish and its Mexican variants, they turned
into the main road and pursued their journey at a good pace. They were
untroubled the first day but on the second day they saw a cloud of dust
behind them.

"Sheep being driven to market," said Obed.

"I don't know," replied Ned, looking back. "That cloud of dust is at
least a mile away, but it seems to me I saw it give out a flash or two."

"What kind of a flash do you mean?"

"Bright, like silver or steel. There, see it!"

"Yes, I see it now, and I think you know what makes it, Ned."

"I should say that it is the sun striking on the steel heads of long
lances."

"So should I, and I say also that those lances are carried by Mexican
cavalrymen bound for Texas. It may not be a bad guess either that this
is the vanguard of the army of Cos. I infer from the volume of dust that
it is a considerable force."

"Therefore it is wise for us to leave the road and hide as best we can."

"Correctly spoken. The truth needs no bush. It walks without talking."

They turned aside at once, and entered a field of Indian corn, where
they hoped to pass quietly out of sight, but some of the lancers came on
very fast and noticed the dusty figures at the far edge of the field.
Many of the Mexicans were skilled and suspicious borderers, and the
haste with which the two were departing seemed suspicious to them.

Ned and Obed heard loud and repeated shouts to halt, but pretending not
to hear passed out of the field and entered a stretch of thin forest
beyond.

"We must not stop," said Obed. "Being regular soldiers they will surely
discover, if they overtake us, that we are not Mexicans, and two or
three lance thrusts would probably be the end of us. Now that we are
among these trees we'll run for it."

A shout came from the lancers in the corn field as soon as they saw the
two break into a run. Ned heard it, and he felt as the fox must feel
when the hounds give tongue. Tremors shook him, but his long and silent
mental training came to his aid. His will strengthened his body and he
and Obed ran rapidly. Nor did they run without purpose. Both
instinctively looked for the roughest part of the land and the thickest
stretches of forest. Only there could they hope to escape the lancers
who were thundering after them.

Ned more than once wished to use his rifle, but he always restrained the
impulse, and Obed glanced at him approvingly. He seemed to know what was
passing in the boy's mind.

"Our bullets would be wasted now, even if we brought down a lancer or
two," he said, "so we'll just save 'em until we're cornered--if we are.
Then they will tell. Look, here are thorn bushes! Come this way."

They ran among the bushes which reached out and took little bits of
their clothing as they passed. But they rejoiced in the fact. Horses
could never be driven into that dense, thorny growth, and they might
evade pursuers on foot. The thorn thicket did not last very long,
however. They passed out of it and came into rough ground with a general
trend upward. Both were panting now and their faces were wet with
perspiration. The breath was dry and hot and the heart constricted
painfully. They heard behind them the noise of the pursuit, spread now
over a wide area.

"If only these hills continue to rise and to rise fast," gasped Obed
White, "we may get away among the rocks and bushes."

There was a rapid tread of hoofs, and two lancers, with their long
weapons leveled, galloped straight at them. Obed leaped to one side, but
Ned, so startled that he lost command of himself, stopped and stood
still. He saw one of the men bearing down upon him, the steel of the
lance head glittering in the sunlight, and instinctively he closed his
eyes. He heard a sharp crack, something seemed to whistle before his
face, and then came a cry which he knew was the death cry of a man. He
had shut his eyes only for a moment, and when he opened them he saw the
Mexican falling to the ground, where he lay motionless across his lance.
Obed White stood near, and his rifle yet smoked. Ned instantly recovered
himself, and fired at the second lancer who, turning about, galloped
away with a wound in his shoulder.

"Come Ned," cried Obed White. "There is a time for all things, and it is
time for us to get away from here as fast as we can."

He could not be too quick for Ned, who ran swiftly, avoiding another
look at the silent and motionless figure on the ground. The riderless
horse was crashing about among the trees. From a point three or four
hundred yards behind there came the sound of much shouting. Ned thought
it to be an outburst of anger caused by the return of the wounded
lancer.

"We stung 'em a little," he panted.

"We did," said Obed White. "Remember that when you go out to slay you
may be slain. But, Ned, we must reload."

They curved about, and darting into a thick clump of bushes put fresh
charges in their rifles. Ned was trembling from excitement and
exertion, but his anger was beginning to rise. There must always come a
time when the hunted beast will turn and rend if it can. Ned had been
