lessons in this art. After some little difficulty, and after
questioning first Mrs. Dove, and finally the much-dreaded Mr. Dove,
she was directed to a teacher, who promised to instruct her at the
rate of three pounds three shillings for twelve lessons. Primrose did
not know whether her teacher was good or bad, or whether she was
paying too much or too little--she resolved to take the lessons and to
spend some of her little capital in buying the necessary materials.

"After I've had my twelve lessons Mr. Jones thinks I may begin to
offer some of my plates and things for sale; he says he will be very
glad to put them up in his own shop window. He thinks," continued
Primrose with her sweet, grave smile, "that I may be able to recoup
myself for the expense of learning at the end of a few months."

"And now," said Jasmine, "what am I to do? It's all settled for you,
Primrose--you will be an artist--and you shall paint a breakfast set
for our nest in your odd moments, and I'll buy it from you when my
ship comes home. Oh! and we are both going to be very successful, are
we not, darling? and we won't have any trouble at all in supporting
our pet Daisy and her kitty-cat. You know, Primrose, my gifts lie in
the poetic and novelistic line. I have really thought of a glowing
plot for a story since I came to London, and Mr. Dove is to be the
ruffian of the piece. I'll introduce Mrs. Dredge and poor Miss Slowcum
too, and, of course, you'll be the heroine, my beautiful sister. I
mean to buy some paper, and work away at my novel in the evenings next
week; but as we have come up to London expressly to have our education
perfected, and our gifts developed, don't you think I ought to be
having some lessons in English style? After all, Primrose, I do not
think Mrs. Flint's way of speaking was correct. Arthur Noel did not
talk in the least like her, nor did dear Mrs. Ellsworthy; and after
all, they are a real lady and gentleman. I wonder, Primrose, who would
teach me proper style. I wish I could meet Arthur Noel again, that he
might tell me!"

"Oh, Jasmine, it is dreadful of you to speak of a perfect stranger by
his Christian name! Don't do it, dear--I know it is not right."

"He did not seem the least like a stranger," said Jasmine, pushing
back her curling locks. "Well, Rose, who is to teach me style?--you
see, if I am to earn money by my pen I must be polished up. I have got
a poem now in the back of my head which would exactly suit the ----
_Review_. It's almost exactly on the lines of one they published not
long ago by Tennyson; but I'd rather not send it until I've had a
lesson or two from some gifted person here--who shall I go to,
Primrose?"

"You must go to a school, of course," answered Primrose. "There is a
seminary for young ladies just round the corner--we will call there
this afternoon, and find out if the lady can give you lessons."

Miss Egerton, the principal of the seminary in question, opened her
eyes a good deal at Jasmine's modest request.

"I don't want French, nor German, nor music," quoth the young lady,
"but I do want to be helped to make very smooth and flowing verses,
and I want to have the plots of my novels cut up and criticised--for I
don't mind telling you," continued Jasmine, looking full into Miss
Egerton's deeply-lined and anxious face, "that I mean to live by my
pen. My sister is to be an artist, and I am to be a novelist and
poet."

Miss Egerton owned to herself afterwards that she had never met such
extraordinary girls; but then they were so pretty, and so fresh, and
the times were hard, and the High Schools were carrying off all her
pupils, so though she knew little or nothing of making up verses or
developing plots, she promised to receive Jasmine as a pupil, to
direct her reading, and to help her to the best of her ability. She
was a good and kind-hearted woman, and she made a further suggestion.

"What is to become of your little sister while you are both so busy,
young ladies?" she said.

"Oh, Daisy promises to be very good," said Primrose with a tender
smile at the little one. "Daisy will stay at home, and take care of
the Pink, and she is learning to sew very nicely. When Daisy is good
and stays quietly at home she helps our plan, and does as much for our
cause as any of us."

Miss Egerton looked straight into Daisy's eyes. Long ago this dry and
hard-looking old maid had a little sister like Daisy--a pretty little
lass, who went away to play in the heavenly gardens many and many a
year ago. For the sake of little Constance Miss Egerton felt a great
kindness welling up in her heart towards Daisy Mainwaring.

"Your little sister must not stay at home by herself," she said. "She
shall come to me. While I am teaching Miss Jasmine, Daisy can play or
work as she pleases, only not by herself in your lodgings, young
ladies, but in the room with her sister."

So it was arranged, and the three girls might fairly have been said to
commence their work.

When Primrose had gone to Mr. Danesfield and asked him to allow her to
draw their little capital out of his bank, he had made wonderfully
few objections. Of all their friends, he was the one who had opposed
Primrose's scheme the least, and perhaps for that reason she was more
willing to take his advice, and to be guided by him, than by either
Mrs. Ellsworthy or Miss Martineau. Mr. Danesfield had said to her: "My
dear, you and your sisters are in some particulars in a very unique
and unfortunate position. You are all three very young, yet you are
absolutely your own mistresses. No one in all the world has any real
control over you. If you ask me for your money, I cannot refuse you--I
have absolutely no choice in the matter; the money is yours, and when
you want it you must have it. Now I tell you plainly that Mrs.
Ellsworthy and Miss Martineau are dreadfully shocked with your scheme.
I may be wrong, but I confess I am not shocked. I fancy that you are
the kind of girls who will come out victorious, and that though you
will have rather a hard struggle, you will not be beaten; but there is
one thing I am most anxious to do for you, and that is to keep part of
your money. You have exactly two hundred pounds. How much of this
little capital do you propose to spend a year?"

"As little as ever we can," answered Primrose.

"Yes, my dear young lady, but you must have some sort of idea with
regard to your expenses. I would counsel you on no account to spend
more of your capital than seventy pounds a year; by restricting
yourselves to this sum you will have a very tiny but certain, income
for two years, and will have something to fall back on even in the
third year, if you are not then earning enough. Suppose I divide your
seventy pounds into four quarterly instalments, and send it to you as
you require it. You know nothing of keeping a banking account
yourself, and it will absolutely not be safe for you to live in London
lodgings, and have a large sum of money with you. Take my advice in
this particular, Miss Primrose, and allow me still to be your banker."

"There is one little difficulty," said Primrose; "we really want to be
independent, and as we know that there will be difficulties and
discouragements in the career we are marking out for ourselves, and
that we may often grow faint-hearted and lonely, Jasmine and I feel
that we had better put ourselves quite out of the way of temptation.
We have, therefore, made up our minds not to give our address to any
one in Rosebury for at least two years. How can you send us the money,
Mr. Danesfield, if you don't know where to send it?"

"My dear young lady, I fear you are a little bit too headstrong, and
though I admire your spirit, I cannot quite approve of your cutting
yourselves off from all communications with your friends. However, it
is not for me to interfere. Will this satisfy you, Miss
Primrose?--shall I give you my solemn promise only to use the address
with which you favor me to forward your money each quarter, and never
to divulge your secret to anybody else?"

Finally this plan was adopted, and Primrose received her small
quarterly allowance with great regularity.




CHAPTER XXII.

CROSS PURPOSES.


After his interview with Jasmine in St. Paul's Cathedral, Arthur Noel
went home to his very luxurious chambers in Westminster, and wrote the
following letter to Mrs. Ellsworthy:--

"MY DEAR MOTHER-FRIEND,

"The most curious thing has happened. I came accidentally to-day
across the three girls about whom you were so interested. I met them
at St. Paul's, and could not help speaking to the second one. The
brightness, and yet the melancholy, of her little face attracted my
attention. She was not with the rest of her party, but sat for some of
the time on one of the chairs, and then knelt down and covered her
face. Poor little soul! I think she was crying. My sympathies were
roused by her, and I spoke. She flashed up a very bright glance at me,
and we became friends on the spot. I took her about the cathedral, and
showed her one or two objects of interest. She was full of
intelligence. Then her sisters joined her, and your boy came up, and,
of course, his name came out; and there was confusion and wondering
glances, and the girl whom I had spoken to turned first crimson, and
then white, and her dark grey eyes became full of tears. 'I know the
Ellsworthys; they are my dear, dear friends!' she exclaimed.

"I found out where the three lived before I left them. They were
accompanied by a prim-looking maiden lady, who was introduced to me as
a Miss Slowcum, and who appeared to be taking excellent care of the
pretty creatures. All three are delightful, and I have lost my heart
to them all.

"Can I do anything for them? Of course you have already told me what
perverse creatures they are, and Miss Jasmine confirmed your story,
only, of course, she put her own coloring on it. I pity them, and yet,
to a certain extent--forgive me, mother-friend--I admire their spirit.
That eldest girl had a look about her face which will certainly keep
every one from being rude to her. Such an expression of innocence and
dignity combined I have seldom come across. Now, can I help them? It
is an extraordinary thing, but I have a wonderful fellow-feeling for
them. I can never forget the old days when I too was alone in London,
and you took me up. Do you remember how you met me, and took my thin
and dirty hands in yours, and looked into my face and said: 'Surely
this is a gentleman's son, although he is clothed in rags?' I could
just remember that I was a gentleman's son, and that I used to put my
arms round a beautiful lady's neck and kiss her, and call her mother.
Between her face and me there was a great horror of darkness, and
suffering, and ill-usage; and my memories were feeble and dream-like.
I don't even now recall them more vividly. You took me up, and--you
know the rest of my history.

"Well, it is a strange thing, but those girls, especially that little
Jasmine, brought back the memory of the lady whose sweet face I used
to kiss. Can I do anything for your girls? There are a thousand ways
in which I could help them without hurting their proud spirits.

     "Yours affectionately,
     "ARTHUR NOEL."

In a very short time Mr. Noel received a brief communication from Mrs.
Ellsworthy:--

MY DEAR ARTHUR,

"Your letter has been an untold relief. It was a special and good
Providence that directed your steps to St. Paul's on that afternoon.
My dear little Jasmine!--she is my pet of all the three. My dear
Arthur, pray call on the girls at that dreadful Penelope Mansion; they
are so naughty and so obstinate that they simply must be caught by
guile. You must use your influence to get them out of that dreadful
place. Look for respectable and nice lodgings, and go beforehand to
the landlady. If she is very nice, confide in her, and tell her she is
to look to me for payment, but she is on no account to let out this
fact to the girls. Kensington is a nice, quiet, respectable
neighborhood; you might take the drawing-room floor of a very quiet,
nice house, and ask the landlady to offer it to the girls for five
shillings a week, or something nominal of that sort. Primrose is so
innocent at present that she will think five shillings quite a large
sum; but tell the lady of the house to let it include all extras--I
mean such as gas and firing. I suppose you could not get a house with
the electric light?--no, of course not; it is not used yet in private
dwellings--gas is so unwholesome, but the girls might use candles.
Tell the landlady to provide them with the best candles, and tell her
I'll pay her something handsome if she'll go out with them. And, my
dear Arthur, _don't_ let them go in omnibuses. Do your best, and,
above all things, take them away from that awful mansion as soon as
possible.

     "Your affectionate Mother-Friend,
     "KATE ELLSWORTHY."

But alas! when Arthur Noel, in accordance with Mrs. Ellsworthy's
instructions, went to see the girls, he was confronted first by Mrs.
Flint, who assured him in her soft and cushion-like style that the
young ladies had left, and as they had been undutiful enough not to
confide in her she could furnish him with no address. As he was
leaving the mansion Poppy Jenkins rushed up to him.

"I heard you asking for my young ladies, sir, but it ain't no use, for
they're gone. Flowers of beauty they was--beautiful in manner and in
face--but they ain't to be found here no more. The Mansion didn't suit
them, and the people in the Mansion didn't suit them, and that isn't
to be wondered at. I suppose they has gone to a more congenial place,
but the address is hid from me; no, sir, I know nothing at all about
them. Yes, sir, it's quite true--I misses them most bitter!"

Here poor Poppy, covering her face with her hands, burst into tears
and disappeared down the back staircase.

Noel wrote to Mrs. Ellsworthy, and Mrs. Ellsworthy wrote back to him,
and between them they made many inquiries, and took many steps, which
they felt quite sure must lead to discovery, but notwithstanding all
their efforts they obtained no clue to the whereabouts of the
Mainwaring girls.




CHAPTER XXIII.

DARK DAYS.


"How bitterly cold it is, Primrose!"

The speaker was Jasmine; she sat huddled up to a small, but bright
fire, which burned in the sitting-room grate.

The girls had now been several months in Eden Street, and all the
summer weather and the summer flowers had departed, and the evening in
question was a very dull and foggy one in late November.

The little sitting-room still wore its rose-tinted paper, but the
white curtains at the windows had assumed a decided and permanent tint
of yellow, and the fog found its way in through the badly-fitting
attic windows, and made the whole room look cloudy. The girls' faces,
too, had altered with the months. Jasmine had lost a good deal of her
vivacity, her expression was slightly fretful, and she no longer
looked the spruce and sparkling little lass who had gone away from
Rosebury in the summer. Primrose had lost the faint color which used
to tinge her cheeks; they were now almost too white for beauty, but
her eyes were still clear, calm, and sweet; her dress was still the
essence of simplicity and neatness, and her bearing was gentle and
dignified as of old. The alteration in Daisy was less apparent at this
moment, for she was stretched on two cushions in one corner of the
sitting-room, and with a warm rug thrown over her, and with the Pink
curled up in her arms, was fast asleep.

"How cold it is, Primrose," repeated Jasmine; then, as her sister made
no reply, but went on calmly darning some stockings, she continued, "I
think you have really grown stingy. Why can't we have some more coal?
this is much too small a fire for weather with snow on the ground, and
a horrid, odious fog filling every corner."

"Hush!" said Primrose, laying down her work, and stooping towards her
younger sister, who sat on the hearthrug, "I am keeping the coal to
put on until Daisy wakes. You know, Jasmine, we resolved not to run up
any bills, and I cannot get in any coal until Mr. Danesfield sends us
our next quarter's allowance--wrap my fur cloak round you, darling,
and then you will be quite warm."

Jasmine shivered, but rising slowly, she went into the bedroom, and
returned in a moment, not with the fur cloak, but with a white woolly
shawl. "The day for Mr. Danesfield's money will arrive in less than a
week," she said. "Oh, Primrose! I thought you were going to be a good
manager; I did not think you were going to bring us to this."

Primrose smiled.

"Jasmine, dear," she said, "you are not quite brave to-night, or you
would not speak to me in that tone. You forget that we should not have
been short of money had not that five-pound note been stolen from us.
When Mr. Danesfield's allowance comes in we shall be able to go on as
usual, and then you need not suffer from a short allowance of fire.
Jasmine, I know what is the matter with you; you did not eat half
enough dinner to-day. When I was out this afternoon I called to see
Miss Egerton, and she gave me three delicious new-laid eggs--really
new-laid--we'll have them for supper."

"No, we won't," said Jasmine, her eyes suddenly filling with tears,
and her pettish mood changing to a tender and very sad one--"those
eggs were given for Daisy, and no one else shall eat them. Do you
know, Primrose, that Miss Egerton does not think Daisy at all strong?"

"Oh, she is mistaken," said Primrose. "No one who does not know her
thinks Daisy strong; she has a fragile look, but it is only her look.
All my courage would go if I thought Daisy were ill--she is not ill;
look at her now, what a sweet color she has on her cheeks."

"Miss Egerton says she is like a little sister of her own," continued
Jasmine. Then she stopped suddenly. "Oh! Primrose, you are not going
to cry? oh, don't; it would be dreadful if you gave way! No, Primrose,
she is not like little Constance Egerton; she is just our own Daisy,
who never looks strong, but who is very strong--she shall never be
cold, and she shall have all the nourishment--you and I don't mind how
plainly we live, do we, Queen Rose?"

Primrose had quickly wiped away her sudden tears. She rose to her
feet, and, going up to Jasmine, gave her a hasty kiss.

"We'll remember our good old resolution," she said brightly, "not to
grumble, not to fret, not to cry. Ah! here is our dear little birdie
waking from her sleep. Now, Jasmine on with the coals, and let us have
a merry blaze while I see to the supper--porridge for you and me, and
a nice fresh egg and a cup of warm milk for the Daisy-flower."

"The Pink must have some milk too," said Daisy, as she tumbled lazily
out of her soft nest of cushions; "the Pink isn't half as fat as she
used to be--I can feel all the bones down her spine--I know she wants
cream. Oh, Primrose! I had such a darling dream--I thought the Prince
came and found us!"

"The Prince, Daisy?"

"Yes; and he had the look of the gentleman we met long, long, long ago
at St. Paul's Cathedral! Oh, Primrose, I'm so tired of London!"

"Never mind, darling," answered Primrose; "I'm always telling you you
are only seeing the shady side at present. Only wait till Christmas
comes, and Mr. Danesfield sends us our money."

"I wrote another poem last night," said Jasmine; "I called it 'The
Uses of Adversity.' It was very mournful indeed; it was a sort of
story in blank verse of people who were cold and hungry, and I mixed
up London fogs, and attic rooms, and curtains that were once white,
and had now turned yellow, and sloppy streets covered with snow, with
the story. It was really very sad, and I cried a great deal over it. I
am looking out now for a journal which likes melancholy things to send
