rifle and ammunition, and then he ran out into the square. From many
windows he saw the triumphant faces of Mexicans looking out, but he paid
no attention to them. He thought alone of the Texans, who were now
displaying the greatest energy. In the face of the imminent and deadly
peril Travis, Crockett, Bowie and the others were cool and were acting
with rapidity. The order was swiftly given to cross to the Alamo, the
old mission built like a fortress, and the Texans were gathering in a
body. Ned saw a young lieutenant named Dickinson catch up his wife and
child on a horse, and join the group of men. All the Texans had their
long rifles, and there were also cannon.

As Ned took his place with the others a kindly hand fell upon his
shoulder and a voice spoke in his ear.

"I was going to send for you, Ned," said Bowie, "but you've come.
Perhaps it would have been better for you, though, if you had been left
in San Antonio."

"Oh, no, Mr. Bowie!" cried Ned. "Don't say that. We can beat off any
number of Mexicans!"

Bowie said nothing more. Much of Ned's courage and spirit returned, but
he saw how pitifully small their numbers were. The little band that
defiled across the plain toward the Alamo numbered less than one hundred
and fifty men, and many of them were without experience.

They were not far upon the plain when Ned saw a great figure coming
toward him. It was Old Jack, who had been forgotten in the haste and
excitement. The saddle was still on his back and his bridle trailed on
the ground. Ned met him and patted his faithful head. Already he had
taken his resolution. There would be no place for Old Jack in the Alamo,
but this good friend of his should not fall into the hands of the
Mexicans.

He slipped off saddle and bridle, struck him smartly on the shoulder and
exclaimed:

"Good-by, Old Jack, good-by! Keep away from our enemies and wait for
me."

The horse looked a moment at his master, and, to Ned's excited eyes, it
seemed for a moment that he wished to speak. Old Jack had never before
been dismissed in this manner. Ned struck him again and yet more
sharply.

"Go, old friend!" he cried.

The good horse trotted away across the plain. Once he looked back as if
in reproach, but as Ned did not call him he kept on and disappeared over
a swell. It was to Ned like the passing of a friend, but he knew that
Old Jack would not allow the Mexicans to take him. He would fight with
both teeth and hoofs against any such ignominious capture.

Then Ned turned his attention to the retreat. It was a little band that
went toward the Alamo, and there were three women and three children in
it, but since they knew definitely that Santa Anna and his great army
had come there was not a Texan who shrank from his duty. They had been
lax in their watch and careless of the future, faults frequent in
irregular troops, but in the presence of overwhelming danger they showed
not the least fear of death.

They reached the Alamo side of the river. Before them they saw the hewn
stone walls of the mission rising up in the form of a cross and facing
the river and the town. It certainly seemed welcome to a little band of
desperate men who were going to fight against overwhelming odds. Ned
also saw not far away the Mexican cavalry advancing in masses. The
foremost groups were lancers, and the sun glittered on the blades of
their long weapons.

Ned believed that Urrea was somewhere in one of these leading groups.
Urrea he knew was full of skill and enterprise, but his heart filled
with bitterness against him. He had tasted the Texan salt, he had broken
bread with those faithful friends of his, the Panther and Obed White,
and now he was at Santa Anna's right hand, seeking to destroy the Texans
utterly.

"Looks as if I'd have a lot of use for Old Betsy," said a whimsical
voice beside him. "Somebody said when I started away from Tennessee that
I'd have nothing to do with it, might as well leave my rifle at home.
But I 'low that Old Betsy is the most useful friend I could have just
now."

It was, of course, Davy Crockett who spoke. He was as cool as a cake of
ice. Old Betsy rested in the hollow of his arm, the long barrel
projecting several feet. His raccoon skin cap was on the back of his
head. His whole manner was that of one who was in the first stage of a
most interesting event. But as Ned was looking at him a light suddenly
leaped in the calm eye.

"Look there! look there!" said Davy Crockett, pointing a long finger.
"We'll need food in that Alamo place, an' behold it on the hoof!"

About forty cattle had been grazing on the plain. They had suddenly
gathered in a bunch, startled by the appearance of so many people, and
of galloping horsemen.

"We'll take 'em with us! We'll need 'em! Say we can do it, Colonel!"
shouted Crockett to Travis.

Travis nodded.

"Come on, Ned," cried Crockett, "an' come on the rest of you
fleet-footed fellows! Every mother's son of you has driv' the cows home
before in his time, an' now you kin do it again!"

A dozen swift Texans ran forward with shouts, Ned and Davy Crockett at
their head. Crockett was right. This was work that every one of them
knew how to do. In a flash they were driving the whole frightened herd
in a run toward the gate that led into the great plaza of the Alamo. The
swift motion, the sense of success in a sudden maneuver, thrilled Ned.
He shouted at the cattle as he would have done when he was a small boy.

They were near the gate when he heard an ominous sound by his side. It
was the cocking of Davy Crockett's rifle, and when he looked around he
saw that Old Betsy was leveled, and that the sure eye of the Tennessean
was looking down the sights.

Some of the Mexican skirmishers seeing the capture of the herd by the
daring Texans were galloping forward to check it. Crockett's finger
pressed the trigger. Old Betsy flashed and the foremost rider fell to
the ground.

"I told that Mexican to come down off his horse, and he came down,"
chuckled Crockett.

The Mexicans drew back, because other Texan rifles, weapons that they
had learned to dread, were raised. A second body of horsemen charged
from a different angle, and Ned distinctly saw Urrea at their head. He
fired, but the bullet missed the partisan leader and brought down
another man behind him.

"There are good pickings here," said Davy Crockett, "but they'll soon be
too many for us. Come on, Ned, boy! Our place is behind them walls!"

"Yes," repeated Bowie, who was near. "It's the Alamo or nothing. No
matter how fast we fired our rifles we'd soon be trod under foot by the
Mexicans."

They passed in, Bowie, Crockett and Ned forming the rear guard. The
great gates of the Alamo were closed behind them and barred. For the
moment they were safe, because these doors were made of very heavy oak,
and it would require immense force to batter them in. It was evident
that the Mexican horsemen on the plain did not intend to make any such
attempt, as they drew off hastily, knowing that the deadly Texan rifles
would man the walls at once.

"Well, here we are, Ned," said the cheerful voice of Davy Crockett, "an'
if we want to win glory in fightin' it seems that we've got the biggest
chance that was ever offered to anybody. I guess when old Santa Anna
comes up he'll say: 'By nations right wheel; forward march the world.'
Still these walls will help a little to make up the difference between
fifty to one."

As he spoke he tapped the outer wall.

"No Mexican on earth," he said, "has got a tough enough head to butt
through that. At least I think so. Now what do you think, Ned?"

His tone was so whimsical that Ned was compelled to laugh despite their
terrible situation.

"It's a pity, though," continued Crockett, "that we've got such a big
place here to defend. Sometimes you're the stronger the less ground you
spread over."

Ned glanced around. He had paid the Alamo one hasty visit just after the
capture of San Antonio by the Texans, but he took only a vague look
then. Now it was to make upon his brain a photograph which nothing could
remove as long as he lived.

He saw in a few minutes all the details of the Alamo. He knew already
its history. This mission of deathless fame was even then more than a
century old. Its name, the Alamo, signified "the Cottonwood tree," but
that has long since been lost in another of imperishable grandeur.

The buildings of the mission were numerous, the whole arranged,
according to custom, in the form of a cross. The church, which was now
without a roof, faced town and river, but it contained arched rooms, and
the sacristy had a solid roof of masonry. The windows, cut for the needs
of an earlier time, were high and narrow, in order that attacking
Indians might not pour in flights of arrows upon those who should be
worshipping there. Over the heavy oaken doors were images and carvings
in stone worn by time.

To the left of the church, beside the wing of the cross, was the plaza
of the convent, about thirty yards square, with its separate walls more
than fifteen feet high and nearly four feet thick.

Ned noted all these things rapidly and ineffaceably, as he and Crockett
took a swift but complete survey of their fortress. He saw that the
convent and hospital, each two stories in height, were made of adobe
bricks, and he also noticed a sallyport, protected by a little redoubt,
at the southeastern corner of the yard.

They saw beyond the convent yard the great plaza into which they had
driven the cattle, a parallelogram covering nearly three acres, inclosed
by a wall eight feet in height and three feet thick. Prisons, barracks
and other buildings were scattered about. Beyond the walls was a small
group of wretched jacals or huts in which some Mexicans lived. Water
from the San Antonio flowed in ditches through the mission.

It was almost a town that they were called upon to defend, and Ned and
Crockett, after their hasty look, came back to the church, the strongest
of all the buildings, with walls of hewn stone five feet thick and
nearly twenty-five feet high. They opened the heavy oaken doors, entered
the building and looked up through the open roof at the sky. Then
Crockett's eyes came back to the arched rooms and the covered sacristy.

"This is the real fort," he said, "an' we'll put our gunpowder in that
sacristy. It looks like sacrilege to use a church for such a purpose,
but, Ned, times are goin' to be very hot here, the hottest we ever saw,
an' we must protect our powder."

He carried his suggestion to Travis, who adopted it at once, and the
powder was quickly taken into the rooms. They also had fourteen pieces
of cannon which they mounted on the walls of the church, at the stockade
at the entrance to the plaza and at the redoubt. But the Texans,
frontiersmen and not regular soldiers, did not place much reliance upon
the cannon. Their favorite weapon was the rifle, with which they rarely
missed even at long range.

It took the Texans but little time to arrange the defence, and then came
a pause. Ned did not have any particular duty assigned to him, and went
back to the church, which now bore so little resemblance to a house of
worship. He gazed curiously at the battered carvings and images over the
door. They looked almost grotesque to him now, and some of them
threatened.

He went inside the church and looked around once more. It was old, very
old. The grayness of age showed everywhere, and the silence of the
defenders on the walls deepened its ancient aspect. But the Norther had
ceased to blow, and the sun came down, bright and unclouded, through the
open roof.

Ned climbed upon the wall. Bowie, who was behind one of the cannon,
beckoned to him. Ned joined him and leaned upon the gun as Bowie pointed
toward San Antonio.

"See the Mexican masses," he said. "Ned, you were a most timely herald.
If it had not been for you our surprise would have been total. Look how
they defile upon the plain."

The army of Santa Anna was entering San Antonio and it was spread out
far and wide. The sun glittered on lances and rifles, and brightened the
bronze barrels of cannon. The triumphant notes of a bugle came across
the intervening space, and when the bugle ceased a Mexican band began
to play.

It was fine music. The Mexicans had the Latin ear, the gift for melody,
and the air they played was martial and inspiring. One could march
readily to its beat. Bowie frowned.

"They think it nothing more than a parade," he said. "But when Santa
Anna has taken us he will need a new census of his army."

He looked around at the strong stone walls, and then at the resolute
faces of the men near him. But the garrison was small, pitifully small.

Ned left the walls and ate a little food that was cooked over a fire
lighted in the convent plaza. Then he wandered about the place looking
at the buildings and inclosures. The Alamo was so extensive that he knew
Travis would be compelled to concentrate his defense about the church,
but he wanted to examine all these places anyhow.

He wandered into one building that looked like a storehouse. The
interior was dry and dusty. Cobwebs hung from the walls, and it was
empty save for many old barrels that stood in the corner. Ned looked
casually into the barrels and then he uttered a shout of joy. A score of
so of them were full of shelled Indian corn in perfect condition, a
hundred bushels at least. This was truly treasure trove, more valuable
than if the barrels had been filled with coined gold.

He ran out of the house and the first man he met was Davy Crockett.

"Now what has disturbed you?" asked Crockett, in his drawling tone.
"Haven't you seen Mexicans enough for one day? This ain't the time to
see double."

"I wish I could see double in this case, Mr. Crockett," replied Ned,
"because then the twenty barrels of corn that I've found would be
forty."

He took Crockett triumphantly into the building and showed him the
treasure, which was soon transferred to one of the arched rooms beside
the entrance of the church. It was in truth one of the luckiest finds
ever made. The cattle in the plaza would furnish meat for a long time,
but they would need bread also. Again Ned felt that pleasant glow of
triumph. It seemed that fortune was aiding them.

He went outside and stood by the ditch which led a shallow stream of
water along the eastern side of the church. It was greenish in tint, but
it was water, water which would keep the life in their bodies while they
fought off the hosts of Santa Anna.

The sun was now past the zenith, and since the Norther had ceased to
blow there was a spring warmth in the air. Ned, conscious now that he
was stained with the dirt and dust of flight and haste, bathed his face
and hands in the water of the ditch and combed his thick brown hair as
well as he could with his fingers.

"Good work, my lad," said a hearty voice beside him. "It shows that you
have a cool brain and an orderly mind."

Davy Crockett, who was always neat, also bathed his own face and hands
in the ditch.

"Now I feel a lot better," he said, "and I want to tell you, Ned, that
it's lucky the Spanish built so massively. Look at this church. It's got
walls of hewn stone, five feet through, an' back in Tennessee we build
'em of planks a quarter of an inch thick. Why, these walls would turn
the biggest cannon balls."

"It surely is mighty lucky," said Ned. "What are you going to do next,
Mr. Crockett?"

"I don't know. I guess we'll wait on the Mexicans to open the battle.
Thar, do you hear that trumpet blowin' ag'in? I reckon it means that
they're up to somethin'."

"I think so, too," said Ned. "Let's go back upon the church walls, Mr.
Crockett, and see for ourselves just what it means."

The two climbed upon the great stone wall, which was in reality a
parapet. Travis and Bowie, who was second in command, were there
already. Ned looked toward San Antonio, and he saw Mexicans everywhere.
Mexican flags hoisted by the people were floating from the flat roofs of
the houses, signs of their exultation at the coming of Santa Anna and
the expulsion of the Texans.

The trumpet sounded again and they saw three officers detach themselves
from the Mexican lines and ride forward under a white flag. Ned knew
that one of them was the young Urrea.

"Now what in thunder can they want?" growled Davy Crockett. "There can
be no talk or truce between us an' Santa Anna. If all that I've heard of
him is true I'd never believe a word he says."

Travis called two of his officers, Major Morris and Captain Martin, and
directed them to go out and see what the Mexicans wanted. Then, meeting
Ned's eye, he recalled something.

"Ah, you speak Spanish and Mexican Spanish perfectly," he said. "Will
you go along, too?"

"Gladly," said Ned.

"An', Ned," said Davy Crockett, in his whimsical tone, "if you don't
tell me every word they said when you come back I'll keep you on bread
an' water for a week. There are to be no secrets here from me."

"I promise, Mr. Crockett," said Ned.

The heavy oaken doors were thrown open and the three went out on foot
to meet the Mexican officers who were riding slowly forward. The
afternoon air was now soft and pleasant, and a light, soothing wind was
blowing from the south. The sky was a vast dome of brilliant blue and
gold. It was a picture that remained indelibly on Ned's mind like many
others that were to come. They were etched in so deeply that neither the
colors nor the order of their occurrence ever changed. An odor, a touch,
or anything suggestive would make them return to his mind, unfaded and
in proper sequence like the passing of moving pictures.

The Mexicans halted in the middle of the plain and the three Texans met
them. The Mexicans did not dismount. Urrea was slightly in advance of
the other two, who were older men in brilliant uniforms, generals at
least. Ned saw at once that they meant to be haughty and arrogant to the
last degree. They showed it in the first instance by not dismounting. It
was evident that Urrea would be the chief spokesman, and his manner
indicated that it was a part he liked. He, too, was in a fine uniform,
irreproachably neat, and his handsome olive face was flushed.

"And so," he said, in an undertone and in Spanish to Ned, "we are here
face to face again. You have chosen your own trap, the Alamo, and it is
not in human power for you to escape it now."

His taunt stung, but Ned merely replied:

"We shall see."

Then Urrea said aloud, speaking in English, and addressing himself to
the two officers:

"We have come by order of General Santa Anna, President of Mexico and
Commander-in-Chief of her officers, to make a demand of you."

"A conference must proceed on the assumption that the two parties to it
are on equal terms," said Major Morris, in civil tones.

"Under ordinary circumstances, yes," said Urrea, without abating his
haughty manner one whit, "but this is a demand by a paramount authority
upon rebels and traitors."

He paused that his words might sink home. All three of the Texans felt
anger leap in their hearts, but they put restraint upon their words.

"What is it that you wish to say to us?" continued Major Morris. "If it
is anything we should hear we are listening."

Urrea could not subdue his love of the grandiose and theatrical.

"As you may see for yourselves," he said, "General Santa Anna has
returned to Texas with an overpowering force of brave Mexican troops.
