idea of running every time he pipes."

Very much to the surprise of his companions, Shuffles, his irritation
increased by the conduct of Wilton, took no notice of the call, and went
forward, instead of aft. His companions, more wise and prudent, walked
up to the hatch, which Mr. Lowington had just mounted.

"Groom, tell Shuffles to come aft," said the principal to one of the
midshipmen.

The officer obeyed the order; Shuffles flatly refused to go aft. Mr.
Lowington descended from his rostrum and went forward to enforce
obedience. This event created a profound sensation among the students.

"Shuffles," said Mr Lowington, sternly.

"Sir," replied the malcontent, in a surly tone.

"The boatswain piped the crew to muster."

"I heard him."

"You did not obey the call. I sent for you, and you refused to come."

"I don't think I ought to obey the boatswain's call."

"May I ask why not?"

"I've been an officer three terms, and I should be now if we had had
fair play," growled Shuffles.

"I am not disposed to argue this point in your present frame of mind. I
order you to go aft."

"And I won't go!" replied Shuffles, impudently.

"Mr. Peaks," said the principal, calling the senior boatswain.

"Here, sir," replied Peaks, touching his hat to the principal.

"Mr. Leech," added Mr. Lowington.

"Here, sir."

"Walk this young gentleman aft."

"Let me alone!" cried Shuffles, as Peaks placed his hand upon him.

"Gently, my sweet lamb," said the boatswain, with affected tenderness.

"Take your hands off me!" roared the mutinous pupil, as he struggled to
release himself from the grasp of the stalwart seaman.

Peaks took him by the collar with one hand, and held his wrist with the
other, on one side, while Leech did the same on the other side.

"Walk him aft," repeated the principal.

"Mr. Fluxion, may I trouble you to bring up the irons?" continued Mr.
Lowington, when the boatswain and carpenter had "walked" the rebel aft,
in spite of his struggling and kicking.

"Irons!" gasped Shuffles, as he heard the request of the principal.

He trembled with rage as he uttered the word. The irons seemed to pierce
his soul. Probably he did not think that the son of a wealthy gentleman
would be compelled to submit to such an indignity as being put in irons.

Mr. Fluxion came on deck with a pair of handcuffs. It was the first time
they had been seen, and no student even knew there were any on board.
The discipline of the ship had been as gentle as it was firm, and this
was the first time such instruments were necessary.

"Mr. Peaks, put the irons on him!" said Mr. Lowington, his usual dignity
unruffled by angry emotions.

"Don't put them on me!" cried Shuffles, making an effort to disengage
himself from the grasp of his captors.

"Put them on at once!" added the principal.

"You shall not put them on me! I will die first!" roared the rebel.

It was easier to talk than to do, in the hands of two sturdy sailors,
one of whom had used the cat in the navy, when its use was tolerated.
Shuffles did not die, and he was ironed, in spite of his struggles and
his protest.




CHAPTER IX.

THE WATCH-BILL.


Shuffles struggled with the irons and with the stout men who held him
until he had exhausted himself; and then, because his frame, rather than
his spirit, was worn down, he was quiet. It was the first case of severe
discipline that had occurred on board, and it created a tremendous
sensation among the students.

Mr. Lowington stood with folded arms, watching the vain struggles of the
culprit, until he was reduced to a state of comparative calmness. He
looked sad, rather than angry, and his dignity was not impaired by the
assault upon his authority.

"Shuffles, I am sorry to see one who has been an officer of the ship
reduced to your condition; but discipline must and shall be maintained,"
said the principal. "We are on the high seas now, and disobedience is
dangerous. You led me to believe that you had reformed your life and
conduct."

"It isn't my fault," replied Shuffles, angrily.

"You had better not reply to me in that tone," added Mr. Lowington,
mildly.

"Yes, I will!"

"Mr. Topliffe," continued the principal.

"Here, sir," replied the head steward.

"You will have the brig cleared out for use."

"Yes, sir;" and the head steward went below to obey the order.

There was not a boy on board who knew what the "brig" was, though the
establishment had existed in the steerage from the time when the boys
first went on board the ship. It had never before been required for use,
and Mr. Lowington had carefully veiled every disagreeable feature of
discipline, until it was necessary to exhibit it. The brig was the
prison of the ship--the lock-up. It was located under and abaft the main
ladder, in the steerage, being an apartment five feet in length by three
feet in width. The partitions which enclosed it were composed of upright
planks, eight inches in width, with spaces between them for the
admission of light and air.

The brig had been used as a store room for bedding by the stewards, and
the students never suspected, till Shuffles' case came up, that it was
not built for a closet. Mr. Topliffe and his assistants removed the
blankets and comforters from this lock-up, and prepared it for the
reception of the refractory pupil. When the room was ready he went on
deck, and reported the fact to the principal.

"Shuffles, our discipline has always been of the mildest character,"
said Mr. Lowington, breaking the impressive silence which reigned on
deck. "I regret to be compelled to resort to force in any form; even now
I would avoid it."

"You needn't, on my account," replied Shuffles, shaking his head. "You
have done your worst already."

"Mr. Peaks, take him below, lock him up in the brig, and bring the key
to me."

The manacled rebel made another effort to resist, but the stout sailors
easily handled him, and bore him down into the steerage. He was thrust
into the brig, ironed as he was, and the door locked upon him. Shuffles
glanced at the interior of the prison, and broke out into a contemptuous
laugh. He then commenced kicking the pales of the partition? but he
might as well have attempted to break through the deck beneath.

"Shuffles," said Peaks, in a low tone, when he had locked the door, "be
a man. You act like a spoiled child now."

"I have been insulted, and abused," replied Shuffles, fiercely.

"No, you haven't. Aboard almost any ship, you would have got a knock on
the head with a handspike before this time. Don't make a fool of
yourself. You are only making yourself ridiculous now--'pon my word as
an old sailor, you are."

"I'll have satisfaction."

"No, you won't, unless you break your own head. I want to advise you, as
a friend, not to make a fool of yourself. I'm sorry for you, my lad."

"Don't talk to me."

"I can forgive you for disobeying orders, but I can't forgive you for
being a fool. Now, keep quiet, and be a man."

The well-meant effort of the boatswain to pacify the culprit was a
failure, and Peaks, going on deck, delivered the key of the brig to Mr.
Lowington. Shuffles kicked against the partition till he was tired of
the exercise.

"Young gentlemen, to-day we enter upon a new experience on shipboard,"
said the principal, without making any further allusion to Shuffles.
"Our short trips last season were so timed that we kept no regular night
watches, and, with two or three exceptions, the ship was at anchor when
you slept. Of course that is not practicable on a long voyage, and you
must all do duty by night as well as by day.

"This has been a difficult matter to arrange, for you are all too young
to be deprived of your regular sleep, though in heavy weather I am
afraid you will lose your rest to some extent. At eight o'clock this
evening the starboard watch will be on duty. We have four times as many
hands on board the Young America as are usually employed in merchant
ships, so that a quarter watch will be able to handle the ship on all
ordinary occasions. We shall, therefore, keep a quarter watch on ship's
duty at all times through the twenty-four hours.

"During the night, including the time from eight in the evening until
eight in the morning, each quarter watch will be on duty two hours, and
then off six hours; and each hand will obtain six consecutive hours'
sleep every night. At eight this evening, the first part of the
starboard watch will have the ship in charge, and all others may turn in
and sleep. At ten, the second part of the starboard watch will be
called, without disturbing any others. At twelve, the first part of the
port watch will be summoned; at two, the second part; and so on till
eight in the morning.

"The first part of the starboard watch, which turned in at ten, will
sleep till four, giving them six hours of rest all together, and they
may turn in again at six o'clock, when relieved by the second part, and
sleep till half past seven, which is breakfast time for those off duty.

"During the daytime, from eight in the morning till eight in the
evening, the same routine will be observed To-morrow, at eight in the
morning, the first part of the port watch will take charge of the ship
till ten; the second part will be off duty, and the time will be their
own, to use as they think proper. At ten, the second part will be in
charge, and the first will have their own time till twelve. All the
starboard watch, during these four hours, will study and recite. In the
afternoon the same course will be pursued with the other watch. Do you
understand it?"

"Yes, sir," replied the boys.

"By this arrangement you will average three hours of duty every night.
To-night the port watch will be on deck two hours, and the starboard
watch, whose turn will come twice, four hours; but to-morrow night the
operation will be reversed, and the port will have the deck four hours,
and the starboard but two. Two copies of the watch bill will be posted
in the steerage, and one in the after cabin. Young gentlemen, I
recommend you to study it, until you are perfectly familiar with its
requirements."

"How is it with the officers, Mr. Lowington?" asked Paul Kendall, who
was generally the spokesman for his companions.

"The officers are divided into watches in precisely the same manner as
the crew. To the starboard watch belong the first and third lieutenant,
the second and fourth master, and the first and third midshipman, which
makes one officer of each grade for each quarter watch," replied Mr.
Lowington. "Their off-time and study-time correspond with those of the
crew."

It is quite possible that the officers and crew of the Young America
understood the complicated arrangement of the principal. If they did
not, they could refer to the posted document; and, as we cannot deprive
our readers of this privilege, we insert in full, the

     WATCH BILL. FIRST DAY.

     _First Watch, from 8 till 12 P.M._

     From 8 till 10. 1st Lieut., 2d Master, 1st Mid. First Part of the
     Starboard Watch.

     From 10 till 12. 3d Lieut., 4th Master, 3d Mid. Second Part of the
     Starboard Watch.


     _Mid Watch, from 12 till 4 A.M._

     From 12 till 2. 2d Lieut., 1st Master, 2d Mid. First Part of the
     Port Watch.

     From 2 till 4. 4th Lieut., 3d Master, 4th Mid. Second Part of the
     Port Watch.


     _Morning Watch, from 4 till 8 A.M._

     From 4 till 6. 1st Lieut., 2d Master, 1st Mid. First Part of the
     Starboard Watch.

     From 6 till 8. 3d Lieut., 4th Master, 3d Mid. Second Part of the
     Starboard Watch.


     _Forenoon Watch, from 8 till 12 A.M._

     From 8 till 10. 2d Lieut., 1st Master, 2d Mid. First Part of the
     Port Watch. Second Part of Port Watch off Duty. All the Starboard
     Watch study and recite till 12.

     From 10 till 12. 4th Lieut., 3d Master, 4th Mid. Second Part of
     Port Watch. First Part of Port Watch off Duty.


     _Afternoon Watch, from 12 till 4 P.M._

     From 12 till 2. 1st Lieut., 2d Master, 1st Mid. First Part of
     Starboard Watch. Second Part of the Starboard Watch off Duty. All
     the Port Watch study and recite till 4.

     From 2 till 4. 3d Lieut., 4th Master, 3d Mid. Second Part of the
     Starboard Watch. First Part of the Starboard Watch off Duty.


     _First Dog Watch, from 4 till 6 P.M._

     From 4 till 5. 2d Lieut., 1st Master, 2d Mid. First Part of the
     Port Watch. Second Part of the Port Watch off Duty. All the
     Starboard Watch study and recite till 6.

     From 5 till 6. 4th Lieut., 3d Master, 4th Mid. Second Part of the
     Port Watch. First Part of the Port Watch off Duty.


     _Second Dog Watch, from 6 till 8 P.M._

     From 6 till 7. 1st Lieut., 2d Master, 1st Mid. First Part of the
     Starboard Watch. Second Part of the Starboard Watch off Duty. All
     the Port Watch study and recite till 8.

     From 7 till 8. 3d Lieut., 4th Master, 3d Mid. Second Part of the
     Starboard Watch. First Part of the Starboard Watch off Duty.


     _Breakfast._

     Port Watch, 7-1/2 o'clock. Starboard Watch, 8 o'clock.


     _Dinner._

     Starboard Watch, 11-1/2 o'clock. Port Watch, 12 o'clock.


     _Supper._

     Starboard Watch, 5-1/2 o'clock. Port Watch, 6 o'clock.

The watch bill for the second day was the same, with the exception of
the names of the watches and quarter watches. The entire programme was
reversed by the operation of the dog watches, which substituted "port"
for "starboard," and "starboard" for "port," in the next day's routine.

When the boys were permitted to go below, they rushed to the watch
bills, and studied them faithfully, till they fully understood the
programme. Each student ascertained his duty for the night, and his
off-time and study-hours for the next day, which were included in the
first day's bill.

"I go on at twelve o'clock," said Paul Kendall, in the after cabin, when
he had examined the bill.

"And I go on deck at eight o'clock," added Joseph Haven, the first
lieutenant. "I shall have a chance to sleep from ten till four in the
morning, and an hour and a half, from six till half past seven."

"I shall have my watch below from two till breakfast time. I don't think
we need wear ourselves out under this arrangement."

"No; I thought we should be obliged to take four hours of duty at a time
on deck."

"How will it be when we have rough weather?" asked Paul.

"I don't know; I suppose we must take our chances then."

"What do you think of Shuffles' case?" added Paul.

"He will get the worst of it."

