wished to hear it from one who had seen with his own eyes."

"We saw them withdrawing, Madame, with these two pairs of eyes of ours,"
said Lannes.

"And then Poiret can go back to his work with the vines. Whether it is
war or peace, men must eat and drink, Monsieur."

"But certainly, Madame, and women too." "It is so. I trust that soon the
Germans will be driven back much faster. The house quivers all the time.
It is old and already several pieces of plaster have fallen."

Her anxiety was obvious. With the Germans driven back she thought now of
the Poiret homestead. John, in the new strength that had come to him
from food and drink, had forgotten for the moment that ceaseless quiver
of the earth. He held the little bottle aloft and poured a thin stream
of wine into his glass. The red thread swayed gently from side to side.

"You speak truly, Madame," he said. "The rocking goes on, but I'm sure
that the concussion of the guns will be too far away tonight for you to
feel it."

They offered her gold for the food and wine, but after one longing
glance she steadfastly refused it.

"Since you have come across the sea to fight for us," she said to John,
"how could I take your money?"

Lannes and John returned to the bit of grass in front of the house,
where the elderly general and other generals were still standing and
using their glasses.

"You are refreshed?" said the general to Lannes.

"Refreshed and ready to take your orders wherever you wish them to go."

John stepped aside, while the general talked briefly and in a low tone
to his comrade. He looked upon himself merely as a passenger, or a sort
of help to Lannes, and he would not pry into military secrets. But when
the two rose again in the _Arrow_, the general and all his suite waved
their caps to them. Beyond a doubt, Lannes had done magnificent work
that day, and John was glad for his friend's sake.

The _Arrow_ ascended at a sharp angle, and then hovered for a little
while in curves and spirals. John saw the generals below, but they were
no longer watching the aeroplane. Their glasses were turned once more to
the battle front.

"Ultimately we're to reach the commander of the central army, if we
can," said Lannes, "but meanwhile we're to bend in toward the German
lines, in search of your immediate chief, General Vaugirard, who is one
of the staunchest and most daring fighters in the whole French Army. If
we find him at all it's likely that we'll find him farther forward than
any other general."

"But not any farther than my friend of Montmartre, Bougainville. There's
a remarkable fellow. I saw his military talent the first time I met him.
Or I should better say I felt it rather than saw it. And he was making
good in a wonderful manner today."

"I believe with you, John, that he's a genius. But if we find General
Vaugirard and then finish our errand we must hasten. It will be night in
two hours."

He increased the speed of the aeroplane and they flew eastward,
searching all the hills and woods for the command of General Vaugirard.




CHAPTER VI

IN HOSTILE HANDS


The task that lay before the two young men was one of great difficulty.
The battle line was shifting continually, although the Germans were
being pressed steadily back toward the east and north, but among so many
generals it would be hard to find the particular one to whom they were
bearing orders. The commander of the central army was of high
importance, but the fact did not bring him at once before the eye.

They were to see General Vaugirard, too, but it was possible that he had
fallen. John, though, could not look upon it as a probability. The
general was so big, so vital, that he must be living, and he felt the
same way about Bougainville. It was incredible that fate itself should
snuff out in a day that spark of fire.

Lannes, uncertain of his course, bore in again toward the German lines,
and dropped as low as he could, compatible with safety from any kind of
shot. John meanwhile scanned every hill and valley wood and field with
his powerful glasses, and he was unable to see any diminution in the
fury of the struggle. The cannon thundered, with all their might, along
a line of scores of miles; rapid firers sent a deadly hail upon the
opposing lines; rifles flashed by the hundred thousand, and here and
there masses of troops closed with the bayonet.

Seen from a height the battle was stripped of some of its horrors, but
all its magnitude remained to awe those who looked down upon it. From
the high, cold air John could not see pain and wounds, only the swaying
back and forth of the battle lines. All the time he searched attentively
for men who did not wear the red and blue of France, and at last he
said:

"I've failed to find any sign of the British army."

"They're farther to the left," replied Lannes. "I caught a glimpse of
their khaki lines this morning. Their regular troops are great fighters,
as our Napoleon himself admitted more than once, and they've never done
better than they're doing today. When I saw them they were advancing."

"I'm glad of that. It's curious how I feel about the English, Philip.
They've got such a conceit that they irritate me terribly at times, yet
I don't want to see them beaten by any other Europeans. That's our
American privilege."

"A family feeling, perhaps," said Lannes, laughing, "but we French and
English have been compelled to be allies, and after fighting each other
for a thousand years we're now the best of friends. I think, John, we'll
have to go down and procure information from somebody about our
general. Otherwise we'll never find him."

"We must be near the center of our army, and that's where he's likely to
be. Suppose we descend in the field a little to the east of us."

Lannes looked down, and, pronouncing the place suitable, began to drop
in a series of spirals until they rested in a small field that had been
devoted to the growth of vegetables. Here John at once felt the shaking
of the earth, and tasted the bitter odor again. But woods on either side
of them hid the sight of troops, although the sound of the battle was as
great and violent as ever.

"We seem to have landed on a desert island," said Lannes.

"So we do," said John. "Evidently there is nobody here to tell us where
we can find our dear and long lost general. I'll go down to the edge of
the nearest wood and see if any of our skirmishers are there."

"All right, John, but hurry back. I'll hold the _Arrow_ ready for
instant flight, as we can't afford to linger here."

John ran toward the wood, but before he reached the first trees he
turned back with a shout of alarm. He had caught a glimpse of horses,
helmets and the glittering heads of lances. Moreover, the Uhlans were
coming directly toward him.

In that moment of danger the young American showed the best that was in
him. Forgetful of self and remembering the importance of Lannes'
mission, he shouted:

"The Uhlans are upon us, Philip! I can't escape, but you must! Go! Go
at once!"

Lannes gave one startled glance, and he understood in a flash. He too
knew the vital nature of his errand, but his instant decision gave a
wrench to his whole being. He saw the Uhlans breaking through the woods
and John before them. He was standing beside the _Arrow_, and giving the
machine a sharp push he sprang in and rose at a sharp angle.

"Up! Up, Philip!" John continued to cry, until the cold edge of a lance
lay against his throat and a brusque voice bade him to surrender.

"All right, I yield," said John, "but kindly take your lance away. It's
so sharp and cold it makes me feel uncomfortable."

As he spoke he continued to look upward. The _Arrow_ was soaring higher
and higher, and the Uhlans were firing at it, but they were not able to
hit such a fleeting target. In another minute it was out of range.

John felt the cold steel come away from his throat, and satisfied that
Lannes with his precious message was safe, he looked at his captors.
They were about thirty in number, Prussian Uhlans.

"Well," said John to the one who seemed to be their leader, "what do you
want with me?"

"To hold you prisoner," replied the man, in excellent English--John was
always surprised at the number of people on the continent who spoke
English--"and to ask you why we find an American here in French
uniform."

The man who spoke was young, blond, ruddy, and his tone was rather
humorous. John had been too much in Germany to hate Germans. He liked
most of them personally, but for many of their ideas, ideas which he
considered deadly to the world, he had an intense dislike.

"You find me here because I didn't have time to get away," he replied,
"and I'm in a French uniform because it's my fighting suit."

The young officer smiled. John rather liked him, and he saw, too, that
he was no older than himself.

"It's lucky for you that you're in some kind of a uniform," the German
said, "or I should have you shot immediately. But I'm sorry we didn't
take the man in the aeroplane instead of you."

John looked up again. The _Arrow_ had become small in the distant blue.
A whimsical impulse seized him.

"You've a right to be sorry," he said. "That was the greatest flying man
in the world, and all day he has carried messages, heavy with the fate
of nations. If you had taken him a few moments ago you might have saved
the German army from defeat today. But your chance has gone. If you were
to see him again you would not know him and his plane from others of
their kind."

The officer's eyes dilated at first. Then he smiled again and stroked
his young mustache.

"It may be true, as you say," he replied, "but meanwhile I'll have to
take you to my chief, Captain von Boehlen."

John's heart sank a little when he heard the name von Boehlen. Fortune,
he thought, had played him a hard trick by bringing him face to face
with the man who had least cause to like him. But he would not show it.

"Very well," he said; "which way?"

"Straight before you," said the officer. "I'd give you a mount, but it
isn't far. Remember as you walk that we're just behind you, and don't
try to run away. You'd have no chance on earth. My own name is Arnheim,
Wilhelm von Arnheim."

"And mine's John Scott," said John, as he walked straight ahead.

They passed through a wood and into another field, where a large body of
Prussian cavalry was waiting. A tall man, built heavily, stood beside a
horse, watching a distant corner of the battle through glasses. John
knew that uncompromising figure at once. It was von Boehlen.

"A prisoner, Captain," said von Arnheim, saluting respectfully.

Von Boehlen turned slowly, and a malicious light leaped in his eyes when
he saw John on foot before him, and wholly in his power.

"And so," he said, "it's young Scott of the hotel in Dresden and of the
wireless station, and you've come straight into my hands!"

The whimsical humor which sometimes seized John when he was in the most
dangerous situation took hold of him again. It was not humor exactly,
but it was the innate desire to make the best of a bad situation.

"I'm in your hands," he replied, "but I didn't walk willingly into 'em.
Your lieutenant, von Arnheim here, and his men brought me on the points
of their lances. I'm quite willing to go away again."

Von Boehlen recognized the spirit in the reply and the malice departed
from his own eyes. Yet he asked sternly:

"Why do you put on a French uniform and meddle in a quarrel not your
own?"

"I've made it my own. I take the chances of war."

"To the rear with him, and put him with the other prisoners," said von
Boehlen to von Arnheim, and the young Prussian and two Uhlans escorted
him to the edge of the field where twenty or thirty French prisoners sat
on the ground.

"I take it," said von Arnheim, "that you and our captain have met
before."

"Yes, and the last time it was under circumstances that did not endear
me to him."

"If it was in war it will not be to your harm. Captain von Boehlen is a
stern but just man, and his conduct is strictly according to our
military code. You will stay here with the other prisoners under guard.
I hope to see you again."

With these polite words the young officer rode back to his chief, and
John's heart warmed to him because of his kindness. Then he sat down on
the grass and looked at those who were prisoners with him. Most of them
were wounded, but none seemed despondent. All were lying down, some
propped on their elbows, and they were watching and listening with the
closest attention. A half-dozen Germans, rifle in hand, stood near by.

John took his place on the grass by the side of a fair, slim young man
who carried his left arm in a bandage.

"Englishman?" said the young man.

"No, American."

"But you have been fighting for us, as your uniform shows. What
command?"

"General Vaugirard's, but I became separated from it earlier in the
day."

"I've heard of him. Great, fat man, as cool as ice and as brave as a
lion. A good general to serve under. My own name is Fleury, Albert
Fleury. I was wounded and taken early this morning, and the others and I
have been herded here ever since by the Germans. They will not tell us a
word, but I notice they have not advanced."

"The German army is retreating everywhere. For this day, at least, we're
victorious. Somebody has made a great plan and has carried it through.
The cavalry of the invader came within sight of Paris this morning, but
they won't be able to see it tomorrow morning. Whisper it to the others.
We'll take the good news quietly. We won't let the guards see that we
know."

The news was circulated in low tones and every one of the wounded forgot
his wound. They spoke among themselves, but all the while the thunder of
the hundred-mile battle went on with unremitting ferocity. John put his
ear to the ground now, and the earth quivered incessantly like a ship
shaken at sea by its machinery.

The day was now waning fast and he looked at the mass of Uhlans who
stood arrayed in the open space, as if they were awaiting an order.
Lieutenant von Arnheim rode back and ordered the guards to march on with
them.

There was none too severely wounded to walk and they proceeded in a file
through the fields, Uhlans on all sides, but the great mass behind them,
where their commander, von Boehlen, himself rode.

The night was almost at hand. Twilight was already coming over the
eastern hills, and one of the most momentous days in the story of man
was drawing to a close. People often do not know the magnitude of an
event until it has passed long since and shows in perspective, but John
felt to the full the result of the event, just as the old Greeks must
have known at once what Salamis or Plataea meant to them. The hosts of
the world's greatest military empire were turned back, and he had all
the certainty of conviction that they would be driven farther on the
next day.

The little band of prisoners who walked while their Prussian captors
rode, were animated by feelings like those of John. It was the captured
who exulted and the captors who were depressed, though neither expressed
