gait, and, like his fiercer brother the wild boar of Europe, he
possessed undoubted courage.

"Well, if that ain't the funniest sight I ever saw!" roared Nick,
bending himself almost double with laughter; "we thought it was a bear,
and I guess Herbert and Sam are sure it is a royal Bengal tiger or mad
elephant--"




CHAPTER XXVII.

WAS IT A JOKE?


At that instant, Nick Ribsam felt himself suddenly lifted in air and
spinning forward with great speed on the back of the vigorous hog, which
plunged between his rather short legs.

The astounded lad instantly stopped laughing, and, dropping his gun and
torch, grasped at something to sustain himself against the peril, the
nature of which he could hardly guess.

The hog had struck him from the front, so that Nick was seated in
reverse position on his back. The object which he grasped was the spiral
tail of the animal, but, before he could make his grip certain, the
porker swerved so suddenly to one side that Nick rolled off and bumped
against a tree.

His body was not hurt to one half the extent that his feelings were, for
he heard Sam Harper roaring with mirth, loud enough to be heard half a
mile; and as Nick hastily clambered upon his feet, he was certain
Herbert's cracked laugh was also rending the night air.

The porker, having made the round and paid his tribute to each member of
the company in turn, whisked off into the woods, with a triumphant
grunt, as if to say, "I guess you folks and your dog will let me alone
now."

As soon as the boys found their guns, and restored two of the torches to
a blaze, they looked at each other and gave way to their unrestrained
mirth for several minutes before they could speak so as to be
understood.

Never had a pompous expedition ended more ignobly: they had started out
to attack a fierce black bear, and unexpectedly were overturned by a
large-sized pig, which resented the interference with his slumber.

Some naturalists maintain that many animals possess a sense of the
humorous, and it looked as though the sluggish Bowser enjoyed the joke
as much as did the victims; for, when the latter made their way back to
the camp fire, they saw the hound stretched out close to the warm blaze
with his head between his paws and apparently asleep; but, watching him
closely, he was seen to open one of his eyes, just a little ways, and,
surveying them a minute, he closed it to open again a minute later.

No animal could have said more plainly:

"I've got the joke on you this time, boys, and I'm laughing so hard that
I can't keep my eyes open."

"I tell you there is a good deal more in the heads of brutes than many
of us think," said Nick Ribsam, after he had studied the actions of the
hound; "I believe he wanted to make us believe there was some sort of
game out there so as to play the fool with us."

"Do you think he foresaw the trick of the hog?" asked Herbert, who was
rubbing his bruised elbows and knees.

"That would have been impossible, for we could not have foreseen it
ourselves if we had arranged the joke; he simply meant to mislead us,
and then we acted the fool for _his_ amusement."

It looked very much as if Nick Ribsam was correct in his supposition,
and that Bowser enjoyed even more than they the shrewd trick he had
played on them.

"I suppose there are several hundred hogs wandering through the woods,"
said Nick, "picking up acorns and nuts that have fallen off the trees,
and making a good living at it."

"Yes, lots of them have been running wild for weeks and months," added
Sam, "and when their owners try to gather them in, there will be
trouble, for it doesn't take hogs long to become savage."

"It didn't take that hog very long, I'm sure," observed Herbert, sitting
down with care upon the ground.

"But how was it there was but _one_?" asked Sam.

"There wasn't need of any more than one," said Nick; "he had no trouble
in doing as he pleased with us."

"But hogs go in droves, and you wouldn't be apt to find one of them by
himself in the woods."

"There were others close by, for I am sure I heard them; but it is a
little curious that they didn't attack us, for hogs don't know as much
as dogs, and they had no reason to feel that one of their number was
more than enough for us."

"I don't see the use in talking about it," remarked Herbert, who gently
tipped his body to the other side, so as to rest differently on the
ground; "I am sure I never was so upset in all my life."

"Nor were we," added Nick; "hogs are queer creatures; if a drove finds
it is going to be attacked by an enemy, the boars will place themselves
on the outside, with the sows and younger ones within, so as to offer
the best resistance to the bear or whatever it is, and they will fight
with great fury. In a wild state, they can run fast, and when the tusks
of the boars get to be six or eight inches long, as they do in time,
they are afraid of no animal in the woods."

"How is that?" asked Herbert, again shifting his position with great
care, but feeling interested in what the lad was telling.

"I suppose because they haven't any reason to be afraid. With those
frightful tusks curving upward from the lower jaw, and with a strength
like Sampson in their necks, they can rip up a bear, a tiger, or any
animal that dare attack them."

"I s'pose they're very strong, Nick?" continued Herbert.

"So strong, indeed, that one of the wild boars in Germany has run under
the horse of a hunter, and, lifting both clear from the ground, trotted
fifty yards with them, before the struggling animal could get himself
loose."

Herbert looked fixedly at the narrator for a moment, then solemnly
reached out his hand to Sam, for him to shake over the last astounding
statement, which was altogether too much for him to credit.

Sam Harper grasped the hand and wabbled it once or twice, but said:

"It's as true as gospel, Herbert; I don't know anything about it myself,
but when Nick Ribsam tells you anything for truth, you can make up your
mind it is the truth and nothing else."

The friends lay for a long time by the camp fire, talking over the
events of the day, while Nick Ribsam gave them many wonderful facts
concerning the various wild animals found in different parts of the
world. The lad read everything he could obtain relating to natural
history, and his strong memory retained nearly all the facts.

But, as the night wore on, all three began to feel drowsy, and they made
ready to sleep.

The arrangements for doing this were not so perfect as they could wish.
Not one of them had anything like a blanket, and, though it was the time
of the balmy Indian summer, the nights were quite cold.

There was an abundance of wood around them, and they gathered all they
could possibly need. Then they heaped up a big lot of leaves and lay
down as close to each other as possible.

This was the best that could be done; but it gave a great advantage to
the one who lay in the middle, as the warmth of the others kept him
comfortable, while they were forced to turn one side to the cold air.

By changing about, however, they got along quite well until past
midnight, when the pile of leaves caught fire and caused them to leap to
their feet with so much vigor that the outside ones got sufficiently
warm to last till daylight.

The friends were glad enough when it began growing red in the east. They
rose early, washed their hands and faces in the clear brook, which
flowed near at hand, using their handkerchiefs for towels. Then a rabbit
and couple of squirrels were shot, and, with the same wolf-like
appetites, they made a nourishing and substantial meal.

The brook, from which they took a draught of clear, strengthening water,
lay a short distance to the south of their camp, that is, between it and
Shark Pond, which they passed the day before.

The three were standing by this stream, considering the best thing to be
done to get on the track of the bear, when Sam Harper suddenly stopped
talking and looked fixedly at a point a few yards away. Then he walked
slowly to it, without removing his gaze, stooped down, and attentively
scrutinized the ground.

Without speaking, he turned and beckoned to the others to approach.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE TRAIL OF THE BEAR.


The boys did as directed, and, also stooping down, saw in the soft earth
near the water the prints of the feet of a large animal, such tracks
indeed as could have been made only by the bear.

All agreed that it was that much desired and yet dreaded animal, and
that it was more than likely he had moved to the southward, so that in
point of fact the hunters and hunted had exchanged relative positions.

Sam sternly directed the attention of Bowser to the trail, and ordered
him to "look into the matter."

The hound sniffed the ground, ran back and forth several times, and then
gazed up at his master, as if awaiting further orders.

"I won't stand any such nonsense as that," said his impatient master,
grasping him by the baggy skin at the back of the neck and giving him
several sharp blows with a switch.

Bowser yelped and kicked lustily, and, when released, placed his nose to
the ground, emitted several more cries, and then trotted off, taking a
direction leading almost directly back over the path Herbert had
followed the day before.

"He's on the trail _this_ time," said Sam, with restored admiration for
the hound, "and if he does well, I'll consider him a great deal better
hunting dog than he has shown himself yet."

In fact, Bowser acted as if anxious to redeem his tainted reputation,
and, trotting quite briskly, was soon out of sight among the trees, the
lads hurrying after him.

A few minutes later, the yelping of the hound ceased, but the young
hunters kept up their pursuit, the fresh trail made by the dog being
easily followed, as he turned over and rumpled the abundant leaves on
the ground, so that it was plainly discernible.

"I wonder why he has stopped barking," said Sam.

"I guess he has got tired," was the rather original reply of Herbert,
who was ready to give information, whether reliable or not.

"Bowser seems to have a way of doing things which is different from
other dogs--hallo! there he goes again."

The resounding cries of the hound echoed through the woods, seemingly at
a distance of a half mile, and a little to the east of south.

"I guess he has treed him!" said Herbert, striking into a trot, the
others doing the same, and very much doubting whether the odd dog had
ever treed anything in his life.

A short run only was necessary, when, by stopping and listening, they
learned that the hound was standing instead of running. If he had been a
regular hunting dog, this fact would have proven that he had brought the
game to bay.

As respecting Bowser, it was uncertain what it signified.

It did not take the lads long to hurry over the intervening space, when
they came upon the hound, who was standing under a large red oak,
looking up and barking with all the vigor he possessed.

"He has treed the bear, I do believe!" exclaimed Sam Harper, breaking
ahead of the others in his excitement.

Nick Ribsam also thought the indications pointed that way.




CHAPTER XXIX.

"HELP! HELP!"


The belief that they were close upon the bear threw the boys into a
flutter of excitement, and they walked slowly as they approached the
tree, up which the hound was barking.

As has been stated, it was what was known as the red oak, very large,
with branching limbs at no great distance from the ground.

"_I see him!--I see him!_" whispered Herbert, just as he caught his foot
in a root and pitched forward.

"Where?"

Herbert picked up his hat, muttered something impatient, and then looked
upward again, and found he was mistaken.

"I thought that big knot up there was the bear," replied the city youth,
in meeker tones.

The boys slowly circled about the tree again and again, back and forth,
scrutinizing trunk, limbs, and twigs so closely that a cat could not
have concealed itself from view.

The result was disheartening: there was no bear in sight.

"May be the trunk is hollow," suggested Sam, "and he has gone into a
hole."

They struck against the bark, but the sound showed that the wood beneath
was solid. Besides, an examination of the bark itself failed to bring to
view the scratching and abrasion that would have been made by a bear in
going up, and especially in coming down, the trunk.

Bowser, beyond all question, had been "barking up the wrong tree."

"You're a pretty hunting dog, ain't you?" sneered Sam Harper, addressing
the canine; "come here, that I may give you another switching."

But Bowser wheeled about, and, taking the trail again, trotted to the
southward, his nose close to the ground, while he bayed at intervals of
a few seconds.

"The bear ain't far off, you can make up your mind to that," said
Herbert, still all excitement; "if we keep close to the dog, we'll run
upon the other pretty soon."

In fact, the youthful Watrous showed such an interest in the sport that
he forgot the danger which always accompanies it. Had he stopped a
minute or so to reflect, he would have seen that now was the time for
the three to stick together, for never was there likely to be an
occasion which would demonstrate more certainly that in union there is
strength.

Forgetful of this, Herbert sped forward so fast that in a brief while he
vanished from view.

Nick shouted to him not to hasten so fast, but the young gentleman was
not to be checked in that style, and he kept up his flight with
undiminished speed.

"Let him go, then," said Nick, dropping down to a rapid walk, in which
Sam joined him; "his legs are so long that he can outrun us both."

"Which is a good thing."

"Why so?"

"As soon as he catches sight of the bear, he will turn about and run
with might and main."

"I'm not so sure of that," remarked Nick, who began to think there was
more in Herbert than they had suspected.

"He is so anxious to get the animal that he doesn't know the risk he is
running. The fight you had with the buck yesterday shows what a more
harmless animal will do when he turns to fight the hunter."

"But Herbert will be likely to wait till we come up to him if he sees
the bear."

"There's no telling what such a fellow will do when he loses his head;
the only chance for him is that we may be so close that we can turn in
and help him."

"Then we had better hurry."

Thereupon the two broke into a run again, which they kept up till pretty
well tired out.

They could hear Bowser baying at no great distance, and, consequently,
were sure that Herbert himself was not far off.

"If we three come upon him we ought to be able to kill him without much
risk to ourselves--that is, if we use any sort of care in taking aim."

"We must try and do that--hark!"

At that instant they were startled by the sharp report of a rifle, the
distance and direction leaving no doubt that it was fired by Herbert
Watrous.

Sam and Nick fairly turned pale, and something like a feeling of envy
came over them at the belief that Herbert, after all his boasting, had
succeeded in bringing down the royal game without their help.

The shot was fired so close that, as they hastened forward again, they
expected to come upon the hunter and his game every minute.

"Hallo! what does that mean?"

The question was caused by the sudden appearance of Bowser, who was
limping toward them in a panic of terror. At every leap he uttered a
yelp, which was of pain and fear.

The boys stopped, and the hound, running up, crouched down at their
feet, whining and moaning.

"He is hurt!" said Sam, who noticed that he was bleeding from a wound in
the shoulder, where the claws of some animal had struck him with great
