he safely arrived, without unnecessary delay.  He found the first mate
and his sailors well and in high spirits, though they were beginning to
wonder whether their captain, like the friends of Irons, had not
forgotten, and concluded to leave them to themselves.

No objection was offered to their departure, and bidding an
affectionate good-by to the Englishman, who had proven the best kind of
a friend, they returned to the missionary island.  Two months later the
missionary vessel, the _Morning Star_, arrived, and carried them all to
Honolulu, which was reached in November.  Thence Captain Gooding and a
part of the crew were brought by the steamer _Australia_ to San
Francisco, from which point the captain made his way to his home in
Yarmouth, where his family and friends welcomed him back as one risen
from the dead, for they had long given up hope of ever seeing him again.




AN UNPLEASANT COMPANION.

"Say, Jack, the shellbarks are droppin' thick down in Big Woods.  What
a chance for a fellow to lay up a bushel or two before the crowd gets
down there in the morning."

"Wouldn't it, though, Ned!" I replied wistfully, for if there was
anything I had a fondness for, it was shellbarks.

We were trudging home to our dinner, for Ned and I lived close to the
schoolhouse, much to the envy of some less fortunate pupils who brought
their noonday meal with them in tin pails.  It was a late September
Friday, and a soft golden haze lay on hillside and woodland, and the
quail were whistling in the furrows; and, as Ned spoke, I could see in
my mind's eye just how Big Woods would look that afternoon with the
soft sunlight slanting through the trees, and glimmering on the quiet
waters of the creek.

"Well, Jack, will you go?" said Ned abruptly.

"You mean will I play truant?" I asked, a little startled.

"Yes; there's no danger, Jack; we'll tell the teacher we had to stay
home to cut corn."

At first, I resisted Ned's appeal.  I had played truant once before, a
long time ago, and the memory of the punishment that I received in the
woodshed at home was still strongly impressed on my memory.

But this, I thought, was an exceptional case, I badly wanted a bushel
or two of shellbarks, and I knew full well that, unless they were
gathered that afternoon, they wouldn't be gathered at all; for bright
and early the next morning all the boys in the neighborhood would be
down in Big Woods, armed with clubs and baskets and sacks, and even the
squirrels would stand a poor show after that invasion.

In our selfishness, we never thought that other people might have a
fondness for shellbarks as well as ourselves.  So, after a little more
pleading on Ned's part, I gave in, and we agreed to meet down at the
foot of our orchard, as soon as dinner was over, for Ned lived right
across, on the next farm.  In a corner of the barn, I found my old
chestnut club, a hickory stave, well coiled with lead at the top.
Shoving this under my jacket, so no prying eyes could see it, I joined
Ned at the meeting-place, and off we went in high spirits for the
Yellow-breeches.

It was a good mile to Big Woods, for we had to circle away down to
Hake's Mill to get across the creek, but we felt well repaid for our
trouble when we arrived there.  The fallen nuts lay thick amid the dead
leaves, and up on the half-naked trees the splitting hulls hung in
clusters, willing to drop their burden at the least rustle of the
breeze.

We heaped the shellbarks in great piles, ready to stow away in Ned's
big wheat bag; and, when the ground was cleaned up pretty well, and the
leaves had been thoroughly raked, we turned our attention to a close
cluster of trees that stood close by the creek.  These nuts were
unusually large, and thin-shelled.  The hulls were cracked apart, but
very few nuts lay on the ground, so I hauled out my club, and drove it
fairly into the heart of the tree.  A shower of nuts came down, with a
merry clatter that gladdened our hearts; but the club, striking the
trunk of the tree, bounded sideways and lodged in the crotch of a limb
overhanging the creek, some twenty or thirty feet above the water.

Here was a dilemma.  I didn't want to lose that club, for it had done
good service in past autumns, and had gone through a great many
hairbreadth escapes.

If we tried to dislodge it by hurling sticks or stones, it would fall
into the water, and just at that point the creek was very deep, and
moreover, as popular tradition held, a treacherous undertow existed
which would render the recovery of the club impossible.

"Climb the tree, Jack," said Ned; "that's your only chance."

I was always considered a pretty good climber, so, after a little
hesitation (for this was an unusually difficult tree), I started up the
slippery trunk, and, with Ned's friendly aid, pulled myself among the
lower limbs.

It was an easy matter to reach the particular bough that I wanted, but
then came the tug.  I was half-inclined to give up the whole thing and
go down to the ground, but Ned kept egging me on so confidently that I
determined to go through with it.

Straddling the limb, I took a firm hold with both hands in front of me,
for no other boughs were close enough to be grasped, and thus inch by
inch I moved cautiously forward.

The branch creaked and groaned, and at last began to bend in such an
alarming fashion that I stopped short.

There was the club, not four feet away now, and far below I could see
the quiet waters of the creek, wrinkling the reflected foliage as a
dropping nut or stray leaf rippled the surface.

"You're nearly there, now," cried Ned, with hearty encouragement; "just
a little more, Jack, and you'll have it.

"But the limb will break," I called down.

"No, it won't," he insisted, "don't be afraid."

That settled it.  I wasn't afraid, and Ned should know it.

I took a firmer grip on the bough, and slid forward half a foot.

Crack, crack,--the big branch slowly began to split, and as I made a
frantic effort to crawl back, a strange noise from the bushy part of
the tree overhead turned my gaze upward.

It's a wonder my hair didn't turn white that very instant, for what I
saw was a big, tawny wild-cat, with blazing eyes and quivering claws,
crouched on a narrow limb.  I knew the animal was going to spring, and
I tried to shout as loudly as I could, but my tongue stuck to the roof
of my mouth, and the only sound I made was an odd cry that caused Ned
to laugh, for he couldn't see what was the matter from where he stood.

Then like a streak the brute plumped down on my back, and with a
tremendous splash, limb, wildcat, and myself went into the creek.

I heard Ned shout, as the water closed over me, and then everything
became dark.

I rose to the surface terribly frightened, for, sad to relate, I had
never learned to swim, and Ned could do very little in that direction.
Instead of clutching at the empty air, as most drowning persons do, I
caught hold of something substantial; and when the water was out of my
eyes and out of my stomach, for I had swallowed about a pint, I saw
that I was hanging to the bushy end of the broken limb.  That was all
very well, but the next thing I observed was not so pleasant, for six
feet distant, on the thick part of the branch, sat the wild-cat,
apparently none the worse for his fall.  His sharp claws were driven
into the bark, and he was calmly licking his dripping fur.  Meanwhile
the current was sweeping us down stream, and Ned was running along the
bank in a sad state of fright and excitement.  My back began to hurt
pretty badly, and I discovered that my face was torn and bleeding in
one or two places, though whether this was caused by the fall or by the
wild-cat I did not know.

"Swim, Jack, let go and swim," shouted Ned, and then, remembering
perhaps that I was unable to follow his instructions, he suddenly
turned and ran back through the woods at the top of his speed, instead
of making any effort to help me.

I was badly scared before, and now, when I saw, as I supposed, my last
hope vanish, I began to shout for help as loudly as I could.

But at the very first cry the wild-cat lifted his head, and emitted a
vicious snarl.  As I howled louder than ever, he advanced a foot or two
along the limb, ripping off the bark, and fixing his big glaring eyes
savagely on my face.

I was terrified into silence, and, as soon as I ceased shouting, the
brute stopped and coolly proceeded to lick his fur again.

Apparently, he did not object to my presence so long as I remained
quiet.  The worst of it was that my end of the branch was pretty far
down in the water, and threatened every moment to carry me entirely
under the surface.

In this precarious situation, I drifted down the creek, until the bend
drew near that sweeps round to Hake's Mill.  Here the country was a
little more open, and a farmhouse came into sight over the brow of a
hill.

There was a chance of rescue, and in spite of my previous experience, I
decided to try it, for my limbs were becoming chilled, and I knew I
could not hold on much longer.

"Help!  Help!" I cried with might and main.  No answer came back, but
before I could shout a third time the wild-cat uttered a snarl, and
began creeping toward me, inch by inch, and lashing the water fiercely
with his tail.  Lower and lower sank the branch, until my shoulders
were submerged, and still the beast kept advancing.

I continued to shout, but no welcome voice responded, only empty echoes
floating back from the hills.

Then I must have given up all hope, for I remember wondering vaguely
what had become of Ned, and what they were doing in school, and whether
my absence was noticed or not.

The cold water was rippling about my neck now, and the wild-cat was so
close that I could note the horrible colors of the glaring eyes, and
feel the hot breath in my face.  I wondered how it would feel when
those two rows of needle-like teeth met in my flesh; and then, before I
could think any more, a deafening report filled my ears, and, through
the cloud of smoke that rolled over the creek, the wild-cat bounded
high in air, and fell into the water with a loud splash.  That was all
I remembered then.  The next thing I knew, I was lying in a grassy
hollow, alongside the creek, while Ned and an old farmer bent over me,
and threw water in my face.  Ned's desertion was explained.  He had cut
off the bend in the creek by running over the hill, and, accompanied by
the farmer, who happened to be down in the woods hunting rabbits, they
had arrived just in time to shoot the wild-cat and drag me out of the
water.  That was the last time I played truant.  I didn't lose my share
of the shellbarks, for Ned went down early the next morning and got
them, but I did lose the chestnut club, and what was worse, in spite of
my sore back, I spent a very unpleasant quarter of an hour out in the
woodshed, just two days later, and Ned, I am happy to say, passed
through the same edifying experience.




A STIRRING INCIDENT.

India is the home of the deadliest serpents and fiercest wild beasts on
the globe.  When it is stated that more than twenty thousand persons
are killed annually by the snakes and animals of that country, some
idea may be formed of its attractions in the way of a residence.  To
this should be added the fact that, during certain seasons, the climate
is like that of Sahara itself.  For days and nights the thermometer
stands above one hundred degrees in the shade and in the city of
Madras, unacclimated persons have died at midnight in their beds from
apoplexy caused by the appalling temperature.

Among the venomous serpents of India, the _cobra di capello_ holds
foremost rank, though it is claimed that a still more deadly reptile
has been found in the interior, and I believe the British Museum has
one of these terrible creatures, whose bite brings death with the
suddenness of the lightning stroke.  However, the cobra has been known
to strike two persons in instant succession, proving fatal to both
within ten minutes of each other.  It is hard to conceive of any
serpent more venomously destructive than this.

On one of the flaming Sunday mornings, when there was not a cloud in
the brazen skies, a well known missionary came home from early service
and seated himself at the breakfast-table with his family.  The door of
the dining-room was open and the Teluga school-teacher was outside,
when he became interested in a novel sight.  A frog was hopping along
the front veranda, with an immense cobra chasing it.  The serpent
struck at it repeatedly, but the fugitive, in its desperation, eluded
each blow, giving utterance to pitiful cries, as a frog will do when
pursued by a snake.

The end of the veranda reached, the frog leaped off, and the cobra
dropped to the ground in hot pursuit, but a box, standing near, offered
shelter.  The creature scrambled beneath, just in time to avoid another
swift blow of the reptile, which was unable to follow it.  The cobra
glided around the box, seeking some avenue by which to reach his
victim, but, finding none, moved off in the grass and disappeared.

The teacher hurried into the dining-room, with the announcement of what
he had seen.  The missionary listened gravely and then inquired:

"Where is the cobra now?"

"I cannot tell, sir; he moved off among the flower-pots, but I do not
know whither he went."

"It is not my practice to go shooting on Sunday," remarked the
minister, "but it won't do to have that serpent where it is liable to
bite one of us.  He must have a hole somewhere near the flower-pots;
please keep watch while I get my pistol."

The missionary always kept a loaded revolver for use when traveling
through the jungle at night, and he speedily stepped out on the
veranda, with the weapon in hand, and started to find the cobra.

Two large native flower-pots stood within a couple of yards of the
veranda.  Each contained a fragrant rose, of which the good man's wife
was very fond.  Every day she spent some time sprinkling them with
water or removing the dead leaves, never suspecting what proved to be
the fact that while thus employed, she continually moved about a spot
where an immense cobra lay coiled.

An opening was discovered directly between the flower pots, partly
concealed by the grass.  It was about as thick as a man's wrist, and
descended perpendicularly, expanding into a small chamber.

The minister called for a hand-mirror, and with little trouble threw
the bright reflection of the sun into the hole, a little more than a
foot deep, fully lighting up the interior.

The cobra was there!  It lay motionless in a glistening coil, as if
resting from its fruitless pursuit of the frog and brooding over its
disappointment.  It was an alarming sight, but the good man kept cool,
and meant business from the start.

Taking a piece of broken wagon tire, he thrust it slantingly into the
hole, to hold the serpent a prisoner, and shoving the muzzle of his
revolver forward, he let fly.

Not the slightest motion followed.  He had missed.  He now gently
turned the tire edgewise and fired again.  A furious writhing followed,
proving that the snake had been hit hard.  The tire was instantly
turned over flat to prevent its coming out.  It struck fiercely at the
iron, which in a minute was shifted on its edge again, and the
missionary emptied the remaining chambers of his revolver down the
hole.  Then he turned up the tire once more, and allowed the hideous
head to dart forth.

The minister had brought with him a pair of large hedge shears, with
which he seized the protruding neck, drew out the snake and gave it a
flirt toward the compound.  He was so absorbed with his task that he
had not noticed the crowd of men, women and children that had gathered
to watch the results of his hunt.  When they saw a huge cobra flying
through the air toward them, there was a scampering and screaming,
which might have been less had they known that the grip of the shears
had dislocated the serpent's neck.

The good man did not forget that whenever you find one deadly serpent,
another is quite certain to be close at hand.  He had passed the wagon
tire to the teacher, when he began pulling out the wounded cobra, and
asked him to insert it again without an instant's delay.  This was
done, and returning with the hand-glass, the missionary once more
conveyed the rays into the underground chamber.

Sure enough a second cobra was there, wriggling and squirming in a way
to show that he had received some of the bullets intended for his
companion.  The revolver was reloaded and a fusillade opened, standing
off a few paces, the marksman waited for the head to come forth that he
might seize and draw it out as he had done with the other.

The wounded reptile continued its furious squirming and striking, but
its head did not appear, until shot after shot had been fired.  At last
it showed itself, and was immediately gripped with the shears.
Dropping the pistol, the missionary employed both hands in the effort,
and running backward a few steps, the whole frightful length of the
serpent was drawn out upon the ground.

Remembering their former experience, the crowd moved away, but the
missionary spared them a second fright.

Both cobras being helpless, an examination was made of them.  The
second one showed the marks of fourteen pistol balls through his body,
any three of which would have proved fatal, but he was still full of
fight, and died while trying to strike the persons near him.

The serpents were now stretched out on the veranda and measured one of
them five feet eleven inches long, and the other six feet two inches.
The last is an extraordinary size, rarely seen even in the favorite
haunts of the reptile.  An investigation of their home left no doubt
that they had been living for months right among the flower pots that
were attended to daily, and within six feet of the veranda and twelve
feet of the door of the missionary's study.

As for the frog that crawled under the box just in time to save
himself, he was well and flourishing at the last accounts.




CYCLONES AND TORNADOES.

Science as yet has not been able to grasp the laws that govern
cyclones.  They seem to be the result of some intensely electric
condition of the elements, which finds an expression in that form.
Cyclones, until within a few years, meant those circular tempests
encountered in the Pacific and Indian oceans.  They are the most
destructive of all storms, being far more deadly than monsoons and
tornadoes.

All navigators, when caught in a cyclone know how to get out of it.
They have only to sail at right angles to the wind, when they will
either pass beyond the outer rim of the circular sweep, or reach the
center, where the ocean is calm.

The diameters of the ocean cyclones range from fifty to five hundred or
a thousand miles.  Professor Douglas, of Ann Arbor University,
entertains his friends now and then by manufacturing miniature
cyclones.  He first suspends a large copper plate by silken cords.  The
plate is heavily charged with electricity, which hangs below in a
bag-like mass.  He uses arsenious acid gas, which gives the electricity
a greenish tint.  That mass of electricity becomes a perfect little
cyclone.  It is funnel-shaped and spins around like a top.  When he
moves the plate over a table, his cyclone catches up pennies, pens,
pith balls and other small articles, and scatters them in every
direction.

Cyclones never touch the equator, though the ocean ones are rare
outside the torrid one.  They are caused by the meeting of contrary
currents of winds, and are known under the names of hurricanes,
typhoons, whirlwinds or tornadoes.  Those terrifying outbursts which
now and then cause so much destruction in our own country seem to be
the concentration of the prodigious force of an immense ocean cyclone
within a small space, which renders them resistless.

A writer in the _N. Y. Herald_ gives some interesting facts regarding
these scourges of the air.  While the cyclone, as we have shown, may
have a diameter of hundreds of miles, the track of a tornado is often
limited to a few hundred feet, and rarely has the width of half a mile.

The cyclone carries with it a velocity of as much as 100 to 140 miles
an hour.  It sends a certain amount of warning ahead of its track, and
the acceleration of the wind's speed at any given point, is gradual.

The tornado falls almost without notice, or rather the indications are
often so similar to those of an ordinary thunderstorm that only a
skilled and careful observer can detect the difference.

The phenomena and effects of cyclones in the West Indies have long been
subjects of study and observation.  As the center approaches a ship she
is assaulted by wind of a terrible force and a sea that is almost
indescribable.  The water no longer runs in waves of regular onward
motion, but leaps up in pyramids and peaks.  The wind swirls and
strikes until wherever there is a chance for vibration or flutter, even
in tightly furled sails, the fabric soon gives way.  I once saw a brig
go drifting past us in a West Indies cyclone with everything furled and
closely lashed with sea gaskets.  We were in company nearly at the
height of the storm, when the center was only a few miles away.  There
was a spot in the bunt of the foretopsail where the sail was not
tightly stowed, and for several hours it had doubtless been fluttering
under tremendous pressure.  As I watched her a little white puff went
out of the bunt of the topsail, and then the destruction of the sail
was rapid.  Long ribbons of canvas went slithering off as if a huge
file had rasped the yard arm, and in a short time there was nothing
left on the yard except the bolt ropes and the reef tackles.  We could
do nothing to help the crew, for it was doubtful whether we could keep
off the reefs ourselves, and the brig passed out of sight to her
certain doom.

