
Diana's little breast heaved more than ever, tears came into her eyes,
but she blinked them furiously away.

"You can come to me, if you want; I shan't come to you. You isn't much
of a mother," she repeated.

"But I did not know you were in trouble, darling. Do, do come to your
own Iris. Do tell me what is the matter."

"Oh, Iris!" sobbed Diana.

The first kind note utterly melted her little heart; she rushed to
her sister, flung herself upon her, and sobbed as if she would never
stop crying.

"We can't stay in this howid place, Iris," she said; "all my darlin's
has gone and got deaded. That howid old woman upstairs said they was
wermin. She has killed 'em all. I can't stay here; I won't stay here.
Take me back to the beautiful garden. Do, Iris; do. I'se just so
mis'ble."

Iris sat down on one of the hard-backed chairs.

"Look here, Di," she said, "I have no time now to talk things over
with you. Of course, everything is altered, and our lives are
completely changed. When mother was dying, when I last saw her, she
told me that I must expect this. She said she knew that, when she went
away to the angels, we four children would have to go out into the
world and fight our battles. She said that everybody in the world has
got a battle to fight, and even little children have to fight theirs.
She said, too, that if we were brave and the kind of children she
wants us to be, we would follow the names she gave us and conquer our
enemies. Now, Di, you are called after Diana, the great Diana, who was
supposed to be a sort of goddess. Do you think she would have given
in? Don't you think she would have been brave?"

"Yes, course," said the little nineteenth-century Diana. "She would
have shotted people down dead with her bow and arrows--I know kite
well she was a bwave sort of a lady. All wight, Iris, I'll copy her if
you wishes."

"Indeed I do wish, darling. I think it would be splendid of you."

"She was a very bwave lady," repeated Diana. "She had her bow and her
arrows; she was a gweat huntwess, and she shotted people. I don't
mind copying her one little bit."

Diana dried away her tears and looked fixedly at her sister.

"Then you really mean to be good and brave, Di?"

"Certain sure, Iris."

"And you won't call Aunt Jane any more names?"

"I won't call her names--names don't si'nify, names don't kill
people."

"And you'll go and beg her pardon now?"

"What's that?"

"You'll say you are sorry that you called her names."

"Would she let me out of this woom, then? and could I do just what I
liked my own self?"

"I expect so; I expect she is really sorry that she had to be hard on
you to-day; but you see she has got a different way of bringing up
children from our own mother."

"Please, Iris, we won't talk much of our own mother--it makes me lumpy
in the trof," said Diana, with a little gulp. "I'll beg her pardon, if
it pleases her. I don't care--what's words? I'll go at once, and,
Iris, mind me that I'm like Diana. She was a bwave lady and she
shotted lots of people."

"Well, then, come along, Di; you'll be allowed to come to dinner if
you beg Aunt Jane's pardon."

Di gave her hand to Iris, who took her upstairs. Here Iris washed her
little sister's face and hands and brushed out her thick black hair,
and kissed her on her rosebud lips, and then said:

"There is nothing I would not do, Di, to be a real little mother to
you."

"All wight," answered Diana; "you just mind me now and then that I is
called after the bwave lady what lived long, long ago. Is that the
second gong? I'se desp'ate hungy. Let's wun downstairs, p'ease, Iris."

Diana entered the dining room with her face all aglow with smiles, the
rich color back again in her cheeks, and her black eyes dancing. Even
Mr. Dolman gave a gasp of relief when he saw her.

Even Mrs. Dolman felt a slight degree of satisfaction. She did not
intend to be hard on the children--in her heart of hearts she was
quite resolved to make them not only good, but also happy.

"Well, my dear little girl," she said, drawing Diana to her side, "and
so you are sorry for what you said?"

"Awfu' sossy," answered Diana, in a cheerful voice.

"Then you beg my pardon, and you won't be naughty again?"

"I begs yous pardon, Aunt Jane," said Diana. She looked very
attentively up and down her relation's figure as she spoke.

"Poor Aunt Jane, she's awfu' stout," murmured Diana, under her breath.
"I must get a good sharp arrow--oh, yes! words is nothing."

Mrs. Dolman drew out a chair near herself.

"You shall sit near me, Diana, and I will help you to your dinner,"
she said. "I hope in future you will really try to be a very good
little girl."

Diana made no reply to this, but when her aunt piled her plate with
nourishing and wholesome food, she began to eat with appetite. Towards
the end of the meal she bent over towards Mrs. Dolman, and said in a
confiding voice:

"Has you got woods wound here?"

"Yes, my dear; there are some nice woods about a mile away."

"I'd like to go there this afternoon, please, Aunt Jane. I has
'portant business to do in those woods." Diana looked round the table
very solemnly as she said these last words. Philip could not help
laughing.

"Hush, Philip! I won't have Diana laughed at," said Mrs. Dolman, who
for some reason was now inclined to be specially kind to the little
girl. "If you would really like to spend the afternoon in the woods,
Diana, I see nothing against it," she remarked. "You are all having a
holiday, and as to-morrow lessons will of course be resumed, I do not
see why your wish should not be gratified. Miss Ramsay, you will of
course accompany the children, and, Lucy, my dear, you can have the
pony chaise, if you promise to be very careful. You can take turns to
sit in it, children. And what do you say to asking cook to put up a
few bottles of milk and some cake and bread and butter--then you need
not return home to tea?"

"That would be delightful, mamma," said Lucy, in her prim voice.

"Thank you, mamma," said Mary.

"French, my dears; French!" said Miss Ramsay.

"As it is a holiday, Miss Ramsay, the children are allowed to tender
their thanks to me in the English tongue," said Mrs. Dolman.

Miss Ramsay bowed and slightly colored.

"Is you going with us?" asked Diana, fixing her dark eyes full upon
the governess' face.

"Yes, Diana; your aunt wishes it."

"We don't want no g'own-ups."

"Hush, Diana! you must not begin to be rude again," said Mrs. Dolman.
"Miss Ramsay certainly goes with you, please understand."

"I underland--thank you, Aunt Jane," said Diana.

She looked solemnly down at her empty plate. Her whole little mind was
full of her namesake--the great Diana of long ago. She wondered if in
the deep shade of the woods she might find a bow strong enough to
injure her enemies.




CHAPTER X.

BOW AND ARROW.


Nothing interfered with the excursion to the pleasant woods near
Super-Ashton Rectory. The children all found themselves there soon
after four o'clock on this lovely summer afternoon. They could sit
under the shade of the beautiful trees, or run about and play to their
hearts' content.

Miss Ramsay was a very severe governess during school hours, but when
there was a holiday she was as lax as she was particular on other
occasions. This afternoon she took a novel out of her pocket, seated
herself with her back to a great overspreading elm tree, and prepared
to enjoy herself.

Lucy, Mary, and Ann surrounded Iris; Apollo marched away by himself,
and Philip and Conrad mysteriously disappeared with little Orion.
Diana thus found herself alone. For a time she was contented to lie
stretched out flat on the grass playing soldiers, and watching the
tricks of a snow-white rabbit who ran in and out of his hole close by.
Presently, however, she grew tired of this solitary entertainment, and
sprang to her feet, looking eagerly around her.

"Punishment is a very good thing," she said to herself. "I's punished,
and I's lot better. It's now Aunt Jane's turn to be punished, and it's
Simpson's turn to be punished--it'll do them heaps of good. First time
I's only going to punish 'em, I isn't going to kill 'em down dead,
but I's going to pwick 'em. I is Diana, and mother said I was to live
just like the gweat Diana what lived long, long, _long_ ago."

Diana began to trot eagerly up and down under the shade of the tall
forest trees. She looked about her to right and left, and presently
was fortunate enough to secure a pliant bough of a tree which was
lying on the ground. Having discovered this treasure, she sat down
contentedly and began to pull off the leaves and to strip the bark.
When she had got the long, supple bough quite bare, she whipped some
string out of her pocket, and converted it into the semblance of a
bow. It was certainly by no means a perfect bow, but it was a bow
after a fashion.

The bow being made, the arrow must now be secured. Diana could not
possibly manage an arrow without a knife, and she was not allowed to
keep a knife of her own. Both bow and arrow must be a secret, for if
anyone saw her with them it might enter into the head of that person
not to consider it quite proper for her to punish Aunt Jane.

"And Aunt Jane must be punished," muttered Diana. "I must make an
arrow, and I must pwick her with it. My bow is weally beautiful--it is
a little crooked, but what do that matter? I could shoot my arrow now
and pwick the twees, if only I could get one made. Oh, here's a
darlin' little stick--it would make a lovely arrow, if I had a knife
to sharpen the point with. Now, I do wonder what sort of a woman that
Miss Wamsay is."

Diana fixed her coal-black eyes on the lady.

"She looks sort of gentle now she's weading," whispered the little
girl to herself. "She looked howid this morning in the schoolroom, but
she looks sort of gentle now. I even seed her smile a minute back,
and I should not be a bit s'prised if she didn't hate Aunt Jane too. I
know what I'll do; I'll just go and ask her--there is nothing in all
the world like being plain-spoke. If Miss Wamsay hates Aunt Jane, why,
course, she'll help me to sharpen my arrow, when I tell her it is to
give Aunt Jane a little pwick."

Accordingly Diana approached Miss Ramsay's side, and, as the governess
did not look up, she flung herself on the grass near by, uttering a
deep sigh as she did so. But Miss Ramsay was intent on her book, and
did not take the least notice of Diana's deep-drawn breath. The little
girl fidgeted, and tried further measures. She came close up to the
governess, and, stretching out one of her fat hands, laid it on one of
Miss Ramsay's.

"Don't touch me, my dear," said the lady. "You are much too hot, and
your hand is very dirty."

"I's sossy for that," said Diana. "I had to touch you 'cos you
wouldn't look up. I has something most 'portant to talk over."

"Have you indeed?" replied Miss Ramsay. She closed her book. The part
she was reading was not specially interesting, and she could not help
being amused with such a very curious specimen of the genus child as
Diana Delaney.

"Well, little girl, and what is it?" she asked.

"I 'spects," said Diana, looking very solemnly into her face, "that
you and me, we has both got the same enemies."

"The same enemies! My dear child, what do you mean?" asked Miss
Ramsay.

"I 'spects I's wight," said Diana, tossing her black head. "I's not
often wrong. I wead your thoughts--I think that you has a desp'ate
hate, down deep in your heart, to Aunt Jane."

"Good gracious!" cried the governess, "what does the child mean? Why
should I hate Mrs. Dolman?"

"But why should not you?--that's the point," said Diana.

"Well, I don't," said Miss Ramsay.

Diana looked intently at her. Slowly, but surely, her big black eyes
filled with tears; the tears rolled down her cheeks; she did not
attempt to wipe them away.

"What is the matter with you, you queer little creature?" said Miss
Ramsay. "What in the world are you crying about?"

"I is so bitter dis'pointed," repeated Diana.

"What, because I don't hate your Aunt Jane?"

"I is bitter dis-pointed," repeated Diana. "I thought, course, you
hated her, 'cos I saw her look at you so smart like, and order you to
be k'ick this morning, and I thought, 'Miss Wamsay don't like that,
and course Miss Wamsay hates her, and if Miss Wamsay hates her, well,
she'll help me, 'cos I hates her awful.'"

"But do you know that all this is very wrong?" said Miss Ramsay.

"W'ong don't matter," answered Diana, sweeping her hand in a certain
direction, as if she were pushing wrong quite out of sight. "I hate
her, and I want to punish her. You ought to hate her, 'cos she told
you to be k'ick, and she looked at you with a kind of a fwown. Won't
you twy and begin? Do, p'ease."

"I really never heard anything like this before in the whole course of
my life," said Miss Ramsay. "Mrs. Dolman did warn me to be prepared
for much, but I never heard a Christian child speak in the way you
are doing."

"I isn't a Chwistian child," said Diana. "I is a heathen. Did you
never hear of Diana what lived long, long ago?--the beautiful, bwave
lady that shotted peoples whenever she p'eased with her bow and
arrows?"

"Do you mean the heathen goddess?" said Miss Ramsay.

"I don't know what you call her, but I is named after her, and I mean
to be like her. My beautiful mother said I was to be like her, and I'm
