they sent out many swift sailing, well-armed vessels to prey upon
Spanish commerce. They did their work so effectively that by and by they
extended their attacks to the vessels of all nations. Nothing being done
for a time to check them, they grew rapidly in numbers and audacity,
until, as has been stated, the West Indies swarmed with the pests. The
men living along the coast found buccaneering so profitable that they
gave up their peaceful pursuits and became free-booters of the sea. Like
the Spaniards themselves, they were ferocious, and generally murdered
the crews of the captured vessels and then divided the plunder among
themselves.

Seeing that something must be done to check these intolerable outrages,
our Government gave the task, in 1819, to Oliver Hazard Perry, the hero
of Lake Erie. His work was more difficult than would be supposed, for,
in addition to destroying the pirates, he had to avoid offending the
countries named, with whom we wished to maintain friendly relations.
They sent out regular cruisers that had the same right to prey upon
Spanish commerce that our privateers had to attack English ships when we
were at war with their country. Some of these cruisers secretly engaged
in piracy; many that flew the black flag, in the presence of those who
could not defend themselves, claimed to be authorized privateers at
other times and carried forged commissions. They were treacherous, cruel
and merciless to the last degree.

It will be seen, therefore, that the task assigned to Captain Perry
required quick decision, courage and discretion. He possessed all those
qualities in a high degree, and, in the performance of his duty, reached
the mouth of the Orinoco in July, 1815, in command of three powerful
ships. The following extract from his journal will give a vivid idea of
the discomforts which he and his men underwent in the performance of
their work:

"The sun, as soon as it shows itself in the morning, strikes almost
through you. Mosquitoes, sand flies and gnats cover you, and as the sun
gets up higher it becomes entirely calm and the rays pour down a heat
that is insufferable. The fever that it creates, together with the
irritation caused by the insects, produces a thirst which is insatiable,
to quench which we drink water at a temperature of eighty-two degrees.
About four o'clock in the afternoon a rain squall, accompanied by a
little wind, generally takes place. It might be supposed that this would
cool the air, but not so, for the steam which arises as soon as the sun
comes out makes the heat still more intolerable. At length night
approaches and we go close inshore and anchor. Myriads of mosquitoes and
gnats come off to the vessel and compel us to sit over strong smoke
created by burning oakum and tar, rather than endure their terrible
stings, until, wearied and exhausted, we go to bed to endure new
torments. Shut up in the berth of a small cabin, if there is any air
stirring, not a breath of it can reach us. The mosquitoes, more
persevering, follow us and annoy us the whole night by their noise and
bites until, almost mad with heat and pain, we rise to go through the
same trouble the next day."

Perry sailed three hundred miles up the Orinoco and was undaunted by the
fact that the dreaded yellow fever soon appeared among his men. He was
seized with the terrible disease and died on the 24th of August. He was
buried with the highest civic and military honors at Trinidad, many
British officers who had fought against him on Lake Erie showing their
respect for his bravery and an appreciation of his kindness to them when
they were prisoners of war. His remains were afterward removed to
Newport, Rhode Island, where a magnificent monument was erected to his
memory.

The untimely death of this naval hero before he had time to complete
his work encouraged the West Indian pirates and they became more
audacious than before. In the autumn of 1821 several naval vessels were
sent thither by our Government. They did vigorous work, capturing and
destroying a number of piratical vessels, but there were too many of
them, and they were spread over too extended a space to be wiped out by
a few captures. In the following year a still more powerful squadron
went to the West Indies under the command of Captain James Biddle, who
did such valiant service in the War of 1812. A good many buccaneers were
destroyed, including several leaders of the buccaneers whose atrocious
deeds had long made their names a terror. In one of these attacks
Lieutenant William H. Allen, of the schooner _Alligator_, was killed by
a musket ball. His gallantry in the fight between the _Argus_ and
_Pelican_ in the war with Great Britain sent a thrill of admiration
through the country and brought him well-merited promotion.

You have not forgotten the wonderful cruise of Captain David Porter in
the _Essex_, when he entered the Pacific Ocean and caused such havoc
among the British shipping. He was appointed commander of the West India
forces and arrived off Porto Rico in March, 1823. He was provided, in
addition to his warships, with a number of barges, furnished with
twenty oars apiece, and which were indispensable in following the
pirates up the shallow creeks and into the shoal waters where the
vessels could not go.

[Illustration: OUR FLEET IN THE BALTIC.]

Captain Porter was discreet but impatient with injustice. When one of
his schooners was fired into by the Porto Rican authorities he promptly
demanded an explanation, which was given. The most important incident of
his service occurred in the autumn of 1824 and is known as the "Foxardo
Affair."

In October of that year the storehouse of the American consul at St.
Thomas was broken into and robbed of much valuable property which there
was reason to believe had been carried to the small port at the eastern
end of Porto Rico known as Foxardo. Lieutenant Platt, of the _Beagle_,
anchored off the town and asked the help of the authorities in capturing
the criminals and recovering the property. The officer was treated with
the grossest discourtesy. Having landed in civilian clothes, the
authorities accused him of being an impostor and ordered him to show his
commission. The Lieutenant produced it, whereupon they declared it a
forgery and arrested him on the charge of being a pirate. After he and a
midshipman who accompanied him had been insulted repeatedly they were
allowed to leave.

When Captain Porter learned of this outrage he entered the harbor with
several of his vessels and sent a letter to the alcalde or governor,
notifying him that he had one hour in which to send an explanation of
his action. While waiting for the return of the flag of truce Captain
Porter saw one of the shore batteries getting ready to fire upon him.
Instantly, he sent a detachment, which captured the battery and spiked
the guns. Then Captain Porter landed, and, after spiking another
battery, made his way to the town. By and by the alcalde and captain of
the port appeared and made such profuse and humble apologies that the
officer could not refuse to accept them, and returned to his ship.

Such is a truthful account of the incident as it occurred. It would seem
that there was nothing in the course of the gallant naval officer that
deserved censure. One of his officers had been insulted and he compelled
the offenders to make a suitable apology. Fearing with good reason a
treacherous attack from the batteries on shore, he spiked their guns.
But when the news reached our Government Captain Porter was ordered
home, tried by court martial and sentenced to be suspended from the
service for six months. Feeling himself unjustly treated, Captain Porter
resigned and entered the Mexican navy, where he remained until 1829. In
that year Andrew Jackson became President of the United States. He had
been through trying and stormy times himself and would never submit to
insult from any man or nation. He appointed Porter consul general at
Algiers. He afterward became minister to Turkey and died March 28, 1843.

Captain Lewis Warrington succeeded Porter in the West Indies and
followed out his aggressive policy. The buccaneers were hunted down
without cessation and nest after nest broken up until, at the close of
1825, piracy in those waters was practically suppressed. For several
years, however, a squadron was maintained there and more than once its
services were needed, but the work was completed and since then no
trouble in that quarter of the world of the nature described has plagued
either ourselves or any other nation.

Even in the Mediterranean our navy had similar work to do. While little
Greece was making so gallant a struggle for freedom against Turkey a
number of her vessels played the role of pirate and attacked ships of
other nations. Among others, an English brig had been seized, but
Lieutenant Lewis M. Goldsborough, after a furious fight, recaptured the
vessel. Lieutenant John A. Carr singled out the Greek captain and in
the fierce hand-to-hand conflict killed him. Lieutenant
Goldsborough--who afterward became rear-admiral--received the thanks of
several of the Mediterranean powers for his assistance in ridding the
waters of the pirates who, though few in number, became exceedingly
troublesome.

It was by such prompt, vigorous and brave measures that the American
navy compelled the respect not only of civilized but of barbarous
peoples in all parts of the world. This fact is proven by a remarkable
occurrence, not often mentioned in history, the particulars of which are
given in the next chapter.




CHAPTER XXI.

The Qualla Battoo Incident.


Qualla Battoo is the name of a small Malay town, which stood on the
northwestern coast of Sumatra. In the month of February, 1831, the
_Friendship_, a trading vessel from Salem, Mass., lay at anchor off the
town, taking on board a cargo of pepper. Her captain, Mr. Endicott, and
crew numbered fifteen men. There being no harbor, the vessel was about
half a mile from shore. The day was oppressively hot and no one on the
_Friendship_ put forth more exertion than was absolutely necessary. Even
the swarthy natives seemed to languish in the flaming heat and displayed
less vigor in bringing out the pepper in their boats than they did when
the sun beat down upon them with its usual rigor.

Captain Endicott understood the treacherous nature of the Malays, and he
and his crew kept sharp watch of those who were given the management of
the vessel's boats, owing to the difficult character of the coast which
made such a course necessary.

The trade in pepper was almost the only one in which Qualla Battoo
engaged. Captain Endicott, his second mate and four seamen were on
shore at the trading station, a little way up the river, superintending
the weighing of the pepper. The first mate and the rest of the crew
waited on the vessel to receive and stow away the cargo. The work had
hardly begun when a suspicious proceeding caught the eye of Captain
Endicott.

The first boat, after receiving its load, passed the short distance
necessary down the river to the sea, where, instead of rowing directly
out to the ship, it turned up the coast and took on board more men. The
Captain concluded the crew needed this additional help to work their way
through the heavy surf. But, not wholly satisfied, he told two of his
men to go nearer the shore, keep their eyes on the boat and report to
him anything that looked wrong.

Captain Endicott, from his position, was unable to catch the full
significance of the first action of the natives in charge of the
outgoing boat, for, instead of taking on board more help, the whole
unarmed party stepped ashore and twice as many fully armed warriors took
their places. They carefully concealed their weapons and the Americans
on the vessel made the same mistake as their captain in believing they
were merely the additions necessary to help work the craft through the
surf.

They tied fast to the gangway and most of them climbed over the side
with their daggers hidden in their clothing. The mate would have stopped
them, but they pretended not to understand his words and acted as if
interested in the appearance of the guns and rigging. Their conduct was
so natural that the mate and his men gave their whole attention to
taking the pepper on board and stowing it away. The mate was absorbed in
his work, when suddenly several Malays sprang with lightning-like
quickness at him and buried their daggers in his back. He turned and
attempted to defend himself, but was quickly despatched. Five men rushed
to the help of the mate, but they were unarmed and outnumbered four to
one. Two were quickly killed and three made prisoners. The other four
seamen sprang overboard and swam for land. They saw that the beach was
lined with warriors waiting for them. Accordingly they turned to one
side and swam several miles to a promontory, where they were safe for
the time.

Seeing that their friends had gained possession of the ship, several
boatloads of natives rowed out to it, took possession, plundered and
then tried to run it ashore, that they might break out the metal work at
their leisure.

Meanwhile the two seamen stationed near shore by the captain saw what
had taken place and ran back to him with the alarming news. He instantly
ordered all into the second boat and hurried down the river, hoping to
reach the vessel in time to recapture it. The boat was pursued by the
natives along the bank, but it managed to reach the mouth of the river,
where it would have perished in the surf but for the help of a friendly
member of an adjoining tribe, who sprang from his armed coasting
schooner and swam to their assistance. He helped them through the surf,
and, when confronted by the native armed boats, made such threats and
flourishes with his sword (none of the Americans being armed) that he
kept the miscreants at bay and the white men succeeded in reaching the
open sea.

Seeing that it would be sure death to go to the vessel, the boat was
rowed to a small town about twenty miles distant, where the occupants
found three American merchant vessels. The officers and crews were
enraged upon learning what had taken place, and, although it was night,
they made sail at once for Qualla Battoo, reaching it next day. In reply
to the demand that the _Friendship_ should be returned, the insolent
Rajah told them to take her if they could. The three ships moved as
close to shore as was safe and opened fire with such guns as they had.
All merchant vessels carried some kind of armament against pirates in
that part of the world. Impatient with the delay involved in recapturing
the _Friendship_, by attacking at long range, as it may be called, three
boats were filled with armed men who rowed straight for the vessel. It
was swarming with armed natives, who kept up a vicious but ill directed
fire, the result of which was the sailors rowed the faster, eager to get
close enough to punish the miscreants for their murderous work.

When they were almost to the ship the Malays sprang overboard and swam
frantically for land. Captain Endicott regained possession of his
vessel, and, upon examination, found it had been rifled from stem to
stern. Among the plunder taken away was $12,000 in specie. Altogether
the loss was $40,000 to the owners of the ship and the captain was
compelled to give up his voyage and return home.

It took a long time for news to travel in those days, but it finally
reached the United States, where Andrew Jackson happened to be
President. He immediately ordered the 44-gun frigate _Potomac_ to that
out of the way corner of the world, with instructions to punish the
guilty parties concerned in the outrage. Captain Downes lost no time in
getting under way and arrived off Qualla Battoo in February, 1832, just
a year after the treacherous attack upon the _Friendship_.

Anxious to prevent his errand becoming known so that he might surprise
the Malays, Captain Downes disguised his ship as a merchantman, closing
his ports and taking every precaution possible. He displayed the Danish
colors, still maintaining the guise of a merchantman, and sent a boat's
crew to take soundings along shore. The natives on the beach displayed
so hostile a disposition that no landing was made, and, having gained
the necessary information, the boat returned to the frigate. Captain
Downes then informed them that the expedition would leave the ship at
midnight.

A strong armed force in several boats secretly rowed to land at the time
named, but day was approaching when they reached the beach, where the
men landed under the guidance of the former second mate of the
_Friendship_ and started inland. One division turned to the left to
attack the fort at the northern end of the town. The Malays received
them with a brisk discharge of cannon, muskets, javelins and arrows.
But, returning the fire, the Americans burst open the gate of the
stockade, fought hand to hand with the fierce Malays and drove them out
of the open space into the citadel. There they were attacked with the
same impetuosity, but they fought like tigers, and it was not until
twelve had been killed and a great many wounded that they were overcome.
The Rajah in command, after a desperate defence in which he wounded
several Americans, was finally despatched.

In the meantime the fort in the middle of the town had been attacked by
the other division and carried after a bloody fight in which a marine
was killed and a number wounded. But the strongest fort of all stood on
the bank of the river near the beach. There the Rajah of Qualla Battoo,
who was the real author of the attack on the _Friendship_, had gathered
a large force of his best warriors and announced that he would fight to
the death.

The strength of the force which marched against the fort was eighty-five
men. One of the officers who took part in this attack said: "The natives
were brave and fought with a fierceness bordering on desperation. They
would not yield while a drop of their savage blood warmed their bosoms
or while they had strength to wield a weapon, fighting with that
undaunted firmness which is the characteristic of bold and determined
spirits and displaying such an utter carelessness of life as would have
been honored in a better cause. Instances of the bravery of these
people were numerous, so much so that were I to give the detail of each
event my description would probably become tiresome."

The barricades stoutly resisted the fire. Leaving a force to engage the
fort in front, Lieutenant Shubrick led a body of sailors through the
woods to the rear with the 6-pounder which had been brought from the
frigate. When they reached their position they came upon three heavily
armed schooners, swarming with warriors, awaiting a chance to take part
in the fight. Shubrick promptly opened upon them with his cannon,
followed by a destructive fire of musketry, which sent the Malays
leaping overboard and into the woods. They succeeded, however, in
warping one of the schooners beyond range.

The Americans now being at the front and rear of the fort, a
simultaneous attack was made. The gate was wrenched from its fastenings,
but the first American who tried to enter was killed and three others
badly wounded. Undaunted the remainder of the assailants rushed through
and drove the defenders to a high platform, where they made their final
stand. The other stockade was in flames, which were burning so fast that
the Americans themselves were in danger from them. The little cannon was
brought into play from a neighboring elevation and poured canister and
grape into the Malays. Meanwhile the Americans, who had performed their
part so well, came up and joined in the attack on the main fort. The
Malays, still fighting, shrieked out their defiant cries. In the ardor
of the assault the little cannon was too heavily loaded and dismounted.
Amid the wild confusion the flames of the second fort reached the
magazine and the whole structure blew up with a tremendous explosion.

The cannon being useless, Lieutenant Shubrick ordered a general assault
upon the citadel, and it was made with a resistless rush. The men
scrambled upon the platform, in the face of the swarthy wild cats, and
despatched them in a whirlwind fashion. The work being apparently
completed, the bugle was sounded for retreat and the Americans returned
to the beach. On the way they were fired upon by another fort for which
they had searched without being able to find it. Returning the fire, the
Americans charged through the jungle and after another desperate fight
it was captured, most of the garrison slain and the remainder sent
scurrying through the woods.

The roll call revealed that two Americans had been killed and eleven
wounded. All were gently lifted into the boats and carried to the ship.
A moderate estimate made 100 of the Malays killed and fully double the
number wounded.

Captain Downes now brought his long 32-pounders to bear and opened a
bombardment of Qualla Battoo which spread destruction and death among
the natives. Many were killed and others sent scurrying in terror to the
jungle. Toward the close of the day white flags were displayed and the
firing ceased. Immediately after a boat was sent out by the remaining
rajahs, with a white flag fluttering at the bow. On coming aboard the
messengers were presented to Captain Downes and they humbly prayed that
he would stop the firing of his big guns, which were killing all their
people. He promised to do so on their pledge never again to molest an
American. He assured them that if they ever did his country would send
larger and more terrible ships across the ocean that would lay their
towns in ashes and slay hundreds of their men. The subsequent history of
that quarter of the world leaves no doubt that the impressive warning of
Captain Downes produced the best of results, for Sumatra has never
required any further attention from our navy.




CHAPTER XXII.

Wilkes's Exploring Expedition.


Perhaps my young readers have wondered over the same fact that used to
puzzle me when a boy. While the civilized world was interested, as it
has been for hundreds of years, in trying to reach the Pole, and the
nations were constantly sending expeditions to search for it, to be
followed by others to hunt for the expeditions and then by others to
look up those that were hunting for the others and so on, all these
efforts were confined to the North Pole. Everybody seemed to have
forgotten that there is also a South Pole, which is not a mile further
from the equator than the North Pole.

Of course there was good reason for all this. There is a great deal of
land in the north, while the unbroken ocean seas stretch away from the
South Pole for hundreds and thousands of miles in every direction and
the prodigious masses and mountains of ice make it impossible to get
