for your safety was due to your quick wittedness and courage; and your
escape with your companion from the guard house, the manner in which
you got through the fort in the pass, and your defence of that hut,
until the Rajah's troop arrived to your rescue, were all of them
admirably managed."

He then proceeded to inquire further into the object for which Dick
had come out to India.

"I heartily wish you success in your search," he said, "and sincerely
hope we may obtain news of your father. I do not know what your
intentions may be, afterwards, but should you wish to enter the army,
I will at once nominate you to a commission, in one of our native
cavalry regiments."

"I am deeply obliged to your Excellency," Dick replied, "but as, if we
learn nothing of my father during the war, I am quite resolved to
spend, if necessary, some years in Mysore in the search for him, I
must therefore be free to devote my time to that."

"At any rate," the general said, "if at any time you should feel free
to accept my offer, it will be open to you. In the meantime, I will
appoint you one of the interpreters to the army, during the
expedition, and will attach you to my own staff. It will give you a
recognised position, and it is only right that, as you are doing good
service, you should receive pay. You shall be put in orders this
evening. You can, of course, continue to camp and live with the
Rajah."

The change made very little difference in Dick's duties, and he
continued at his former work, in the quartermasters' department, until
the army was ready for its advance to Bangalore. To the general
surprise, as the army moved forward, nothing was seen of Tippoo's
cavalry, by which they had expected to be continually harassed. The
sultan had, as soon as he perceived that Bangalore was threatened,
hurried the whole army to that city, where he had sent his harem when
he started from Seringapatam to attack Travancore; and instead of
sending off a few hundred horsemen, to escort them to the capital,
while with his army he opposed the advance of the British, he took his
whole force with him, in order to remove his harem with all the pomp
and ceremony with which their passage through the country was
generally accompanied. Consequently, it was not until after taking,
without resistance, the forts of Colar and Ooscotah, and arriving
within ten miles of Bangalore, that the army encountered Tippoo's
cavalry.

This was on the 4th of March. They made an attempt to reach the
baggage trains, but were sharply repulsed, and on the following day
the army took up its position before Bangalore. As they approached the
town, three horsemen dashed out from a small grove, and rode furiously
towards a little group, consisting of Lord Cornwallis, General
Meadows, and the staff, who were reconnoitring at some little distance
from the head of the column. It was evident that their intention was
to cut down the general.

The Rajah, who was riding as usual with the staff, dashed forward with
four or five other officers, and encountered the horsemen before they
could reach him. The Rajah cut down one of them, another was killed by
one of the staff, and the third knocked off his horse and captured.

It was learned that the enterprise was not a planned one, but was the
result of a quarrel between the men, themselves. One had charged the
others with cowardice, and in return they had challenged him to follow
them where they dared go. All had prepared themselves for the
enterprise by half intoxicating themselves with bhang, and thus made
but a poor fight, when they found their object thwarted by the
officers who threw themselves between them and their intended victim.

Bangalore was a fine town, situated on a plain so elevated that the
climate was temperate, the soil fertile, and vegetation abundant. The
town was of considerable extent, that portion lying within the
fortifications being a mile and a quarter long, by half a mile broad.
It was surrounded by a strong rampart, a thick hedge, and a deep, dry
ditch. The wall, however, did not extend across the side facing the
fort, whose guns were supposed to render it ample protection.

The fort was oval in shape, and about nine hundred yards across, at
its greatest diameter. It was defended by a broad rampart,
strengthened by thirty semicircular bastions and five outworks. The
two gates, one at each end, were also protected by outworks. In the
fort stood the splendid palace built by Tippoo. Here also were immense
foundries of cannon, factories for muskets, the arsenal, and large
magazines of grain and ammunition.

The position taken up by the army lay to the northeast of the petah,
or town, and the next morning a reconnoitring party, escorted by
Colonel Floyd, with the whole of the cavalry and a brigade of
infantry, went out to examine the defences of the town and fort.
Seeing a large body of laden elephants and camels, escorted by a
strong body of horsemen, Colonel Floyd rode with the cavalry to attack
them. The movement was a rash one, as the guns on the fort opened
fire, and although at first he defeated the Mysore horse, a heavy fire
was poured upon him, when entangled in broken ground. He himself was
shot by a musket ball which, striking him in the face, passed through
both jaws. It was at first believed that he was dead, but he was
carried back to camp, and ultimately recovered. This rash attack cost
the lives of seventy-one men, and of four times as many horses.

As Tippoo's army was lying at a distance of only six miles away, the
general determined that it would be best, in the first place, to
capture the town without delay; and to assault the fort on that side,
as he could then do so without any fear of an attack by Tippoo; who
would be able to harass him, constantly, were he to approach the fort
from any other direction. Orders were therefore issued for the 36th
Regiment, supported by the 26th Bengal Sepoys, and a party of
artillery under Colonel Moorhouse, to prepare to storm the north gate
of the town at daybreak the next morning.

As soon as dawn broke, the troops rushed forward against the gate. The
outside work was speedily stormed, but as they issued from it, towards
the gate itself, they were received with a very heavy fire from the
walls, together with a storm of hand grenades. Colonel Moorhouse
brought forward a six pounder, receiving two wounds as the piece was
run up to the gate. The first time it was fired, it had no effect
beyond making a small hole, and the next shot had no greater success.
Colonel Moorhouse ordered a twelve-pounder to be brought up, but as he
was aiding to put it into position, another ball struck him, and he
fell dead.

While the artillerymen were pouring shot after shot into the gate, the
roar of musketry was unceasing, the 36th keeping up an incessant fire
upon the enemy upon the wall, in order to cover, as much as possible,
the operations of the gunners. At last, the gate gave way. The troops
poured in, cheering loudly, and the enemy at once fled.

Many, however, took up their positions in the houses, and kept up a
galling fire, until their places of refuge were stormed by detachments
of troops, scattered through the town. By nine o'clock all was over,
and the town completely in the possession of the British.

Tippoo, furious at its having been so speedily captured, moved down
early in the afternoon with a strong force of infantry; and, marching
along by the side of the fort, endeavoured to force his way into the
town through the open space at that end. He was aided by the guns of
the fort, while his artillery kept up a heavy cannonade upon the
British encampment.

When the sultan was seen marching towards the town, with the evident
intention of endeavouring to retake it, the 76th Regiment was sent in
to reinforce the garrison; and the three battalions opposed so steady
a resistance to Tippoo's infantry that the latter were forced to fall
back, after sustaining a loss of five hundred men. The troops began
next morning to erect batteries.

The position was a singular one. A small army was undertaking the
siege of a strong fortress, while an army vastly outnumbering it was
watching them; and was able, at any moment, to throw large
reinforcements into the fort through the Mysore gate, which was at the
opposite end of the fort to that attacked, the efforts of the British
being directed against the Delhi gate, which faced the town.

The advantage which had been gained, by the employment of the great
train carrying the provisions for the troops, was now manifest; for,
unless the army had been so provided, it would have been forced to
retreat; as, in the face of Tippoo's army, with its great host of
cavalry, it would have been impossible to gather provisions.

The first batteries erected by the engineers proved to be too far
distant from the wall of the fort to effect any material damage, and
others were commenced at a much shorter range. The work was performed
with great difficulty, for the guns of the defenders were well served,
and a storm of missiles were poured, night and day, into the town and
against the batteries. The garrison, which consisted of eight thousand
men, were frequently relieved by fresh troops from the sultan's army,
and were thus able to maintain their fire with great vigour.

On the 17th, Tippoo cannonaded the British camp from a distance, but
without doing great damage. In the meantime, the fire of our siege
guns was steadily doing its work, in spite of the heavy fire kept up
on them. The stone facing of the bastion next to the gateway was soon
knocked away, but the earth banks behind, which were very thick and
constructed of a tough red clay, crumbled but slowly. Still, the
breach was day by day becoming more practicable, and Tippoo, alarmed
at the progress that had been made, moved his army down towards the
east side of the fort, and seemed to meditate an attack upon our
batteries. He placed some heavy guns behind a bank surrounding a large
tank, and opened some embrasures through which their fire would have
taken our trenches, which were now pushed up close to the fort, in
flank.

Lord Cornwallis at once directed a strong force to advance, as if with
the intention of attacking the new work, and Tippoo ordered his troops
to retire from it. It was evident, however, that he had determined to
give battle in order to save the fort, and the English general
therefore determined to storm the place that very night, the 21st of
March. The preparations were made secretly, lest the news should be
taken to Tippoo by one of the natives in the town, and it was not
until late in the evening that orders were issued to the troops which
were to take part in the assault.

The column was to be composed of the grenadier and light companies of
all the European regiments, and these were to be followed and
supported by several battalions of Sepoys. The force, commanded by
Colonel Maxwell, at eleven o'clock issued from the town and advanced
through the trenches. The besieged were vigilant, and the instant the
leading company sprang from the trenches and, in the bright moonlight,
ran forward to the breach, a number of blue lights were lighted all
along the ramparts, and a heavy musketry fire was opened.

The scene was eagerly watched by the troops in the camp, every feature
being distinctly visible. The storming party could be seen, rushing up
the breach and mounting, by ladders, over the gateway, which was the
central object of attack. The enemy gathered in masses at the top of
the breach, but as soon as the stormers collected in sufficient
strength, and charged them with the bayonet, they broke and dispersed.

The grenadiers moved along the ramparts to the right, clearing it of
its defences as they went along. The light companies did the same
along the ramparts to the left, while the Sepoys descended into the
body of the fort. The whole of the defenders fled towards the Mysore
gate at the other end of the fort, and when the three bodies of troops
met there, they found the gate blocked by the masses of fugitives.

They charged them on all sides. The governor, a brave old soldier, and
a great favourite of the sultan, died fighting gallantly to the last.
Six hundred of the garrison fell, and three hundred, for the most part
wounded, were taken prisoners. The British loss was only fifty
officers and men, killed and wounded.

The body of the governor was found, next morning, among the slain; and
Lord Cornwallis sent a message to Tippoo, with an offer to have the
body carried to his camp for burial. Tippoo, however, replied that the
proper place for a soldier to be buried was where he fell, and
accordingly the brave old soldier was laid to rest, in the fort, by
the Mohammedan troops in the Sepoy regiments; with all military
honours.

While the assault was going on, Tippoo--who, in spite of the
precautions taken, had received news of the intention of the general,
and had warned the garrison of the fort to be prepared--despatched two
heavy columns, as soon as the fire opened, to attack the British camp
on its flank. The movement had been foreseen and prepared against, and
the attacks were both repulsed with heavy loss.

The capture of the fort was effected but just in time, for the
provisions were almost entirely consumed, and the scanty rations were
eked out by digging up the roots of grasses and vegetables within the
circuit of our pickets. The draught and carriage cattle were dying
daily, by hundreds. The few remaining, intended for food, were in so
emaciated a state that the flesh was scarcely eatable. And, worst of
all, the supply of ammunition was almost exhausted.

The news of the fall of the fortress, considered by the natives to be
almost impregnable, under the very eyes of the sultan himself and his
great army, produced a widespread effect; greatly depressing the
spirit of Tippoo's adherents, while it proportionately raised those of
the British troops, and excited the hopes of the peoples conquered by
Tippoo and his father. One result was that the polagars, or chiefs, of
a tribe that had but recently fallen under the yoke of Mysore, were at
once emboldened to bring in provisions to the town. As great stores
were found in the magazines in the fort, the starving animals regained
some of their condition during the ten days that the troops were
occupied in repairing the breaches, burying the dead, and placing the
fort in a condition to stand a siege, should Tippoo return during the
absence of the army.

When this was done, and the stores of ammunition replenished from the
magazines, the army started on its march north to Deonhully, where
they were to effect a junction with the cavalry that the Nizam had
agreed to furnish. As it marched, it passed within three miles of
Tippoo's army, which was proceeding in a westerly direction. Tippoo
could here have brought on a general engagement, had he wished it; but
the capture of Bangalore had for the time cowed his spirit, and he
continued his march, at a rate that soon placed him beyond the reach
of the British.

At Deonhully a junction was effected with the Nizam's horse, ten
thousand in number. These proved, however, of no real utility, being a
mere undisciplined herd, who displayed no energy whatever, except in
plundering the villagers. The united force now moved southeast, to
guard a great convoy which was advancing up the pass of Amboor; and,
when this had been met, returned to Bangalore.

During the operations of the siege, the Rajah's troop had remained
inactive, and Dick's duties as interpreter had been nominal. At
Bangalore, no English prisoners had been found, and he was heartily
glad when he heard that it was the intention of Lord Cornwallis to
march directly upon Seringapatam.

It was, indeed, a necessity for the English general to bring the
campaign to a speedy termination. The war was entailing a tremendous
strain upon the resources of the Company. The Nizam and Mahrattis were
not to be depended upon in the slightest degree, and might at any
moment change sides. The French revolution had broken out, and all
Europe was alarmed, and many of the English regiments might, at any
moment, be ordered to return home. Therefore, anything like a thorough
conquest of Mysore was impossible, and there was only time to march to
Seringapatam, to capture Tippoo's capital, and to dictate terms to
him.

Immense exertions were made to restore the efficiency of the baggage
train, and on the 3rd of May, the army marched from Bangalore.

Tippoo, devoured alike by rage and fear, had taken no efficient steps
to meet the coming storm. His first thought was to prevent the English
from discovering the brutal cruelty with which his white captives had
been treated. He had, over and over again, given the most solemn
assurances that he had no white prisoners in his hands; and he now
endeavoured to prevent their obtaining evidence of his falsehood and
cruelty, by murdering the whole of those who remained in his hands at
Seringapatam. Having effected this massacre, he next ordered all the
pictures that he had caused to be painted on the walls of his palace
and other buildings, holding up the English to the contempt and hatred
of his subjects, to be obliterated; and he also ordered the bridge
over the northern loop of the Cauvery to be destroyed. He then set out
with his army to bar the passage of the British to Seringapatam.

The weather was extremely bad when the British started. Rain storms
had deluged the country, and rendered the roads well nigh impassable,
and the movement was, in consequence, very slow. Tippoo had taken up a
strong position on the direct road and, in order to avoid him, Lord
Cornwallis took a more circuitous route, and Tippoo was obliged to
fall back.

The whole country through which the English passed had been wasted.
The villages were deserted, and not an inhabitant was to be met with.
Suffering much from wet, and the immense difficulties of bringing on
the transport, the army, on the 13th of May, arrived on the Cauvery,
nine miles east of Seringapatam. Here it had been intended to cross
the river, but the rains had so swollen the stream that it was found
impossible to ford it. It was, therefore, determined to march to a
point on the river, ten miles above Seringapatam, where it was hoped
that a better ford could be found; and where a junction might be
effected with General Abercrombie's Bombay army, which was moving up
from the Malabar coast, and was but thirty or forty miles distant.

To effect this movement, it was necessary to pass within sight of the
capital. Tippoo came out, and took up a strong position, on a rugged
and almost inaccessible height. In front was a swamp stretching to the
river, while batteries had been thrown up to sweep the approaches.

By a night march, accomplished in the midst of a tremendous thunder
and rain storm, Lord Cornwallis turned Tippoo's position. The
confusion occasioned by the storm, however, and the fact that several
of the corps lost their way, prevented the full success hoped for from
being attained, and gave Tippoo time to take up a fresh position.

Colonel Maxwell led five battalions up a rocky ledge, held by a strong
body of the Mysore troops, carried it at the point of the bayonet, and
captured some guns. Tippoo immediately began to fall back, but would
have lost the greater portion of his artillery, had not the Nizam's
horse moved forward across the line by which the British were
advancing. Here they remained in an inert mass, powerless to follow
Tippoo, and a complete barrier to the British advance. So
unaccountable was their conduct, that it was generally believed in the
army that it was the result of treachery; and it was with difficulty
that the British troops could be restrained from firing into the horde
of horsemen, who had, from the time they joined the force, been worse
than useless.

As soon as the British could make their way through, or round, the
obstacle to their advance, they pursued the retreating force of
Tippoo, until it took refuge under the guns of the works round
Seringapatam. Their loss had been 2000, that of the British 500.

But the success was of little benefit to the latter. The terrible
state of the roads, and the want of food, had caused the death of
great numbers of draught animals, and the rest were so debilitated as
to be absolutely useless; and during the two days' marches, that were
required to reach the point on the river previously determined upon,
the battering train, and almost the whole of the carts, were dragged
along by the troops.

The position of the army was bad in the extreme. Neither food nor
forage were to be obtained from the country round. The troops were
almost on famine rations, worn out by fatigue, and by the march
through heavy rains, and nights spent on the sodden ground. Tippoo's
horsemen hovered round them. The cavalry of the Nizam, which had been
specially engaged to keep the foe at a distance, never once ventured
to engage them. It was absolutely impossible to communicate with
General Abercrombie, and after remaining but a couple of days in his
new camp, Lord Cornwallis felt that the army could only be saved from
destruction by immediate retreat.

No time was lost in carrying out the decision, when once arrived at.
Some natives were paid heavily to endeavour to make their way to
Abercrombie, with orders for him to retire down the ghauts again into
Malabar. Then the whole of the battering train, and the heavy
equipments, were destroyed; and on the 26th of May, the army started
for its long march back to Bangalore.

It had made but six miles when a body of horsemen, some two thousand
strong, were seen approaching. Preparations were instantly made to
repel an attack, when a soldier rode in, and announced that the
horsemen were the advance party of two Mahratta armies, close at hand.
This was welcome news, indeed, for Lord Cornwallis had no idea that
the Mahrattis were within two hundred miles of him, and had come to
believe that they had no intention, whatever, of carrying out their
engagements.

They had, it appeared, sent off a messenger, every day, to inform him
of their movements; but so vigilant were Tippoo's cavalry, that not
one of them ever reached the British. In a few hours, the junction was
completed, and the sufferings of the army were at an end. Stores of
every kind were abundant with the Mahrattis, and not only food, but
clothing, and every necessary of life, could be purchased in the great
bazaars, occupied by the Mahratta traders who accompanied the army.

Had the two Mahratta armies arrived a couple of days earlier, the
destruction of the siege train would have been avoided, Seringapatam
would have been besieged, Abercrombie's army of eight thousand men
have joined, and the war brought at once to a conclusion. It was now,
however, too late. The means for prosecuting the siege of so powerful
a fortress were altogether wanting, and the united armies returned, by
easy marches, to Bangalore.

On the march, the future plan of operations was decided upon. Lord
Cornwallis sent orders for the sum of 1,500,000 rupees, that had been
intended for China, to be at once despatched to Bangalore for the use
of the army, and the allies. The larger of the Mahratta forces, under
Purseram Bhow, with a detachment of Bombay troops that had accompanied
it, were to march to the northwest, and reduce some of the forts and
towns still held by the troops of Mysore. The other Mahratta force,
consisting chiefly of cavalry, under Hurry Punt, were to remain at
Bangalore.

The cause of the long delay, on the part of the Nizam and the
Mahrattis, was now explained. The Nizam's troops had spent six months
in the siege of the fortress of Capool, while an equal time had been
occupied, by Purseram Bhow, in the siege of Durwar, a very strong
place, garrisoned by ten thousand men.

Tippoo began negotiations immediately after his defeat near
Seringapatam, and these were continued until July, when they were
finally broken off. Some months were occupied in reducing a number of
the hill forts, commanding the entrances to the various passes. Among
these, two, deemed absolutely impregnable, Savandroog and Nundidroog,
were captured, but the attack upon Kistnagherry was repulsed with
considerable loss.

By the capture of these places, Lord Cornwallis obtained access to
supplies from the Malabar and Carnatic coasts, and was thus free from
the risk of any recurrence of the misfortunes that had marred his
previous attempt to lay siege to Seringapatam; and, on the 5th of
February, 1792, he again came within sight of Tippoo's capital.



Chapter 9: News Of The Captive.


During the nine months that had elapsed since the retreat from before
Seringapatam, Dick had been occupied in following out the main object
of his presence in Mysore. Finding that Purseram Bhow's army was the
first that would be engaged in active service, he asked permission
from the general to join it. This was at once granted, and Lord
Cornwallis introduced him to the officer in command of the Bombay
troops attached to that army, informing him of the object that he had
in view.

"He will not be of much use as an interpreter," he said, "for as the
country in which you are going to operate formed, until lately, a part
of the Mahratta dominions, Mahratti will be principally spoken. He
will, therefore, go simply as an officer of my staff, attached for the
present to your command. He has asked me to allow him to take with him
twenty men, belonging to the troop of his uncle, the Rajah of
Tripataly. His object, in doing so, is that he will be able to
traverse the country independently, and can either rejoin me here, or
go to one of the other columns operating against the hill forts, if it
should seem to him expedient to do so. Should you desire to make a
reconnaissance at any time, while he is with you, you will find him
useful as an escort, and will not be obliged to ask Purseram Bhow for
a party of his cavalry."

Dick was sorry to leave his uncle, whose tent he had now shared for
the last ten months. He found himself, however, very comfortable with
the Bombay troops, being made a member of the mess, consisting of the
officer in command and the four officers of his staff. Wishing to have
some duties with which to occupy himself, he volunteered to act as an
aide-de-camp; and although the work was little more than nominal, it
gave him some employment. When not otherwise engaged, he generally
rode with Surajah, whom his uncle had appointed to command the twenty
troopers.

In the year that had elapsed since his arrival in India, Dick had
grown considerably, and broadened out greatly, and was now a powerful
young fellow of over seventeen. He had, since the troop joined the
army of Lord Cornwallis, exchanged his civilian dress for the undress
uniform of an officer, which he had purchased at the sale of the
effects of a young lieutenant on the general's staff, who had died
just as the army arrived before Bangalore. It was, indeed, necessary
that he should do this, riding about, as he did, either on the staff
of the general, or with the officers of the quartermasters'
department. There would be no difficulty in renewing his uniform, for
hardship, fever, and war had carried off a large number of officers,
as well as men; and the effects were always sold by auction, on the
day following the funeral.

Many hill fortresses were captured by the Mahrattis, but few offered
any resistance; as their commanders knew well that there was no chance
of their being relieved, while the men were, in most cases, delighted
at the prospect of an escape from their enforced service, and of
freedom to return to their homes. In a few of these forts, English
captives were found. Some had been there for years, their very
existence being apparently forgotten by the tyrant. Some had been
fairly treated by the Mysore governor, and where this was the case,
the latter was furnished by the British officers with papers,
testifying to the kindness with which they had treated the prisoners,
