
Major W. F. Butler: "The Great Lone Land."




As every action is capable of a peculiar dignity in the manner of it, so
also it is capable of dignity still higher in the motive of it. There is
no action so slight, nor so mean, but it may be done to a great purpose,
and ennobled therefore; nor is any purpose so great but that slight
actions may help it, and may be so done as to help it much, most
especially that chief of all purposes, the pleasing of God.

Ruskin




THE UNNAMED LAKE


    It sleeps among the thousand hills
      Where no man ever trod,
    And only nature's music fills
      The silences of God.

    Great mountains tower above its shore,
      Green rushes fringe its brim,
    And o'er its breast for evermore
      The wanton breezes skim.

    Dark clouds that intercept the sun
      Go there in Spring to weep,
    And there, when Autumn days are done,
      White mists lie down to sleep.

    Sunrise and sunset crown with gold
      The peaks of ageless stone,
    Where winds have thundered from of old
      And storms have set their throne.

    No echoes of the world afar
      Disturb it night or day,
    But sun and shadow, moon and star,
      Pass and repass for aye.

    'Twas in the gray of early dawn
      When first the lake we spied,
    And fragments of a cloud were drawn
      Half down the mountain side.

    Along the shore a heron flew,
      And from a speck on high,
    That hovered in the deepening blue,
      We heard the fish-hawk's cry.

    Among the cloud-capt solitudes,
      No sound the silence broke,
    Save when, in whispers down the woods,
      The guardian mountains spoke.

    Through tangled brush and dewy brake,
      Returning whence we came,
    We passed in silence, and the lake
      We left without a name.

F. G. Scott




We are not sent into this world to do anything into which we cannot put
our hearts. We have certain work to do for our bread, and that is to be
done strenuously; other work to do for our delight, and that is to be
done heartily; neither is to be done by halves or shifts, but with a
will.

Ruskin




LIFE IN NORMAN ENGLAND


The tall, frowning keep and solid walls of the great stone castles, in
which the Norman barons lived, betokened an age of violence and
suspicion. Beauty gave way to the needs of safety. Girdled with a green
and slimy ditch, round the inner side of which ran a parapeted wall
pierced along the top with shot-holes, stood the buildings, spreading
often over many acres.

If an enemy managed to cross the moat and force the gateway, in spite of
a portcullis crashing from above, and melted lead pouring in burning
streams from the perforated top of the rounded arch, but little of his
work was yet done; for the keep lifted its huge angular block of masonry
within the inner bailey or courtyard, and from the narrow chinks in its
ten-foot wall rained a sharp incessant shower of arrows, sweeping all
approaches to the high and narrow stair, by which alone access could be
had to its interior.

These loopholes were the only windows, except in the topmost story,
where the chieftain, like a vulture in his rocky nest, watched all the
surrounding country. The day of splendid oriels had not yet come in
castle architecture. Thus a baron in his keep could defy, and often did
defy, the king upon his throne. Under his roof, eating daily at his
board, lived a throng of armed retainers; and around his castle lay
farms tilled by martial franklins, who at his call laid aside their
implements of husbandry, took up the sword and spear, which they could
wield with equal skill, and marched beneath his banner to the war.

The furniture of a Norman keep was not unlike that of an English house.
There was richer ornament--more elaborate carving. A _faldestol_, the
original of our arm-chair, spread its drapery and cushions for the
chieftain in his lounging moods. His bed now boasted curtains and a
roof, although, like the English lord, he still lay only upon straw.
Chimneys tunnelled the thick walls, and the cupboards glittered with
glass and silver. Horn lanterns and the old spiked candle-sticks lit up
his evening hours, when the chess-board arrayed its clumsy men, carved
out of walrus-tusk, then commonly called whale's-bone. But the baron had
an unpleasant trick of breaking the chess-board on his opponent's head,
when he found himself checkmated; which somewhat marred that player's
enjoyment of the game. Dice of horn and bone emptied many a purse in
Norman England. Draughts were also sometimes played.

Dance and music whiled away the long winter nights; and on summer
evenings the castle courtyards resounded with the noise of football,
wrestling, boxing, leaping, and the fierce joys of the bull-bait. But
out of doors, when no fighting was on hand, the hound, the hawk, and the
lance attracted the best energies and skill of the Norman gentleman.

The Normans probably dined at nine in the morning. When they rose they
took a light meal; and ate something also after their day's work,
immediately before going to bed. Goose and garlic formed a favourite
dish. Their cookery was more elaborate, and, in comparison, more
delicate, than the preparations for an English feast; but the character
for temperance, which they brought with them from the continent, soon
vanished.

The poorer classes hardly ever ate flesh, living principally on bread,
butter, and cheese; a fact in social life which seems to underlie that
usage of our tongue by which the living animals in field or stall bore
English names--ox, sheep, calf, pig, deer; while their flesh, promoted
to Norman dishes, rejoiced in names of French origin--beef, mutton,
veal, pork, venison. Round cakes, piously marked with a cross, piled the
tables, on which pastry of various kinds also appeared. In good houses
cups of glass held the wine, which was borne from the cellar below in
jugs.

Squatted around the door or on the stairs leading to the Norman
dining-hall, which was often on an upper floor, was a crowd of beggars
or gluttons, who grew so insolent in the days of Rufus, that ushers,
armed with rods, were posted outside to beat back the noisy throng, who
thought little of snatching the dishes as the cooks carried them to
table!

The juggler, who under the Normans filled the place of the English
gleeman, tumbled, sang, and balanced knives in the hall; or, out in the
bailey of an afternoon, displayed the acquirements of his trained monkey
or bear. The fool, too, clad in coloured patchwork, cracked his ribald
jests and shook his cap and bells at the elbow of roaring barons, when
the board was spread and the circling of the wine began.

Monasteries served many useful purposes at this time. Besides their
manifest value as centres of study and literary work, they gave alms to
the poor, a supper and a bed to travellers; their tenants were better
off and better treated than the tenants of the nobles; the monks could
store grain, grow apples, and cultivate their flower-beds with little
risk of injury from war, because they had spiritual penalties at their
call, which usually awed even the most reckless of the soldiery into a
respect for sacred property.

As schools, too, the monasteries did no trifling service to society in
the Middle Ages. In addition to their influence as great centres of
learning, English law had enjoined every mass-priest to keep a school in
his parish church where all the young committed to his care might be
instructed. The youth of the middle classes, destined for the cloister
or the merchant's stall, chiefly thronged these schools. The aristocracy
cared little for book-learning. Very few indeed of the barons could read
or write. But all could ride, fence, tilt, play at cards, and carve
extremely well; for to these accomplishments many years of pagehood and
squirehood were given.

W. F. Collier, (Adapted)




Self-reverence, self-knowledge, self-control, These three alone lead
life to sovereign power.

Tennyson




YE MARINERS OF ENGLAND


    Ye mariners of England
    That guard our native seas,
    Whose flag has braved, a thousand years,
    The battle and the breeze!
    Your glorious standard launch again
    To match another foe:
    And sweep through the deep,
    While the stormy winds do blow;
    While the battle rages loud and long,
    And the stormy winds do blow.

    The spirits of your fathers
    Shall start from every wave--
    For the deck it was their field of fame,
    And Ocean was their grave:
    Where Blake and mighty Nelson fell
    Your manly hearts shall glow,
    As ye sweep through the deep,
    While the stormy winds do blow;
    While the battle rages loud and long,
    And the stormy winds do blow.

    Britannia needs no bulwarks,
    No towers along the steep;
    Her march is o'er the mountain waves,
    Her home is on the deep.
    With thunders from her native oak
    She quells the floods below--
    As they roar on the shore,
    When the stormy winds do blow;
    When the battle rages loud and long,
    And the stormy winds do blow.

    The meteor flag of England
    Shall yet terrific burn,
    Till danger's troubled night depart
    And the star of peace return.
    Then, then, ye ocean-warriors!
    Our song and feast shall flow
    To the fame of your name,
    When the storm has ceased to blow;
    When the fiery fight is heard no more,
    And the storm has ceased to blow.

Thomas Campbell




    It is the land that freemen till;
      That sober-suited Freedom chose,
      The Land, where girt with friends or foes
    A man may speak the thing he will;
    A land of settled government,
      A land of old and just renown,
      Where freedom broadens slowly down
    From precedent to precedent.

Tennyson




INSTRUCTION


Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know
understanding. Get wisdom, get understanding: forget it not; neither
decline from the words of my mouth. Forsake her not, and she shall
preserve thee: love her, and she shall keep thee. Wisdom is the
principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting get
understanding. Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring
thee to honour, when thou dost embrace her. She shall give to thine head
an ornament of grace: a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee.

My son, attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my sayings. Let them
not depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of thine heart. For
they are life unto those that find them and health to all their flesh.
Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life.
Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee.
Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before
thee. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established.
Turn not to the right hand nor to the left: remove thy foot from evil.

Proverbs, IV.




HOME THOUGHTS FROM ABROAD


            Oh, to be in England
            Now that April's there,
        And whoever wakes in England
        Sees, some morning, unaware,
    That the lowest boughs and the brushwood sheaf
    Round the elm tree bole are in tiny leaf,
    While the chaffinch sings on the orchard bough
            In England--now!

    And after April, when May follows,
    And the white-throat builds, and all the swallows!
    Hark! where my blossomed pear-tree in the hedge
    Leans to the field and scatters on the clover
    Blossoms and dewdrops--at the bent spray's edge--
    That's the wise thrush; he sings each song twice over,
    Lest you should think he never could recapture
    The first fine careless rapture!
    And though the fields look rough with hoary dew,
    All will be gay when noontide wakes anew
    The buttercups, the little children's dower,
    --Far brighter than this gaudy melon-flower!

Browning




THE BELLS OF SHANDON


    With deep affection and recollection
      I often think of those Shandon bells,
    Whose sounds so wild would, in the days of childhood,
      Fling round my cradle their magic spells.
    On this I ponder where'er I wander,
      And thus grow fonder, sweet Cork, of thee;
    With thy bells of Shandon that sound so grand on
      The pleasant waters of the River Lee.

    I've heard bells chiming full many a clime in,
      Tolling sublime in cathedral shrine;
    While at a glib rate brass tongues would vibrate;--
      But all their music spoke naught like thine.
    For memory dwelling on each proud swelling
      Of thy belfry knelling its bold notes free,
    Made the bells of Shandon sound far more grand on
      The pleasant waters of the River Lee.

    I've heard bells tolling old Adrian's Mole in,
      Their thunder rolling from the Vatican;
    And cymbals glorious swinging uproarious
      In the gorgeous turrets of Notre Dame.
    But thy sounds were sweeter than the dome of Peter
      Flings o'er the Tiber, pealing solemnly;
    O, the bells of Shandon sound far more grand on
      The pleasant waters of the River Lee.

    There's a bell in Moscow; while on tower and kiosk O!
      In Saint Sophia the Turkman gets,
    And loud in air calls men to prayer
      From the tapering summits of tall minarets.
    Such empty phantom I freely grant them;
      But there's an anthem more dear to me;
    'Tis the bells of Shandon that sound so grand on
      The pleasant waters of the River Lee.

Francis Mahony


