to you for letting me have my own way."

"You always do have your own way, Frances," her mother laughed.
"You get round your father first, and then you come to me, and what
can I do against the two of you?"

Reuben briefly answered Miss Furley and Mrs. Hudson; and Mr.
Hudson, feeling that the lad would rather get over the scene as
soon as possible, slipped his arm though his and said:

"Now, Reuben, you must just come up for a minute on the poop. The
other passengers are all waiting to shake you by the hand, and they
would not forgive me if I were to let you run off, as I know you
are wanting to do, without a word."

Accordingly Reuben was taken up to the poop, where the passengers
all shook hands with him, and congratulated him upon his courage.

"Now, I suppose I can go, sir," he said, with a smile to Mr.
Hudson, when this was over.

"Yes, you can go now," Mr. Hudson laughed. "Most young fellows at
your age would be glad of an opportunity for figuring as a hero,
but you talk as if it was one of the most painful businesses
imaginable."

"Anyhow, I am glad it's over, Mr. Hudson, I can assure you; and
now, I think I will turn in again. Considering what a night I had,
I feel wonderfully sleepy."

It was not until the sun was setting that Reuben appeared again on
deck. Shortly after he did so, Captain Wilson strolled up to the
place where he was standing.

"I wish, Reuben," he said, after a few remarks on other subjects,
"that you would tell me a little more about yourself. You
understand that I do not ask from mere inquisitiveness; but after
what has happened, you see, we seem to have got into close
relationship with each other; and if I knew more about you, I could
the easier see in what way I could most really be useful to you,
out there. Are you what you appear to be?"

"I am, indeed," Reuben replied, with a smile. "My history is a very
simple one. My father was a miller with a good business and, up to
the age of ten, it did not appear that I should ever be working as
a craftsman for my living. Unhappily, at that time my father
slipped, one night, into the mill pond and was drowned; and when
his affairs came to be wound up, it was found that he had
speculated disastrously in wheat; and that, after paying all
claims, there was nothing left.

"My mother took a little village shop, and I went to the village
school. At first, I think I did not work very hard; but fortunately
there was a change in masters, and the new one turned out one of
the best friends a boy ever had. He pushed me on greatly and, when
I was apprenticed to a mill wright, he urged me to continue my
education by working of an evening. I stuck to it hard, and with
his help learned, therefore, a good deal more than was usual, in my
station of life. My mother was always particular about my speaking
and, what with that and the books, I suppose I talk better than
they generally do."

"And is your mother alive?"

"Yes, sir."

"But how came you to think of emigrating, at your age; when indeed,
you cannot have served out your full time?"

"That, sir," Reuben said gravely, "I cannot tell you. Some day,
perhaps, if you care to know, I may bring myself to do so. I may
say that it was a serious matter, but that I was really in no way
to blame, whatever people may think. My conscience is absolutely
clear, and yet I would rather that the story, which I left England
to escape, should not be known to anyone."

"I do not seek to know further, Reuben. I think I know enough of
you to be perfectly sure that you would do nothing that was wrong,
and I am perfectly willing to take your word in the matter.
However, I am glad that you have told me as much as you have. Your
early rearing, your mother's care, and the education you have had,
perfectly account for what seemed strange about you before. You
have no objection, I hope, to my repeating your story to Mr.
Hudson, who is as much interested in you as I am.

"And now another thing. I know that it is painful, to him, that one
to whom he is so indebted should be forward here in the forecastle,
instead of being in the cabin. He was afraid of hurting your
feelings, by speaking to you about it; but I know that it would be
a great relief and pleasure, to him and Mrs. Hudson, if you would
allow them to make an arrangement with the captain that, for the
remainder of the voyage, you should be a passenger."

"I am much obliged to them," Reuben said quietly; "but I could not
think of accepting such an offer. I am working my way out
independently, sir, and I owe no one anything. I am really enjoying
the passage, and so far there has been no hardship worth speaking
of. Even putting aside the fact that I should not like to accept an
obligation which would, to most people, look like a payment for the
service I was fortunate enough to be able to render to Mr. Hudson,
I should feel out of my element. I am very comfortable, and get on
very well with the men; while in the cabin I should feel strange,
and out of place."

"I don't think you would seem out of place anywhere, Reuben. No
one, from your manner and conversation, would judge you to be
otherwise than a gentleman by birth; while there are several of the
passengers, aft, whose talk and methods of expression are by no
means up to the level of yours."

"I should feel uncomfortable myself," Reuben said, "even if I
didn't make other people uncomfortable. So I think that, with all
gratitude for the offer, I would very much rather remain as I am.
Accustomed as I have been to hard work, during my apprenticeship,
the life here appears to be exceedingly easy."

"Then we will say no more about it," Captain Wilson said. "It would
have been a pleasure, both to me and the Hudsons, to have you aft,
and I am sure you would be well received by all the passengers.
However, as you think you would not be comfortable, we will let the
matter drop.

"However, as to your work in the colony, we must have a say in
that; and I hope that, when I thoroughly understand your wishes, we
shall be able to help you forward there."

"For that I shall be extremely obliged, sir. It would be a great
thing, indeed, for anyone on landing to have gentlemen ready to
assist him, and push him forward. This is so at home, and is of
course still more the case in a strange country. I am very anxious
to get on, and am ready to work my hardest, to deserve any kindness
that may be shown me."

"Well, we shall have plenty of time to think it over before we
arrive.

"I fancy," Captain Wilson went on, looking upwards at the sky,
"that our wonderful run of good luck, with regard to the weather,
is likely to end shortly, and that we are in for a gale."

"Do you think so, sir?"

"I do, indeed; and if we do get a gale, it is likely to be a
serious one. The Cape, you know, was much feared for its terrible
storms by the Portuguese, and it has kept up its reputation ever
since. I think it is going to give us a taste of its quality."



Chapter 8: A Gale.


"Wilson tells me he thinks we are going to have a gale, Bill."

"Ay, ay, Reuben; anyone with half an eye could see that."

"Which way is it likely to come?"

"Most likely from the north or northwest. At least that's the
quarter it's likely to settle into; but there ain't no saying which
way it may take us. I thought things had been going on too smooth
to last. Now you are going to see what a storm is, my lad. You
thought it was blowing when we went down the Channel."

"Is it likely to be much heavier than that, Bill?"

"Heavier!" the sailor repeated scornfully. "Why, there's as much
difference between a capful of wind in the Channel, and a gale off
the Cape, as there is between a newborn baby and me."

"Do they last long, generally?"

"Last! Why they goes on for weeks. There ain't no end to them. I've
wondered sometimes to myself where all the wind comes from, and
where it goes to, onlass it works round and round."

"But it does work round and round, Bill?"

"Ay, when you are near the centre of it. Why, lad, in three hours I
have gone round the compass three times, with the wind dead aft all
the time; but that's only when you are near the centre. When you
ain't it blows straight, and I have known vessels run for days--ay,
for weeks--with the wind blowing all the time in the same quarter.
Some have been blown down right to the edge of the ice, south. I
have been among the icebergs myself, two or three times, and I
guess that many a ship has laid her bones down in the ice fields
there, and no news ever come back home as to what's come to them;
and what makes it worse is as we have convicts on board."

"What difference does that make, Bill?"

"It don't make no difference, as long as all goes straight and
fair. I have heard, in course, of risings; but that's only when
either the guard are very careless, or the men is so bad treated
that they gets desperate, and is ready to die on the off chance of
getting free. So far we ain't had no trouble with them. The ship is
kept liberal, and the poor wretches ain't cheated out of the
rations as government allows them. The officer in charge seems a
good sort, and there's no knocking of them about, needless; so
there ain't no fear of trouble, as long as things go square. But
when things goes wrong, and a vessel gets cast away or anything of
that kind, then there's well-nigh sure to be trouble. The convicts
seize their opportunity, and it ain't scarce in human nature for
them not to take it, and then there ain't no saying what will
happen."

"Why, what a croaker you are, Bill! I didn't expect that from you."

"I ain't no croaker, Reuben, but I knows what I knows. I have been
through a job like that I am telling you of, once; and I don't want
to do it again. I will tell you about it, some day. I ain't saying
as I expect any such thing will happen, on board the Paramatta. God
forbid. She's a tight ship, and she's got as good officers and crew
as ever I sailed with. She has as good a chance as ever a ship had;
but when I sees that 'ere sort of sky in these latitudes, I feels
as we are in for a tough job."

The conversation was broken off, abruptly, by the call of the first
mate.

"All hands aloft to shorten sail!"

"The bells is ringing up for the beginning of the performance,
Reuben. Here goes aloft!"

The next minute the whole of the crew were climbing the shrouds,
for the watch off duty were all on deck, and the order was
expected; for the signs of the weather could, by this time, be read
by every sailor on board. Above, the sky was still bright and blue;
but around the whole circle of the horizon, a mist seemed to hang
like a curtain.

"Smartly, lads, smartly," the captain shouted; "don't hurry over
your work, but do it with a will.

"I hope we have not left it too long, Mr. James. I have held on
longer than I ought, for every mile we get away from land is an
advantage, and we have been running nearly due south, ever since I
noticed the first falling of the glass when we got up in the
morning."

"I think we shall have time, sir," the mate said. "We are going to
have it, and no mistake, presently; but it don't seem to be coming
up fast."

"The glass is going down rapidly," the captain said. "It's down an
inch already, and is still falling.

"Mr. Mason," he went on, to the officer in command of the
detachment of marines, "will you kindly place your men under the
orders of Mr. James? I am going to send down all the upper spars,
and they can be useful on deck."

Never was the Paramatta stripped more rapidly of her sails, for
every man was conscious of the urgency of the work. As soon as the
sails were furled, the yards were sent down. The upper spars
followed them and, in little over half an hour from the time the
men began to ascend the shrouds, the Paramatta was metamorphosed.
Her tall tapering masts and lofty spread of sail were gone. Every
spar above the topmasts had been sent down to the deck; and she lay
under close-reefed topsails, a stay sail, and a storm jib. The
captain gave a sigh of relief, as the men began to descend the
rigging.

"Thank God, that is safely accomplished. Now we are in readiness
for whatever may come."

He dived into his cabin, and returned almost immediately.

"The glass has fallen another half inch, Mr. James," he said
gravely. "I have never but once seen it as low.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he went on, addressing the passengers, who
were gathered in a group, talking in low tones and anxiously
watching the wall of vapour; which now seemed to rise from the
water's edge and reach far up into the sky, the circle of view
extending scarce half a mile in any direction; "I must ask you to
go below, at once. The storm may strike us any moment now, and when
it does come it will come heavily. I should like the deck perfectly
clear, and nothing to disturb my thoughts from the working of the
ship."

Reuben had not gone aloft, as he was called back, just as he began
to ascend the shrouds, by the first mate, and ordered to go round
the cabins and fasten the dead lights securely. When this was done,
he aided the marines in nailing tarpaulins over the cabin
skylights, and then went round the deck, seeing that every movable
article was securely lashed. When this was done he joined Bill who,
with some others, had been at work securing all the hatches. The
convicts had long since been all sent below.

"Shall I send my men down, captain?" Mr. Mason asked.

"There is no occasion for it, just at present; but you had better
pass the word for all of them to hold on, when the gale strikes
her. That will be the critical moment. Once past that, she will be
all right till the sea begins to rise. Then you had best get them
below, for we shall have the water sweeping knee deep along the
waist, in no time.

"I should say send them down at once; but I know many of them have
been to sea before, and may be useful in cutting away, if anything
goes."

"She looks snug enough, captain," the young officer said, glancing
up at the diminished spread of canvas.

"She is snug enough for any ordinary gale," the captain said; "but
this is not going to be an ordinary gale. When we once get her
before it, it will be all right.

"Do you think we have another five minutes, Mr. James?"

"There's no saying, sir; but I should think so. What do you want,
sir?"

"I want that top sail off her, altogether."

"I will do it, sir," the mate said and, calling Bill Hardy and two
others of the best sailors, he led the way up the main shrouds.

Every eye on deck was fixed on the four seamen as, rapidly but
steadily, they proceeded to furl and stow the sail. There was still
not a breath of wind, but a low humming noise was heard.

"Quick, Mr. James, never mind the sail. All hands on deck!" the
captain shouted; but the work was just done, and the sailors ran
quickly down the ratlines on to the deck.

"Thank God!" the captain said reverently, "that is done."

The ship was now under the close-reefed fore-top sail, a diminutive
try sail on the mizzen, and the jib. The hum had increased to a
roar, but still not a breath of wind stirred the sails.

"Look up!" Bill said to Reuben; "you may be at sea fifty years, and
never see that again."

Reuben looked up. Immediately overhead was a small circle of blue
sky, round and round whose edge the edging of cloud seemed to be
circling, with extreme velocity. The light seemed to pierce
straight down onto the vessel, and she stood, pale and white, while
all around her a pitchy blackness seemed to prevail.

"We are in the eye of the storm, my lad. Here it comes. Now, hold
on for your life."

In another moment it seemed to Reuben that the end of all things
was come. He was pinned against the bulwark, as if by a mighty
invisible hand; and the vessel heeled over and over, until the deck
seemed to rise in a wall above him. Then the water poured over him
and, though he still held on, he thought the vessel had capsized.
Then he felt her rising beneath his feet, and his head emerged from
the water.

The captain, the first mate, and two seamen were at the wheel.
Reuben saw the captain wave his hand, but his words were lost in
the fury of the wind. The second mate, Bill Hardy, and two or three
other sailors knew what was required, and hauled upon the lee brace
of the fore-top-sail yard. The Paramatta was still lying nearly
over on her beam ends, but gradually her head began to pay off, and
she slowly righted. A minute later she was tearing directly before
the gale. Scarcely had she done so, when the fore-top sail blew out
of the bolt ropes, with a report that was heard even above the howl
of the tempest.

"It's done its work," Bill shouted in Reuben's ear. "I thought she
was gone. Just a little more, and she would have turned turtle."

The captain had used almost precisely the same words to the first
officer, adding:

"She will do now, but we shall have to try to get a little more
head sail on her, when the sea gets up. Call some of the hands aft,
and get this try sail down. She yaws so, now the fore-top sail's
gone, there is no steering her."

This was soon done and, under bare poles, the storm jib now the
only sail upon her, the Paramatta tore through the water. There was
little motion, for the sea had not begun to get up, seeming to be
pressed flat by the force of the wind. The captain now left the
helm. Two or three of the male passengers were standing at the top
of the companion, peering out.

"You can come out, gentlemen, for a bit. She is running on an even
keel now, though that won't last long. No one hurt below, I hope."

"Two or three of us have got bruised a little, captain; and I think
we have all of us got a severe fright. We thought she was over."

"I thought so, too," the captain said. "Luckily she has got three
hundred tons of iron on board, and it's all stowed at the bottom of
the cargo, so that helped her up again; but it was touch and go
with her, for half a minute.

"And now, gentlemen, if you will take my advice you will just look
