'That was another book, a poetry book. It had only one cover, so
everything that was on the last page got out naturally. We got a lot out
of that page, rain and sun and sky and clouds, mountains, gardens,
roses, lilies, flowers in general, "Blossoms of delight" they were
called in the book and trees and the sea, and the desert and silver and
iron--as much of all of them as anybody could possibly want. There are
no limits to poets' imaginations, you know.'

'I see,' said Lucy, and took a large bite of cake. 'And where did you
come from, Polly, dear?'

'I,' said the parrot modestly, 'came out of the same book as the
Hippogriff. We were on the same page. My wings entitled me to associate
with him, of course, but I have sometimes thought they just put me in as
a contrast. My smallness, his greatness; my red and green, his white.'

'I see,' said Lucy again, 'and please will you tell us----'

'Enough of this,' said the parrot; 'business before pleasure. You have
begun the day with the pleasures of my conversation. You will have to
work very hard to pay for this privilege.'

So they washed up the breakfast things in warm water obligingly provided
by the camel.

'And now,' said the parrot, 'we must pack up and go on our way to
destroy the fear of the Dwellers by the Sea.'

'I wonder,' Brenda said to Max in an undertone, 'I wonder whether it
wouldn't be best for dear little dogs to lose themselves? We could turn
up later, and be so _very_ glad to be found.'

'But why?' Max asked.

'I've noticed,' said Brenda, sidling up to him with eager
affectionateness, 'that wherever there's fear there's something to be
afraid of, even if it's only your fancy. It would be dreadful for dear
little dogs to be afraid, Max, wouldn't it? So undignified.'

'My dear,' said Max heavily, 'I could give seven noble reasons for being
faithful to our master. But I will only give you one. There is nothing
to eat in the desert, and nothing to drink.'

'You always were so noble, dearest,' said Brenda; 'so different from
poor little me. I've only my affectionate nature. I know I'm only a
silly little thing.'

So when the camel lurched forward and the parrot took wing, the dogs
followed closely.

'Dear faithful things,' said Lucy. 'Brenda! Max! Nice dogs!'

And the dogs politely responding, bounded enthusiastically.

The journey was not long. Quite soon they found a sort of ravine or
gully in the cliff, and a path that led through it. And then they were
on the beach, very pebbly with small stones, and there was the home of
the Dwellers by the Sea; and beyond it, broad and blue and beautiful,
the sea by which they dwelt.

The Dwelling seemed to be a sort of town of rounded buildings more like
lime-kilns than anything else, with arched doors leading to dark
insides. They were all built of tiny stones, such as lay on the beach.
Beyond the huts or houses towered the castle, a vast rough structure
with towers and arches and buttresses and bastions and glacis and
bridges and a great moat all round it.

'But I never built a city like that, did you?' Lucy asked as they drew
near.

'No,' Philip answered; 'at least--do you know, I do believe it's the
sand castle Helen and I built last summer at Dymchurch. And those huts
are the moulds I made of my pail--with the edges worn off, you know.'

Towards the castle the travellers advanced, the camel lurching like a
boat on a rough sea, and the dogs going with cat-like delicacy over the
stones. They skirted large pools and tall rocks seaweed covered. Along a
road broad enough for twelve chariots to have driven on it abreast,
slowly they came to the great gate of the castle. And as they got
nearer, they saw at every window heads leaning out; every battlement,
every terrace, was crowded with figures. And when they were quite near,
by throwing their heads very far back, so that their necks felt quite
stiff for quite a long time afterwards, the children could see that all
those people seemed quite young, and seemed to have very odd and
delightful clothes--just a garment from shoulder to knee made, as it
seemed, of dark fur.

[Illustration: Slowly they came to the great gate of the castle.]

'What lots of them there are,' said Philip; 'where did they come from?'

'Out of a book,' said the parrot; 'but the authorities were very prompt
that time. Only a line and a half got out.

          'Happy troops
           Of gentle islanders.

Those are the islanders.'

'Then why,' asked Philip naturally, 'aren't they on an island?'

'There's only one island, and no one is allowed on that except two
people who never go there. But the islanders are happy even if they
don't live on an island--always happy, except for the great fear.'

Here the travellers began to cross one of the bridges across the moat,
the bridge, in fact, which led to the biggest arch of all. It was a very
rough arch, like the entrance to a cave.

And from out its dark mouth came a little crowd of people.

'They're savages,' said Lucy, shrinking till she seemed only an extra
hump on the camel's back.

They were indeed of a dark complexion, sunburnt in fact, but their faces
were handsome and kindly. They waved friendly hands and smiled in the
most agreeable and welcoming way.

The tallest islander stepped out from the crowd. He was about as big as
Philip.

'They're not savages,' said Philip; 'don't be a donkey. They're just
children.'

'Hush!' said the parrot; 'the Lord High Islander is now about to begin
the state address of welcome!'

He was. And this was the address.

'How jolly of you to come. Do get down off that camel and come indoors
and have some grub. Jim, you might take that camel round to the stable
and rub him down a bit. You'd like to keep the dogs with you, of course.
And what about the parrot?'

'Thanks awfully,' Philip responded, and slid off the camel, followed by
Lucy; 'the parrot will make his own mind up--he always does.'

They all trooped into the hall of the castle which was more like a cave
than a hall and very dark, for the windows were little and high up. As
Lucy's eyes got used to the light she perceived that the clothes of the
islanders were not of skins but of seaweed.

'I asked you in,' said the Lord High Islander, a jolly-looking boy of
about Philip's age, 'out of politeness. But really it isn't dinner time,
and the meet is in half an hour. So, unless you're really hungry----?'

The children said 'Not at all!'

'You hunt, of course?' the Lord High Islander said; 'it's really the
only sport we get here, except fishing. Of course we play games and all
that. I do hope you won't be dull.'

'We came here on business,' the parrot remarked--and the happy islanders
crowded round to see him, remarking--'these are Philip and Lucy,
claimants to the Deliverership. They are doing their deeds, you know,'
the parrot ended.

Lucy whispered, 'It's really _Philip_ who is the claimant, not me; only
the parrot's so polite.'

The Lord High Islander frowned. 'We can talk about that afterwards,' he
said; 'it's a pity to waste time now.'

'What do you hunt?' Philip asked.

'All the different kinds of graibeeste and the vertoblancs; and the
blugraiwee, when we can find him,' said the Lord High Islander. 'But
he's very scarce. Pinkuggers are more common, and much bigger, of
course. Well, you'll soon see. If your camel's not quite fresh I can
mount you both. What kind of animal do you prefer?'

'What do you ride?' Philip asked.

It appeared that the Lord High Islander rode a giraffe, and Philip
longed to ride another. But Lucy said she would rather ride what she
was used to, thank you.

When they got out into the courtyard of the castle, they found it full
of a crowd of animals, any of which you may find in the Zoo, or in your
old Noah's ark if it was a sufficiently expensive one to begin with, and
if you have not broken or lost too many of the inhabitants. Each animal
had its rider and the party rode out on to the beach.

'What _is_ it they hunt?' Philip asked the parrot, who had perched on
his shoulder.

'All the little animals in the Noah's ark that haven't any names,' the
parrot told him. 'All those are considered fair game. Hullo!
blugraiwee!' it shouted, as a little grey beast with blue spots started
from the shelter of a rock and made for the cover of a patch of giant
seaweed. Then all sorts of little animals got up and scurried off into
places of security.

'There goes a vertoblanc,' said the parrot, pointing to a bright green
animal of uncertain shape, whose breast and paws were white, 'and
there's a graibeeste.'

The graibeeste was about as big as a fox, and had rabbit's ears and the
unusual distinction of a tail coming out of his back just half-way
between one end of him and the other. But there are graibeestes of all
sorts and shapes.

[Illustration: 'If your camel's not quite fresh I can mount you
both.']

You know when people are making the animals for Noah's arks they make
the big ones first, elephants and lions and tigers and so on, and paint
them as nearly as they can the right colours. Then they get weary of
copying nature and begin to paint the animals pink and green and
chocolate colour, which in nature is not the case. These are the
chockmunks, and vertoblancs and the pinkuggers. And presently the makers
get sick of the whole business and make the animals any sort of shape
and paint them all one grey--these are the graibeestes. And at the very
end a guilty feeling of having been slackers comes over the makers of
the Noah's arks, and they paint blue spots on the last and littlest of
the graibeestes to ease their consciences. This is the blugraiwee.

'Tally Ho! Hark forrad! Yoicks!' were some of the observations now to be
heard on every side as the hunt swept on, the blugraiwee well ahead.
Dogs yapped, animals galloped, riders shouted, the sun shone, the sea
sparkled, and far ahead the blugraiwee ran, extended to his full length
like a grey straight line. He was killed five miles from the castle
after a splendid run. And when a pinkugger had been secured and half a
dozen graibeeste, the hunt rode slowly home.

'We only hunt to kill and we only kill for food,' the Lord High Islander
said.

'But,' said Philip, 'I thought Noah's ark animals turned into wood when
they were dead?'

'Not if you kill for food. The intention makes all the difference. I had
a plum-cake intention when we put up the blugraiwee, the pinkugger I
made a bread and butter intention about, and the graibeestes I intended
for rice pudding and prunes and toffee and ices and all sorts of odd
things. So, of course, when we come to cut them up they'll _be_ what I
intended.'

'I see,' said Philip, jogging along on his camel. 'I say,' he added,
'you don't mind my asking--how is it you're all children here?'

'Well,' said the Lord High Islander, 'it's ancient history, so I don't
suppose it's true. But they say that when the government had to make
sure that we should always be _happy_ troops of gentle islanders, they
decided that the only way was for us to be children. And we do have the
most ripping time. And we do our own hunting and cooking and wash up our
own plates and things, and for heavy work we have the M.A.'s. They're
men who've had to work at sums and history and things at College so hard
that they want a holiday. So they come here and work for us, and if any
of us do want to learn anything, the M.A.'s are handy to have about the
place. It pleases them to teach anything, poor things. They live in the
huts. There's always a long list waiting for their turn. Oh yes, they
wear the seaweed dress the same as we do. And they hunt on Tuesdays,
Thursdays and Saturdays. They hunt big game, the fierce ambergris who is
grey with a yellow stomach and the bigger graibeestes. Now we'll have
dinner the minute we get in, and then we must talk about It.'

The game was skinned and cut up in the courtyard, and the intentions of
the Lord High Islander had certainly been carried out. For the
blugraiwee was plum-cake, and the other animals just what was needed.

And after dinner the Lord High Islander took Lucy and Philip up on to
the top of the highest tower, and the three lay in the sun eating toffee
and gazing out over the sea at the faint distant blue of the island.

'The island where we aren't allowed to go,' as the Lord High Islander
sadly pointed out.

'Now,' said Lucy gently, 'you won't mind telling us what you're afraid
of? Don't mind telling us. _We're_ afraid too; we're afraid of all sorts
of things quite often.'

'Speak for yourself,' said Philip, but not unkindly. 'I'm not so jolly
often afraid as you seem to think. Go ahead, my Lord.'

'You might as well call me Billy,' said the Lord High Islander; 'it's my
name.'

'Well, Billy, then. What is it you're afraid of?'

'I hate being afraid,' said Billy angrily. 'Of course I know no true boy
is afraid of anything except doing wrong. One of the M.A.'s told me
that. But the M.A.'s are afraid too.'

'What of?' Lucy asked, glancing at the terrace below, where already the
shadows were lengthening; 'it'll be getting dark soon. I'd much rather
know what you're afraid of while it's daylight.'

'What we're afraid of,' said Billy abruptly, 'is the sea. Suppose a
great wave came and washed away the castle, and the huts, and the M.A.'s
and all of us?'

'But it never _has_, has it?' Lucy asked.

'No, but everything must have a beginning. I know that's true, because
another of the M.A.'s told it me.'

'But why don't you go and live somewhere inland?'

'Because we couldn't live away from the sea. We're islanders, you know;
we couldn't bear not to be near the sea. And we'd rather be afraid of
it, than not have it to be afraid of. But it upsets the government,
because we ought to be _happy_ troops of gentle islanders, and you can't
be quite happy if you're afraid. That's why it's one of your deeds to
take away our fear.'

'It sounds jolly difficult,' said Philip; 'I shall have to think,' he
added desperately. So he lay and thought with Max and Brenda asleep by
his side and the parrot preening its bright feathers on the parapet of
the tower, while Lucy and the Lord High Islander played cat's cradle
with a long thread of seaweed.

'It's supper time,' said Billy at last. 'Have you thought of anything?'

'Not a single thing,' said Philip.

'Well, don't swat over it any more,' said Billy; 'just stay with us and
have a jolly time. You're sure to think of something. Or else Lucy will.
We'll act charades to-night.'

They did. The rest of the islanders were an extremely jolly lot, and all
the M.A.'s came out of their huts to be audience. It was a charming
evening, and ended up with hide-and-seek all over the castle.

To wake next morning on a bed of soft, dry, sweet-smelling seaweed, and
to know that the day was to be spent in having a good time with the
jolliest set of children she had ever met, was delightful to Lucy.
Philip's delight was dashed by the knowledge that he must, sooner or
later, _think_. But the day passed most agreeably. They all bathed in
the rock pools, picked up shell-fish for dinner, played rounders in the
afternoon, and in the evening danced to the music made by the M.A.'s who
most of them carried flutes in their pockets, and who were all very
flattered at being asked to play.

So the pleasant days went on. Every morning Philip said to himself, 'Now
to-day I really _must_ think of something,' and every night he said, 'I
really ought to have thought of something.' But he never could think of
anything to take away the fear of the gentle islanders.

It was on the sixth night that the storm came. The wind blew and the sea
roared and the castle shook to its very foundations. And Philip,
awakened by the noise and the shaking, sat up in bed and understood what
the fear was that spoiled the happiness of the Dwellers by the Sea.

'Suppose the sea did sweep us all away,' he said; 'and they haven't even
got a boat.'

And then, when he was quite far from expecting it, he did think of
something. And he went on thinking about it so hard that he couldn't
sleep any more.

And in the morning he said to the parrot:

'I've thought of something. And I'm not going to tell the others. But I
can't do it all by myself. Do you think you could get Perrin for me?'

'I will try with pleasure,' replied the obliging bird, and flew off
without further speech.

That afternoon, just as a picnic tea was ending, a great shadow fell on
the party, and next moment the Hippogriff alighted with Mr. Perrin and
the parrot on its back.

'Oh, _thank_ you,' said Philip, and led Mr. Perrin away and began to
talk to him in whispers.

'No, sir,' Mr. Perrin answered suddenly and aloud. 'I'm sorry, but I
couldn't think of it.'

'Don't you know _how_?' Philip asked.

'I know everything as is to be known in my trade,' said Mr. Perrin, 'but
carpentry's one thing, and manners is another. Not but what I know
manners too, which is why I won't be a party to no such a thing.'

'But you don't understand,' said Philip, trying to keep up with Mr.
Perrin's long strides. 'What I want to do is for you to build a Noah's
ark on the top of the highest tower. Then when the sea's rough and the
wind blows, all the Sea-Dwellers can just get into their ark and then
they'll be quite safe whatever happens.'

'You said all that afore,' said Mr. Perrin, 'and I wonder at you, so I
do.'

'I thought it was _such_ a good idea,' said poor Philip in gloom.

'Oh, the _idea's_ all right,' said Mr. Perrin; 'there ain't nothing to
complain of 'bout the _idea_.'

'Then what _is_ wrong?' Philip asked impatiently.

'You've come to the wrong shop,' said Mr. Perrin slowly. 'I ain't the
man to take away another chap's job, not if he was to be in the humblest
way of business; but when it comes to slapping the government in the
face, well, there, Master Pip, I wouldn't have thought it of you. It's
as much as my place is worth.'

'Look here,' said Philip, stopping short in despair, 'will you tell me
straight out why you won't help me?'
