closely.

After some five minutes spent in this way they got under cover of a
little clump near the water's edge, and near enough to the gigantic
game.  Upon their hands and knees they now approached the verge of the
underwood; and having parted the leaves, looked through.  The mighty
quadruped was right under their eyes, within twenty yards of them!

He was still busy plunging about, and blowing volumes of water over his
body.  He gave no sign that he had any suspicion of their presence.
They could take time, therefore, in choosing a part of his huge body at
which to aim their pieces.

When first seen from their new position, he was standing stern towards
them.  Von Bloom did not think it a good time to fire, as they could not
give him a deadly wound in that situation.  They waited, therefore,
until he might turn his side, before they should deliver their volley.
They kept their eyes all the while steadily fixed on him.

He ceased at length to "churn" with his feet, and no longer raised water
in his trunk; and now the hunters perceived that the lake was red for a
space around him!  It was his blood that had reddened it.

They no longer doubted that he had been wounded by the rhinoceros; but
whether the wound was a bad one they could not tell.  It was in his
side, and as yet they could only see his broad stern from the position
in which he still continued to stand.  But they waited with confidence--
as they knew that in turning to get out of the water, he would have to
present his side towards them.

For several minutes he kept the same position, but they noticed that his
tail no longer switched about, and that his attitude was loose and
drooping.  Now and then he turned his proboscis to the spot where he had
received the thrust of the kobaoba's horn.  It was evident that the
wound was distressing him, and this became more apparent by the loud
painful breathing the creature uttered through his trunk.

The three began to grow impatient.  Hendrik asked leave to creep round
to another point, and give him a shot that would turn him round.

Just at that moment the elephant made a motion, as though he was about
to come out of the water.

He had got fairly round--his head and forepart were over dry land--the
three guns were pointed--the eyes of the three hunters were about to
glance through the sights of their pieces, when all at once he was seen
to rock and stagger,--and then roll over!  With a loud plash, his vast
body subsided into the water, sending great waves to every corner of the
lake.

The hunters uncocked their guns, and, springing from their ambush,
rushed forward to the bank.  They saw at a glance that the elephant was
dead.  They saw the wound upon his side,--the hole made by the horn of
the rhinoceros.  It was not very large, but the terrible weapon had
penetrated far into his body, into his very vitals.  No wonder, then, at
the result it had produced--the death of the mightiest of quadrupeds.

As soon as it became known that the elephant was dead, everybody was
seen rushing forward to the spot.  Little Truey and Jan were called from
their hiding-place--for they had both been hidden in the wagon--and
Totty, too, went down with the rest.  Swartboy was one of the first upon
the spot, carrying an axe and a large knife--for Swartboy had designs
upon the carcass--while Hans and Hendrik both threw off their jackets to
assist in the butchering operations.

And what during this time was Von Bloom about?  Ha!  That is a more
important question than you think for.  That was an important hour--the
hour of a great crisis in the life of the field-cornet.

He was standing with folded arms on the bank of the lake, directly over
the spot where the elephant had fallen.  He appeared to be wrapt in
silent meditation, his eyes bent upon the huge carcass of the animal.
No, not on the carcass.  A close observer would have perceived that his
eyes did not wander over that mountain of thick skin and flesh, but were
resting upon a particular spot.

Was it the wound in the animal's side?  And was Von Bloom meditating how
the thrust had caused the death of such a huge creature?

Neither one nor the other.  His thoughts were upon a very different
theme from either.

The elephant had fallen so that his head was clear of the water, and
rested upon a little bank of sand; along which, his soft and limber
trunk lay extended to its full length.  Curving like a pair of gigantic
scimitars from its base, were the yellow enamelled tusks; those ivory
arms that for years,--ay centuries, perhaps,--had served him to root up
the trees of the forest, and rout his antagonists in many a dread
encounter.  Precious and beautiful trophies were they, but alas! their
world-wide fame had cost no less than life to many thousands of his
race.

Shining in all their magnificence lay these mated crescents, gently
curved and softly rounded.  It was upon _these_ that the eyes of the
field-cornet were bent.

Ay, and bent too with an eagerness unusual in his glance.  His lips were
compressed, his chest was visibly heaving.  Oh! there was a world of
thoughts passing through the mind of Von Bloom at that moment.

Were they painful thoughts?  The expression of his face told the
contrary.  The cloud that all that day sat perched upon his brow had
vanished.  Not a trace of it remained, but in its place could be seen
the lines of hope and joy, and these feelings at length found expression
in words.

"It is the hand of Heaven!" he exclaimed aloud.  "A fortune--a fortune!"

"What is it, papa?" inquired little Truey, who was near him; "what were
you speaking about, dear papa?"

And then all the others gathered around him, noticing his excited
manner, and pleased at seeing him look so happy.

"What is it, papa?" asked all together, while Swartboy and Totty stood
eager as the rest to hear the answer.

In the pleasant excitement of his thoughts, the fond father could no
longer conceal from his children the secret of his new-born happiness.
He would gratify them by disclosing it.

Pointing to the long crescents he said,--

"You see those beautiful tusks?"

Yes, of course, they all did.

"Well, do you know their value?"

No.  They knew they were worth something.  They knew that it was from
elephants' tusks that ivory was obtained, or, more properly, that
elephants' tusks were ivory itself; and that it was used in the
manufacture of hundreds of articles.  In fact, little Truey had a
beautiful fan made out of it, which had been her mother's; and Jan had a
knife with an ivory handle.  Ivory was a very beautiful material and
cost very dear, they knew.  All this they knew, but the value of the two
tusks they could not guess at.  They said so.

"Well, my children," said Von Bloom, "as near as I can estimate them,
they are worth twenty pounds each of English money."

"Oh! oh!  Such a grand sum!" cried all in a breath.

"Yes," continued the field-cornet; "I should think each tusk is one
hundred pounds in weight, and as ivory at present sells for four
shillings and sixpence the pound weight, these two would yield between
forty and fifty pounds of sterling money."

"Why, it would buy a full span of best oxen!" cried Hans.

"Four good horses!" said Hendrik.

"A whole flock of sheep!" added little Jan.

"But whom can we sell them to?" asked Hendrik, after a pause.  "We are
away from the settlements.  Who is to give us either oxen, or horses, or
sheep, for them?  It would not be worth while to carry two tusks all the
way--"

"Not _two_, Hendrik," said his father, interrupting him; "but _twenty_
it might,--ay, twice twenty, or three times that number.  Now, do you
understand what makes me so gay?"

"Oh!" exclaimed Hendrik, as well as the others, who now began to
perceive what their father was so joyed about, "you think we can obtain
more tusks in these parts?"

"Precisely so.  I think there are many elephants here.  I feel certain
of it from the quantity of their spoor I have already noticed.  We have
our guns, and fortunately, plenty of ammunition.  We are all pretty fair
shots--why can we not obtain more of these valuable trophies?

"But we shall," continued Von Bloom.  "I know we shall, because I
recognise the hand of God in sending us this wealth in the midst of our
misery--after we had lost everything.  More will come by the guiding of
the same hand.  So be of good cheer, my children!  We shall not want--we
shall yet have plenty--we may be _rich_!"

It was not that any of those young creatures cared much about being
rich, but because they saw their father so happy, that they broke out
into something more than a murmur of applause.  It was, in fact, a
cheer, in which both Totty and Swartboy joined.  It rang over the little
lake, and caused the birds about settling to roost to wonder what was
going on.  There was no happier group in all Africa than stood at that
moment upon the shore of that lonely little vley.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

TURNED HUNTERS.

The field-cornet, then, had resolved upon turning hunter by profession--
a hunter of elephants; and it was a pleasant reflection to think, that
this occupation promised, not only exciting sport, but great profit.  He
knew that it was not so easy a matter to succeed in killing such large
and valuable game as elephants.  He did not suppose that in a few weeks
or months he would obtain any great quantities of their ivory spoils;
but he had made up his mind to spend even years in the pursuit.  For
years he should lead the life of a Bushman--for years his sons would be
"Bush-boys," and he hoped that in time his patience and toil would be
amply rewarded.

That night around the camp-fire all were very happy and very merry.  The
elephant had been left where he lay, to be cut up on the morrow.  Only
his trunk had been taken off--part of which was cooked for supper.

Although all the flesh of the elephant is eatable, the trunk is esteemed
one of the delicate bits.  It tastes not unlike ox-tongue; and all of
them liked it exceedingly.  To Swartboy, who had made many a meal upon
"de ole klow," it was a highly-relished feast.

They had plenty of fine milk, too.  The cow, now upon the best of
pasture, doubled her yield; and the quantity of this, the most delicious
of all drinks, was sufficient to give every one a large allowance.

While enjoying their new-fashioned dish of roast elephant-trunk, the
conversation naturally turned upon these animals.

Everybody knows the appearance of the elephant, therefore a description
of him is quite superfluous.  But everybody does not know that there are
two distinct kinds of this gigantic quadruped--the _African_ and
_Asiatic_.

Until a late period they were thought to be of the same species.  Now
they are acknowledged to be, not only distinct, but very different in
many respects.  The Asiatic, or, as it is more frequently called, the
"Indian" elephant is the larger of the two; but it is possible that
domestication may have produced a larger kind, as is the rule with many
animals.  The African species exists only in a wild state; and it would
appear that individuals of this kind have been measured having the
dimensions of the largest of the _wild_ Asiatic elephants.

The most remarkable points of difference between the two are found in
the ears and tusks.  The ears of the African elephant are of enormous
proportions, meeting each other above the shoulders, and hanging down
below the breast.  Those of the Indian elephant are scarce one-third the
size.  In his grand tusks the former has far the advantage--these in
some individuals weighing nearly two hundred pounds each--while the
tusks of the latter rarely reach the weight of one hundred.  To this,
however, there are some exceptions.  Of course a two hundred pound tusk
is one of the very largest, and far above the average even of African
elephants.  In this species the females are also provided with tusks--
though not of such size as in the males--whereas the female of the
Indian elephant has either no tusks at all, or they are so small as to
be scarcely perceptible outside the skin of the lips.  The other chief
points of difference between the two are that the front of the Asiatic
elephant is concave, while that of the African is convex; and the former
has four horny toes or _sabots_ on the hind-foot, where only three
appear upon that of the latter.  The enamel of the teeth presents still
another proof of these animals being different in species.

Nor are all Asiatic elephants alike.  In this species there are
varieties which present very distinct features; and, indeed, these
"varieties," as they are called, appear to differ from each other,
nearly as much as any one of them does from the African kind.

One variety known among Orientals by the name of "mooknah," has straight
tusks that _point downward_, whereas the usual habit of these singular
appendages is to _curve upward_.

Asiatics recognise two main _castes_, or perhaps species, among their
elephants.  One known as "coomareah," is a deep-bodied, compact, and
strong animal, with large trunk and short legs.  The other called
"merghee," is a taller kind, but neither so compact nor strong as the
coomareah, nor has he so large a trunk.  His long legs enable him to
travel faster than the coomareah; but the latter having a larger trunk
(a point of beauty among elephant-owners) and being capable of enduring
more fatigue, is the favourite, and fetches a larger price in the
Oriental market.

Occasionally a _white_ elephant is met with.  This is simply an
"albino," but such are greatly prized in many countries of Asia, and
large sums are given for them.  They are even held in superstitious
veneration in some parts.

The Indian elephant at the present time inhabits most of the southern
countries of Asia, including the large islands, Ceylon, Java, Sumatra,
Borneo, etcetera.  Of course every one knows that in these countries the
elephant has been trained long ago to the use of man, and is one of the
"domestic animals."  But he also exists in a wild state, both upon the
continent of Asia and in its islands; and hunting the elephant is one of
the grand sport of the East.

In Africa the elephant exists _only_ in a state of nature.  None of the
nations upon this little-known continent tame or train him to any
purpose.  He is only prized among them for his precious tusks, and his
flesh as well.  Some have asserted that this species is more fierce than
its Indian congener, and could not be domesticated.  This is altogether
a mistake.  The reason why the African elephant is not trained, is
simply that none of the modern nations of Africa have yet reached a high
enough point of civilisation to avail themselves of the services of this
valuable animal.

The African elephant may be domesticated and trained to the "howdah," or
castle, as easily as his Indian cousin.  The trial has been made; but
that it can be done no better proof is required than that at one period
it was done, and upon a large scale.  The elephants of the Carthaginian
army were of this species.

The African elephant at present inhabits the central and southern parts
of Africa.  Abyssinia on the east, and Senegal on the west, are his
northern limits, and but a few years ago he roamed southward to the very
Cape of Good Hope.  The activity of the Dutch ivory-hunters, with their
enormous long guns, has driven him from that quarter; and he is no
longer to be found to the south of the Orange River.

Some naturalists (Cuvier among others) believed the Abyssinian elephant
to be of the Indian species.  That idea is now exploded, and there is no
reason to think that the latter inhabits any part of Africa.  It is very
likely there are varieties of the African species in different parts of
the continent.  It is well-known that those of the tropical regions are
larger than the others; and a _reddish and very fierce_ kind is said to
be met with in the mountains of Africa, upon the river Niger.  It is
probable, however, that these _red_ elephants seen have been some whose
bodies were coated with red dust, as it is a habit of elephants to
powder themselves with dust on many occasions, using their trunks as
"dredgers."

Swartboy spoke of a variety well-known among the Hottentot hunters as
the "koes-cops."  This kind, he said, differed from the ordinary ones by
its altogether wanting the tusks, and being of a far more vicious
disposition.  Its encounter is more dreaded; but as it possesses no
trophies to make it worth the trouble and danger of killing, the hunters
usually give it a wide berth.

Such was the conversation that night around the camp-fire.  Much of the
information here given was furnished by Hans, who of course had gathered
it from books; but the Bushman contributed his quota--perhaps of a far
more reliable character.  All were destined ere long to make practical
acquaintance with the haunts and habits of this huge quadruped, that to
