     "RICHARD HUNTER."

     "_Station-House, Franklin Street._"

The other letter was to Fosdick; here it is:--

     "DEAR FOSDICK,--I didn't much think when I left you this
     morning that I should be writing to you from the station-house
     before night. I'll tell you how it happened." [Here follows a
     detailed account, which is omitted, as the reader is already
     acquainted with all the circumstances.] "Of course they will wonder
     at the boarding-house where I am. If Miss Peyton or Mr. Clifton
     inquires after me to-night, you can say that I am detained by
     business of importance. That's true enough. I wish it wasn't. As
     soon as dinner is over, I wish you'd come and see me. I don't know
     if you can, not being acquainted with the rules of this hotel. I
     shan't stop here again very soon, if I can help it. There's a woman
     in the next cell, who was arrested for fighting. She is swearing
     frightfully. It almost makes me sick to be in such a place. It's
     pretty hard to have this happen to me just when I was getting along
     so well. But I hope it'll all come out right. Your true friend,

     "DICK.

     "P.S.--I've given my watch and chain to the officer to keep for me.
     Gold watches aint fashionable here, and I didn't want them to think
     me putting on airs.

     "_Station-House, Franklin Street._"

After Dick had written these letters he was left to himself. His
reflections, as may readily be supposed, were not the most pleasant.
What would they think at the boarding-house, if they should find what
kind of business it was that had detained him! Even if he was acquitted,
some might suppose that he was really guilty. But there was a worse
contingency. He might be unable to prove his innocence, and might be
found guilty. In that case he would be sent to the Island. Dick
shuddered at the thought. Just when he began to feel himself
respectable, it was certainly bad to meet with such hard luck. What,
too, would Mr. Greyson and Ida think? He had been so constant at the
Sunday school that his absence would be sure to be noticed, and he knew
that his former mode of life would make his guilt more readily believed
in the present instance.

"If Ida should think me a pick-pocket!" thought poor Dick, and the
thought made him miserable enough. The fact was, that Ida, by her
vivacity and lively manners, and her evident partiality for his society,
had quite won upon Dick, who considered her by all odds the nicest girl
he had ever seen. I don't mean to say that Dick was in love,--at least
not yet. Both he and Ida were too young for that; but he was certainly
quite an admirer of the young lady. Again, if he were convicted, he
would have to give up the party to which he had been invited, and he
could never hope to get another invitation.

All these reflections helped to increase Dick's unhappiness. I doubt if
he had ever felt so unhappy in all his life. But it never once occurred
to him that his arrest was brought about by the machinations of his
enemies. He hadn't chanced to see Micky Maguire, and had no suspicion
that it was he who dropped the wallet into his pocket. Still less did he
suspect that Gilbert's hostility had led him so far as to conspire with
such a boy as Micky against him. It was lucky that he did not know this,
or he would have felt still more unhappy.

But it is now time to turn to Micky Maguire and Mr. Gilbert, whose joint
scheme had met with so much success.




CHAPTER XIV.

MICKY MAGUIRE'S DISAPPOINTMENT.


Micky Maguire waited until Dick was actually on the way to the
station-house, and then started for Pearl Street to acquaint Gilbert
with the success of his machinations. His breast swelled with triumph at
the advantage he had gained over his enemy.

"May be he'll keep his 'cheerin' reflections' to himself another time,"
thought Micky. "He won't have much to say about my going to the Island
when he's been there himself. They won't stand none of his airs there,
I'm thinkin'."

There was another pleasant aspect to the affair. Micky had not only
triumphed over his enemy, but he was going to be paid for it. This was
the stipulation between Gilbert and himself. The book-keeper had not
promised any definite sum, but Micky, in speculating upon the proper
compensation for his service, fixed upon five dollars as about what he
ought to receive. Like many others who count their chickens before they
are hatched, he had already begun to consider what he would buy with it
when he had got it.

Now, only the day previous, Micky had noticed hanging in a window in
Chatham Street, a silver watch, and chain attached, which was labelled
"GENUINE SILVER, ONLY FIVE DOLLARS." Since Micky had been the
possessor of a blue coat with brass buttons, his thoughts had dwelt more
than ever before on his personal appearance, and the watch had struck his
fancy. He did not reflect much on the probable quality of a silver watch
which could be sold for five dollars, and a chain thrown into the
bargain. It was a watch, at any rate, and would make a show. Besides,
Dick wore a watch, and Micky felt that he did not wish to be outdone. As
soon as he received his reward he meant to go and buy it.

It was therefore in a very cheerful frame of mind that Micky walked up
in front of Rockwell & Cooper's store, and took his stand, occasionally
glancing at the window.

Ten minutes passed away, and still he remained unnoticed. He grew
impatient, and determined to enter, making his business an excuse.

Entering, he saw through the open door of the office, the book-keeper,
bending over the desk writing.

"Shine yer boots?" he asked.

Gilbert was about to answer angrily in the negative, when looking up he
recognized his young confederate. His manner changed, and he said, "Yes,
I believe I'll have a shine; but you must be quick about it."

Micky swung his box from his shoulder, and, sinking upon his knees,
seized his brush, and went to work scientifically.

"Any news?" asked Gilbert, in a low voice.

"Yes, mister, I've done it," said Micky.

"Have you managed to trap him?"

"Yes, I left him on his way to the station-house."

"How did you manage it?"

"I grabbed an old fellow's wallet, and dropped it into Dick's pocket. He
pulled it out, and while he was lookin' at it, up came the 'copp' and
nabbed him."

"How about the man from whom the wallet was taken?"

"He came up puffin', and swore Dick was the chap that stole it."

"So he was carried off to the station-house?"

"Yes; he's there safe enough."

"Then we shall have to carry on business without him," said Gilbert,
coolly. "I hope he will enjoy himself at his new quarters."

"Maybe they'll send him to the Island," said Micky, beginning his
professional operations upon the second boot.

"Very likely," said Gilbert. "I suppose you've been there before this."

"Wot if I have?" said Micky, in rather a surly tone, for he did not
relish the allusion.

"No offence," said Gilbert. "I only meant that if you have ever been
there, you can judge whether your friend Dick will enjoy it."

"Not a great deal," said Micky; "but you needn't call him my friend. I
hate him."

"Your enemy, then. But get through as soon as possible."

Micky struck his brush upon the floor to indicate that the job was
finished, and, rising, waited for his fee.

Gilbert took from his pocket ten cents and handed him.

"That's for the shine," he said; "and here's something for the other
matter."

So saying, he placed in the hand of the boot-black a bank-note.

Micky glanced at it, and his countenance changed ominously, when he
perceived the denomination. It was a one-dollar bill!

"It's one dollar," he said.

"Isn't that enough?"

"No, it isn't," he answered, sullenly. "I might 'ave been nabbed myself.
I can't afford to work on no such terms."

Micky was right. It certainly was a very small sum to receive for taking
such a risk, apart from all moral considerations, and his
dissatisfaction can hardly be wondered at. But Gilbert was not of a
generous nature. In fact he was disposed to be mean, and in the present
instance he had even expected to get the credit of being generous. A
dollar, he thought, must seem an immense sum to a ragged boot-black. But
Micky thought differently, and Gilbert felt irritated at his
ingratitude.

"It's all you'll get," said he, roughly.

"Then you'd better get somebody else to do your dirty work next time,
mister," said Micky, angrily.

"Clear out, you young blackguard!" exclaimed Gilbert, his temper by this
time fully aroused. "Clear out, if you don't want to be kicked out!"

"Maybe you'll wish you'd given me more," said Micky, sullenly picking up
his box, and leaving the office.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Murdock, who happened to come up just as
Micky went into the street, and heard the last words of the altercation.

"Oh," said Gilbert, carelessly, "he wasn't satisfied with his pay. I
gave him ten cents, but the young rascal wanted more."

As he said this, he turned back to his desk.

"I wonder whether Gilbert's going anywhere," thought the head clerk. "I
never knew him so extravagant before. He must be going out this
evening."

Just then it occurred to him that Dick had been absent longer than
usual, and, as he needed his services, he asked, "Has Richard returned,
Mr. Gilbert?"

"I haven't seen him."

"Did he go out at the usual time?"

"Yes."

"What can have detained him?" said Mr. Murdock, thoughtfully.

"He's probably fallen in with some of his old friends, and forgotten all
about his duties."

"That is not his way," said Mr. Murdock, quietly, as he walked away. He
understood very well Mr. Gilbert's hostility to Dick, and that the
latter was not likely to receive a very favorable judgment at his hands.

Five minutes later a boy entered the store, and, looking about him a
moment in uncertainty, said, "I want to see Mr. Murdock."

"I am Mr. Murdock," he answered.

"Then this note is for you."

The clerk felt instinctively that the note was from Dick, and, not
wishing Gilbert to hear the conversation, motioned the boy to follow him
to the back part of the store.

Then he opened and read the note quickly.

"Did Richard Hunter give this to you?" he asked.

"No," said Tim Ryan, for that was his name. "It was the 'copp' that
arrested him."

"I suppose a 'copp' is a policeman."

"Yes, sir."

"Were you present when he was arrested?"

"Yes, sir."

"Do you know anything about it?"

"Yes, I seed it all."

"You saw the wallet taken?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did Richard take it?"

"You mean Dick?" said Tim, interrogatively, for Richard was to him a
strange name.

"No, he didn't, then. He wouldn't steal. I never know'd him to."

"Then you know Dick?"

"Yes, sir. I've knowed him ever since I was so high," indicating a point
about three feet above the floor.

"Then who did take it, if not he?"

"Micky Maguire."

"Who is he?"

"He blacks boots."

"Then how did it happen that he was not arrested?"

"Micky was smart enough to drop the wallet into Dick's pocket as he was
standin' before a shop winder. Then he got out of the way, and Dick was
nabbed by the 'copp.'"

"Is this Micky of whom you speak a friend of yours?"

"No; he likes to bully small boys."

"Then why didn't you tell the officer he had arrested the wrong boy?"

"I wanted to," said Tim, "for Dick's always been kind to me; but I was
afraid Micky would give me a beatin' when he got free. Then there was
another reason."

"What was that?"

"It's mean to tell of a fellow."

"Isn't it meaner to let an innocent boy get punished, when you might
save him by telling?"

"Maybe it is," said Tim, perplexed.

"My lad," continued Mr. Murdock, "you say Dick has been kind to you. You
now have an opportunity to repay all he has ever done, by clearing him
from this false charge, which you can easily do."

"I'll do it," said Tim, stoutly. "I don't care if Micky does lick me for
it."

"By the way," said Mr. Murdock, with a sudden thought, "what is the
appearance of this Micky Maguire?"

"He's rather stout, and has freckles."

"Does he wear a blue coat, with large brass buttons?"

"Yes," said Tim, in surprise. "Do you know him?"

"I have seen him this morning," said Mr. Murdock. "Wait a minute, and I
will give you a line to Dick; or rather it will not be necessary. If you
can get a chance, let him know that I am going to call on him this
afternoon. Will you be at the station-house, or near it, at six
o'clock?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then we can arrange about your appearing as a witness at the trial.
Here is half a dollar for your trouble in bringing the note."

"I don't want it, sir," said Tim. "I don't want to take anything for
doing a good turn to Dick."

"But you have been prevented from earning money. You had better take
it."

But Tim, who was a warm-hearted Irish boy, steadfastly refused, and left
the store in quest of Henderson's hat and cap store, having also a note
to deliver to Fosdick.

"So that was Micky Maguire who was here a little while since," said Mr.
Murdock to himself. "It seems singular that immediately after getting
Richard into trouble, he should have come here where he was employed.
Can it be that Gilbert had a previous acquaintance with him?"

The more Mr. Murdock reflected, the more perplexed he became. It did
cross his mind that the two might be in league against Dick; but then,
on the other hand, they evidently parted on bad terms, and this seemed
to make such a combination improbable. So he gave up puzzling himself
about it, reflecting that time would clear up what seemed mysterious
about the affair.
