their own account opened a vista of such endless possibilities, that
they were quite startled.

"It ought to be easy enough if we manage properly," said Mr Stratton.
"Suppose, now, we who are here were to form a committee and decide to
run the shop, how should we begin?"

"It depends on what Robert left behind," said Percy.

"Oh, we wouldn't take over any of his stuff.  No, the first thing would
be to reckon up how much we should want to start with, and either club
together or get some one to advance it.  How many tarts do you suppose
are sold a day?"

"Hundreds," said Ashby.

"Well, according to Robert, about eighty.  But say one hundred.  That at
a penny each would be about 8 shillings for tarts.  Then the ginger-
beer.  Would twenty bottles do?  That would be 3 shillings 4 pence,
supposing they cost 2 pence each.  That's 11 shillings 4 pence.  What
next?  Apples?  Suppose we put them down at 2 shillings 6 pence--13
shillings 10 pence.  Sweets?  Well, say 2 shillings 6 pence more--16
shillings 4 pence.  Nuts 1 shilling--17 shillings 4 pence.  It mounts
up, you see.  We ought at least to have 25 or 30 shillings to start
with.  Well, I happen to know somebody who would lend that amount to the
shareholders for a little time if we should want it.  Now suppose we've
got our money.  We ought to send to some of the best shops and market
people in the town to see what we could get our things for.  As it
happens, Mrs Stratton when she was in Penchurch this morning did
inquire, and this is her report.  The tarts that we should sell for a
penny we could get for three farthings each, so that on a hundred tarts
we should make a profit of 2 shillings 1 penny.  And the confectioner
would send his cart up every day with fresh tarts of different kinds of
jam, and take back yesterday's stale ones at half-price.  That would be
a great improvement, wouldn't it?"

"Rather," said everybody.

"Then the ginger-beer.  Would you believe it, if we undertake to take
not less than twelve bottles a day daring the half we can get them for a
penny each, and might sell them for three-halfpence.  That would make a
great increase in the demand, I fancy, and every bottle we can sell, we
make a dear halfpenny profit.  The same with the sweets.  You can get
most sorts for 9 or 10 pence a pound, and if we sell at a penny an
ounce, you see we get 7 or 8 pence profit.  I should vote for only
getting the best kind of sweets, and making rather less profit than
that.  At any rate, you see, if we are careful, we ought pretty soon to
be able to pay back what we owe, and after providing for the expense of
a person to mind the shop and do the selling, put by a little week by
week, which will go to the School clubs or anything else the fellows
decide.  What do you think of the plan?"

They all thought it would be magnificent.

"I see no reason why you youngsters should not manage it splendidly by
yourselves at soon as you get once started.  You'll have to draw up
strict rules, of course, for managing the shop, and make up the
accounts; and look out sharp that you aren't selling anything at a loss.
Remember, the cheaper you can sell (provided you get a fair profit),
the more customers you'll have.  And the better your stuff is, the more
it will be liked.  Mrs Stratton says she will act as banker, and take
care of the money at the end of each day and pay out what you want for
stores.  Don't say anything about it out of doors at present; talk it
over among yourselves daring the week, and if you think it will work,
tell me, and we'll have a regular business meeting to settle
preliminaries.  Now suppose we have a game of crambo?"

When the party broke up, Moderns and Classics strolled affectionately
across the Green arm in arm, deep in confabulation as to the projected
shop.

When they reached the door of Wakefield's, Wally said, "By the way, have
any of you chaps lost a football?  There's one kicking about in our
room.  Hang outside and I'll chuck it to you out of the window."

Which he did.  And the ball proved to be the very one the Moderns had
lost a week ago!  How curious!



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

FELLSGARTH VERSUS RENDLESHAM.

How it came that Rollitt played, after all, in the Rendlesham match, no
one could properly understand.

His name was not down on the original list.  Yorke _had_ given up asking
him to play, as he always either excused himself, or, what was worse,
promised to come and failed at the last moment.

After the defeat of the Moderns at the second election, the question of
the selection of the fifteen had been allowed to drop; and those who
were keen on victory hoped no further difficulty would arise.  Two days
before the match, however, Brinkman was unlucky enough to hurt his foot,
and to his great mortification was forbidden by the doctor to play.  The
news of his accident caused general consternation, as he was known to be
a good forward and a useful man in a scrimmage.  Clapperton increased
the difficulty by coming over to say that as Brinkman was laid up, he
had arranged for Corder to play instead.

Corder, as it happened, was a Modern senior, a small fellow, and reputed
an indifferent player.

"He wouldn't do at all," said Yorke, decisively.

"Why not?  Surely we've got a right to find a substitute for our own
man," said Clapperton, testily.

"What do you mean by your own man?  Who cares twopence whose man he is,
as long as he plays up?  The fifteen are Fellsgarth men, and no more
yours than they are mine."

"If they were as much mine as yours no one would complain."

"You mean to say that if you were captain of the fifteen you'd put
Corder in the team for a first-class match?"

"Why not?  There are plenty worse than he."

"There are so many better, that he is out of the question."

"That means only five of our men are to play against ten of yours."

"You're talking rot, Clapperton, and you know it.  If I'm captain, I'll
choose my own team.  If you don't like it, or if the best fifteen men in
the school aren't in it, you are welcome to complain.  I hope you will."

"It strikes me pretty forcibly our fellows won't fancy being snubbed
like this.  It would be a bad job if they showed as much on the day of
the match."

"It would be a bad job--for them," said the captain.

When Yorke repeated this disagreeable conversation to his friends later
on, they pulled long faces.

"I suppose he means they don't intend to play up," said Dalton.

"If that's so," said Fisher major, "why not cut them all out and make up
the fifteen of fellows you can depend on?"

"That wouldn't do," said Yorke.  "I expect when the time comes they'll
play up all right.  After all, Clapperton and Fullerton are two of our
best men."

"But what about the vacant place?"

"I've four or five names all better than Corder," said the captain, "but
none of them as good as Brinkman."

The company generally, it is to be feared, did not lament as honestly as
Yorke did, the accident to their rival.  They did not profess to
rejoice, of course; still they bore the blow with equanimity.

Next morning, to the astonishment of everybody, the notice board
contained an abrupt announcement in the captain's hand, that in
consequence of Brinkman's inability to play, Rollitt would take his
place in the fifteen.

Yorke himself could not account for this sudden act of patriotism.
Rollitt, he said, had looked into his room last night at bedtime and
said--

"I'll play on Saturday," and vanished.

Fisher minor was perhaps, of all persons, better able to explain the
mystery than any one else.  He had overheard in Ranger's study a general
lamentation about the prospects for Saturday, and a wish expressed by
his brother that Rollitt were not so unsociable and undependable.
Everybody agreed it was utterly useless to ask him to play, and that
they would have to get a second-rate man to fill the empty place, and so
most probably lose the match.

Fisher minor heard all this, and when presently, on his way to his own
den, he passed Rollitt's door, a tremendous resolution seized him to
take upon himself the duty of ambassador extraordinary for the School.
Rollitt appeared to owe him no grudge for throwing stones the other day,
and had already come to his relief handsomely at the time of the second
election and in the affair with Dangle.  On the whole, Fisher minor
thought he might venture.

Rollitt was reading hard by the light of one small candle when he
entered.

"Please, Rollitt," said the boy, "would you ever mind playing for the
School on Saturday?"

Rollitt looked up in such evident alarm that Fisher major put his hand
on the latch of the door, and made ready to bolt.

"I'll see--get out," said Rollitt.

And Fisher minor did get out.

It was really too absurd to suppose that Rollitt was going to play in
the fifteen to oblige Fisher minor.  So at least thought that young
gentleman, and remained discreetly silent about his interview, hoping
devoutly no one would hear of it.

The joy of the Classics was almost equal to the fury of the Moderns.
The latter could not deny that Rollitt was a host in himself, and worth
a dozen Corders.  Yet it galled them to see him quietly put in the
vacant place, and to hear the jubilation on every hand.

For Rollitt was the fellow who had publicly insulted the Moderns in the
person of Dangle; and not only that, but--poor and shabby as he was--had
shown himself utterly indifferent to their indignation and contemptuous
of their threats.

"Why," Dangle said, "the fellow's a pauper! he can't even pay for his
clubs!  His father's a common fellow, I'm told."

"Yes, and I heard," said Brinkman, "his fees up here are paid for him.
Why, we might just as well have Bob in the fifteen."

"A jolly sight better.  Bob knows how to be civil."

"It is a crime to be poor," said Fullerton.  "I hope I shall never
commit it."

"Well," said Clapperton, ignoring this bit of sarcasm, "if he was well
enough off to buy a cake of soap once a term, it wouldn't be so bad.  I
believe when he wants a wash he goes down to Mrs Wisdom and borrows a
bit of hers."

"By the way, that reminds me," said Dangle; "did you fellows ever hear
about Mrs Wisdom's boat?  The lout had it out the other day in the
rapids, and let it go over the falls, and it got smashed up."

"What!" exclaimed everybody.

"Do you mean," said Brinkman, "poor Widow Wisdom has lost her boat owing
to that cad?  Why, she'll be ruined?  However is she to get a new one?"

"That's the extraordinary thing," said Dangle.  "It was she told me
about it.  She says that Rollitt went straight away to the lake and
bought her a boat that was for sale there; and she's got it now down in
the lower reach; and it's a better one than the other."

"What!" exclaimed Clapperton, incredulously; "Rollitt bought a new boat!
Bosh!"

"It was a second-hand one for sale cheap.  But it cost five pounds.  She
showed me the receipt."

"Stuff and nonsense.  She was gammoning you," said Clapperton.

"All right," said Dangle, snappishly; "you're not obliged to believe it
unless you like."

And there the conversation ended.

The day of the great match came at last.  The Rendlesham men, who had to
come from a distance, were not due till one o'clock, and, as may be
imagined, the interval was peculiarly trying to some of the inhabitants
of Fellsgarth.  The farce of morning school was an ordeal alike to
masters and boys.  If gazing up at the clouds could bring down the rain,
a deluge should have fallen before 10 a.m.  As the hour approached the
impatience rose to fever heat.  It was the first match of the season.
For the last three years the two teams had met in deadly combat, and
each time the match had ended in a draw, with not one goal kicked on
either side.  Victory or defeat to-day would be a crisis in the history
of Fellsgarth.  Woe betide the man who missed a point or blundered a
kick!

Percy and his friends put on flannels in honour of the occasion and
sallied out an hour before the time to look at the ground and inspect
the new goal and flag posts which Fisher major, as the first act of his
treasurership, had ordered for the School.

It disgusted them somewhat to find that Wally and his friends--also in
flannels--were on the spot before them, and, having surveyed the new
acquisitions, had calmly bagged the four front central seats in the
pavilion reserved by courtesy for the head-master and his ladies.

Since the tea at Mr Stratton's, the juniors had abated somewhat of
their immemorial feud, although the relations were still occasionally
subject to tension.

"Hullo, you kids," cried Wally, as his brother approached, "how do you
do?  Pretty well this morning?  That's right--so are we.  Have a seat?
Plenty of room in the second row."

Considering that no one had yet put in an appearance, this was strictly
correct.  Yet it did not please the Modern juniors.

"You'll get jolly well turned out when Ringwood comes," said Percy.
"Come on, you chaps," added he to his own friends.  "What's the use of
sitting on a bench like schoolboys an hour before the time?  Let's have
a trot."

"Mind you don't dirty your white bags," cried D'Arcy.

"No, we might be mistaken for Classic kids if we did," shouted Cottle.
"Ha, ha!"

Whereupon, and not before time, the friends parted for a while.

When Percy and Co. returned, they found the pavilion was filling up,
and, greatly to their delight, the front row was empty.  The enemy had
been cleared out; and serve them right.

"Come on, you chaps," said Lickford; "don't let's get stuck in there.
Come over to the oak tree, and get up there.  It's the best view in the
field."

Alas! when they got to the oak tree, four friendly voices hailed them
from among the leaves.

"How are you, Modern kids?  There's a ripping view up here.  Have an
acorn?  Mind your eye.  Sorry we're full up.  Plenty of room up the
poplar tree."

The Moderns scorned to reply, and walked back sulkily to the pavilion,
not without parting greetings from their friends up the oak tree, and
squatted themselves on the steps.

The place was filling up now.  Mrs Stratton was there with some
visitors.  All the little Wakefields were there, of course--"minor,
minimus, and minimissima," as they were called--uttering war-whoops in
honour of their house.  And there was a knot of Rendlesham fellows
talking among themselves and generally taking stock of the Fellsgarth
form.  Mr Stratton, in civilian dress, as became the umpire, was the
first representative of the School to show up on the grass.  A distant
cheer from the top of the oak tree hailed his arrival, and louder cheers
still from the steps of the pavilion indicated that the popular master
was not the private property of any faction in Fellsgarth.

To Fisher minor it was amazing how Mr Stratton could talk and laugh as
pleasantly as he did with the umpire for the other side.  He felt sure
_he_ could not have done it himself.

Suddenly it occurred to Fisher minor, by what connection of ideas he
could not tell, what an awful thing it would be if Rollitt were to
forget about the match.  The horror of the idea, which had all the
weight of a presentiment, sent the colour from his cheeks, and without a
word to anybody he slid down the tree and began to run with all his
might towards the school.

"What's the row--collywobbles!" asked D'Arcy.

But no one was in a position to answer.  A fusillade of acorns from the
tree, and derisive compliments of "Well run!"  "Bravo, Short-legs!" from
the pavilion steps, greeted the runner as he passed that warm corner.
He didn't care.  Even the captain and his own brother, whom he met going
down to the field of battle, did not divert him.  He rushed panting up
the stairs and into Rollitt's study.

Rollitt was sitting at the table taking observations of a crumb of bread
through a microscope.

"Rollitt," gasped the boy, "the match!  It's just beginning, and you
promised to play.  Do come, or we shall be licked!"

Rollitt took a further look at the crumb and then got up.

"I forgot," said he; "come on, Fisher minor."

"Aren't you going to put on flannels?" asked the boy.

"Why!" said Rollitt roughly, stalking out.

Fisher minor wondered if the reason was that he had none.  But he was
too full of his mission to trouble about that, and, keeping his prize
well in sight, for fear he should go astray, had the satisfaction of
seeing him arrive on the field of battle just as the opposing forces
were taking their places, and just as the Classic seniors were inwardly
calling themselves fools for having depended for a moment on a hopeless
fellow of this sort.

The Classic juniors felt a good deal compromised by the champion's
shabby cloth trousers and flannel shirt, but they cheered lustily all
the same, while the Moderns, having expressed their indignation to one
another, relieved their feelings by laughing.

But a moment after, everybody forgot everything but the match.

The Rendlesham men looked very trim and dangerous in their black and
white uniform; and when presently their captain led off with a
magnificent place-kick which flew almost into the School lines, Classics
and Moderns forgot their differences and squirmed with a common
foreboding.  Fullerton promptly returned the ball into _medias res_, and
the usual inaugural scrimmage ensued.  To the knowing ones, who judged
from little things, it seemed that the present match was likely to be as
even as any of its predecessors.  The forwards were about equally
weighted, and the quarter and half-backs who hovered outside seemed
equally alert and light-footed.

Presently the ball squeezed out on the School side and gave Ranger the
first chance of a run.  He used it well, and with Fisher major and Yorke
on his flanks got well past the Rendlesham forwards amid loud cheers
