nose.

"He's a very good bybie"--so the child pronounced it--"on'y rather
self-willed at times, m'm," said Tottie, going through the athletic feat
of lifting her charge.

"Just so.  True to your woman's nature.  Always ready to apologise for
the male monster that tyrannises over you.  I suppose, now, you'd say
that your drunken father was a good man?"

Miss Stivergill repented of the speech instantly on seeing the tears
start into Tottie's large eyes as she replied quickly--"Indeed I would,
m'm.  Oh! you've no notion 'ow kind father is w'en 'e's not in liquor."

"There, there.  Of course he is.  I didn't mean to say he wasn't, little
Bones.  It's a curious fact that many drun--, I mean people given to
drink, _are_ kind and amiable.  It's a disease.  Go now, and get your
things on, and do you likewise, Lilly.  My cab is at the door.  Be
quick."

In a few minutes the whole party descended to the street.  Miss
Stivergill locked the door with her own hand, and put the key in her
pocket.  As she turned round, Tottie's tawdry bonnet had fallen off in
her efforts to raise the baby towards the outstretched hands of her
mistress, while the cabman stood looking on with amiable interest.

Catching up the bonnet, Miss Stivergill placed it on the child's head,
back to the front, twisted the strings round her head and face--anyhow--
lifted her and her charge into the cab, and followed them.

"Where to, ma'am?" said the amiable cabman.

"Charing Cross,--you idiot."

"Yes, ma'am," replied the man, with a broad grin, touching his hat and
bestowing a wink on a passing policeman as he mounted the box.

On their way to the station the good lady put out her head and shouted
"Stop!"

The maligned man obeyed.

"Stay here, Lilly, with the baby.--Jump out, little Bones.  Come with
me."

She took the child's bonnet off and flung it under the cab, then grasped
Tottie's hand and led her into a shop.

"A hat," demanded the lady of the shopwoman.

"What kind of hat, ma'am?"

"Any kind," replied Miss Stivergill, "suitable for this child--only see
that it's not a doll's hat.  Let it fit her."

The shopwoman produced a head-dress, which Tottie afterwards described
as a billycock 'at with a feather in it.  The purchaser paid for it,
thrust it firmly on the child's head, and returned to the cab.

A few minutes by rail conveyed them to a charmingly country-like suburb,
with neat villas dotting the landscape, and a few picturesque old red
brick cottages scattered about here and there.

Such a drive to such a scene, reader, may seem very commonplace to you,
but what tongue can tell, or pen describe, what it was to Tottie Bones?
That pretty little human flower had been born in the heart of London--in
one of the dirtiest and most unsavoury parts of that heart.  Being the
child of a dissolute man and a hard-working woman, who could not afford
to go out excursioning, she had never seen a green field in her life.
She had never seen the Thames, or the Parks.  There are many such
unfortunates in the vast city.  Of flowers--with the exception of
cauliflowers--she knew nothing, save from what little she saw of them in
broken pots in the dirty windows of her poor neighbourhood, and on the
barrows and baskets of the people who hawked them about the city.  There
was a legend among the neighbours of Archangel Court that once upon a
time--in some remote period of antiquity--a sunbeam had been in the
habit of overtopping the forest of chimneys and penetrating the court
below in the middle of each summer, but a large brick warehouse had been
erected somewhere to the southward, and had effectually cut off the
supply, so that sunshine was known to the very juvenile population only
through the reflecting power of roofs and chimney-cans and gable
windows.  In regard to scents, it need scarcely be said that Tottie had
had considerable experience of that class which it is impossible to term
sweet.

Judge then, if you can, what must have been the feelings of this little
town-sparrow when she suddenly rushed, at the rate of forty miles an
hour, into the heavenly influences of fields and flowers, hedgerows, and
trees, farm-yards and village spires, horse-ponds, country inns, sheep,
cattle, hay-carts, piggeries, and poultry.

Her eyes, always large and liquid, became great crystal globes of
astonishment, as, forgetful of herself, and _almost_ of baby, she sat
with parted lips and heaving breast, gazing in rapt ecstasy from the
carriage window.

Miss Stivergill and Miss Lillycrop, being sympathetic souls, gazed with
almost equal interest on the child's animated face.

"She only wants wings and washing to make her an angel," whispered the
former to the latter.

But if the sights she saw on the journey inflated Tottie's soul with
joy, the glories of Rosebud Cottage almost exploded her.  It was a
marvellous cottage.  Rosebushes surrounded it, ivy smothered it, leaving
just enough of room for the windows to peep out, and a few of the old
red bricks to show in harmony with the green.  Creepers in great variety
embraced it, and a picturesque clump of trees on a knoll behind
sheltered it from the east wind.  There was a farm-yard, which did not
belong to itself, but was so close to it that a stranger could scarcely
have told whether it formed part of the Rosebud domain or that of the
neighbouring cottage.  The day, too, was exceptionally fine.  It was one
of those still, calm, sunny, cloudless days, which induce healthy people
sometimes to wish that earth might be their permanent home.

"Oh, bybie!" exclaimed Tottie Bones, when, having clambered to the top
of the knoll, she sat down on a tree-root and gazed on the cottage and
the farm-yard, where hens were scratching in the interest of active
chickens, and cows were standing in blank felicity, and pigs were
revelling in dirt and sunshine--"Oh, bybie! it's 'eaven upon earth,
ain't it, darling?"

The darling evidently agreed with her for once, for, lying on his back
in the long grass, he seized two handfuls of wild-flowers, kicked up his
fat legs, and laughed aloud.

"That's right, darling.  Ain't it fun?  And _such_ flowers too--oh! all
for nothing, only got to pull 'em.  Yes, roll away, darling, you can't
dirty yourself 'ere.  Come, I shall 'ave a roll too."  With which remark
Tottie plunged into the grass, seized the baby and tumbled him and
herself about to such an extent that the billycock hat was much
deteriorated and the feather damaged beyond recovery.

Inside The Rosebud the other two members of the party were also enjoying
themselves, though not exactly in like manner.  They revelled in tea and
in the feast of reason.

"Where, and when, and why did you find that child?" asked Miss
Stivergill.

Her friend related what she knew of Tottie's history.

"Strange!" remarked Miss Stivergill, but beyond that remark she gave no
indication of the state of her mind.

"It is indeed strange," returned her friend, "but it is just another
instance of the power of God's Word to rescue and preserve souls, even
in the most unfavourable circumstances.  Tottie's mother is Christian,
and all the energies of her vigorous nature are concentrated on two
points--the training of her child in the fear of God, and the saving of
her husband from drink.  She is a woman of strong faith, and is quite
convinced that her prayers will be answered, because, she says, `He who
has promised is faithful,' but I fear much that she will not live to see
it."

"Why so?" demanded the other sharply.

"Because she has a bad affection of the lungs.  If she were under more
favourable circumstances she might recover."

"Pooh! nonsense.  People constantly recover from what is called bad
affection of the lungs.  Can nothing be done for her?"

"Nothing," replied Miss Lillycrop; "she will not leave her husband or
her home.  If she dies--"

"Well, what then?"

"Little Tottie must be rescued, you know, and I have set my heart on
doing it."

"You'll do nothing of the sort," said Miss Stivergill firmly.

Miss Lillycrop looked surprised.

"No, you shan't rescue her," continued the good lady, with still firmer
emphasis; "you've got all London at your feet, and there's plenty more
where that one came from.  Come, Lilly, you mustn't be greedy.  You may
have the baby if you like, but you must leave little Bones to me."

Miss Lillycrop was making feeble resistance to this proposal when the
subject of dispute suddenly appeared at the door with glaring eyes and a
horrified expression of face.  Baby was in her arms as usual, and both
he and his nurse were drenched, besides being covered from head to foot
with mud.

It needed little explanation to tell that in crossing a ditch on a
single plank Tottie had stumbled and gone headlong into the water with
baby in her arms.  Fortunately neither was hurt, though both had been
terribly frightened.

Miss Stivergill was equal to the occasion.  Ordering two tubs half-full
of warm water into the back kitchen, she stripped the unfortunates and
put them therein, to the intense joy of baby, whose delight in a warm
bath was only equalled by his pleasure in doing mischief.  At first Miss
Stivergill thought of burning the children's garments, and fitting them
out afresh, but on the suggestion of her friend that their appearing at
home with new clothes might create suspicion, and cause unpleasant
inquiries, she refrained.  When thoroughly cleaned, Tottie and baby were
wrapped up in shawls and set down to a hearty tea in the parlour.

While this was being devoured, the two friends conversed of many things.
Among others, Miss Stivergill touched on the subject of her
progenitors, and made some confidential references to her mother, which
her friend received with becoming sympathy.

"Yes, my dear," said Miss Stivergill, in a tone of unwonted tenderness.
"I don't mind telling you all about her, for you're a good soul, with a
feeling heart.  Her loss was a terrible loss to me, though it was great
gain to her.  Before her death we were separated for a time--only a
short time,--but it proved to be a blessed separation, for the letters
she wrote me sparkled with love and wit and playfulness, as though they
had been set with pearls and rubies and diamonds.  I shall show you my
treasures before going to bed.  I keep them in that box on the
sideboard, to be always handy.  It is not large, but its contents are
more precious to me than thousands of gold and silver."

She paused; and then, observing that Tottie was staring at her, she
advised her to make the most of her opportunity, and eat as much as
possible.

"If you please, m'm, I can't eat any more," said Tottie.

"Can't eat more, child?--try," urged the hospitable lady.

Tottie heaved a deep sigh and said that she couldn't eat another morsel
if she were to try ever so much.  As baby appeared to be in the same
happy condition, and could with difficulty keep his eyes open, both
children were sent to bed under the care of a maid, and Miss Stivergill,
taking down her treasure-box, proceeded to read part of its contents to
her bosom friend.

Little did good Miss Stivergill imagine that she had dug a mine that
night under Rosebud Cottage, and that the match which was destined to
light it was none other than her innocent _protegee_, little Bones.

Throwing herself into the receptive arms of her mother, two days after
the events just described, Tottie poured the delight and amazement of
her surcharged spirit into sympathetic ears.  Unfortunately her glowing
descriptions also reached unsympathetic ears.  Mrs Bones had happily
recovered her husband, and brought him home, where he lay in his
familiar corner, resting from his labours of iniquity.  The
unsympathetic ears belonged to Mr Abel Bones.

When Tottie, however, in her discursive wandering began to talk of
pearls, and rubies, and diamonds, and treasures worth thousands of gold
and silver, in a box on the sideboard, the ears became suddenly
sympathetic, and Mr Bones raised himself on one elbow.

"Hush! darling," said Mrs Bones, glancing uneasily at the dark corner.

Mr Bones knew well that if his wife should caution Tottie not to tell
him anything about Rosebud Cottage, he would be unable to get a word out
of her.  He therefore rose suddenly, staggered towards the child, and
seized her hand.

"Come, Tot, you and I shall go out for a walk."

"Oh, Abel, don't.  Dear Abel--"

But dear Abel was gone, and his wife, clasping her hands, looked
helplessly and hopelessly round the room.  Then a gleam of light seemed
to come into her eyes.  She looked up and went down on her knees.

Meanwhile Abel went into a public-house, and, calling for a pint of
beer, bade his child drink, but Tottie declined.  He swore with an oath
that he'd compel her to drink, but suddenly changed his mind and drank
it himself.

"Now, Tot, tell father all about your visit to Miss Stivergill.  She's
very rich--eh?"

"Oh! awfully," replied Tottie, who felt an irresistible drawing to her
father when he condescended to speak to her in kindly tones.

"Keeps a carriage--eh?"

"No, nor a 'oss--not even a pony," returned the child.

"An' no man-servant about the house?"

"No--not as I seed."

"Not even a gardener, now?"

"No, only women--two of 'em, and very nice they was too.  One fat and
short, the other tall and thin.  I liked the fat one best."

"Ha! blessin's on 'em both," said Mr Bones, with a bland smile.  "Come
now, Tot, tell me all about the cottage--inside first, the rooms and
winders, an' specially the box of treasure.  Then we'll come to the
garden, an' so we'll get out by degrees to the fields and flowers.  Go
ahead, Tot."

It need scarcely be said that Abel Bones soon possessed himself of all
the information he required, after which he sent Tottie home to her
mother, and went his way.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

MISS LILLYCROP GETS A SERIES OF SURPRISES.

What a world this is for plots!  And there is no escaping them.  If we
are not the originators of them, we are the victims--more or less.  If
we don't originate them designedly we do so accidentally.

We have seen how Abel Bones set himself deliberately to hatch one plot.
Let us now turn to old Fred Blurt, and see how that invalid, with the
help of his brother Enoch, unwittingly sowed the seeds of another.

"Dear Enoch," said Fred one day, turning on his pillow, "I should have
died but for you."

"And Miss Lillycrop, Fred.  Don't be ungrateful.  If Miss Lillycrop had
not come to my assistance, it's little I could have done for you."

"Well, yes, I ought to have mentioned her in the same breath with
yourself, Enoch, for she has been kind--very kind and patient.  Now, I
want to know if that snake has come."

"Are you sure you've recovered enough to attend to business?" asked the
brother.

"Yes, quite sure.  Besides, a snake is not business--it is pleasure.  I
mean to send it to my old friend Balls, who has been long anxious to get
a specimen.  I had asked a friend long ago to procure one for me, and
now that it has come I want you to pack it to go by post."

"By post!" echoed the brother.

"Yes, why not?"

"Because I fear that live snakes are prohibited articles."

"Get the Post-Office Directory and see for yourself," said the invalid.

The enormous volume, full six inches thick, which records the abodes and
places of business of all noteworthy Londoners, was fetched.

"Nothing about snakes here," said Enoch, running his eye over the
paragraph referring to the articles in question,--"`Glass bottles,
leeches, game, fish,' (but that refers to dead ones, I suppose) `flesh,
fruit, vegetables, or other perishable substances' (a snake ain't
perishable, at least not during a brief post-journey)--`nor any bladder
or other vessel containing liquid,' (ha! that touches him: a snake
contains blood, don't it?)--`or anything whatsoever which might by
pressure or otherwise be rendered injurious to the contents of the
mail-bags or to the officers of the Post-Office.'--Well, brother,"
continued Enoch, "I'm not quite sure that it comes within the forbidden
degrees, so we'll give it the benefit of the doubt and pack it.  How
d'you propose doing it up?  In a letter?"

"No, I had a box made for it before I was taken ill.  You'll find it in
the shop, on the upper shelf, beside the northern diver."

The little box was brought, and the snake, which had been temporarily
