
"Ha!" said the Colonel.  "And Glyn likes you, I know; and no wonder--
brought up together as you were like brothers.  Well, my boy, I went out
to India not very much older than you two fellows are, as a cadet in the
Company's service, and somehow or other, being a reckless sort of a
fellow, I was sent into several of the engagements with some of the
chiefs, and was picked out at last, when I pretty well understood my
work, to go to your father's court as you said, my boy, with
half-a-dozen six-pounders and teams of the most dashing Arab horses in
the service.  Then, somehow, your father got to like me, and I liked
him, and then we did a lot of fighting together until he was fixed
securely upon his throne, and he never would hear of my leaving him
again.  But there, you know all about it.  He left you to me, Singh, to
make a man of you with Glyn here, and I hope to live to go back with you
both to Dour and see you safe in your rightful position and fight for
you if the need should ever come.  And some day I hope that you two boys
will have grown into two strong, true-hearted men, with the same
brotherly love between you as held your fathers fast.  And then--Oh,
hang that music!  The fellows can't play a bit.  Here, what do you say?
Shall we walk into the field and listen to them and see the show?  Your
elephant too?"

"No," said Singh softly.  "Let's stop here and talk about Dour and my
father.  We don't often see you now, sir, and I should like that best."

"To be sure, then, my dear boys, we will stop here.  I want you to do
what you like best.--But you, Glyn: what do you say?"

"I like to hear you talk, father, and to be with you as much as we can."

"That's good, my boy.  Then, to begin with," cried the Colonel with a
chuckle, "I'll just finish my lecture.  I was very nearly letting it
slip."

"Oh, but, father," cried Glyn, "I thought you had looked over all that."

"I have, my boy; but you know I am not good at talking.  The Doctor
would have given you a splendid lecture on fighting."

"He did," said Glyn drily, and the Colonel laughed.

"I suppose he would, my boys; but since I saw you this morning something
occurred to me that I might have mentioned to you.  How much do you boys
know about Shakespeare?"

"Not much, father--neither of us, I am afraid."

"Ah, well, I dare say it will come to you by-and-by; but there are some
words that Shakespeare put into the mouth of an old court official in
_Hamlet_, when he was bidding his son good-bye before he went abroad.
There, don't yawn, either of you.  I am only trying to quote it to you
because to my mind they were very good words, and just suitable for you,
because they were about fighting: `Beware of entrance to a quarrel; but
being in, bear't that the opposer may beware of thee; and--' Humph!  Ah,
dear me, let me see; there was something else about borrowing and
lending.  But never mind that.  It was about the fighting that I wanted
to speak, and the long and short of it was, don't fight, boys, if you
can possibly help it; but if you do fight, show the other fellow that
you know how.  There, that's enough about that.  Now then, what shall we
talk about next?--Yes, waiter, what is it?"

"Beg pardon, sir, but there's a person, sir, in the hall wants to know
if he can see the young gentlemen."

"Eh?  Who is it?" said the Colonel sharply.  "Not one of the masters?"

"No, sir.  It's the proprietor, sir, of the big wild-beast show, sir, in
the field--Mr Ramball, sir."

"Oh, pooh! pooh!" cried the Colonel.  "Tell him the young gentlemen are
engaged, and don't care to visit his show to-night."

"Yes, sir.  But beg pardon, sir, I don't think it's about that.  He's in
great trouble about something, sir.  He's well-known here, sir; has a
large farm two or three miles away where he keeps his wild things when
he's not taking them round the country."

"Well, but--" began the Colonel.

"Said it was very particular business, sir, and he must see the young
gentlemen."

"Why, it must be something about his elephant, father," cried Glyn
eagerly.

"Well, but, my dear boys, you can't be at the beck and call of this man
because he owns animals that he can't manage.  But there, there, I don't
want you two to withhold help when you can give it.  We'll hear what he
has to say.--We'll come out and speak to him.--I'll come, boys, because
you may want to refer to me."

The little party followed the waiter out into the hall, where Ramball
was standing, hat in one hand, yellow handkerchief in the other, dabbing
his bald head and looking very much excited.

"Hah!" he cried.  "There you are, gentlemen!"  And he put his
handkerchief on the top of his head and made a movement as if to thrust
his hat into his pocket, but recollected himself and put the
handkerchief into the hat instead.  "I have been up to the school,
gentlemen--Your servant, sir.  I beg pardon for interrupting you; but I
have been up to the school to ask for the young gentlemen there, and I
saw Mr Wrench the Doctor's man, and he said that you had come on here
to dinner.--Pray, pray, gentlemen, come and help me, or I am a ruined
man."

"Why, what's the matter?" cried Singh and Glyn in a breath.

"Didn't you hear, gentlemen?  He's got away again--pulled the iron
picket out of the ground, and gone off with the chain and all
chinkupping from his leg.  I have got men out all over scouring the
country, and as soon as they have found out where he is I'd take it
kindly, gentlemen, if you'd come and bring him home."

"Come, come, my man," said the Colonel good-humouredly, "isn't this
rather cool?"

"Cool, sir!  It's too hot to be borne.  That great beast will be the
death of me before he's done.  Do say a kind word for me, sir, to the
young gents.  They have got a power over that beast as beats miracles.
I wouldn't ask, sir, but I'm about done.  I should have shot him the
other day if these 'ere young gents hadn't stopped me and showed me, a
man of fifty, as has handled poisonous snakes and gone after lions
before now when they'd got out--showed me, I say, that I didn't
understand my work."

"Oh, well," said the Colonel, "I--I--"

At that moment the elephant's keeper and another man, a driver of one of
the caravans, hurried excitedly into the hotel hall, dragging between
them a miserable-looking object, drenched with mud and water, and
trembling in every limb.

"Mr Ramball, sir!" cried the keeper.

"What, have you found him?" cried the proprietor.

"No, sir; but we've come across this chap, as has got a cock-and-bull
story about something, and I think it means that he's seen him."

"Yes--what?  Where?  How?" cried Ramball, catching hold of the man by
the shoulders and letting go again directly, to dive into his hat for
his handkerchief.  "Why, you are all wet and muddy!" he cried, wiping
his hands.  "Where did you see him?"

"The giant, sir?" said the poor fellow, shivering.

"Giant?" cried Ramball.  "Well, yes, giant if you like.  Where did you
see him?"

"It was about a mile down the road, sir, and we was coming down the Cut
Lane with a load of clover, my mate and me, which we had been to fetch
for the governor's horses in the yard here.  My mate was driving, and I
was sitting on a heap of the clover, stacked up on the hind ladder of
the cart.  We'd stopped a while after loading up, being a bit tired, to
give the horses a drink, and it had got dark, while as we was coming
home, me sitting behind as I telled you, and my mate driving in front,
all of a suddent, and just as I was half-asleep and smoking my pipe, a
great big giant loomed up on t'other side of the hedge, and before I
knew where I was he reaches down, slips his arm round me, and lifts me
right out of the cart."

The man wiped his face with his muddy hand and uttered a low groan.

"Well, go on," cried Ramball.  "What next?"

"Don't hurry me, master, please," said the man piteously.  "I'm shook
all to pieces, and feel that freckened that I could sit down and cry.  I
was too much staggered to call out for help, and when I tried to look
round, my mate and the cart was gone, and this 'ere great thing was
carrying me away right across Snow's field, and all I could think of was
that he was hungry and had made me his prey."

"Humph!  An ogre, I suppose," said the Colonel to the boys.

"No, sir," said the man; "it was one of them there great giants as you
read of in books; and no matter how I tried to get away, he only hugged
me the tighter."

"Well, well," said the Colonel; "but you did escape."

"No, sir; I didn't, sir.  He carried me right across the field and
dropped me into the big horse-pond in the corner.  I was half-drowned, I
was; and when I struggled to the side my legs stuck in the mud right up
to my knees.  And then I found that I had come out, half-blind with mud
and water, just where he was standing with his back to me, and then I
daren't move.  But he took no more notice of me, and walked right off,
so that I saved my life.  Next thing was I come upon your two men, Mr
Ramball, sir, and they got asking me questions; but I was too skeart to
understand what they meant, and so they brought me here.--You don't
know, I suppose," he continued, speaking to one of the waiters who had
come into the hall, "whether my mate came home safely with the clover
cart?"

"Bah!" cried Ramball.  "With your giant indeed!  Which way did he go?"

"I dunno, sir; it was too dark.  But it were a giant.  I could swear to
him if I saw him again.  I should know him by his trowges."

"Know him by what?" cried the Colonel, laughing heartily.

"By his trowges, sir.  I was down in the mud close behind him, and I
could see right up his great legs to his waist.  I couldn't see any
farther, he was so big.  Awful giant, he was.  You may take my word,
sir, for that."

"Bah!" roared the proprietor.  "Here, my lads, he's frightened this poor
lad nearly into fits, and we are wasting time.  Off with you, and follow
his track from the spot where you found the man.  Run him down, and then
don't do anything more to scare him or make him turn nasty; but one of
you stop and watch, and t'other come back here and tell me where he is."

The two keepers obeyed promptly, and hurried away, while one of the
waiters sent the scared carter out into the kitchen.

"That's 'im, sir," said Ramball; "and if the young gents would just give
me a hand to make things easy--"

"Yes, yes," said the Colonel; "but from what I know of elephants, that
great brute may go wandering about through the country for half the
night.  You'd better go after your men and track him.  He'll be most
likely in some turnip-field having a gorge, and if you can't get him
quietly back come to me again and I'll see what I can do."

"Beg pardon, sir," said Ramball quietly, "I am ready for anything now,
cunning as I used to think myself.  But does your honour understand
elephants?"

"Does he understand elephants, Glyn!" cried Singh.--"Why, Mr Ramball,
my friend's father has trapped scores out in the Terai."

"Of course he has, sir," said Ramball.--"Thank you kindly, then, sir.
I'll have my pony put to and go after him at once."

Ramball hurried out of the hall, and the Colonel with his young guests
was about to return to the dining-room when they found that Morris and
Professor Barclay were standing close behind them.

"Quite a succession of adventures, Mr Singh," said Morris.

"Yes," said the Professor, "and most interesting your knowledge of the
habits of those great beasts."

"Yes, exactly," said the Colonel drily.  "They are rather difficult to
deal with.--Come boys," and he led the way into the dining-room.
"There, sit down for a bit," he said, resuming his old seat.  "Are both
those your masters, Glyn, my boy?"

"No, father; only one.  The other's a friend of his, I think."

"What, that rather shady-looking individual?"

"No, father, the Professor--Professor Barclay.  He dined at the Doctor's
the other night."

"Oh," said the Colonel.  "Well, I don't wish to be too exclusive; but
somehow I never care for strangers who are so very eager to make
friends."

"But oughtn't we to have gone to help find the elephant, father?" said
Glyn.

"No, my boy, I think not.  You are my guests to-night, and we don't
often meet.  If they find him, and there is any real necessity, perhaps
we will go; but we shall see."

They did not see; for a quiet chat was enjoyed for another half-hour,
and then the Colonel walked with them to the Doctor's gates and said
goodnight.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

THE RAJAH'S MORNING CALL.

"Singh!"

There was no answer.  "Singh!  Oh, what a sleepy old mongoose it is!
Singhy!  What's that row out in the playground?"

It was early dawn.  The first faint rays of day were peering in on both
sides of the drawn blind, the speaker was Glyn, and the words were
uttered in consequence of a peculiar clanking noise heard out in the
play-yard.

Now, the most common-sense way of finding out the meaning of the noise
which had awakened the boy from a deep sleep would have been to jump out
of bed, draw up the blind, and throw up the window, letting in the
fresh, cool morning air, as the head was thrust out and eyes brought to
bear upon the dimly seen shadowy space below.  But Glyn felt very
drowsy, exceedingly comfortable, and not in the slightest degree
disposed to stir.  Consequently he called across the little room to the
other bed, and, as before said, there was no reply.

"Oh, you are a sleepy one!" muttered the boy, and reaching up his hands
he turned them into a catapult, seizing the pillow by both ends, and
drawing it upwards from beneath his head, when without rising he hurled
it across at Singh, striking him with a pretty good whop.

"Great cowardly bully; that's what you are," muttered the boy.  "Oh, I
wish I was ten times as strong!  Take that, and that, and that!"

The commands were accompanied by a heavy panting, and the sound of
blows.

"Why, what's he doing?" said Glyn to himself, growing more wakeful, and
beginning to chuckle as he grasped the situation.  "Oh, what a game!" he
said softly.  "He's lying on his back, and got the nightmare, only it's
a morning mare; and he's dreaming he's fighting with old Slegge again,
and punching my pillow, thinking it's his head.  I only wish it had been
as soft, and then I shouldn't have had so much skin off my knuckles.--
There!  There it goes again!  It must be the workpeople come to open a
drain or something.  They must be cross at having to get up so early, or
else they wouldn't be banging their tools down like that!  Hi!  Singhy!"

"Cowardly brute!"

"Singhy!"

"Eh?  What's the matter?  Time to get up?  I haven't heard the bell."

"There it goes again," cried Glyn, as the jangling rattle rose to his
ears once more.

"Glyn, what's that?"

"Oh, what an old stupid it is!  Here have I been shouting ever so long
to make you get up and see.  Go and open the window and look out."

"Heigh-ho-hum!" yawned Singh.  "I was dreaming that old Slegge hit me in
the face again."

"Yes, I know you were."

"Why, you couldn't know I dreamt it."

"But I tell you I did know."

"How could you know, when I was dreaming and you weren't?"

"Why, you were shouting it at me, and pitching into my pillow, thinking
it was old Slegge's head."

"Get out!  I wasn't.  I--Here, how is it I have got two pillows here?
Why, you wretch, you must have thrown one at me to wake me!"

There was a sharp rustling, an expiration of breath, and the soft
head-rest was hurled back again, just as the jangling noise was repeated
more loudly.

"There!  Hear that?" cried Glyn.

"I am not deaf, stupid."

"Then jump up and go and see what it is."

"Shan't!  It's quite dark yet, and I am as tired as can be."

"Well, only get up and see what that noise is, and then you can go to
sleep again."

"Shan't, I tell you.  I am not your coolie.  What lazy people you
English are!"

There was a fresh jangling from below, exciting Glyn's curiosity almost
to the highest pitch.

"Look here, Singhy, if you don't get up directly and see what that noise
is, I'll come and make you."
