them only as a faint murmur, and did not disturb the stillness of the
night.

And a day of quiet splendour it certainly was--the sea as calm as glass,
insomuch that it reflected all the fleecy clouds that hung in the bright
sky.  Even the ocean-swell had gone to rest with just motion enough left
to prove that the calm was not a "dead" one, but a slumber.  All round,
the numerous vessels of the Short Blue fleet floated in peaceful
idleness.  At every distance they lay, from a hundred yards to the
far-off horizon.

We say that they floated peacefully, but we speak only as to appearance,
for there were other hells in the fleet, similar to that which we have
described, and the soft sound of distant oars could be distinguished now
and then as boats plied to and fro between their smacks and the Coper,
fetching the deadly liquid with which these hells were set on fire.

Other sounds there were, however, which fell pleasantly on the ears of
the two listeners.

"Psalm-singers," said Billy.

"They might be worse," replied Ned.  "What smack does it come from,
think 'ee?"

"The _Boy Jim_, or the _Cephas_--not sure which, for I can't make out
the voices.  It might be from the _Sparrow_, but that's it close to us,
and there could be no mistake about Jim Frost's voice if he was to
strike up."

"What! has Jim Frost hoisted the Bethel-flag?"

"Ay, didn't you see it flyin' last Sunday for the first time?"

"No, I didn't," returned Ned, "but I'm glad to hear it, for, though I'm
not one o' that set myself.  I do like to see a man not ashamed to show
his colours."

The flag to which they referred is supplied at half cost to the fleet by
the Mission to Deep-Sea Fishermen--and is hoisted every Sabbath-day by
those skippers in the fleet who, having made up their minds boldly to
accept all the consequences of the step, have come out decidedly on the
Lord's side.

While the two shipmates were conversing thus in low tones, enjoying the
fresh air and the calm influences around them, the notes of an accordion
came over the water in tones that were sweetened and mellowed by
distance.

"Ha! that's Jim Frost now," said Billy, in subdued excitement, while
pleasure glittered in his eyes.  "Oh!  Ned, I _does_ like music.  It
makes my heart fit to bu'st sometimes, it does.  An' Jim plays that--
that what's 'is name--so beautiful!"

"His accordion," said Ned.

"Yes--his accordium--"

"No, Billy, not accordium, but accordion."

"Well, well--no matter.  I don't care a button what you calls it, so
long as Jim plays it.  Why, he'd make his fortin' if he was to play that
thing about the streets o' Lun'on.  Listen."

Jim Frost deserved all the praise that the enthusiastic boy bestowed on
him, for, besides possessing a fine ear and taste for music, and having
taught himself to play well, he had a magnificent tenor voice, and took
great delight in singing the beautiful hymns which at that time had been
introduced to the fleet.  On this particular day he was joined by his
crew, whose voices--more or less tuneful--came rolling over the water in
a great volume of melody.

"He's got Singin' Peter a-visitin' him," said Billy.  "Don't you hear
him?"

"Ay, I hear him, boy.  There's no mistakin' Singin' Peter's voice.  I'd
know it among a thousand."

"If it's hell here," remarked Billy, with a great sigh of satisfaction,
after the hymn was done, "it do seem like heaven over there.  I only
wish we had Jim Frost on board of us instead of that brute Gunter."

"Don't be hard on Gunter, Billy," said Ned.  "We don't know what he's
got to bear.  Some men are born, you see, wi' narves that are for ever
screwin' at 'em, an' ticklin' of 'em up; an' other men have narves that
always keep smoothin' of 'em down.  The last are the pleasantest to have
to do with, no doubt, but the others ain't quite so bad as they look
sometimes.  Their bark is worse than their bite."

"Hush!" exclaimed the boy, holding up a finger at the moment, for Jim
Frost's accordion again sent forth its rich tones in the prelude to a
hymn.  A few moments later and the tuneful voices came rolling towards
them in that beautiful hymn, the chorus of which ends:--

  "We shall know each other better when the mists are rolled away."

When the last verse was sung little Billy found a tear struggling to get
out of each eye, and a lump sticking in his throat, so he turned his
head away to conceal them.

"Ain't it beautiful?" he said, when the lump had disappeared.

"And ain't it curious," answered Ned, "that it should touch on what we
was talkin' about afore they began?  P'r'aps we shall know John Gunter
better `when the mists are rolled away.'"

Billy shook his head dubiously.  "I'm not so sure o' that," he said.
"Anyhow, there's a deal o' mist to be rolled away before we can know
_him_ better."

"There's a breeze comin' up from the south'ard," remarked Ned, who, to
say truth, did not seem to care very much about getting to know his
surly shipmate better; "we'll have to get your father aboard soon."

"That won't be an easy matter," said Billy, and he was right, for when
David Bright was set down with a friend, and a glass, and a pack of
cards, it was very difficult to move him.  He was, indeed, as fond of
gambling as of drinking, and lost much of his hardly earned gains in
that way.  Billy, therefore, received little but abuse when he tried to
induce him to return to his own vessel, but the freshing of the breeze,
and a sudden lurch of the smack, which overturned his glass of grog into
Gunter's lap, induced him at last to go on deck.

There the appearance of things had changed considerably.  Clouds were
beginning to obscure the bright sky, the breeze had effectually
shattered the clear mirror of the sea, and a swell was beginning to roll
the _White Cloud_, so that legs which would have found it difficult to
steady their owners on solid land made sad work of their office on the
heaving deck.

"Haul up the boat," cried Brock in a drivelling voice as he came on
deck; "where are you steerin' to?  Let me take the helm."

He staggered toward the tiller as he spoke, but Dick Herring and one of
his mates, seeing that he was quite unable to steer, tried to prevent
him.  Brock, however, had reached that stage of drunkenness in which men
are apt to become particularly obstinate, and, being a powerful man,
struggled violently to accomplish his purpose.

"Let him have it," said Herring at last.  "He can't do much damage."

When set free, the miserable man grasped the tiller and tried to steady
himself.  A lurch of the vessel, however, rendered his effort abortive.
The tiller fell to leeward.  Brock went headlong with it, stumbled over
the side, and, before any one could stretch out a hand to prevent it,
fell into the sea and sank.

His comrades were apparently sobered in an instant.  There was no need
for the hurried order to jump into the boat alongside.  Ned Spivin and
Billy were in it with the painter cast off and the oars out in a couple
of seconds.  The boat of the _White Cloud_ was also launched with a
speed, that only North Sea fishermen, perhaps, can accomplish, and both
crews rowed about eagerly while the smack lay-to.  But all without
success.  The unfortunate man was never more seen, and the visitors left
the vessel in sobered silence, and rowed, without exchanging a word, to
their own smack, which lay about a quarter of a mile distant on the port
quarter.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

RUTH AND CAPTAIN BREAM TAKE TO SCHEMING.

Returning to London, we will follow Captain Bream, who, one fine
morning, walked up to Mrs Dotropy's mansion at the west end, and
applied the knocker vigorously.

"Is Miss Ruth at home?"

Yes, Miss Ruth was at home, and would he walk in.

He was ushered into the library of the mansion; that room in which the
Dotropy ancestors, who could not find space among their kindred in the
dining-room, held, so to speak, an overflow meeting to themselves.  Ruth
soon joined him.

"I'm so glad to see you, Captain Bream," she said, shaking with much
fervency the hand held out to her.  "Sit down.  It is so kind of you to
come at once to help me in my little schemes--though I have not seen you
to explain why I asked you--but there, I was almost off on another
subject before I had begun the one I wish to consult you about.  And, do
you know, captain," added Ruth, with a slightly perplexed look, "I find
scheming a very troublesome business!"

"I should think you did, Miss Ruth, and it seems to me that it's always
better to go straight at what you've got to do without scheming--all
fair an' aboveboard.  Excuse me, my dear, but an old man who has sailed
your lamented father's ships for over thirty years, and known you since
you were a baby, may be allowed to say he's surprised that _you_ should
take to scheming."

"An old man who has not only sailed my dear father's ships for over
thirty years," said Ruth, "but has brought me toys from all parts of the
world, and has, besides, been as true to the family as the needle to the
pole--or truer, if all be true that is said of needles--may say to my
father's daughter exactly what he pleases without the smallest chance of
giving offence.  But, let me tell you, sir, that you are a foolish old
man, and much too quick in forming your opinions.  Scheming is both
justifiable and honourable at times--as I shall soon convince you."

A beaming smile overspread the captain's visage as he said--

"Very well, Miss Ruth.  Go on."

"But before I go on tell me how are the Miss Seawards?"

"Quite well, I believe.  At least I have no reason to think otherwise.
Rather thinnish if anything, but filled out wonderfully since I first
saw 'em."

"That's good," said Ruth, laughing.  "And now, do you know why I asked
you to go and lodge with them?"

"Well, I always thought it was because you knew I wanted a lodgin',
though I confess it has puzzled me to make out why you wanted me to come
to such an out-o'-the-way part o' the city; and, to tell you the truth,
it _is_ rather inconvenient, but your letter was so urgent, Miss Ruth,
that I knew you must have some good reason, and as your dear father's
daughter has a right to command me, I obeyed, as you know, without
question."

"You are a good old man," returned Ruth, laying her hand on the brown
fist of the captain and looking up in his face with the same loving
girlish look that she had bestowed on him many a time in years past on
his frequent visits with foreign toys, "and I shall test your goodness a
good deal before I have done with you."

"Test away, Miss Ruth.  You'll find I can stand a good deal of testin'.
I haven't sailed the salt sea for forty years for nothing."

"Well then," said Ruth, looking slightly perplexed again.  "What would
you do, Captain Bream, if you knew of two ladies who were unable to
work, or to find suitable work, and so poor as to be literally
starving--what would you do?"

"Give 'em money, of course."

"But suppose that, owing to some delicacy of feeling, or, perhaps, some
sort of mistaken pride, they would not accept money, and flushed very
much and felt hurt, if you ventured to offer it to them?"

"Why, then, I'd send 'em victuals."

"But suppose," continued Ruth, "that there were great difficulties in
the way of doing that, and they felt as much objection to receive
gratuitous victuals as money, what would you do then? you would not let
them starve, would you?"

"Of course not," returned the captain, promptly.  "If it fairly came to
that I'd be apt to treat 'em as nurses do obstinate infants and castor
oil.  I'd take 'em on my knee, force open their mouths, and shove the
victuals down their throats."

Ruth burst into a merry little laugh at this.

"But," said she, "don't you think that before proceeding to such
forcible treatment you might scheme a little to get them to take it
willingly, as nurses sometimes disguise the taste of the oil with coffee
or milk?"

"Well, you _might_ scheme a little on that sort of principle, Miss Ruth;
but in ordinary cases I prefer straightforward plans myself."

"Then why, let me ask," said Ruth with some severity in her look, "do
you dare to scheme with the wind as you and all sailors do when it is
dead against you?"

"You're becomin' too deep for me now, my dear; what d'ee mean?"

"When the wind blows dead against you, say from the north," replied
Ruth, "don't you begin your naughty--at least your nautical--scheming at
once?  Don't you lay your course to the nor'-west and pretend you are
going in that direction, and then don't you soon tack about--isn't that
what you call it--and steer nor'-east, pretending that you are going
_that_ way, when all the time you are wanting to go due north?  What do
you call that, sir, if it is not scheming to circumvent the wind?"

While she was speaking, Captain Bream's smile expanded and broke forth
at last in one of his bass broadsides of laughter, which gave Ruth great
delight for she had, as a little girl, enjoyed these thunderous laughs
excessively, and her taste for them had not departed.

"Well, my dear," said her visitor, "I admit that there are some sorts o'
fair-an'-above-board schemin' which ain't dishonourable, or unworthy of
a British sailor."

"Very good," returned Ruth; "then listen while I reveal some of my
recent scheming.  Some time ago I found out that two very dear friends
of mine--who were in delicate health and quite unable to work hard, as
well as being unable to find any kind of work whatever--were on the
point of starvation.  They would not accept money.  I schemed a little
to get them to earn money, but it was not easy, and the result was not a
sufficiently permanent income.  At last I thought I would try to get
them a boarder--a somewhat rich boarder, whose powerful appetite and
large meals might leave some crumbs for--"

"You don't mean to tell me, Miss Ruth," interrupted the captain, in
amazement, "that the Miss Seawards were in a state of starvation when I
went to 'em!"

"Indeed I do," replied Ruth; "at least as nearly in that state as was
compatible with existence."

"Well, well," said the captain, "no wonder they looked so thin; and no
wonder they're beginnin' to be a little better in flesh now, wi' the
legs o' mutton an' chops an' such like things that I get in to take the
edge off my appetite--which, as you justly observe, Miss Ruth, is not a
bad one.  I'm glad you've told me this, however, for I'll go in for
extra heavy feedin' now."

"That's right.  But stay, Captain Bream, I have not nearly done with my
scheming yet.  And I shall still want you to help me."

"Go ahead, my dear.  I'm your man, for, to tell 'ee the downright truth,
I've taken a great fancy to these two sisters, an' would steer a long
way out o' my course to help 'em."

"I knew you would," returned Ruth with a little look of triumph.
"Whoever comes in contact with these dear friends of mine thinks exactly
as you do.  Now, their health is not nearly as good as it ought to be,
so I want them to have a change of air.  You see, the poor little street
in which they live is not the freshest in London."

"Exactly so.  They want a trip to Brighton or Broadstairs or Ramsgate,
and a whiff of fresh sea-air, eh?" said the captain with a look of
satisfaction.

"No not to these places," said Ruth; "I thought of Yarmouth."

"Well, Yarmouth--just as good.  Any part o' the coast will do to blow
the London cobwebs out o' their brains--say Yarmouth."

"Very good, captain, but my difficulty is, how to manage it."

"Nothing easier, Miss Ruth.  I will take an afternoon train, run down,
hire a lodgin', come up to-morrow, an' carry the Miss Seawards off wi'
me."

"But suppose they won't go?"

"But they must go.  I'm quite able to take up one under each arm an'
carry 'em off by force if they won't."

"I would highly approve of that method, captain, if it were possible,
but I'm afraid such things are not permitted in this free country.  No,
if done at all, the thing must be gone about with a little more care and
delicacy."

"Well then, I'll go down an' take a lodgin', an' write up and ask them
to pay me a visit for the benefit of their health."

Ruth shook her pretty little head and frowned.

