
  _Rom_.
  Thank goodness they are gone.  Now, old chap, to work.
  Sit up! you're getting lazy.  Come, don't shirk.

  _Rem.  (turning red_).
  I getting lazy!  Like your awful cheek!
  I've done more in a day than you in a week.

  _Rom_.
  Ha, ha! ho, he!  My! that's a pretty joke.
  Look what I've done.  _You've_ hardly done a stroke.

  _Rem_.
  If that's your tune, you're free to do it all.
  _Your_ work, indeed!  Do you call _this_ a wall?
  I'd hop it on one foot.  Ho, ho!  A pretty town.
  A puff of wind would blow your rampart down.

  _Rom_.
  Hop it, you ass?  I'd like to see you try.
  I promise you shall know the reason why.

  _Rem.  (laughing_).
  Stupid old Romulus
  Sat on a tumulus
  Trying to build a town,
  There came this young brother,
  One foot over t'other,
  And knocked his precious wall down.
  Hurroo! here goes! stand clear! this for your wall!
  What care I if from now to Christmas Day you bawl?
  (_Hops over the wall, knocking off the top course_.)
  Missed it!  Hard luck!  I'll try again!  Stand by!
  I guess I ought to clear what's barely three feet high.

  _Rom.  (aside_).
  I've stood this long enough!  The time has come
  When I or Remus, single-handed, must build Rome.
  Ho! stay thy impious foot, thou scoffing mule,
  Or I will slay thee!  Cease to play the fool!

  _Rem.  (sings_).
  Over the city wall, over the city wall,
  See how we bump, hop, skip, and jump,
  Over the city wall.

  (_Jumps again_)

  _Rom.  (picking up a scaffolding-pole_).
  Thy doom is sealed!
  I said I'd kill thee!  Ha!
  'Tis thy last jump!  Thou hoppest never more!

  (_Knocks him on the head.)

  Rem_.
  I've overdone it!  Now I'm slain!  Alas!
  I do repent that I have played the ass!

  (_Dies_.)

  _Rom.  (sings_).
  Remus he would a-fooling go
  (Heigh-ho! says Romly),
  Whether his brother could stand it or no,
  With a Romly, Remy, Roman, and Grecian.
  (Heigh-ho! says Romulus Romly.)

  _Enter She-wolf suddenly_.

  _Wolf_.
  Hullo, my lad!  I've caught you then at last!
  I've waited twenty years to break my fast.
  It's hungry work.  But now I've got you.
  Come.  Don't kick, 'twill hurt the more.  Fe, fi, fo, fum!

  1.  A classical quotation having special reference to the anticipation
  of
  a good square meal.

  _Rom_.
  Oh, please it wasn't me!  See, there's my brother,
  He's far more on his bones than me, my dear stepmother!

  _Wolf (perceiving Remits_).
  Humph!  I may want you both.
  But if you wish
  I'll start on Remus for my opening dish.

  _Rom_.
  Do, gentle step-dame; then when he is done,
  Come back and claim your sole surviving son.

  _Wolf_.
  Agreed!  But lest you should forget your promise, dear,
  I'll take, if you'll allow, my first course here.
  I shan't be long; and as your turn comes next,
  Don't keep me waiting--I should be so vexed.

  (_Proceeds to devour Remus with relish_.)

  _Rom.  (aside_).
  Ah, ha, old glutton!  Ha, not much you don't!

  If I can help it, dine off me you won't.
  (_Stabs the wolf from behind_.)

  _Wolf_.
  Alack, I die, my banquet, half untasted!
  To think of so much dainty dinner wasted!

  _Rom.  (dances and sings_) -
  Who killed old Remus?
  I, said his brother, likewise his step-mother,
  I killed old Remus.
  Who saw him fall?
  Not a man-jack saw him drop on his back;
  None saw him fall.  Who's all right now?
  I, says the Roman; I'm rid of my foeman,
  I'm all right now.

  _Enter Chorus (with a band and flags_).

  Great Romulus, we're glad to see you licked him
  (Sing hey the jolly Roman and his ma);
  We're jolly glad you punched his head and kicked him
  (Sing hey the jolly Roman that you are).

  Then hail to you, great Roman!
  We yield to you or no man,
  (Sing hey the jolly Roman and his ma).
  We beg you'll let us help you build the city
  (Sing hey the jolly city that he rears);
  We'll be your loyal subjects; show us pity
  (Sing hey the jolly city and three cheers).
  Then hail the jolly city,
  To you we chant our ditty,
  (Sing hey the jolly city and three cheers).

  _Rom_.
  Friends, thank you one and all; excuse my tear,
  Domestic trouble makes me feel so queer;
  But if you like, to celebrate this day
  I sing you here one final roundelay.

  (_Sings_.)
  When Romulus from Tiber's stream escaped,
  His infant footsteps to the woodland shaped,
  He sort of vowed, if ever he grew big,
  He would the walls of a great city dig.
  This was his object; here he takes his stand,
  Romans ever, ever, ever I'll command.

  _Chorus (all going)_--
  Rule, old Roma, Roma rule the land,
  Romans ever, ever, ever he'll command.

  (_Exeunt omnes_.)



CHAPTER SEVEN.

A NIGHT WITH THE CROWNED HEADS.

Sub-Chapter I.

THE ARREST.

It was a ferociously hot day at the beginning of the summer vac.  I, as
in duty bound, had been spending my first day as a well-conducted, newly
broken-up schoolboy should.

Being fully impressed with the importance of combining self-improvement
with all my recreations, I had been in the morning to the Zoo, where I
had eaten buns with the elephant, cracked jokes and nuts with the
monkeys, prodded the hippopotamus, got a rise out of the grizzly, made
the lions roar, had a row with the chimpanzee, and generally enjoyed
myself.

Then I had done the Tower.  This only took ten minutes, as the place was
horribly slow, and fellows looked after you wherever you went.

After that I had had a turn at the circus, to study the habits of the
horse in a state of nature.  I should have liked this more if the clown
had not been such a muff.  He wasn't half up to his business, and
consequently the place was not as improving as it ought to have been.
So I shook off the dust of it from my feet, and, after laying some
apples and other things aboard, took an omnibus to Madame Tussaud's,
where I knew I should see some fellows of my acquaintance, and be able
to improve my mind in good company.

You must know I had pulled off the third history prize in our division
last term, and therefore felt more or less friendly disposed to the
kings and queens generally, and was even a little curious to see what
they looked like, now that I was supposed to know more about them than
most fellows do.

To tell the truth, although I had several times been to Madame Tussaud's
before, I had invariably cut these grand people and devoted myself to
another part of the establishment, which boys are usually supposed to
understand better.  Even on the present occasion it was necessary to pay
a visit to those regions, since several celebrated historical figures
were kept down there, which I felt I must on no account miss seeing.

But after I had thoroughly explored that portion, making the
acquaintance of all the new-comers, putting my head into the guillotine,
taking a turn in the condemned cell, sitting in Napoleon's carriage, and
otherwise informing myself concerning the seamy side of human nature, I
determined to be virtuous and devote at least half an hour to the study
of the royalties in the Great Hall.

The enterprise was not to be undertaken without refreshment.  I
therefore took a preliminary excursion to the ground floor, where the
historical costumes are kept, and, close beside them, the ices, buns,
Victoria sandwiches, ginger-beer, Turkish delight, lemon squashes, and
other wholesome aids to historical research.  Here I dallied a little--
just long enough to repair the ravages of nature--and then, feeling very
much as Little Jack Horner did after he had partaken of refreshment, I
mounted once more the marble stairs and set myself to do the crowned
heads.

I set myself literally, for it occurred to me I could do their Majesties
just as well sitting as standing.  And, as the afternoon was hot, and
the sofa near the door was comfortable, and as, moreover, I was slightly
oppressed with my study of the costumes downstairs, and considerably
soothed by the strains of Madame Tussaud's orchestra, it so fell out
that, just as I was nodding how-do-you-do to William the Conqueror, I
dropped asleep.

How long I slept I must leave it to those of my readers who have come
through the same exertions of mind and body to guess.  I had never
intended to exceed a short forty winks, because I was aware that only
half an hour was left before the time for closing arrived.  But when I
awoke it was with a start, to find that the place was silent, dark, and
deserted.  The music had gone, the shuffling of footsteps on the stairs
had ceased, the hum of voices had died away.  All was so quiet that my
own breathing sounded loud and noisy.

I rubbed my eyes and looked round.  Yes, I was on the same seat, but not
a soul was left in the place--only I--I and the wax figures.

The lights were out, all except one solitary gas-jet over the door of
the Chamber of Horrors, which sent a flickering gleam my way, and danced
weirdly in and out among the motionless images around me.  It was not a
comfortable position to be in, and I confess I did not like it.  Of
course a wax image in the dark is the same as a wax image in the day.
Still, thought I, I would sooner be outside, and--

What was it made me stop short, and sit up in my seat, petrified, and
with the blood curdling in my veins?

My eyes, while I meditated, had turned towards William the Conqueror, to
whom, as I have already said, I had been in the act of nodding in a
friendly way when I dropped asleep.

To my horror, I now perceived that he was, in a most unmistakable
manner, nodding at me!  Yes, by the feeble light I could see, not only
his head move, but even his eyes too!  I was helpless and speechless.  I
could no more move, or call out, or take my eyes off him, than if I had
been a wax figure myself.

Presently I saw his hands move slowly to the arms of his chair, and
then, keeping his eyes still on me, he rose to his feet.  I could hear
the clank of the sword against his greaves as he stepped off his
platform on to the floor of the hall and advanced a step towards me.
Then, as I sat quaking there, I felt his eyes upon mine, and knew that
he was staring at me from head to toe.

By a superhuman effort I dug my fingers into the plush of the sofa, and
ejaculated a frantic "Oh!"

The cry resounded fearfully through the building, and seemed to wake
echoes which certainly had nothing in common with my voice.  It was as
if every one in the place had suddenly caught sight of me at the same
moment and was giving vent to his or her astonishment.

I had better have remained silent!  For, as I gave one scared look
round, I saw King John lay down his pen, and, rising hastily, walk
towards me.  He scowled viciously at me, and then, as I collapsed in a
heap on to the floor, I saw him turn inquiringly to William the
Conqueror.

Whatever the question he asked was, William answered it in the
affirmative, whereupon John turned round to the rest of the company, and
beckoned with his hand.

Instantly William Rufus, Henry the First, Stephen, Matilda, Henry the
Second, and Richard Coeur de Lion, came forward.  William the Second
turned me over with his foot, and stooped down to look at my face.

"That's him!" said he.

"That's he, you mean," said Henry Beauclerk.

"I mean nothing of the kind," said Rufus.  "I mean him.  So now, old
lampreys!"

"They were _not_ lampreys," said Henry sulkily; "they were oysters."

"Yes, yes," said Matilda.  "But what business has _he_ here?"

"Him?" said Rufus doggedly.

"You'd better ask him," said Stephen, with a sneer.  "The chances are
he'll want to know what business _you_ have here."

"I'm as much an empress as you," said Matilda, spitefully.

"I know that; which means you're no empress at all."

"Look here," said Henry the Second, "don't you cheek me, Steevie.  She
let you have it pretty hot, you know."

"Hot?  I like that," said Stephen.  "It was cold enough that day she
made tracks in the snow.  I've had rheumatism ever since."

"By the way," said Henry the Second, "I can put you up to a capital cure
for rheumatism.  Tried it myself.  It was after that _little_ affair
about Beckett, you know.  I was a good deal run down; and I got a fellow
to touch me up on the shoulder with a cat.  You've no notion how it
picks a fellow up.  Quite my own notion, too.  Come, and I'll give you a
dose."

