stricken face.

Up to that date the family had prospered steadily, and, may we not add,
deservedly; their children having been trained in the knowledge of God,
their duties having been conscientiously discharged, their sympathies
with suffering humanity encouraged, and their general principles carried
into practical effect.  The consequence was that they were a
well-ordered and loving family.  There are many such in our land--
families which are guided by the Spirit and the Word of God.  The sudden
disappearance, therefore, of the eldest son of the Twitter family was
not an event to be taken lightly for he had never slept out of his own
particular bed without the distinct knowledge of his father and mother
since he was born, and his appearance at the breakfast-table had been
hitherto as certain as the rising of the sun or the winding of the
eight-day clock by his father every Saturday night.

In addition to all this, Sammy was of an amiable disposition, and had
been trustworthy, so that when he came to the years of discretion--which
his father had fixed at fifteen--he was allowed a latch-key, as he had
frequently to work at his employer's books till a lateish hour,--
sometimes eleven o'clock--after the family, including the domestic, had
gone to rest.

"Now, Samuel," said Mrs Twitter, with a slight return of her wonted
energy, "there can be only two explanations of this.  Either the dear
boy has met with an accident, or--"

"Well, Mariar, why do you pause?"

"Because it seems so absurd to think of, much more to talk of, his going
wrong or running away!  The first thing I've got to do, Samuel, is to go
to the police-office, report the case, and hear what they have to
advise."

"The very thing I was thinking of, Mariar; but don't it strike you it
might be better that _I_ should go to the station?"

"No, Samuel, the station is near.  I can do that, while you take a cab,
go straight away to his office and find out at what hour he left.  Now,
go; we have not a moment to lose.  Mary," (this was the next in order to
Sammy), "will look after the children's breakfast.  Make haste!"

Mr Twitter made haste--made it so fast that he made too much of it,
over-shot the mark, and went down-stairs head foremost, saluting the
front door with a rap that threw that of the postman entirely into the
shade.  But Twitter was a springy as well as an athletic man.  He arose
undamaged, made no remark to his more than astonished children, and went
his way.

Mrs Twitter immediately followed her husband's example in a less
violent and eccentric manner.  The superintendent of police received her
with that affable display of grave good-will which is a characteristic
of the force.  He listened with patient attention to the rather
incoherent tale which she told with much agitation--unbosoming herself
to this officer to a quite unnecessary extent as to private feelings and
opinions, and, somehow, feeling as if he were a trusted and confidential
friend though he was an absolute stranger--such is the wonderful
influence of Power in self-possessed repose, over Weakness in
distressful uncertainty!

Having heard all that the good lady had to say, with scarcely a word of
interruption; having put a few pertinent and relevant questions and
noted the replies, the superintendent advised Mrs Twitter to calm
herself, for that it would soon be "all right;" to return home, and
abide the issue of his exertions; to make herself as easy in the
circumstances as possible, and, finally, sent her away with the first
ray of comfort that had entered her heart since the news of Sammy's
disappearance had burst upon her like a thunderclap.

"What a thing it is," she muttered to herself on her way home, "to put
things into the hands of a _man_--one you can feel sure will do
everything sensibly and well, and without fuss."  The good lady meant no
disparagement to her sex by this--far from it; she referred to a manly
man as compared with an unmanly one, and she thought, for one moment,
rather disparagingly about the salute which her Samuel's bald pate had
given to the door that morning.  Probably she failed to think of the
fussy manner in which she herself had assaulted the superintendent of
police, for it is said that people seldom see themselves!

But Mrs Twitter was by no means bitter in her thoughts, and her
conscience twitted her a little for having perhaps done Samuel a slight
injustice.

Indeed she _had_ done him injustice, for that estimable little man went
about his inquiries after the lost Sammy with a lump as big as a walnut
on the top of his head, and with a degree of persistent energy that
might have made the superintendent himself envious.

"Not been at the office for two days, sir!" exclaimed Mr Twitter,
repeating--in surprised indignation, for he could not believe it--the
words of Sammy's employer, who was a merchant in the hardware line.

"No, sir," said the hardware man, whose face seemed as hard as his ware.

"Do--you--mean--to--tell--me," said Twitter, with deliberate solemnity,
"that my son Samuel has not been in this office for _two days_?"

"That is precisely what I mean to tell you," returned the hardware man,
"and I mean to tell you, moreover, that your son has been very irregular
of late in his attendance, and that on more than one occasion he has
come here drunk."

"Drunk!" repeated Twitter, almost in a shout.

"Yes, sir, drunk--intoxicated."

The hardware man seemed at that moment to Mr Twitter the hardest-ware
man that ever confronted him.  He stood for some moments aghast and
speechless.

"Are you aware, sir," he said at last, in impressive tones, "that my son
Samuel wears the blue ribbon?"

The hardware man inquired, with an expression of affected surprise, what
that had to do with the question; and further, gave it as his opinion
that a bit of blue ribbon was no better than a bit of red or green
ribbon if it had not something better behind it.

This latter remark, although by no means meant to soothe, had the effect
of reducing Mr Twitter to a condition of sudden humility.

"There, sir," said he, "I entirely agree with you, but I had believed--
indeed it seems to me almost impossible to believe otherwise--that my
poor boy had religious principle behind his blue ribbon."

This was said in such a meek tone, and with such a woe-begone look as
the conviction began to dawn that Sammy was not immaculate--that the
hardware man began visibly to soften, and at last a confidential talk
was established, in which was revealed such a series of irregularities
on the part of the erring son, that the poor father's heart was crushed
for the time, and, as it were, trodden in the dust.  In his extremity,
he looked up to God and found relief in rolling his care upon Him.

As he slowly recovered from the shock, Twitter's brain resumed its
wonted activity.

"You have a number of clerks, I believe?" he suddenly asked the hardware
man.

"Yes, I have--four of them."

"Would you object to taking me through your warehouse, as if to show it
to me, and allow me to look at your clerks?"

"Certainly not.  Come along."

On entering, they found one tying up a parcel, one writing busily, one
reading a book, and one balancing a ruler on his nose.  The latter, on
being thus caught in the act, gave a short laugh, returned the ruler to
its place, and quietly went on with his work.  The reader of the book
started, endeavoured to conceal the volume, in which effort he was
unsuccessful, and became very red in the face as he resumed his pen.

The employer took no notice, and Mr Twitter looked very hard at the
hardware in the distant end of the warehouse, just over the desk at
which the clerks sat.  He made a few undertoned remarks to the master,
and then, crossing over to the desk, said:--

"Mr Dobbs, may I have the pleasure of a few minutes' conversation with
you outside?"

"C-certainly, sir," replied Dobbs, rising with a redder face than ever,
and putting on his hat.

"Will you be so good as to tell me, Mr Dobbs," said Twitter, in a quiet
but very decided way when outside, "where my son Samuel Twitter spent
last night?"

Twitter looked steadily in the clerk's eyes as he put this question.  He
was making a bold stroke for success as an amateur detective, and, as is
frequently the result of bold strokes, he succeeded.

"Eh! your--your--son S-Samuel," stammered Dobbs, looking at Twitter's
breast-pin, and then at the ground, while varying expressions of guilty
shame and defiance flitted across his face.

He had a heavy, somewhat sulky face, with indecision of character
stamped on it.  Mr Twitter saw that and took advantage of the latter
quality.

"My poor boy," he said, "don't attempt to deceive me.  You are guilty,
and you know it.  Stay, don't speak yet.  I have no wish to injure you.
On the contrary, I pray God to bless and save you; but what I want with
you at this moment is to learn where my dear boy is.  If you tell me, no
further notice shall be taken of this matter, I assure you."

"Does--does--he know anything about this?" asked Dobbs, glancing in the
direction of the warehouse of the hardware man.

"No, nothing of your having led Sammy astray, if that's what you mean,--
at least, not from me, and you may depend on it he shall hear nothing,
if you only confide in me.  Of course he may have his suspicions."

"Well, sir," said Dobbs, with a sigh of relief, "he's in my lodgings."

Having ascertained the address of the lodgings, the poor father called a
cab and soon stood by the side of a bed on which his son Sammy lay
sprawling in the helpless attitude in which he had fallen down the night
before, after a season of drunken riot.  He was in a heavy sleep, with
his still innocent-looking features tinged with the first blight of
dissipation.

"Sammy," said the father, in a husky voice, as he shook him gently by
the arm; but the poor boy made no answer--even a roughish shake failed
to draw from him more than the grumbled desire, "let me alone."

"Oh!  God spare and save him!" murmured the father, in a still husky
voice, as he fell on his knees by the bedside and prayed--prayed as
though his heart were breaking, while the object of his prayer lay
apparently unconscious through it all.

He rose, and was standing by the bedside, uncertain how to act, when a
heavy tread was heard on the landing, the door was thrown open, and the
landlady, announcing "a gentleman, sir," ushered in the superintendent
of police, who looked at Mr Twitter with a slight expression of
surprise.

"You are here before me, I see, sir," he said.

"Yes, but how did you come to find out that he was here?"

"Well, I had not much difficulty.  You see it is part of our duty to
keep our eyes open," replied the superintendent, with a peculiar smile,
"and I have on several occasions observed your son entering this house
with a companion in a condition which did not quite harmonise with his
blue ribbon, so, after your good lady explained the matter to me this
morning I came straight here."

"Thank you--thank you.  It is _very_ kind.  I--you--it could not have
been better managed."

Mr Twitter stopped and looked helplessly at the figure on the bed.

"Perhaps," said the superintendent, with much delicacy of feeling, "you
would prefer to be alone with your boy when he awakes.  If I can be of
any further use to you, you know where to find me.  Good-day, sir."

Without waiting for a reply the considerate superintendent left the
room.

"Oh!  Sammy, Sammy, speak to me, my dear boy--speak to your old father!"
he cried, turning again to the bed and kneeling beside it; but the
drunken sleeper did not move.

Rising hastily he went to the door and called the landlady.

"I'll go home, missis," he said, "and send the poor lad's mother to
him."

"Very well, sir, I'll look well after 'im till she comes."

Twitter was gone in a moment, and the old landlady returned to her
lodger's room.  There, to her surprise, she found Sammy up and hastily
pulling on his boots.

In truth he had been only shamming sleep, and, although still very
drunk, was quite capable of looking after himself.  He had indeed been
asleep when his father's entrance awoke him, but a feeling of intense
shame had induced him to remain quite still, and then, having commenced
with this unspoken lie, he felt constrained to carry it out.  But the
thought of facing his mother he could not bear, for the boy had a
sensitive spirit and was keenly alive to the terrible fall he had made.
At the same time he was too cowardly to face the consequences.  Dressing
himself as well as he could, he rushed from the house in spite of the
earnest entreaties of the old landlady, so that when the distracted
mother came to embrace and forgive her erring child she found that he
had fled.

Plunging into the crowded thoroughfares of the great city, and walking
swiftly along without aim or desire, eaten up with shame, and rendered
desperate by remorse, the now reckless youth sought refuge in a low
grog-shop, and called for a glass of beer.

"Well, I say, you're com--comin' it raither strong, ain't you, young
feller?" said a voice at his elbow.

He looked up hastily, and saw a blear-eyed youth in a state of
drivelling intoxication, staring at him with the expression of an idiot.

"That's no business of yours," replied Sam Twitter, sharply.

"Well, thash true, 'tain't no b-busnish o' mine.  I--I'm pretty far gone
m'self, I allow; but I ain't quite got the l-length o' drinkin' in a
p-public 'ouse wi' th' bl-blue ribb'n on."

The fallen lad glanced at his breast.  There it was,--forgotten,
desecrated!  He tore it fiercely from his button-hole, amid the laughter
of the bystanders--most of whom were women of the lowest grade--and
dashed it on the floor.

"Thash right.--You're a berrer feller than I took you for," said the sot
at his elbow.

To avoid further attention Sammy took his beer into a dark corner and
was quickly forgotten.

He had not been seated more than a few minutes when the door opened, and
a man with a mild, gentle, yet manly face entered.

"Have a glass, ol' feller?" said the sot, the instant he caught sight of
him.

"Thank you, no--not to-day," replied John Seaward, for it was our city
missionary on what he sometimes called a fishing excursion--fishing for
men!  "I have come to give you a glass to-day, friends."

"Well, that's friendly," said a gruff voice in a secluded box, out of
which next minute staggered Ned Frog.  "Come, what is't to be, old man?"

"A looking-glass," replied the missionary, picking out a tract from the
bundle he held in his hand and offering it to the ex-prize-fighter.
"But the tract is not the glass I speak of, friend: here it is, in the
Word of that God who made us all--made the throats that swallow the
drink, and the brains that reel under it."

Here he read from a small Bible, "`But they also have erred through
wine, and through strong drink are out of the way.'"

"Bah!" said Ned, flinging the tract on the floor and exclaiming as he
left the place with a swing; "I don't drink wine, old man; can't afford
anything better than beer, though sometimes, when I'm in luck, I have a
drop of Old Tom."

There was a great burst of ribald laughter at this, and numerous were
the witticisms perpetrated at the expense of the missionary, but he took
no notice of these for a time, occupying himself merely in turning over
the leaves of his Bible.  When there was a lull he said:--

"Now, dear sisters," (turning to the women who, with a more or less
drunken aspect and slatternly air, were staring at him), "for sisters of
mine you are, having been made by the same Heavenly Father; I won't
offer you another glass,--not even a looking-glass,--for the one I have
already held up to you will do, if God's Holy Spirit opens your eyes to
see yourselves in it; but I'll give you a better object to look at.  It
is a Saviour--one who is able to save you from the drink, and from sin
in every form.  You know His name well, most of you; it is Jesus, and
that name means Saviour, for He came to save His people from their
sins."

At this point he was interrupted by one of the women, who seemed bent on
keeping up the spirit of banter with which they had begun.  She asked
him with a leer if he had got a wife.

"No," he said, "but I have got a great respect and love for women,
because I've got a mother, and if ever there was a woman on the face of
this earth that deserves the love of a son, that woman is my mother.
Sister," he added, turning to one of those who sat on a bench near him
with a thin, puny, curly-haired boy wrapped up in her ragged shawl, "the
best prayer that I could offer up for you--and I _do_ offer it--is, that
the little chap in your arms may grow up to bless his mother as heartily
as I bless mine, but that can never be, so long as you love the strong
drink and refuse the Saviour."

At that moment a loud cry was heard outside.  They all rose and ran to
the door, where a woman, in the lowest depths of depravity, with her
eyes bloodshot, her hair tumbling about her half-naked shoulders, and
her ragged garments draggled and wet, had fallen in her efforts to enter
the public-house to obtain more of the poison which had already almost
destroyed her.  She had cut her forehead, and the blood flowed freely
over her face as the missionary lifted her.  He was a powerful man, and
could take her up tenderly and with ease.  She was not much hurt,
however.  After Seaward had bandaged the cut with his own handkerchief
she professed to be much better.

This little incident completed the good influence which the missionary's
words and manner had previously commenced.  Most of the women began to
weep as they listened to the words of love, encouragement, and hope
addressed to them.  A few of course remained obdurate, though not
unimpressed.

All this time young Sam Twitter remained in his dark corner, with his
head resting on his arms to prevent his being recognised.  Well did he
know John Seaward, and well did Seaward know him, for the missionary had
long been a fellow-worker with Mrs Twitter in George Yard and at the
Home of Industry.  The boy was very anxious to escape Seaward's
observation.  This was not a difficult matter.  When the missionary
