
CHAPTER NINETEEN.

A HERCULEAN FEAT.

The whole skirmish did not occupy two minutes.  It was like most charges
of Mexican cavalry--a dash, a wild yelling, half a dozen empty saddles,
and a hasty retreat.

The guerilleros had swerved off as soon as they perceived that we had
gained a safe position, and the bullets of our reloaded pieces began to
whistle around their ears.  Dubrosc alone, in his impetuosity, galloped
close up to the inclosure; and it was only on perceiving himself alone,
and the folly of exposing himself thus fruitlessly, that he wheeled
round and followed the Mexicans.  The latter were now out upon the
prairie, beyond the range of small-arms, grouped around their wounded
comrades, or galloping to and fro, with yells of disappointed vengeance.

I entered the corral, where most of my men had sheltered themselves
behind the stockades.  Little Jack sat upon Twidget, reloading his
rifle, and trying to appear insensible to the flattering encomiums that
hailed him from all sides.  A compliment from Lincoln, however, was too
much for Jack, and a proud smile was seen upon the face of the boy.

"Thank you, Jack," said I, as I passed him; "I see you can use a rifle
to some purpose."

Jack held down his head, without saying a word, and appeared to be very
busy about the lock of his piece.

In the skirmish, Lincoln had received the scratch of a lance, at which
he was chafing in his own peculiar way, and vowing revenge upon the
giver.  It might be said that he had taken this, as he had driven his
short bayonet through his antagonist's arm, and sent him off with this
member hanging by his side.  But the hunter was not content; and, as he
retired sullenly into the inclosure, he turned round, and, shaking his
fist at the Mexican, muttered savagely:

"Yer darned skunk!  I'll know yer agin.  See if I don't git yer yit!"

Gravenitz, a Prussian soldier, had also been too near a lance, and
several others had received slight wounds.  The German was the only one
killed.  He was still lying out on the plain, where he had fallen, the
long shaft of the lance standing up out of his skull.  Not ten feet
distant lay the corpse, of his slayer, glistening in its gaudy and
picturesque attire.

The other guerillero, as he fell, had noosed one of his legs in the lazo
that hung from the horn of his saddle, and was now dragged over the
prairie after his wild and snorting mustang.  As the animal swerved, at
every jerk his limber body bounded to the distance of twenty feet, where
it would lie motionless until slung into the air by a fresh pluck on the
lazo.

As we were watching this horrid spectacle, several of the guerilleros
galloped after, while half a dozen others were observed spurring their
steeds towards the rear of the corral.  On looking in this direction we
perceived a huge red horse, with an empty saddle, scouring at full speed
across the prairie.  A single glance showed us that this horse was
Hercules.

"Good heavens! the Major!"

"Safe somewhere," replied Clayley; "but where the deuce can he be?  He
is not _hors de combat_ on the plain, or one could see him even ten
miles off.  Ha! ha! ha!--look yonder!"

Clayley, yelling with laughter, pointed to the corner of the rancho.

Though after a scene so tragic, I could hardly refrain from joining
Clayley in his boisterous mirth.  Hanging by the belt of his sabre upon
a high picket was the major, kicking and struggling with all his might.
The waist-strap, tightly drawn by the bulky weight of the wearer,
separated his body into two vast rotundities, while his face was
distorted and purple with the agony of suspense and suspension.  He was
loudly bellowing for help, and several soldiers were running towards
him; but, from the manner in which he jerked his body up, and screwed
his neck, so as to enable him to look over the stockade, it was evident
that the principal cause of his uneasiness lay on the "other side of the
fence."

The truth was, the major, on the first appearance of the enemy, had
galloped towards the rear of the corral, and, finding no entrance, had
thrown himself from the back of Hercules upon the stockade, intending to
climb over; but, having caught a glance of some guerilleros, he had
suddenly let go his bridle, and attempted to precipitate himself into
the corral.

His waist-belt, catching upon a sharp picket, held him suspended midway,
still under the impression that the Mexicans were close upon his rear.
He was soon unhooked, and now waddled across the corral, uttering a
thick and continuous volley of his choicest oaths.

Our eyes were now directed towards Hercules.  The horsemen had closed
upon him within fifty yards, and were winding their long lazos in the
air.  The major, to all appearance, had lost his horse.

After galloping to the edge of the woods, Hercules suddenly halted, and
threw up the trailing-bridle with a loud neigh.  His pursuers, coming
up, flung out their lazos.  Two of these, settling over his head, noosed
him around the neck.  The huge brute, as if aware of the necessity of a
desperate effort to free himself, dropped his nose to the ground, and
stretched himself out in full gallop.

The lariats, one by one tightening over his bony chest, snapped like
threads, almost jerking the mustangs from their feet.  The long
fragments sailed out like streamers as he careered across the prairie,
far ahead of his yelling pursuers.

He now made directly for the corral.  Several of the soldiers ran
towards the stockade, in order to seize the bridle when he should come
up; but Hercules, spying his old comrade--the horse of the "Doctor"--
within the inclosure, first neighed loudly, and then, throwing all his
nerve into the effort, sprang high over the picket fence.

A cheer rose from the men, who had watched with interest his efforts to
escape, and who now welcomed him as if he had been one of themselves.

"Two months' pay for your horse, Major!" cried Clayley.

"Och, the bewtiful baste!  He's worth the full of his skin in goold!  By
my sowl! the capten ought to have 'im," ejaculated Chane; and various
other encomiums were uttered in honour of Hercules.

Meanwhile, his pursuers, not daring to approach the stockade, drew off
towards their comrades with gestures of disappointment and chagrin.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

RUNNING THE GAUNTLET.

I began to reflect upon the real danger of our situation--corralled upon
a naked prairie, ten miles from camp, with no prospect of escape.  I
knew that we could defend ourselves against twice the number of our
cowardly adversaries; they would never dare to come within range of our
rifles.  But how to get out? how to cross the open plain?  Fifty
infantry against four times that number of mounted men--lancers at
that--and not a bush to shelter the foot-soldier from the long spear and
the iron hoof!

The nearest _motte_ was half a mile off, and that another half a mile
from the edge of the woods.  Even could the motte be reached by a
desperate run, it would be impossible to gain the woods, as the enemy
would certainly cordon our new position, and thus completely cut us off.
At present they had halted in a body about four hundred yards from the
corral; and, feeling secure of having us in a trap, most of them had
dismounted, and were running out their mustangs upon their lazos.  It
was plainly their determination to take us by siege.

To add to our desperate circumstances, we discovered that there was not
a drop of water in the corral.  The thirst that follows a fight had
exhausted the scanty supply of our canteens, and the heat was excessive.

As I was running over in my mind the perils of our position, my eye
rested upon Lincoln, who stood with his piece at a carry, his left hand
crossed over his breast, in the attitude of a soldier waiting to receive
orders.

"Well, Sergeant, what is it?"  I inquired.

"Will yer allow me, Cap'n, ter take a couple o' files, and fetch in the
Dutchman?  The men 'ud like ter put a sod upon him afore them thievin'
robbers kin git at him."

"Certainly.  But will you be safe?  He's at some distance from the
stockade."

"I don't think them fellers 'll kum down--they've had enuf o' it just
now.  We'll run out quick, and the boys kin kiver us with their fire."

"Very well, then; set about it."

Lincoln returned to the company and selected four of the most active of
his men, with whom he proceeded towards the entrance.  I ordered the
soldiers to throw themselves on that side of the inclosure, and cover
the party in case of an attack; but none was made.  A movement was
visible among the Mexicans, as they perceived Lincoln and his party rush
out towards the body; but, seeing they would be too late to prevent them
from carrying it off, they wisely kept beyond the reach of the American
rifles.

The body of the German was brought into the inclosure and buried with
due ceremony, although his comrades believed that before many hours it
would be torn from its "warrior grave", dragged forth to feed the coyote
and vulture, and his bones left to whiten upon the naked prairie.  Which
of us knew that it might not in a few hours be his own fate?

"Gentlemen," said I to my brother officers, as we came together, "can
you suggest any mode of escape?"

"Our only chance is to fight them where we stand.  There are four to
one," replied Clayey.

"We have no other chance, Captain," said Oakes, with a shake of the
head.

"But it is not their intention to fight _us_.  Their design is to starve
us.  See! they are picketing their horses, knowing they can easily
overtake us if we attempt to leave the inclosure."

"Cannot we move in a hollow square?"

"But what is a hollow square of fifty men? and against four times that
number of cavalry, with lances and lazos?  No, no; they would shiver it
with a single charge.  Our only hope is that we may be able to hold out
until our absence from camp may bring a detachment to our relief."

"And why not send for it?" inquired the major, who had scarcely been
asked for his advice, but whose wits had been sharpened by the extremity
of his danger.  "Why not send for a couple of regiments?"

"How are we to send, Major?" asked Clayley, looking on the major's
proposition as ridiculous under the circumstances.  "Have you a pigeon
in your pocket?"

"Why?--how?  There's Hercules runs like a hare; stick one of your
fellows in the saddle, and I'll warrant him to camp in an hour."

"You are right, Major," said I, catching at the major's proposal; "thank
you for the thought.  If he could only pass that point in the woods!  I
hate it, but it is our only chance."

The last sentence I muttered to myself.

"Why do you hate it, Captain?" inquired the major, who had overheard me.

"You might not understand my reasons, Major."

I was thinking upon the disgrace of being trapped as I was, and on my
first scout, too.

"Who will volunteer to ride an express to camp?"  I inquired, addressing
the men.

Twenty of them leaped out simultaneously.

"Which of you remembers the course, that you could follow it in a
gallop?"  I asked.

The Frenchman, Raoul, stood forth, touching his cap.

"I know a shorter one, Captain, by Mata Cordera."

"Ha!  Raoul, you know the country.  You are the man."

I now remembered that this man joined us at Sacrificios, just after the
landing of the expedition.  He had been living in the country previous
to our arrival, and was well acquainted with it.

"Are you a good horseman?"  I inquired.

"I have seen five years of cavalry service."

"True.  Do you think you can pass them?  They are nearly in your track."

"As we entered the prairie, Captain; but my route will lie past this
motte to the left."

"That will give you several points.  Do not stop a moment after you have
mounted, or they will take the hint and intercept you."

"With the red horse there will be no danger, Captain."

"Leave your gun; take these pistols.  Ha! you have a pair in the
holsters.  See if they are loaded.  These spurs--so--cut loose that
heavy piece from the saddle: the cloak, too; you must have nothing to
encumber you.  When you come near the camp, leave your horse in the
chaparral.  Give this to Colonel C."

I wrote the following words on a scrap of paper:--

"Dear Colonel,

"Two hundred will be enough.  Could they be stolen out after night?  If
so, all will be well--if it gets abroad...

"Yours,

"H.H."

As I handed the paper to Raoul, I whispered in his ear--

"To Colonel C's own hand.  Privately, Raoul--privately, do you hear?"

Colonel C. was my friend, and I knew that he would send a _private_
party to my rescue.

"I understand, Captain," was the answer of Raoul.

"Ready, then! now mount and be off."

The Frenchman sprang nimbly to the saddle, and, driving his spurs into
the flanks of his horse, shot out from the pen like a bolt of lightning.

For the first three hundred yards or so he galloped directly towards the
guerilleros.  These stood leaning upon their saddles, or lay stretched
along the green-sward.  Seeing a single horseman riding towards them,
few of them moved, believing him to be some messenger sent to treat for
our surrender.

Suddenly the Frenchman swerved from his direct course, and went sweeping
around them in the curve of an ellipse.

They now perceived the _ruse_, and with a yell leaped into their
saddles.  Some fired their escopettes; others, unwinding their lazos,
started in pursuit.

Raoul had by this time set Hercules's head for the clump of timber which
he had taken as his guide, and now kept on in a track almost
rectilinear.  Could he but reach the motte or clump in safety, he knew
that there were straggling trees beyond, and these would secure him in
some measure from the lazos of his pursuers.

We stood watching his progress with breathless silence.  Our lives
depended on his escape.  A crowd of the guerilleros was between him and
us; but we could still see the green jacket of the soldier, and the
great red flanks of Hercules, as he bounded on towards the edge of the
woods.  Then we saw the lazos launched out, and spinning around Raoul's
head, and straggling shots were fired; and we fancied at one time that
our comrade sprang up in the saddle, as if he had been hit.  Then he
appeared again, all safe, rounding the little islet of timber, and the
next moment he was gone from our sight.  There followed a while of
suspense--of terrible suspense--for the motte hid from view both
pursuers and pursued.  Every eye was straining towards the point where
the horseman had disappeared, when Lincoln, who had climbed to the top
of the rancho, cried out:

"He's safe, Cap'n!  The dod-rotted skunks air kummin 'ithout him."

It was true.  A minute after, the horsemen appeared round the motte,
riding slowly back, with that air and attitude that betoken
disappointment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note.  A motte is an eminence.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

A SHORT FIGHT AT "LONG SHOT".

The escape of Raoul and Hercules produced an affect almost magical upon
the enemy.  Instead of the listless defensive attitude lately assumed,
the guerilleros were now in motion like a nest of roused hornets,
scouring over the plain, and yelling like a war-party of Indians.

They did not surround the corral, as I had anticipated they would.  They
had no fear that we should attempt to escape; but they knew that,
instead of the three days in which they expected to kill us with thirst
at their leisure, they had not three hours left to accomplish that
object.  Raoul would reach the camp in little more than an hour's time,
and either infantry or mounted men would be on them in two hours after.

Scouts were seen galloping off in the direction taken by Raoul, and
others dashed into the woods on the opposite side of the prairie.  All
was hurry and scurry.

Along with Clayley I had climbed upon the roof of the rancho, to watch
the motions of the enemy, and to find out, if possible, his intentions.
We stood for some time without speaking, both of us gazing at the
manoeuvres of the guerilleros.  They were galloping to and fro over the
prairie, excited by the escape of Raoul.

"Splendidly done!" exclaimed my companion, struck with their graceful
horsemanship.  "One of those fellows, Captain, as he sits, at this
minute, would--"

"Ha! what--?" shouted he, suddenly turning and pointing towards the
woods.

I looked in the direction indicated.  A cloud of dust was visible at the
_debouchement_ of the Medellin road.  It appeared to hang over a small
body of troops upon the march.  The sun was just setting, and, as the
cloud lay towards the west, I could distinguish the sparkling of bright
objects through its dun volume.  The guerilleros had reined up their
horses, and were eagerly gazing towards the same point.

Presently the dust was wafted aside, a dozen dark forms became visible,
and in the midst a bright object flashed under the sun like a sheet of
gold.  At the same instant an insulting shout broke from the
guerilleros, and a voice was heard exclaiming:

"_Cenobio!  Cenobio!  Los canones_!"  (Cenobio!  Cenobio! the cannon!)

Clayley turned towards me with an inquiring look.

"It is true, Clayley; by heavens, we'll have it now!"

"What did they say?"

