At first, when he opened his eyes, he fancied, from the sound of water
in his ears, that it must have come on to rain very heavily, but, being
regardless of rain, he tried to fall asleep again.  Then he felt as if
there must be a leak in his berth somewhere, he was so wet; but, being
sleepy, he shut his eyes, and tried to shut his senses against moisture.
Not succeeding, he resolved to turn on his other side, but experienced
a strange resistance to that effort.  Waxing testy, he wrenched himself
round, and in so doing kicked out somewhat impatiently.  This, of
course, woke him up to the real state of the case.  It also awoke Slagg,
who received the kick on his shins.  He, delivering a cry of pain
straight into Sam Shipton's ear, caused that youth to fling out his
fist, which fell on Stumps's nose, and thus in rapid succession were the
sleepers roused effectually to a full sense of their condition.

"It's cold," remarked Stumps, with chattering teeth.

"You should be thankful that you're alive to feel the cold, you
ungrateful creetur," said Slagg.

"I _am_ thankful, Jim," returned the other humbly, as he sought to undo
the rope that held him fast; "but you know a feller can scarcely express
thanks or--or--otherwise half asleep, an' his teeth goin' like a pair o'
nut-crackers."

"The wind is evidently down," remarked Sam, who had already undone his
lashings.  "Here, Robin, help me to untie this corner of the sail.  I
had no idea that sleeping with one's side in a pool of water would make
one so cold and stiff."

"If it had bin a pool, Mr Shipton," said Slagg, "it wouldn't have made
you cold; 'cause why? you'd have made it warm.  But it was the sea
washin' out and in fresh that kep' the temperater low--d'ee see?"

"What a cargo o' rheumatiz we've been a-layin' in this night for old
age," said Stumps ruefully, as he rubbed his left shoulder.

Throwing off the sail, Sam stood up and looked round, while an
exclamation of surprise and pleasure broke from him.  The contrast
between the night and morning was more than usually striking.  Not only
had darkness vanished and the wind gone down, but there was a dead calm
which had changed the sea into a sheet of undulating glass, and the sun
had just risen, flooding the sky with rosy light, and tipping the summit
of each swell with gleaming gold.  The gentle, noiseless heaving of the
long swell, so far from breaking the rest of nature, rather deepened it
by suggesting the soft breathings of slumber.  There were a few gulls
floating each on its own image, as if asleep, and one great albatross
soared slowly in the bright sky, as if acting the part of sentinel over
the resting sea.

"How glorious!" exclaimed Robin, as, with flashing eyes, he gazed round
the scarce perceptible horizon.

"How hard to believe," said Sam, in a low voice, "that we may have been
brought here to die."

"But surely you do not think our case so desperate?" said Robin.

"I hope it is not, but it may be so."

"God forbid," responded Robin earnestly.

As he spoke his arm pressed the little bible which he had rescued from
the wreck.  Thrusting his hand into his bosom he drew it out.

"Darling mother!" he said, "when she gave me this she told me to consult
it daily, but especially in times of trouble or danger.  I'll look into
it now, Sam."

He opened the book, and, selecting the verse that first met his eye,
read: "In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his
presence saved them; in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and
he bare them and carried them all the days of old."

"That's a grand word for us, isn't it?--from Isaiah," said Robin.

"Well, what do you make of it?" asked Sam, whose religious education had
not been attended to as well as that of his friend.

"That our God is full of love, and pity, and sympathy, so that we have
nothing to fear," said Robin.

"But surely you can't regard that as a message to us when you know that
you turned to it by mere chance," said Sam.

"I do regard it as a special message to us," returned Robin with
decision.

"And what if you had turned up an entirely unsuitable or inapplicable
verse?" said Sam.

"Then I should have concluded that God had no _special_ message for us
just now, but left us to that general comfort and instruction contained
throughout the whole word.  When, however, special comfort is sought and
found, it seems to me ungrateful to refuse it."

"But I don't refuse it, Robin," returned Sam; "I merely doubt whether it
is sent to us or not."

"Why, Sam, _all_ the bible was sent to us for comfort and instruction."

"True--true.  I have not thought much on that subject, Robin, but I'll
try to believe at present that you are right, for we stand much in need
of strong hope at all events.  Here we are, none of us knows how far
from the nearest land, with little food and less water, on a thing that
the first stiff breeze may knock to pieces, without shelter and without
compass!"

"Without shelter and compass, Mr Shipton!" said Jim Slagg, who had
hitherto listened in silence to the conversation; "why, what d'ye call
this?"  (taking hold of the sail).  "Ain't that shelter enough, and
won't the sun guide us by day and the stars by night.  It seems to me
that you are too despondin', Mr Shipton."

"Don't `mister' me any more, Slagg.  It was all very well aboard ship
where we had our relative positions, but now we are comrades in
distress, and must be on an equal footing."

"Very good," replied Slagg, looking round in his comrades' faces, and
raising his voice as if making a speech.  "Bein' equal, as you say, I
takes the liberty o' callin' a general meetin' o' this free and--if I
may be allowed the expression--easy Republic.  Moreover, I move myself
into the chair and second the motion, which, nobody objectin', is
carried unanimously.  Gentlemen, the business of this here meetin' is to
appoint a commander to this here ship, an' what could be more in
accordance with the rule o' three--not to mention the rules o' four and
common sense--than a Shipton takin' command.  Who's goin' to make the
first reslootion?"

Entering into the spirit of the thing, Robin moved that Samuel Shipton
be appointed to command the ship and the party, with the title of
captain.

"And without pay," suggested Slagg.

"And _I_ move," said Stumps, who was just beginning to understand the
joke, though a little puzzled by the fact that it was done in earnest,
"I move that Robin Wright be first leftenant."

"Brayvo, Stumps!" cried Slagg, "your intellec' _is_ growin'.  It on'y
remains to appoint you ship's monkey and maid-of-all-work--specially
dirty work--and, then, with a hearty vote o' thanks to myself for my
conduct in the chair, to vacate the same an' dissolve the meetin'."

These matters having been satisfactorily settled, the castaways
proceeded to prepare breakfast, and while this was being done the
recently appointed captain looked once more anxiously round in the hope
of seeing the large raft with their late shipmates on it, but it was not
to be seen.  Neither raft, ship, nor any other sign of man wos visible
on all the glittering sea.

Breakfast was not a tempting meal.  The biscuits were, indeed, as good
as ship's biscuits ever are, and when moistened with sea water formed a
comparatively pleasant as well as strengthening food; but the barrel of
pork was raw; they had no means of cooking it, and had not yet
experienced those pangs of hunger which induce men to luxuriate in
anything that will allay the craving.  They therefore breakfasted
chiefly on biscuit, merely making an attempt, with wry faces, to swallow
a little pork.

Observing this, Sam said, in a half-jocular manner:--

"Now, my lads, it is quite clear to me that in taking command of this
ship, my first duty is to point out the evils that will flow from
unrestrained appetite for biscuit;--also to insist on the cultivation of
a love for raw pork.  You have no notion how good it is when fairly
believed in.  Anyhow you'll have to try, for it won't do to eat up all
the biscuit, and have to feed at last on pure pork."

"I calls it impure pork," said Slagg; "hows'-ever, capting, you've on'y
to give the word and we obey.  P'r'aps the best way'll be to put us on
allowance."

This suggestion was at once acted on, and a considerable part of that
bright day was spent by Sam and Robin in calculating how much pork
should go to a biscuit, so that they should diminish in an equal ratio,
and how much of both it would be safe to allow to each man per diem,
seeing that they might be many days, perhaps even weeks, at sea.  While
the "officers" were thus engaged, Slagg and his friend Stumps busied
themselves in making a mast and yard out of one of the planks--split in
two for the purpose--and fitting part of their sail to the same.

Evening found them with the work done, a small sail hoisted on the rude
mast, the remaining part of the canvas fitted more securely as a
covering, and the apportioned meal before them.  But the sail hung idly
from its yard and flapped gently to and fro as the little ark rose and
sank on the swell, for the calm still prevailed and the gorgeous sunset,
with its golden clouds and bright blue sky, was so faithfully reflected
in the sea, that they seemed to be floating in the centre of a crystal
ball which had been dipped in the rainbow.

When night descended, the scene was, if possible, still more impressive,
for although the bright colours had vanished, the castaways still
floated in the centre of a dark crystal universe, whose unutterable
depths were radiant with stars of varied size and hue.

Long they sat and gazed in solemn admiration at the scene, talking in
subdued tones of past, present, and future, until their eyes refused to
do their office and the heavy lids began to droop.  Then, reluctantly,
they crept beneath the sail-cloth covering and lay down to rest.

The planks were hard, no doubt, but our castaways were hardy; besides, a
few folds of the superfluous portions of the large sail helped to soften
the planks here and there.

"Now, boys," said Slagg, as he settled himself with a long-drawn sigh,
"the on'y thing we wants to make us perfectly happy is a submarine
telegraph cable 'tween this an' England, to let us say good-night to our
friend, ashore, an' hope they won't be long in sending out to search for
us."

It is sad to be obliged to record that, Slagg's companions being already
asleep, this tremendous and original piece of pleasantry was literally
cast upon the waters, where it probably made no impression whatever on
the inhabitants of the slumbering sea.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

IN WHICH WILL BE FOUND MORE SURPRISES THAN ONE.

Events of the most singular description are often prefaced by incidents
of the most commonplace character.  Who is so inexperienced in the
vicissitudes of life as not to know this!

Early in the morning that succeeded their second night on the raft,
Robin Wright awoke with a very commonplace, indeed a vulgar, snore; we
might almost call it a snort.  Such as it was, however, it proved to be
a most important link in the chain of events which it is our province to
narrate.

To explain: It must be understood that John Shanks, or Stumps, among
other eccentricities, practised sprawling in his sleep, spreading
himself abroad in inconceivable attitudes, shooting out an arm here, or
a leg there, to the alarm or indignation of bedfellows, insomuch that,
when known, bedfellows refused to remain with him.

Aware of Stumps's propensity, Slagg had so arranged that his friend
should lie at the stern of the raft with two strands of the
binding-cable between him and Robin, who lay next to him.  During the
first part of the night, Stumps, either overcome by weariness or subdued
by his friends' discourses on the stellar world, behaved pretty well.
Only once did he fling out and bestow an unmerited blow on the
pork-barrel.  But, about daybreak, he began to sprawl, gradually working
his way to the extreme edge of the raft, where a piece of wood, nailed
there on purpose, prevented him from rolling off altogether.  It did
not, however, prevent his tossing one of his long legs over the edge,
which he accordingly did.  The leg and foot were naked.  He preferred
to sleep so, even when bedless, having been brought up in
shoe-and-stockingless society.  With his foot dipping lightly in the
wave, he prolonged his repose.

They were slipping quietly along at the time under the influence of a
steady though gentle breeze, which had sprung up and filled their sail
soon after they lay down to rest.  An early shark, intent on picking up
sea-worms, observed Stumps's foot, and licked his lips, no doubt.  He
sank immediately for much the same reason that little boys retire to
take a race before a leap.  Turning on his back, according to custom, he
went at the foot like a submarine thunderbolt.

Now, it was at that precise moment that Robin Wright snored, as
aforesaid.  The snore awoke Stumps, who had another sprawl, and drew up
his leg gently--oh, how gently compared with what he would have done had
he known what you know, reader!  Nevertheless, the action was in time,
else would he have had, for the rest of his life, a better title than
heretofore to his nickname.  As it was, the nose and lips of the slimy
monster struck the youth's foot and slid up the side of his leg.

Hideous was the yell with which Stumps received the salute.  Acrobatic
was the tumble with which he rolled over his comrades, and dire was the
alarm created in all their hearts as they bounced from under the
respective corners of their covering, and stood up, aghast!

"You twopenny turnip," said Slagg, "why did you screech like--"

He stopped.  There was no need to finish the question, for the fin of
the disappointed shark, describing angry zig-zags in the water close by,
furnished a sufficient answer.

"He has only grazed me," said Stumps, feeling his leg anxiously.

"Only grazed you! rather say crazed you," returned Sam, "for a cry like
that could only come from a madman.  What were you doing?--washing your
feet in the sea?"

"No, not exactly," replied Stumps, somewhat abashed, "but one of my legs
got over the end of the raft somehow, and was trailing in the water."

"Hallo!  I say, look there, Sam!" said Robin, with sudden animation,
pointing to the horizon straight ahead of them; "is that the big raft or
a ship?"

"Neither, Robin," replied Sam, after a prolonged and earnest gaze; "it
must be an island.  What do you think, Slagg?"

The incident of the shark was almost totally forgotten in the excitement
caused by this new discovery.  For some time Slagg and all the others
gazed intently without uttering a word.  Then Slagg looked round with a
deep sigh.

"Yes, it's a island," he said; "no doubt about that."

"What a blessing!" exclaimed Robin, with heartfelt emotion.

"Well, that depends," said Sam, with a shake of the head.  "Islands in
the China seas are not always places of refuge--at least for honest
people."

"By no means," added Slagg; "I've heard say that the pirates there are
about the wust set o' cut-throats goin'--though I don't myself believe
there's much difference atween one set and another."

The light wind which had carried the raft slowly over the sea, while
they were asleep, now freshened into a stiff breeze, and tested the
qualities of their craft, severely; but, with a little strengthening--an
extra turn of a rope or an additional nail--here and there, it held
pretty well together.  At breakfast, which was served according to
regulation, they discussed their situation.

"You see," said Sam, "this may turn out to be a small barren island, in
which case we shall have to leave it and trust to falling in with some
vessel; or it may be inhabited by savages or pirates, in which case we
shall have to leave it from prudential motives, if they will allow us to
do so.  In any case, we won't begin by being extravagant with the
provisions to-day."

As they drew near to the island, the probability of its being inhabited
became greater, because, although solitary, and, according to Sam's
amateur calculations, far remote from other lands, it presented a bold
and fertile aspect.  It was not, indeed, large in circumference, but it
rose to a considerable height, and was covered with rich vegetation,
above which waved numerous groups of the cocoa-nut palm.  A band of
light yellow sand fringed the shore, on which the waves roiled in a
still lighter fringe of foam, while two or three indentations seemed to
indicate the existence of creeks or openings into the interior.

With eager gaze the castaways watched this island as they slowly
approached it--the minuter beauties of rock and dell and leafy copse
brightening into view as the sun mounted the clear blue sky.

"What I have thought or dreamed of sometimes, when dear mother used to
speak of heaven," murmured Robin, as if communing with himself.

"Well, I have not thought much of heaven," said Sam, "but I shouldn't
wonder if it's something like the paradise, from which Adam and Eve were
driven."

"There's no sign o' natives as yet," said Slagg, who, regardless of
these remarks, had been gazing at the island with eyes shaded by his
hand.

"Yes there is; yonder is one sitting on the rocks," said Stumps; "don't
you see him move?"

"That's not a native," returned Slagg, "it's too long in the back for a
human being.  It's a big monkey--a gorilla, maybe.  Did you ever hear
