much-thrilled girls were hurriedly pulling away at cabbage stalks, and
estimating, by the amount of earth that came up with them, the wealth of
their future husbands. The general surroundings and the associations of
the evening were sufficient to send shivers down their spines. Gowan,
looking up suddenly, saw standing among the bushes a dark figure with a
heavy black mustache, and she caught her breath with a gasp, and
clutched at Carmel's arm. For an instant eight horrified faces stared at
the apparition, then Dulcie made a dive in its direction, and dragged
forth Prissie.

"You wretch!"

"What a mean trick to play!"

"You didn't take _me_ in!"

"It was very clever, though!"

"You really looked just like a spook!"

"Take it off now!"

"No, _no_!" said Prissie. "Leave me alone! I haven't finished. Hush! I
believe somebody else is coming to try the ordeal. Slip behind that
cucumber-frame and hide, and let us see who it is. Quick! You'll be
caught!"

The girls made a swift, but silent, dash for the shadow of the
cucumber-frame, and concealed themselves only just in time. They were
barely hidden when footsteps resounded on the gravel, and a figure
advanced from the direction of the house. It came alone, and it carried
something in its hand. In the clear beams of the moonlight, the Mafia
had no difficulty in recognizing Laurette, and could see that what she
bore was her bedroom mirror. They chuckled inwardly. Most evidently she
had sallied forth to try the white magic of Hallowe'en, and to make the
spell work more securely had come alone to consult the cabbage oracle.

First she placed her mirror on the ground, and tilted its swing glass to
a convenient angle at which to catch reflections. Then she pulled hard
at a stalk, looked with apparent satisfaction at the decidedly thick
lumps of earth that adhered (which, if the magic were to be trusted,
must represent a considerable fortune); then, clasping her cabbage in
her hand, knelt down in front of the looking-glass, and began to mutter
something to herself in a low voice. Her back was towards the
cucumber-frame and the bushes, and her eyes were fixed on her mirror.

Prissie, looking on, realized that it was the chance of a lifetime. She
stole on tiptoe from her retreat, and peeped over Laurette's shoulder so
that her reflection should be displayed in the glass. Laurette, seeing
suddenly a most unexpected vision of a dark mustache, literally yelled
with fright, sprang up, and turned round to face her "spook," then with
a further blood-curdling scream, dashed down the garden towards the
house. The Mafia, rising from the shadow of the cucumber-frame, laughed
long, though with caution.

"What an absolutely topping joke!" whispered Dulcie.

[Illustration: SHE PEEPED OVER LAURETTE'S SHOULDER]

"And on Laurette, of all people in this wide world!" rejoiced Bertha.

"Congrats., Prissie!"

"You _did_ play up no end!"

"I flatter myself I made her squeal and run!" smirked Prissie. "It just
serves her right! I was longing for a chance to get even with her!"

"What about the looking-glass?" asked Carmel. "Won't some of them be
coming out to fetch it?"

"Yes, of course they will! We must take it in at once. Let us scoot
round the other way, and go in by the back door before Laurette and Co.
catch us!"

Prissie seized the mirror, and the nine girls fled by another path to
the door near the kitchen, where by great good luck they avoided meeting
any of the servants, and were able to bolt upstairs unseen. The Gold
bedroom was empty--no doubt its occupants were shivering at the side
door--so they were able to restore the looking-glass to its place on the
dressing-table as a surprise for Laurette when she returned. Whether she
suspected them or not, it was impossible to tell, for she kept her own
counsel, and, though next day they referred casually to Hallowe'en
observances, she only glanced at them with half-closed eyelids, and
remarked that _she_ was quite above such silly superstitions.

"Which is more than a fiblet, and about the biggest whopper that Miss
Laurette Aitken has ever told in her life!" declared Prissie, still
chuckling gleefully at the remembrance of the startled figure fleeing
down the garden.




CHAPTER XIII

The Money-makers


"All Saints'" brought a brief spell of golden weather, a snatch of
Indian summer, as if Persephone, loth to go down into the Underworld,
had managed to steal a few days' extra leave from Pluto, and had
remained to scatter some last flowers on earth before her long
banishment from the sunshine. Under the sheltered brick wall in the
kitchen-garden Czar violets were blooming, sweet and fragrant as those
of spring; the rose trees had burst out into a second crop, and the
chrysanthemums were such a special show that Miss Walters almost shook
hands with Jones the gardener over them. Little wild flowers blossomed
on in quiet nooks at the edge of the shrubbery, and butterflies, brought
out by the bright days, made a last flutter in the sunshine. The leaves,
which Carmel had grieved so much to see fall, lay crisp and golden on
the ground, but the bare boughs of the trees, somewhat to her surprise,
held a beauty of form and tint quite their own.

"They are all sorts of lovely soft delicate colors," she remarked.
"Quite different from trees in Sicily. I think it must be the damp in
the air here that does it; everything seems seen through a blue haze--a
kind of fairy glamour that makes them different from what they are!"

"Wait till you see them on a sousing wet December morning!" declared
Gowan. "You won't find much romance about them then!"

"But in the meantime we'll enjoy them!" said Miss Walters, who happened
to overhear. "Who votes for a walk this afternoon? Anybody who prefers
to stop at home and write French translation may do so!"

The girls grinned. Miss Walters did not often give them an unexpected
holiday, so such treats were appreciated when they came. Twenty-one
enthusiasts donned strong boots, jerseys, and tam-o'-shanters, and
started forth for a ramble on the hill-side. They had climbed through
the wood, and were walking along the upper road that led to the hamlet
of Five Stone Bridge, when they came face to face with a very curious
little cavalcade. Two large soap boxes, knocked together, had been
placed on old perambulator wheels, and in this roughly fashioned
chariot, on a bundle of straw and an old shawl, reclined a little, thin,
white-faced girl. One sturdy boy of ten was pushing the queer
conveyance, while a younger pulled it by a piece of rope, and the small
occupant, her lap full of flowers, smiled as proudly as a queen on
coronation day. Against the background of green hedgerow and red village
roofs, the happy children made a charming picture; they had not noticed
the approach of the school, and were laughing together in absolute
unconsciousness. The sight of them at that particular moment was one of
those brief glimpses into the heart of other folks' lives that only come
to us on chance occasions, when by some accident we peep over the wall
of human reserve into the inner circle of thought and feeling. Almost
with one accord the girls stopped and smiled.

"I wish I'd brought my camera!" murmured Dulcie.

"They're too sweet for words!" agreed Prissie.

Miss Walters spoke to the children, asked their names, and ascertained
that the little girl had been ill for a long time, and could not walk.
They were shy, however, and all the spontaneous gladness that had made
the first snapshot view of them so charming faded away in the presence
of strangers. They accepted some pieces of chocolate, and remained by
the hedge bank staring with solemn eyes as the line of the school filed
away. The chance meeting was no doubt an event on both sides: the
children would tell their mother about the ladies who had spoken to
them, and the girls, on their part, could not forget the pretty episode.
They urged Miss Walters to make some inquiries about the family, and
found that little Phyllis was suffering from hip disease, and had been
for a short time in the local hospital. Then an idea sprang up amongst
the girls. It was impossible to say quite where it originated, for at
least five girls claimed the honor of it, but it was neither more nor
less than that Chilcombe School should raise a subscription and buy an
adequate carriage for the small invalid.

"That terrible box must shake her to pieces, poor kid!"

"It had no springs!"

"She looked so sweet!"

"But as white as a daisy!"

"Wouldn't she be proud of a real, proper carriage?"

"Can't we write off and order one at once?"

"What would it cost?"

"Let's get up a concert or something for it."

"Oh, yes! That would be ever such sport!"

Miss Walters, on being appealed to, was cautious--caution was one of her
strong characteristics--and would not commit herself to any reply until
she had consulted the doctor who attended the child, the clergyman of
the parish, and the local schoolmaster. Armed with this accumulated
information, she visited the mother, then gave a report of her
interview.

"They're not well off, but we mustn't on any account pauperize them,"
was her verdict. "Dr. Cranley says an invalid carriage would be a great
boon to the child, but suggests that the parents should pay half the
expense. They would value it far more if they did so, than if it were
entirely a gift. He knows of a second-hand wicker carriage that could
be had cheap. It belongs to another patient of his, and he saw it at
their house only the other day. If you girls can manage to raise about
L2, 10s., the parents would do the rest. He was mentioning the subject
of a carriage to them a short time ago, and they said they could afford
something, but not the full price. He thinks this would settle the
matter to everybody's satisfaction."

Dr. Cranley's proposal suited the girls, for L2, 10s. was a sum that
seemed quite feasible to collect among themselves. They determined,
however, to get as much fun out of the business as possible.

"Don't let's have a horrid subscription list!" urged Lilias. "It's so
unutterably dull just to put down your name for half a crown. I hoped we
were going to give a concert."

"What I vote," said Gowan, "is that each bedroom should have a show of
its own, ask the others to come as audience, charge admission, and
wangle the cash that way."

"There'd be some sport in that!" agreed Lilias.

"It's great!" declared Dulcie.

"You bet it will catch on!" purred Prissie.

Gowan's scheme undoubtedly caught on. It was so attractive that there
was no resisting it. Even the occupants of the Gold bedroom, who as a
rule were not too ready to receive suggestions from the Blue Grotto,
could not find a single fault, and plumped solidly for a dramatic
performance. Each dormitory was to give any entertainment it chose, and
while the Brown room decided on Nigger Minstrels, and the Green room on
a general variety program, the Blue, Gold and Rose were keen on acting.
Miss Walters, who, of course, had to be consulted, not only gave a
smiling permission, but seemed on the very verge of suggesting a
personal attendance, then, noticing the look of polite agony which swept
over the faces of the deputation, kindly backed out from such an
evidently embarrassing proposal, and declared that she and the
mistresses would be too busy to come, and must leave the girls to manage
by themselves.

"Thank goodness!" exclaimed Gowan, when they were safely out of earshot
of the study door. "I never dreamt of such an awful thing as Miss
Walters offering to turn up! Why, we couldn't have had any fun at all!"

"We'd have had to act Shakespeare, or something stilted out of a book!"
shuddered Edith.

"I should simply shut up if any of the mistresses were looking on,"
protested Dulcie.

"And I should shut down, and crawl under a bed, I think," laughed
Noreen. "I say, I hope Miss Walters wasn't offended. We certainly looked
very blank when she began asking us the price of 'stalls.' I suppose it
wasn't exactly what you'd call polite!"

"Perhaps it wasn't, but it can't be helped," groaned Gowan. "It would
wreck everything to have an audience of mistresses. I feel we've escaped
a great danger. We must warn the others not to be too encouraging, or
give the mistresses any loophole of an excuse to butt in. This
particular show is to be private and confidential."

It was decided to hold each performance on a separate day, during the
evening recreation time.

"_Matinees_ are no good!" decreed Prissie. "Everybody feels perfectly
cold in the afternoon. It's impossible to get up any proper enthusiasm
until the lamps are lighted."

"I feel a perfect stick at 4 P. M.," admitted Carmel.

"What will you feel later on?"

"A sort of combination of Mary Pickford and Charlie Chaplin thrown
together, I hope!" twinkled Carmel. "It depends whether you put me on a
comic turn or a romantic scene."

"I vote we have a little bit of both," said Gowan. "We'll harrow their
feelings first, and end in comedy."

The five bedrooms drew lots for the order of their performances, and the
honor of "first night" fell to the Blue Grotto. Its occupants (including
Carmel, whose dressing-room was considered an annex) held a rejoicing
committee to plan out their play. Squatting on Gowan's bed, they each
contributed portions of the plot.

"Shall we write it out and learn our parts?" asked Lilias.

"Certainly not. It would quite spoil it if you were just reeling off
speeches by heart, with one ear open to the prompter. I know you! I
shall never forget Lilias when we did 'The Vanity Bag.' She said her
bits as if she were repeating a lesson, and Bertha----"

"Are we to say anything we like, then?" interrupted Carmel, for Gowan's
reminiscences were becoming rather too personal for purposes of harmony.

"We'll map the whole thing out beforehand, of course, but you must just
say what comes into your head at the moment. It will be ever so much
fresher and funnier. All you've got to do is to get into the right
spirit and play up!"

"All serene! As long as no mistresses are sitting looking on, I don't
mind."

The Blue Grotto, being the first on the list of performances, was
determined to do the thing in style. Bertha and Carmel between them
evolved a poster. It was painted in sepia on the back of one of Dulcie's
school drawings, sacrificed for the purpose. It represented the profile
of a rather pert looking young person with a tip-tilted nose and an eye
several sizes larger than was consistent with the usual anatomy of the
human countenance. Lower down, in somewhat shaky lettering, was set
forth the following announcement:

[Illustration:

Come to the blue Grotto!

GRAND DRAMA

"THE COURSE OF TRUE LOVE"

.FEATURING.

THE SISTERS INGLETON..........The Cheverley Favourites

SIGNORINA CARMEL LESLIE....The famous Sicilian Comedienne

MISS GOWAN BARBOUR..............The Daisy of Chilcombe

MISS BERTHA CHESTERS...................(Our Bert)

Have half an hour of Fun and Pathos
It will do you good to laugh and cry

SILVER COLLECTION]

This they placed temporarily in the passage, but when the girls had
giggled over it sufficiently they removed it, for fear its attractions
might tempt some of the mistresses into asking permission to attend, a
fatality which must at all costs be avoided.

The performers spent a hectic day making arrangements. The time allowed
in their dormitory was necessarily limited, so preparations were a
scramble. The four beds were moved and placed as seats, and one corner
of the room was reserved as the stage. Carmel's dressing-room made an
excellent "green room," and gave the Blue Grotto a substantial
theatrical lift over other dormitories.

Ten minutes before the hour, five distracted actresses were struggling
to complete their impromptu toilets.

"I'm so rocky, I know I shan't be able to say anything at all!"
fluttered Dulcie.

"Nonsense! Pull yourself together, child!" urged Gowan. "Get some
stiffening into you, can't you?"

"I'm going to have umpteen dozen fits!"

"You've got to reckon with me if you spoil the play, so there! Don't be
a silly cockchafer!"

"Are we downhearted?" twittered Bertha.

"No!" answered a stalwart chorus of three, hauling up Dulcie, who was
sitting on a chair shivering in the agonies of an acute attack of stage
fright.

By this time the audience was trooping in, and seating itself upon the
beds, and by frantic clapping clamored for the entertainment to begin.
Gowan opened the show, and took the stage in the character of Miss
Monica Morton, an elderly spinster. Her make-up was very good,
considering the limited resources of the company. Some cotton wool did
service for white hair neatly arranged under a boudoir cap; her dress
(borrowed from Noreen, who was a head taller than Gowan) fell to her
ankles; she wore spectacles, and wrinkles had been carefully painted
across her forehead. Bertha, a forward chit of a maidservant (servants
on the stage invariably assume a cheekiness of manner that would never
be tolerated by any employer in private life), bounced in and handed her
a letter, and stood making grimaces to the audience while her
mistress--very foolishly--read its contents aloud. It ran thus:

         "11 PARK LANE,
             "MAYFAIR.

    "DEAREST MONICA,

