even be wiser in their generation than tall girls who have entered the
Fifth. Gwen's cough, which had been hacking all day, came on much
worse, and began to hurt her chest: she wished she had brought her
_thick_ muffler. It was a subject of perennial dispute between herself
and Beatrice, and she often discarded it simply because the latter
told her to put it on. She hated to appear mollycoddlish, and
sometimes indeed did very silly things out of sheer foolhardiness. At
present she was bitterly cold. The snow had sifted inside her
galoshes, and made her feet wet, and the chilly wind was creeping down
her neck and up her sleeves, and whirling frozen flakes at her face.
No cheery tea in the Chambers' drawing-room, and no delightful chat
with Dick afterwards about photography and magic lanterns.

"The fact of the matter is that I've been an idiot!" she confessed to
herself. "Anybody with an ounce of sense would have known it was too
snowy to cross the wold. I ought to have gone round by the high road.
I seemed to turn across here just out of habit."

Gwen could not tell how long she stumbled about. It felt like
interminable hours as she wearily dragged herself along, watching the
sky grow darker, and the landscape more and more blurred, till she
could scarcely distinguish which was snow and which was sky. At last
her aching limbs absolutely refused to carry her any farther, and she
crouched under the shelter of a big juniper bush that overhung a piece
of rock. Here at least she was out of the biting, freezing wind. The
comparative warmth made her feel sleepy. She roused herself with an
effort. To sleep in the snow, she knew, was fatal, so she fell to
rubbing her hands and feet to try and restore the circulation. All at
once she started up and shouted aloud.

In the distance she had heard a short, sharp yelp, and she reasoned
that where there was a dog, a man might possibly be following. Again
and again she called, till, to her intense relief, a "Hallo!" came in
answer, and she made out a snowy form moving in her direction. The dog
found her first; it bounded at her, whining and sniffing at her
skirts, then rushed away barking loudly to inform its master of her
whereabouts.

"Can you tell me where I am? I've got lost!" cried Gwen, wading
through a drift in her eagerness to meet her rescuer.

"Why, you're close to our house--Rawlins' farm. Who is it? I can't see
in the dark. Miss Gascoyne? Why, whatever are you doing here all
alone?"

He might well ask, Gwen thought, but she ignored the question. She
knew the man, for he was a parishioner, and two of his boys sang in
the choir at church.

"Can you tell me how to get home?" she said, with chattering teeth and
watering eyes.

"Better come and have a sup o' tea first; you look clemmed wi' the
cold," he returned. "We'll tak' you back after wi' the lantern. It's
nobbut a step to the farm."

He whistled to the dog and moved on, and Gwen stumbled after him,
wondering how she had missed seeing the house when it was so near. She
scarcely knew whether to pose in the light of a heroine or a culprit
as she walked into Mrs. Rawlins' kitchen, but decided to give as
guarded an account of the matter as she could. There would be
explanations in plenty when she returned to the Parsonage. She was
very glad to sit and thaw by the fire and drink hot tea, despite the
difficulty of fencing with Mrs. Rawlins' questions, that good dame
being consumed with curiosity, and not restrained by any feelings of
delicacy from catechizing her guest.

"Yes. No, I wasn't coming back from school, it's the holidays--yes,
I'm generally with one of my sisters--no, I wasn't delivering Parish
Magazines, we sent yours by Charlie--yes, I expect my father will be
missing me. Thanks very much for the tea; I think I must be going
now," said Gwen, gulping her second cup and making a move.

"Here's the lantern, Jim," said Mrs. Rawlins to her husband, "and take
Miss Gascoyne round by the road; 'tain't fit to venture over the moor.
It's scarce a night for a Christian to be out--and her with that
churchyard cough, too! Goodness, gracious, how it's blowing!"

Gwen reached home so spent and exhausted with her long tramp through
the snow, that she had only wits enough left wearily to thank Mr.
Rawlins for his escort, and to stumble in at the front door. Winnie
ran forward with a cry of relief, and shouted to Beatrice the welcome
news of the arrival.

"Don't ask me anything! Oh, I just want to go to bed; I'm done!"
wailed Gwen, subsiding on to the nearest chair.

Beatrice took the hint, and refrained from any reproaches till she
had tucked up the prodigal in warmed blankets, with a hot bottle at
her feet, and seen her consume a basin full of steaming bread and
milk. Then she observed:

"I suppose you know Father and half the village are out hunting for
you with lanterns? They raised the Boy Scouts and broke up the Band of
Hope meeting. They telephoned to the Police Station at North Ditton
too. I expect you're rather proud of yourself!"

And Gwen turned her face to the wall and sobbed and coughed till she
nearly choked.

Next afternoon a very miserable-looking object, with watering eyes and
a swollen cheek sat wrapped in a shawl by the fire in Father's study.
Gwen had made her peace with Beatrice and had been forgiven, but she
was still "eating the husks" of her escapade in the shape of a
thoroughly bad cold and a touch of toothache. She refused to stay in
bed, yet the noise of the family sitting-room made her head throb, so
finally Father had taken pity upon her, and allowed her to bring her
troubles into his sanctum. He had said very little about the events of
the day before, but Gwen knew exactly what he must be thinking. She
mopped her eyes with her handkerchief, and tried to believe it was her
toothache that was making her cry. After a long time she said huskily,
a propos of nothing in particular:

"Things always go so hardly with me, somehow, Dad! I don't know how it
is. I generally seem unlucky, both at school and at home. I suppose
it's partly me, but if things were easier, I'd be better. I should,
really."

[Illustration: "THINGS GO SO HARDLY WITH ME SOMEHOW, DAD."]

Father did not reply: he was busy addressing the motto-cards that he
was sending to his parishioners for the New Year. He handed one to her
silently.

And Gwen read:

     "O do not pray for easy lives. Pray to be stronger men. Do
     not pray for tasks equal to your powers; pray for powers
     equal to your tasks. Then the doing of your work shall be no
     miracle. But you shall be a miracle. Every day you shall
     wonder at yourself, at the richness of life which has come
     to you by the Grace of God."

--_Phillips Brooks._

Gwen sat staring hard into the fire.

"I'll hang this up in my bedroom, Dad," she said presently.

"Do; you'll find it worth thinking about," replied Father, as he
blotted the thirty-fourth envelope.




CHAPTER XI

A Prize Essay


Gwen went back to school feeling rather tamed and sober. The bad cold
and face-ache, subsequent on her adventure in the snow, had seriously
interfered with her plans for the holidays, and she had not
accomplished half she intended to do in the time. Dick Chambers had
been laid up in bed with an attack of rheumatism, so she had scarcely
seen anything of him, and altogether the much-longed-for month had
held its disappointments. She returned to her desk in the Fifth almost
glad to begin a fresh term, though she knew many difficulties awaited
her. First and foremost was the horrible fact that she owed a whole
sovereign to Netta Goodwin, and had absolutely no prospect of paying
it. She tried to avoid any private conversation with her chum, but the
ruse was not successful for long. Netta was a girl who was accustomed
to get her own way, and she followed Gwen round the school until she
caught her alone.

"I say, you old slacker, what about that sov.?" she began. "I suppose
you got your Christmas presents all right?"

"Oh, yes, I got my presents!" said Gwen, trying to pass things off
airily. "Not quite what I expected, though."

"But you can pay me back?"

"I'm afraid I can't just yet."

Netta's rather pretty face changed its expression considerably.

"When can you, then?" she asked sharply. "I want to know."

"Could you wait a fortnight?"

"It's inconvenient, but I might."

Netta was still scowling. "Will you promise faithfully to bring it by
the 1st of February?"

"I'll do my best," agreed Gwen, escaping from what was to both a very
unpleasant interview.

She had mentioned a fortnight simply on the spur of the moment to put
Netta off, but she knew that the 1st of February would bring no way
out of her entanglement. It was something, however, to have even a
respite of two weeks; it gave her time to think and to lay plans. She
wondered what Netta would do if, as seemed most likely, the debt still
remained owing. She did not suppose Netta would turn informer to Miss
Roscoe, but she might very possibly mention the matter to Winnie, who
would tell Beatrice, who would promptly tell Father.

"Only a fortnight!" groaned Gwen, feeling like a criminal in a
condemned cell. "Unless 'something turns up', as Mr. Micawber says in
_David Copperfield_. If I were the heroine of a novel, a forgotten
uncle in America would suddenly die, and leave me a million just at
the opportune moment. But I'm only a very unromantic, every-day kind
of person, not the forget-me-not-eyed, spun-gold-haired,
wild-rose-petal-complexioned, pearly-toothed sort of girl who gets
fortunes; I'm solid fact, not fiction. Most things are nowadays, I
suppose."

Certainly the Fifth Form did not offer scope for romance or sentiment.
Its daily doings were most prosaic, a round in which Latin,
mathematics, and chemistry were chiefly to the fore, and the only
appeal to the imagination was the weekly lecture on English literature
from the Principal. Gwen liked these; Miss Roscoe had the knack of
making historical dry bones live, and encouraged the girls to read for
themselves. All her lessons were interesting, but in this she was
inspiring. She was accustomed to give themes for fortnightly
exercises, and at the first lecture of this new term she announced as
a special subject: "An Essay on any one of the Great Writers of the
Victorian Era", promising a volume of Browning's poems as a prize.

"I had intended to offer it for Christmas," she said, "but I thought
you were too busy preparing for examinations to be able to give time
to such an essay. I hope you'll do justice to the subject now."

It was a large order, thought Gwen, when already their homework had
about reached its outside limit. Miss Roscoe was quite unconscionable
in her demands on their time and brains. She fixed the standard of the
Form so high that only the very bright girls could possibly keep up to
it. Many slacked off entirely, but Gwen could not, dared not slack.
She knew Miss Roscoe was watching her work, and that very much
depended upon her reports for the next year or two. Father had thrown
out a few hints that had stirred her ambition and raised wild hopes
for the future. She was aware that there were several good
scholarships from Rodenhurst, and visions of College began to dawn on
her horizon.

"'Gwen Gascoyne, B.A.', sounds no end. It would be worth the grind. I
mayn't be the beauty of the family, but I believe I've got the best
share of the brains. Beatrice would be proud of me if I took my
degree. I must make something of this essay if I 'burn the midnight'.
Miss Roscoe will expect me to turn up trumps. I'll toil like a navvy!"

So Gwen decided, and stuck to her resolution. She had an undoubted
capacity for work, a power of application and of steady plodding that
were of immense service, as well as more brilliant gifts. She attacked
the question at once. The Victorian writers offered a fairly wide
choice of subject. She hesitated at first between George Eliot and
Dickens, and finally selected Thomas Carlyle. Something about the
rugged old prophet attracted her, and she thought he would be a
congenial theme for her pen. She spent every spare moment in reading
his biographies or his works, till she felt she had him at her
fingers' ends. Then, with a mass of notes as a foundation, she began
her essay.

Most young writers undergo the same first agonies of composition: the
vainly sought simile, the sentence that will not turn nicely, the
tiresome word that crops up too often, yet for which there seems no
adequate substitute; the sudden lack of ideas, or the non-ability to
clothe those one has in suitable language.

Gwen wrote and burnt, and wrote and burnt again, till at last she
managed something, not at all up to the ideal of her imagination, but
the best her limited literary experience could produce. She refused to
show it to anybody at home, and bore it off to school to read over and
correct during the dinner hour. She was sitting at her desk, busy
altering sentences and erasing words, when Netta came into the room.

"Hello, you old solitary hermit!" she exclaimed. "What are you doing
here, with your nose buried in an exercise book? There's no getting at
you nowadays. You'll grow old before your time, Gwen, my child! Come
out this instant, and play basket-ball."

"Can't, so that's flat," responded Gwen. "Netta, if you love me, if
you've any humanity in you, leave me alone. Basket-ball's off till
I've finished this."

"Well, you've got to tell me what you're doing, at any rate. Let me
look! No, Miss Modesty, you're not going to hide your light under a
bushel. I insist! Oho! What have we got here now?"

Netta dragged the book from Gwen's reluctant hands, and sitting on a
neighbouring desk, began hastily to skim through the essay, giving
grunts of approval as she read.

"First rate! I say, this is immense! Gwen, my hearty, I didn't think
you'd got it in you!"

"Will it do?" demanded Gwen anxiously. She had sat on metaphorical
pins to hear Netta's verdict.

"Do? I should rather think it would! If Lemonade doesn't mark it A1,
First Prize, I shall say she doesn't know her business, that's all!
You're pretty safe for that book of Browning, in my opinion."

"Wish it were cash instead! But I shan't get it in any case," sighed
Gwen. "If I did, I'd trade it for anything I could."

"You mercenary wretch!"

"I'm so hard up. I'm no nearer paying what I owe you, Netta. I
literally haven't a penny in my pocket I wish you'd take it in kind
instead of money."

Netta sat silent, drumming with her fingers on the desk.

"I've a rather decent locket, if you'd care for that--" continued
Gwen.

"Hush! Be quiet! You've given me an idea, Gwen Gascoyne."
