when the old gentleman concluded; "for I cannot imagine that any of your
peculiar Cornish hugs or twists can be so potent as to overturn a stout
fellow who is accustomed to wrestle in another fashion.  Can you show me
one of the particular grips or twists that are said to be so effective?"

"I think I can," replied the old gentleman, with a smile, and a twinkle
in his eye; "of course the style of grip and throw will vary according
to the size of the man one has to deal with.  Give me hold of your
wrist, and plant yourself firmly on your legs.  Now, you see, you must
turn the arm--so, and use your toe--thus, so as to lift your man, and
with a sudden twist--there!  That's the way to do it!" said the old
gentleman, with a chuckle, as he threw Oliver head foremost into the
middle of a haycock that lay opportunely near.

It is hard to say whether Mr Cornish or Oliver was most surprised at
the result of the effort--the one, that so much of his ancient prowess
should remain, and the other, that he should have been so easily
overthrown by one who, although fully as large a man as himself, had his
joints and muscles somewhat stiffened by age.

Oliver burst into a fit of laughter on rising, and exclaimed, "Well
done, sir!  You have effectually convinced me that there is something
worth knowing in the Cornish mode of wrestling; although, had I known
what you were about to do, it might not perhaps have been done so
easily."

"I doubt it not," said Mr Cornish with a laugh; "but that shows the
value of `science' in such matters.  Good-morning, doctor.  Hope you'll
find your patients getting on well."

He waved his hand as he turned off, while Oliver pursued his way to the
miners' cottages.

The first he entered belonged to a man whose chest was slightly affected
for the first time.  He was a stout man, about thirty-five years of age,
and of temperate habits--took a little beer occasionally, but never
exceeded; had a good appetite, but had caught cold frequently in
consequence of having to go a considerable distance from the shaft's
mouth to the changing-house while exhausted with hard work underground
and covered with profuse perspiration.  Often he had to do this in wet
weather and when bitterly cold winds were blowing--of late he had begun
to spit blood.

It is necessary here to remind the reader that matters in this respect--
and in reference to the condition of the miner generally--are now much
improved.  The changing-houses, besides being placed as near to the
several shafts as is convenient, are now warmed with fires, and supplied
with water-troughs, so that the men have a comfortable place in which to
wash themselves on coming "to grass," and find their clothes thoroughly
dried when they return in the morning to put them on before going
underground.  This renders them less liable to catch cold, but of course
does not protect them from the evil influences of climbing the ladders,
and of bad air.  Few men have to undergo such severe toil as the Cornish
miner, because of the extreme hardness of the rock with which he has to
deal.  To be bathed in perspiration, and engaged in almost unremitting
and violent muscular exertion during at least eight hours of each day,
may be said to be his normal condition.

Oliver advised this man to give up underground work for some time, and,
having prescribed for him and spoken encouragingly to his wife, left the
cottage to continue his rounds.

Several cases, more or less similar to the above, followed each other in
succession; also one or two cases of slight illness among the children,
which caused more alarm to the anxious mothers than there was any
occasion for.  These latter were quickly but good-naturedly disposed of,
and the young doctor generally left a good impression behind him, for he
had a hearty, though prompt, manner and a sympathetic spirit.

At one cottage he found a young man in the last stage of consumption.
He lay on his lowly bed pale and restless--almost wishing for death to
relieve him of his pains.  His young wife sat by his bedside wiping the
perspiration from his brow, while a ruddy-cheeked little boy romped
about the room unnoticed--ignorant that the hour was drawing near which
would render him fatherless, and his young mother a widow.

This young man had been a daring, high-spirited fellow, whose animal
spirits led him into many a reckless deed.  His complaint had been
brought on by racing up the ladders--a blood-vessel had given way, and
he had never rallied after.  Just as Oliver was leaving him a Wesleyan
minister entered the dwelling.

"He won't be long with us, doctor, I fear," he said in passing.

"Not long, sir," replied Oliver.

"His release will be a happy one," said the minister, "for his soul
rests on Jesus; but, alas! for his young wife and child."

He passed into the sickroom, and the doctor went on.

The next case was also a bad one, though different from the preceding.
The patient was between forty and fifty years of age, and had been
unable to go underground for several years.  He was a staid, sober man,
and an abstemious liver, but it was evident that his life on earth was
drawing to a close.  He had been employed chiefly in driving levels, and
had worked a great deal in very bad air, where the candles could not be
made to burn unless placed nine or ten feet behind the spot where he was
at work.  Indeed, he often got no fresh air except what was blown to
him, and only a puff now and then.  When he first went to work in the
morning the candle would not keep alight, so that he had to take his
coat and beat the air about before going into the level, and, after a
time, went in when the candles could be got to burn by holding them on
one side, and teasing out the wick very much.  This used to create a
great deal of smoke, which tended still further to vitiate the air.
When he returned "to grass" his saliva used to be as black as ink.
About five years before giving up underground work he had had
inflammation of the lungs, followed by blood-spitting, which used to
come on when he was at work in what he called "poor air," or in
"cold-damp," and he had never been well since.

Oliver's last visit that day was to the man John Batten; who had
exploded a blast-hole in his face the day before.  This man dwelt in a
cottage in the small hamlet of Botallack, close to the mine of the same
name.  The room in which the miner lay was very small, and its furniture
scanty; nevertheless it was clean and neatly arranged.  Everything in
and about the place bore evidence of the presence of a thrifty hand.
The cotton curtain on the window was thin and worn, but it was well
darned, and pure as the driven snow.  The two chairs were old, as was
also the table, but they were not rickety; it was obvious that they owed
their stability to a hand skilled in mending and in patching pieces of
things together.  Even the squat little stool in the side of the chimney
corner displayed a leg, the whiteness of which, compared with the other
two, told of attention to small things.  There was a peg for everything,
and everything seemed to be on its peg.  Nothing littered the
well-scrubbed floor or defiled the well-brushed hearthstone, and it did
not require a second thought on the part of the beholder to ascribe all
this to the tidy little middle-aged woman, who, with an expression of
deep anxiety on her good-looking countenance, attended to the wants of
her injured husband.

As Oliver approached the door of this cottage two stout youths, of about
sixteen and seventeen respectively, opened it and issued forth.

"Good-morning, lads!  Going to work, I suppose?" said Oliver.

"Iss, sur," replied the elder, a fair-haired ruddy youth, who, like his
brother, had not yet sacrificed his colour to the evil influence of the
mines; "we do work in the night corps, brother and me.  Father is worse
to-day, sur."

"Sorry to hear that," said the doctor, as he passed them and entered the
cottage, while the lads shouldered their tools and walked smartly down
the lane that led to Botallack mine.

"Your husband is not quite so well to-day, I hear," said the doctor,
going to the side of the bed on which the stalwart form of the miner
lay.

"No, sur," replied the poor woman; "he has much pain in his eyes to-day,
but his heart is braave, sur; I never do hear a complaint from he."

This was true.  The man lay perfectly still, the compressed lip and the
perspiration that moistened his face alone giving evidence of the agony
he endured.

"Do you suffer much?" inquired the doctor, as he undid the bandages
which covered the upper part of the man's face.

"Iss, sur, I do," was the reply.

No more was said, but a low groan escaped the miner when the bandage was
removed, and the frightful effects of the accident were exposed to view.
With intense anxiety Mrs Batten watched the doctor's countenance, but
found no comfort there.  A very brief examination was sufficient to
convince Oliver that the eyes were utterly destroyed, for the miner had
been so close to the hole when it exploded that the orbs were singed by
the flame, and portions of unburnt powder had been blown right into
them.

"Will he see--a _little_, sur?" whispered Mrs Batten.

Oliver shook his head.  "I fear not," he said in a low tone.

"Speak out, doctor," said the miner in firm tones, "I ain't afeard to
knaw it."

"It would be unkind to deceive you," replied Oliver sadly; "your eyes
are destroyed."

No word was spoken for a few minutes, but the poor woman knelt by her
husband's side, and nestled close to him.  Batten raised his large brown
hand, which bore the marks and scars of many a year of manly toil, and
laid it gently on his wife's head.

"I'll never see thee again, Annie," he murmured in a low deep tone; "but
I see thee face now, lass, as I _last_ saw it, wi' the smile of an angel
on't--an' I'll see it so till the day I die; bless the Lord for that."

Mrs Batten rose and went softly but quickly out of the room that she
might relieve her bursting heart without distressing her husband, but he
knew her too well to doubt the reason of her sudden movement, and a
faint smile was on his lips for a moment as he said to Oliver,--"She's
gone to weep a bit, sur, and pray.  It will do her good, dear lass."

"Your loss is a heavy one--very heavy," said Oliver, with hesitation in
his tone, for he felt some difficulty in attempting to comfort one in so
hopeless a condition.

"True, sur, true," replied the man in a tone of cheerful resignation
that surprised the doctor, "but it might have been worse; `the Lord
gave, and the Lord hath taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord!'"

Mrs Batten returned in a few minutes, and Oliver left them, after
administering as much comfort as he could in the circumstances, but to
say truth, although well skilled in alleviating bodily pains, he was
incapable of doing much in the way of ministering to the mind diseased.
Oliver Trembath was not a medical missionary.  His mother, though a
good, amiable woman, had been a weak, easy-going creature--one of those
good-tempered, listless ladies who may be regarded as human vegetables,
who float through life as comfortably as they can, giving as little
trouble as possible, and doing as little good as is compatible with the
presence of even nominal Christianity.  She performed the duties of life
in the smallest possible circle, the centre of which was herself, and
the extremity of the radii extending to the walls of her garden.  She
went to church at the regulation hours; "said her prayers" in the
regulation tone of voice; gave her charities in the stated way, at
stated periods, with a hazy perception as to the objects for which they
were given, and an easy indifference as to the success of these
objects--the whole end and aim of her wishes being attained in, and her
conscience satisfied by, the act of giving.  Hence her son Oliver was
not much impressed in youth with the power or value of religion, and
hence he found himself rather put out when his common sense told him, as
it not unfrequently did, that it was his duty sometimes to administer a
dose to the mind as well as to the body.

But Oliver was not like his mother in any respect.  His fire, his
energy, his intellectual activity, and his impulsive generosity he
inherited from his father.  Amiability alone descended to him from his
mother--an inheritance, by the way, not to be lightly esteemed, for by
it all his other qualities were immeasurably enhanced in value.  His
heart had beat in sympathy with the mourners he had just left, and his
manly disposition made him feel ashamed that the lips which could give
advice glibly enough in regard to bandages and physic, and which could
speak in cheery, comforting tones when there was hope for his patient,
were sealed and absolutely incapable of utterance when death approached
or hopeless despair took possession of the sufferer.

Oliver had felt something of this even in his student life, when the
solemnities of sickness and death were new to him; but it was pressed
home upon him with peculiar power, and his manhood was often put to the
blush when he was brought into contact with the Wesleyan Methodism of
West Cornwall, where multitudes of men and women of all grades drew
comfort from the Scriptures as readily and as earnestly as they drew
water from their wells--where religion was mingled with everyday and
household duties--and where many of the miners and fishermen preached
and prayed, and comforted one another with God's Word, as vigorously, as
simply, and as naturally as they hewed a livelihood from the rocks or
drew sustenance from the sea.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

TREATS OF SPIRITS AND OF SUNDRY SPIRITED MATTERS AND INCIDENTS.

One sunny afternoon Mrs Maggot found herself in the happy position of
having so thoroughly completed her round of household work that she felt
at leisure to sit down and sew, while little Grace sat beside her, near
the open door, rocking the cradle.

Baby, in blissful unconsciousness of its own existence, lay sound asleep
with a thumb in its mouth; the resolute sucking of that thumb having
been its most recent act of disobedience.

Little Grace was flushed, and rather dishevelled, for it had cost her
half an hour's hard wrestling to get baby placed in recumbent
somnolence.  She now sought to soothe her feelings by tickling the chin
of the black kitten--a process to which that active creature submitted
with purring satisfaction.

"Faither's long of coming hum, mother," said little Grace, looking up.

"Iss," replied Mrs Maggot.

"D'ee knaw where he is?" inquired Grace.

"No, I doan't," replied her mother.

It was evident that Mrs Maggot was not in the humour for conversation,
so Grace relapsed into silence, and devoted herself to the kitten.

"Is that faither?" said Grace, after a few minutes, pointing to the
figure of a man who was seen coming over the distant moor or waste land
which at that period surrounded the town of St. Just, though the greater
part of it is now cultivated fields.

"It isn' like un," said Mrs Maggot, shading her eyes with her hand;
"sure, it do look like a boatsman."

[The men of the coastguard were called "boatsmen" at that time.]

"Iss, I do see his cutlash," said little Grace; "and there's another man
comin' down road to meet un."

"Haste 'ee, Grace," cried Mrs Maggot, leaping up and plucking her
last-born out of the cradle, "take the cheeld in to Mrs Penrose, an'
bide theer till I send for 'ee--dost a hear?"

Plucked thus unceremoniously from gentle slumber to be plunged headlong
and without preparation into fierce infantine war, was too much for baby
Maggot; he uttered one yell of rage and defiance, which was succeeded by
a lull--a sort of pause for the recovery of breath--so prolonged that
the obedient Grace had time to fling down the horror-struck Chet, catch
baby in her arms, and bear him into the neighbouring cottage before the
next roar came forth.  The youthful Maggot was at once received into the
bosom of the Penrose family, and succeeding yells were smothered by
eight out of the sixteen Penroses who chanced to be at home at the time.

That Mrs Maggot had a guilty conscience might have been inferred from
her future proceedings, which, to one unacquainted with the habits of
her husband, would have appeared strange, if not quite unaccountable.
When baby was borne off, as related, she seized a small keg, which stood
in a corner near the door and smelt strongly of brandy, and, placing it
with great care in the vacant cradle, covered it over with blankets.
She next rolled a pair of stockings into a ball and tied on it a little
frilled night-cap, which she disposed on the pillow, with the face
pretty well down, and the back of the head pretty well up, and so
judiciously and cleverly covered it with bedclothes that even Maggot
himself might have failed to miss his son, or to recognise the outlines
of a keg.  A bottle half full of brandy, with the cork out, was next
placed on the table to account for the odour in the room, and then Mrs
Maggot sat down to her sewing, and rocked the cradle gently with her
foot, singing a sweet lullaby the while.  Ten minutes later, two stout
men of the coastguard, armed with cutlasses and pistols, entered the
cottage.  Mrs Maggot observed that they were also armed with a pick and
shovel.

"Good-hevenin', missus; how dost do?" said the man who walked foremost,
in a hearty voice.

"Good-hevenin', Eben Trezise; how are _you_?" said Mrs Maggot.

"Braave, thank 'ee," said Trezise; "we've come for a drop o' brandy,
missus, havin' heard that you've got some here, an' sure us can smell
it--eh?"

"Why, iss, we've got wan small drop," said Mrs Maggot, gently arranging
the clothes on the cradle, "that the doctor have order for the cheeld.
You're welcome to a taste of it, but plaise don't make so much noise,
for the poor cheeld's slaipin'."

"He'll be smothered, I do think, if you don't turn his head up a bit,
missus," said the man; "hows'ever you've no objection to let Jim and me
have a look round the place, I dessay?"

Mrs Maggot said they were welcome to do as they pleased, if they would
only do it quietly for the sake of the "cheeld;" so without more ado
