
"That is a good deal of money," said his wife, gravely.

"Yes; I don't know where to raise it. If Squire Hudson were only a
little considerate. But he isn't, and, even if he were, I am afraid
there is no prospect of my raising the money at present."

"You may get some money from Tom soon," suggested Sarah.

"I can't rely upon that. Tom will doubtless send when he is able, for he
understands my circumstances, and is a thoughtful boy; but it is going
to take time for him to earn a surplus--enough to send on."

"He may find a big nugget," said Walter, the second boy, who eagerly
read the letters from California which from time to time appeared in the
weekly paper.

"He _may_, but the chances are against it."

"I was reading in last week's paper about a man finding a nugget worth
over two thousand dollars."

"Such nuggets are as rare as large prizes in a lottery, I suspect," said
Mark Nelson, who had a large share of plain common-sense.

Walter looked rather disappointed, having made up his mind that Tom
would certainly find a big lump of gold, and come home rich.

"Don't you think Tom will find some gold?" he asked.

"Yes, I have no doubt he will gather some gold-dust. I have no doubt,
too, that he will earn more than he or I can do at home; but I haven't
much faith in these extraordinary pieces of good luck."

"Still, Tom _may_ find a nugget," persisted Walter.

"Yes, he _may_, and I shall be very glad if he does; but we must not
build too many air-castles on that chance."

"I wish I could see the dear boy again," sighed his mother, looking up
from the stocking she was laboriously darning.

"So do I," said Walter. "He would have a lot to tell us."

"California seems so far away," resumed Mrs. Nelson, "and he has no one
there to look after him, and mend his clothes--"

"And darn his stockings," said Walter, smiling.

"If he walked all the way across the continent," said Sarah, "I don't
believe he would have larger holes in his stockings than you have,
Walter."

"Oh, well, I exercise a good deal," said Walter. "Ask father if I
don't."

"Walter will be more successful as a farmer than as a scholar," said Mr.
Nelson. "He helps me a good deal."

"Tom was a good scholar," said Sarah, "and he was always ready to work
too. Walter will never astonish or electrify the world by his learning."

"I don't want to," said her brother. "It isn't in my line."

"That's true enough."

"Don't tease Walter," said Mrs. Nelson. "He helps your father a good
deal, and he is not a dunce."

"Thank you, mother, for taking my part. Sarah is going to be a
strong-minded woman. I should not wonder if she came out as a lecturer
on 'Woman's Rights' some time. I think I see her, with a pair of
iron-bowed spectacles on her nose, and her back hair tied up in a big
knot, flinging her arms about, and--"

"That'll do, Walter," said Sarah. "It is an unusually powerful effort
for you. I have no desire to lecture on 'Woman's Rights,' though I think
they ought to have them all the same."

"I guess you'll get yours. You'll make your husband stand round, if you
ever get one."

Sarah laughed good-naturedly, and retorted, "I shall pity your wife, if
she has to darn your stockings."

The next day about dinner-time Squire Hudson walked up to the front
door, and knocked. His approach was witnessed, not without trepidation,
for he was not an easy creditor.

The squire looked about him searchingly as he entered. He suspected that
the interest was not ready, and the farmer's grave face confirmed his
suspicions. That he was glad of this of course Mark Nelson did not
dream, for he was not aware of his creditor's deep-laid plans.

"A fine day!" said the squire, with suavity. "I hope you are well, Mrs.
Nelson."

"Pretty well, thank you, sir."

"Have you heard from Tom lately?"

"Yes; he had just reached California."

"Then of course he could not say anything of his prospects?"

"It was too soon."

"You must miss him a good deal--all of you."

"I am thinking of him all the time," said Mrs. Nelson.

"To be sure, that is natural in a mother. But if the boy does well, that
will repay you hereafter."

"If I only felt sure he would do well."

"Oh, he is young and industrious. He will be sure to make his way. He'll
like it too. Why, my Sinclair envies him the chance of leaving home. He
wanted to go with him."

"Sinclair would not like to go in the same way as Tom, with the prospect
of having to work hard after he got there," said Mark Nelson.

"To be sure not, neighbor Nelson. My boy has never been brought up to
work. My circumstances--ahem!--have not made it necessary."

"Sinclair is fortunate in having a rich father," said the farmer.

"So I tell him," said the squire, complacently. "His fortune is already
made."

"What are you going to do with him, squire?"

"Oh, I shall make a professional man of him,--a lawyer, most likely,"
said the rich man, complacently. "I can give him a suitable income till
he gets into a paying practice."

"That will be a good many years," thought Sarah, "unless Sinclair works
harder than he has lately at school;" but the shrewd young lady kept
this thought to herself.

One by one wife and children left the room, for it was well understood
that the squire came on business, and would be likely to desire a
private interview with the farmer. They went into the kitchen, closing
the door behind them, and awaited anxiously the result of the
interview.

"I do hope Squire Hudson will be considerate," said Mrs. Nelson,
anxiously.

"I am afraid he won't be, mother," said Sarah. "He is a hard man."

"Sinclair puts on no end of airs," said Walter. "By the way he struts
round you would think he owned the whole town. You had better set your
cap for him, Sarah, for he will be rich some day."

"I would rather be an old maid than marry him," said Sarah, decidedly.

"Very likely your wish will be gratified," said her brother.

Mrs. Nelson did not smile at this sally, for her mind was too full of
anxiety.




CHAPTER XIX.

A MODERN SHYLOCK.


"I believe your interest falls due to-day, Mr. Nelson," said the squire,
when he found himself alone with his debtor.

"Yes," answered the farmer, slowly. It was not very likely to slip his
mind.

"I suppose you have the money ready," continued the squire, who supposed
no such thing.

"I have a part of it ready," said Mark Nelson, with an effort.

"A part," repeated his creditor, with a frown.

"Yes; I can give you thirty-six dollars to-day."

"_Only_ thirty-six dollars! The amount due is sixty-six."

"I know it, Squire Hudson; but this has been a bad year for the farmers,
as you probably know. Owing to the drought, my crops fell off at least
one quarter."

"I can't help that," said the squire, coldly.

"If you will be a little patient," said Mr. Nelson, uneasily.

"Neighbor Nelson," said his creditor, interrupting him, "I wish to ask
you one question. When I lent you money on mortgage was there a
stipulation that if there was a drought I was to wait for my just
interest?"

"No, Squire Hudson."

"To be sure not; I would not of course lend you money on any such terms.
It was understood that my interest was to be paid semi-annually,--was it
not so?"

"Yes, but--"

"Wait a moment. You must certainly agree that I am entitled to prompt
payment. A bargain is a bargain."

"I don't dispute it, Squire Hudson, and I have tried to be ready for
you; but in spite of all my efforts I am thirty dollars short."

"Do you expect me to be content with this explanation?"

"I think you are rather hard on me, squire. It isn't as if I had the
money and objected to pay. I am a poor man, but no one ever lost a
dollar by me; and I don't mean that any one shall, while I have my life
and strength."

"That's all very well, but it won't make up the thirty dollars in which
you are delinquent."

"What would you have me do? I cannot _make_ money."

"I wouldn't give much for an investment when the interest is delayed. It
is no longer worth its face. If any of my railroad bonds defer their
usual interest they at once drop in value."

"I know very little of railroad bonds, never having any money to invest
in them; but I think my farm will be full security for all the money I
owe you."

"Suppose I should foreclose--you would consider it an unkind thing and a
great hardship, wouldn't you?"

"It would take away my means of supporting my family. I don't think you
would go to extremes, for the sake of thirty dollars."

"It isn't the amount of money, neighbor Nelson, that is to be
considered. It is the principle that is involved."

This is a very common pretext with men who have made up their minds to
do a mean thing. Generally speaking it is false, and the money is the
first consideration.

"Will you give me two months to pay the balance of interest?" asked Mark
Nelson.

"What better prospect have you of being able to pay me then?"

"As soon as Tom has any money to send, he will remit to me. I think it
probable that I shall hear from him in the course of two months."

"If that is your reliance," said the squire, shrugging his shoulders, "I
am afraid you are leaning upon a broken reed. I know boys pretty well,
and I fancy Tom will find a use for all the money he earns."

"You don't know him, Squire Hudson. He is a very conscientious boy, and
understands very well the sacrifice I made in raising money to send him
to California. He is not very likely to forget that."

"It seems to me that the sacrifice was mine," said the squire, with a
half sneer. "If I remember rightly, I advanced the money which he took
away with him."

Mark Nelson flushed, and he answered warmly, "You did advance the money,
Squire Hudson, but I gave you security for it."

"And the very first interest that has come due you are not prepared to
meet. You can't blame me for feeling a little doubt as to the wisdom of
my advance."

"Are you very much in need of the thirty dollars?" asked Mr. Nelson,
nettled at the squire's tone.

"What do you mean, sir?"

"Is it subjecting you to any great inconvenience to wait a couple of
months for it? That is what I mean."

"My circumstances are not such," returned the squire, haughtily, "as to
make me feel even the loss of thirty dollars."

"I wish I could say the same, but I cannot. Since, then, it will
occasion you no inconvenience, I ask you as a favor that you will let
the balance rest for two months."

Squire Hudson saw that he was cornered; but none the less was he
disposed to yield the point. He even felt provoked with the farmer for
having forced from him an acknowledgment that he did not need the money
he so persistently demanded.

"I told you before," he said, "that it was not the amount of money, but
the principle, that I care for. You cannot have forgotten this."

"I don't see how any principle is involved, Squire Hudson."

"You look at the matter solely from a debtor's point of view. If you
held the mortgage, instead of myself, you would change your view very
quickly."

"I don't think I should," said the farmer, slowly. "I would be
considerate to a poor neighbor, even if it did inconvenience me a
little."

"The poor neighbor should not have borrowed money on which he was unable
to pay interest," said Squire Hudson, severely.

"How could I anticipate the drought that has diminished my crops?" said
Mark Nelson, with spirit.

"That is neither here nor there. You knew that the interest must be
paid, drought or no drought, crop or no crop."

"I cannot argue with you further, since you refuse to consider
circumstances over which I have had no control. You refuse to grant me
any delay?"

"I do."

"Since I have not the money to pay you, will you tell me what you
require?"

"How many cows do you keep?"

"Three."

"You can give me one of these, and I will consider it an equivalent for
the thirty dollars."

"Do you require this?" asked the farmer, uneasily.

"Yes; unless you have some other satisfactory arrangement to propose."
