his form, blazed like charcoal and snow, when he flung his defiance to
the Fox and buff Coyote, and danced with little effort before them,
first a black-and-white Jack, then a little white spot, and last a
speck of thistledown, before the distance swallowed him.

Many of the farmers' Dogs had learned the lesson: "A grayish Rabbit you
may catch, but a very black-and-white one is hopeless." They might,
indeed, follow for a time, but that was merely for the fun of a chivvy,
and his growing power often led Warhorse to seek the chase for the sake
of a little excitement, and to take hazards that others less gifted
were most careful to avoid.

Jack, like all other wild animals, had a certain range or country which
was home to him, and outside of this he rarely strayed. It was about
three miles across, extending easterly from the centre of the village.
Scattered through this he had a number of "forms," or "beds" as they
are locally called. These were mere hollows situated under a sheltering
bush or bunch of grass, without lining excepting the accidental grass
and in-blown leaves. But comfort was not forgotten. Some of them were
for hot weather; they faced the north, were scarcely sunk, were little
more than shady places. Some for the cold weather were deep hollows
with southern exposure, and others for the wet were well roofed with
herbage and faced the west. In one or other of these he spent the day,
and at night he went forth to feed with his kind, sporting and romping
on the moonlight nights like a lot of puppy Dogs, but careful to be
gone by sunrise, and safely tucked in a bed that was suited to the
weather.

The safest ground for the Jacks was among the farms, where not only
Osage hedges, but also the newly arrived barb-wire, made hurdles and
hazards in the path of possible enemies. But the finest of the forage
is nearer to the village among the truck-farms--the finest of forage
and the fiercest of dangers. Some of the dangers of the plains were
lacking, but the greater perils of men, guns, Dogs, and impassable
fences are much increased. Yet those who knew Warhorse best were not at
all surprised to find that he had made a form in the middle of a
market-gardener's melon-patch. A score of dangers beset him here, but
there was also a score of unusual delights and a score of holes in the
fence for times when he had to fly, with at least twoscore of
expedients to help him afterward.


III

Newchusen was a typical Western town. Everywhere in it, were to be seen
strenuous efforts at uglification, crowned with unmeasured success. The
streets were straight level lanes without curves or beauty-spots. The
houses were cheap and mean structures of flimsy boards and tar paper,
and not even honest in their ugliness, for each of them was pretending
to be something better than itself. One had a false front to make it
look like two stories, another was of imitation brick, a third
pretended to be a marble temple.

But all agreed in being the ugliest things ever used as human
dwellings, and in each could be read the owner's secret thought--to
stand it for a year or so, then move out somewhere else. The only
beauties of the place, and those unintentional, were the long lines of
hand-planted shade-trees, uglified as far as possible with whitewashed
trunks and croppy heads, but still lovable, growing, living things.

The only building in town with a touch of picturesqueness was the grain
elevator. It was not posing as a Greek temple or a Swiss chalet, but
simply a strong, rough, honest, grain elevator. At the end of each
street was a vista of the prairie, with its farm-houses, windmill
pumps, and long lines of Osage-orange hedges. Here at least was
something of interest--the gray-green hedges, thick, sturdy, and high,
were dotted with their golden mock-oranges, useless fruit, but more
welcome here than rain in a desert; for these balls were things of
beauty, and swung on their long tough boughs they formed with the soft
green leaves a color-chord that pleased the weary eye.

Such a town is a place to get out of, as soon as possible, so thought
the traveller who found himself laid over here for two days in late
winter. He asked after the sights of the place. A white Muskrat stuffed
in a case "down to the saloon"; old Baccy Bullin, who had been scalped
by the Indians forty years ago; and a pipe once smoked by Kit Carson,
proved unattractive, so he turned toward the prairie, still white with
snow.

A mark among the numerous Dog tracks caught his eye: it was the track
of a large Jack-rabbit. He asked a passer-by if there were any Rabbits
in town.

"No, I reckon not. I never seen none," was the answer. A mill-hand gave
the same reply, but a small boy with a bundle of newspapers said: "You
bet there is; there's lots of them out there on the prairie, and they
come in town a-plenty. Why, there's a big, big feller lives right round
Si Kalb's melon-patch--oh, an awful big feller, and just as black and
as white as checkers!" and thus he sent the stranger eastward on his
walk.

The "big, big, awful big one" was the Little Warhorse himself. He
didn't live in Kalb's melon-patch; he was there only at odd times. He
was not there now; he was in his west-fronting form or bed, because a
raw east wind was setting in. It was due east of Madison Avenue, and as
the stranger plodded that way the Rabbit watched him. As long as the
man kept the road the Jack was quiet, but the road turned shortly to
the north, and the man by chance left it and came straight on. Then the
Jack saw trouble ahead. The moment the man left the beaten track, he
bounded from his form, and wheeling, he sailed across the prairie due
east.

A Jack-rabbit running from its enemy ordinarily covers eight or nine
feet at a bound, and once in five or six bounds, it makes an
observation hop, leaping not along, but high in the air, so as to get
above all herbage and bushes and take in the situation. A silly young
Jack will make an observation hop as often as one in four, and so waste
a great deal of time. A clever Jack will make one hop in eight or nine,
do for observation. But Jack Warhorse as he sped, got all the
information he needed, in one hop out of a dozen, while ten to fourteen
feet were covered by each of his flying bounds. Yet another personal
peculiarity showed in the trail he left. When a Cottontail or a
Wood-hare runs, his tail is curled up tight on his back, and does not
touch the snow. When a Jack runs, his tail hangs downward or backward,
with the tip curved or straight, according to the individual; in some,
it points straight down, and so, often leaves a little stroke behind
the foot-marks. The Warhorse's tail of shining black, was of unusual
length, and at every bound, it left in the snow, a long stroke, so long
that that alone was almost enough to tell which Rabbit had made the
track.

Now some Rabbits seeing only a man without any Dog would have felt
little fear, but Warhorse, remembering some former stinging experiences
with a far-killer, fled when the foe was seventy-five yards away, and
skimming low, he ran southeast to a fence that ran easterly. Behind
this he went like a low-flying Hawk, till a mile away he reached
another of his beds; and here, after an observation taken as he stood
on his heels, he settled again to rest.

But not for long. In twenty minutes his great megaphone ears, so close
to the ground, caught a regular sound--crunch, crunch, crunch--the
tramp of a human foot, and he started up to see the man with the
shining stick in his hand, now drawing near.

Warhorse bounded out and away for the fence. Never once did he rise to
a "spy-hop" till the wire and rails were between him and his foe, an
unnecessary precaution as it chanced, for the man was watching the
trail and saw nothing of the Rabbit.

Jack skimmed along, keeping low and looking out for other enemies. He
knew now that the man was on his track, and the old instinct born of
ancestral trouble with Weasels was doubtless what prompted him to do
the double trail. He ran in a long, straight course to a distant fence,
followed its far side for fifty yards, then doubling back he retraced
his trail and ran off in a new direction till he reached another of his
dens or forms. He had been out all night and was very ready to rest,
now that the sun was ablaze on the snow; but he had hardly got the
place a little warmed when the "tramp, tramp, tramp" announced the
enemy, and he hurried away.

After a half-a-mile run he stopped on a slight rise and marked the man
still following, so he made a series of wonderful quirks in his trail,
a succession of blind zigzags that would have puzzled most trailers;
then running a hundred yards past a favorite form, he returned to it
from the other side, and settled to rest, sure that now the enemy would
be finally thrown off the scent.

It was slower than before, but still it came--"tramp, tramp, tramp."

Jack awoke, but sat still. The man tramped by on the trail one hundred
yards in front of him, and as he went on, Jack sprang out unseen,
realizing that this was an unusual occasion needing a special effort.
They had gone in a vast circle around the home range of the Warhorse
and now were less than a mile from the farm-house of the black Dog.
There was that wonderful board fence with the happily planned hen-hole.
It was a place of good memory--here more than once he had won, here
especially he had baffled the Greyhound.

These doubtless were the motive thoughts rather than any plan of
playing one enemy against another, and Warhorse bounded openly across
the snow to the fence of the big black Dog.

The hen-hole was shut, and Warhorse, not a little puzzled, sneaked
around to find another, without success, until, around the front, here
was the gate wide open, and inside lying on some boards was the big
Dog, fast asleep. The Hens were sitting hunched up in the warmest
corner of the yard. The house Cat was gingerly picking her way from
barn to kitchen, as Warhorse halted in the gateway.

The black form of his pursuer was crawling down the far white prairie
slope. Jack hopped quietly into the yard. A long-legged Rooster, that
ought to have minded his own business, uttered a loud cackle as he saw
the Rabbit hopping near. The Dog lying in the sun raised his head and
stood up, and Jack's peril was dire. He squatted low and turned himself
into a gray clod. He did it cleverly, but still might have been lost
but for the Cat. Unwittingly, unwillingly, she saved him. The black Dog
had taken three steps toward the Warhorse, though he did not know the
Rabbit was there, and was now blocking the only way of escape from the
yard, when the Cat came round the corner of the house, and leaping to a
window-ledge brought a flower-pot rolling down. By that single awkward
act she disturbed the armed neutrality existing between herself and the
Dog. She fled to the barn, and of course a flying foe is all that is
needed to send a Dog on the war-path. They passed within thirty feet of
the crouching Rabbit. As soon as they were well gone, Jack turned, and
with-out even a "Thank you, Pussy," he fled to the open and away on the
hard-beaten road.

The Cat had been rescued by the lady of the house; the Dog was once
more sprawling on the boards when the man on Jack's trail arrived. He
carried, not a gun, but a stout stick, sometimes called "dog-medicine,"
and that was all that prevented the Dog attacking the enemy of his prey.

This seemed to be the end of the trail. The trick, whether planned or
not, was a success, and the Rabbit got rid of his troublesome follower.

Next day the stranger made another search for the Jack and found, not
himself, but his track. He knew it by its tail-mark, its long leaps and
few spy-hops, but with it and running by it was the track of a smaller
Rabbit. Here is where they met, here they chased each other in play,
for no signs of battle were there to be seen; here they fed or sat
together in the sun, there they ambled side by side, and here again
they sported in the snow, always together. There was only one
conclusion: this was the mating season. This was a pair of
Jack-rabbits--the Little Warhorse and his mate.


IV

Next summer was a wonderful year for the Jack-rabbits. A foolish law
had set a bounty on Hawks and Owls and had caused a general massacre of
these feathered policemen. Consequently the Rabbits had multiplied in
such numbers that they now were threatening to devastate the country.

The farmers, who were the sufferers from the bounty law, as well as the
makers of it, decided on a great Rabbit drive. All the county was
invited to come, on a given morning, to the main road north of the
county, with the intention of sweeping the whole region up-wind and at
length driving the Rabbits into a huge corral of close wire netting.
Dogs were barred as unmanageable, and guns as dangerous in a crowd; but
every man and boy carried a couple of long sticks and a bag full of
stones. Women came on horseback and in buggies; many carried rattles or
horns and tins to make a noise. A number of the buggies trailed a
string of old cans or tied laths to scrape on the wheel-spokes, and
thus add no little to the deafening clatter of the drive. As Rabbits
have marvellously sensitive hearing, a noise that is distracting to
mankind, is likely to prove bewildering to them.

The weather was right, and at eight in the morning the word to advance
was given. The line was about five miles long at first, and there was a
man or a boy every thirty or forty yards. The buggies and riders kept
perforce almost entirely to the roads; but the beaters were supposed,
as a point of honor, to face everything, and keep the front unbroken.
The advance was roughly in three sides of a square. Each man made as
much noise as he could, and threshed every bush in his path. A number
of Rabbits hopped out. Some made for the lines, to be at once assailed
by a shower of stones that laid many of them low. One or two did get
through and escaped, but the majority were swept before the drive. At
first the number seen was small, but before three miles were covered
the Rabbits were running ahead in every direction. After five
miles--and that took about three hours--the word for the wings to close
in was given. The space between the men was shortened up till they were
less than ten feet apart, and the whole drive converged on the corral
with its two long guide wings or fences; the end lines joined these
wings, and the surround was complete. The drivers marched rapidly now;
scores of the Rabbits were killed as they ran too near the beaters.
Their bodies strewed the ground, but the swarms seemed to increase; and
in the final move, before the victims were cooped up in the corral, the
two-acre space surrounded was a whirling throng of skurrying, jumping,
bounding Rabbits. Round and round they circled and leaped, looking for
a chance to escape; but the inexorable crowd grew thicker as the ring
grew steadily smaller, and the whole swarm was forced along the chute
into the tight corral, some to squat stupidly in the middle, some to
race round the outer wall, some to seek hiding in corners or under each
other.

And the Little Warhorse--where was he in all this? The drive had swept
him along, and he had been one of the first to enter the corral. But a
curious plan of selection had been established. The pen was to be a
death-trap for the Rabbits, except the best, the soundest. And many
were there that were unsound; those that think of all wild animals as
pure and perfect things, would have been shocked to see how many halt,
maimed, and diseased there were in that pen of four thousand or five
thousand Jack-rabbits.

It was a Roman victory--the rabble of prisoners was to be butchered.
The choicest were to be reserved for the arena. The arena? Yes, that is
the Coursing Park.

In that corral trap, prepared beforehand for the Rabbits, were a number
of small boxes along the wall, a whole series of them, five hundred at
least, each large enough to hold one Jack.

In the last rush of driving, the swiftest Jacks got first to the pen.
Some were swift and silly; when once inside they rushed wildly round
and round. Some were swift and wise; they quickly sought the hiding
afforded by the little boxes; all of these were now full. Thus five
hundred of the swiftest and wisest had been selected, in, not by any
means an infallible way, but the simplest and readiest. These five
hundred were destined to be coursed by Greyhounds. The surging mass of
over four thousand were ruthlessly given to slaughter.

Five hundred little boxes with five hundred bright-eyed Jack-rabbits
were put on the train that day, and among them was Little Jack Warhorse.


V

Rabbits take their troubles lightly, and it is not to be supposed that
any great terror was felt by the boxed Jacks, once the uproar of the
massacre was over; and when they reached the Coursing Park near the
great city and were turned out one by one, very gently,--yes, gently;
the Roman guards were careful of their prisoners, being responsible for
