made his teeth rattle.

"I sent for him, Abner. I wanted to find how I could best reward him
for----"

"For interfering with me on another occasion--yes, I know!" finished her
husband, glaring at her. "You'd spend a lot of money on any one who
tried to injure me, but you wouldn't give me a cent to keep me from
starving!"

As Dexter rattled off this charge he worked himself up into a passion.
He shook Dick again, until he espied a closet in the room, in the lock
of which was the key.

"In there for you!" snarled Dexter, still shaking Prescott and dragging
him across the room. Slam! Into the closet went Dick. Click! went the
lock, and Dexter thrust the key into his pocket.

"I'll take command of things here, as I ought to," growled the man. "As
for you, Jennie, here's another closet on the other side of the room.
Come, for I don't want to hurt you."

Frightened badly now, the woman obeyed the impulse of Dexter's hand on
her arm. She sank, cowering, into the other closet. Dexter turned the
key in that lock also.

"Now, are you going to come to your senses?" He called through the
locked door to his wife.

"If you mean am I going to give you any more money, I am not!" came Mrs.
Dexter's reply, in a firmer tone, for she had been stung anew into
defiance.

"Then good night--and good-bye!" he laughed harshly.

Both captives heard the scratching of a match. Dexter held the small
flame against a drapery until it was burning freely.

He had no intention of having his wife burn up in the house, for, dead,
her money would be lost to him forever. He planned only to scare her
into nervous collapse. But Jane, the housekeeper, did not liberate the
captives in the two closets as Dexter had expected. Instead, as the
housekeeper came to the head of the stairs, heard the crackling of
flames and smelled the rising smoke, she fell on the landing in a faint.

"Dick! Dick!" screamed Mrs. Dexter's voice. "The house is afire. Can't
you break down the door and save us both?"

"I'm trying to," shouted back young Prescott above the din of his own
blows. "I'm trying to--but I'm afraid this door is too strong for me!"




CHAPTER XV

WHAT GRAMMAR SCHOOL BOYS CAN DO


Inside of a minute Dick Prescott was both gasping and despairing.

Outside the volume of smoke was increasing. Some of it worked in through
the cracks around the door.

Coughing, choking, trembling in a cold chill of dread, Dick continued
frantically to hurl himself against the door.

"Can't you get out, Dick?"

"I'm awfully afraid I can't."

"Nor can I," screamed back Mrs. Dexter, though she was doing nothing
besides beating a feeble tattoo with her soft fists against the panels
of the door of her prison. "Jane! Jane!"

But the housekeeper still lay in a death-like faint above. As for Myra,
she slept as only a tired small child can sleep.

"Oh, Dick, you must break down your door!" screamed the woman. "Myra--my
child--upstairs. She'll be burned to death!"

"I'll keep on trying, ma'am, as long as I have any life left," Dick
promised, chokingly.

Brave words! Young as he was, Dick Prescott was not of the kind to die a
coward's death. Yet, in his own mind he was convinced that the door was
too stout for him.

"You can't save us, can you?" called Mrs. Dexter's own choking tones
finally.

"I'm still trying, ma'am."

"But you don't expect to succeed. Tell me the truth."

"I shan't give up, ma'am, but I am afraid that all the chances are
against us!"

Bang! Bang! went Dick's shoulders against the panels. He was aching now
from his hopeless exertions.

Yet, every time that he paused he heard the crackling of the flames
outside. The sound told him that the woodwork had caught at last.

"Dick!"

"Yes, ma'am."

"I'm quite calm now."

"I'm glad to hear that, Mrs. Dexter."

"I've stopped thinking of myself, Dick. I know that my little Myra is
asleep. She'll suffocate, and won't wake up to know any pain."

"But where's your housekeeper?"

"She must have slipped out after she put Myra to bed. There's no hope
for us, Dick. We must go as bravely as we can. But, my poor boy, I can't
tell you how sorry I am that helping me has brought you to such a
plight."

"But you forget, Mrs. Dexter. Central will send a policeman. He will
find out what's wrong here and save us."

"Don't try to comfort me with false hopes, Dick. You and I both know
that the policeman can't get here in time to save us."

This had, indeed, occurred to Dick some moments before, but he wanted to
help Mrs. Dexter to keep her courage up as long as possible.

"Dick," called a subdued voice, "your mother taught you to pray?"

"Oh, yes, ma'am."

"Then you know how to pray now--the last chance you'll have."

"All right, then," young Prescott shot back to her, "and I'll keep on
working while I pray!"

Mrs. Dexter did not speak again. The smoke, passing into the closet, had
proved too much for her, and she had collapsed on the floor.

But Dick, naturally stronger, and with robust lungs, was still fighting
bravely, though he was conscious that he was growing feebler and that
air was harder to get.

Then there came to his ears two sounds of the sweetest description. The
first noise was that of running feet. The second was Dave Darrin's voice
shouting:

"Fellows, there's some fearful work going on here. And here's the fire!
Move like lightning! Bring water from the kitchen--in anything."

There was a sound of many running feet. Then Dick called, huskily:

"Dave, are you there?"

"Dick, where are you?"

"In this closet--locked in!"

"But there doesn't seem to be any key," quivered Darrin.

"No; Dexter took that away with him."

"Did he set this----"

"Yes; but listen! Mrs. Dexter is locked up in the closet opposite."

Dave crossed the room in a flash. Finding the key in the lock of the
other closet door, Dave Darrin turned it and found Mrs. Dexter lying on
the floor.

"Fellows!" bawled Dave hoarsely. "Never mind the water. Come here--on
the jump!"

Half a dozen boys ran back into the room, just in time to see Dave
struggling to drag Mrs. Dexter out to the front porch.

"One of you help me," directed Darrin. "The others batter down that
closet door over there. Dick Prescott is locked up there, and there is
no key."

"Here's a hatchet," cried another boy, running in from the kitchen.
"Clear the way and let me at the door."

The boy was Greg Holmes. He brought the hatchet down with telling force
at each blow, smashing all the paneling around the lock. In a very few
moments Greg had the door open, and he and Dave helped catch Dick as the
latter fell forward, dizzy and all but unconscious.

"Rush him out on to the front porch!" ordered Dave. "Then we'll come
back and fight the fire!"

"Has--has anyone turned in an alarm?" inquired Dick, as he reached the
porch and took in a life-saving breath of the pure, cool air.

"No," admitted Dave. "We forgot that. But I'll run and do it now."

"What's the matter? Fire?" called a man from the next yard.

"Yes," Dave yelled back. "Run and turn in an alarm, won't you?"

"I surely will," came the answer.

This left Dave free to remain and do what he could.

"I'm all right now," declared Dick, getting up out of the chair into
which he had been dropped, though he was not yet any too strong. "Dave,
you and the other fellows fight the fire the best you can. Greg, you
come upstairs with me, and we'll find Myra and get her out of the
smoke."

At the head of the stairs Prescott and Holmes found Jane, still in a
faint.

"We'll need more help to get her downstairs," muttered Dick. "Greg, you
find Myra, bundle her in blankets and rush down with her. I'll stay here
until you come back."

When Greg, after darting downstairs with the child, returned, he had two
other boys with him. It took all four to get Jane down and outside to
one of the porch chairs.

"This is work for the doctor," announced Dick, looking from Jane to Mrs.
Dexter. "You other fellows jump in to get the fire out, and I'll 'phone
for Dr. Bentley. He's Mrs. Dexter's doctor."

While making that comment, Dick darted back to the telephone. As seconds
were precious here, he merely called up central and stated what was
wanted. Then he ran to join the others.

"There's a hose outside this window. I've seen it before," called
Prescott, opening the window and jumping outside. Then:

"Dave!"

"Here I am, Dick."

"Here's the hose. I'll pass the nozzle in and then turn the water on."

"Bully for you, Handy Andy!"

Sizz-zz! Dave directed the stream against the liveliest flames. It was
only a lawn-sprinkling hose that he held, but even that threw a lot of
water.

Dick climbed in through the window again.

"We'll hold things down until the firemen get here," he announced
energetically.

So busy had all been that only two or three out of the ten boys present
had noticed that the fire-alarm whistle had called off the box number
some time previously.

Finally, with a screeching of whistles and a clanging of gongs, a part
of the Gridley Fire Department hauled up outside.

While hosemen fastened a line to a hydrant, and nozzlemen dragged the
lengths in through the wide-open front door, the chief ran ahead of
them.

"Where's the fire?" he called, and made his way inside.

"Well, you boys are dandies!" remarked the chief grimly. Then he ran out
to the front door.

"Shut that stream off!" the chief bellowed hoarsely. "A lot of Grammar
School boys have put the fire out with a lawn hose."

Two or three minutes later the policeman whom Prescott had summoned
arrived, out of breath. Two minutes after that Dr. Bentley's auto
stopped at the door.

Both unconscious women were revived, and Myra, who had not once awakened
in all the excitement, was taken up and tucked in bed.

"How did you get into the house, Dick?" Mrs. Dexter at last found time
to inquire.

"Why, the door was open just a crack, ma'am, when I got here. I heard
Dexter threatening you, and realized that you must be alone. I knew I
couldn't do much alone, so I sneaked in as softly as I could and got to
the telephone."

As soon as he found himself with only his boy friends about, Dick
demanded to know how they had arrived so opportunely.

"That's easy enough," Dave Darrin explained. "Just after you left me I
ran into Greg, Tom, Dan and Harry. I told them where you'd gone, and
what the business would probably turn out to be. Then--then--well, we
got so awfully curious that we made up our minds to stroll up here to
the corner and wait until you came out. Then we ran into four other
fellows from our school, and there was a mob of us. To kill time we
walked down past. As we went past we saw smoke coming out of one of the
open windows on the ground floor. Then Bert Johnson remembered that he
had seen Ab. Dexter come out and hurry away. It didn't take us long,
then, to make up our minds to get into the house. We found the front
door unlocked, and the rest was easy."

"We'll get out of here as soon as we can now," hinted Dick.

"Why?" Dalzell wanted to know, "This is the center of all the excitement
in town to-night."

"Yes," Prescott replied, "but as soon as Mrs. Dexter thinks of it she'll
send for us and offer more thanks and rewards. We can get away 'most any
time now. And there comes her special policeman. Dexter won't be back
to-night, anyway."

So the Grammar School boys slipped away, but they had added another page
to the history of Gridley.

Dexter, with his usual luck, appeared to have made a safe retreat. The
police paid a visit to his former cave up the road, but did not catch
him there, although a police guard was kept at the cave for three days.

But Dick received a postal card, on the back of which was printed:

"If you ever interfere with me again, I promise you that your luck is at
an end!"

The message was unsigned, but the message was postmarked at Gridley.




CHAPTER XVI

OUT FOR HALLOWE'EN FUN


"There'll be loads of fun to-night," proclaimed Dan Dalzell, his eyes
sparkling with mischief, as he danced up and down in the schoolyard at
forenoon recess.

"Why?" asked Dick innocently.

"Don't you know what day this is?" Dan insisted.

"Yes; and I also know that to-night will be Hallowe'en."

"Then don't you know that there are going to be several barrels of fun
uncorked in this old burg to-night?"

"I didn't know that barrels were ever 'uncorked,'" replied Dick
judicially.

"Oh, pshaw! This isn't the first class in language!" retorted Dan
disdainfully. "You're going to be out to see the fun, aren't you?"

"I suppose likely I shall be out on the street a little while after
supper," Prescott admitted.

"Hear the young saint!" taunted Dan derisively, appealing to a group of
boys. "No one would ever suppose that Dick Prescott had ever gotten up
any mischief--hey?"

"Oh, Dick will have one or two tricks ready for us to trim our enemies
with to-night," replied Ben Alvord. "Don't worry!"

"Sure! Dick never yet went back on the crowd," declared Wrecker Lane.
"He's got a few good ones ready right now."

"Have you, Dick?" demanded a chorus of eager voices.

"Tell us one or two of the tricks now," pressed "Hoof" Sadby.

But Dick shook his head.

"Come on out with it!" coaxed Spoff Henderson.

"Ain't he the mean one--keeping it all to himself?"

"If Dick has anything hidden in his sleeve," broke in Tom Reade, "he'd
show a lot of sense, wouldn't he, telling it to a lot of you fellows
with loose-jointed tongues? Why, it would be in the evening paper, and
the folks we want to torment would be at their gates waiting for us."

"We won't tell--won't breathe a word! Honest!" came in instant denial.

"I'll tell you just one thing, fellows, if you think you really can keep
it to yourselves," grinned Dick.

"Go ahead!"

"Don't trust these talkative Indians with anything in advance, Dick,"
protested Tom Reade.

"Yes, yes--go ahead!" cried the boys.

"You won't tell, fellows, will you?" Dick fenced.

"Cross our hearts we won't."

"Well, then, fellows, the truth is that you are all on the wrong scent.
I haven't thought up a blessed prank for to-night."

"Aw!" came an unbelieving chorus.

"Let's make him tell. Get hold of him. We'll paddle Dick Prescott until
he'll be glad to tell."
