be moving.

"Hand me that glass," said Manton to one of the men beside him.  "I
shouldn't wonder if the niggers were up to some mischief there.  Ah!
just so," he exclaimed, adjusting the telescope a little more correctly,
and again applying it to his eye.  "They seem to be scuffling on the top
of yonder precipice.  Now there's one fellow down; but it's so far off
that I can't make out clearly what they're about.  I say, Mr Scraggs,
get the other glass and take a squint at them--you are farther sighted
than I am."

"You're right; they are killin' one another up yonder," observed
Scraggs, surveying the group on the cliffs with calm indifference.

"Here comes the breeze," exclaimed Manton, with a look of satisfaction.
"Now, look alive, lads; we shall be close on the nigger village in five
minutes--it's just round the point of this small island close ahead.
Come, Mr Scraggs, we've other business on hand just now than squinting
at the scrimmages of these fellows."

"Hold on," cried Scraggs with a grin; "I do believe they're going to
pitch a feller over that cliff.  What a crack he'll come down into the
water with, to be sure.  It's to be hoped the poor man is dead, for his
own sake, before he takes that flight.  Hallo!" added Scraggs with an
energetic shout and a look of surprise, "I say, that's one of _our_ men;
I know him by his striped flannel shirt.  If he would only give up
kicking for a second I'd make out his--humph! it's all up with him now,
poor fellow, whoever he is."

As he said the last words, the figure of a man was seen to shoot out
from the cliff, and, descending with ever increasing rapidity, to strike
the water with terrific violence, sending up a jet of white foam as it
disappeared.

"Stand by to lower the gig," shouted Manton.

"Ay, ay, sir," was the hearty response of the men, as some of them
sprang to obey.

"Lower away!"

The boat struck the water, and its crew were on the thwarts in a moment.
At the same time the point of the island was passed, and the native
village opened up to view.

"Load Long Tom--double shot!" roared Manton, whose ire was raised not so
much at the idea of a fellow-creature having been so barbarously
murdered, as at the notion of one of the crew of his schooner having
been so treated by contemptible niggers.  "Away, lads, and pick up that
man."

"It's of no use," remonstrated Scraggs; "he's done for by this time."

"I know it," said Manton, with a fierce oath, "bring him in, dead or
alive; if the sharks leave an inch of him, bring it to me.  I'll make
the black villains eat it raw."

This ferocious threat was interlarded with and followed by a series of
terrible oaths which we think it inadvisable to repeat.

"Starboard!" he shouted to the man at the helm, as soon as the boat shot
away on its mission of mercy.

"Starboard it is."

"Steady!"

While he gave these orders, Manton sighted the brass gun carefully, and,
just as the schooner's head came up to the wind, he applied the match.

Instantly a cloud of smoke obscured the centre of the little vessel as
if her powder magazine had blown up, and a deafening roar went ringing
and reverberating from cliff to cliff as two of the great iron shot were
sent groaning through the air and pitched right into the heart of the
village.

It was this tremendous shot from Long Tom, followed almost
instantaneously by the entire broadside of the _Talisman_, that saved
the life of Alice, possibly the lives of her young companions also,--
that struck terror to the hearts of the savages, causing them to
converge towards their defenceless homes from all directions, and that
apprised Ole Thorwald and Henry Stuart that the assault on the village
had commenced in earnest.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

GREATER MYSTERIES THAN EVER--A BOLD MOVE AND A CLEVER ESCAPE.

We return now to the _Talisman_.

The instant the broadside of the cruiser burst with such violence, and
in such close proximity, on Manton's ears, he felt that he had run into
the very jaws of the lion; and that escape was almost impossible.  The
bold heart of the pirate quailed at the thought of his impending fate,
but the fear caused by conscious guilt was momentary; his constitutional
courage returned so violently as to render him reckless.

It was too late to put about and avoid being seen, for, before the shot
was fired, the schooner had already almost run into the narrow channel
between the island and the shore.  A few seconds later, she sailed
gracefully into view of the amazed Montague, who at once recognised the
pirate vessel from Gascoyne's faithful description of her, and hurriedly
gave orders to load with ball and grape, while a boat was lowered in
order to slew the ship round more rapidly, so as to bring her broadside
to bear on the schooner.

To say that Gascoyne beheld all this unmoved would be to give a false
impression of the man.  He knew the ring of his great gun too well to
require the schooner to come in sight in order to convince him that his
vessel was near at hand.  When, therefore, she appeared, and Montague
turned to him with a hasty glance of suspicion and pointed to her, he
had completely banished every trace of feeling from his countenance, and
sat on the taffrail puffing his cigar with an air of calm satisfaction.
Nodding to Montague's glance of inquiry, he said--

"Ay, that's the pirate.  I told you he was a bold fellow, but I did not
think he was quite so bold as to attempt _this_!"

To do Gascoyne justice, he told the plain truth here; for, having sent a
peremptory order to his mate by John Bumpus, not to move from his
anchorage on any account whatever, he was not a little surprised as well
as enraged at what he supposed was Manton's mutinous conduct.  But, as
we have said, his feelings were confined to his breast--they found no
index in his grave face.

Montague suspected, nevertheless, that his pilot was assuming a
composure which he did not feel; for, from the manner of the meeting of
the two vessels, he was persuaded that it was as little expected on the
part of the pirates as of himself.  It was with a feeling of curiosity,
therefore, as to what reply he should receive, that he put the
question--

"What would Mr Gascoyne advise me to do _now_?"

"Blow the villains out of the water," was the quick answer; "I would
have done so before now, had I been you."

"Perhaps you might, but not _much_ sooner," retorted the other, pointing
to the guns which were ready loaded, while the men stood at their
stations matches in hand only waiting for the broadside to be brought to
bear on the little vessel, when an iron shower would be sent against her
which must, at such short range, have infallibly sent her to the bottom.

The mate of the pirate schooner was quite alive to his danger, and had
taken the only means in his power to prevent it.  Close to where his
vessel lay, a large rock rose between the shore of the large island and
the islet in the bay which has been described as separating the two
vessels from each other.  Owing to the formation of the coast at this
place, a powerful stream ran between the rock and this islet at low
tide.  It happened to be flowing out at that time like a mill-race.
Manton saw that the schooner was being sucked into this stream.  In
other circumstances, he would have endeavoured to avoid the danger; for
the channel was barely wide enough to allow even a small craft to pass
between the rocks; but now he resolved to risk it.

He knew that any attempt to put the schooner about, would only hasten
the efforts of the cruiser to bring her broadside to bear on him.  He
also knew that, in the course of a few seconds, he would be carried
through the stream into the shelter of the rocky point.  He therefore
ordered the men to lie down on the deck; while, in a careless manner, he
slewed the big brass gun round, so as to point it at the man-of-war.

Gascoyne at once understood the intended manoeuvre of his mate; and, in
spite of himself, a gleam of triumph shot from his eyes.  Montague
himself suspected that his prize was not altogether so sure as he had
deemed it; and he urged the men in the boat to put forth their utmost
efforts.  The _Talisman_ was almost slewed into position, when the
pirate schooner was observed to move rapidly through the water, stern
foremost, in the direction of the point.  At first Montague could
scarcely credit his eyes; but when he saw the end of the main-boom pass
behind the point, he became painfully alive to the fact that the whole
vessel would certainly follow in the course of a few seconds.  Although
the most of his guns were still not sufficiently well pointed, he gave
the order to fire them in succession.  The entire broadside burst in
this manner from the side of the _Talisman_, with a prolonged and mighty
crash or roar, and tore up the waters of the narrow channel.

Most of the iron storm passed close by the head of the pirate.  However,
only one ball took effect; it touched the end of the bowsprit, and sent
the jib-boom into the air in splinters.  Manton applied the match to the
brass gun almost at the same moment, and the heavy ringing roar of her
explosion seemed like a prolonged echo of the broadside.  The gun was
well aimed; but the schooner had already passed so far behind the point,
that the ball struck a projecting part of the cliff; dashed it into
atoms, and, glancing upwards, passed through the cap of the _Talisman's_
mizzen-mast, and brought the lower yard, with all its gear, rattling
down on the quarter-deck.  When the smoke cleared away, the _Avenger_
had vanished from the scene.

To put the ship about, and follow the pirate schooner, was the first
impulse of Montague; but, on second thoughts, he felt that the risk of
getting on the rocks in the narrow channel was too great to be lightly
run.  He therefore gave orders to warp the ship about, and steer round
the islet, on the other side of which he fully expected to find the
pirate.  But time was lost in attempting to do this, in consequence of
the wreck of the mizzen-mast having fouled the rudder.  When the
_Talisman_ at last got under way, and rounded the outside point of the
islet, no vessel of any kind was to be seen.

Amazed beyond measure, and deeply chagrined, the unfortunate captain of
the man-of-war turned to Gascoyne, who still sat quietly on the taffrail
smoking his cigar--

"Does this pirate schooner sport wings as well as sails?" said he; "for
unless she does, and has flown over the mountains, I cannot see how she
could disappear in so short a space of time."

"I told you the pirate was a bold man; and now he has proved himself a
clever fellow.  Whether he sports wings or no is best known to himself.
Perhaps he can dive.  If so, we have only to watch until he comes to the
surface, and shoot him leisurely."

"Well, he is off; there is no doubt of that," returned Montague.  "And
now, Mr Gascoyne, since it is vain for me to chase a vessel possessed
of such mysterious qualities, you will not object, I daresay, to guide
my ship to the bay where your own little schooner lies.  I have a fancy
to anchor there."

"By all means," said Gascoyne, coolly.  "It will afford me much pleasure
to do as you wish, and to have you alongside of my little craft."

Montague was surprised at the perfect coolness with which the other
received this proposal.  He was persuaded that there must be some
mysterious connexion between the pirate schooner and the sandal-wood
trader, although his ideas on this point were somewhat undefined and
confused; and he had expected that Gascoyne would have shewn some
symptoms of perplexity, on being thus ordered to conduct the _Talisman_
to a spot where he suspected no schooner would be found; or, if found,
would appear under such a changed aspect, as to warrant his seizing it
on suspicion.  As Gascoyne, however, shewed perfect willingness to obey
the order, he turned away and left his strange pilot to conduct the ship
through the reefs, having previously given him to understand that the
touching of a rock, and the termination of his (Gascoyne's) life, would
certainly be simultaneous events.

Meanwhile the _Avenger_, alias the _Foam_, had steered direct for the
shore, into which she apparently ran and disappeared like a
phantom-ship.  The coast of this part of the island, where the events we
are narrating occurred, was peculiarly formed.  There were several
narrow inlets in the high cliffs which were exceedingly deep, but barely
wide enough to admit of the passage of a large boat, or a small vessel.
Many of these inlets or creeks, which in some respects resembled the
narrow fjords of Norway, though on a miniature scale, were so thickly
fringed with trees, and the luxuriant undergrowth peculiar to southern
climes, that their existence could not be detected from the sea.
Indeed, even after the entrance to any one of them was discovered, no
one would have imagined it to extend so far inland.

Two of those deep narrow inlets, opening from opposite sides of the cape
which lay close to the islet above referred to, had approached so close
to each other at their upper extremities? that they had at last met, in
consequence of the sea undermining and throwing down the cliff that
separated them.  Thus the cape was in reality an island; and the two
united inlets formed a narrow strait, through which the _Avenger_ passed
to her former anchorage, by means of four pair of powerful sweeps or
oars.  This secret passage was well known to the pirates; and it was
with a lurking feeling that it might some day prove of use to him, that
Gascoyne invariably anchored near to it when he visited the island as a
sandal-wood trader.

During the transit, the carpenters of the schooner were not idle.  The
red streak and flag, and griffin's head, were removed; the big gun was
covered with the long boat, and the vessel which entered the one end of
the channel as the warlike _Avenger_, issued from the other side as the
peaceful _Foam_; and, rowing to her former anchorage, dropt anchor.  The
shattered jib-boom had been replaced by a spare one, and part of the
crew were stowed away under the cargo, in an empty space of the hold
reserved for this special purpose, and for concealing arms.  A few of
them were also landed, not far from the cliff over which poor Bumpus had
been thrown, with orders to remain concealed, and be ready to embark at
a moment's notice.

Soon after the schooner anchored, the boat which had been sent off in
search of the body of our unfortunate seaman returned, having failed to
discover the object for which it was sent out.

The breeze had by this time died away almost entirely, so that three
hours elapsed before the _Talisman_ rounded the point, stood into the
bay, and dropt anchor at a distance of about two miles from the
suspected schooner.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

REMARKABLE DOINGS OF POOPY--EXTRAORDINARY CASE OF RESUSCITATION.

It is time now to return to our unfortunate friends, Corrie, Alice, and
Poopy, who have been left long enough exposed on the summit of the
cliffs, from which they had expected to be tossed by the savages, when
the guns of the _Talisman_ so opportunely saved them.

The reader will observe, that these incidents, which have taken so long
to narrate, were enacted in a very brief space of time.  Only a few
hours elapsed between the firing of the broadside already referred to,
and the anchoring of the _Talisman_ in the bay, where the _Foam_ had
cast anchor some time before her; yet in this short space of time many
things occurred on the island which are worthy of particular notice.

As we have already remarked, Corrie and his two companions in misfortune
had been bound; and, in this condition, were left by the savages to
their fate.  Their respective positions were by no means enviable.  Poor
Alice lay near the edge of the cliff, with her wrists and ankles so
securely tied that no effort of which she was capable could set her
free.  Poopy lay about ten yards farther up the cliff, flat on her sable
back, with her hands tied behind her, and her ankles also secured; so
that she could by no means attain to a sitting position, although she
made violent and extraordinary efforts to do so.  We say extraordinary,
because Poopy, being ingenious, hit upon many devices of an unheard of
nature to accomplish her object.  Among others, she attempted to turn
heels over head, hoping thus to get upon her knees; and there is no
doubt whatever that she would have succeeded in this, had not the
formation of the ground been exceedingly unfavourable for such a
manoeuvre.

Corrie had shewn such an amount of desperate vindictiveness, in the way
of kicking, hitting, biting, scratching, and pinching, when the savages
were securing him, that they gave him five or six extra coils of the
rope of cocoa-nut fibre with which they bound him.  Consequently he
could not move any of his limbs, and he now lay on his side between
Alice and Poopy, gazing with much earnestness and no little astonishment
at the peculiar contortions of the latter.

"You'll never manage it, Poopy," he remarked in a sad tone of voice, on
beholding the poor girl balanced on the small of her back, preparatory
to making a spring that might have reminded one of the leaps of a trout
when thrown from its native element upon the bank of a river.  "And
you'll break your neck if you go on like that," he added, on observing
that, having failed in these attempts, she recurred to the
heels-over-head process--but all in vain.

"Oh, me!" sighed Poopy, as she fell back in a fit of exhaustion.  "It's
be all hup wid us."

"Don't say that, you goose," whispered Corrie, "you'll frighten Alice,
you will."

"Will me?" whispered Poopy, in a tone of self-reproach; then in a loud
voice, "Oh, no! it not all hup yet, Miss Alice.  See, me go at it agin."

And "go at it" she did in a way that actually alarmed her companions.
At any other time Corrie would have exploded with laughter, but the poor
boy was thoroughly overwhelmed by the suddenness and the extent of his
misfortune.  The image of Bumpus, disappearing headlong over that
terrible cliff, had filled his heart with a feeling of horror which
nothing could allay, and grave thoughts at the desperate case of poor
little Alice (for he neither thought of nor cared for Poopy or himself)
sank like a weight of lead upon his spirit.

"Don't try it any more, dear Poopy," said Alice, entreatingly, "you'll
only hurt yourself and tear your frock.  I feel _sure_ that some one
will be sent to deliver us.  Don't _you_, Corrie?"

The tone in which this question was put shewed that the poor child did
not feel quite so certain of the arrival of succour as her words
implied.  Corrie perceived this at once, and, with the heroism of a true
lover, he crushed back the feelings of anxiety and alarm which were
creeping over his own stout little heart in spite of his brave words,
and gave utterance to encouraging expressions and even to slightly
jovial sentiments, which tended very much to comfort Alice, and Poopy
too.

"Sure?" he exclaimed, rolling on his other side to obtain a view of the
child, (for, owing to his position and his fettered condition he had to
turn on his right side when he wished to look at Poopy, and on his left
when he addressed himself to Alice.) "Sure? why, of course I'm sure.
D'ye think your father would leave you lying out in the cold all night?"

"No, that I am certain he would not," cried Alice, enthusiastically;
"but, then, he does not know we are here, and will never think of
looking for us in such an unlikely place."

"Humph! that only shews your ignorance," said Corrie.

"Well, I dare say I _am_ very ignorant," replied Alice, meekly.

"No, no!  I don't mean _that_," cried Corrie, with a feeling of
self-reproach.  "I don't mean to say that you're ignorant in a general
way, you know, but only about what men are likely to do, d'ye see, when
they're hard put to it, you understand.  _Our_ feelings are so different
