"A big market basket, Mother, lined with red paper. Do line it with
red," pleaded Mary.

"It shall be lined with red, little lady! And trimmed with holly, too!"
replied Uncle Frederick. "I will undertake to furnish both decorations
along with the turkey."

"Why not put in Santa Claus napkins? I saw some paper ones the other
day and they were tremendously festive," suggested Mrs. McGregor.

"I think the best plan is for us all to go together and buy the
dinner," the Captain suddenly announced.

Shouts of approval greeted the plan.

"But the baby!" demurred his sister.

"We can wheel James Frederick in the carriage and take turns staying
outside the shops with him," said Carl.

"And if we have the carriage we can bring home our stuff in it," put in
Tim.

"Poor baby! How would you like to have a big ten-pound turkey piled on
top of you?" questioned Mary indignantly.

"Oh, James Frederick won't mind," Tim responded comfortably. "And
anyhow, he's got to do his bit toward making other people happy. As far
as I can see he isn't denying himself anything, for he couldn't eat a
turkey if it was set right under his nose. So it's his part to tote
home the parcels in his flivver; he seems to be the only member of the
family that has one."

Thus it was agreed and on the day before Christmas it would have done
one good to witness the cavalcade of McGregors issuing forth on their
altruistic pilgrimage. First went Mary, leading Nell by the hand; then
Carl with Martin's mitten firmly clutched in his. Next came Mrs.
McGregor with Tim, and bringing up at the rear was Uncle Frederick
wheeling his namesake, the baby. What a tour it was! Certainly there
never had been such a turkey as the one the reckless captain bought--a
turkey so plump of breast, so white of skin, so golden of claw! Why, it
was a king of birds! And then the shining coral of the cranberries, the
satin gleam of the onions, the warm brown of the potatoes! As for the
celery--its delicate green and faint canary tips were as good as a
bouquet of flowers. Just to view its crispness was to make the mouth
water. And the nuts, raisins, candy, oranges! Once in their vicinity
Captain Dillingham cast aside all caution and wildly purchased one
dainty after another. He seemed to have gone quite mad and it was not
until his sister very positively informed him that not another bundle
could be carried that he consented to be dragged away from the counters
of sweet-meats.

Then staggering beneath their load of whity-brown parcels, the family
hastened out to the baby carriage where Mary stood guarding James
Frederick.

"Put the turkey down near his feet," cried she excitedly, as she lifted
the baby in order to make more room. "The other things can be packed in
round him."

"But he'll be stifled!" objected Mrs. McGregor.

"Oh, no, he won't, Ma!" contradicted Tim. "He'll probably be uncomfortable.
Christmas comes but once a year, though, so he ought to be able to survive
being cramped."

"Oh, James Frederick is perfectly used to having his coupe turned into
an express wagon, Mother," Carl explained. "Don't worry about him.
Often he rides home from down-town buried a foot deep in bundles. All
that fusses me is whether the carriage will stand the strain. If it
should part in the middle and the front wheels go off on an independent
route it would be----"

"Both inconvenient and embarrassing," concluded Captain Dillingham with
a laugh.

Fortunately, however, James Frederick's chariot was staunchly
constructed and reached Mulberry Court without mishap, its precious
contents--including the patient owner of the vehicle--being borne
triumphantly aloft to the McGregor flat. Once upstairs the basket,
scarlet paper, and holly were produced, and Mary with deft fingers went
to work to fashion a receptacle worthy of the bounties with which the
O'Dowds were to be surprised. At last into this garish hamper were
packed the viands and afterward a card bearing holiday greetings was
tied to the handle with a flaring red bow.

"Now the worst task is to come," declared Mrs. McGregor, "and that is
to land the present at Julie's door without being caught. They are
proud people, the O'Dowds, and I wouldn't for worlds have them know
from whom the dinner comes. Timmie is not strong enough to take it and
Carl is too clumsy. Should he start to run away, like as not he would
stumble and bring all Mulberry Court to see what the racket was."

"Why can't I carry it?" inquired Captain Dillingham.

"You! One sight of your gold buttons would be enough, Frederick.
Besides, you're none too agile in making a getaway."

"I fancy some boy could be found to leave it if I paid him," suggested
the captain.

"The very thing! There's a score of 'em on the street. Fetch in the
fastest runner you see, Timmie. No matter whether you know him or not.
In fact, get one you don't know. 'Twill be all the better."

Away sped Tim only to return an instant later with a grimy, Italian
youngster at his heels.

Captain Dillingham explained the errand.

At the sight of the gleaming quarter of a dollar the Italian grinned.
He would leave a bomb or a live ox at anybody's door for a quarter,
affirmed he with an ingratiating smile.

Therefore the precious basket was entrusted to him and to judge by the
scampering that followed its thud before the O'Dowds' door he was quite
as fleet of foot as Tim had asserted.

"Wouldn't you like to see their faces when they find it?" whispered
Carl who, with Mary, was hanging over the banister, straining his ears
for every sound.

There was not, however, much to hear.

After the furious knock somebody ventured into the hall. Then Julie's
voice, high-pitched with excitement and consternation, exclaimed,
"Mercy on us!" With that she dragged the basket into her abode and
banged the door.

It was a brief drama but one entirely satisfying to the McGregors. Over
and over again did Carl and Mary enact the scene to the intense delight
of the family.

"Now mind, should Mrs. O'Dowd come up here with questions, you are to
be careful what you say," cautioned their mother. "There's to be no
hinting, winking, or smirking. Should Julie say anything, leave it to
your uncle or me to answer. All the fun would be spoiled if you gave
the secret away."

"Oh, yes," agreed Carl. "The sport is to keep folks guessing."

But no sooner were the words out of his mouth is than there was a
rapping at the hall door.

"Oh, Ma! I'll bet that is Mrs. O'Dowd now!" gasped Mary.

"It can't be! She'd not track us down so quick as this," replied Mrs.
McGregor, flustered and half rising.

"Most likely it's the Christmas tree, Mother," Tim suggested. "They
promised to send it early this afternoon."

Again came the knock.

"I'm half afraid to open the door lest it be Julie," faltered Mrs.
McGregor. "Be still a minute, all of you, till I think what I'll say to
her."

But when, amid a tense hush, the door was finally opened, neither Julie
O'Dowd nor the watched-for Christmas tree was on the threshold. Instead
they saw a holly-decked basket so exactly a replica of the one they had
given away that a cry of disappointment greeted it.

"She's sent it back!" cried Mary.

[Illustration: "But that isn't our basket, Mother," Carl said. "This
is much bigger." _Page_ 155.]

"She was offended and wouldn't take it!" murmured Mrs. McGregor. "I
feared as much."

"But that isn't our basket, Mother," Carl said. "This is much bigger.
Besides, we had no apples or candy bags in the one we sent."

Critically studying the gift, the family clustered around.

"It isn't our basket, Mother," Mary presently asserted. "See, this one
is red."

"There must be some mistake, then," Mrs. McGregor declared. "They've
left it at the wrong place."

"But our name is on it!" cried Tim.

"Where? Where?" What a bumping of heads there was as everybody bent to
read the card.

"Yes, our name is on it plain as day!" replied Mrs. McGregor with a
puzzled expression. Then, inspired by a solution of the mystery, she
wheeled round on her brother.

"How much do you know about this, Frederick?"

"Not a thing, Nellie--I give you my word! Dearly as I should have liked
to send you such a gift, my purse wasn't quite good for it," flushed
the captain.

"And what wonder, with all you've spent this day," returned his sister
quickly. "Then we'll count you out. But where could it have come from?"

"We don't need to leave it in the hall until we find out, do we,
Mother?" Mary ventured mischievously.

"No, I suppose we don't," was the retort. "Timmie, you and Carl drag it
indoors. Don't try to lift it, for you'll only be straining yourselves
and maybe drop it. Let's get it into the kitchen. There may be some
clue when we have a better light."

But examine it as they would, no hint as to the mysterious sender could
be found.

"I guess he believes with Carl that the sport of giving a present is to
keep the other person guessing," Tim remarked wickedly.

A general laugh at Carl's expense greeted the observation.

"Hush!" cautioned Mrs. McGregor. "There's somebody in the hall."

"He won't get away this time," Carl cried, springing up and throwing
open the door.

"Good heavens, man! You nearly knocked me down!" cried Hal Harling,
amazed by the suddenness of his welcome. "What's the matter with you?
Trying to trap a burglar?" Then, glancing at the object about which the
household were clustering, he added, "Jove! Have you got one, too?"

"What do you mean?"

"Why, just now somebody left a basket exactly like this at our flat. I
thought maybe you folks had something to do with it and came straight
over here to see. But you seem to be favored by a similar gift. They
are alike as two peas. Who sent them?"

"That is precisely what we want to know," Carl replied.

"You've no idea?"

"Not the most remote."

"Hasn't Captain Dillingham?"

"I'm not guilty, if that is what you mean," the sea captain answered.

"Straight goods?" Hal insisted.

"Hang, die, and choke to death!" laughed the little old man.

"But--but--somebody sent the thing!" blustered Hal. "Why, there is
everything on earth in it. Food enough to last a week. And ours has a
shawl for my mother and some felt slippers for my grandfather in the
bottom. And there are gloves for Louise and me. It came from somebody
who knew all about us. It was no haphazard present."

"Can you beat it!" murmured Carl. "Whoever do you suppose----"

"I can't suppose. We thought it was you," announced Hal. "There's a
knock at the door. Shall I go?"

Leaping forward he turned the knob, and in came Mrs. O'Dowd.

"I've had the most wonderful basket sent me that ever----" began she;
then her eye fell upon the hamper in the center of the floor. "Glory be
to goodness!" she ejaculated. "Wherever did you get that?"

"We don't know," Carl answered.

"And we've one just like it and can't find out who sent us ours," put
in Hal Harling.

"Well, I thought for sure as you were the folks that sent me mine,"
declared Julie. "But if they are being scattered broadcast and you are
getting one yourselves I reckon it is safe to say you don't know much
about where mine came from. Well, all I can say is may the sender of
them have a blessed Christmas. Owing to O'Dowd being out of work, we
were to have a pretty slim celebration this year. The children were
like to get nothing at all. And then just when I was trying to comfort
myself with thinking how glad I should be that Joey was well, and that
we all had our health even if we did lack a turkey and the fixings,
along comes this windfall. Why, it is as if the heavens opened and
dropped it straight down at our door. It does you good to know there
are kind hearts in the world, doesn't it?"

One and all the McGregors smiled. If they wanted thanks for the
self-denial they had practised they certainly had them in the gratitude
that beamed from Julie's face.

"Well, it will be a royal Christmas for all of us, won't it?" went on
the little woman, bustling out. "I must hurry back downstairs. The
children are that crazy they are like to eat the turkey raw, claws,
neck and feathers!"

"I'll come with you, Mrs. O'Dowd," said Hal. "Good-by, and a Merry
Christmas, everybody."

"I'm mighty glad we sent that dinner to the O'Dowd's!" commented Carl
soberly, when the door was shut and the McGregors were alone. "I'd be
glad we did it even if we had no dinner of our own," he added, his eyes
alight with a grave happiness.

"And I, too," whispered Tim.




CHAPTER XII

A CLUE


The next morning, fluttering excitedly round a Christmas tree spangled
with tinsel and aglow with lights, the McGregors received their
presents; and not they alone, for Julie O'Dowd, with her five
youngsters, swelled the party, together with the Murphys and the
Sullivans from the floors below. There was popcorn for everybody and
satiny striped candy, and from the mysterious basket an orange for each
guest was produced.

"When we have so much ourselves it would be wrong to keep it all," Mrs.
McGregor had asserted; and her household fully agreed with her.
Therefore the neighbors were summoned in to share in the festivity.

And after the visitors had trailed down the long stairway, shouting
back their pleasure and gratitude, the wonderful dinner the hamper
contained was prepared, and what a delightful ceremonial that was! Did
ever any such tantalizing aroma drift upon the air as ascended from the
browning turkey? Or did ever potatoes so fill their jackets to
bursting? As for the celery--it was like ivory; and the cranberry jelly
as transparent and glowing as a huge ruby. And, oh, the browning crust
of the mince pies! So many hungry little McGregors swarmed round the
stove it was a marvel some of them were not burned to death on hot
stove covers or the oven door. One could scarcely baste the turkey
without falling over two or three of them.

However, nobody was scalded or blistered and when at length the great
bronzed bird was borne from the oven a procession of exultant children
followed in the wake of the huge platter, every one of them shouting
for the wishbone or a drumstick.

"Was the creature a centipede he would hardly have drumsticks to
satisfy you!" laughed their mother. "Who ever saw such a lot of
cannibals! Was anybody to hear your hubbub they'd think you had never
had a mouthful to eat in all your lives. I don't believe your uncle
ever saw worse heathen in the South Sea Islands."

Nevertheless, in spite of her caustic comment, it was plain that the
mother was enjoying her children's pleasure and that Uncle Frederick
was enjoying it too.

"Well," went on Mrs. McGregor, "if you do not get filled up to-day it
will be your own fault. I shall put no check on anybody. You may eat
all you'll hold."

Profiting by this spacious permission the McGregors fell to and what a
feast they had! Never had they dreamed of such a meal. Even Carl and
Martin, whose capacity appeared to be limitless, were at length forced
to confess that for once in their lives they had had enough; as for Tim
he sank back in his chair almost in tears because he could not find
room for another mouthful.

"I couldn't squeeze down a single 'nother thing if I was paid for it,"
wailed he. "And I did so want a second helping of pudding! Why didn't
you stop me, Ma, when I started out on that giant sweet potato?"

His mother shrugged her shoulders.

"You must learn to make your own choices," said she. "Perhaps 'twill
teach you next time not to covet all you see. And now, before we begin
to clear up, I want to make sure you are all content. There must be no
regrets. I don't want to hear to-morrow that you wish you had had
so-and-so. So think well before the food is whisked into the pantry.
Has everybody had enough?"

A chorus of muffled groans arose.

"What do you think we are, Ma?" Tim managed to murmur.

"Indeed I don't know," was the grim retort. "I've often wondered. So
you think you couldn't eat a morsel more?"

"_Think!_ We know we couldn't," gasped Carl.

"Then sit still a second, all of you, till I take a good look at you!"
commanded their mother. "That I should live to see the day when I would
dish up a meal without some amongst you yammering for another helping!
I'm almost tempted to take an affidavit with your signatures in black
and white and preserve it in the family Bible."

With arms akimbo she viewed her grinning flock.

"Well, since you're beyond urging, we may as well turn to the dishes--that
is, if anybody can stagger up and help."

Reaching over she began to remove the food from the table.

Mary sprang to aid her.

"Let me carry the things into the pantry," Tim said. "Maybe if I walk
round some it will shake down what I've eaten."

"Are you laying to eat another course?" derided Carl.

"Aw, quit it!" growled Tim. "I'll bet I haven't made way with any more
than you have. Here, fork over that pie! I'll put it in the closet."

"Can we trust you with it?" called Captain Dillingham.
