use the points of the compass in describing the position of things.
Thus, if they tell a slave to look for a thing in the house, they will
say, Look in the north, south, east, or west corner, or side; and they
apply this rule to the person also.  I once heard the member of a
mission from England told by his host that some rice was sticking to his
moustache.  The missionary wiped the wrong side.  `No,' said the host,
`it is on the _southern_ side of your moustache.'"

"Do you know," said Mark Breezy, "that is not so strange to me as you
might suppose; for I was once told by a friend who lived in the Scottish
Highlands, that an old woman there actually said to her that she had
toothache on the east side of her head!"

Further comment on this point was arrested by their coming suddenly in
sight of the house where the guide's friend dwelt.

"You had better stay here at the edge of this wood, while I go forward
alone," said the guide; "because although the man is kind, and has
always professed to be my friend, I am not quite sure of him.  It is
well to be cautious.  If I wave my hand to you, come up to the house,
all will be well.  If things don't seem favourable I will return to
you--but keep close; don't show yourselves needlessly.  You see, my
friend is an officer of the palace.  If friendly he can be very useful
to us, if unfriendly he can be dangerous."

"But why run risk by going near him at all?" asked Mark.

"We _must_ run risk when life and death are in the balance," replied the
guide, shortly.

Concealed by the bushes, the travellers watched their companion as he
went up to the house.  Before he reached it a man opened the door and
stepped out.  Suddenly this man seemed to burst into a furious passion.
He grasped Ravonino by the throat, almost threw him on his back, and,
seizing a stick, began to belabour him violently, while two other men
appeared at the door of the house, and, from their inordinate laughter,
seemed fully to enjoy the scene.

"Hi!" exclaimed Ebony in shrill falsetto, as he jumped up in blazing
wrath, intending to rush to the rescue, but Hockins grasped his woolly
head and pulled him back.

"Obey orders, you black grampus!  D'ee think he's a babby as can't take
care of himself?  Didn't he tell us to keep close?"

Great as had been the surprise of the watchers at this sudden and
unprovoked assault, it was as nothing compared with their astonishment
when they saw their guide fairly turn tail and run towards them, closely
followed by the furious man, who continued to thrash him all the time.

As Ravonino drew near, the angry man seemed to have exhausted himself,
for he fell behind, and finally stopped.  The guide ran on at full speed
until he reached the wood, but did not even then slacken his speed.  As
he ran past his friends, however, he exclaimed in a sharp, stern voice--

"Follow me!"

Laihova obeyed with the unquestioning readiness of a faithful hound.
The others followed suit with the open eyes of perplexity and amazement!

Reaching a sequestered dell in a few minutes, Ravonino suddenly stopped
and turned round with a calm air of satisfaction.

"Well, dis am de most awrful supprise I'se had since my mudder give me
my fust wollopin'."

The expression on the negro's face rendered the remark needless.

"It was well done," said the guide, seating himself on the trunk of a
fallen tree.

"A'most too well done!" returned Hockins, with a touch of sarcasm.

"Do you know," continued the guide gravely, "I've had a narrow escape?
The two men you saw laughing at the door are the very men we have been
trying to avoid,--the Queen's spies,--whom I have long known, and who
would certainly have discovered me in spite of my shaved and stained
face if we had come to talk to each other in the same room.  Luckily my
friend is smart as well as true.  He knew my voice at once.  To have
talked with me, or warned me, or let me enter his house, would have been
fatal.  His only resource lay in thrashing me off his premises--as you
have seen.  How he will explain matters to the spies I know not, but I
can trust him for that."

"Das most awrful clebber!" exclaimed Ebony, his every feature broadening
with delight at the success of the ruse.

"But what are we to do now?" asked Mark.

"Wait till he comes here.  He told me to wait."

"What!  Told you?"

"Ay--you don't suppose he let his tongue lie idle while he was using his
stick.  Of course I was myself taken aback at first when he seized me by
the throat, but two or three muttered words in the midst of his anger
opened my eyes, and I ran at once.  All the way as he ran after and
belaboured me he was giving me important information in furious tones!
The spies are only staying with him for a short rest.  When they are
gone he will come and find us here."

"He's a born actor," said Hockins.

"True--and he acted some of his blows heavier than I could have wished,
in his anxiety to impress his information on me!" said the guide.

"What is his name?" asked Mark.

"Fisatra.  He is named after a great chief who lived in this district
not long ago.--But here he comes to speak for himself."

At that moment a tall, fine-looking man, of very dark complexion, and
clad in the ample folds of a beautiful lamba, approached them.  His
whole countenance was wrinkled with the lines of fun, and his brilliant
teeth glistened as he smilingly held out his hand to the Englishmen, and
asked them to accept his hospitality.

As they passed into the house they saw two slave-girls pounding rice in
a large wooden mortar, with two enormous wooden pestles, while the
savoury steam that arose from some invisible kitchen served to put a
finer edge on their already sharpened appetites.

When the mats were spread, and the feast was being enjoyed, Ravonino
asked the host how he had got rid of the spies, and how he managed to
explain his conduct without raising their suspicions.

"Nothing easier," said Fisatra, while his broad shoulders heaved with an
inward chuckle.  "You know that I used to be feared in the palace in
days gone bye because of my violent nature, and the way in which I used
to knock about the furniture and make the household slaves--sometimes
the household troops--scurry when I was in a rage.  Yet I'm sure you
know very well, (he looked sheepishly innocent here), that I never was
an angry man--at least not a cruel one.  But that's all changed.  I am
one of _your_ set now, though no one suspects it.  Since I met Mr
Ellis--"

"Is Mr Ellis here just now?" interrupted Ravonino, anxiously.

"Not now," answered Fisatra; "he departed some weeks ago, but I believe
has not yet left the coast.  And now there is no check on the Queen's
violence.  Well, as I was about to say, I took to the old habit in
pretence, as you have seen, and when I returned from thrashing you I
went storming through the house, kicking about the pots and pans, and
foaming at the mouth in such a way that I not only stopped the spies
laughing, but put them in fear of their lives."

Again the fun-wrinkles corrugated the visage of Fisatra, and his mighty
shoulders heaved with internal explosions.

"After I had calmed down a bit," he continued, "the spies ventured to
ask timidly if that was a great enemy that I had beaten.  This set me
into, a worse passion than ever.  `Enemy?'  I shouted `no--no--not an
enemy--he--he's a--a--' but I got no further than that, for I didn't
know what to say, and I wouldn't lie, so I took to foaming and stamping
again!  At last I said, `Don't speak to me about him--excuse me, my
friends; I can't stand it--and--and the rice is nearly ready.  You must
be hungry!'  I said this with a look and tone as if another fit was
coming on.  They excused themselves.  `No,' they said, `we are not
hungry, and we have yet far to go this day before the sun descends.  The
Queen's orders will not wait.'  And off they went, glad to get out of my
way.  Truly, if it is sinful to get in a rage, it is useful sometimes to
act it!  So now, my friends, eat--eat--while you have the chance, and
fear not the return of the spies!"

"Tell me," said the guide, anxiously, "are you sure that Rafaravavy is
still safe?"

"She is still safe--but no one knows how long that may be, for she is
fearless, and utters the forbidden prayers even in the presence of the
Queen.  If it had not been for the love that Ranavalona bears her, she
would have been tossed from the `rock of hurling' long ago."

"Faithful, even unto death," said the guide, with a look and tone in
which pathos and triumph were strangely blended.

"She has not yet been tried to that extent, but if she is, God will
enable her to stand firm," said Fisatra, whose grave child-like
sincerity, when talking of religious subjects, was not less impulsively
honest and natural than were the outbursts of his fun when another
humour stirred his feelings.

The "rock" to which he alluded was a frightful precipice at one side of
the city from which criminals were usually hurled--a spot which is
hallowed by the blood of many Christian martyrs who perished there
during the long reign of that tyrant queen Ranavalona.

"Has then the queen forbidden the Christians to pray?" asked Ravonino.

"Have you not heard?--but of course you have not, being an outlaw and
having only just returned.  Recently a very bad fit has come over the
Queen.  You know that for some years past there have been a few French
people living in Antananarivo, who by their knowledge and skill in
mechanics and mercantile matters have made themselves useful to our
government.  These men lately tried to dethrone the Queen, on pretence
of delivering the country from her cruelties, and establishing a `French
Protectorate.'  They gained over some of our chief men, collected in one
of their houses a large quantity of weapons and ammunition, and had even
fixed the night when the palace was to be invaded, the Queen seized, and
the Protectorate set up.  Fortunately the plot came to my knowledge.  I
say fortunately, because a bad queen is better than a French
Protectorate, for the first will die, but the latter might never end!
Well, I at once informed the Queen, who had the conspirators seized and
banished from the country for ever.  Among them were a Roman Catholic
lady and two Jesuits.  The anger of the Queen was of course very great,
and she has had, as I have said, a very bad fit against the Christians;
for, as these unprincipled conspirators have the name though none of the
reality of Christians, she naturally mixed us all up together--and I
know not what the end will be, but I have much fear, because the Queen
is very angry."

"Has she done nothing yet?" asked Ravonino.

"Nothing--except threaten and fume.  But when the black cloud is
overhead, and muttering thunder is heard, one knows too well what to
expect--especially when one has been exposed to the storm in former
years."

"The sun is shining behind the black cloud and it will break through
when the Master wills," said Laihova, joining in the conversation for
the first time that evening, and looking earnestly at his friend
Ravonino, as if the words were meant for his ear alone--as indeed they
were.

"Thanks, thanks, my friend, for the comforting words," said Ravonino,
"and I take shame to myself that my faith is so weak."

"You will spend the night with me?" said their host to the guide.

"No, Fisatra, I dare not delay.  Even now I may be too late.  I will
journey all night."

Ravonino rose quickly and prepared to go.  The others followed his
example, and soon the party was proceeding rapidly along the high-road
towards the capital, under a cloudless sky and a galaxy of twinkling
stars.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

ARRIVAL AT THE CAPITAL--QUEEN RANAVALONA'S TROUBLES AND PERPLEXITIES.

Towards sunrise on the following morning our travellers, on passing out
of a rather dense piece of plantation which crowned the brow of a low
hill, came in sight of the capital--Antananarivo.  It was still in the
far distance, with many a rice-field and garden between, but distinctly
visible, for it occupies the summit and slopes of a considerable hill.

"Here, then, through the goodness of God, we have reached the end of our
journey," said Ravonino, halting, "and I must remain behind, while you,
my friends, push on to the city.  Fain would I go with you, but that
would ruin all, for I am a known and marked man.  Laihova will now guide
you, and tell you what to do.  I have just one word for you at parting.
Be peaceful, do not take offence.  Interfere not with our customs.  Use
not the fist, and commit your way to God."

The guide looked so pointedly at Ebony while he spoke that that sable
comrade could not help noticing it.

"What you looks so hard at me for, hey?" demanded the negro.

"Because you are somewhat hot-tempered and apt to get people into
scrapes," answered Ravonino, with a slight twinkle in his eye.

"_Me_ 'ot-tempered!" exclaimed Ebony, in surprise, with an appealing
glance at his comrades.  "I'd knock you down, Ravonino, for sayin' dat,
only it would be like as if what you say's true!  Ob all de niggers on
'art' I's de meekest, quietest--jest like a babby; why, my moder always
said so, an' surely _she_ ought to know!"

"No doubt she knew, whatever she said," observed Hockins, with a laugh.

"We will be careful," said Mark.  "But are your people, then, so
particular, that we should require this caution?"

"Well, they are not very different from other people," replied the
guide, "and if things had been as usual I should have had no fear; but
when Queen Ranavalona has one of her bad fits, there's no saying what
she may do.  Her banishing the Europeans is a bad sign.  I would that I
had not brought you here, but there is no help for it now.  We have been
seen by many people.  The news will spread to the town, and if you did
not soon appear you would be suspected as spies, and the country would
be scoured in search of you.  No, there is nothing for it now but a bold
face and an honest purpose."

"Humph!" ejaculated Ebony, "you's a fine feller to talk 'bout bold faces
an' honest purpusses, w'en you're goin' to steal a young ooman out ob de
pallis, fro' under de bery nose ob do queen!"

"To help Rafaravavy to escape of her own free will is not theft,"
replied the guide, gravely.  "When we are persecuted in one city
Scripture advises us to flee to another."

"Das true, Ravonino.  No offence meant.  Gib us your flipper, old boy!"

Grasping the guide's hand, the negro shook it warmly, and at the same
time vowed that he would be most "awrful careful," and that he would
bring Rafaravavy to his feet, dead or alive, though he should have to
fight the whole town single-handed to effect his object.

It was a Thursday evening when they stood thus conversing.  They had
kept count of the days because of the guide's quiet but firm
determination to rest in camp on the Sabbath--a plan which, although
they had no very strong principle on the subject, commended itself to
the rest of the party because of the pleasant effect of the day's rest
on both soul and body, for it afforded opportunity to have long and
earnest talks with Ravonino about the former days of persecution, as
well as quiet strolls, alone or in couples, and--it must be admitted--
occasional slumbers in the cool shade of bush or tree!

"I have purposely contrived," said the guide, "that, by walking all
night, you shall arrive early to-morrow--Friday--because it is
market-day in the town, and you will be less noticed, as well as more
amused by what you see, than if you were to arrive on any other day.
Go, and God go with you!  I shall be found in the cave that Laihova
knows of.  Farewell."

He turned, with a wave of his hand, as he spoke, and re-entered the
bush, while the others, taking the most direct route to Antananarivo,
descended into the open country.  Soon they were involved in the crowds
which were passing along all the roads leading to the city.  The people
were either taking their goods for sale or going to make purchases--
mayhap to meet friends or kindred.

All night Laihova led his friends at a smart pace.  Next day, as the
first object of our travellers was to get into the town without
attracting attention, they kept in the thick of the throng all the way
up to the market-place.  Of course the people nearest them took special
note of the two Englishmen, and some were inquisitive, but, by telling
the simple facts regarding their arrival in Madagascar, Laihova removed
any unpleasant suspicions that might have arisen regarding them.

The crowds increased as they advanced, and the numbers were still
further augmented, as well as diversified, by the Hova army, which they
came upon exercising on a plain just below the city.  Ascending the
sides of the steep hill on which Antananarivo stands, they obtained a
magnificent view of the animated scene, which conveyed the impression
rather of a grand holiday than an ordinary market-day.  This, no doubt,
was largely owing to the operations of the soldiers, whose manoeuvres
Hockins watched with a critical eye, for his father, having been a
soldier, had made him intimately acquainted with the drill as practised
in the British army at that period.

"Why, I do believe the fellers are speakin' English!" he said, in some
surprise.

"Not wonder much, for Ingleesh drill'd um," said Laihova, who, since
they parted from Ravonino, had begun to use his broken English to the
best of his power.  It must be said that that power was not great, even
at the best.

He explained to his friends that Radama the First--that wise king who
had been so fond of the English, and had done so much to aid the
missionaries, abolish the slave-trade, and civilise his people--had,
among other changes, remodelled his army after the British pattern, and
had obtained the services of non-commissioned officers from the
Mauritius to drill his troops.  These organised them into divisions,
brigades, regiments, companies, etcetera, and as they found no native
words suitable to express military evolutions, they introduced their own
English words of command, which have remained in use ever since.

By means of this army of Hova troops, and the flint-lock weapon known
familiarly as `Brown Bess,' Radama succeeded in subduing all the native
chiefs of Madagascar, with only a few exceptions, and thus became the
recognised king of an island considerably larger than Great Britain.
Being an enlightened and well-disposed monarch, he made good use of the
power thus acquired.  It was only after his death in 1828 that a
retrograde movement set in, as we have said, under the wicked Queen
Ranavalona.

It is one of the misfortunes of our fallen condition that rectitude in
any course, however good, cannot long be maintained--at least in
reasonable perfection.  The army which had enabled Radama to pursue on
the whole a beneficent course, ere long began to make its creator know
