
The year 1766 furnishes the somewhat rare case of a total eclipse of the
Sun observed on board ship on the high seas. The observers were officers
of the French man-of-war the _Comte d'Artois_. Though the total
obscuration lasted only 53 secs., there was seen a luminous ring about
the Moon which had four remarkable expansions, situate at a distance of
90 deg. from each other.[105] These expansions are doubtless those rays
which we now speak of as "streamers" from the Corona.

Curiously enough the next important total eclipse deserving of notice
was also observed at sea. This was the eclipse of June 24, 1778. The
observer was the Spanish Admiral, Don Antonio Ulloa, who was passing
from the Azores to Cape St. Vincent. The total obscuration lasted 4
minutes. The luminous ring presented a very beautiful appearance: out of
it there issued forth rays of light which reached to the distance of a
diameter of the Moon. Before it became very conspicuous stars of the 1st
and 2nd magnitudes were distinctly visible, but when it attained its
greatest brilliancy, only stars of the 1st magnitude could be perceived.
"The darkness was such that persons who were asleep and happened to
wake, thought that they had slept the whole evening and only waked when
the night was pretty far advanced. The fowls, birds, and other animals
on board took their usual position for sleeping, as if it had been
night."[106]

On Sept. 5, 1793, there happened an eclipse which, annular to the N. of
Scotland, was seen and observed in England by Sir W. Herschel[107] as a
partial eclipse. He made some important observations on the Moon on this
occasion measuring the height of several of the lunar mountains.
Considerations respecting the shape of one of the Moon's horns led him
to form an opinion adverse to the idea that there the Moon had an
atmosphere.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 79: _Historiarum Sui Temporis_, Lib. iv., cap. 9.]

    [Footnote 80: _Historia Novella_, Lib. i., sec. 8.]

    [Footnote 81: _Norman Conquest_, vol. v. p. 239.]

    [Footnote 82: _Historia Novella_, Lib. ii., sec. 35.]

    [Footnote 83: Letter in the _Times_, July 28, 1871.]

    [Footnote 84: Rogerus de Wendover, _Flores Historiarum_, vol. ii. p.
    535, Bohn's ed.]

    [Footnote 85: _Sugli Eclissi Solari Totali del 3 Giugno 1239, e del
    6 Ottobre 1241_ in the _Memorie del R. Istituto Lombardo di Scienze
    e Littere_, vol. xiii. p. 275.]

    [Footnote 86: _Historia Coelestis_, vol. i. p. 38.]

    [Footnote 87: _Hist. Engl._, vol. iii. chap. xviii. p. 50, 4to. ed.]

    [Footnote 88: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xl. p. 194, 1737.]

    [Footnote 89: _Astronomiae Pars Optica_, c. viii. sec. 3; _Opera
    Omnia_, vol. ii. p. 315. Ed. Frisch, 1859.]

    [Footnote 90: Quoted by Kepler, as above, at p. 315.]

    [Footnote 91: _Commentarius in Sacroboscum_, cap. iv.; quoted in
    Kepler's _Astronomiae Pars Optica_, c. viii. sec. 3; _Opera Omnia_,
    vol ii. p. 316. Ed. Frisch, 1859.]

    [Footnote 92: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xl. p. 193; 1737.]

    [Footnote 93: _De Stella Nova in Pede Serpentarii_, p. 115; Pragae,
    1606.]

    [Footnote 94: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xl. p. 193; 1737.]

    [Footnote 95: V. Wing, _Astronomia Britannica_, p. 355.]

    [Footnote 96: _Historia Coelestis_, vol. i. pp. 7 and 21.]

    [Footnote 97: _Diary of Samuel Pepys_, vol. vi. p. 208; Ed. M.
    Bright, 1879.]

    [Footnote 98: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xxv. p. 2240; 1706.]

    [Footnote 99: Being half a _Saros_ period (see p. 20, _ante_).]

    [Footnote 100: _Itinerarium Curiosum_, 2nd ed., vol. i. p. 180.]

    [Footnote 101: _Mem. de Mathematique et de Physique de l'Acad. des
    Sciences_, 1724, p. 259.]

    [Footnote 102: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xl. pp. 181, 184. 1737.]

    [Footnote 103: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xlv. p. 586. 1750. This is the
    man who under the designation of "Lord Aberdour" observed the
    eclipse of 1737 (_ante_).]

    [Footnote 104: Rev. W. Stukeley, Rector of St. George's, Queen's
    Square, London, _Diary_, vol. xx. p. 44, ed. "Surtees Soc.," vol.
    lxxvi. p. 384.]

    [Footnote 105: Le Gentil, _Voyage dans les Mers de l'Inde_, vol. ii.
    p. 16. Paris, 1769.]

    [Footnote 106: _Phil. Trans._, vol. lxix. p. 105. 1779.]

    [Footnote 107: _Phil. Trans._, vol. lxxxiv. p. 39. 1794.]




                             CHAPTER XIII.

          ECLIPSES OF THE SUN DURING THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.


Observations of total solar eclipses during the 19th century have been,
for the most part, carried on under circumstances so essentially
different from everything that has gone before, that not only does a new
chapter seem desirable but also new form of treatment. Up to the
beginning of the 18th century the observations (even the best of them)
may be said to have been made and recorded with but few exceptions by
unskilled observers with no clear ideas as to what they should look for
and what they might expect to see. Things improved a little during the
18th century and the observations by Halley, Maclaurin, Bradley, Don
Antonio Ulloa, Sir W. Herschel, and others in particular rose to a much
higher standard than any which had preceded them. However, it has only
been during the 19th century, and especially during the latter half of
it, that total eclipses of the Sun have been observed under
circumstances calculated to extract from them large and solid extensions
of scientific knowledge. Inasmuch as it has been deemed convenient to
sort out and classify our knowledge under particular heads in previous
chapters, I shall in this chapter speak only of the leading facts of
each eclipse in such an outline form as will avoid as far as possible
unnecessary repetition.

In 1806 a total eclipse of the Sun occurred, visible in N. America.
Observations made in the United States have been handed down to us. Don
Joachin Ferrer, a Spanish astronomer, observed the eclipse at Kinderhook
in the State of New York. The totality lasted more than 41/2 m.--a somewhat
unusual length of time. One or two planets and a few 1st magnitude stars
were seen. During the totality there was a slight fall of dew.

On Nov. 19, 1816, there occurred the first total eclipse of the Sun in
the 19th century, the central line of which passed over Europe. There is
only one known observation of the total phase, and this was by Hagen at
Culm in Bohemia, but he appears to have seen only the beginning of the
totality and not the whole of it.

A partial eclipse of the Sun visible as such in England but which was
annular in the Shetland Isles took place on Sept. 7, 1820. The only
reason why this is worth mention is for its political associations. The
trial of Queen Caroline was going on in the House of Lords, and the
House suspended its sitting for a short time for the sake of the
eclipse.

On May 15, 1836, there occurred an annular eclipse of the Sun, which
though it was nowhere total, may be looked upon as the first of the
modern eclipses the observations of which have taken such a great
development during recent years. The annularity of this eclipse was
observed in the N. of England and in the S. of Scotland; and it was at
Jedburgh in Roxburghshire that Mr. Francis Baily[108] observed that
feature of eclipses of the Sun now universally known as "Baily's Beads."
Some indications of the Red Flames were also obtained at places where
the eclipse was annular.

Probably it was the recognition of Baily's Beads as a regular
concomitant of eclipses of the Sun, which helped to pave the way for the
extensive preparations made in France, Italy, Austria, and Russia for
observing the total eclipse of July 8, 1842. Many of the most eminent
astronomers of Europe repaired to different stations on the central line
in order to see the phenomenon. Amongst these may be named Arago, Valz,
Airy, Carlini, Santini, and O. Struve. The eclipse was witnessed under
favourable circumstances at all the various stations on the central line
across Europe, from Perpignan in France in the West to Lipesk in Russia
in the East.

Arago wrote[109] such an exceedingly graphic account of this eclipse
from what may be termed the standpoint of the general public, that I
will quote it at some length, because, with an alteration of date, it
might be re-written and applied to every total eclipse visible in much
populated tracts of country.

"At Perpignan persons who were seriously unwell alone remained within
doors. As soon as day began to break the population covered the terraces
and battlements of the town, as well as all the little eminences in the
neighbourhood, in hopes of obtaining a view of the Sun as he ascended
above the horizon. At the citadel we had under our eyes, besides
numerous groups of citizens established on the slopes, a body of
soldiers about to be reviewed.

"The hour of the commencement of the eclipse drew nigh. More than twenty
thousand persons, with smoked glasses in their hands, were examining the
radiant globe projected upon an azure sky. Although armed with our
powerful telescopes, we had hardly begun to discern the small notch on
the western limb of the Sun, when an immense exclamation, formed by the
blending together of twenty thousand different voices, announced to us
that we had anticipated by only a few seconds the observation made with
the unaided eye by twenty thousand astronomers equipped for the
occasion, whose first essay this was. A lively curiosity, a spirit of
emulation, the desire of not being outdone, had the privilege of giving
to the natural vision an unusual power of penetration. During the
interval that elapsed between this moment and the almost total
disappearance of the Sun we remarked nothing worthy of relation in the
countenances of so many spectators. But when the Sun, reduced to a very
narrow filament, began to throw upon the horizon only a very feeble
light, a sort of uneasiness seized upon all; every person felt a desire
to communicate his impressions to those around him. Hence arose a deep
murmur, resembling that sent forth by the distant ocean after a tempest.
The hum of voices increased in intensity as the solar crescent grew more
slender; at length the crescent disappeared, darkness suddenly succeeded
light, and an absolute silence marked this phase of the eclipse with as
great precision as did the pendulum of our astronomical clock. The
phenomenon in its magnificence had triumphed over the petulance of
youth, over the levity which certain persons assume as a sign of
superiority, over the noisy indifference of which soldiers usually make
profession. A profound stillness also reigned in the air; the birds had
ceased to sing. After an interval of solemn expectation, which lasted
about two minutes, transports of joy, shouts of enthusiastic applause,
saluted with the same accord, the same spontaneous feeling, the first
reappearance of the rays of the Sun. To a condition of melancholy
produced by sentiments of an indefinable nature there succeeded a lively
and intelligible feeling of satisfaction which no one sought to escape
from or moderate the impulses of. To the majority of the public the
phenomenon had arrived at its term. The other phases of the eclipse had
few attentive spectators beyond the persons devoted especially to
astronomical pursuits."

The total eclipse of July 28, 1851, may be said to have been the first
which was the subject of an "Eclipse Expedition," a phrase which of late
years has become exceedingly familiar. The total phase was visible in
Norway and Sweden, and great numbers of astronomers from all parts of
Europe flocked to those countries. Amongst those who went from England
were Sir G. B. Airy, the Astronomer Royal (then Mr. Airy), Mr. J. R.
Hind and Mr. Lassell. The Red Flames were very much in evidence, and the
fact that they belonged to the Sun and not to the Moon was clearly
established. Hind mentions that "the aspect of Nature during the total
eclipse was grand beyond description." This feature is dwelt upon with
more than usual emphasis in many of the published accounts. I have never
seen it suggested that the mountainous character of the country may have
had something to do with it, but that idea would seem not improbable.

In the year 1858, two central eclipses of the Sun occurred, both
presenting some features of interest. That of March 15 was annular, the
central line passing across England from Lyme Regis in Dorsetshire to
the Wash, traversing portions of Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Berkshire,
Oxfordshire, Northamptonshire, Lincolnshire, and Norfolk. The weather
generally was unfavourable and the annular phase was only observed at a
few places, but important meteorological observations were made and
yielded results, as regards the diminution of temperature, which were
very definite. All over the country rooks and pigeons were seen
returning home during the greatest obscuration; starlings in many places
took flight; at Oxford a thrush commenced its evening song; at Ventnor a
fish in an aquarium, ordinarily visible in the evening only, was in full
activity about the time of greatest gloom; and generally, it was noted
that the birds stopped singing and flew low from bush to bush. The
darkness, though nowhere intense, was everywhere very appreciable and
decided. The second central eclipse of 1858 took place on September 7
and was observed in Peru by Lieutenant Gilliss of the U.S. Navy. The
totality only lasted one minute, and the general features of a total
eclipse do not appear to have been very conspicuously visible. Gilliss
remarks[110]:--"Two citizens of Olmos stood within a few feet of me,
watching in silence, and with anxious countenances, the rapid and
fearful decrease of light. They were wholly ignorant that any sudden
effect would follow the total obscuration of the Sun. At that instant
one exclaimed in terror "_La Gloria_," and both, I believe, fell to
their knees, filled with awe. They appreciated the resemblance of the
Corona to the halos with which the old masters have encircled their
ideals of the heads of our Saviour and the Madonna, and devoutly
regarded this as a manifestation of the Divine Presence."

The year 1860 saw the departure from England of the first great Ship
Expedition to see an eclipse. One was due to happen on July 18, and a
large party went out from England to Spain in H.M.S. _Himalaya_. Mr. De
La Rue took a very well-equipped photographic detachment, and his
photographs were eminently successful. This eclipse settled for ever the
doubt as to whether the Red Flames belonged to the Sun or the Moon, and
in favour of the former view.

The years 1868, 1869, and 1870 were each marked by total eclipses,
which were observed to a greater or less extent. In the first-named year
the eclipse occurred on August 18, the central line passing across
India. The weather was not everywhere favourable, but several
expeditions were dispatched to the East Indies. The spectroscope was
largely brought into play with the immediate result of showing that the
Corona was to be deemed a sort of atmosphere of the Sun, not
self-luminous, but shining by reflected light. The eclipse of 1869 was
observed by several well-equipped parties in the United States, and a
very complete series of excellent photographs was obtained.

To view the eclipse of December 22, 1870, several expeditions were
dispatched, the central line passing over some very accessible places in
Spain, Sicily, and North Africa. The English observers went chiefly in
H.M.S. _Urgent_, though some of them travelled overland to Sicily. The
expenses, both of the sea and land parties, were to a large extent
defrayed by Her Majesty's Government. It deserves to be noted that so
great was the anxiety of the French astronomer Janssen to see this
eclipse, that he determined to try and escape in a balloon from Paris
(then besieged by the Germans) and succeeded, carrying his instruments
with him. The weather seriously interfered with the work of all the
observers who went out to see this eclipse, which was the more to be
regretted because the preparations had been on a very extensive and
costly scale. The chief result was that it was ascertained that the Red
Flames (hence forward generally called "Prominences") are composed of
hydrogen gas in an incandescent state.

The year 1871 saw, on December 12, another Indian eclipse, noteworthy
for the numerous and excellent photographs which were obtained of the
Corona, of the rifts in it, and of the general details, which were well
recorded on the plates.

There was an eclipse visible in South Africa on April 16, 1874. Some
useful naked eye views were obtained and recorded, but as no
photographic work was done, this eclipse cannot be said to come into
line with those which preceded or followed it.

In the following year, that is to say on April 6, 1875, there was a
total eclipse of the Sun, visible in the far East, especially Siam; but
the distance from England, coupled with the very generally unfavourable
weather, prevented this from being anything more than a second-class
total eclipse, so to speak, although extensive preparations had been
made, and the sum of L1000 had been granted by the British Government
towards the expenses. A certain number of photographs were obtained, but
none of any very great value.

Perhaps of the next eclipse which we have to consider, it may be said
that the circumstances were more varied than those of any other during
the second half of the 19th century. The eclipse in question occurred on
July 29, 1878.

Several favourable circumstances concurred to make it a notable event.
In the first place, the central line passed entirely across the United
States; in other words, across a long stretch of inhabited and civilised
territory, accessible from both sides to a nation well provided with the
requisite scientific skill and material resources of every kind. But
there was another special and rare facility available: the central line
crossed the chain of the Rocky Mountains, an elevated locality, which an
American writer speaks of as overhung by "skies of such limpid
clearness, that on several evenings Jupiter's satellites were seen with
the naked eye." On the summit of a certain peak, known as Pike's Peak, a
party of skilled observers, headed by Professor Langley, observed the
wonderful developments of the Corona, mentioned on a previous page. The
fact that such a display came under the eyes of man was no doubt mainly
due to the superbly clear atmosphere through which the observations were
made. That this is not a mere supposition may be inferred from the fact
that at the lower elevation of only 8000 feet, instead of 14,000 feet,
the Coronal streamers were seen by Professor Newcomb's party, far less
extended than Langley saw them. Perhaps the best proof of the importance
of a diaphanous sky is to be found in the fact that on the summit of
Pike's Peak, the Corona remained visible for fully 4 minutes after the
total phase had come to an end. A comparison of the descriptions shows
that even at the elevation of 10,200 ft. the observers placed there,
whilst they were better off than those at 8000 ft., assuredly did not
see so much or so well as those at 14,000 ft.

There occurred a total eclipse on July 11, 1880, visible in California,
but as the totality lasted only 32 secs. and the Sun's elevation was
only 11 deg., not much was got out of this eclipse notwithstanding that it
was observed in a cloudless sky at a station 6000 ft. above the sea.

The eclipse of May 17, 1882, yielded several interesting and important
features although the totality was short--only about 11/4 minutes. Here
again favourable local circumstances helped astronomers in more ways
than one. It was in Egypt that the eclipse was visible, and Egypt is a
country which it is exceedingly easy for travellers to reach, and it is
also noted for its clear skies. These were doubtless two of the reasons
which combined to inspire the elaborate preparations which were made for
photographic and spectroscopic observations. The former resulted in a
very unprecedented success. One of Dr. Schuster's photographs of the
totality showed not only the expected Corona, but an unexpected comet.

Though on more than one previous occasion in history the darkness which
is a special accompaniment of a total eclipse had caused a comet to be
seen, yet the 1882 eclipse was the first at which a comet had thrust
itself upon the notice of astronomers by means of a photographic plate.
It will be remembered that the political circumstances of Egypt in 1882
were of a somewhat strained character and probably this contributed to
the development of an unusual amount of astronomical competition in
