CHAPTER XI

A Relapse


Towards the end of June there was a burst of very warm weather, so
sultry and hot as to make games, or any form of violent exertion,
almost an impossibility. Ruth Latimer fainted one day when she was
fielding, after which Miss Cavendish absolutely prohibited cricket in
the blazing sun, and set to work to devise other means of occupation.
The girls themselves would have been ready enough to lounge about all
the afternoon in the grounds, chatting and doing nothing, but of that
the head mistress did not approve; she considered it might tend to
encourage habits of gossip and idling, and much preferred that everyone
should have some definite employment. She temporarily altered the hours
of work, setting preparation from two until four, so that in the
evening the school might be free to go out and enjoy the breeze that
often rose towards sunset. In the circumstances, this really seemed a
better division of time, for during the early afternoon it was actually
cooler in the house, with sunblinds drawn to protect the windows, than
out-of-doors; and though there were many groans at having to learn
lessons and write exercises immediately after dinner, on the whole the
change was regarded with favour. General public opinion would have
decided on swimming as the most suitable occupation in the state of the
thermometer, but since the events related in the last chapter Miss
Cavendish would not allow more than eight girls to go into the sea at
once.

"It is as many as Miss Young can undertake to be responsible for," she
said. "Steamers are frequently passing between Westhaven and Dunscar,
and they seem to take a course nearer the coast than formerly. The wash
from them is so exceedingly strong that it is wiser to run no risks."

Bathing, therefore, was conducted in small detachments, and though
fresh relays went each day to the cove, it took so long to work through
the whole school that nobody seemed to have the chance of a second
turn. Miss Cavendish, however, was never at a loss. Everyone with the
slightest aptitude for drawing was provided with paper and pencil, and
taken out to sketch from nature. Those who possessed paint-boxes were
encouraged to work in colours, and the head mistress, who had herself
no little skill, gave many useful hints on the putting-in of skies and
the washing of middle distances. Janie Henderson, who was naturally
artistic, and had been accustomed to try her 'prentice hand at home,
found herself at a decided advantage, and won more credit in a single
week than she had hitherto gained in a whole year at Chessington.

"You've scored tremendously, Janie," said Honor, who revelled in her
friend's brief hour of triumph. "Vivian Holmes was most impressed by
your sketch of the cliffs. I heard her telling one of the Aldwythites
about it. She said you were quite an artist. There, don't blush! I'm
particularly rejoiced, because Vivian is so superior, and always does
everything so much better than everybody else, and yet her picture
wasn't half as good as yours, and she knew it."

"Vivian paints rather well, though."

"Oh, yes, tolerably! But she hasn't your touch. She muddles her greens,
and her trees get so treacly! She's not really clever, as you are."

Honor had not brought a paint-box to school, but Janie lent her a brush
and a tube of sepia and a china palette that she had to spare, so that
she was able to attempt studies in monochrome, if she could not try
colour.

"They're horrid daubs," she declared. "I don't pretend to have the
least atom of talent; I only drew these because Miss Cavendish said I
must. It's art under compulsion."

"Like the man who painted the pictures for some Moorish sultan," said
Janie. "I've forgotten the exact facts of the story, but I know he was
taken prisoner, and was marched with a long line of other wretched
captives to learn his fate. The sultan asked the first on the list:
'Can you paint?' and when he answered 'No', ordered his head to be
chopped off. Seven more were asked the same question, and given the
same doom. Then, when it came to an Englishman's turn, he said 'Yes',
although he knew as much about drawing as the man in the moon. The
sultan spared his life, and ordered him to begin at once to decorate
the walls of the palace, so he was obliged to try. I believe the
pictures are still there, and people go to look at them because they're
so extraordinary. I wish I could remember where the place is!"

"I should certainly like to see it," said Honor. "My productions would
have been unique. I think I should have represented battle scenes, and
put smoke to hide everything, and then have said it was impressionistic!
The sultan was as bad as the Queen in _Alice in Wonderland_, who cried,
'Off with her head!'"

"They're absolute autocrats," said Janie. "I read a story of another
who had a pet donkey, and sent for a philosopher and commanded him to
teach it to talk. The poor old sage expected his last hour had come,
but luckily an idea occurred to him. He said he would do so, but it
would take seven years. He thought that in the meantime either the
sultan might die, or the donkey might die, or he himself might die."

"And what happened?"

"Oh, I don't know! Like all good stories, it ends there."

"How disappointing! I want to hear the sequel. I suppose the
philosopher might have poisoned the donkey."

"Or, perhaps, somebody poisoned the sultan. It was an amiable little
way in those days of getting rid of an unpopular monarch. By the by, to
go back to the subject of drawing, Miss Cavendish says there's to be an
exhibition of all the sketches at the end of the term. They're to be
pinned up round the gymnasium, and she'll ask an artist friend to come
and judge them, and mark them first, second, and third class. Perhaps
she may even set a special competition for a prize."

"You'll win, then, if she does. I'm certain Marjorie Parkes's painting
is no better, though the St. Bride's girls have been crowing
tremendously over her."

"Don't pin your hopes to me! I'm a broken reed. If I want to do a thing
particularly nicely, I never can. All my most successful hits have been
made when I wasn't trying."

"Yes, that's often the way. I always say my highest scores at cricket
are really flukes. Here's Lettice coming to criticize. Don't look at my
sketch, Lettice, it's abominable! You may admire Janie's as much as you
like."

"I think you've both been very quick," said Lettice. "I've only drawn
in about half of mine yet. But I can generally manage to make a little
work go a long way! I came to tell you that it's time to pack up. And I
have a piece of good news as well; it has been so much cooler to-day
that Miss Cavendish says we may be more enterprising to-morrow. I don't
know what's arranged for the other houses, but St. Chad's is down for a
botany ramble. Isn't it jolly? I shall like it much better than
sketching. Miss Maitland is to take us, and we're to walk along the
hills towards Latchfield. There's to be an archery tournament as well,
and we may go to that instead, if we like, only we must put our names
down to-night. The lists for both will be hung up in the hall. I know
which I shall choose."

"So do I," said Janie. "I've never hit the target yet, so it's not much
use my entering against Blanche Marsden and Trissie Turner and Sophy
Williams. A ramble sounds lovely. Honor, do come! I'm sure you're not
keen on bows and arrows!"

"I haven't tried, so I can't tell. A tournament doesn't seem exactly
the place, though, to make one's first wild shots, and I've no time
even for an hour's practice. If it's to be botany versus archery, I
think I'll put my valuable autograph on the side of science."

No one could be more capable of leading a botanical ramble than Miss
Maitland. She was a close student of nature, and not only loved plants
and flowers herself, but could make them interesting to other people.
The beautiful collection of pressed specimens in the school museum was
mostly her work, and she was regarded as the best authority on the
subject in the College.

"I'm often so glad we're at St. Chad's," said Janie. "Miss Maitland is
a thousand times nicer than any of the other house-mistresses. The
Hilaryites are very proud of Miss Hulton because she writes for the
_Scientific World_, the Aldwythites plume themselves on Miss Paterson's
double first, and the Bridites worship Miss Daubeny since she did that
splendid climb in the Alps last summer; but Miss Maitland is so jolly
all round, I like her by far the best. Of course, the School House
girls say the very cream of Chessington is to be with Miss Cavendish,
but I think a head mistress is pleasanter at a distance, one always
feels so much in awe of her."

"Yes; I'm afraid I should never feel quite at ease with Miss
Cavendish," avowed Honor. "At St. Chad's we seem almost like a big
family."

The College stood in the midst of a pretty country, and there was no
lack of walks in the neighbourhood. At exactly half-past four on the
following afternoon a party of sixteen Chaddites set off under the wing
of Miss Maitland, and turned at once in the direction of the woods that
led to Latchfield, by a deliciously green and shady path. The warm sun,
pouring between the thick leaves, made little radiant patches of golden
light among the deep shadows under the trees; the whole air seemed
alive with the hum of insects; and here and there rang out the sharp
tap of a woodpecker, or the melancholy "coo-coo-coo" of a wild pigeon.

"The birds are generally very silent in such sultry weather," said Miss
Maitland. "They sing at dawn and again at sunset, but you hear little
of them in the heat of the day. Those doves probably have a nest at the
top of that tall ash. I think I can see some sticks among the leaves on
that big bough."

Some pieces of honeysuckle twined round the low undergrowth of bushes,
and tall foxgloves reared their purple spikes in every small, open
glade. The girls gathered these as their first specimens.

"I wonder why they're called foxgloves?" said Lettice. "They've nothing
to do with foxes."

"It's simply a corruption of 'good folks' gloves', meaning 'fairies'
gloves'," said Miss Maitland. "People gave the plants much more
romantic names in olden days than modern scientists do. I confess I
like 'Queen of the Meadows' better than _Spiraea Ulmaria_, and I think
'poor man's weather-glass' a far better description of the scarlet
pimpernel than _Anagallis arvensis_. We shan't find many flowers
here, among the trees; but I'm hoping we may come across some orchids
when we get on to the moors."

They had been walking uphill all the time, and, as soon as they were
clear of the woods, found they had reached a high table-land, covered
with pastures, through the midst of which flowed a stream, whose rushy
banks were gay with purple loosestrife, Ragged Robin, and yellow
spearwort. It was a famous place in which to botanize, and the girls
were allowed to disperse and hunt about for specimens, and came back
every now and then to show their finds to their teacher.

"Adeline Vaughan is the only one who knows much about the natural
orders, or the proper scientific terms," said Lettice. "It seems rather
funny, because she's a Londoner, and doesn't belong to the country."

"Country people aren't always the best authorities on the subject,"
said Miss Maitland. "I know some who go through life with deaf ears and
blind eyes, and never hear or see what is all around them. The main
thing is to have enthusiasm, and then, it doesn't matter where your
home is, you'll manage to enjoy nature, even if it is only at
second-hand, from books."

"And there are always the holidays," said Adeline. "We went to
Switzerland last August, and I found twenty-seven different specimens
just in one walk."

"Before I came to St. Chad's," confessed Lettice, "I used to think
daisies were the flowers of grass, and not separate plants--I did
indeed!"

"You certainly know better now," laughed Miss Maitland. "We can get so
much pleasure from things when we have learnt even a very little about
them. Every leaf or blade of grass becomes a marvel, if we begin to
examine its structure, and look at it through the microscope. There is
nothing so wonderful as the book of nature, and it is always there,
ready to entertain us when we wish to read it."

It was much cooler and breezier up on the hills, though even there the
air had a sultry feeling, and a dull, heavy haze was creeping up from
the sea.

"It looks like thunder," said Miss Maitland. "I should not be surprised
if we were to have a storm to-night. We had better turn towards home
now; but we'll go back by the cliffs above Sandihove, instead of
through the woods."

It was rather a difficult matter to get the girls along, so many
interesting discoveries were made on the way--first a patch of
pink-fringed buck-bean, growing at the edge of the stream; then a clump
of butterfly orchis; and last, but not least, a quantity of the
beautiful "Grass of Parnassus", the delicate white blossoms of which
were starring the boggy corner of a meadow. Miss Maitland was kept
quite busy naming specimens, and everybody had a large bunch of
treasures to carry home. Janie Henderson and Adeline Vaughan, being the
two chief enthusiasts of the party, walked on either side of the
teacher, discussing matters botanical; and the others straggled in
little groups behind. Honor found herself walking with Lettice Talbot,
who was in a more than usually sprightly frame of mind, bantering and
teasing, and turning everything into fun.

"I've learnt the names of so many new flowers," she declared, "that I'm
sure I shall get a bad mark for history to-morrow. My brain is small,
and only capable of holding a certain amount. When fresh things are put
in, out go the old ones, or else I mix them completely up. I shall
probably say that Oliver Cromwell was born at Marsh Cinquefoil, and
that Charles the First belonged to the family of Ranunculaceae. Paddy,
you look rather glum! What's the matter? Don't you like botany? Or are
you longing for your native wilds in Kerry? Is that a surreptitious
tear trickling down your cheek?"

"Surreptitious rubbish!" laughed Honor. "I wasn't thinking of anything
so romantic. I was looking at that little white village below us, and
wondering if it can boast of possessing a shop."

"Then I can satisfy you on that point. It does--a very small shop,
where they sell tea, and red herrings, and tinned provisions."

"Do they sell peppermint humbugs, or raspberry drops?"

"I dare say. I believe I remember some big bottles in the window."

"Then let us go and buy some. I haven't had any sweets since I came to
St. Chad's. I'm simply yearning for butter-scotch or chocolates!"

"Don't talk of them! So am I! There's only one slight drawback, and
that is, that we're not allowed!"

"Why not?"

"How can I say why? It's one of the rules: 'No girl to enter any shop,
or make purchases, without special permission from her house-mistress'."

"Then run on and ask Miss Maitland if we may. She's in a particularly
good temper tonight, so she'll probably say 'yes'. I have some pennies
in my pocket."

"All right. One can but try!" replied Lettice, and hurrying after the
teacher, who was a little distance in front, she made her request.

She came back to Honor shaking her head gloomily.

"As I thought!" she announced. "Miss Maitland says 'No'. We're not to
pass the shop at all; we're to keep to the upper road that skirts above
the village."

"How disgusting!" grumbled Honor. "It would only have taken a minute
longer. I'm sure there's no need to be in such a tremendous hurry.
Lettice! Suppose we were to dash down this lane, we could go to the
village and catch the others up at the crossroads. I can see the path
quite plainly from here. We couldn't possibly miss it, and we could run
all the way."

"Whew! But how about breaking rules?"

"Bother rules! Miss Maitland shouldn't make so many, and then they'd be
better kept. It is ridiculous if girls of our age mayn't walk five
yards by themselves. We're not infants in arms!"

Lettice hesitated, glanced to see if anyone in front was looking, or
whether anybody was close behind, then yielded to the voice of the
temptress.

"It's horribly risky, but it would be a joke!" she said.

Honor was in one of her self-willed moods that evening, ready to dare
or do anything. In her heart of hearts she was offended because Janie
should have walked on with Adeline and Miss Maitland, and left her
behind. She was of a jealous temperament, and had enjoyed keeping her
friend as her own private and particular property. It seemed quite a
new state of affairs for Janie to be conversing in so animated a manner
with anybody but herself, and the change was the reverse of pleasant.

"They're so interested in their talk, they've completely forgotten me!"
she thought. "Very well; so much the better! They won't notice what
we're doing. I'm not going to keep all these silly regulations. One
might be in the nursery, to have to ask leave for such an absurd little
thing as buying a pennyworth of sweets."

The two girls ran as fast as they could along the lane, Honor looking
reckless and rather stubborn, and Lettice decidedly guilty. It was
certainly a most deliberate act of disobedience, and one that, if they
were caught, would involve them in very disagreeable consequences. The
discipline at Chessington was so perfect that it was seldom any pupil
ever dreamt of even questioning a mistress's orders; and Lettice, in
her two years at St. Chad's, had never done such a naughty thing
before. She felt almost frightened at her own daring, but very excited,
and ready to follow Honor to the end of the adventure. They hurried
into the little shop and made their purchases as quickly as possible,
though the old woman who served them did not understand the meaning of
the word "haste", and weighed out butterdrops and caramels with
exasperating deliberation. The pair stood by almost dancing with
impatience, and when the packets were at last ready, snatched them up
and rushed off with all speed.

"This way!" cried Honor, turning sharply to the left through an open
gate. "I noticed the path particularly when we were on the hill above,
and this is a short cut back to the road."

"It looks as if we were going into an orchard," objected Lettice.

"No; I'm sure I'm right. We shall get out through those apple trees at
the top of the bank."

The pathway, however, merely seemed to lead to a field, and ended at a
gate that was securely fastened by a piece of wire.

"I believe there's a stile across there," panted Honor, hot and out of
breath with running. "Don't bother to undo that wire! We'll climb over.
Here, take my hand!"

It was a vain hope. On closer examination the supposed stile proved to
be only part of a fence. The meadow was surrounded by a quickset hedge,
so thick as to be an insuperable barrier.

"I must have taken the wrong turning, after all," said Honor blankly.
"What a fearful nuisance! We shall have to go back."

"It's all very well to say 'go back'!" exclaimed Lettice, turning and
clutching at Honor's arm. "Look at what is in front of us!"

Honor stopped short as suddenly as her companion. Directly facing them
was a large bull: it had been feeding in the ditch when they entered
the field, and thus they had not perceived its presence; but now it had
walked across, and was standing exactly opposite the gate, completely
cutting off their return to the footpath.

"Perhaps it mayn't be really savage," said Honor, with a slight quiver
in her voice. "Shall we walk a little nearer, and see if it takes any
notice of us?"

"No! No! Don't!" implored Lettice. "I'm terrified even of cows, and
this is a monster. I'm sure it's dangerous--it has a ring in its nose!"

Honor looked round the pasture in dismay. She felt as if they were
caught in a trap. How were they to make their escape while that huge
beast stood between them and safety?

"We'd better go to the hedge again," she said. "Perhaps there may be
some little hole where we can scramble through into the next field."

They beat a cautious retreat, not daring to run from fear that they
might attract the bull's attention. But the farmer had mended his
fences only too well; they did not find the smallest opening, search as
they would.

"What are we to do?" demanded Lettice distractedly. "We can't stay all
night in the field, yet if we call for help that creature will come
rushing at us. Oh, Honor, look! It's seen us now!"

The bull had certainly become aware of their proximity. It was gazing
at them in an uneasy fashion, sniffing the air, and pawing the ground
restlessly. It gave a roar like the growling of thunder, and began to
walk slowly in their direction. With white faces, the girls backed
nearer the fence. Perhaps the heat, or the flies, or the unusual
appearance of two strangers in its meadow irritated the animal, for
again it gave a loud, rumbling bellow, and, lowering its horns, made
straight for the intruders. Shrieking with fright, Honor and Lettice
plunged into the hedge, scrambling anyhow through quickset and
brambles, scratching their hands and faces and rending their dresses in
the struggle, their one object being to escape from the horror behind
them. With torn blouses and fingers full of thorns they issued from the
opposite side, and rolled down a bank before they were able to stop
themselves.

Honor sprang up promptly, and looked anxiously back. Fortunately, the
bushes were far too thick and high for the bull to leap over.

"We're quite safe now!" she exclaimed, with a gasp of intense relief.

Lettice, sitting on the bank, indulged in a private little cry. She was
very agitated and upset, and was trembling violently.

"I thought we were going to be gored to death," she quavered. "Oh! has
