by Jesuit explorers about 1660, but was not worked until 1845. It is one
of the most productive mines in the world, its yearly output averaging
fifty million tons.

The export trade in copper is very important, amounting at the close of
the past century to about one hundred and seventy thousand short tons.
Of this amount, half goes to Germany (most of it through ports of the
Netherlands), and one-fifth each to France and Great Britain. The market
price to the consumer during the ten years closing the century averaged
about sixteen cents per pound. Most of the product is exported from New
York and Baltimore. The head-quarters of the great copper-mining
companies of America are at Boston. The imports of raw ores and partly
reduced ores called "regulus," come mainly from Mexico to New York and
Baltimore, and from Mexico and Japan to Puget Sound ports. The most
important American refineries are at New York and Baltimore.

A part of the copper is mixed with zinc to form brass, an alloy much
used in light machinery. A considerable quantity is rolled into sheets
to sheath building fronts and the iron hulls of vessels. By far the
greater part, however, is drawn into wire for carrying electricity, and
for this purpose it is surpassed by silver alone. The decrease in the
price of copper in the past few years is due, not to a falling off in
the demand, but to methods of reducing the ores and transporting the
product more economically.

=Aluminium.=--Aluminium is the base of clay, this mineral being its oxide.
It occurs in the various feldspars and feldspathic rocks, and in mica.
The expense of extracting the metal from these minerals has been so
great as to prohibit its commercial use. In 1870 there were probably
less than twenty pounds of the metal in existence, and it was to be
found only as a curiosity in the chemical laboratories. The discovery
that the metal could be extracted cheaply from cryolite, a mineral with
an aluminium base, obtained from Ivigtut, Greenland, led to a sparing
use of the metal in the economic arts.

The chief step in the production of the metal dates from the time that
the mineral _bauxite_, a hydroxide of aluminium and iron, was decomposed
in the electric furnace. The process has been repeatedly improved, and
under the patents covered by the Hall process the crude metal is now
produced at a market price of about eighteen cents per pound. The entire
production of the United States is controlled by the Pittsburg Reduction
Company, which also manufactures much of the commercial product of
England. The competitor of the Pittsburg Reduction Company is an
establishment in Germany, near Bremen.

Aluminium does not corrode; it is easily rolled, drawn, or cast; and,
bulk for bulk, it is less than one-third as heavy as copper. Because of
these properties it has a great and constantly growing economic value.
Because of its greater size, a pound of aluminium wire will carry a
greater electric current than a pound of copper wire of the same length.
It therefore has an increasing use as a conductor of electricity.

Bauxite, the mineral from which the metal is now chiefly extracted, is
obtained in two localities. One extends through Georgia and Alabama;
the other is in Arkansas.

=Lead.=--Lead is neither so abundant nor so widely diffused as iron,
copper, and the precious metals, but the supply is fully equal to the
demand. Lead ores, mainly galena or lead sulphide, occur abundantly in
the Rocky Mountains, Colorado, Idaho, and Utah, producing more than half
the total output of the United States. In these localities, in Mexico,
and in the Andean states of South America it is used mainly in the
smelting of silver ores.

Metallic lead is used largely in the manufacture of water-pipes, and for
this purpose it must be very nearly pure. It is also rolled into sheets
to be used as lining for water-tanks. The fact that the edges of
sheet-lead and the ends of pipes may be readily joined with solder gives
to lead a great part of its economic value. Alloyed with arsenic it is
used in making shot; alloyed with antimony it forms type metal; alloyed
with tin it forms pewter and solder.

The greater part, however, is manufactured into the carbonate or "white"
lead that is used as a pigment, or paint. Red lead, an oxide, is a
pigment; litharge, also an oxide, is used for glazing the cheaper kinds
of pottery. About two hundred and thirty thousand tons of lead are
produced in the United States and one-half as much is imported--mainly
from Mexico and Canada. The linotype machines, now used in all large
printing establishments, have increased the demand for lead.

=Other Metals.=--Most of the remaining economic metals occur in small
quantities as compared with iron, copper, gold, and silver. Some of
them, however, are highly important from the fact that in various
industrial processes no substitutes for them are known.

_Quicksilver_, or _mercury_, is the only industrial metal that at
ordinary temperatures is a liquid. It is the base of the substance
calomel, a chloride, and corrosive sublimate, a dichloride, both of
which are employed as medicines. It is essential in the manufacture of
thermometers and barometers, but is used chiefly, however, as a solvent
of gold, which it separates from the finely powdered ore by solution or
amalgamation. Quicksilver occurs in the mineral cinnabar, a sulphide.

Nearly one-half the world's product comes from California. The New
Almaden mines of Santa Clara County produce over five thousand flasks
(each seventy-six and one-half pounds net); those of Napa County nearly
nine thousand flasks; the mines of the whole State yield about
twenty-six thousand flasks, valued at $1,200,000. Almaden, Spain, and
Idria, Austria, produce nearly all the rest of the output. An average of
about fifteen thousand flasks are exported from San Francisco, mainly to
the mines of Mexico, and Central and South America.

_Tin_ is about the only metal of industrial value whose ores are not
found in paying quantities in the United States. Small quantities occur
in San Bernardino County, Cal., and in the vicinity of Bering Strait,
Alaska, but it is doubtful if either will ever pay for development.
About three-fifths of the world's product comes from the Straits
Settlements on the Malay Peninsula; the nearby islands of Banca and
Billiton also yield a considerable quantity.

The mines of Cornwall, England, have been worked for two thousand years
and were probably the source of the tin that made the "bronze age." The
United States imports yearly about twenty million dollars worth of tin,
about half of which comes from the Straits Settlements. This is used
almost wholly for the manufacture of tin plate[48]--that is, sheet-iron
coated with tin. Much of the block tin imported from Great Britain is
returned there in the form of tin plate, being manufactured in the
United States much more economically than in Europe.

_Nickel_ occurs in New Caledonia, in Canada, and in the State of
Missouri. It is used in the manufacture of small coins and for plating
iron and steel. It is an essential in the metal known as "nickel steel"
which is now generally used in armor-plate and propeller-shafts, about
four per cent. of nickel being added to the steel. Most of the product
used in the United States is imported from Canada.

_Manganese_, a metal resembling iron, occurs in Russia, Brazil, and
Cuba, Russia producing about half the total output. It is used mainly to
give hardness to steel. The propeller-blades of large steamships are
usually made of manganese bronze. The building of war-ships in the
United States during the past few years has led to the extensive use of
manganese for armor-plate, and manganese ores to the amount of more than
two hundred and fifty thousand tons were imported in 1900. More than
one-half of this came from Russia; most of the remaining half from
Brazil.

_Zinc_ is abundant in nearly every part of the world. In the United
States the best known mines are in the Galena-Joplin District, in
Missouri and Kansas, which produce about two-thirds of the home
product--mainly from the ore _blende_, a sulphide. There are also
extensive zinc-mining operations in Illinois, New Jersey, and
Pennsylvania. The lower Rhine District, Great Britain, and Silesia are
the chief European sources. Sheet-zinc is found in nearly every dwelling
in the United States, and zinc-coated or "galvanized" iron has become a
domestic necessity. Zinc-white is extensively used as a pigment. About
two hundred and fifty million pounds of crude zinc, or "spelter," are
produced in the United States; forty-five million pounds were exported
in 1900, mainly to Great Britain.


QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION

What are the qualities that make iron the most valuable of metals?

In what ways does commerce depend on iron and steel?

What substances are used for food, clothing, or domestic purposes that
are not manufactured by the aid of iron?

Ingot or billet steel is rated at about one cent per pound; the
hair-springs of watches are worth several thousand dollars per pound;
what makes the difference in their value?

What are the qualities that give to gold its value?

Would all the gold mined in the United States pay the national debt at
the end of the Civil War?

What causes have led to the increasing price of copper during the past
few years?

What is the market price each of copper, silver, steel rails, and
aluminium to-day?


FOR STUDY AND REFERENCE

Obtain specimens of the following iron ores: Hematite, brown hematite,
magnetite, carbonate, and pyrites. Note the color and physical
appearance of each; scratch the first four with a very hard steel point
and note the color of the streak.

Obtain specimens of pig-iron, cast iron, wrought iron, and cast steel;
note carefully the fracture or "break" of each; how does cast iron
differ from wrought iron?

Obtain specimens of the following copper ores: Malachite, azurite,
chalcopyrite, and red oxide; wet a very small fragment with an acid and
note the color when it is held in the flame of an alcohol lamp or a
Bunsen burner; dissolve a crystal of blue vitriol (copper sulphate) in
water and note what occurs if the end of a bright iron wire be dipped in
the solution.

Name the various uses to which nickel, tin, lead, and aluminium are put.

Consult the chapters on these subjects in any cyclopaedia.

[Illustration: TRANSPORTING SUGAR-CANE, CUBA]

[Illustration: SUGAR-CANE GROWING IN CUBA]

[Illustration: HAVEMEYER SUGAR-REFINERY, BROOKLYN, N.Y.]




CHAPTER XIV

SUGAR AND ITS COMMERCE


The term sugar is applied rather loosely to a large number of substances
characterized by the quality of sweetness. In a few instances the name
is given to certain mineral salts, such as sugar of lead, but in the
main the sugars are plant products very similar in chemical structure to
the starches. They are very closely connected with plant growth, and
even in animal life, starchy substances are changed to sugar in the
process of digestion. Although sugar does not sustain life, it is
necessary as an adjunct to other food-stuffs, and it is probably
consumed by a greater number of people than any other food-stuffs except
starch and water.

Three kinds of sugar are found in commerce, namely--_cane_-sugar,
_grape_-sugar, and _milk_-sugar. Cane-sugar occurs in the sap of the
sugar-cane, sorghum-cane, certain of the palms, and the juice of the
beet. Grape-sugar is the sweet principle of most fruits and of honey.
Sugar of milk occurs in milk, and in several kinds of nuts.

=Sugar-Cane Sugar.=--Cane-sugar is so called because until recently it was
derived almost wholly from the sap of the sugar-cane (_Saccharum
officinarum_). The plant belongs to the grass family and much resembles
maize before the latter has matured. It is thought to be native to Asia,
but it is now cultivated in nearly all tropical countries in the world.

Practically every moist tropical region in the world, the basins of the
Kongo and Amazon Rivers excepted, is a cane-sugar-producing region. As
a rule it is grown in the states under native rule for home consumption,
and in European colonial possessions for commercial purposes. India and
China are probably the foremost in the production of sugar-cane sugar,
but the product is not exported. Cuba, Java, the Gulf coast of the
United States, Mauritius, the Philippine and the Hawaiian Islands
produce the most of the supply that enters into commerce.

=Beet-Sugar.=--During the last quarter of the nineteenth century the
demands for sugar increased so greatly that it became necessary either
to raise the price of the commodity, or else to utilize some plant other
than the sugar-cane as a source. After a few years of experimental work
it was found that sugar could be readily extracted from the juice of the
common beet (_Beta vulgaris_). Several varieties of this plant have been
improved and are now very largely cultivated for the purpose. Beet-sugar
and cane-sugar are identical.

Almost all the beet-sugar of commerce comes from northwestern Europe;
Germany leads with nearly one-third the world's product; France,
Austria, and Russia follow, each producing about one-sixth. A small
amount is produced in the United States--mainly in California and
Michigan. The area of production, however, is increasing.

=Other Cane-Sugars.=--Maple-sugar is derived from the sap of several
species of maple-trees occurring mainly in the northeastern United
States and in Canada. The sap is obtained by tapping the trees in early
spring, a single tree often yielding several gallons. The value of
maple-sugar lies mainly in its pleasant flavor. It is used partly as a
confection, but in the main as a sirup. A very large part of the
maple-sirup and not a little of the sugar is artificial, consisting of
ordinary sugar colored with caramel and flavored with an extract
prepared from the maple-tree.

Sorghum-sugar is obtained from a cane known as Chinese grass, or Chinese
millet. It has been introduced into the United States from southeastern
Asia and Japan. The sorghum-cane grows well in the temperate zone, and
its cultivation in the Mississippi Valley States has been successful.
The sugar is not easily crystallizable, however, and it is usually made
into table-sirup.

Maguey-sugar is derived from the sap of the maguey-plant (_Agave
Americana_). It is much used in Mexico and the Central American states.
The method of manufacture is very crude and the product is not exported.
Palm-sugar is obtained from the sap of several species of palm growing
in India and Africa.

=Sugar Manufacture.=--Sugar manufacture includes three
processes--expressing the sap, evaporating, and refining. The first two
are carried on at or near the plantations; the last is an affair
requiring an immense capital and a most elaborately organized plant. The
refining is done mainly in the great centres of population at places
most convenient for transportation. The raw sugar may travel five or ten
thousand miles to reach the refinery; the refined product rarely travels
more than a thousand miles.

After it has been cut and stripped of its leaves the sugar-cane is
crushed between powerful rollers in order to express the juice. The
sugar-beet is rasped or ground to a pulp and then subjected to great
pressure. The expressed juice contains about ten or twelve per cent. of
sugar. In some factories the beet, or the cane, is cut into thin slices
and thrown into water, the juice being extracted by the solvent
properties of the latter. This is known as the "diffusion" process.

The juice is first strained or filtered under pressure in order to
remove all foreign matter and similar impurities. It is then clarified
by adding slacked lime, at the same time heating the liquid nearly to
the boiling point and skimming off the impurities that rise to the
surface. The purified juice is then boiled rapidly in vacuum pans until
it is greatly concentrated.

When the proper degree of concentration is reached, the liquid is
quickly run off into shallow pans, in which most of it immediately
crystallizes. The crystalline portion forms the _raw sugar_ of commerce;
the remaining part is molasses. The whole mass is then shovelled into a
centrifugal machine which in a few minutes separates the two products.

In purchasing raw sugar, the refiner was formerly at a loss to know just
how much pure sugar could be made from a given weight of the raw sugar.
In order to aid in making a correct determination, the Dutch government
formerly prepared sixteen samples put up in glass flasks and sealed.
These samples varied in color according to the amount of pure sugar
contained. The pure solution was known in commerce as No. 16 Dutch
standard, and this was generally taken all over the world as the
standard of pure sugar. Within recent years the polariscope, an optical
instrument that determines the percentage of sugar by means of polarized
light, has largely replaced the Dutch standard.

The refineries, as a rule, are built with reference to a minimum
handling and transportation of the raw product. The cane-sugar
refineries are mainly at the great seaports, where the raw sugar does
not pay railway transportation. The beet-sugar refineries are in the
midst of the beet-growing districts. So nearly perfect and economically
managed are these processes, that raw sugar imported from Europe or
from the West Indies, at a cost of from two and a quarter to two and a
half cents per pound, is refined and sold at retail at about five cents.

The margin of profit is so very close, however, that in the United
States, as well as most European states, the sugar industry is protected
by government enactments. In the United States imported raw sugar pays a
tariff in order to protect the cane-sugar industry of the Gulf coast and
the beet-sugar grower of the Western States. The duty at the close of
the nineteenth century was about 1.66 cents per pound; or, if the sugar
came from a foreign country paying a bounty on sugar exported, an
additional countervailing duty equal to the bounty was also charged.

In the various states of western Europe the beet-sugar industry is
governed by a cartel or agreement among the states, which makes the
whole business a gigantic combination arrayed against the tropical sugar
interests. In general, the government of each state pays a bounty on
every pound of beet-sugar exported. The real effect of the export bounty
is about the same as the imposition of a tax on the sugar purchased for
consumption at home.

Two-thirds of the entire sugar product are made from the beet, at an
average cost of about 2.5 cents a pound. In the tropical islands the
yield of cane-sugar per acre is about double that of beet-sugar and it
is produced for about five dollars less per ton. This difference is in
part offset by the fact that the raw cane-sugar must pay transportation
for a long distance to the place of consumption, and in part by the
government bounties paid on the beet product.

Both the political and the economic effects of beet sugar-making have
been far-reaching. In Germany the agricultural interests of the country
have been completely reorganized. The uncertain profits of cereal
food-stuffs have given place to the sure profits of beet-sugar
cultivation, with the result that the income of the Germans has been
enormously increased. In the other lowland countries of western Europe
the venture has been equally successful. Even the Netherlands has
profited by it.

In the case of Spain, the result of beet-sugar cultivation was
disastrous. The price of cane-sugar in Cuba and the Philippine Islands
fell to such a low point that the islands could not pay the taxes
imposed by the mother country. Instead of lowering the taxes and
adjusting affairs to the changed conditions, the Spaniards drove the
islands into rebellion, and the latter finally resulted in war with the
United States, and the loss of the colonies. Great Britain wisely
adjusted her colonial affairs to the changed conditions, but the British
colonies suffered greatly from beet-sugar competition.

=Production and Consumption.=--The production and consumption of sugar
increased about sevenfold during the latter half of the nineteenth
century, the increase being due very largely to the decreased price.
Thus, in 1850, white (loaf) sugar was a luxury, retailing at about
twenty cents per pound; in 1870 the wholesale price of pure granulated
sugar was fourteen cents; in 1902 it was not quite five cents.

Although the tropical countries are greatly handicapped by the political
legislation of the European states, they cannot supply the amount of
sugar required, unless the area of production be greatly extended. It is
also certain that without governmental protection, sugar growing in the
temperate zone cannot compete with that of the tropical countries.

Of the eight million tons of sugar yearly consumed, two-thirds are
beet-sugar. The annual consumption per capita is about ninety pounds in
Great Britain, seventy pounds in the United States, and not far from
thirty-five pounds in Germany and France. In Russia and the eastern
European countries it is less than fifteen pounds.

=Molasses.=--The molasses of commerce is the uncrystallizable sugar that
is left in the vacuum pans at the close of the process of evaporation.
The molasses formerly known as "sugar house" is a filthy product that
nowadays is scarcely used, except in the manufacture of rum. The color
of molasses is due mainly to the presence of "caramel" or half-charred
sugar; it cannot be wholly removed by any ordinary clarifying process.

Purified molasses is usually known as "sirup," and much of it is made by
boiling a solution of raw sugar to the proper degree of concentration. A
considerable part is made from the sap of the sorghum-cane, and probably
a larger quantity consists of glucose solution colored with caramel.
Maple-sirup, formerly a solution of maple-sugar, is now very largely
made from raw cane-sugar clarified and artificially flavored.

=Glucose.=--Glucose, or grape-sugar, is the natural sugar of the grape and
most small fruits. Honey is a nearly pure, concentrated solution of
glucose. Grape-sugar has, roughly, about three-fifths the sweetening
power of cane-sugar. Natural grape-sugar is too expensive for ordinary
commercial use; the commercial product, on the other hand, is
artificial, and is made mainly from cornstarch.

Glucose is employed in the cheaper kinds of confectionery in the United
States; most of it, however, is exported to Great Britain, the annual
product being worth about four million dollars. From the fact that it
can be made more economically from corn than from any other grain,
practically all the glucose is made in the United States.


QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION

It frequently happens that the prices of sugar and tin-plate rise and
fall together; show how the fruit-crop may cause this fluctuation.

Which of the possessions of the United States are adaptable for
cane-sugar?--for beet-sugar?
