"Glad to find you alive, Sherburne.  Where's your troop?"

"What's left of it is on ahead.  I'll join the men in a few minutes.
But look back there!"

Harry from the knoll, which was higher than he had thought, gazed upon
a vast and dusky panorama.  Once more the field of Gettysburg swam
before him, not now in fire and smoke, but in vapors and misty rain.
When he shut his eyes he saw again the great armies charging on the
slopes, the blazing fire from hundreds of cannon and a hundred thousand
rifles. There, too, went Pickett's brigades, devoted to death but never
flinching.  A sob burst from his throat, and he opened his eyes again.

"You feel about it as I do," said Sherburne.  "We'll never come back
into the North."

"It isn't merely a feeling within me, I know it."

"So do I, but we can still hold Virginia."

"I think so, too.  Come, we'd better turn.  There goes the field of
Gettysburg.  The rain and mist have blotted it out."

The panorama, the most terrible upon which Harry had ever looked,
vanished in the darkness.  The two rode slowly from the knoll and into
the road.

"It will be daylight in an hour," said Sherburne, "and by that time the
last of our men will be gone."

"And I must hasten to our commander-in-chief," said Harry.

"How is he?" asked Sherburne.  "Does he seem downcast?"

"No, he holds his head as high as ever, and cheers the men.  They say
that Pickett's charge was a glorious mistake, but he takes all the
blame for it, if there is any.  He doesn't criticize any of his
generals."

"Only a man of the greatest moral grandeur could act like that.  It's
because of such things that our people, boys, officers and all, will
follow him to the death."

"Good-by, Sherburne," said Harry.  "Hope I'll see you again soon."

He urged his horse into a faster gait, anxious to overtake Lee and
report that all was well with the rear guard.  He noticed once more,
and with the greatest care that long line of the wounded and the
unwounded, winding sixteen miles across the hills from Gettysburg to
Chambersburg, and his mind was full of grave thoughts.  More than two
years in the very thick of the greatest war, then known, were
sufficient to make a boy a man, at least in intellect and
responsibility.

Harry saw very clearly, as he rode beside the retreating but valiant
army that had failed in its great attempt, that their role would be the
defensive.  For a little while he was sunk in deep depression.  Then
invincible youth conquered anew, and hope sprang up again.  The night
was at the darkest, but dawn was not far away.  Fugitive gusts of wind
drenched him once more, but he did not mind it, nor did he pay any
attention to the occasional growl of a distant gun.  He was strong in
the belief that Meade would not pursue--at least not yet.  A general
who had just lost nearly one-third of his own army was not in much
condition to follow his enemy.

He urged his horse to increased speed, and pressed on toward the head
of the column.  The rain ceased and cool puffs of wind came out of the
east. Then the blackness there turned to gray, which soon deepened into
silver. Through the silver veil shot a bolt of red fire, and the sun
came over the hills.

Although the green world had been touched with brown by the hot sun of
July it looked fresh and beautiful to Harry.  The brown in the morning
sunlight was a rosy red, and the winds of dawn were charged with life.
His horse, too, felt the change and it was easy now to force him into a
gallop toward a fire on a low hill, which Harry felt sure had been
built to cook breakfast for their great commander.

As he approached he saw Lee and his generals standing before the blaze,
some eating, and others drinking.  An orderly, near by, held the
commander's famous horse, Traveller, and two or three horses belonging
to the other generals were trying to find a little grass between the
stony outcrops of the hills.  Harry felt an overwhelming curiosity, but
he kept it in restraint, dismounting at a little distance, and
approaching on foot.

He could not observe much change in the general's appearance.  His
handsome gray suit was as neat as ever, and the three stars, the only
marks of his rank that he wore, shone untarnished upon his collar. The
dignified and cheerful manner that marked him before Gettysburg marked
him also afterward.  To Harry, so young and so thoroughly charged with
the emotions of his time and section, he was a figure to be approached
with veneration.

He saw the stalwart and bearded Longstreet and other generals whom he
knew, among them the brilliant Stuart in his brilliant plumage, but
rather quiet and subdued in manner now, since he had not come to
Gettysburg as soon as he was needed.  Harry hung back a little, fearing
lest he might be regarded as thrusting himself into a company so much
his superior in rank, but Lee saw him and beckoned to him.

"I sent you back toward Gettysburg to report on our withdrawal,
Lieutenant Kenton," he said.

"Yes, sir.  I returned all the way to the field.  The last of our
troops should be leaving there just about now.  The Northern army had
made no preparation for immediate pursuit."

"Your report agrees with all the others that I have received.  How long
have you been without sleep?"

"I don't know, sir," he said at last.  "I can't remember.  Maybe it has
been two or three days."

Stuart, who held a cup of coffee in his hand, laughed.  "The times have
been such that there are generals as well as lieutenants," he said,
"who can't remember when they've slept."

"You're exhausted, my lad," said Lee gravely and kindly, "and there's
nothing more you can do for us just now.  Take some breakfast with us,
and then you must sleep in one of the wagons.  An orderly will look
after your horse."

Lee handed him a cup of coffee with his own hand, and Harry, thanking
him, withdrew to the outer fringe of the little group, where he took
his breakfast, amazed to find how hungry he was, although he had not
thought of food before.  Then without a word, as he saw that the
generals were engrossed in a conference, he withdrew.

"You'll find Lieutenant Dalton of the staff in the covered wagon over
there," said the orderly who had taken his horse.  "The general sent
him to it more'n two hours ago."

"Then I'll be inside it in less than two minutes," said Harry.

But with rest in sight he collapsed suddenly.  His head fell forward of
its own weight.  His feet became lead.  Everything swam before his
eyes. He felt that he must sleep or die.  But he managed to drag
himself to the wagon and climbed inside.  Dalton lay in the center of
it so sound asleep that he was like one dead.  Harry rolled him to one
side, making room for himself, and lay down beside him.  Then his eyes
closed, and he, too, slept so soundly that he also looked like one dead.

He was awakened by Dalton pulling at him.  The young Virginian was
sitting up and looking at Harry with curiosity.  He clapped his hands
when the Kentuckian opened his eyes.

"Now I know that you're not dead," he said.  "When I woke up and found
you lying beside me I thought they had just put your body in here for
safekeeping.  As that's not the case, kindly explain to me and at once
what you're doing in my wagon."

"I'm waking up just at present, but for an hour or two before that I
was sleeping."

"Hour or two?  Hour or two?  Hear him!  An orderly who I know is no
liar told me that you got in here just after dawn.  Now kindly lift
that canvasflap, look out and tell me what you see."

Harry did as he was told, and was amazed.  The same rolling landscape
still met his eyes, and the sun was just about as high in the sky as it
was when he had climbed into the wagon.  But it was in the west now
instead of the east.

"See and know, young man!" said Dalton, paternally.  "The entire day
has elapsed and here you have lain in ignorant slumber, careless of
everything, reckless of what might happen to the army.  For twelve
hours General Lee has been without your advice, and how, lacking it, he
has got this far, Heaven alone knows."

"It seems that he's pulled through, and, since I'm now awake, you can
hurry to him and tell him I'm ready to furnish the right plans to stop
the forthcoming Yankee invasion."

"They'll keep another day, but we've certainly had a good sleep, Harry."

"Yes, a provision or ammunition wagon isn't a bad place for a wornout
soldier.  I remember I slept in another such as this in the Valley of
Virginia, when we were with Jackson."

He stopped suddenly and choked.  He could not mention the name of
Jackson, until long afterward, without something rising in his throat.

The driver obscured a good deal of the front view, but he suddenly
turned a rubicund and smiling face upon them.

"Waked up, hev ye?" he exclaimed.  "Wa'al it's about time.  I've looked
back from time to time an' I wuzn't at all shore whether you two
gen'rals wuz alive or dead.  Sometimes when the wagon slanted a lot you
would roll over each other, but it didn't seem to make no diffunce.
Pow'ful good sleepers you are."

"Yes," said Harry.  "We're two of the original Seven Sleepers."

"I don't doubt that you are two, but they wuz more'n seven."

"How do you know?"

"'Cause at least seven thousand in this train have been sleepin' as
hard as you wuz.  I guess you mean the 'rig'nal Seventy Thousand
Sleepers."

Harry's spirits had returned after his long sleep.  He was a lad again.
The weight of Gettysburg no longer rested upon him.  The Army of
Northern Virginia had merely made a single failure.  It would strike
again and again, as hard as ever.

"It's true that we've been slumbering," he said, "but we're as wide
awake now as ever, Mr. Driver."

"My name ain't Driver," said the man.

"Then what is it?"

"Jones, Dick Jones, which I hold to be a right proper name."

"Not romantic, but short, simple and satisfying."

"I reckon so.  Leastways, I've never wanted to change it.  I'm from
No'th Calliny, an' I've been followin' Bobby Lee a pow'ful long
distance from home.  Fine country up here in Pennsylvany, but I'd
ruther be back in them No'th Calliny mountains.  You two young gen'rals
may think it's an easy an' safe job drivin' a wagon loaded with
ammunition.  But s'pose you have to drive it right under fire, as you
most often have to do, an' then if a shell or somethin' like it hits
your wagon the whole thing goes off kerplunk, an' whar are you?"

"It's a sudden an' easy death," said Dalton, philosophically.

"Too sudden an' too easy.  I don't mind tellin' you that seein' men
killed an' wounded is a spo't that's beginnin' to pall on me.  Reckon
I've had enough of it to last me for the next thousand years.  I've
forgot, if I ever knowed, what this war wuz started about.  Say, young
fellers, I've got a wife back thar, a high-steppin', fine-lookin' gal
not more'n twenty years old--I'm just twenty-five myself, an' we've got
a year-old baby the cutest that wuz ever born.  Now, when I wuz lookin'
at that charge of Pickett's men, an' the whole world wuz blazin' with
fire, an' all the skies wuz rainin' steel and lead, an' whar grass
growed before, nothin' but bayonets wuz growin' then, do you know what
I seed sometimes?"

"What was it?" asked Harry.

"Fur a secon' all that hell of fire an' smoke an' killin' would float
away, an' I seed our mountain, with the cove, an' the trees, an' the
green grass growin' in it, an' the branch, with the water so clear you
could see your face in it, runnin' down the center, an' thar at the
head of the cove my cabin, not much uv a buildin' to look at, no
towerin' mansion, but just a stout two-room log cabin that the snows
an' hails of winter can't break into, an' in the door wuz standin' Mary
with the hair flyin' about her face, an' her eyes shinin', with the
little feller in her arms, lookin' at me 'way off as I come walkin'
fast down the cove toward 'em, returnin' from the big war."

There was a moment's silence, and Dalton said gruffly to hide his
feelings:

"Dick Jones, by the time this war is over, and you go walking down the
cove toward your home, a man with mustache and side whiskers will come
forward to meet you, and he'll be that son of yours."

But Dick Jones cheerfully shook his head.

"The war ain't goin' to last that long," he said confidently, "an' I
ain't goin' to git killed.  What I saw will come true, 'cause I feel it
so strong."

"There ought to be a general law forbidding a man with a young wife and
baby to go to a war," said Harry.

"But they ain't no sich law," said Dick Jones, in his optimistic tone,
"an' so we needn't worry 'bout it.  But if you two gen'rals should
happen along through the mountains uv western No'th Calliny after the
war I'd like fur you to come to my cabin, an' see Mary an' the baby an'
me. Our cove is named Jones' Cove, after my father, an' the branch that
runs through it runs into Jones' Creek, an' Jones' Creek runs into the
Yadkin River an' our county is Yadkin.  Oh, you could find it plumb
easy, if two sich great gen'rals as you wuzn't ashamed to eat sweet
pertaters an' ham an' turkey an' co'n pone with a wagon driver like me."

Harry saw, despite his playful method of calling them generals, that he
was thoroughly in earnest, and he was more moved than he would have
been willing to confess.

"Too proud!" he said.  "Why, we'd be glad!"

"Mebbe your road will lead that way," said Jones.  "An' ef you do, jest
remember that the skillet's on the fire, an' the latch string is
hangin' outside the do'."

The allusion to the mountains made Harry's mind travel far back, over
an almost interminable space of time now, it seemed, when he was yet a
novice in war, to the home of Sam Jarvis, deep in the Kentucky
mountains, and the old, old woman who had said to him as he left: "You
will come again, and you will be thin and pale, and in rags, and you
will fall at the door.  I see you coming with these two eyes of mine."

A little shiver passed over him.  He knew that no one could penetrate
the future, but he shivered nevertheless, and he found himself saying
mechanically:

"It's likely that I'll return through the mountains, and if so I'll
look you up at that home in the cove on the brook that runs into Jones'
Creek."

"That bein' settled," said Jones, "what do you gen'rals reckon to do
jest now, after havin' finished your big sleep?"

"Your wagon is about to lose the first two passengers it has ever
carried," replied Harry.  "Orderlies have our horses somewhere.  We
belong on the staff of General Lee."

"An' you see him an' hear him talk every day?  Some people are pow'ful
lucky.  I guess you'll say a lot about it when you're old men."

"We're going to say a lot about it while we're young men.  Good-by, Mr.
Jones.  We've been in some good hotels, but we never slept better in
any of them than we have in this moving one of yours."

"Good-by, you're always welcome to it.  I think Marse Bob is on ahead."

The two left the wagon and took to a path beside the road, which was
muddy and rutted deeply by innumerable hoofs and wheels.  But grass and
foliage were now dry after the heavy rains that followed the Battle of
Gettysburg, and the sun was shining in late splendor.  The army, taking
the lack of pursuit and attack as proof that the enemy had suffered as
much as they, if not more, was in good spirits, and many of the men
sang their marching songs.  A band ahead of them suddenly began to play
mellow music, "Partant Pour La Syrie," and other old French songs.  The
airs became gay, festive, uplifting to the soul, and they tickled the
feet of the young men.

"The Cajun band!" exclaimed Harry.  "It never occurred to me that they
weren't all dead, and here they are, playing us into happiness!"

"And the Invincibles, or what's left of them, won't be far away," said
Dalton.

They walked on a little more briskly and beside them the vast length of
the unsuccessful army still trailed its slow way back into the South.
The sun was setting in uncommon magnificence, clothing everything in a
shower of gold, through which the lilting notes of the music came to
Harry and Dalton's ears.  Presently the two saw them, the short, dark
men from far Louisiana, not so many as they had been, but playing with
all the fervor of old, putting their Latin souls into their music.

"And there are the Invincibles just ahead of them!" exclaimed Dalton.
"The two colonels have left the wagon and are riding with their men.
See, how erect they sit."

"I do see them, and they're a good sight to see," said Harry.  "I hope
they'll live to finish that chess game."

"And fifty years afterward, too."

A shout of joy burst from the road, and a tall young man, slender, dark
and handsome, rushed out, and, seizing the hands of first one and then
the other, shook them eagerly, his dark eyes glittering with happy
surprise.

"Kenton!  Dalton!" he exclaimed.  "Both alive! Both well!"

