"It seems to me you are very inconsistent.  Here is a suit of clothes
that cost me thirty-four dollars, which I offer you, and you decline."

"You know why well enough, sir," said Joe, "You did not tell me you
intended to dress me in Oscar's castoff clothes, too small, and
stained at that.  I would rather wear the patched suit I have on till
it drops to pieces than wear this suit."

"You can go, Joseph," said Major Norton, in a tone of annoyance.  "I
did not expect to find you so unreasonable.  If you do not choose to
take what I offer you, you will have to go without."

"Very well, sir."

Joe left the room, his face flushed and his heart full of indignation
at the slight which had been attempted on him.

"It is Oscar's doings, I have no doubt," he said to himself.  "It is
like his meanness.  He meant to mortify me."

If there had been any doubt in Joe's mind, it would soon have been
cleared up.  Oscar had been lying in wait for his appearance, and
managed to meet him as he went out into the yard.

"Where are your new clothes?" he asked mockingly.

"I have none," answered Joe.

"Didn't my father give you a suit of mine?"

"He offered me the suit which you stained so badly with acid."

"Well, it's pretty good," said Oscar patronizingly.  "I only wore it
about a month."

"Why don't you wear it longer?"

"Because it isn't fit for me to wear," returned Oscar.

"Nor for me," said Joe.

"You don't mean to say you've declined?" exclaimed Oscar, in surprise.

"That is exactly what I have done."

"Why?"

"You ought to know why."

"It is better than the one you have on."

"It is too small for me.  Besides, it would attract general
attention."

"Seems to me somebody is getting proud," sneered Oscar.  "Perhaps you
think Annie Raymond wouldn't walk with you in that suit?"

"I think it would make ho difference to her," said Joe.  "She was
willing to walk with me in this ragged suit."

"I don't admire her taste."

"She didn't walk with my clothes; she walked with me."

"A hired boy!"

"Yes, I am a hired boy; but I don't get very good pay."

"You feel above your business, that's what's the matter with you."

"I hope some time to get higher than my business," said Joe.  "I mean
to rise in the world, if I can."

Oscar shrugged his shoulders.

"Perhaps you would like to be a wealthy merchant, or a member of
Congress," he said.

"I certainly should."

Oscar burst into a sneering laugh, and left Joe alone.

Joe's work was done, and, being left free to do as he liked, he
strolled over to the village store.




CHAPTER III

THE RETURNED CALIFORNIAN

The village store, in the evening, was a sort of village club-house,
where not only the loungers, but a better class, who desired to pass
the evening socially, were wont to congregate.  About the center of
the open space was a large box-stove, which in winter was kept full
of wood, ofttimes getting red-hot, and around this sat the villagers.
Some on wooden chairs, some on a wooden settee, with a broken back,
which was ranged on one side.

Joe frequently came here in the evening to pass a social hour and
kill time.  At the house of Major Norton he had no company.  Oscar
felt above him, and did not deign to hold any intercourse with his
father's drudge, while the housekeeper--Major Norton being a
widower--was busy about her own special work, and would have wondered
at Joe if he had sought her company.  I make this explanation because
I do not wish it to be understood that Joe was a common village
lounger, or loafer.

When Joe entered the store he found the usual company present, but
with one addition.

This was Seth Larkin, who had just returned from California, whither
he had gone eighteen months before, and was, of course, an object of
great attention, and plied with numerous questions by his old
acquaintances in regard to the land of promise in the far West, of
which all had heard so much.

It was in the fall of the year 1851, and so in the early days of
California.

Seth was speaking as Joe entered.

"Is there gold in California?" repeated Seth, apparently in answer to
a question.  "I should say there was.  Why, it's chock full of it.
People haven't begun to find out the richness of the country.  It's
the place for a poor man to go if he wants to become rich.  What's
the prospects here?  I ask any one of you.  A man may go working and
plodding from one year's end to another and not have ten dollars at
the end of it.  There's some here that know that I speak the truth."

"How much better can a man do in California?" asked Daniel Tompkins.

"Well, Dan," said Seth, "it depends on the kind of man he is.  If
he's a man like you, that spends his money for rum as fast as he gets
it, I should say it's just as well to stay here.  But if he's willing
to work hard, and to put by half he makes, he's sure to do well, and
he may get rich.  Why, I knew a man that landed in California the
same day that I did, went up to the mines, struck a vein, and--well,
how much do you think that man is worth to-day?"

"A thousand dollars?" suggested Dan Tompkins.

"Why, I'm worth more than that myself, and I wasn't lucky, and had
the rheumatism for four months.  You'll have to go higher."

"Two thousand?" guessed Sam Stone.

"We don't make much account of two thousand dollars in the mines,
Sam," said Seth.

"It's of some account here," said Sam.  "I've been workin' ten years,
and I ain't saved up a third of it."

"I don't doubt it," said Seth; "and it ain't your fault, either.
Money's scarce round here, and farmin' don't pay.  You know what I
was workin' at before I went out--in a shoe shop.  I just about made
a poor livin', and that was all.  I didn't have money enough to pay
my passage out, but I managed to borrow it.  Well, it's paid now, and
I've got something left."

"You haven't told us yet how much the man made that you was talkin'
about," said Tom Sutter.  "It couldn't be five thousand dollars, now,
could it?"

"I should say it could," said Seth.

"Was it any more?" inquired Dan Tompkins.

"Well, boys, I s'pose I may as well tell you, and you may b'lieve it
or not, just as you like.  That man is worth twenty thousand dollars
to-day."

There was a chorus of admiring ejaculations.

"Twenty thousand dollars!  Did you ever hear the like?"

"Mind, boys, I don't say it's common to make so much money in so
short a time.  There isn't one in ten does it, but some make even
more.  What I do say is, that a feller that's industrious, and
willin' to work, an' rough it, and save what he makes, is sure to do
well, if he keeps well.  That's all a man has a right to expect, or
to hope for."

"To be sure it is."

"What made you come home, Seth, if you were gettin' on so well?"
inquired one.

"That's a fair question," said Seth, "and I'm willin' to answer it.
It was because of the rheumatics.  I had 'em powerful bad at the
mines, and I've come home to kinder recuperate, if that's the right
word.  But I'm goin' back ag'in, you may bet high on that.  No more
work in the shoe shop for me at the old rates.  I don't mean that I'd
mind bein' a manufacturer on a big scale.  That's a little more
stiddy and easy than bein' at the mines, but that takes more capital
than I've got."

"How much does it cost to go out there?" asked Dan Tompkins.

"More money than you can scare together, Dan.  First-class, nigh on
to three hundred dollars, I believe."

This statement rather dampened the ardor of more than one of the
listeners.  Three hundred dollars, or even two, were beyond the
convenient reach of most of those present.  They would have to
mortgage their places to get it.

"You can go second-class for a good deal less, and you can go round
the Horn pretty cheap," continued Seth.

"How far away is Californy?" inquired Sam Stone.

"By way of the isthmus, it must be as much as six thousand miles, and
it's twice as fur, I reckon, round the Horn.  I don't exactly know
the distance."

"Then it's farther away than Europe," said Joe, who had been
listening with eager interest.

"Of course it is," said Seth.  "Why, that's Joe Mason, isn't it?  How
you've grown since I saw you."

"Do you think I have?" said Joe, pleased with the assurance.

"To be sure you have.  Why, you're a big boy of your age.  How old
are you?"

"Fifteen---nearly sixteen."

"That's about what I thought.  Where are you livin' now, Joe?"

"I'm working for Major Norton."

Seth burst into a laugh.

"I warrant you haven't made your fortune yet, Joe," he said.

"I haven't made the first start yet toward it."

"And you won't while you work for the major.  How much does he pay
you?"

"Board and clothes."

"And them are the clothes?" said Seth, surveying Joe's appearance
critically.

"Yes."

"I guess the major's tailor's bill won't ruin him, then.  Are they
the best you've got?"

"No; I've got a better suit for Sunday."

"Well, that's something.  You deserve to do better, Joe."

"I wish I could," said Joe wistfully.  "Is there any chance for a boy
in California, Mr. Larkin?"

"Call me Seth.  It's what I'm used to.  I don't often use the handle
to my name.  Well, there's a chance for a boy, if he's smart; but
he's got to work."

"I should be willing to do that."

"Then, if you ever get the chance, it won't do you any harm to try
your luck."

"How much did you say it costs to get there?"

"Well, maybe you could get there for a hundred dollars, if you wasn't
particular how you went."

A hundred dollars!  It might as well have been ten thousand, as far
as Joe was concerned.  He received no money wages, nor was he likely
to as long as he remained in the major's employ.  There was a shoe
shop in the village, where money wages were paid, but there was no
vacancy; and, even if there were, Joe was quite unacquainted with the
business, and it would be a good while before he could do any more
than pay his expenses.

Joe sighed as he thought how far away was the prospect of his being
able to go to California.  He could not help wishing that he were the
possessor of the magic carpet mentioned in the Arabian tale, upon
which the person seated had only to wish himself to be transported
anywhere, and he was carried there in the twinkling of an eye.

Joe walked home slowly, dreaming of the gold-fields on the other side
of the continent, and wishing he were there.




CHAPTER IV

JOE'S LEGACY

The next day was Saturday.  There was no school, but this did not
lighten Joe's labors, as he was kept at work on the farm all day.

He was in the barn when Deacon Goodwin, a neighbor, drove up.

Oscar was standing in front of the house, whittling out a cane from a
stick he had cut in the woods.

"Is Joe Mason at home?" the deacon inquired.

Oscar looked up in surprise.  Why should the deacon want Joe Mason?

"I suppose he is," drawled Oscar.

"Don't you know?"

"Probably he is in the barn," said Oscar indifferently.

"Will you call him?  I want to see him on business."

Oscar was still more surprised.  He was curious about the business,
but his pride revolted at the idea of being sent to summon Joe.

"You'll find him in the barn," said he.

"I don't want to leave my horse," said the deacon.  "I will take it
as a favor if you will call him."

Oscar hesitated.  Finally he decided to go and then return to hear
what business Joe and the deacon had together.  He rather hoped that
Joe had been trespassing on the deacon's grounds, and was to be
reprimanded.

He opened the barn door and called out:

"Deacon Goodwin wants you out at the gate."

Joe was as much surprised as Oscar.

He followed Oscar to the front of the house and bade the deacon good
morning.

"Oscar tells me you want to see me," he said.

"Yes, Joe.  Do you remember your Aunt Susan?"

"My mother's aunt?"

"Yes; she's dead and buried."

"She was pretty old," said Joe.

"The old lady had a small pension," continued the deacon, "that just
about kept her, but she managed to save a little out of it.  When the
funeral expenses were paid it was found that there were fifty-six
dollars and seventy-five cents over."

"What's going to be done with it? he inquired.

"She's left it to you," was the unexpected reply, "You was the
nearest relation she had, and it was her wish that whatever was left
should go to you."

"I'm very much obliged to her.  I didn't expect anything.  I had
almost forgotten I had a great-aunt."

"The money has been sent to me, Joe," continued the deacon.  "I'm
ready to pay it over to you when you want it, but I hope you won't
spend it foolish."

"I don't think I shall, Deacon Goodwin."

"It wouldn't take long to spend it, Joe," said the deacon.  "Do you
want me to keep it for you?"

"I don't know," said Joe; "I haven't had time to think.  I'll come
round to-night and see you."

"Very well, Joseph.  G'lang, Dobbin!" and the deacon started his old
horse, who had completed his quarter century, along the road.

Oscar had listened, not without interest, to the conversation.
Though he was the son of a rich man, he had not at command so large a
sum as his father's hired boy had fallen heir to.  On the whole, he
respected Joe rather more than when he was altogether penniless.

"You're in luck, Joe," said he graciously.

"Yes," said Joe.  "It's very unexpected."

"You might buy yourself a new suit of clothes."

"I don't intend to do that."

"Why not?  You were wishing for one yesterday."

"Because it is your father's place to keep me in clothes.  That's the
bargain I made with him."

"Perhaps you are right," said Oscar.

"I'll tell you what you can do," he said, after a pause.

"What?"

"You might buy a boat."
