"It does not always pay--even in war--to be brutal. I am glad to see he
has found out his mistake so soon," another officer said. "McClellan
waged war like a gentleman; and if blackguards are to be allowed to
carry fire and sword through the land they will soon find it is a game
that two can play at, and matters will become horribly embittered."

"We shall never do that," Vincent said. "Our generals are all gentlemen,
and Lee and Jackson and many others are true Christians as well as true
soldiers, and I am sure they will never countenance that on our side
whatever the Northerners may do. We are ready to fight the hordes of
Yankees and Germans and Irishmen as often as they advance against us,
but I am sure that none of us would fire a homestead or ill-treat
defenseless men and women. It is a scandal that such brutalities are
committed by the ruffians who call themselves Southerners. The
guerrillas in Missouri and Tennessee are equally bad whether on our side
or the other, and if I were the president I would send down a couple of
regiments, and hunt down the fellows who bring dishonor on our cause. If
the South cannot free herself without the aid of ruffians of this kind
she had better lay down her arms at once."

"Bravo, Wingfield! spoken like a knight of chivalry!" one of the others
laughed. "But many of these bands have done good nevertheless. They have
kept the enemy busy there, and occupied the attention of a very large
force who might otherwise have been in the woods yonder with Pope. I
agree with you, it would be better if the whole thing were fought out
with large armies, but there is a good deal to be said for these bands
you are so severe upon. They are composed of men who have been made
desperate by seeing their farms harried and their buildings burned by
the enemy. They have been denounced as traitors by their neighbors on
the other side, and if they retaliate I don't know that they are to be
altogether blamed. I know that if my place at home were burned down and
my people insulted and ill-treated I should be inclined to set off to
avenge it."

"So would I," Vincent agreed, "but it should be upon those who did the
wrong, not upon innocent people."

"That is all very well, but if the other side destroy your people's
farms, it is only by showing them that two can play at the game that you
can make them observe the laws of war. I grant it would be very much
better that no such thing should take place; but if the Northerners
begin this sort of work they may be sure that there will be retaliation.
Anyhow, I am glad that I am an officer in the 7th Virginians and not a
guerrilla leader in Missouri. Well, all this talking is dry work. Has no
one got a full canteen?"

"I have," Vincent said. "Dan managed to buy a gallon of rum at a
farmhouse yesterday. I think the farmer was afraid that the enemy might
be paying him a visit before many days, and thought it best to get rid
of his spirits. Anyhow, Dan got the keg at ordinary city prices, as well
as that couple of fine turkeys he is just bringing along for our supper.
So you had better each get your ration of bread and fall to."

There was a cheer as Dan placed the turkeys down in the center of the
group, and soon the whole party, using their bread as plates, fell to
upon them, and afterward joined in many a merry song, while Dan handed
round the jar of spirits.


CHAPTER IX. A PRISONER.

The party round the fire were just about to disperse when the captain of
Vincent's troop approached. He took the horn of spirits and water that
Vincent held up to him and tossed it off.

"That is a stirrup-cup, Wingfield."

"What! are we for duty, captain?" Vincent asked as he rose to his feet.

"Yes; our troop and Harper's are to muster. Get the men together
quietly. I think it is a serious business; each of the regiments furnish
other troops, and I believe Stuart himself takes the command."

"That sounds like work, indeed," Vincent said. "I will get the troop
together, sir."

"There are to be no trumpet calls, Wingfield; we are to get off as
quietly as possible."

Most of the men were already fast asleep, but as soon as they learned
that there was a prospect of active work all were full of life and
animation. The girths of the saddles were tightened, swords buckled on,
and revolvers carefully examined before being placed in the holsters.
Many of the men carried repeating rifles, and the magazines were filled
before these were slung across the riders' shoulders.

In a few minutes the three troops were mounted and in readiness for a
start, and almost directly afterward Colonel Jones himself rode up and
took the command. A thrill of satisfaction ran through the men as he did
so, for it was certain that he would not himself be going in command of
the detachment unless the occasion was an important one. For a few
minutes no move was made.

"I suppose the others are going to join us here," Vincent said to the
officer next him.

"I suppose so," he replied. "We lie in the middle of the cavalry brigade
with two regiments each side of us, so it is likely enough this is the
gathering place. Yes, I can hear the tramping of horses."

"And I felt a spot of rain," Vincent said. "It has been lightning for
some time. I fear we are in for a wet ride."

The contingent from the other regiments soon arrived, and just as the
last came up General Stuart himself appeared and took his place at the
head of the party, now some 500 strong. Short as the time had been since
Vincent felt the first drop, the rain was now coming down in torrents.
One by one the bright flames of the fires died down, and the darkness
became so intense that Vincent could scarcely see the officer on his
right hand.

"I hope the man who rode up with the general, and is no doubt to be our
guide, knows the country well. It is no joke finding our way through a
forest on such a night as this."

"I believe Stuart's got eyes like a cat," the officer said. "Sometimes
on a dark night he has come galloping up to a post where I was in
command, when one could scarcely see one's hand before one. It never
seems to make any difference to him; day or night he rides about at a
gallop."

"He trusts his horse," Vincent said. "That's the only way in the dark.
They can see a lot better than we can, and if men would but let them go
their own way instead of trying to guide them they would seldom run
against anything. The only thing is to lie well down on the horse's
neck, otherwise one might get swept out of the saddle by a bough. It's a
question of nerve, I think not many of us would do as Stuart does, and
trust himself entirely to his horse's instinct."

The word was now passed down the line that perfect silence was to be
observed, and that they were to move forward in column, the ranks
closing up as much as possible so as not to lose touch of each other.
With heads bent down, and blankets wrapped round them as cloaks, the
cavalry rode off through the pouring rain. The thunder was clashing
overhead, and the flashes of the lightning enabled them to keep their
places in close column. They went at a rapid trot, and even those who
were ready to charge a body of the enemy, however numerous, without a
moment's hesitation, experienced a feeling of nervousness as they rode
on in the darkness through the thick forest on their unknown errand.
That they were going northward they knew, and knew also, after a short
time, that they must be entering the lines of the enemy. They saw no
signs of watch-fires, for these would long since have been quenched by
the downpour. After half an hour's brisk riding all knew by the sharp
sound of the beat of the horses' hoofs that they had left the soft track
through the forest and were now upon a regular road.

"Thank goodness for that!" Vincent said in a low tone to his next
neighbor. "I don't mind a brush with the enemy, but I own I don't like
the idea that at any moment my brains may be knocked out by the branch
of a tree."

"I quite agree with you," the other replied; "and I fancy every man felt
the same."

There was no doubt as to this. Hitherto no sound had been heard save the
jingling of accouterments and the dull heavy sound of the horses' tread;
but now there could be heard mingled with these the buzz of voices, and
occasionally a low laugh. They were so accustomed to wet that the
soaking scarce inconvenienced them. They were out of the forest now, and
felt sure of their guide; and as to the enemy, they only longed to
discover them.

For another hour the rapid advance continued, and all felt sure that
they must now have penetrated through the enemy's lines and be well in
his rear. At last they heard a challenge of sentry. Then Stuart's voice
shouted, "Charge!" and at full gallop they rode into the village at
Catlet's Station on the Orange and Alexandria railroad, where General
Pope had his headquarters. Another minute and they were in the midst of
the enemy's camp, where the wildest confusion reigned. The Federal
officers rushed from their tents and made off in the darkness; but the
soldiers, who were lying on the line of railroad, leaped to their feet
and opened a heavy fire upon their invisible foes. Against this the
cavalry, broken up in the camp, with its tents, its animals, and its
piles of baggage, could do little, for it was impossible to form them up
in the broken and unknown ground.

The quarters of Pope were soon discovered; he himself had escaped,
leaving his coat and hat behind. Many of his officers were captured, and
in his quarters were found a box of official papers which were
invaluable, as among them were copies of his letters asking for
reinforcements, lists giving the strength and position of his troops,
and other particulars of the greatest value to the Confederates. No time
was lost, as the firing would set the whole Federal army on the alert,
and they might find their retreat cut off. Therefore placing their
prisoners in the center, and taking the box of papers with them, the
cavalry were called off from the camp, and without delay started on
their return ride.

They did not take the road by which they had come, but made a long
detour, and just as daylight was breaking re-entered the Confederate
lines without having encountered a foe from the time of their leaving
Catlet's Station. Short as their stay in the camp had been, few of the
men had returned empty handed. The Northern army was supplied with an
abundance of excellent food of all descriptions, forming the strongest
possible contrast to the insufficient rations upon which the Confederate
troops existed, and the troopers had helped themselves to whatever they
could lay hands upon in the darkness and confusion.

Some rode in with a ham slung on each side of their saddle, others had
secured a bottle or two of wine or spirits. Some had been fortunate
enough to lay hands on some tins of coffee or a canister of tea,
luxuries which for months had been unknown to them save when they were
captured from the enemy. The only article captured of no possible
utility was General Pope's coat, which was sent to Richmond, where it
was hung up for public inspection; a wag sticking up a paper beside it,
"This is the coat in which General Pope was going to ride in triumph
into Richmond. The coat is here, but the general has not yet arrived."

The Confederates had lost but two or three men from the fire of the
Federal infantry, and they were in high spirits at the success of their
raid. No sooner had General Lee informed himself of the contents of the
papers and the position of the enemy's forces than he determined to
strike a heavy blow at him; and General Jackson, who had been sharply
engaged with the enemy near Warrenton, was ordered to make a long
detour, to cross the Blue Ridge mountains through Thoroughfare Gap, to
fall upon Pope's rear and cut his communications with Washington, and if
possible to destroy the vast depot of stores collected at Manassas.

The cavalry, under Stuart, were to accompany him. The march would be a
tremendous one, the danger of thus venturing into the heart of the
enemy's country immense, but the results of such an expedition would, if
successful, be great; for Lee himself was to advance with his army on
Pope's flank, and there was therefore a possibility of the utter defeat
of that general before he could be joined by the army marching to
reinforce him from Fredericksburg.

It was on Monday the 25th of August that Jackson started on his march,
ascending the banks of the Rappahannock, and crossed the river at a
ford, dragging his artillery with difficulty up the narrow and rocky
road beyond. There was not a moment to be lost, for if the news reached
the enemy the gorge known as Thoroughfare Gap would be occupied, and the
whole object of the movement be defeated. Onward the force pushed,
pressing on through fields and lanes without a single halt, until at
night, hungry and weary but full of spirit, they marched into the little
town of Salem, twenty miles from their starting-place. They had neither
wagons nor provisions with them, and had nothing to eat but some ears of
corn and green apples plucked on the road.

It was midnight when they reached Salem, and the inhabitants turned out
in blank amazement at the sight of Confederate troops in that region,
and welcomed the weary soldiers with the warmest manifestations. At
daylight they were again upon the march, with Stuart's cavalry, as
before, out upon each flank. Thoroughfare Gap was reached, and found
undefended, and after thirty miles' marching the exhausted troops
reached the neighborhood of Manassas. The men were faint from want of
food, and many of them limped along barefooted; but they were full of
enthusiasm.

Just at sunset, Stuart, riding on ahead, captured Bristoe, a station on
the Orange and Alexandria Railroad four miles from Manassas. As they
reached it a train came along at full speed. It was fired at, but did
not stop, and got safely through to Manassas. Two trains that followed
were captured; but by this time the alarm had spread, and no more trains
arrived. Jackson had gained his point. He had placed himself on the line
of communication of the enemy, but his position was a dangerous one
indeed. Lee, who was following him, was still far away. An army was
marching from Fredericksburg against him, another would be despatched
from Washington as soon as the news of his presence was known, and Pope
might turn and crush him before Lee could arrive to his assistance.

Worn out as the troops were, it was necessary at once to gain possession
of Manassas, and the 21st North Carolina and 21st Georgia volunteered
for the service, and, joined by Stuart with a portion of his cavalry,
marched against it. After a brief contest the place was taken, the enemy
stationed there being all taken prisoners. The amount of arms and stores
captured was prodigious: Eight pieces of artillery, 250 horses, 3
locomotives, and tens of thousands of barrels of beef, pork, and flour,
with an enormous quantity of public stores and the contents of
innumerable sutlers' shops.

The sight of this vast abundance to starving men was tantalizing in the
extreme. It was impossible to carry any of it away and all that could be
done was to have at least one good meal. The troops therefore were
marched in and each helped himself to as much as he could consume, and
the ragged and barefooted men feasted upon tinned salmon and lobsters,
champagne and dainties of every description forwarded for the use of
officers. Then they set to work to pile the enormous mass of stores
together and to set it on fire. While they were engaged at this a
brigade of New Jersey troops which had come out from Washington to save
Manassas was attacked and utterly routed. Ewell's division had remained
at Bristoe, while those of Hill and Jackson moved to Manassas, and in
the course of the afternoon Ewell saw the whole of Pope's army marching
against him.

He held them in check for some hours, and thus gave the troops at
Manassas time to destroy completely the vast accumulation of stores, and
when Stuart's cavalry, covering the retreat, fell back at nightfall
through Manassas, nothing but blackened cinders remained where the
Federal depots had been situated. The blow to the Northerners was as
heavy as it was unexpected. Pope had no longer either provisions for his
men or forage for his cattle, and there was nothing left for him but to
force his way past Jackson and retire upon Washington.

Jackson had now the option of falling back and allowing the enemy to
pass, or of withstanding the whole Federal army with his own little
force until Lee came up to the rescue. He chose the latter course, and
took up a strong position. The sound of firing at Thoroughfare Gap was
audible, and he knew that Longstreet's division of Lee's army was hotly
engaged with a force which, now that it was too late, had been sent to
hold the gorge. It was nearly sunset before Pope brought up his men to
the attack. Jackson did not stand on the defensive, but rushed down and
attacked the enemy--whose object had been to pass the position and press
on--with such vigor that at nine o'clock they fell back.

An hour later a horseman rode up with the news that Longstreet had
passed the Gap and was pressing on at full speed, and in the morning his
forces were seen approaching, the line they were taking bringing them up
at an angle to Jackson's position. Thus their formation as they arrived
was that of an open V, and it was through the angle of this V that Pope
had to force his way. Before Longstreet could arrive, however, the enemy
hurled themselves upon Jackson, and for hours the Confederates held
their own against the vast Federal army, Longstreet's force being too
far away to lend them a hand. Ammunition failed, and the soldiers fought
with piles of stones, but night fell without any impression being made
upon these veterans. General Lee now came up with General Hood's
division, and hurled this against the Federals and drove them back. In
the evening Longstreet's force took up the position General Lee had
assigned to it, and in the morning all the Confederate army had arrived,
and the battle recommenced.

The struggle was long and terrible; but by nightfall every attack had
been repulsed, and the Confederates, advancing on all sides, drove the
Northerners, a broken and confused crowd, before them, the darkness
alone saving them from utter destruction. Had there been but one hour
more of daylight the defeat would have been as complete as was that in
the battle of Bull Run, which had been fought on precisely the same
ground. However, under cover of the darkness the Federals retreated to
Centreville, whence they were driven on the following day.


In the tremendous fighting in which Jackson's command had for three long
days been engaged, the cavalry bore a comparatively small part. The
Federal artillery was too powerful to permit the employment of large
bodies of cavalry and although from time to time charges were made when
an opportunity seemed to offer itself, the battle was fought out by the
infantry and artillery. When the end came Jackson's command was for a
time hors de combat. During the long two days' march they had at least
gathered corn and apples to sustain life; but during these three days'
fighting they had had no food whatever, and many were so weak that they
could no longer march.

They had done all that was possible for men to do; had for two days
withstood the attack of an enemy of five times their numbers, and had on
the final day borne their full share in the great struggle, but now the
greater part could do no more, thousands of men were unable to drag
themselves a step further, and Lee's army was reduced in strength for
the time by nearly 20,000 men. All these afterward rejoined it; some as
soon as they recovered limped away to take their places in the ranks
again, others made their way to the depot at Warrenton, where Lee had
ordered that all unable to accompany his force should rendezvous until
he returned and they were able to rejoin their regiments.

Jackson marched away and laid siege to Harper's Ferry, an important
depot garrisoned by 11,000 men, who were forced to surrender just as
McClellan with a fresh army, 100,000 strong, which was pressing forward
to its succor, arrived within a day's march. As soon as Jackson had
taken the place he hurried away with his troops to join Lee, who was
facing the enemy at the Antietam river. Here upon the following day
another terrible battle was fought; the Confederates, though but 39,000
strong, repulsing every attack by the Federals, and driving them with
terrible slaughter back across the river.

Their own loss, however, had been very heavy, and Lee, knowing that he
could expect no assistance, while the enemy were constantly receiving
reinforcements, waited for a day to collect his wounded, bury his dead,
and send his stores and artillery to the rear, and then retired
unpursued across the Rappahannock. Thus the hard-fought campaign came to
an end.

Vincent Wingfield was not with the army that retired across the
Rappahannock. A portion of the cavalry had followed the broken Federals
to the very edge of the stream, and just as they reined in their horses
a round shot from one of the Federal batteries carried away his cap, and
he fell as if dead from his horse. During the night some of the
Northerners crossed the stream to collect and bring back their own
wounded who had fallen near it, and coming across Vincent, and finding
that he still breathed, and was apparently without a wound, they carried
him back with them across the river as a prisoner.

Vincent had indeed escaped without a wound, having been only stunned by
the passage of the shot that had carried away his cap, and missed him
but by the fraction of an inch. He had begun to recover consciousness
just as his captors came up, and the action of carrying him completely
restored him. That he had fallen into the hands of the Northerners he
was well aware; but he was unable to imagine how this had happened. He
remembered that the Confederates had been, up to the moment when he
fell, completely successful, and he could only imagine that in a
subsequent attack the Federals had turned the tables upon them.

How he himself had fallen, or what had happened to him, he had no idea.
Beyond a strange feeling of numbness in the head he was conscious of no
injury, and he could only imagine that his horse had been shot under
him, and that he must have fallen upon his head. The thought that his
favorite horse was killed afflicted him almost as much as his own
capture. As soon as his captors perceived that their prisoner's
consciousness had returned they at once reported that an officer of
Stuart's cavalry had been taken, and at daybreak next morning General
McClellan on rising was acquainted with the fact, and Vincent was
conducted to his tent.

"You are unwounded, sir?" the general said in some surprise.

"I am, general," Vincent replied. "I do not know how it happened, but I
believe that my horse must have been shot under me, and that I must have
been thrown and stunned; however, I remember nothing from the moment
when I heard the word halt, just as we reached the side of the stream,
to that when I found myself being carried here."

"You belong to the cavalry?"

"Yes, sir."

"Was Lee's force all engaged yesterday?"

"I do not know," Vincent said. "I only came up with Jackson's division
from Harper's Ferry the evening before."

"I need not have questioned you," McClellan said. "I know that Lee's
whole army, 100,000 strong, opposed me yesterday."

Vincent was silent. He was glad to see that the Federal general, as
usual, enormously overrated the strength of the force opposed to him.

"I hear that the whole of the garrison of Harper's Ferry were released
on parole not to serve again during the war. If you are ready to give me
your promise to the same effect I will allow you to return to your
friends; if not, you must remain a prisoner until you are regularly
exchanged."
