
The followers of Vrishnoo wear a very different ornament from that just
described. It consists of a perpendicular line drawn on the forehead,
generally of a red or yellow color, and a white line on each side of it,
which unite at the bottom with the middle line, and form a trident.

Another ornament consists of a small circle, which is called pottu. This
is stamped in the middle of the forehead. Sometimes it is red, sometimes
yellow or black. Large numbers of women, in this part of the country,
wash their faces with a yellow water, made so by dissolving in it a
paste made of a yellow root and common shell-lime. The Brahmins
frequently instead of rubbing ashes, draw a horizontal line over the
middle of their foreheads, to show that they have bathed and are pure.
Sometimes the people ornament themselves with a paste of sandal-wood.
They rub themselves from head to foot with it. This has a very
odoriferous smell.

When the people are loaded with jewels, and covered with the marks which
I have just described they think themselves to be highly ornamented But
after all, "they are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all
uncleanness." The "Pearl of great price," to which I before alluded,
the only Pearl which is of any value in the sight of Him who looketh at
the heart, and not at the outward appearance, they possess not. Millions
in this Eastern world have never even heard of it. O how incessantly
ought you to pray that they may come into possession of it. How gladly
should you give your money to send it to them. I wish, in this place, to
ask you one question. Who of you expect, by and by, to become
missionaries to this land, to tell this people of the Pearl of great
price?




CHAPTER III.

DRESS, HOUSES, EATING, AND SALUTATION OF THE HINDOOS.


My dear Children--The dress of the Hindoos is very simple. A single
piece of cloth uncut, about three yards in length and one in width,
wrapped round the loins, with a shawl thrown over the shoulders,
constitutes the usual apparel of the people of respectability. These
garments are often fringed with red silk or gold. The native ladies
frequently almost encase themselves in cloth or silk. Under such
circumstances, their cloths are perhaps twenty yards in length. Most of
the native gentlemen now wear turbans, an ornament which they have
borrowed from the Mohammedans This consists of a long piece of very fine
stuff, sometimes twenty yards in length and one in breadth. With this
they encircle the head in many folds.

Those who are employed by European or Mohammedan princes, wear a long
robe of muslin, or very fine cloth. This also, is in imitation of the
Mohammedans, and was formerly unknown in the country.

The houses of the Hindoos are generally very plainly built. In the
country, they are commonly made of earth, and thatched with straw. In
the cities, they are covered with tiles. The kitchen is situated in the
most retired part of the house. In the houses of the Brahmins, the
kitchen-door is always barred, to prevent strangers from looking upon
their earthen vessels; for if they should happen to see them, their look
would pollute them to such a degree that they must be broken to pieces.
The hearth is generally placed on the south-west side, which is said to
be the side of the _god of fire_, because they say that this god
actually dwells there.

The domestic customs of this people are very different from ours. The
men and women do not eat together. The husband first eats, then the
wife. The wife waits upon the husband After she has cooked the rice, she
brings a brass plate, if they are possessors of one; or if not, a piece
of a plantain-leaf, and puts it down on the mat before him. She then
bails out the rice, places it upon the leaf, and afterwards pours the
currie over it. This being done, the husband proceeds to mix up the
currie and the rice with his hands, and puts it into his mouth. He never
uses a knife and fork, as is customary with us. The currie of which I
have spoken is a sauce of a yellow color, owing to the _munchel_, a
yellow root which they put in it. This and onions, kottamaly-seeds
mustard, serakum, pepper, etc., constitute the ingredients of the
currie. Some add to these ghea, or melted butter, and cocoa-nut milk. By
the cocoa-nut milk, I do not mean the water of the cocoa-nut.
This--except in the very young cocoa-nut, when it is a most delicious
beverage--is never used. The milk is squeezed from the _meat_ of the
cocoa-nut, after it has been reduced to a pulp by means of an indented
circular iron which they use for this purpose.

After the husband has eaten, the wife brings water for him to wash his
hands. This being done, she supplies him with vettalay, paakku,
shell-lime, and tobacco, which he puts into his mouth as his dessert.
The vettalay is a very spicy leaf. Why they use paakku, I do not know.
It is a nut, which they cut into small pieces, but it has not much
taste. Sometimes the wife brings her husband a segar. This people, I am
sorry to say, are great smokers and chewers, practices of which I hope
that you, my dear children, will never be guilty. In Ceylon, it is
customary for females to smoke. Frequently, after the husband has smoked
for a while, he hands the segar to his wife. She then puts it into her
mouth, and smokes.

Several years ago, one of the schoolmasters in that island became a
Christian. After he had partaken of the Lord's supper, his wife
considered him so defiled, that she would not put his segar into her
mouth for a month afterwards. She, however, has since become a
Christian.

I spoke just now of the plantain-leaf. This leaf is sometimes six feet
long, and in some places a foot and a half wide. It is an unbroken leaf,
with a large stem running through the middle of it. It is one of the
handsomest of leaves. Pieces enough can be torn from a single leaf, to
take the place of a dozen plates. When quite young, it is an excellent
application to surfaces which have been blistered.

When this people eat, they do not use tables and chairs. They sit down
on mats, and double their legs under them, after the manner of our
friends the tailors in America, when they sew. This is the way in which
the natives as a general thing, sit in our churches. It is not common to
have benches or pews for them. Carpenters and other tradesmen also sit
down either on a board, or on the ground, or on their legs, when they
work. It would divert you much to see their manoeuvring. If a carpenter,
for instance, wants to make a little peg, he will take a small piece of
board, and place it in an erect position between his feet, the soles of
which are turned inward so as to press upon the board. He then takes
his chisel in one hand, and his mallet in the other, and cuts off a
small piece. Afterwards he holds the piece in one hand, and while he
shapes it with his chisel with the other, he steadies it by pressing it
against his great toe.

[Illustration]

The blacksmiths, with the exception of those who use the sledge-hammer,
sit as do the carpenters while they hammer the iron. I wish you could
see them at work with their simple apparatus. They have small anvils,
which they place in a hole made in a log of wood which is buried in the
ground. They do not use such bellows as you see in America.

Theirs consist of two leather bags, about a foot wide and a foot and a
half long, each having a nozzle at one end. The other end is left open
to admit the air. When they wish to blow the fire, they extend these
bags to let in the air. They then close them by means of the thumb on
one side, and the fingers on the other, and press them down towards the
nozzle of the bellows, which forces the air through them into the fire.
I should have said before, that the nozzle of the bellows passes through
a small semicircular mound of dried mud.

I mentioned that the natives do not use tables and chairs in their
houses. Neither do they, as a general thing, use bedsteads. They have no
beds. They sleep on mats, which are spread down on the floor. Sometimes
they use a cotton bolster for their heads. More generally their pillows
are hard boards, which they put under the mat. In addition to cooking,
the females have to prepare the rice for this purpose, by taking it out
of the husk. This they do by beating it in a mortar about two feet high.
The pestle with which they pound it, is about five feet long, made of
wood, with an iron rim around the lower part of it. Three women can
work at these mortars at the same time. Of course they have to be very
skilful in the use of the pestle, so as not to interfere with each
others' operations. Sometimes, while thus engaged, the children, who are
generally at play near their mothers, put their hands on the edge of the
mortars. In such cases, when the pestle happens to strike the edge,
their fingers are taken off in a moment.

The Hindoos have many modes of salutation. In some places they raise
their right hand to the heart. In others, they simply stretch it out
towards the person who is passing, if they know him, for they never
salute persons with whom they are not acquainted.

In many places there is no show of salutation. When they meet their
acquaintances they content themselves by saying a friendly word or two
in passing, and then pursue their way. They have borrowed the word
_salam_ from the Mohammedans. They salute both Mohammedans and Europeans
with this word, at the same time raising their hand to the forehead.
When they address persons of high rank, they give them their _salam_
thrice, touching the ground as often with both hands, and then lifting
them up to their foreheads.

The other castes salute the Brahmins by joining the hands and elevating
them to the forehead, or sometimes over the head. It is accompanied with
_andamayya_, which means, Hail, respected lord. The Brahmins stretch out
their hands and say, _aaseervaathum_--benediction.

Another very respectful kind of salutation consists in lowering both
hands to the feet of the person to be honored, or even in falling-down
and embracing them.

Of all the forms of salutation, the most respectful is the
_shaashtaangkum_, or prostration, in which the feet, the knees, the
stomach, the head, and the arms, all touch the ground. In doing this,
they throw themselves at their whole length on the ground, and stretch
out both arms above their heads. This is practised before priests, and
in the presence of an assembly, when they appear before it to beg pardon
for a crime.

Relations, who have long been separated, testify their joy when they
meet by chucking each other under the chin, and shedding tears of joy.
I am not aware that grown persons ever kiss each other. Sometimes
mothers, or other individuals, will put their noses to the cheeks of
little children, and draw the air through them, just as we do when we
smell any thing which is agreeable. At other times they will apply the
thumb and first finger to the cheek of the child, and then apply them to
their own noses, and, as it were, smell them.

The women, as a mark of respect, turn their backs, or at least their
faces aside, when they are in the presence of those whom they highly
esteem. They are never permitted to sit in the presence of men. A
married woman cannot do this, even in the presence of her husband.

If a person meets another of high rank, he must leave the path, if on
foot, or alight, if on horseback, and remain standing until he has
passed. He must at the same time take off his slippers. He also must
take off his slippers when he enters a house. Should he fail to do this,
it would be considered a great impropriety.

In addressing a person of note, they mast keep at a certain distance
from him, and cover their mouths with their hands while they are
speaking, lest their breath, or a particle of moisture, should escape
to trouble him.

When the Hindoos visit a person of distinction for the first time,
civility requires them to take some present as a mark of respect, or to
show that they come with a friendly intention; especially if they wish
to ask some favor in return. When they have not the means of making
large presents, they carry with them sugar, plantains, milk, and other
things of this kind.

In case of mourning, visits must always be made, though at a distance of
a hundred miles. Letters of condolence would by no means be received as
a substitute.




CHAPTER IV.

MARRIAGE AMONG THE HINDOOS.


My dear Children--Marriage, to the Hindoos is the greatest event of
their lives. In the celebration of it, many ceremonies are performed Of
these I will mention some of the most important. If the father of the
young girl is a Brahmin, and if he is rich and liberal, he will
frequently bear all the expenses of the marriage of his daughter. To
give a daughter in marriage and to sell her, are about the same thing.
Almost every parent makes his daughter an article of traffic, refusing
to give her up until the sum of money for which he consented to let her
go, is paid. Men of distinction generally lay out this money for jewels,
which they present to their daughters on their wedding-day. You will
infer from what I have just said, that the parties to be married have
nothing to do in the choice of each other.

There are properly but four months in the year in which marriages can
take place, namely March, April, May, and June. This probably arises
from the circumstance that these are the hottest seasons of the
year--the seasons when the people have more leisure to attend to them.
From the harvest, also, which has just been gathered in, they are
provided with means to perform the various ceremonies.

The marriage ceremony lasts five days. The bride and bridegroom are
first placed under a puntel, a kind of bower, covered with leaves, in
front of the house. This is superbly adorned. The married women then
come forward, and perform the ceremony called _arati_, which is as
follows. Upon a plate of copper, they place a lamp made of a paste from
rice flour. It is supplied with oil, and lighted. They then take hold of
the plate with both hands, and raise it as high as the heads of the
couple to be married, and describe a number of circles with the plate
and lamp. This is to prevent the evil of any jealous looks, which
certain persons might make. The Hindoos believe that great evils arise
from wicked looks. They consider that even the gods themselves are not
out of the reach of malicious eyes; and therefore after they have been
carried through the streets, the ceremony of arati is always performed,
to efface the evil which they may have suffered from these looks.

It ought to have been mentioned, that before any thing is done, they
place an image of Pullian under the puntel. This god is much honored
because he is much feared. And although the great ugliness of his
appearance has hitherto kept him without a wife, they never fail to pay
him the greatest attention, lest he should in some way or other injure
them.

After arati and many other ceremonies are performed, the kankanan, which
is merely a bit of saffron, is tied to the right wrist of the young
man, and to the left wrist of the girl. This is done with great
solemnity. Another remarkable ceremony succeeds this. The young man
being seated with his face towards the east, his future father-in-law
supposes that he beholds in him the great Vrishnoo. With this
impression, he offers him a sacrifice, and then, making him put both of
his feet in a new dish filled with cow-dung, he first washes them with
water, then with milk, and again with water, accompanying the whole with
suitable muntrums or prayers.

After many other ceremonies, he takes the hand of his daughter and puts
it into that of his son-in-law. He then pours water over them in honor
of Vrishnoo. This is the most solemn of all the ceremonies, being the
token of his resigning his daughter to the authority of the young man.
She must be accompanied with three gifts, namely, one or more cows, some
property in land, and a _salagrama_, which consists of some little
amulet stones in high esteem among the Brahmins. This ceremony being
finished, the tahly is brought to be fastened to the neck of the bride.
This, as I before said, is presented on a salver, decked and garnished
with sweet-smelling flowers. Incense is offered to it, and it is
presented to the assistants each of whom touches it and invokes
blessings upon it. The bride then turning towards the East, the
bridegroom takes the tahly, repeats a muntrum or prayer aloud, and ties
it around her neck.

Fire is then brought in, upon which the bridegroom offers up the
sacrifice of _homam_, which consists of throwing boiled rice with melted
butter upon the fire. He then takes his bride by the hand, and they walk
three times around it, while the incense is blazing.

There is another ceremony, which, perhaps, ought to be mentioned, as it
is considered by some to be one of much importance. Two baskets of
bamboo are placed close together, one for the bride, the other for the
bridegroom. They step into them, and two other baskets being brought,
filled with ground rice, the husband takes up one with both hands and
pours the contents over the head of the bride. She does the same to him.
In the marriage of great princes pearls are sometimes used instead of
rice.

On the evening of the third day, when the constellations appear, the
astrologer points out to the married pair a very small star, close to
the middle or in the tail of _Ursa Major_, which he directs them to
worship, and which he says is the wife of Vasestha.

While the assembled guests, are dining, the bridegroom and the bride
also partake, and eat together from the same plate. This is a token of
the closest union. This is the only instance in which they ever eat
together.

After all the ceremonies are finished, a procession is made through the
streets of the village It commonly takes place in the night, by
torchlight, accompanied with fire-works. The newly married pair are
seated in one palanquin with their faces towards each other, both richly
dressed. The bride, in particular, is generally covered with jewels and
precious stones.

The procession moves slowly; and their friends and relations come out of
their houses, as they pass; the women hailing the married couple with
the ceremony of _arati_, and the men with presents of silver, fruits,
sugar, and betel. I once witnessed one of these marriage processions in
the streets of Madras at night, but can give you but little idea of its
magnificence. The lamps used on the occasion could not be numbered. The
shrubbery, which was drawn on carts or other vehicles, appeared
exceedingly beautiful, in consequence of the light reflected from the
lamps. Intermingled with this shrubbery, were to be seen little girls
elegantly dressed, and adorned with flowers on their heads. Many
elephants, with their trappings of gold and silver and red, formed a
part of the procession. Fire-works were also added to make the scene
more brilliant.




CHAPTER V.

DEATH AND FUNERALS OF THE HINDOOS.


My dear Children--The death of a Hindoo is followed by many ridiculous
ceremonies. I will give you a description of a few, connected with the
death of one who has moved in one of the higher ranks--of a Brahmin.

[Illustration]

When it is evident that a Brahmin has but a little time to live, a space
is prepared with earth, well spread with cow-dung, over which a cloth,
that has never been worn, is spread. The dying man is placed upon this
at full length. Another cloth is wrapped around his loins. This being
done, the ceremony of expiating his sins is performed as follows. The
chief of the funeral brings on one plate some small pieces of silver or
copper coin, and on another the punchakaryam, etc. A little of this
punchakaryam is then put into his mouth, and, by virtue of this nauseous
draught, the body is perfectly purified. Besides this, there is a
general cleansing, which is accomplished by making the dying man recite
within himself, if he cannot speak, the proper muntrums, by which he is
delivered from all his sins. After this, a cow is introduced with her
calf. Her horns are decorated with rings of gold or brass, and her neck
with garlands of flowers. A pure cloth is laid over her body. Thus
decked, she is led up to the sick man, who takes hold of her tail.
Prayers are now offered up that the cow may conduct him, by a blessed
path, to the next world. He then makes a gift of a cow to a Brahmin.
This gift is considered indispensable to enable the soul to go over the
river of fire, which it is said all must pass after death. Those who
have made this gift, are met by one of these favored creatures the
moment they arrive at the bank of the stream, and by her help, they are
enabled to pass without injury from the flames.

As soon as the breath has left his body, all who are present must weep
for a reasonable time, and join in lamentations together.

After various ceremonies, the body is washed, and a barber is called to
shave his head. He is then clad with his finest clothes and adorned with
jewels. He is rubbed with sandal-wood where the body is uncovered, and
the accustomed mark is put upon his forehead. Thus dressed he is placed
on a kind of state bed, where he remains until he is carried to the
pile.

After every preparation is made to bear away the corpse, the person who
is to conduct the funeral, with the assistance of some relative or
friend, strips it of its clothing and jewels, and covers it with a
handkerchief provided for the occasion. The corpse is then placed on a
litter. Those who die in a state of marriage, have their faces left
uncovered. The litter, adorned with flowers and foliage, and sometimes
decked with valuable stuffs, is borne by four Brahmins. The procession
is arranged as follows.

The chief of the funeral marches foremost, carrying fire in a vessel.
The body follows, attended by the relations and friends, without their
turbans, and with nothing on their heads but a bit of cloth, in token of
mourning. The women never attend the funeral, but remain in the house,
where they set up a hideous cry when the corpse is taken out. While
advancing on the road, the custom is to stop three times on the way,
and, at each pause, to put into the mouth of the dead a morsel of
unboiled rice, moistened. The object of stopping is considered to be
very important. It is not without reason; for they say that persons
supposed to be dead have been alive, or even when lifeless have been
