
The plumbers had almost finished their work, when a sudden breeze blew
on the raised side of the ship, forced her still further down, and the
water began to pour into her lower port-holes. Instantly the danger
became apparent; the men were ordered to right the ship: they ran to
move the guns for this purpose, but it was _too late_.

In a minute or two more, she fell quite over on her side, with her masts
nearly flat on the water, and the Royal George sank to the bottom,
before one signal of distress could be given! By this dreadful accident,
about nine hundred persons lost their lives; about two hundred and
thirty were saved, some by running up the rigging, and being with others
picked up by the boats which put off immediately from other vessels to
their assistance. There were many visitors, women and little children on
board at the time of the accident.




BLOWING UP OF THE ROYAL GEORGE.


At the time when the dreadful event which I have just related to you
occurred, the Lark sloop, which brought the cargo of rum, was lying
alongside of the Royal George; in going down, the main-yard of the Royal
George caught the boom of the Lark, and they sank together, but this
made the position of the Royal George much more upright in the water
than it would otherwise have been. There she lay at the bottom of the
sea, just as you have seen small vessels when left by the tide on a
bank. Cowper, when he heard the sad tale, thus wrote

  "Her timbers yet are sound,
    And she may float again,
  Full charged with England's thunder,
    And plough the distant main.

  "But Kempenfelt is gone,
    His victories are o'er,
  And he, and his eight hundred
    Shall plough the wave no more."

Admiral Kempenfelt was writing in his cabin when the ship sank; his
first captain tried to inform him of their situation, but the heeling of
the ship so jammed the cabin doors that he could not open them: thus the
admiral perished with the rest. It seems Cowper thought the Royal George
might be recovered; other people were of the same opinion.

[Illustration: BLOWING UP OF THE ROYAL GEORGE.]

In September of the year in which the vessel sank, a gentleman, named
Tracey, living in the neighborhood, by means of diving-machines,
ascertained the position and state of the ship, and made proposals to
government to adopt means of raising her and getting her again afloat.
After a great many vexatious delays and interruptions on the part of
those who were to have supplied him with assistance, he succeeded in
getting up the Lark sloop. His efforts to raise the Royal George were so
far successful, that at every time of high tide she was lifted from her
bed; and on the 9th of October she was hove at least thirty or forty
feet to westward; but the days were getting short, the boisterous winds
of winter were setting in, the lighters to which Tracey's apparatus was
attached were too old and rotten to bear the strain, and he was forced
to abandon the attempt.

The sunken ship remained, a constant impediment to other vessels wishing
to cast anchor near the spot, for nearly fifty years, when Colonel
Pasley, by means of gunpowder, completely demolished the wreck: the
loose pieces of timber floated to the surface; heavier pieces--the
ship's guns, cables, anchors, the fire-hearth, cooking utensils, and
many smaller articles were recovered by the divers. These men went down
in Indian-rubber dresses, which were air and water-tight; they were
furnished with helmets, in each side of which were glass windows, to
admit light, and supplied with air by means of pipes, communicating with
an air-pump above. By these means they could remain under water more
than an hour at a time. I do not think you are old enough to understand
the nature of Colonel Pasley's operations. Large hollow vessels, called
cylinders, were filled with gunpowder, and attached by the divers to the
wreck, these were connected by conducting wires with a battery on board
a lighter above, at a sufficient distance to be out of reach of danger
when the explosion took place. Colonel Pasley then gave the word to fire
the end of the rod; instantly a report was heard, and those who
witnessed the explosions, say that the effect was very beautiful. On
one occasion, the water rose in a splendid column above fifty feet high,
the spray sparkling like diamonds in the sun; then the large fragments
of the wreck came floating to the surface; soon after the mud from the
bottom, blackening the circle of water, and spreading to a great
distance around; and with it rose to the surface great numbers of fish,
who, poor things, had found a hiding-place in the wreck, but were
dislodged and killed by the terrible gunpowder.

[Illustration: LOSS OF THE MELVILLE CASTLE.]




LOSS OF THE MELVILLE CASTLE.


Many and great are the dangers to which those who lead a seafaring life
are exposed. The lightning's flash may strike a ship when far away from
port, upon the trackless deep, or the sudden bursting of a particular
kind of cloud, called a waterspout, may overwhelm her, and none be left
to tell her fate. But of all the perils to which a ship is liable, I
think that of her striking on a sand-bank, or on sunken rocks is the
greatest. There must be men and women now living on the Kentish coast,
in whose memory the disastrous wreck of the Melville Castle, with all
its attendant horrors, is yet fresh. It is a sorrowful tale, doubly so,
inasmuch as acts of imprudence, and still worse, of obstinacy, may be
said to have occasioned the loss of four hundred and fifty lives.

In the first place, the Melville Castle, or as I suppose we should call
her the Vryheid, was in a very decayed state; she had been long in the
East India Company's service, and was by them sold to some Dutch
merchants, who had her upper works tolerably repaired, new sheathed and
coppered her, and resold her to the Dutch government, who were then in
want of a vessel to carry out troops and stores to Batavia.

The Melville Castle was accordingly equipped for the voyage, painted
throughout, and her name changed to the Vryheid. On the the morning of
November, 1802, she set sail from the Texel, a port on the coast of
Holland, with a fair wind, which lasted till early on the following day,
when a heavy gale came on in an adverse direction.

The captain immediately had the top-gallant masts and yards struck to
make her ride more easily; but as the day advanced, the violence of the
wind increased, and vain seemed every effort of the crew to manage the
ship. There were many mothers and little children on board, whose state
was truly pitiable. The ship was scourged onward by the resistless
blast, which continued to increase until it blew a perfect hurricane.

About three in the afternoon, the mainmast fell overboard, sweeping
several of the crew into the sea, and severely injuring four or five
more. By this time they were near enough to the Kentish coast to discern
objects on land, but the waves which rolled mountains high prevented the
possibility of any help approaching. By great exertion the ship was
brought to anchor in Hythe Bay, and for a few moments hope cheered the
bosoms of those on board; it was _but_ a few, for almost immediately
she was found to have sprung a leak; and while all hands were busy at
the pumps, the storm came on with increased fury.

In this dismal plight they continued till about six o'clock the
following morning, when the ship parted from one of her largest anchors,
and drifted on towards Dymchurch-wall, about three miles to the west of
Hythe. This wall is formed by immense piles, and cross pieces of timber,
supported by wooden jetties, which stretch far into the sea. It was
built to prevent the water from overflowing a rich, level district,
called Romney Marsh.

The crew continued to fire guns and hoist signals of distress. At
daybreak a pilot boat put off from Dover, and nearing the Melville
Castle, advised the captain to put back to Deal or Hythe, and wait for
calmer weather, or, said the boatman, "all hands will assuredly be
lost." But the captain would not act on his recommendation; he thought
the pilot boat exaggerated the danger, hoped the wind would abate as
the day opened, and that he should avoid the demands of the Dover pilot
or the Down fees by not casting anchor there. Another help the captain
rejected, and bitterly did he lament it when it was too late.

No sooner had the pilot boat departed, than the commodore at Deal
despatched two boats to endeavor to board the ship. The captain
obstinately refused to take any notice of them, and ordered the crew to
let the vessel drive before the wind. This they did, till the ship ran
so close in shore, that the captain himself saw the imminent danger, and
twice attempted to put her about, but in vain. On the first of the
projecting jetties of Dymchurch-wall the vessel struck. I would not if I
could grieve your young heart with a detail of all the horrors that
ensued; the devoted ship continued to beat on the piles, the sea
breaking over her with such violence, that the pumps could no longer be
worked.

The foremast soon went over the ship's side, carrying twelve seamen
with it, who were swallowed up by the billows. The rudder was unshipped,
the tiller tore up the gundeck, and the water rushed in at the
port-holes. At this fearful moment most of the passengers and crew
joined in solemn prayer to the Almighty. Morning came, but it was only
to witness the demolition of the wreck.

Many were the efforts made by the sufferers, some in the jolly boat,
some on a raft, others by lashing themselves to pieces of timber,
hogsheads, and even hencoops, to reach the shore; but out of four
hundred and seventy-two persons who a few days before had left the coast
of Holland, not more than eighteen escaped the raging billows. The
miserable remnant received generous attention from the inhabitants of
the place, who did all in their power to aid their recovery.

[Illustration: BURNING OF THE KENT EAST INDIAMAN.]




BURNING OF THE KENT EAST INDIAMAN.


This picture represents the burning of the Kent East Indiaman, in the
Bay of Biscay. She had on board in all six hundred and forty-one persons
at the time of the accident. The fire broke out in the hold during a
storm. An officer on duty, finding that a spirit cask had broken loose,
was taking measures to secure it, when a lurch of the ship caused him to
drop his lantern, and in his eagerness to save it, he let go the cask,
which suddenly stove in, and the spirits communicated with the flame,
the whole place was instantly in a blaze. Hopes of subduing the fire at
first were strong, but soon heavy volumes of smoke and a pitchy smell
told that it had reached the cable-room.

In these awful circumstances, the captain ordered the lower decks to be
scuttled, to admit water. This was done; several poor seamen being
suffocated by the smoke in executing the order; but now a new danger
threatened, the sea rushed in so furiously, that the ship was becoming
water-logged, and all feared her going down. Between six and seven
hundred human beings, were by by this time crowded on the deck. Many on
their knees earnestly implored the mercy of an all-powerful God! while
some old stout-hearted sailors quietly seated themselves directly over
the powder magazine, expecting an explosion every moment, and thinking
thus to put a speedier end to their torture.

In this time of despair, it occurred to the fourth mate to send a man to
the foremast, hoping, but scarce daring to think it probable, that some
friendly sail might be in sight. The man at the fore-top looked around
him; it was a moment of intense anxiety; then waving his hat, he cried
out, "A sail, on the lee-bow!"

Those on deck received the news with heart-felt gratitude, and answered
with three cheers. Signals of distress were instantly hoisted, and
endeavors used to make towards the stranger, while the minute guns were
fired continuously. She proved to be the brig Cambria, Captain Cook,
master, bound to Vera Cruz, having twenty Cornish miners, and some
agents of the Mining Company on board. For about one quarter of an hour,
the crew of the Kent doubted whether the brig perceived their signals:
but after a period of dreadful suspense, they saw the British colors
hoisted, and the brig making towards them.

On this, the crew of the Kent got their boats in readiness; the first
was filled with women, passengers, and officers' wives, and was lowered
into a sea so tempestuous as to leave small hope of their reaching the
brig; they did, however, after being nearly swamped through some
entanglement of the ropes, get clear of the Kent, and were safely taken
on board the Cambria, which prudently lay at some distance off.

After the first trip, it was found impossible for the boats to come
close alongside of the Kent, and the poor women and children suffered
dreadfully, in being lowered over the stern into them by means of ropes.
Amid this gloomy scene, many beautiful examples occurred of filial and
parental affection, and of disinterested friendship; and many sorrowful
instances of individual loss and suffering. At length, when all had been
removed from the burning vessel, but a few, who were so overcome by
fear as to refuse to make the attempt to reach the brig, the captain
quitted his ill-fated ship.

The flames which had spread along her upper deck, now mounted rapidly to
the mast and rigging, forming one general conflagration and lighting up
the heavens to an immense distance round. One by one her stately masts
fell over her sides. By half-past one in the morning the fire reached
the powder magazine; the looked-for explosion took place, and the
burning fragments of the vessel were blown high into the air, like so
many rockets.

The Cambria, with her crowd of sufferers, made all speed to the nearest
port, and reached Portsmouth in safety, shortly after midnight, on the
3d of March, 1825, the accident having taken place on the 28th of
February. Wonderful to tell, fourteen of the poor creatures, left on the
Kent, were rescued by another ship, the Caroline, on her passage from
Alexandria to Liverpool.




THE PELICAN.


The life of a pelican seems to be a very lazy, if not a very pleasant
one. Man, ever on the watch to turn the habits of animals to his own
account, observing how good a fisherman the pelican is, often catches
and tames him, and makes him fish for _him_. I have heard of a bird of
this kind in America, which was so well trained, that it would at
command go off in the morning, and return at night with its pouch full,
and stretched to the utmost; part of its treasure it disgorged for its
master, the rest was given to the bird for its trouble. It is hardly
credible what these extraordinary pouches will hold; it is said, that
among other things, a man's leg with the boots on was once found in one
of them.

Pelicans live in flocks; they and the cormorants sometimes help one
another to get a living. The cormorant is a species of pelican, of a
dusky color: it is sometimes called the sea crow. The cormorants are the
best divers, so the pelicans arrange themselves in a large circle at
some great distance from the land, and flap their great wings on the
surface of the water, while the cormorants dive beneath. Away swim the
poor frightened fish towards the shore; the pelicans draw into a
narrower circle, and the fish at last are brought into so small a
compass, that their pursuers find no difficulty in obtaining a plentiful
meal.

[Illustration: THE SEA TURTLE.]




CATCHING TURTLE.


There are two kinds of turtle; the one is called the green turtle, and
is much valued as a delicious article of food; the other the hawk's bill
turtle supplies the tortoise shell of commerce, which is prepared and
moulded into various forms by heat. The flesh of the hawk's bill turtle
is considered very unwholesome.

[Illustration: CATCHING TURTLE.]

The turtles in the picture are of the edible kind; they are found on the
shores of nearly all the countries within the tropics.

There is a little rocky island in the south Atlantic Ocean, called the
Island of Ascension, where they are found in vast numbers, and this
barren spot is often visited by Indiamen for the purpose of obtaining
some of them. The turtles feed on the sea weed and other marine plants
which grow on the shoals and sand banks, and with their powerful jaws,
they crush the small sea shells which are found among the weeds. This
kind of food is always to be had in great abundance, so that the turtles
have no occasion to quarrel among themselves, for that which is afforded
in such plenty for all; indeed they seem to be a very quiet and
inoffensive race, herding peaceably together on their extensive
feeding-grounds, and when satisfied retiring to the fresh water at the
mouth of the rivers, where they remain holding their heads above water,
as if to breathe the fresh air, till the shadow of any of their numerous
enemies alarms them, when they instantly dive to the bottom for
security.

In the month of April, the females leave the water after sunset, in
order to deposit their eggs in the sand. By means of their fore-fins
they dig a hole above high water mark, about one foot wide and two deep,
into which they drop above a hundred eggs; they then cover them lightly
over with a layer of sand, sufficient to hide them, and yet thin enough
to admit the warmth of the sun's rays for hatching them. The instinct
which leads the female turtle to the shore to lay her eggs, renders her
a prey to man. The fishers wait for them on shore, especially on a
moonlight night, and following them in one of their journeys, either
coming or returning, they turn them quickly over on their backs, before
they have time to defend themselves, or to blind their assailants by
throwing up the sand with their fins.

When very large, for I should tell you that the usual weight of the
turtle is from four to six hundred pounds, it requires the efforts of
several men to turn them over, and for this purpose they often employ
levers: the back shell of the turtle is so flat that when once over it
is impossible for them to right themselves, so there the poor creatures
lie in this helpless condition, till they are either taken away in the
manner you see in the picture, or deposited by their captors in a crawl,
which is a kind of enclosure surrounded by stakes, and so situated as to
admit the influx of the sea.

The inhabitants of the Bahama Isles, catch many turtles at a
considerable distance from the shore; they strike them with a spear, the
head of which slips off when it has entered the body of the turtle, but
it is fastened by a string to the pole, and by means of this apparatus
they are able to secure them, and either take them into the boat or haul
them on shore. The length of the green turtle frequently exceeds six
feet. A boy ten years old, a son of Captain Roche, once made use of a
very large shell as a boat, and ventured in it from the shore to his
father's ship which lay about a quarter of a mile off. It was in the
bay of Campeachy, off Port Royal, where the rightful occupant of this
shell was caught.

[Illustration: WRECK OF THE STEAMBOAT.]




THE WRECK OF THE STEAMBOAT.


The following narrative teaches a lesson of courage and devotion such as
are seldom read. In one of the light-houses of the desolate Farne Isles,
amid the ocean, with no prospect before it but the wide expanse of sea,
and now and then a distant sail appearing, her cradle hymn the ceaseless
sound of the everlasting deep, there lived a little child whose name
was Grace Darling. Her father was the keeper of the light-house; and
here Grace lived and grew up to the age of twenty-two, her mother's
constant helpmate in all domestic duties. She had a fair and healthy
countenance, which wore a kind and cheerful smile, proceeding from a
heart at peace with others, and happy in the consciousness of
endeavoring to do its duty.

It was at early dawn, one September morning, in the year 1838, that the
family at the Longstone light-house looked out through a dense fog which
hung over the waters. All night the sea had run extremely high, with a
heavy gale from the north, and at this moment the storm continued
unabated. Mr. and Mrs. Darling and Grace were at this time the only
persons in the light-house; through the dim mist they perceived the
wreck of a large steam vessel on the rocks, and by the aid of their
telescope the could even make out the forms of some persons clinging to
her.

It was the Forfarshire steamboat on her passage from Hull to Dundee.
She left the former place with sixty-three persons on board. She had
entered Berwick Bay about eight o'clock the previous evening, in a heavy
gale and in a leaky condition; the motion of the vessel soon increased
the leak to such a degree that the fires could not be kept burning.
About ten o'clock she bore up off St. Abb's Head, the storm still
raging. Soon after the engineer reported that the engines would not
work; the vessel became unmanageable; it was raining heavily, and the
fog was so dense that it was impossible to make out their situation. At
length the appearance of breakers close to leeward, and the Farne lights
just becoming visible, showed to all on board their imminent danger.

The captain vainly tried to run the vessel between the islands and the
main land, she would no longer answer the helm, and was driven to and
fro by a furious sea. Between three and four o'clock in the morning she
struck with her bows foremost on a jagged rock, which pierced her
timbers. Soon after the first shock a mighty wave lifted the vessel
from the rock, and let her fall again with such violence as fairly to
break her in two pieces; the after part, containing the cabin with many
passengers, all of whom perished, was instantly carried away through a
tremendous current, while the fore part was fixed on the rock. The
survivors, only nine in number, five of the crew and four passengers,
remained in this dreadful situation till daybreak, when they were
descried by the family at the light-house. But who could dare to cross
the raging abyss which lay between them?

Grace, full of pity and anxiety for the wretched people on the wreck,
forgot all toil and danger, and urged her father to launch the boat; she
took one oar and her father the other; but Grace had never assisted in
the boat before, and it was only by extreme exertion and the most
determined courage that they succeeded in bringing the boat up to the
