on the highest ground, and formidable works constructed at three points
where alone a landing could be effected. The smoke rose from a score of
great mounds, where charcoal-burners were converting timber into fuel
for the forges. Fifty smiths and armourers were working vigorously at
forges in the open air, roofs thatched with rushes and supported by
poles being erected over them to keep the rain and snow from the fires.
A score of boats were threading the mazes of the marshes bringing men
and cattle to the island. All was bustle and activity, every face shone
with renewed hope. King Alfred himself and his thanes moved to and fro
among the workers encouraging them at their labours.

Messengers came and went in numbers, and from all parts of Wessex King
Alfred received news of the joy which his people felt at the tidings
that he was again about to raise his standard, and of the readiness of
all to obey his summons. So well was the secret kept that no rumour of
the storm about to burst upon them reached the Danes. The people,
rejoicing and eager as they were, suffered no evidence of their
feelings to be apparent to their cruel masters, who, believing the
Saxons to be finally crushed, were lulled into a false security. The
king's treasure had been brought from its hiding-place to Athelney, and
Edmund and Egbert had also handed over their own share of the booty to
the king. The golden cups and goblets he had refused to take, but had
gladly accepted the silver.

Edmund and Egbert had left Athelney for a few days on a mission. The
king had described to them minutely where he had hidden the sacred
standard with the Golden Dragon. It was in the hut of a charcoal-burner
in the heart of the forests of Wiltshire. Upon reaching the hut, and
showing to the man the king's signet-ring, which when leaving the
standard he had told him would be the signal that any who might come
for it were sent by him, the man produced the standard from the thatch
of his cottage, in which it was deeply buried, and hearing that it was
again to be unfurled called his two stalwart sons from their work and
at once set out with Edmund and Egbert to join the army.

Easter came and went, but the preparations were not yet completed. A
vast supply of arms was needed, and while the smiths laboured at their
work Edmund and Egbert drilled the fighting men who had assembled, in
the tactics which had on a small scale proved so effective. The wedge
shape was retained, and Edmund's own band claimed the honour of forming
the apex, but it had now swollen until it contained a thousand men, and
as it moved in a solid body, with its thick edge of spears outward, the
king felt confident that it would be able to break through the
strongest line of the Danes.

From morning till night Edmund and Egbert, assisted by the thanes of
Somerset who had gathered there, drilled the men and taught them to
rally rapidly from scattered order into solid formation. Unaccustomed
to regular tactics the ease and rapidity with which these movements
came to be carried out at the notes of Edmund's bugle seemed to all to
be little less than miraculous, and they awaited with confidence and
eagerness their meeting with the Danes on the field.

At the end of April messengers were sent out bidding the Saxons hold
themselves in readiness, and on the 6th of May Alfred moved with his
force from Athelney to Egbertesstan (now called Brixton), lying to the
east of the forest of Selwood, which lay between Devonshire and
Somerset. The Golden Dragon had been unfurled.   On the fort in
Athelney, and after crossing the marshes to the mainland it was carried
in the centre of the phalanx.

On the 12th they reached the appointed place, where they found a great
multitude of Saxons already gathered. They had poured in from
Devonshire, Somerset, and Wiltshire, from Dorset and Hants. In spite of
the vigorous edicts of the Danes against arms a great proportion of
them bore weapons, which had been buried in the earth, or concealed in
hollow trees or other hiding-places until the time for action should
again arrive.

As they saw the king approaching at the head of his band, with the
Golden Dragon fluttering in the breeze, a great shout of joy arose from
the multitude, and they crowded round the monarch with shouts of
welcome at his reappearance among them, and with vows to die rather
than again to yield to the tyranny of the Northmen. The rest of the day
was spent in distributing the newly fashioned arms to those who needed
them, and in arranging the men in bands under their own thanes, or, in
their absence, such leaders as the king appointed.

Upon the following morning the army started, marching in a
north-easterly direction against the great camp of the Danes at
Chippenham. That night they rested at Okeley, and then marched on until
in the afternoon they came within sight of the Danes gathered at
Ethandune, a place supposed to be identical with Edington near Westbury.

As the time for Alfred's reappearance approached the agitation and
movement on the part of the people had attracted the attention of the
Danes, and the news of his summons to the Saxons to meet him at
Egbertesstan having come to their ears, they gathered hastily from all
parts under Guthorn their king, who was by far the most powerful viking
who had yet appeared in England, and who ruled East Anglia as well as
Wessex. Confident of victory the great Danish army beheld the approach
of the Saxons. Long accustomed to success, and superior in numbers,
they regarded with something like contempt the approach of their foes.

In the centre Alfred placed the trained phalanx which had accompanied
him from Athelney, in the centre of which waved the Golden Dragon, by
whose side he placed himself. Its command he left in the hands of
Edmund, he himself directing the general movements of the force. On his
right were the men of Somerset and Hants; on the left those of Wilts,
Dorset, and Devon.

His orders were that the advance was to be made with regularity; that
the whole line were to fight for a while on the defensive, resisting
the onslaught of the Danes until he gave the word for the central
phalanx to advance and burst through the lines of the enemy, and that
when these had been thrown into confusion by this attack the flanks
were to charge forward and complete the rout. This plan was carried
out. The Danes advanced with their usual impetuosity, and for hours
tried to break through the lines of the Saxon spears. Both sides fought
valiantly, the Danes inspired by their pride in their personal prowess
and their contempt for the Saxons; the Saxons by their hatred for their
oppressors, and their determination to die rather than again submit to
their bondage. At length, after the battle had raged some hours, and
both parties were becoming wearied from their exertions, the king gave
Edmund the order.

Hitherto his men had fought in line with the rest; but at the sound of
his bugle they quitted their places, and, ere the Danes could
understand the meaning of this sudden movement, had formed themselves
into their wedge, raised a mighty shout, and advanced against the
enemy. The onslaught was irresistible. The great wedge, with its thick
fringe of spears, burst its way straight through the Danish centre
carrying all before it. Then at another note of Edmund's bugle it broke
up into two bodies, which moved solidly to the right and left,
crumpling up the Danish lines.

Alfred now gave the order for a general advance, and the Saxon ranks,
with a shout of triumph, flung themselves upon the disordered Danes.
Their success was instant and complete. Confounded at the sudden break
up of their line, bewildered by these new and formidable tactics,
attacked in front and in flank, the Danes broke and fled. The Saxons
pursued them hotly, Edmund keeping his men well together in case the
Danes should rally. Their rout, however, was too complete; vast numbers
were slain, and the remnant of their army did not pause until they
found themselves within the shelter of their camp at Chippenham.

No quarter was given by the Saxons to those who fell into their hands,
and pressing upon the heels of the flying Danes the victorious army of
King Alfred sat down before Chippenham. Every hour brought fresh
reinforcements to the king's standard. Many were already on their way
when the battle was fought; and as the news of the victory spread
rapidly every man of the West Saxons capable of bearing arms made for
Chippenham, feeling that now or never must a complete victory over the
Danes be obtained.

No assault was made upon the Danish camp. Confident in his now vastly
superior numbers, and in the enthusiasm which reigned in his army,
Alfred was unwilling to waste a single life in an attack upon the
entrenchments, which must ere long surrender from famine. There was no
risk of reinforcements arriving to relieve the Danes. Guthorn had led
to the battle the whole fighting force of the Danes in Wessex and East
Anglia. This was far smaller than it would have been a year earlier;
but the Northmen, having once completed their work of pillage, soon
turned to fresh fields of adventure. Those whose disposition led them
to prefer a quiet life had settled upon the land from which they had
dispossessed the Saxons; but the principal bands of rovers, finding
that England was exhausted and that no more plunder could be had, had
either gone back to enjoy at home the booty they had gained, or had
sailed to harry the shores of France, Spain, and Italy.

Thus the position of the Danes in Chippenham was desperate, and at the
end of fourteen days, by which time they were reduced to an extremity
by hunger, they sent messengers into the royal camp offering their
submission. They promised if spared to quit the kingdom with all speed,
and to observe this contract more faithfully than those which they had
hitherto made and broken. They offered the king as many hostages as he
might wish to take for the fulfilment of their promises. The haggard
and emaciated condition of those who came out to treat moved Alfred to
pity.

So weakened were they by famine that they could scarce drag themselves
along. It would have been easy for the Saxons to have slain them to the
last man; and the majority of the Saxons, smarting under the memory of
the cruel oppression which they had suffered, the destruction of home
and property, and the slaughter of friends and relations, would fain
have exterminated their foes. King Alfred, however, thought otherwise.

Guthorn and the Danes had effected a firm settlement in East Anglia,
and lived at amity with the Saxons there. They had, it is true, wrested
from them the greatest portion of their lands. Still peace and order
were now established. The Saxons were allowed liberty and equal rights.
Intermarriages were taking place, and the two peoples were becoming
welded into one. Alfred then considered that it would be well to have
the king of this country as an ally; he and his settled people would
soon be as hostile to further incursions of the Northmen as were the
Saxons themselves, and their interests and those of Wessex would be
identical.

Did he, on the other hand, carry out a general massacre of the Danes
now in his power he might have brought upon England a fresh invasion of
Northmen, who, next to plunder, loved revenge, and who might come over
in great hosts to avenge the slaughter of their countrymen. Moved,
then, by motives of policy as well as by compassion, he granted the
terms they asked, and hostages having been sent in from the camp he
ordered provisions to be supplied to the Danes.

The same night a messenger of rank came in from Guthorn saying that he
intended to embrace Christianity. The news filled Alfred and the Saxons
with joy. The king, a sincere and devoted Christian, had fought as much
for his religion as for his kingdom, and his joy at the prospect of
Guthorn's conversion, which would as a matter of course be followed by
that of his subjects, was deep and sincere.

To the Saxons generally the temporal consequence of the conversion had
no doubt greater weight than the spiritual. The conversion of Guthorn
and the Danes would be a pledge far more binding than any oaths of
alliance between the two kingdoms. Guthorn and his followers would be
viewed with hostility by their countrymen, whose hatred of Christianity
was intense, and East Anglia would, therefore, naturally seek the close
alliance and assistance of its Christian neighbour.

Great were the rejoicings in the Saxon camp that night. Seldom, indeed,
has a victory had so great and decisive an effect upon the future of a
nation as that of Ethandune. Had the Saxons been crushed, the
domination of the Danes in England would have been finally settled.
Christianity would have been stamped out, and with it civilization, and
the island would have made a backward step into paganism and barbarism
which might have delayed her progress for centuries.

The victory established the freedom of Wessex, converted East Anglia
into a settled and Christian country, and enabled King Alfred to frame
the wise laws and statutes and to establish on a firm basis the
institutions which raised Saxon England vastly in the scale of
civilization, and have in no small degree affected the whole course of
life of the English people.




CHAPTER XII: FOUR YEARS OF PEACE


Seven weeks afterwards Guthorn, accompanied by thirty of his noblest
warriors, entered Alfred's camp, which was pitched at Aller, a place
not far from Athelney. An altar was erected and a solemn service
performed, and Guthorn and his companions were all baptized, Alfred
himself becoming sponsor for Guthorn, whose name was changed to
Athelstan. The Danes remained for twelve days in the Saxon camp. For
the first eight they wore, in accordance with the custom of the times,
the chrismal, a white linen cloth put on the head when the rite of
baptism was performed; on the eighth day the solemn ceremony known as
the chrism, the loosing or removal of the cloths, took place at
Wedmore. This was performed by the Ealdorman Ethelnoth.

During these twelve days many conferences were held between Alfred and
Athelstan as to the future of the two kingdoms. While the Danes were
still in the camp a witenagemot or Saxon parliament was held at
Wedmore. At this Athelstan and many of the nobles and inhabitants of
East Anglia were present, and the boundary of the two kingdoms was
settled. It was to commence at the mouth of the Thames, to run along
the river Lea to its source, and at Bedford turn to the right along the
Ouse as far as Watling Street. According to this arrangement a
considerable portion of the kingdom of Mercia fell to Alfred's share.

The treaty comprehended various rules for the conduct of commerce, and
courts were instituted for the trial of disputes and crimes. The Danes
did not at once leave Mercia, but for a considerable time lay in camp
at Cirencester; but all who refused to become Christians were ordered
to depart beyond the seas, and the Danes gradually withdrew within
their boundary.

Guthorn's conversion, although no doubt brought about at the moment by
his admiration of the clemency of Alfred, had probably been for some
time projected by him. Mingling as his people did in East Anglia with
the Christian Saxons there, he must have had opportunities for learning
the nature of their tenets, and of contrasting its mild and beneficent
teaching with the savage worship of the pagan gods. By far the greater
proportion of his people followed their king's example; but the wilder
spirits quitted the country, and under their renowned leader Hasting
sailed to harry the shores of France. The departure of the more
turbulent portion of his followers rendered it more easy for the Danish
king to carry his plans into effect.

After the holding of the witan Edmund and Egbert at once left the army
with their followers, and for some months the young ealdorman devoted
himself to the work of restoring the shattered homes of his people,
aiding them with loans from the plunder he had gained on the seas,
Alfred having at once repaid him the sums which he had lent at
Athelney. As so many of his followers had also brought home money after
their voyage, the work of rebuilding and restoration went on rapidly,
and in a few months the marks left of the ravages by the Danes had been
well-nigh effaced.

Flocks and herds again grazed in the pastures, herds of swine roamed in
the woods, the fields were cultivated, and the houses rebuilt. In no
part of Wessex was prosperity so speedily re-established as in the
district round Sherborne governed by Edmund. The Dragon was thoroughly
overhauled and repaired, for none could say how soon fresh fleets of
the Northmen might make their appearance upon the southern shores of
England. It was not long, indeed, before the Northmen reappeared, a
great fleet sailing up the Thames at the beginning of the winter. It
ascended as high as Fulham, where a great camp was formed. Seeing that
the Saxons and East Anglians would unite against them did they advance
further, the Danes remained quietly in their encampment during the
winter, and in the spring again took ship and sailed for France.

For the next two years England enjoyed comparative quiet, the Danes
turning their attention to France and Holland, sailing up the Maas,
Scheldt, Somme, and Seine. Spreading from these rivers they carried
fire and sword over a great extent of country. The Franks resisted
bravely, and in two pitched battles defeated their invaders with great
loss. The struggle going on across the Channel was watched with great
interest by the Saxons, who at first hoped to see the Danes completely
crushed by the Franks.

The ease, however, with which the Northmen moved from point to point in
their ships gave them such immense advantage that their defeats at
Hasle and Saucourt in no way checked their depredations. Appearing
suddenly off the coast, or penetrating into the interior by a river,
their hordes would land, ravage the country, slay all who opposed them,
and carry off the women and children captives, and would then take to
their ships again before the leaders of the Franks could assemble an
army.

Alfred spent this time of repose in restoring as far as possible the
loss and damage which his kingdom had suffered. Many wise laws were
passed, churches were rebuilt, and order restored; great numbers of the
monks and wealthier people who had fled to France in the days of the
Danish supremacy now returned to England, which was for the time freer
from danger than the land in which they had sought refuge; and many
Franks from the districts exposed to the Danish ravages came over and
settled in England.

Gradually the greater part of England acknowledged the rule of Alfred.
The kingdom of Kent was again united to that of Wessex; while Mercia,
which extended across the centre of England from Anglia to Wales, was
governed for Alfred by Ethelred the Ealdorman, who was the head of the
powerful family of the Hwiccas, and had received the hand of Alfred's
daughter Ethelfleda. He ruled Mercia according to its own laws and
customs, which differed materially from those of the West Saxons, and
which prevented a more perfect union of the two kingdoms until William
the Conqueror welded the whole country into a single whole. But
Ethelred acknowledged the supremacy of Alfred, consulted him upon all
occasions of importance, and issued all his edicts and orders in the
king's name. He was ably assisted by Werfrith, the Bishop of Worcester.
The energy and activity of these leaders enabled Mercia to keep abreast
of Wessex in the onward progress which Alfred laboured so indefatigably
to promote.

Edmund, when not occupied with the affairs of his earldom, spent much
of his time with the king, who saw in him a spirit of intelligence and
activity which resembled his own. Edmund was, however, of a less
studious disposition than his royal master; and though he so far
improved his education as to be able to read and write well, Alfred
could not persuade him to undertake the study of Latin, being, as he
said, well content to master some of the learning of that people by
means of the king's translations.

At the end of another two years of peace Edmund was again called upon
to take up arms. Although the Danes attempted no fresh invasion some of
their ships hung around the English coast, capturing vessels,
interfering with trade, and committing other acts of piracy.

Great complaints were made by the inhabitants of the seaports to
Alfred. The king at once begged Edmund to fit out the Dragon, and
collecting a few other smaller ships he took his place on Edmund's ship
and sailed in search of the Danes. After some search they came upon the
four large ships of the Northmen which had been a scourge to the coast.

The Saxons at once engaged them, and a desperate fight took place. The
Dragon was laid alongside the largest of the Danish vessels; and the
king, with Edmund and Egbert by his side, leapt on to the deck of the
Danish vessel, followed by the crew of the Dragon. The Danish ship was
crowded with men who fought desperately, but the discipline even more
than the courage of Edmund's crew secured for them the victory. For a
time each fought for himself; and although inspired by the presence of
the king they were able to gain no advantage, being much out-numbered
by the Northmen.

Edmund, seeing this, sounded on his horn the signal with which in
battle he ordered the men to form their wedge. The signal was instantly
obeyed. The Saxons were all fighting with boarding-pikes against the
Northmen's swords and axes, for they had become used to these weapons
and preferred them to any other.

The instant Edmund's horn was heard, each man desisted from fighting
and rushed to their leader, around whom they instantly formed in their
accustomed order. The Danes, astonished at the sudden cessation of the
battle, and understanding nothing of the meaning of the signal or of
the swift movement of the Saxons, for a minute lowered their weapons in
surprise.

Before they again rushed forward the formation was complete, and in a
close body with levelled spears the Saxons advanced, Egbert as usual
leading the way, with Edmund and the king in the centre.

In vain the Danes strove to resist the onset; in spite of their
superior numbers they were driven back step by step until crowded in a
close mass at one end.

Still the Saxon line of spears pressed on. Many of the Danes leapt into
the sea, others were pushed over or run through, and in a few minutes
not a Northman remained alive in the captured vessel.

In the meantime the battle was raging in other parts. Two of the small
vessels were engaged with one of the Danes at close quarters, while the
other ships hung around the remaining Danish vessels and kept up
volleys of arrows and javelins upon them.

The Dragon at once went to the assistance of the two Saxon ships, whose
crews were almost overpowered by the Northmen. Laying the ship
alongside, Edmund boarded the Danes. The Northmen rushed back from the
decks of the Saxon ship to defend their own vessel; and the Saxons,
regaining courage, at once rallied and followed them. The combat was
short but desperate. Attacked on three sides, the Danes were speedily
overcome and were slaughtered to a man.

An attack was next made upon the two remaining vessels. These resisted
for some time, but they were overwhelmed by the missiles from the Saxon
flotilla; and the greater portion of their crews being killed or
wounded, their commanders prayed for mercy, which was granted them by
Alfred; and with the four captured vessels the fleet returned to
England.

On reaching port Alfred begged Edmund to continue for a while with the
Dragon, to cruise along the coasts and to stop the depredations of the
Danes; and for some weeks the Dragon kept the seas. She met with
considerable success, capturing many Danish galleys. Some of these
contained rich spoil, which had been gathered in France, for cruising
in the seas off Dover Edmund intercepted many of the Danish vessels on
their homeward way from raids up the Seine, Garonne, and other French
rivers.

One day in the excitement of a long pursuit of a Danish galley, which
finally succeeded in making her escape, Edmund had paid less attention
than usual to the weather, and, on giving up the chase as hopeless,
perceived that the sky had become greatly overcast, while the wind was
rising rapidly.

