was a young woman wearing an elegant though quiet dress, and a hat
which looked as if it had been bought in Paris or Vienna.  She had, in
fact, a slightly foreign air, and it was this, indeed, which made Marco
look at her long enough to see that she was also a graceful and lovely
person.  He wondered what her nationality was.  Even at some yards'
distance he could see that she had long dark eyes and a curved mouth
which seemed to be smiling to itself.  He thought she might be Spanish
or Italian.

He was trying to decide which of the two countries she belonged to, as
she drew near to him, but quite suddenly the curved mouth ceased
smiling as her foot seemed to catch in a break in the pavement, and she
so lost her balance that she would have fallen if he had not leaped
forward and caught her.

She was light and slender, and he was a strong lad and managed to
steady her.  An expression of sharp momentary anguish crossed her face.

"I hope you are not hurt," Marco said.

She bit her lip and clutched his shoulder very hard with her slim hand.

"I have twisted my ankle," she answered.  "I am afraid I have twisted
it badly.  Thank you for saving me.  I should have had a bad fall."

Her long, dark eyes were very sweet and grateful.  She tried to smile,
but there was such distress under the effort that Marco was afraid she
must have hurt herself very much.

"Can you stand on your foot at all?" he asked.

"I can stand a little now," she said, "but I might not be able to stand
in a few minutes.  I must get back to the house while I can bear to
touch the ground with it.  I am so sorry.  I am afraid I shall have to
ask you to go with me.  Fortunately it is only a few yards away."

"Yes," Marco answered.  "I saw you come out of the house.  If you will
lean on my shoulder, I can soon help you back.  I am glad to do it.
Shall we try now?"

She had a gentle and soft manner which would have appealed to any boy.
Her voice was musical and her enunciation exquisite.

Whether she was Spanish or Italian, it was easy to imagine her a person
who did not always live in London lodgings, even of the better class.

"If you please," she answered him.  "It is very kind of you. You are
very strong, I see.  But I am glad to have only a few steps to go."

She rested on his shoulder as well as on her umbrella, but it was plain
that every movement gave her intense pain.  She caught her lip with her
teeth, and Marco thought she turned white.  He could not help liking
her.  She was so lovely and gracious and brave. He could not bear to
see the suffering in her face.

"I am so sorry!" he said, as he helped her, and his boy's voice had
something of the wonderful sympathetic tone of Loristan's. The
beautiful lady herself remarked it, and thought how unlike it was to
the ordinary boy-voice.

"I have a latch-key," she said, when they stood on the low step.

She found the latch-key in her purse and opened the door.  Marco helped
her into the entrance-hall.  She sat down at once in a chair near the
hat-stand.  The place was quite plain and old-fashioned inside.

"Shall I ring the front-door bell to call some one?" Marco inquired.

"I am afraid that the servants are out," she answered.  "They had a
holiday.  Will you kindly close the door?  I shall be obliged to ask
you to help me into the sitting-room at the end of the hall.  I shall
find all I want there--if you will kindly hand me a few things.  Some
one may come in presently--perhaps one of the other lodgers--and, even
if I am alone for an hour or so, it will not really matter."

"Perhaps I can find the landlady," Marco suggested.  The beautiful
person smiled.

"She has gone to her sister's wedding.  That is why I was going out to
spend the day myself.  I arranged the plan to accommodate her.  How
good you are!  I shall be quite comfortable directly, really.  I can
get to my easy-chair in the sitting-room now I have rested a little."

Marco helped her to her feet, and her sharp, involuntary exclamation of
pain made him wince internally.  Perhaps it was a worse sprain than she
knew.

The house was of the early-Victorian London order.  A "front lobby"
with a dining-room on the right hand, and a "back lobby," after the
foot of the stairs was passed, out of which opened the basement kitchen
staircase and a sitting-room looking out on a gloomy flagged back yard
inclosed by high walls.  The sitting-room was rather gloomy itself, but
there were a few luxurious things among the ordinary furnishings.
There was an easy-chair with a small table near it, and on the table
were a silver lamp and some rather elegant trifles.  Marco helped his
charge to the easy-chair and put a cushion from the sofa under her
foot.  He did it very gently, and, as he rose after doing it, he saw
that the long, soft dark eyes were looking at him in a curious way.

"I must go away now," he said, "but I do not like to leave you.  May I
go for a doctor?"

"How dear you are!" she exclaimed.  "But I do not want one, thank you.
I know exactly what to do for a sprained ankle.  And perhaps mine is
not really a sprain.  I am going to take off my shoe and see."

"May I help you?" Marco asked, and he kneeled down again and carefully
unfastened her shoe and withdrew it from her foot.  It was a slender
and delicate foot in a silk stocking, and she bent and gently touched
and rubbed it.

"No," she said, when she raised herself, "I do not think it is a
sprain.  Now that the shoe is off and the foot rests on the cushion, it
is much more comfortable, much more.  Thank you, thank you.  If you had
not been passing I might have had a dangerous fall."

"I am very glad to have been able to help you," Marco answered, with an
air of relief.  "Now I must go, if you think you will be all right."

"Don't go yet," she said, holding out her hand.  "I should like to know
you a little better, if I may.  I am so grateful.  I should like to
talk to you.  You have such beautiful manners for a boy," she ended,
with a pretty, kind laugh, "and I believe I know where you got them
from."

"You are very kind to me," Marco answered, wondering if he did not
redden a little.  "But I must go because my father will--"

"Your father would let you stay and talk to me," she said, with even a
prettier kindliness than before.  "It is from him you have inherited
your beautiful manner.  He was once a friend of mine.  I hope he is my
friend still, though perhaps he has forgotten me."

All that Marco had ever learned and all that he had ever trained
himself to remember, quickly rushed back upon him now, because he had a
clear and rapidly working brain, and had not lived the ordinary boy's
life.  Here was a beautiful lady of whom he knew nothing at all but
that she had twisted her foot in the street and he had helped her back
into her house.  If silence was still the order, it was not for him to
know things or ask questions or answer them.  She might be the
loveliest lady in the world and his father her dearest friend, but,
even if this were so, he could best serve them both by obeying her
friend's commands with all courtesy, and forgetting no instruction he
had given.

"I do not think my father ever forgets any one," he answered.

"No, I am sure he does not," she said softly.  "Has he been to Samavia
during the last three years?"

Marco paused a moment.

"Perhaps I am not the boy you think I am," he said.  "My father has
never been to Samavia."

"He has not?  But--you are Marco Loristan?"

"Yes.  That is my name."

Suddenly she leaned forward and her long lovely eyes filled with fire.

"Then you are a Samavian, and you know of the disasters overwhelming
us.  You know all the hideousness and barbarity of what is being done.
Your father's son must know it all!"

"Every one knows it," said Marco.

"But it is your country--your own!  Your blood must burn in your veins!"

Marco stood quite still and looked at her.  His eyes told whether his
blood burned or not, but he did not speak.  His look was answer enough,
since he did not wish to say anything.

"What does your father think?  I am a Samavian myself, and I think
night and day.  What does he think of the rumor about the descendant of
the Lost Prince?  Does he believe it?"

Marco was thinking very rapidly.  Her beautiful face was glowing with
emotion, her beautiful voice trembled.  That she should be a Samavian,
and love Samavia, and pour her feeling forth even to a boy, was deeply
moving to him.  But howsoever one was moved, one must remember that
silence was still the order.  When one was very young, one must
remember orders first of all.

"It might be only a newspaper story," he said.  "He says one cannot
trust such things.  If you know him, you know he is very calm."

"Has he taught you to be calm too?" she said pathetically. "You are
only a boy.  Boys are not calm.  Neither are women when their hearts
are wrung.  Oh, my Samavia!  Oh, my poor little country!  My brave,
tortured country!" and with a sudden sob she covered her face with her
hands.

A great lump mounted to Marco's throat.  Boys could not cry, but he
knew what she meant when he said her heart was wrung.

When she lifted her head, the tears in her eyes made them softer than
ever.

"If I were a million Samavians instead of one woman, I should know what
to do!" she cried.  "If your father were a million Samavians, he would
know, too.  He would find Ivor's descendant, if he is on the earth, and
he would end all this horror!"

"Who would not end it if they could?" cried Marco, quite fiercely.

"But men like your father, men who are Samavians, must think night and
day about it as I do," she impetuously insisted. "You see, I cannot
help pouring my thoughts out even to a boy--because he is a Samavian.
Only Samavians care.  Samavia seems so little and unimportant to other
people.  They don't even seem to know that the blood she is pouring
forth pours from human veins and beating human hearts.  Men like your
father must think, and plan, and  feel that they must--must find a way.
Even a woman feels it.  Even a boy must.  Stefan Loristan cannot be
sitting quietly at home, knowing that Samavian hearts are being shot
through and Samavian blood poured forth.  He cannot think and say
NOTHING!"

Marco started in spite of himself.  He felt as if his father had been
struck in the face.  How dare she say such words!  Big as he was,
suddenly he looked bigger, and the beautiful lady saw that he did.

"He is my father," he said slowly.

She was a clever, beautiful person, and saw that she had made a great
mistake.

"You must forgive me," she exclaimed.  "I used the wrong words because
I was excited.  That is the way with women.  You must see that I meant
that I knew he was giving his heart and strength, his whole being, to
Samavia, even though he must stay in London."

She started and turned her head to listen to the sound of some one
using the latch-key and opening the front door.  The some one came in
with the heavy step of a man.

"It is one of the lodgers," she said.  "I think it is the one who lives
in the third floor sitting-room."

"Then you won't be alone when I go," said Marco.  "I am glad some one
has come.  I will say good-morning.  May I tell my father your name?"

"Tell me that you are not angry with me for expressing myself so
awkwardly," she said.

"You couldn't have meant it.  I know that," Marco answered boyishly.
"You couldn't."

"No, I couldn't," she repeated, with the same emphasis on the words.

She took a card from a silver case on the table and gave it to him.

"Your father will remember my name," she said.  "I hope he will let me
see him and tell him how you took care of me."

She shook his hand warmly and let him go.  But just as he reached the
door she spoke again.

"Oh, may I ask you to do one thing more before you leave me?" she said
suddenly.  "I hope you won't mind.  Will you run up-stairs into the
drawing-room and bring me the purple book from the small table?  I
shall not mind being alone if I have something to read."

"A purple book?  On a small table?" said Marco.

"Between the two long windows," she smiled back at him.

The drawing-room of such houses as these is always to be reached by one
short flight of stairs.

Marco ran up lightly.



XIV

MARCO DOES NOT ANSWER

By the time he turned the corner of the stairs, the beautiful lady had
risen from her seat in the back room and walked into the dining-room at
the front.  A heavily-built, dark-bearded man was standing inside the
door as if waiting for her.

"I could do nothing with him," she said at once, in her soft voice,
speaking quite prettily and gently, as if what she said was the most
natural thing in the world.  "I managed the little trick of the
sprained foot really well, and got him into the house.  He is an
amiable boy with perfect manners, and I thought it might be easy to
surprise him into saying more than he knew he was saying.  You can
generally do that with children and young things.  But he either knows
nothing or has been trained to hold his tongue.  He's not stupid, and
he's of a high spirit.  I made a pathetic little scene about Samavia,
because I saw he could be worked up.  It did work him up.  I tried him
with the Lost Prince rumor; but, if there is truth in it, he does not
or will not know.  I tried to make him lose his temper and betray
something in defending his father, whom he thinks a god, by the way.
But I made a mistake.  I saw that.  It's a pity.  Boys can sometimes be
made to tell anything."  She spoke very quickly under her breath.  The
man spoke quickly too.

"Where is he?" he asked.

"I sent him up to the drawing-room to look for a book.  He will look
for a few minutes.  Listen.  He's an innocent boy.  He sees me only as
a gentle angel.  Nothing will SHAKE him so much as to hear me tell him
the truth suddenly.  It will be such a shock to him that perhaps you
can do something with him then.  He may lose his hold on himself.  He's
only a boy."

"You're right," said the bearded man.  "And when he finds out he is not
free to go, it may alarm him and we may get something worth while."

"If we could find out what is true, or what Loristan thinks is true, we
should have a clue to work from," she said.

"We have not much time," the man whispered.  "We are ordered to Bosnia
at once.  Before midnight we must be on the way."

"Let us go into the other room.  He is coming."

When Marco entered the room, the heavily-built man with the pointed
dark beard was standing by the easy-chair.

"I am sorry I could not find the book," he apologized.  "I looked on
all the tables."

"I shall be obliged to go and search for it myself," said the Lovely
Person.

She rose from her chair and stood up smiling.  And at her first
movement Marco saw that she was not disabled in the least.

"Your foot!" he exclaimed.  "It's better?"

"It wasn't hurt," she answered, in her softly pretty voice and with her
softly pretty smile.  "I only made you think so."

It was part of her plan to spare him nothing of shock in her sudden
transformation.  Marco felt his breath leave him for a moment.

"I made you believe I was hurt because I wanted you to come into the
house with me," she added.  "I wished to find out certain things I am
sure you know."

"They were things about Samavia," said the man.  "Your father knows
them, and you must know something of them at least.  It is necessary
that we should hear what you can tell us.  We shall not allow you to
leave the house until you have answered certain questions I shall ask
you."

Then Marco began to understand.  He had heard his father speak of
political spies, men and women who were paid to trace the people that
certain governments or political parties desired to have followed and
observed.  He knew it was their work to search out secrets, to disguise
themselves and live among innocent people as if they were merely
ordinary neighbors.

They must be spies who were paid to follow his father because he was a
Samavian and a patriot.  He did not know that they had taken the house
two months before, and had accomplished several things during their
apparently innocent stay in it.  They had discovered Loristan and had
learned to know his outgoings and incomings, and also the outgoings and
incomings of Lazarus, Marco, and The Rat.  But they meant, if possible,
to learn other things.  If the boy could be startled and terrified into
unconscious revelations, it might prove well worth their while to have
played this bit of melodrama before they locked the front door behind
them and hastily crossed the Channel, leaving their landlord to
discover for himself that the house had been vacated.

In Marco's mind strange things were happening.  They were spies! But
that was not all.  The Lovely Person had been right when she said that
he would receive a shock.  His strong young chest swelled.  In all his
life, he had never come face to face with black treachery before.  He
could not grasp it.  This gentle and friendly being with the grateful
soft voice and grateful soft eyes had betrayed--BETRAYED him!  It
seemed impossible to believe it, and yet the smile on her curved mouth
told him that it was true.  When he had sprung to help her, she had
