


Hermia and Lysander were lovers; but Hermia's father wished her to marry
another man, named Demetrius.

Now, in Athens, where they lived, there was a wicked law, by which any
girl who refused to marry according to her father's wishes, might be put
to death. Hermia's father was so angry with her for refusing to do as
he wished, that he actually brought her before the Duke of Athens to
ask that she might be killed, if she still refused to obey him. The Duke
gave her four days to think about it, and, at the end of that time, if
she still refused to marry Demetrius, she would have to die.

Lysander of course was nearly mad with grief, and the best thing to
do seemed to him for Hermia to run away to his aunt's house at a place
beyond the reach of that cruel law; and there he would come to her and
marry her. But before she started, she told her friend, Helena, what she
was going to do.

Helena had been Demetrius' sweetheart long before his marriage with
Hermia had been thought of, and being very silly, like all jealous
people, she could not see that it was not poor Hermia's fault that
Demetrius wished to marry her instead of his own lady, Helena. She knew
that if she told Demetrius that Hermia was going, as she was, to the
wood outside Athens, he would follow her, "and I can follow him, and
at least I shall see him," she said to herself. So she went to him, and
betrayed her friend's secret.

Now this wood where Lysander was to meet Hermia, and where the other two
had decided to follow them, was full of fairies, as most woods are, if
one only had the eyes to see them, and in this wood on this night were
the King and Queen of the fairies, Oberon and Titania. Now fairies
are very wise people, but now and then they can be quite as foolish as
mortal folk. Oberon and Titania, who might have been as happy as the
days were long, had thrown away all their joy in a foolish quarrel. They
never met without saying disagreeable things to each other, and scolded
each other so dreadfully that all their little fairy followers, for
fear, would creep into acorn cups and hide them there.

So, instead of keeping one happy Court and dancing all night through in
the moonlight as is fairies' use, the King with his attendants wandered
through one part of the wood, while the Queen with hers kept state in
another. And the cause of all this trouble was a little Indian boy whom
Titania had taken to be one of her followers. Oberon wanted the child to
follow him and be one of his fairy knights; but the Queen would not give
him up.

On this night, in a mossy moonlit glade, the King and Queen of the
fairies met.

"Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania," said the King.

"What! jealous, Oberon?" answered the Queen. "You spoil everything with
your quarreling. Come, fairies, let us leave him. I am not friends with
him now."

"It rests with you to make up the quarrel," said the King.

"Give me that little Indian boy, and I will again be your humble servant
and suitor."

"Set your mind at rest," said the Queen. "Your whole fairy kingdom buys
not that boy from me. Come, fairies."

And she and her train rode off down the moonbeams.

"Well, go your ways," said Oberon. "But I'll be even with you before you
leave this wood."

Then Oberon called his favorite fairy, Puck. Puck was the spirit of
mischief. He used to slip into the dairies and take the cream away, and
get into the churn so that the butter would not come, and turn the beer
sour, and lead people out of their way on dark nights and then laugh at
them, and tumble people's stools from under them when they were going to
sit down, and upset their hot ale over their chins when they were going
to drink.

"Now," said Oberon to this little sprite, "fetch me the flower called
Love-in-idleness. The juice of that little purple flower laid on the
eyes of those who sleep will make them, when they wake, to love the
first thing they see. I will put some of the juice of that flower on
my Titania's eyes, and when she wakes she will love the first thing she
sees, were it lion, bear, or wolf, or bull, or meddling monkey, or a
busy ape."

While Puck was gone, Demetrius passed through the glade followed by poor
Helena, and still she told him how she loved him and reminded him of all
his promises, and still he told her that he did not and could not love
her, and that his promises were nothing. Oberon was sorry for poor
Helena, and when Puck returned with the flower, he bade him follow
Demetrius and put some of the juice on his eyes, so that he might love
Helena when he woke and looked on her, as much as she loved him. So
Puck set off, and wandering through the wood found, not Demetrius, but
Lysander, on whose eyes he put the juice; but when Lysander woke, he saw
not his own Hermia, but Helena, who was walking through the wood looking
for the cruel Demetrius; and directly lie saw her he loved her and left
his own lady, under the spell of the purple flower.

When Hermia woke she found Lysander gone, and wandered about the wood
trying to find him. Puck went back and told Oberon what lie had done,
and Oberon soon found that he had made a mistake, and set about looking
for Demetrius, and having found him, put some of the juice on his eyes.
And the first thing Demetrius saw when he woke was also Helena. So now
Demetrius and Lysander were both following her through the wood, and it
was Hermia's turn to follow her lover as Helena had done before. The
end of it was that Helena and Hermia began to quarrel, and Demetrius and
Lysander went off to fight. Oberon was very sorry to see his kind scheme
to help these lovers turn out so badly. So he said to Puck--

"These two young men are going to fight. You must overhang the night
with drooping fog, and lead them so astray, that one will never find the
other. When they are tired out, they will fall asleep. Then drop this
other herb on Lysander's eyes. That will give him his old sight and his
old love. Then each man will have the lady who loves him, and they will
all think that this has been only a Midsummer Night's Dream. Then when
this is done, all will be well with them."

So Puck went and did as he was told, and when the two had fallen asleep
without meeting each other, Puck poured the juice on Lysander's eyes,
and said:--

       "When thou wakest,
        Thou takest
        True delight
        In the sight
        Of thy former lady's eye:
        Jack shall have Jill;
        Nought shall go ill."

Meanwhile Oberon found Titania asleep on a bank where grew wild thyme,
oxlips, and violets, and woodbine, musk-roses and eglantine. There
Titania always slept a part of the night, wrapped in the enameled skin
of a snake. Oberon stooped over her and laid the juice on her eyes,
saying:--

       "What thou seest when thou wake,
        Do it for thy true love take."

Now, it happened that when Titania woke the first thing she saw was a
stupid clown, one of a party of players who had come out into the wood
to rehearse their play. This clown had met with Puck, who had clapped
an ass's head on his shoulders so that it looked as if it grew there.
Directly Titania woke and saw this dreadful monster, she said, "What
angel is this? Are you as wise as you are beautiful?"

"If I am wise enough to find my way out of this wood, that's enough for
me," said the foolish clown.

"Do not desire to go out of the wood," said Titania. The spell of the
love-juice was on her, and to her the clown seemed the most beautiful
and delightful creature on all the earth. "I love you," she went on.
"Come with me, and I will give you fairies to attend on you."

So she called four fairies, whose names were Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Moth,
and Mustardseed.

"You must attend this gentleman," said the Queen. "Feed him with
apricots and dewberries, purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries.
Steal honey-bags for him from the bumble-bees, and with the wings of
painted butterflies fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes."

"I will," said one of the fairies, and all the others said, "I will."

"Now, sit down with me," said the Queen to the clown, "and let me stroke
your dear cheeks, and stick musk-roses in your smooth, sleek head, and
kiss your fair large ears, my gentle joy."

"Where's Peaseblossom?" asked the clown with the ass's head. He did not
care much about the Queen's affection, but he was very proud of having
fairies to wait on him. "Ready," said Peaseblossom.

"Scratch my head, Peaseblossom," said the clown. "Where's Cobweb?"
"Ready," said Cobweb.

"Kill me," said the clown, "the red bumble-bee on the top of the thistle
yonder, and bring me the honey-bag. Where's Mustardseed?"

"Ready," said Mustardseed.

"Oh, I want nothing," said the clown. "Only just help Cobweb to scratch.
I must go to the barber's, for methinks I am marvelous hairy about the
face."

"Would you like anything to eat?" said the fairy Queen.

"I should like some good dry oats," said the clown--for his donkey's
head made him desire donkey's food--"and some hay to follow."

"Shall some of my fairies fetch you new nuts from the squirrel's house?"
asked the Queen.

"I'd rather have a handful or two of good dried peas," said the clown.
"But please don't let any of your people disturb me; I am going to
sleep."

Then said the Queen, "And I will wind thee in my arms."

And so when Oberon came along he found his beautiful Queen lavishing
kisses and endearments on a clown with a donkey's head.

And before he released her from the enchantment, he persuaded her to
give him the little Indian boy he so much desired to have. Then he took
pity on her, and threw some juice of the disenchanting flower on her
pretty eyes; and then in a moment she saw plainly the donkey-headed
clown she had been loving, and knew how foolish she had been.

Oberon took off the ass's head from the clown, and left him to finish
his sleep with his own silly head lying on the thyme and violets.

Thus all was made plain and straight again. Oberon and Titania loved
each other more than ever. Demetrius thought of no one but Helena, and
Helena had never had any thought of anyone but Demetrius.

As for Hermia and Lysander, they were as loving a couple as you could
meet in a day's march, even through a fairy wood.

So the four mortal lovers went back to Athens and were married; and the
fairy King and Queen live happily together in that very wood at this
very day.




THE TEMPEST



Prospero, the Duke of Milan, was a learned and studious man, who lived
among his books, leaving the management of his dukedom to his brother
Antonio, in whom indeed he had complete trust. But that trust was
ill-rewarded, for Antonio wanted to wear the duke's crown himself, and,
to gain his ends, would have killed his brother but for the love the
people bore him. However, with the help of Prospero's great enemy,
Alonso, King of Naples, he managed to get into his hands the dukedom
with all its honor, power, and riches. For they took Prospero to sea,
and when they were far away from land, forced him into a little boat
with no tackle, mast, or sail. In their cruelty and hatred they put his
little daughter, Miranda (not yet three years old), into the boat with
him, and sailed away, leaving them to their fate.

But one among the courtiers with Antonio was true to his rightful
master, Prospero. To save the duke from his enemies was impossible, but
much could be done to remind him of a subject's love. So this worthy
lord, whose name was Gonzalo, secretly placed in the boat some fresh
water, provisions, and clothes, and what Prospero valued most of all,
some of his precious books.

The boat was cast on an island, and Prospero and his little one landed
in safety. Now this island was enchanted, and for years had lain under
the spell of a fell witch, Sycorax, who had imprisoned in the trunks
of trees all the good spirits she found there. She died shortly before
Prospero was cast on those shores, but the spirits, of whom Ariel was
the chief, still remained in their prisons.

Prospero was a great magician, for he had devoted himself almost
entirely to the study of magic during the years in which he allowed
his brother to manage the affairs of Milan. By his art he set free the
imprisoned spirits, yet kept them obedient to his will, and they were
more truly his subjects than his people in Milan had been. For he
treated them kindly as long as they did his bidding, and he exercised
his power over them wisely and well. One creature alone he found it
necessary to treat with harshness: this was Caliban, the son of the
wicked old witch, a hideous, deformed monster, horrible to look on, and
vicious and brutal in all his habits.

When Miranda was grown up into a maiden, sweet and fair to see, it
chanced that Antonio and Alonso, with Sebastian, his brother, and
Ferdinand, his son, were at sea together with old Gonzalo, and their
ship came near Prospero's island. Prospero, knowing they were there,
raised by his art a great storm, so that even the sailors on board gave
themselves up for lost; and first among them all Prince Ferdinand leaped
into the sea, and, as his father thought in his grief, was drowned. But
Ariel brought him safe ashore; and all the rest of the crew, although
they were washed overboard, were landed unhurt in different parts of
the island, and the good ship herself, which they all thought had been
wrecked, lay at anchor in the harbor whither Ariel had brought her. Such
wonders could Prospero and his spirits perform.

While yet the tempest was raging, Prospero showed his daughter the brave
ship laboring in the trough of the sea, and told her that it was filled
with living human beings like themselves. She, in pity of their lives,
prayed him who had raised this storm to quell it. Then her father bade
her to have no fear, for he intended to save every one of them.

Then, for the first time, he told her the story of his life and hers,
and that he had caused this storm to rise in order that his enemies,
Antonio and Alonso, who were on board, might be delivered into his
hands.

When he had made an end of his story he charmed her into sleep, for
Ariel was at hand, and he had work for him to do. Ariel, who longed
for his complete freedom, grumbled to be kept in drudgery, but on being
threateningly reminded of all the sufferings he had undergone when
Sycorax ruled in the land, and of the debt of gratitude he owed to the
master who had made those sufferings to end, he ceased to complain, and
promised faithfully to do whatever Prospero might command.

"Do so," said Prospero, "and in two days I will discharge thee."

Then he bade Ariel take the form of a water nymph and sent him in search
of the young prince. And Ariel, invisible to Ferdinand, hovered near
him, singing the while--

   "Come unto these yellow sands
      And then take hands:
    Court'sied when you have, and kiss'd
      (The wild waves whist),
    Foot it featly here and there;
    And, sweet sprites, the burden bear!"

And Ferdinand followed the magic singing, as the song changed to a
solemn air, and the words brought grief to his heart, and tears to his
eyes, for thus they ran--

   "Full fathom five thy father lies;
      Of his bones are coral made.
    Those are pearls that were his eyes,
      Nothing of him that doth fade,
    But doth suffer a sea-change
    Into something rich and strange.
    Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell.
    Hark! now I hear them,-- ding dong bell!"

And so singing, Ariel led the spell-bound prince into the presence of
Prospero and Miranda. Then, behold! all happened as Prospero desired.
For Miranda, who had never, since she could first remember, seen
any human being save her father, looked on the youthful prince with
reverence in her eyes, and love in her secret heart.

"I might call him," she said, "a thing divine, for nothing natural I
ever saw so noble!"

And Ferdinand, beholding her beauty with wonder and delight, exclaimed--

"Most sure the goddess on whom these airs attend!"

Nor did he attempt to hide the passion which she inspired in him, for
scarcely had they exchanged half a dozen sentences, before he vowed to
make her his queen if she were willing. But Prospero, though secretly
delighted, pretended wrath.

"You come here as a spy," he said to Ferdinand. "I will manacle your
neck and feet together, and you shall feed on fresh water mussels,
withered roots and husk, and have sea-water to drink. Follow."

"No," said Ferdinand, and drew his sword. But on the instant Prospero
charmed him so that he stood there like a statue, still as stone; and
Miranda in terror prayed her father to have mercy on her lover. But he
harshly refused her, and made Ferdinand follow him to his cell. There
he set the Prince to work, making him remove thousands of heavy logs of
timber and pile them up; and Ferdinand patiently obeyed, and thought his
toil all too well repaid by the sympathy of the sweet Miranda.

She in very pity would have helped him in his hard work, but he would
not let her, yet he could not keep from her the secret of his love, and
she, hearing it, rejoiced and promised to be his wife.

Then Prospero released him from his servitude, and glad at heart, he
gave his consent to their marriage.

"Take her," he said, "she is thine own."

In the meantime, Antonio and Sebastian in another part of the island
were plotting the murder of Alonso, the King of Naples, for Ferdinand
being dead, as they thought, Sebastian would succeed to the throne on
Alonso's death. And they would have carried out their wicked purpose
while their victim was asleep, but that Ariel woke him in good time.

Many tricks did Ariel play them. Once he set a banquet before them, and
just as they were going to fall to, he appeared to them amid thunder
