
  "Rock-a-bye, baby, on a treetop;
  Don't wake her up, or the vision will stop,"

muttered the parrot, but no one paid any attention to the noisy bird.

Gradually, a pink mist formed in the air about the Witch, and in this
mist the vision began to appear.

First, there was Button-bright in the attic of his house, finding the
Magic Umbrella. Then his first flight was shown, and afterward his trip
across the United States until he landed on the bluff where Trot sat.
In rapid succession the scenes shifted and disclosed the trial flights,
with Trot and Cap'n Bill as passengers, then the trip to Sky Island and
the meeting with the Boolooroo. No sound was heard, but it was easy
from the gestures of the actors for the Pinkies to follow all the
adventures of the strangers in the Blue Country. Button-Bright was
greatly astonished to see in this vision how the Boolooroo had tested
the Magic Umbrella and in a fit of rage cast it into a corner
underneath the cabinet, with the seats and lunch basket still attached
to the handle by means of the rope. The boy now knew why he could not
find the umbrella in the Treasure Chamber, and he was provoked to think
he had several times been quite close to it without knowing it was
there. The last scene ended with the trip through the Fog Bank and the
assistance rendered them by the friendly frog. After the three tumbled
upon the grass of the Pink Country, the vision faded away, and Rosalie
lifted her head with a smile of triumph at the success of her
witchcraft.

"Did you see clearly?" she asked.

"We did, O Wonderful Witch!" they declared.

"Then," said Rosalie, "there can be no doubt in your minds that these
strangers have told you the truth."

"None at all," they admitted.

"What arguments are advanced by the six Counselors who voted to allow
them to remain here as guests?" inquired the Witch.

"They have done us no harm," answered Coralie, speaking for her side,
"therefore we should, in honor and justice, do them no harm."

Rosalie nodded. "What arguments have the others advanced?" she asked.

"They interfere with our color scheme and do not harmonize with our
people," a man of the Sunrise Tribe answered.

Again Rosalie nodded, and Trot thought her eyes twinkled a little.

"I think I now fully comprehend the matter," said she, "and so I will
cast my vote. I favor taking the Earth people to the edge of the island
and casting them into the sky."

For a moment there was perfect silence in the room. All present
realized that this was a decree of death to the strangers. Trot was
greatly surprised at the decision, and for a moment she thought her
heart had stopped beating, for a wave of fear swept over her.
Button-Bright flushed red as a Pinky and then grew very pale. He crept
closer to Trot and took her hand in his own, pressing it to give the
little girl courage. As for Cap'n Bill, he was watching the smiling
face of the Witch in a puzzled but not hopeless way, for he thought she
did not seem wholly in earnest in what she had said.

"The case is decided," announced Tourmaline in a clear, cold voice.
"The three strangers shall be taken at once to the edge of the island
and thrown over the bushes into the sky."

"It's raining hard outside," announced Coralie, who sat near the door.
"Why not wait until this shower is over?"

"I have said 'at once,'" replied the little Queen with dignity, "and so
it must be at once. We are accustomed to rain, so it need not delay us,
and when a disagreeable duty is to be performed, the sooner it is
accomplished the better."

"May I ask, ma'am," said Cap'n Bill, addressing the Witch, "why you
have decided to murder of us in this cold-blooded way?"

"I did not decide to murder you," answered Rosalie.

"To throw us off the island will be murder," declared the sailor.

"Then they cannot throw you off," the Witch replied.

"The Queen says they will."

"I know," said Rosalie, "but I'm quite positive her people can't do it."

This statement astonished all the Pinkies, who looked at the Witch
inquiringly. "Why not?" asked Tourmaline.

"It is evident to me," said the Witch, speaking slowly and distinctly,
"that these Earth people are protected in some way by fairies. They may
not be aware of this themselves, nor did I see any fairies in my
vision. But if you will think upon it carefully, you will realize that
the Magic Umbrella has no power in itself, but is enchanted by fairy
power so that it is made to fly and carry passengers through the air BY
FAIRIES. This being the case, I do not think you will be allowed to
injure these favored people in any way; but I am curious to see in what
manner the fairies will defend them, and therefore I have voted to have
them thrown off the island. I bear these strangers no ill will, nor do
I believe they are in any danger. But since you, Tourmaline, have
determined to attempt this terrible thing at once, I shall go with you
and see what will happen."

Some of the Pinkies looked pleased and some troubled at this speech,
but they all prepared to escort the prisoners to the nearest edge of
the island. The rain was pouring down in torrents, and umbrellas were
unknown; but all of them, both men and women, slipped gossamer
raincoats over their clothing, which kept the rain from wetting them.
Then they caught up their sharp sticks and surrounding the doomed
captives commanded them to march to meet their fate.




THE ARRIVAL OF POLYCHROME

CHAPTER 17


Cap'n Bill had determined to fight desperately for their lives, but he
was a shrewd old sailorman, and he found much that was reasonable in
the Witch's assertion that fairies would protect them. He had often
wondered how the Magic Umbrella could fly and obey spoken commands, but
now he plainly saw that the thing must be directed by some invisible
power, and that power was quite likely to save them from the cruel
death that had been decreed. To be sure, the Magic Umbrella was now in
the Blue Country, and the fairies that directed its flight might be
with the umbrella instead of with them, yet the old sailor had already
experienced some strange adventures in Trot's company and knew she had
managed to escape every danger that had threatened. So he decided not
to fight until the last moment and meekly hobbled along the street as
he was commanded to do. Trot was also encouraged by the Witch's
suggestion, for she believed in fairies and trusted them; but
Button-Bright could find no comfort in their situation, and his face
was very sad as he marched along by Trot's side.

If they had followed the corkscrew windings of the street, it would
have been a long journey to the outer edge of the Pink Country, but
Tourmaline took a shortcut, leading them through private gardens and
even through houses, so that they followed almost a bee line to their
destination. It rained all the way and the walking was very
disagreeable, but our friends were confronting an important crisis in
their strange adventures, and with possible death at their journey's
end, they were in no hurry to arrive there.

Once free of the City they traversed the open country, and here they
often stepped into sticky, pink mud up to their ankles. Cap'n Bill's
wooden leg would often go down deep and stick fast in this mud, and at
such times he would be helpless until two of the Pinkies--who were a
strong people--pulled him out again. The parrot was getting its
feathers sadly draggled in the rain, and the poor bird soon presented a
wet and woebegone appearance.

  "Soak us again,
  Drown us with rain!"

it muttered in a resigned tone; and then it would turn to Trot and
moan, "The rose is red, the violet's blue, The Pinkies are a beastly
crew!"

The country was not so trim and neatly kept near the edge, for it was
evident the people did not care to go too near to the dangerous place.
There was a row of thick bushes which concealed the gulf below, and as
they approached these bushes the rain abruptly ceased, and the clouds
began to break and drift away in the sky. "Two of you seize the girl
and throw her over," said Tourmaline in a calm, matter-of-fact way,
"and two others must throw the boy over. It may take four, perhaps, to
lift the huge and ancient man."

"More'n that," said Cap'n Bill grimly. "I'm pretty sure it'll take all
o' you, young lady, an' the chances are you won't do it then."

They had halted a short distance from the bushes, and now there
suddenly appeared through a rift in the clouds an immense Rainbow. It
was perfectly formed and glistened with a dozen or more superb tintings
that were so vivid and brilliant and blended into one another so
exquisitely that everyone paused to gaze enraptured upon the sight.
Steadily, yet with wonderful swiftness, the end of the great bow
descended until it rested upon the pink field--almost at the feet of
the little party of observers. Then they saw, dancing gaily upon the
arch, a score of beautiful maidens, dressed in fleecy robes of rainbow
tints which fluttered around them like clouds.

"The Daughters of the Rainbow!" whispered Tourmaline in an awed voice,
and the Witch beside her nodded and said, "Fairies of the sky. What did
I tell you, Tourmaline?"

Just then one of the maidens tripped lightly down the span of the arch
until near the very end, leaning over to observe the group below. She
was exquisitely fair, dainty as a lily and graceful as a bough swaying
in the breeze. "Why, it's Polychrome!" exclaimed Button-Bright in a
voice of mingled wonder and delight. "Hello, Polly! Don't you remember
me?"

"Of course I remember Button-Bright," replied the maiden in a sweet,
tinkling voice. "The last time I saw you was in the Land of Oz."

"Oh!" cried Trot, turning to stare at the boy with big, wide-open eyes.
"Were you ever in the Land of Oz?"

"Yes," he answered, still looking at the Rainbow's Daughter, and then
he said appealingly, "These people want to kill us, Polly. Can't you
help us?"

  "Polly wants a cracker!
  Polly wants a cracker!"

screeched the parrot.

Polychrome straightened up and glanced at her sisters. "Tell Father to
call for me in an hour or two," said she. "There is work for me to do
here, for one of my old friends is in trouble."

With this she sprang lightly from the rainbow and stood beside
Button-Bright and Trot, and scarcely had she left the splendid arch
when it lifted and rose into the sky. The other end had been hidden in
the clouds, and now the Rainbow began to fade gradually, like mist, and
the sun broke through the clouds and shot its cheering rays over the
Pink Country until presently the Rainbow had vanished altogether and
the only reminder of it was the lovely Polychrome standing among the
wondering band of Pinkies. "Tell me," she said gently to the boy, "why
are you here, and why do these people of the sky wish to destroy you?"

In a few hurried words Button-Bright related their adventures with the
Magic Umbrella and how the Boolooroo had stolen it and they had been
obliged to escape into the Pink Country. Polychrome listened and then
turned to the Queen. "Why have you decreed death to these innocent
strangers?" she asked.

"They do not harmonize with our color scheme," replied Tourmaline.

"That is utter nonsense," declared Polychrome impatiently. "You're so
dreadfully pink here that your color, which in itself is beautiful, had
become tame and insipid. What you really need is some sharp contrast to
enhance the charm of your country, and to keep these three people here
would be a benefit rather than an injury to you."

At this, the Pinkies looked downcast and ashamed, while only Rosalie
the Witch laughed and seemed to enjoy the rebuke. "But," protested
Tourmaline, "the Great Book of Laws says our country shall harbor none
but the Pinkies."

"Does it indeed?" asked the Rainbow's Daughter. "Come, let us return at
once to your City and examine your Book of Laws. I am quite sure I can
find in them absolute protection for these poor wanderers."

They dared not disobey Polychrome's request, so at once they all turned
and walked back to the City. As it was still muddy underfoot, the
Rainbow's Daughter took a cloak from one of the women, partly rolled
it, and threw it upon the ground. Then she stepped upon it and began
walking forward. The cloak unrolled as she advanced, affording a
constant carpet for her feet and for those of the others who followed
her. So, being protected from the mud and wet, they speedily gained the
City and in a short time were all gathered in the low room of
Tourmaline's palace, where the Great Book of Laws lay upon a table.

Polychrome began turning over the leaves, while the others all watched
her anxiously and in silence. "Here," she said presently, "is a Law
which reads as follows: 'Everyone in the Pink Country is entitled to
the protection of the Ruler and to a house and a good living, except
only the Blueskins. If any of the natives of the Blue Country should
ever break through the Fog Bank, they must be driven back with sharp
sticks.' Have you read this Law, Tourmaline?"

"Yes," said the Queen, "but how does that apply to these strangers?"

"Why, being in the Pink Country, as they surely are, and not being
Blueskins, they are by this Law entitled to protection, to a home and
good living. The Law does not say 'Pinkies,' it says any who are in the
Pink Country."

"True," agreed Coralie, greatly pleased, and all the other Pinkies
nodded their heads and repeated, "True, true!"

  "The rose is red, the violet's blue,
  The law's the thing, because it's true!"

cried the parrot.

"I am indeed relieved to have you interpret the Law in this way,"
declared Tourmaline. "I knew it was cruel to throw these poor people
over the edge, but that seemed to us the only thing to be done."

"It was cruel and unjust," answered Polychrome as sternly as her sweet
voice could speak. "But here," she added, for she had still continued
to turn the leaves of the Great Book, "is another Law which you have
also overlooked. It says, 'The person, whether man or woman, boy or
girl, living in the Pink Country who has the lightest skin shall be the
Ruler--King or Queen--as long as he or she lives, unless someone of a
lighter skin is found, and this Ruler's commands all the people must
obey.' Do you know this Law?"

"Oh yes," replied Tourmaline. "That is why I am the Queen. You will
notice my complexion is of a lighter pink than that of any other of my
people."

"Yes," remarked Polychrome, looking at her critically, "when you were
made Queen without doubt you had the lightest-colored skin in all the
Pink Country. But now you are no longer Queen of the Pinkies,
Tourmaline."

Those assembled were so startled by this statement that they gazed at
the Rainbow's Daughter in astonishment for a time. Then Tourmaline
asked, "Why not, your Highness?"

"Because here is one lighter in color than yourself," pointed to Trot.
"This girl is, by the Law of the Great Book, the rightful Queen of the
Pinkies, and as loyal citizens you are all obliged to obey her
commands. Give me that circlet from your brow, Tourmaline." Without
hesitation Tourmaline removed the rose-gold circlet with its glittering
jewel and handed it to Polychrome, who turned and placed it upon Trot's
brow. Then she called in a loud, imperative voice, "Greet your new
Queen, Pinkies!"

One by one they all advanced, knelt before Trot and pressed her hand to
their lips. "Long live Queen Mayre!" called out Cap'n Bill, dancing
around on his wooden leg in great delight. "Vive la--Vive la--ah, ah,
Trot!"

"Thank you, Polly," said Button-Bright gratefully. "This will fix us
all right, I'm sure."

"Why, I have done nothing," returned Polychrome, smiling upon him. "It
is the Law of the Country. Isn't it surprising how little people know
of their Laws? Are you all contented, Pinkies?" she asked, turning to
the people.

"We are!" they cried. Then several of the men ran out to spread the
news throughout the City and Country, so that a vast crowd soon began
to gather in the Court of the Statues.




MAYRE, QUEEN OF THE PINK COUNTRY

CHAPTER 18


Polychrome now dismissed all but Button-Bright, Cap'n Bill, Rosalie the
Witch and the new Queen of the Pinkies. Tourmaline hastened away to her
father's house to put on a beautiful gown all covered with flounces and
ribbons, for she was glad to be relieved of the duties of the Queen and
was eager to be gaily dressed and one of the people again.

"I s'pose," said Trot, "I'll have to put on one of Tourmaline's common
pink dresses."

"Yes," replied Polychrome, "you must follow the customs of the country,
absurd though they may be. In the little sleeping chamber adjoining
this room you will find plenty of gowns poor enough for the Queen to
