"You can't do better," said the landlord. "At fifty dollars a month this
is a very cheap house."

"You mean forty-five? Mr. Stone?" said Mrs. Forbush.

"No, I don't," said the landlord.

"But that is what I have been paying this last year."

"That is true, but I ought to get fifty dollars, and if you won't pay it
somebody else will."

"Mr. Stone," said the widow, in a troubled voice, "I hope you will
be considerate. It has been as much as I could do to get together
forty-five dollars each month to pay you. Indeed, I can pay no more."

"Pardon me for saying that that is no affair of mine," said the landlord
brusquely. "If you can't pay the rent, by all means move into a smaller
house. If you stay here you must be prepared to pay fifty dollars a
month."

"I don't see how I can," answered the widow in dejection.

"I'll give you three days to consider it," said the landlord
indifferently. "You'll make a mistake if you give the house up. However,
that is your affair."

The landlord left the house, and Mrs. Forbush sat down depressed.

"Julia," she said to her daughter, "I wish you were old enough to advise
me. I dislike to move, but I don't dare to engage to pay such a rent.
Fifty dollars a month will amount to----"

"Six hundred dollars a year!" said Julia, who was good at figures.

"And that seems a great sum to us."

"It would be little enough to Mrs. Pitkin," said Julia, who felt that
lady's prosperity unjust, while her poor, patient mother had to struggle
so hard for a scanty livelihood.

"Oh, yes; Lavinia is rolling in wealth," sighed Mrs. Forbush. "I can't
understand how Uncle Oliver can bestow his favors on so selfish a
woman."

"Why don't you ask Philip's advice about keeping the house?" said Julia.

It must be explained that Philip and Julia were already excellent
friends, and it may be said that each was mutually attracted by the
other.

"Poor Philip has his own troubles," said Mrs. Forbush. "He has lost his
place through the malice and jealousy of Mr. and Mrs. Pitkin, for I am
sure that Lavinia is the cause of his dismissal, and I don't know when
he will be able to get another."

"You won't send him away, mother, if he can't pay his board?"

"No," answered her mother warmly. "Philip is welcome to stay with us as
long as we have a roof over our heads, whether he can pay his board or
not."

This answer seemed very satisfactory to Julia, who rose impulsively and
kissed her mother.

"That's a good mother," she said. "It would be a pity to send poor
Philip into the street."

"You seem to like Philip," said Mrs. Forbush, smiling faintly.

"Yes, mother. You know I haven't any brother, and Phil seems just like a
brother to me."

Just then the door opened, and Philip himself entered the room.

Generally he came home looking depressed, after a long and ineffectual
search for employment. Now he was fairly radiant with joy.

"Phil, you've got a place; I know you have!" exclaimed Julia, noticing
his glad expression. "Where is it? Is it a good one?"

"Have you really got a place, Philip?" asked Mrs. Forbush.

"Yes, for the present."

"Do you think you shall like your employer?"

"He is certainly treating me very well," said Phil, smiling. "He has
paid me twenty dollars in advance."

"Then the age of wonders has not passed," said the widow. "Of course I
believe you, Philip, but it seems extraordinary."

"There is something more extraordinary to come," said Phil. "He has sent
you some money, too."

"Me!" exclaimed Mrs. Forbush, in great surprise.

"What can he know about me?"

"I told him about you."

"But we are strangers."

"He used to know you, and still feels an interest in you, Mrs. Forbush."

"Who can it be?" said the widow, looking bewildered.

"I don't want to keep you in suspense any longer, so I may as well say
that it is your Uncle Oliver."

"Uncle Oliver! Why, he is in Florida."

"No; he came home from Charleston. I happened to be at the pier--I went
down to see if I could get a job at smashing baggage--when I saw him
walking down the gang-plank."

"Has he gone to his old quarters at Mr. Pitkin's?"

"No; what I told about the way they treated you and me made him angry,
and he drove to the Astor House. I have a room there, too, and am to act
as his private secretary."

"So that is your new situation, Phil?" said Julia.

"Yes, and it is a good one."

"And he really feels kindly to me?" said Mrs. Forbush hopefully.

"He sends you this and will call to-morrow," said Phil. "Actions speak
louder than words. There are a hundred dollars in this roll of bills."

"He sent all this to me?" she said.

"Yes, and of his own accord. It was no suggestion of mine.

"Julia," said Mrs. Forbush, turning to her daughter, "I believe God has
heard my prayer, and that better days are in store for all of us."

"Philip included," added Phil, smiling.

"Yes. I want you to share in our good fortune."

"Mother, you had better consult Phil about keeping the house."

"Oh, yes."

Mrs. Forbush thereupon told Philip of the landlord's visit and his
proposal to ask a higher rent.

"I hesitated about taking the house," she said; "but with this handsome
gift from Uncle Oliver, I don't know but I may venture. What do you
think?"

"I think, Mrs. Forbush, you had better not decide till you have seen
your uncle. He may have some plan of his own for you. At any rate, you
had better consult him. He will call to-morrow. And now, let me pay you
for my week's board."

"No, Philip. I shall not want it with all this money, which I should not
have received but for you."

"A debt is a debt, Mrs. Forbush, and I prefer to pay it. I shall not be
here to supper, as Mr. Carter is expecting me back to the Astor House. I
shall probably come with him when he calls upon you to-morrow."

On his return to the hotel, as he was walking on Broadway, Phil came
face to face with Alonzo Pitkin.

"I think I'll ask him about that letter his uncle gave him to post to
me," thought Phil, and he waited until Alonzo was close at hand.



CHAPTER XXV.

ALONZO IS PUZZLED.

Alonzo, who had his share of curiosity, as soon as he saw Phil's
approach, determined to speak to him, and ascertain what were his plans
and what he was doing. With the petty malice which he inherited from his
mother, he hoped that Phil had been unable to find a place and was in
distress.

"It would serve him right," said Alonzo to himself, "for trying to get
into Uncle Oliver's good graces. I s'pose he would like to cut me out,
but he'll find that he can't fight against ma and me."

"Oh, it's you, is it?" was Alonzo's salutation when they met.

"Yes," answered Phil.

"Pa bounced you, didn't he?" continued Alonzo complacently.

"Yes," answered Phil. "That is, he discharged me. I suppose that is what
you meant."

"You've got it right the first time," said Alonzo.

"Have you got another place?"

"Do you ask because you feel interested in me?" asked Phil.

"Well, not particularly," answered Alonzo appearing quite amused by the
suggestion.

"Then you ask out of curiosity?"

"S'pose I do?"

"I don't mind telling you that I have found a place, then."

"What sort of a place?" asked Alonzo, disappointed.

"There is no need of going into particulars."

"No. I s'pose not," sneered Alonzo. "You're probably selling papers or
blacking boots."

"You are mistaken. I have a much better situation than I had with your
father."

Alonzo's lower jaw fell. He was very sorry to hear it.

"Didn't your employer ask for a recommendation?"

"He didn't seem to think one necessary!" replied Phil.

"If he'd known pa had sacked you, he wouldn't have wanted you, I guess."

"He knows it. Have you got through asking questions, Alonzo?"

"You are too familiar. You can call me Mr. Pitkin."

Phil laughed at Alonzo's assumption of dignity, but made no comment upon
it.

"I want to ask you what you did with that letter Mr. Carter gave you to
post for me?" asked Phil.

Alonzo was indeed surprised, not to say dismayed. The truth was that,
judging from the "feel" of the letter, it contained money, and he had
opened it and appropriated the money to his own use. Moreover he had
the bank-note in his pocket at that very moment, not having any wish to
spend, but rather to hoard it.

"That's a queer question," he stammered. "What letter do you refer to?"

"A letter Mr. Carter gave you to mail to me."

"If he gave me any such letter I mailed it," answered Alonzo, scarcely
knowing what to say.

"I didn't receive it."

"How do you know he gave me any letter?" demanded Alonzo, puzzled.

"I don't care to tell. I only know that there was such a letter handed
to you. Do you know what was in it?"

"Writing, I s'pose," said Alonzo flippantly.

"Yes, there was, but there was also a ten-dollar bill. I didn't receive
the letter," and Phil fixed his eyes searchingly upon the face of
Alonzo.

"That's a pretty story!" said Alonzo. "I don't believe Uncle Oliver
would be such a fool as to send you ten dollars. If he did, you got it,
and now want to get as much more, pretending you haven't received it."

"You are mistaken," said Phil quietly.

"If you didn't get the letter, how do you know any was written, and that
there was anything in it?" asked Alonzo triumphantly, feeling that the
question was a crusher.

"I don't care to tell you how I know it. Do you deny it?"

"I don't remember whether Uncle Oliver gave me any letter or not."

"Will you be kind enough to give me his address in Florida, so that I
may write to him and find out?"

"No, I won't," said Alonzo angrily, "and I think you are very cheeky
to ask such a thing. Ma was right when she said that you were the most
impudent boy she ever came across."

"That's enough, Alonzo," said Phil quietly. "I've found out all I wanted
to."

"What have you found out?" asked Alonzo, his tone betraying some
apprehension.

"Never mind. I think I know what became of that letter."

"Do you mean to say I opened it and took out the money?" demanded
Alonzo, reddening.

"I wouldn't charge anybody with such a mean act, unless I felt satisfied
of it."

"You'd better not!" said Alonzo, in a bullying tone. "If I find out who
you're working for, I'll let him know that pa bounced you."

"Just as you please! I don't think that any words of yours will injure
me with the gentleman I have the good fortune to work for."

"Don't you be too sure! If you think he wouldn't mind a boy, I'll refer
him to pa and ma. They'll give you a good setting out."

"I don't doubt it," said Phil indifferently, and turned to go away.

He was called back by Alonzo, who had not quite satisfied his curiosity.

"Say, are you boarding with that woman who came to see ma the same day
you were at the house?" he asked.

"No; I have left her."

Alonzo looked well pleased. He knew that his mother felt rather uneasy
at the two being together, dreading lest they should make a concerted
attempt to ingratiate themselves with her rich uncle.

"Ma says she behaved very badly," Alonzo could not help adding.

"Mrs. Forbush is an excellent Lady," said Phil warmly, for he could not
hear one of his friends spoken against.

"Lady! She's as poor as poverty," sneered Alonzo.

"She is none the worse for that."

"Uncle Oliver can't bear her!"

"Indeed!" said Phil; pausing to see what else Alonzo would say.

"Ma says she disgraced herself, and all her relations gave her up. When
you see her tell her she had better not come sneaking round the house
again."

"If you will write a letter to that effect, I will see that she gets
it," said Phil. "That letter won't miscarry."

"I don't care to take any notice of her," said Alonzo loftily.

"You are very kind to have wasted so much notice upon me," said Phil,
amused.

Alonzo did not see fit to answer this, but walked away with his head in
the air. He was, however, not quite easy in mind.

"How in the world," he asked himself, "could that boy have found out
that Uncle Oliver gave me a letter to post? If he should learn that I
opened it and took the money, there'd be a big fuss. I guess I'd
better not meet him again. If I see him any day I'll go in a different
direction. He's so artful he may get me into trouble."

It is needless to say that neither Mr. or Mrs. Pitkin knew of Alonzo's
tampering with the letter. Much as they would have been opposed to
Phil's receiving such a letter, they would have been too wise to
sanction such a bold step.

"Well," said Mr. Carter, when Phil returned, "did you see Rebecca--Mrs.
Forbush?"

"Yes, sir, and handed her the money. She was overjoyed; not so much at
receiving so generous a sum as at learning that you were reconciled to
her."

"Poor girl!" said the old man, forgetting that she was now a worn woman.
"I am afraid that she must have suffered much."

"She has met with many hardships, sir, but she won't mind them now."

"If I live her future shall be brighter than her past. I will call
to-morrow. You, Philip, shall go with me."

"I should like to do so, sir. By the way, I met Alonzo on Broadway."

He detailed the conversation that had taken place between them.

"I am afraid he took the money," said Mr. Carter. "I am sorry any
relative of mine should have acted in that way. Let him keep it. Any
benefit he may derive from it will prove to have been dearly purchased."



CHAPTER XXVI.

A WONDERFUL CHANGE.

"You may order a carriage, Philip," said Mr. Carter the next morning.
"Pick out a handsome one with seats for four."

"Yes, sir."

In five minutes the carriage was at the door.

"Now, Philip, we will go to see my long-neglected niece, Mrs. Forbush.
Give the driver the necessary directions."

"Mrs. Forbush does not have many carriage-callers," said Philip,
smiling.

"Perhaps she will have more hereafter," said Mr. Carter, "I ought not
so long to have lost sight of her. I always liked Rebecca better than
Lavinia, yet I let the latter prejudice me against her cousin, who is
in disposition, education and sincerity her superior. You see, Philip,
there are old fools in the world as well as young ones."

"It is never too late to mend, Mr. Carter," said Phil, smiling.

"That's very true, even if it is a young philosopher who says it."

"I don't claim any originality for it, Mr. Carter."

"By the way, Philip, I have noticed that you always express yourself
very correctly. Your education must be good."

"Yes, sir, thanks to my father, or the man whom I always regarded as my
father. I am a fair Latin scholar, and know something of Greek."

"Were you preparing for college?" asked Mr. Carter, with interest.

"Yes, sir."

"Would you like to go?"

"I should have gone had father lived, but my step-mother said it was
foolishness and would be money thrown away."

"Perhaps she preferred to incur that expense for her own son?" suggested
the old gentleman.

"Jonas wouldn't consent to that. He detests study, and would decidedly
object to going to college."

"By the way, you haven't heard from them lately?"
