boys, as Ann was of the girls. She might have been seen almost any day
with a well-worn basket on her arm, exploring the streets and wharves
in search of chips, for Johnny was too vicious to do the work which
more properly belonged to him.

"You sell lots of candy now--don't you?" said Ann.

"Yes, a great deal," replied Katy, who was not disposed to spend her
time idly, and in the company of one whose reputation in the
neighborhood was not very good.

"Stop a minute--won't you? I want to speak to you."

"I will; but be as quick as you can, for I am in a hurry."

"Don't you think I could sell candy?" continued Ann.

"I dare say you could. Why don't you try, if you want to?"

"But I haven't got no candy; and mother can't make it, as you can. If
you are a mind to let me have some, I will sell it for you, and you may
give me what you like."

The idea struck the little merchant very favorably. There were a great
many girls just like Ann Grippen, who were wasting their time about the
streets, and learning to be wicked. Why couldn't she employ them to
sell candy?

"I will try you," replied Katy.

"Well, I'm all ready to begin."

"Not yet," said the little candy merchant, with a smile.

"Yes, I am."

"Your face and hands are very dirty."

"What odds will that make?" asked Ann, rather indignantly.

"Do you suppose anybody would eat a stick of candy after you had
touched it with those dirty fingers? Your customers would be afraid of
being poisoned."

"I s'pose I can wash 'em," replied Ann, who seemed still to regard it
as a very unnecessary operation.

"It would be a good plan; and while you are about it you must not
forget your face."

"I ain't a-going to touch the candy with my face," added Ann,
triumphantly.

"Very true; but if people saw you with such a dirty face, they would be
afraid your candy was not very clean."

"Any way you like. I will wash my face and hands both, if that's all."

"But that isn't all. Your dress is very dirty and very ragged."

"I can't afford to dress like a lady," said Ann, who had some of her
brother's disposition, and under any other circumstances would have
resented Katy's plain home thrusts.

"You needn't dress like a lady; but the neater and cleaner you are, the
more candy you will sell."

"I will fix up as much as I can."

"Very well; if you will come to my house to-morrow morning, I will let
you have some candy."

"How much will you give me for selling it?" asked Ann.

"I can't tell now; I will think about it, and let you know when you
come."

Katy went her way, turning over and over in her mind the scheme which
Ann's application had suggested to her. She might employ a dozen girls,
or even more than that, and pay them so much a dozen for selling the
candy. She might then stop going out to sell herself, and thus gratify
her mother. She could even go to school, and still attend to her
business.

When she returned home at noon, she proposed the plan to her mother.
Mrs. Redburn was much pleased with it, though she suggested many
difficulties in the way of its success. The girls might not be honest;
but if they were not, they could be discharged. Many of them were
vicious; they would steal or be saucy, so that people would not permit
them to enter their stores and offices, and the business would thus be
brought into disrepute. Katy determined to employ the best girls she
could find, and to tell them all that they must behave like ladies.

The next morning Ann Grippen appeared with her face and hands tolerably
clean, and wearing a dress which by a liberal construction could be
called decent. She brought a dirty, rusty old tray, which was the best
she could obtain; yet in spite of all these disadvantages, the little
candy merchant looked upon it as a hopeful case.

"Now, Ann, you must be very civil to everybody you meet," said Katy, as
she covered the rusty tray with a sheet of clean white paper.

"I hope I know how to behave myself," replied Ann, rather crustily.

"I dare say you do;" and she might have hinted that there was some
difference between knowing how to do a thing and doing it. "I was only
going to tell you how to sell candy. If you don't want me to tell you,
I won't."

"I should like to have you tell me, but I guess I know how to behave."

"You must be very civil to everybody, even when they don't speak very
pleasant to you."

"I don't know about that," replied Ann, doubtfully, for it was contrary
to the Grippen philosophy to be very civil to any one, much less to
those who were not civil to them.

"When any one buys any candy of you, you must always say, 'Thank you';
and then the next time you meet the person he will buy again."

"How much you going to give me for selling?" demanded Ann, abruptly
cutting short the instructions.

"Mother thinks you ought to have four cents a dozen."

"Four cents? My mother says I ought to have half, and I ain't going to
sell your candy for no four cents a dozen."

"Very well; you needn't if you don't wish to do so;" and Katy removed
the sheet of white paper she had placed over the dirty tray.

"You ought to give me half I get," added Ann, rather softened by Katy's
firmness and decision.

"Four cents is enough. I often sell a hundred sticks in a day."

"Well, I don't care; I will try it once."

"If we find we can afford to pay any more than four cents, we will do
so."

Katy covered the tray again, and arranged two dozen sticks on it in an
attractive manner. After giving Ann some further instructions in the
art of selling candy, she permitted her to depart on her mission. She
was not very  confident in regard to her success for Ann was too coarse
and ill-mannered for a good sales-woman. She hoped for the best,
however, and after preparing her own tray, she went out to attend to
business as usual. In the court she saw Master Simon Sneed, who was
sitting on his father's doorstep. She noticed that he looked sad and
downhearted; and when he spoke to her the tones of his voice indicated
the same depression of spirits.

"Have you seen the Mayor lately, Katy?" asked Simon, as he approached.

"Not very lately."

"I should like to see him," added he, raising his eyes to her.

"Why don't you call upon him? You know where he lives--don't you?"

"Yes, but----"

Master Simon paused, as though he did not like to explain the reason.
Katy waited for him to proceed, but as he did not, she remarked that he
looked very sad, and she hoped nothing had happened.

"Something has happened," replied he, gloomily.

"Nothing bad, I hope."

"I have left my place at Sands & Co.'s.

"Left it? Why, how can they possibly get along without you?" exclaimed
Katy.

"It is their own fault; and though I say it who should not say it, they
will never find another young man who will do as much for them as I
have done."

"I shouldn't think they would have let you go."

"Nor I; but some men never know when they are well used."

"How did it happed?"

"I asked them for an increase of salary, and told them I could stay no
longer unless they did so. And what do you think they did?"

"I don't know; I should suppose they would have raised your salary."

"No, Katy," added Simon, bitterly. "Mr. Sands told me I might go; he
wouldn't have me at any rate. Wasn't that cool? Well, well; if they
don't know their own interest, they must bear the consequences. If they
fail, or lose all their trade, they can't blame me for it. Now I have
nothing to do; and I was just thinking whether my friend the mayor
couldn't help me into a situation."

"I dare say he can. Why don't you call and see him at once?"

"I don't like to do so. He sees so many persons that I really don't
think he would recollect me. I must get something to do, though; for my
father is sick, and winter is coming on."

"How much salary did you get, Master Simon?" asked Katy, who highly
approved his determination not to be a burden upon his father.

"Two dollars and a half a week."

"Is that all!"

"Yes; they ought to have given me ten. Even that was better than
nothing."

"I was thinking of something, Master Simon," said Katy, after a pause.

"What, Katy?"

"I make four or five dollars a week."

"Is it possible!"

"If you have a mind to sell candy, I will furnish you all you want, so
that you can make at least three dollars a week."

The lip of Master Simon slowly curled, till his face bore an expression
of sovereign contempt. He rose from his seat, and fixed his eyes rather
sternly upon the little candy merchant, who began to think she had made
a bad mistake, though all the time she had intended to do a kind act.

"What have I done, Katy, that you should insult me? Do you think I have
sunk so low as to peddle candy about the streets?" said he,
contemptuously.

"Do you think I have sunk very low, Master Simon?" asked Katy, with a
pleasant smile on her face.

"Your business is very low," he replied, more gently.

"Is that business low by which I honestly make money enough to support
my sick mother and myself?"

"It would be low for me; my ideas run a little higher than that,"
answered Simon, rather disposed to apologize for his hard words; for
Katy's smile had conquered him, as a smile oftener will conquer than a
hard word.

"You know best; but if I can do anything for you, Master Simon, I shall
be very glad to do so."

"Thank you, Katy; you mean right, but never speak to me about selling
candy again. I think you can help me."

"Then I will."

"I will see you again when I get my plan arranged. In the meantime, if
you happen to meet my friend the mayor, just speak a good word for me."

"I will;" and Katy left him.



CHAPTER XIV.

MASTER SIMON SNEED MAKES A MISTAKE.

Contrary to the expectations of Katy and her mother, Ann Grippen
returned at noon with her tray empty, having sold the whole two dozen
sticks.

"Well, Ann, how do you like the business?" asked Katy.

"First rate. Here is twenty-four cents," replied Ann; and it was
evident, from her good-natured laugh, that she was much encouraged by
her success.

"You may give me sixteen; the other eight belong to you."

"I think I can do something at it," added Ann, as she regarded with
much satisfaction the first money she had ever earned in her life.

"You can, if you work it right; but you must be very gentle and
patient; you must keep yourself clean and----"

"Well, I guess I know all about that," interrupted Ann, who did not
like this style of remark.

"Katy," said her mother, who was sitting in her rocking-chair, by the
fire.

"What, mother?"

"Come here a moment."

Katy crossed the room to her mother, to hear what she wished to say.

"You must not talk to her in that style," said Mrs. Redburn, in a tone
so low that Ann could not hear her.

"Why not, mother? I was only telling her how to do."

"But you speak in that tone of superiority which no one likes to hear.
You are but a child, as she is, and she will not listen to such advice
from you."

Katy wondered what her mother would have thought if she had heard what
she said to Ann the day before. Yet she was conscious that she had "put
on airs," and talked like a very old and a very wise person.

"I suppose you would like to go out again this afternoon," resumed
Katy, joining her assistant again.

"I don't care if I do."

"Well, come this afternoon, and you shall have some more candy;" and
Ann ran home to get her dinner.

"I think my plan will work well, mother," said Katy, when she had gone.

"It has so far, but you must not be too sure."

