that his mission was not only to gather funds for the building of his
church, but to keep alive, in all these remote and lonely
neighborhoods, that love for the cause which was its only hope in the
years to come.

"If any of the sisters will provide entertainment," he said, "Mrs.
Burch and I will remain among you to-night and to-morrow. In that event
we could hold a parlor meeting. My wife and one of my children would
wear the native costume, we would display some specimens of Syrian
handiwork, and give an account of our educational methods with the
children. These informal parlor meetings, admitting of questions or
conversation, are often the means of interesting those not commonly
found at church services so I repeat, if any member of the congregation
desires it and offers her hospitality, we will gladly stay and tell you
more of the Lord's work."

A pall of silence settled over the little assembly. There was some
cogent reason why every "sister" there was disinclined for company.
Some had no spare room, some had a larder less well stocked than usual,
some had sickness in the family, some were "unequally yoked together
with unbelievers" who disliked strange ministers. Mrs. Burch's thin
hands fingered her black silk nervously. "Would no one speak!" thought
Rebecca, her heart fluttering with sympathy. Mrs. Robinson leaned over
and whispered significantly, "The missionaries always used to be
entertained at the brick house; your grandfather never would let 'em
sleep anywheres else when he was alive." She meant this for a stab at
Miss Miranda's parsimony, remembering the four spare chambers, closed
from January to December; but Rebecca thought it was intended as a
suggestion. If it had been a former custom, perhaps her aunts would
want her to do the right thing; for what else was she representing the
family? So, delighted that duty lay in so pleasant a direction, she
rose from her seat and said in the pretty voice and with the quaint
manner that so separated her from all the other young people in the
village, "My aunts, Miss Miranda and Miss Jane Sawyer, would be very
happy to have you visit them at the brick house, as the ministers
always used to do when their father was alive. They sent their respects
by me." The "respects" might have been the freedom of the city, or an
equestrian statue, when presented in this way, and the aunts would have
shuddered could they have foreseen the manner of delivery; but it was
vastly impressive to the audience, who concluded that Mirandy Sawyer
must be making her way uncommonly fast to mansions in the skies, else
what meant this abrupt change of heart?

Mr. Burch bowed courteously, accepted the invitation "in the same
spirit in which it was offered," and asked Brother Milliken to lead in
prayer.

If the Eternal Ear could ever tire it would have ceased long ere this
to listen to Deacon Milliken, who had wafted to the throne of grace the
same prayer, with very slight variations, for forty years. Mrs. Perkins
followed; she had several petitions at her command, good sincere ones
too, but a little cut and dried, made of scripture texts laboriously
woven together. Rebecca wondered why she always ended, at the most
peaceful seasons, with the form, "Do Thou be with us, God of Battles,
while we strive onward like Christian soldiers marching as to war;" but
everything sounded real to her to-day, she was in a devout mood, and
many things Mr. Burch had said had moved her strangely. As she lifted
her head the minister looked directly at her and said, "Will our young
sister close the service by leading us in prayer?"

Every drop of blood in Rebecca's body seemed to stand still, and her
heart almost stopped beating. Mrs. Cobb's excited breathing could be
heard distinctly in the silence. There was nothing extraordinary in Mr.
Burch's request. In his journeyings among country congregations he was
constantly in the habit of meeting young members who had "experienced
religion" and joined the church when nine or ten years old. Rebecca was
now thirteen; she had played the melodeon, led the singing, delivered
her aunts' invitation with an air of great worldly wisdom, and he,
concluding that she must be a youthful pillar of the church, called
upon her with the utmost simplicity.

Rebecca's plight was pathetic. How could she refuse; how could she
explain she was not a "member;" how could she pray before all those
elderly women! John Rogers at the stake hardly suffered more than this
poor child for the moment as she rose to her feet, forgetting that
ladies prayed sitting, while deacons stood in prayer. Her mind was a
maze of pictures that the Rev. Mr. Burch had flung on the screen. She
knew the conventional phraseology, of course; what New England child,
accustomed to Wednesday evening meetings, does not? But her own secret
prayers were different. However, she began slowly and tremulously:--

    "Our Father who art in Heaven, ... Thou art God in Syria
    just the same as in Maine; ...over there to-day are blue
    skies and yellow stars and burning suns . . . the great trees
    are waving in the warm air, while here the snow lies thick
    under our feet, ... but no distance is too far for God to
    travel and so He is with us here as He is with them there, ...
    and our thoughts rise to Him 'as doves that to their
    windows fly.' ...

    "We cannot all be missionaries, teaching people to be good, ...
    some of us have not learned yet how to be good ourselves,
    but if thy kingdom is to come and thy will is to be done on
    earth as it is in heaven, everybody must try and everybody
    must help, ... those who are old and tired and those who
    are young and strong.... The little children of whom we
    have heard, those born under Syrian skies, have strange and
    interesting work to do for Thee, and some of us would like to
    travel in far lands and do wonderful brave things for the
    heathen and gently take away their idols of wood and stone.
    But perhaps we have to stay at home and do what is given us
    to do ... sometimes even things we dislike, ... but that
    must be what it means in the hymn we sang, when it talked
    about the sweet perfume that rises with every morning
    sacrifice.... This is the way that God teaches us to be
    meek and patient, and the thought that He has willed it so
    should rob us of our fears and help us bear the years. Amen."

Poor little ignorant, fantastic child! Her petition was simply a
succession of lines from the various hymns, and images the minister had
used in his sermon, but she had her own way of recombining and applying
these things, even of using them in a new connection, so that they had
a curious effect of belonging to her. The words of some people might
generally be written with a minus sign after them, the minus meaning
that the personality of the speaker subtracted from, rather than added
to, their weight; but Rebecca's words might always have borne the plus
sign.

The "Amen" said, she sat down, or presumed she sat down, on what she
believed to be a bench, and there was a benediction. In a moment or
two, when the room ceased spinning, she went up to Mrs. Burch, who
kissed her affectionately and said, "My dear, how glad I am that we are
going to stay with you. Will half past five be too late for us to come?
It is three now, and we have to go to the station for our valise and
for our children. We left them there, being uncertain whether we should
go back or stop here."

Rebecca said that half past five was their supper hour, and then
accepted an invitation to drive home with Mrs. Cobb. Her face was
flushed and her lip quivered in a way that aunt Sarah had learned to
know, so the homeward drive was taken almost in silence. The bleak wind
and aunt Sarah's quieting presence brought her back to herself,
however, and she entered the brick house cheerily. Being too full of
news to wait in the side entry to take off her rubber boots, she
carefully lifted a braided rug into the sitting-room and stood on that
while she opened her budget.

"There are your shoes warming by the fire," said aunt Jane. "Slip them
right on while you talk."



XIX

DEACON ISRAEL'S SUCCESSOR

"It was a very small meeting, aunt Miranda," began Rebecca, "and the
missionary and his wife are lovely people, and they are coming here to
stay all night and to-morrow with you. I hope you won't mind."

"Coming here!" exclaimed Miranda, letting her knitting fall in her lap,
and taking her spectacles off, as she always did in moments of extreme
excitement. "Did they invite themselves?"

"No," Rebecca answered. "I had to invite them for you; but I thought
you'd like to have such interesting company. It was this way"--

"Stop your explainin', and tell me first when they'll be here. Right
away?"

"No, not for two hours--about half past five."

"Then you can explain, if you can, who gave you any authority to invite
a passel of strangers to stop here over night, when you know we ain't
had any company for twenty years, and don't intend to have any for
another twenty,--or at any rate while I'm the head of the house."

"Don't blame her, Miranda, till you've heard her story," said Jane. "It
was in my mind right along, if we went to the meeting, some such thing
might happen, on account of Mr. Burch knowing father."

"The meeting was a small one," began Rebecca "I gave all your messages,
and everybody was disappointed you couldn't come, for the president
wasn't there, and Mrs. Matthews took the chair, which was a pity, for
the seat wasn't nearly big enough for her, and she reminded me of a
line in a hymn we sang, 'Wide as the heathen nations are,' and she wore
that kind of a beaver garden-hat that always gets on one side. And Mr.
Burch talked beautifully about the Syrian heathen, and the singing went
real well, and there looked to be about forty cents in the basket that
was passed on our side. And that wouldn't save even a heathen baby,
would it? Then Mr. Burch said, if any sister would offer entertainment,
they would pass the night, and have a parlor meeting in Riverboro
to-morrow, with Mrs. Burch in Syrian costume, and lovely foreign things
to show. Then he waited and waited, and nobody said a word. I was so
mortified I didn't know what to do. And then he repeated what he said,
an explained why he wanted to stay, and you could see he thought it was
his duty. Just then Mrs. Robinson whispered to me and said the
missionaries always used to go to the brick house when grandfather was
alive, and that he never would let them sleep anywhere else. I didn't
know you had stopped having them because no traveling ministers have
been here, except just for a Sunday morning, since I came to Riverboro.
So I thought I ought to invite them, as you weren't there to do it for
yourself, and you told me to represent the family."

"What did you do--go up and introduce yourself as folks was goin' out?"

"No; I stood right up in meeting. I had to, for Mr. Burch's feelings
were getting hurt at nobody's speaking. So I said, 'My aunts, Miss
Miranda and Miss Jane Sawyer would be happy to have you visit at the
brick house, just as the missionaries always did when their father was
alive, and they sent their respects by me.' Then I sat down; and Mr.
Burch prayed for grandfather, and called him a man of God, and thanked
our Heavenly Father that his spirit was still alive in his descendants
(that was you), and that the good old house where so many of the
brethren had been cheered and helped, and from which so many had gone
out strengthened for the fight, was still hospitably open for the
stranger and wayfarer."

Sometimes, when the heavenly bodies are in just the right conjunction,
nature seems to be the most perfect art. The word or the deed coming
straight from the heart, without any thought of effect, seems inspired.

A certain gateway in Miranda Sawyer's soul had been closed for years;
not all at once had it been done, but gradually, and without her full
knowledge. If Rebecca had plotted for days, and with the utmost
cunning, she could not have effected an entrance into that forbidden
country, and now, unknown to both of them, the gate swung on its stiff
and rusty hinges, and the favoring wind of opportunity opened it wider
and wider as time went on. All things had worked together amazingly for
good. The memory of old days had been evoked, and the daily life of a
pious and venerated father called to mind; the Sawyer name had been
publicly dignified and praised; Rebecca had comported herself as the
granddaughter of Deacon Israel Sawyer should, and showed conclusively
that she was not "all Randall," as had been supposed. Miranda was
rather mollified by and pleased with the turn of events, although she
did not intend to show it, or give anybody any reason to expect that
this expression of hospitality was to serve for a precedent on any
subsequent occasion.

"Well, I see you did only what you was obliged to do, Rebecca," she
said, "and you worded your invitation as nice as anybody could have
done. I wish your aunt Jane and me wasn't both so worthless with these
colds; but it only shows the good of havin' a clean house, with every
room in order, whether open or shut, and enough victuals cooked so 't
you can't be surprised and belittled by anybody, whatever happens.
There was half a dozen there that might have entertained the Burches as
easy as not, if they hadn't 'a' been too mean or lazy. Why didn't your
missionaries come right along with you?"

"They had to go to the station for their valise and their children."

"Are there children?" groaned Miranda.

"Yes, aunt Miranda, all born under Syrian skies."

"Syrian grandmother!" ejaculated Miranda (and it was not a fact). "How
many?"

"I didn't think to ask; but I will get two rooms ready, and if there
are any over I'll take 'em into my bed," said Rebecca, secretly hoping
that this would be the case. "Now, as you're both half sick, couldn't
you trust me just once to get ready for the company? You can come up
when I call. Will you?"

"I believe I will," sighed Miranda reluctantly. "I'll lay down side o'
Jane in our bedroom and see if I can get strength to cook supper. It's
half past three--don't you let me lay a minute past five. I kep' a good
fire in the kitchen stove. I don't know, I'm sure, why I should have
baked a pot o' beans in the middle of the week, but they'll come in
handy. Father used to say there was nothing that went right to the spot
with returned missionaries like pork 'n' beans 'n' brown bread. Fix up
the two south chambers, Rebecca."

Rebecca, given a free hand for the only time in her life, dashed
upstairs like a whirlwind. Every room in the brick house was as neat as
wax, and she had only to pull up the shades, go over the floors with a
whisk broom, and dust the furniture. The aunts could hear her scurrying
to and fro, beating up pillows and feather beds, flapping towels,
jingling crockery, singing meanwhile in her clear voice:--

  "In vain with lavish kindness
       The gifts of God are strown;
  The heathen in his blindness
       Bows down to wood and stone."

She had grown to be a handy little creature, and tasks she was capable
of doing at all she did like a flash, so that when she called her aunts
at five o'clock to pass judgment, she had accomplished wonders. There
were fresh towels on bureaus and washstands, the beds were fair and
smooth, the pitchers were filled, and soap and matches were laid out;
newspaper, kindling, and wood were in the boxes, and a large stick
burned slowly in each air-tight stove. "I thought I'd better just take
the chill off," she explained, "as they're right from Syria; and that
reminds me, I must look it up in the geography before they get here."

There was nothing to disapprove, so the two sisters went downstairs to
make some slight changes in their dress. As they passed the parlor door
Miranda thought she heard a crackle and looked in. The shades were up,
there was a cheerful blaze in the open stove in the front parlor, and a
fire laid on the hearth in the back room. Rebecca's own lamp, her
second Christmas present from Mr. Aladdin, stood on a marble-topped
table in the corner, the light that came softly through its
rose-colored shade transforming the stiff and gloomy ugliness of the
room into a place where one could sit and love one's neighbor.

"For massy's sake, Rebecca," called Miss Miranda up the stairs, "did
you think we'd better open the parlor?"

Rebecca came out on the landing braiding her hair.

"We did on Thanksgiving and Christmas, and I thought this was about as
great an occasion," she said. "I moved the wax flowers off the
mantelpiece so they wouldn't melt, and put the shells, the coral, and
the green stuffed bird on top of the what-not, so the children wouldn't
ask to play with them. Brother Milliken's coming over to see Mr. Burch
about business, and I shouldn't wonder if Brother and Sister Cobb
happened in. Don't go down cellar, I'll be there in a minute to do the
running."

Miranda and Jane exchanged glances.

"Ain't she the beatin'est creetur that ever was born int' the world!"
exclaimed Miranda; "but she can turn off work when she's got a mind to!"

At quarter past five everything was ready, and the neighbors, those at
least who were within sight of the brick house (a prominent object in
the landscape when there were no leaves on the trees), were curious
almost to desperation. Shades up in both parlors! Shades up in the two
south bedrooms! And fires--if human vision was to be relied on--fires
in about every room. If it had not been for the kind offices of a lady
who had been at the meeting, and who charitably called in at one or two
houses and explained the reason of all this preparation, there would
have been no sleep in many families.

The missionary party arrived promptly, and there were but two children,
seven or eight having been left with the brethren in Portland, to
diminish traveling expenses. Jane escorted them all upstairs, while
Miranda watched the cooking of the supper; but Rebecca promptly took
the two little girls away from their mother, divested them of their
wraps, smoothed their hair, and brought them down to the kitchen to
smell the beans.

There was a bountiful supper, and the presence of the young people
robbed it of all possible stiffness. Aunt Jane helped clear the table
and put away the food, while Miranda entertained in the parlor; but
Rebecca and the infant Burches washed the dishes and held high carnival
in the kitchen, doing only trifling damage--breaking a cup and plate
that had been cracked before, emptying a silver spoon with some
dishwater out of the back door (an act never permitted at the brick
house), and putting coffee grounds in the sink. All evidences of crime
having been removed by Rebecca, and damages repaired in all possible
cases, the three entered the parlor, where Mr. and Mrs. Cobb and Deacon
and Mrs. Milliken had already appeared.

It was such a pleasant evening! Occasionally they left the heathen in
his blindness bowing down to wood and stone, not for long, but just to
give themselves (and him) time enough to breathe, and then the Burches
told strange, beautiful, marvelous things. The two smaller children
sang together, and Rebecca, at the urgent request of Mrs. Burch, seated
herself at the tinkling old piano and gave "Wild roved an Indian girl,
bright Alfarata" with considerable spirit and style.

At eight o'clock she crossed the room, handed a palm-leaf fan to her
aunt Miranda, ostensibly that she might shade her eyes from the
lamplight; but it was a piece of strategy that gave her an opportunity
to whisper, "How about cookies?"

"Do you think it's worth while?" sibilated Miss Miranda in answer.

"The Perkinses always do."

"All right. You know where they be."

Rebecca moved quietly towards the door, and the young Burches
cataracted after her as if they could not bear a second's separation.
In five minutes they returned, the little ones bearing plates of thin
caraway wafers,--hearts, diamonds, and circles daintily sugared, and
flecked with caraway seed raised in the garden behind the house. These
were a specialty of Miss Jane's, and Rebecca carried a tray with six
tiny crystal glasses filled with dandelion wine, for which Miss Miranda
had been famous in years gone by. Old Deacon Israel had always had it
passed, and he had bought the glasses himself in Boston. Miranda
admired them greatly, not only for their beauty but because they held
so little. Before their advent the dandelion wine had been served in
sherry glasses.

As soon as these refreshments--commonly called a "colation" in
Riverboro--had been genteelly partaken of, Rebecca looked at the clock,
rose from her chair in the children's corner, and said cheerfully,
"Come! time for little missionaries to be in bed!"

Everybody laughed at this, the big missionaries most of all, as the
young people shook hands and disappeared with Rebecca.



XX

A CHANGE OF HEART

"That niece of yours is the most remarkable girl I have seen in years,"
said Mr. Burch when the door closed.

"She seems to be turnin' out smart enough lately, but she's consid'able
heedless," answered Miranda, "an' most too lively."

"We must remember that it is deficient, not excessive vitality, that
makes the greatest trouble in this world," returned Mr. Burch.

"She'd make a wonderful missionary," said Mrs. Burch; "with her voice,
and her magnetism, and her gift of language."

"If I was to say which of the two she was best adapted for, I'd say
she'd make a better heathen," remarked Miranda curtly.

"My sister don't believe in flattering children," hastily interpolated
Jane, glancing toward Mrs. Burch, who seemed somewhat shocked, and was
about to open her lips to ask if Rebecca was not a "professor."

Mrs. Cobb had been looking for this question all the evening and
dreading some allusion to her favorite as gifted in prayer. She had
taken an instantaneous and illogical dislike to the Rev. Mr. Burch in
the afternoon because he called upon Rebecca to "lead." She had seen
the pallor creep into the girl's face, the hunted look in her eyes, and
the trembling of the lashes on her cheeks, and realized the ordeal
through which she was passing. Her prejudice against the minister had
relaxed under his genial talk and presence, but feeling that Mrs. Burch
was about to tread on dangerous ground, she hastily asked her if one
had to change cars many times going from Riverboro to Syria. She felt
that it was not a particularly appropriate question, but it served her
turn.
