senate to refuse to listen to the envoys of Rome. Another embassy was
sent to Hannibal, but the general would not give them an interview,
and, following the instructions they had received, the ambassadors then
sailed to Carthage to make a formal demand for reparation, and for the
person of Hannibal to be delivered over to them for punishment.

But the Barcine party were for the moment in the ascendancy; long
negotiations took place which led to nothing, and all this time the
condition of the Saguntines was becoming more desperate. Five new
ambassadors were therefore sent from Rome to ask in the name of the
republic whether Hannibal was authorized by the Carthaginians to lay
siege to Saguntum, to demand that he should be delivered to Rome, and,
in case of refusal, to declare war. The Carthaginian senate met in the
temple of Moloch and there received the Roman ambassadors. Q. Fabius,
the chief man of the embassy, briefly laid the demands of Rome before
the senate. Cestar, one of the Barcine leaders, replied, refusing the
demands. Fabius then rose.

"I give you the choice--peace or war?"

"Choose yourself," the Carthaginians cried.

"Then I choose war," Fabius said.

"So be it," the assembly shouted.

And thus war was formally declared between the two Republics. But
Saguntum had now fallen. The second wall had been breached by the time
Hannibal had returned from his expedition, and an assault was ordered.
As before, the Saguntines fought desperately, but after a long struggle
the Carthaginians succeeded in winning a footing upon the wall.

The Saguntines, seeing that further resistance was vain, that the
besiegers had already won the breach, that there was no chance of
assistance from Rome, and having, moreover, consumed their last
provisions, sought for terms. Halcon, the Saguntine general, and a noble
Spaniard named Alorcus, on the part of Hannibal, met in the breach.
Alorcus named the conditions which Hannibal had imposed--that the
Saguntines should restore to the Torbolates the territory they had
taken from them, and that the inhabitants, giving up all their goods and
treasures, should then be permitted to leave the town and to found a new
city at a spot which Hannibal would name.

The Saguntines, who were crowding round, heard the terms. Many of the
principal senators at once left the place, and hurrying into their
houses carried the gold and silver which they had there, and also some
of that in the public treasury, into the forum, and piling up a vast
heap of wood set it alight and threw themselves into the flames. This
act caused a tremendous commotion in the city. A general tumult broke
out, and Hannibal, seeing that his terms were refused, poured his troops
across the breach, and after a short but desperate fight captured the
city. In accordance with the cruel customs of the times, which, however,
were rarely carried into effect by Hannibal, the male prisoners were
all put to the sword, as on this occasion he considered it necessary
to strike terror into the inhabitants of Spain, and to inflict a lesson
which would not be forgotten during his absence in the country.

The siege had lasted eight months. The booty taken was enormous. Every
soldier in the army had a rich share of the plunder, and a vast sum was
sent to Carthage; besides which the treasure chests of the army were
filled up. All the Spanish troops had leave given them to return to
their homes for the winter, and they dispersed highly satisfied with the
booty with which they were laden. This was a most politic step on the
part of the young general, as the tribesmen, seeing the wealth with
which their countrymen returned, no longer felt it a hardship to fight
in the Carthaginian ranks, and the levies called out in the spring went
willingly and even eagerly.

Hannibal returned with his African troops to spend the winter at
Carthagena. He was there joined by the emissaries he had sent to
examine Southern Gaul and the passes of the Alps, to determine the most
practicable route for the march of the army, and to form alliances
with the tribes of Southern Gaul and Northern Italy. Their reports were
favourable, for they had found the greatest discontent existing among
the tribes north of the Apennines, who had but recently been conquered
by the Romans.

Their chiefs, smarting under the heavy yoke of Rome, listened eagerly
to the offers of Hannibal's agents, who distributed large sums of money
among them, and promised them, in return for their assistance, not only
their freedom from their conqueror, but a full share in the spoils of
Rome. The chiefs replied that they would render any assistance to the
Carthaginians as soon as they passed the Alps, and that they would then
join them with all their forces. The reports as to the passes of the
Alps were less satisfactory. Those who had examined them found that the
difficulties they offered to the passage of an army were enormous, and
that the tribes who inhabited the lower passes, having suffered in
no way yet at the hands of Rome, would probably resist any army
endeavouring to cross.

By far the easiest route would be to follow the seashore, but this was
barred against the Carthaginians by the fact that the Massilians (the
people of Marseilles) were the close allies of Rome. They had admitted
Roman colonists among them, and carried on an extensive trade with the
capital. Their town was strong, and their ports would be open to the
Roman fleets. The tribes in their neighourhood were all closely allied
with them.

Hannibal saw at once that he could not advance by the route by the sea
without first reducing Marseilles. This would be an even more difficult
operation than the siege of Saguntum, as Rome would be able to send any
number of men by sea to the aid of the besieged, and the great struggle
would be fought out in Southern Gaul instead of, as he wished, in Italy.
Thus he decided to march by a route which would take him far north of
Marseilles, even although it would necessitate a passage through the
terrible passes of the Alps.

During the winter Hannibal laboured without intermission in preparing
for his expedition. He was ever among his soldiers, and personally saw
to everything which could conduce to their comfort and well being. He
took a lively interest in every minute detail which affected them; saw
that their clothing was abundant and of good quality, inspected their
rations, and saw that these were well cooked.

It was this personal attention to the wants of his soldiers which, as
much as his genius as a general, his personal valour, and his brilliant
qualities, endeared him to his troops. They saw how anxious he was for
their welfare; they felt that he regarded every man in his army as a
friend and comrade, and in return they were ready to respond to every
appeal, to make every sacrifice, to endure, to suffer, to fight to the
death for their beloved leader. His troops were mercenaries--that is,
they fought for pay in a cause which in no way concerned them--but
personal affection for their general supplied in them the place of the
patriotism which inspires modern soldiers, and transformed these semi
barbarous tribesmen into troops fit to cope with the trained legionaries
of Rome.

Hannibal was far in advance of any of the generals of his time in all
matters of organization. His commissariat was as perfect as that of
modern armies. It was its duty to collect grain from the country through
which the army marched, to form magazines, to collect and drive with the
troops herds of cattle, to take over the provisions and booty brought
in by foraging parties, and, to see to the daily distribution of rations
among the various divisions.

Along the line of communication depots were formed, where provisions,
clothing, and arms were stored in readiness for use, and from which the
whole army could, in case of necessity, be supplied with fresh clothing
and shoes. A band of surgeons accompanied the army, at the head of whom
was Synhalus, one of the most celebrated physicians of the time. So
perfect were the arrangements that it is said that throughout the
long campaign in Italy not a single day passed but that the troops,
elephants, and animals of all descriptions accompanying the army
received their daily rations of food.



CHAPTER X: BESET

During the winter Hannibal made every preparation to ensure the
tranquillity of Spain while he was absent. In order to lessen the number
of possible enemies there he raised a body of twelve hundred horse and
fourteen thousand infantry from among the most turbulent tribes, and
sent them across to Africa to serve as garrisons in Carthage and other
points, while an equal number of African troops were brought over to
garrison Spain, of which Hasdrubal, Hannibal's brother, was to have the
government during his absence.

Hanno, an able general, was to command the force which was to be left in
southern Gaul to keep open the communications between the Pyrenees and
the Alps, while the youngest brother, Mago, a youth of about the same
age as Malchus, was to accompany him to Italy. Hannibal's wife and a
child which had been born in the preceding spring, were sent by ship to
Carthage.

In the early spring the march commenced, the army following the coast
line until it reached the mouth of the Ebro. The mountainous and broken
country lying between this river and the Pyrenees, and now known as
Catalonia, was inhabited by fierce tribes unconquered as yet by Roman or
Carthaginian. Its conquest presented enormous difficulties. There was
no coherence between its people; but each valley and mountain was a
stronghold to be defended desperately until the last. The inhabitants,
accustomed to the mountains, were hardy, active, and, vigourous, ready
to oppose a desperate resistance so long as resistance was possible, and
then to flee across their hills at a speed which defied the fleetest of
their pursuers.

Every man was a soldier, and at the first alarm the inhabitants of the
villages abandoned their houses, buried their grain, and having driven
away their cattle into almost inaccessible recesses among the hills,
returned to oppose the invaders. The conquest of such a people was
one of the most difficult of undertakings, as the French generals
of Napoleon afterwards discovered, to their cost. The cruelty of the
mountaineers was equal to their courage, and the lapse of two thousand
years changed them but little, for in their long struggle against the
French they massacred every detachment whom they could surprise among
the hills, murdered the wounded who fell into their hands, and poisoned
wells and grain.

The army which Hannibal had brought to the foot of this country through
which he had to pass, amounted to 102,000 men, of which 12,000 were
cavalry and 90,000 infantry. This force passed the Ebro in three bodies
of equal strength. The natives opposed a desperate resistance, but the
three columns pressed forward on parallel lines. The towns were besieged
and captured, and after two months of desperate fighting Catalonia was
subdued, but its conquest cost Hannibal twenty-one thousand men, a fifth
of his whole army. Hanno was for the time left here with ten thousand
infantry and a thousand cavalry. He was to suppress any fresh rising, to
hold the large towns, to form magazines for the army, and to keep open
the passes of the Pyrenees. He fixed his headquarters at Burgos. His
operations were facilitated by the fact that along the line of the sea
coast were a number of Phoenician colonies who were natural allies of
the Carthaginians, and aided them in every way in their power. Before
advancing through the passes of the Pyrenees Hannibal still further
reduced the strength of his force by weeding out all those who had in
the conflict among the mountains shown themselves wanting in personal
strength or in military qualities. Giving these leave to return home he
advanced at the head of fifty thousand picked infantry and nine thousand
cavalry.

The company under Malchus had rendered good service during the campaign
of Catalonia. It had accompanied the column marching by the seashore;
with this were the elephants, the treasure, and the heavy baggage of the
army. It had throughout been in advance of the column, feeling the
way, protecting it from ambushes, and dispersing any small bodies of
tribesmen who might have placed themselves on heights, whence with
arrows and slings they could harass the column on its march. The company
had lost comparatively few men in the campaign, for it had taken no part
in the various sieges. Its duties, however, were severe in the extreme.
The men were ever on the watch, scouting the country round, while the
army was engaged in siege operations, sometimes ascending mountains
whence they could command views over the interior or pursuing bands of
tribesmen to their refuges among the hills.

Severely as Malchus had trained himself in every exercise, he found it
at first difficult to support the fatigues of such a life; but every day
his muscles hardened, and by the end of the campaign he was able to keep
on foot as long as the hardest of his men.

One day he had followed a party of the tribesmen far up among the
mountains. The enemy had scattered, and the Arabs in their hot pursuit
had also broken up into small parties. Malchus kept his eye upon the man
who appeared to be the chief of the enemy's party, and pressing hotly
upon him brought him to bay on the face of a steep and rugged gorge.
Only one of the Numidians was at hand, a man named Nessus, who was
greatly attached to his young leader, and always kept close to him in
his expeditions. The savage, a bulky and heavy man, finding he could
no longer keep ahead of his fleet footed pursuers, took his post at a
narrow point in the path where but one could oppose him; and there, with
his heavy sword drawn, he awaited the attack. Malchus advanced to meet
him, sword in hand, when an arrow from Nessus whizzed past him and
struck the chief in the throat, and his body fell heavily down the
rocks.

"That is not fair," Malchus said angrily. "I would fain have fought him
hand to hand."

The Arab bowed his head.

"My lord," he said, "the combat would not have been even; the man had
the upper ground, and you would have fought at a grievous disadvantage.
Why should you risk your life in a fight with the swords, when my arrow
has answered all purposes? What should I have said if I had gone back
without you? What satisfaction would it have been to me to avenge your
fall? What would they have said to me when I told them that I looked on
idly while you engaged in such a struggle? Valour is valour, and we all
know that my lord is the bravest among us; but the life of the cousin of
our general is too valuable to be risked for nought when we are embarked
upon a great enterprise."

"Look, Nessus! what is there?" Malchus exclaimed, his attention
attracted by a dark object which was crossing the narrow path some
distance ahead and ascending the steep side of the gorge. "It is a bear,
let us follow him; his flesh will form a welcome change for the company
tonight."

The bear, who had been prowling in the bottom of the ravine, had been
disturbed by the fall of the body of the savage near him, and started
hastily to return to its abode, which lay high up on the face of the
cliff. Malchus and his companion hurried forward to the spot where it
had crossed the path. The way was plain enough; there were scratches on
the rock, and the bushes growing in the crevices were beaten down. The
path had evidently been frequently used by the animal.

"Look out, my lord!" Nessus exclaimed as Malchus hurried along. "These
bears of the Pyrenees are savage brutes. See that he does not take you
unawares."

The rocks were exceedingly steep; and Malchus, with his bow in his hand
and the arrow fitted and ready to draw, climbed on, keeping his eyes on
every clump of bush lest the bear should be lurking there. At last he
paused. They had reached a spot now but a short distance from the top.
The cliff here fell almost perpendicularly down, and along its face was
a narrow ledge scarcely a foot wide. Along this it was evident the bear
had passed.

"I should think we must be near his den now, Nessus. I trust this ledge
widens out before it gets there. It would be an awkward place for a
conflict, for a stroke of his paw would send one over the edge."

"I shall be close behind you, my lord," said Nessus, whose blood was now
up with the chase. "Should you fail to stop him, drop on one knee that I
may shoot over you."

For some fifty yards the ledge continued unbroken. Malchus moved along
cautiously, with his arrow in the string and his shield shifted round
his shoulder, in readiness for instant action. Suddenly, upon turning a
sharp corner of the cliff, he saw it widened ten feet ahead into a
sort of platform lying in the angle of the cliff, which beyond it again
jutted out. On this platform was a bear, which with an angry growl at
once advanced towards him. Malchus discharged his arrow; it struck the
bear full on the chest, and penetrated deeply. With a stroke of his paw
the animal broke the shaft asunder and rushed forward. Malchus threw
forward the point of his spear, and with his shield on his arm awaited
the onset. He struck the bear fairly on the chest, but, as before, it
snapped the shaft with its paw, and rising to its feet advanced.

"Kneel, my lord!" Nessus exclaimed.

Malchus dropped on one knee, bracing himself as firmly as he could
against the rock, and, with his shield above his head and his sword in
his hand, awaited the attack of the enraged animal. He heard the twang
of the bow behind him; then he felt a mighty blow, which beat down his
shield and descended with terrible force upon his helmet, throwing him
forward on to his face. Then there was a heavy blow on his back; and it
was well for him that he had on backpiece as well as breastplate, or the
flesh would have been torn from his shoulder to his loins. As the blow
fell there was an angry roar. For a moment he felt crushed by a weight
which fell upon him. This was suddenly removed, and he heard a crash far
below as the bear, pierced to the heart by the Arab's spear, fell over
the precipice. Nessus hastened to raise him.

"My lord is not hurt, I hope?"

"In no way, Nessus, thanks to you; but my head swims and my arm is well
nigh broken with that blow. Who would have thought a beast like that
could have struck so hard? See, he has dented in my helmet and has bent
my shield! Now, before we go back and search for the body, let us see
what its den is like."

"Do you take my spear, my lord; your own is broken, and your bow has
gone over the precipice. It may be that there is another bear here.
Where one is, the other is seldom far off."

They advanced on to the platform, and saw in the corner of the angle
a cave entering some distance into the hill. As they approached the
entrance a deep growl was heard within.

"We had best leave it alone, my lord," Nessus said as they both recoiled
a step at the entrance. "This is doubtless the female, and these are
larger and fiercer than the males."

"I agree with you, Nessus," Malchus said. "Were we on other ground I
should say let us attack it, but I have had enough of fighting bears on
the edge of a precipice. There is as much meat as we can carry ready for
us below. Besides, the hour is late and the men will be getting uneasy.
Moreover, we are but half armed; and we cannot get at her without
crawling through that hole, which is scarce three feet high. Altogether,
we had best leave her alone."

While they were speaking the bear began to roar angrily, the deeper
notes being mingled with a chorus of snarls and whinings which showed
that there was a young family with her.

"Do you go first, Nessus," Malchus said. "The rear is the post of honour
here, though I fancy the beast does not mean to come out."

Nessus without a word took the lead, and advanced across the platform
towards the corner.

As he was in the act of turning it he sprang suddenly back, while an
arrow flew past, grazing the corner of the rock.

"There are a score of natives on the path!" he exclaimed. "We are in a
trap."

Malchus looked round in dismay. It was evident that some of the natives
must have seen the fall of their leader and watched them pursue the
bear, and had now closed in behind them to cut off their retreat. The
situation was a most unpleasant one. The ledge extended no further than
the platform; below, the precipice fell away sheer down a hundred feet;
above, it rose as high. The narrow path was occupied with numerous foes.
In the den behind them was the angry bear.

For a moment the two men looked at each other in consternation.

"We are fairly caught, Nessus," Malchus said. "There is one thing, they
can no more attack us than we can attack them. Only one can come round
this corner at a time, and we can shoot or spear them as they do so. We
are tolerably safe from attack, but they can starve us out."

"They can shoot over from the other side of the ravine," Nessus said;
"their arrows will carry from the opposite brow easily enough."

"Then," Malchus said firmly, "we must dispose of the bear; we must have
the cave. We shall be safe there from their arrows, while, lying at the
entrance, we could shoot any that should venture past the corner. First,
though, I will blow my horn. Some of our men may be within hearing."

Malchus pulled forth the horn which he carried. It was useless, being
completely flattened with the blow that the bear had struck him.

"That hope is gone, Nessus," he said. "Now let us get the bear to come
out as soon as possible, and finish with her. Do you stand at the corner
with your arrow ready, in case the natives should try to surprise us,
and be ready to aid me when she rushes out."

Malchus went to the mouth of the den, struck his spear against the side,
and threw in some pieces of stone; but, although the growling was deep
and continuous, the bear showed no signs of an intention of coming out.
