more than Zeus. They look almost starved."

"Indeed, they do!" said Baucis, and she ran quickly to prepare supper
for the strangers.

She spread her best white cloth upon the table, and brought out bacon,
herbs, honey, grapes, bread, and milk. She set these upon the table in
all the best dishes she had and called the strangers in.

Then what do you suppose happened? The dishes that the strangers touched
turned to gold. The pitcher was never empty, although they drank glass
after glass of milk. The loaf of bread stayed always the same size,
although the strangers cut slice after slice.

"These are strange travelers," whispered the old couple to each other.
"They do wonderful things."


II


That night Philemon and Baucis slept upon the floor that the strangers
might have their one bed. In the morning they went with the travelers to
the foot of the hill to see them safely started on their way.

"Now, good people," said one of the strangers, "we thank you, and
whatever you wish shall be yours."

As he said this, his face became like that of the sun. Then Philemon and
Baucis knew that Zeus had spoken to them.

"Grant, O Zeus, that one of us may not outlive the other," they cried in
one voice.

"Your wish is granted," said Zeus; "yes, and more. Return to your home
and be happy."

[Illustration: Philemon and Baucis walking home]

Philemon and Baucis turned homeward, and, lo! their hut was changed to a
beautiful castle.

The old people turned around to thank their guests, but they had
disappeared.

In this castle Philemon and Baucis lived many years. They still did all
they could for others, and were always so happy that they never thought
of wishing anything for themselves.

As the years passed, the couple grew very old and feeble. One day Baucis
said to Philemon, "I wish we might never die, but could always live
together."

"Ah, that is my wish, too!" sighed old Philemon.

The next morning the marble palace was gone; Baucis and Philemon were
gone; but there on the hilltop stood two beautiful trees, an oak and a
linden.

No one knew what became of the good people. After many years, however, a
traveler lying under the trees heard them whispering to each other.

"Baucis," whispered the oak.

"Philemon," replied the linden.

There the trees stood through sun and rain, always ready to spread their
leafy shade over every tired stranger who passed that way.

--FLORA J. COOKE.




THE POPLAR TREE


Long ago the poplar used to hold out its branches like other trees. It
tried to see how far it could spread them.

Once at sunset an old man came through the forest where the poplar trees
lived. The trees were going to sleep, and it was growing dark.

The man held something under his cloak. It was a pot of gold--the very
pot of gold that lies at the foot of the rainbow. He had stolen it and
was looking for some place to hide it. A poplar tree stood by the path.

"This is the very place to hide my treasure," the man said. "The
branches spread out straight, and the leaves are large and thick. How
lucky that the trees are all asleep!"

He placed the pot of gold in the thick branches, and then ran quickly
away.

The gold belonged to Iris, the beautiful maiden who had a rainbow bridge
to the earth. The next morning she missed her precious pot. It always
lay at the foot of the rainbow, but it was not there now.

Iris hurried away to tell her father, the great Zeus, of her loss. He
said that he would find the pot of gold for her.

He called a messenger, the swift-footed Mercury, and said, "Go quickly,
and do not return until you have found the treasure."

Mercury went as fast as the wind down to the earth. He soon came to the
forest and awakened the trees.

"Iris has lost her precious pot of gold that lies at the foot of the
rainbow. Have any of you seen it?" he asked.

The trees were very sleepy, but all shook their heads.

"We have not seen it," they said.

"Hold up your branches," said Mercury. "I must see that the pot of gold
is not hidden among them."

All of the trees held up their branches. The poplar that stood by the
path was the first to hold up his. He was an honest tree and knew he had
nothing to hide.

[Illustration: Mercury among the trees]

Down fell the pot of gold. How surprised the poplar tree was! He dropped
his branches in shame. Then he held them high in the air.

"Forgive me," he said. "I do not know how it came to be there; but,
hereafter, I shall always hold my branches up. Then every one can see
that I have nothing hidden."

Since then the branches have always grown straight up; and every one
knows that the poplar is an honest and upright tree.

--FLORA J. COOKE.




WHO LOVES THE TREES BEST?


  Who loves the trees best?
  "I," said the Spring;
  "Their leaves so beautiful
  To them I bring."

  Who loves the trees best?
  "I," Summer said;
  "I give them blossoms,
  White, yellow, red."

  Who loves the trees best?
  "I," said the Fall;
  "I give luscious fruits,
  Bright tints to all."

  Who loves the trees best?
  "I love them best,"
  Harsh Winter answered;
  "I give them rest."

--ALICE MAY DOUGLAS.




LEAVES IN AUTUMN


  Red and gold, and gold and red,
  Autumn leaves burned overhead;
    Hues so splendid
    Softly blended,
  Oh, the glory that they shed!
  Red and gold, and gold and red.

  Gold and brown, and brown and gold,
  Of such fun the west wind told
    That they listened,
    And they glistened,
  As they wrestled in the cold;
  Gold and brown, and brown and gold.

  Brown and gold, and red and brown,
  How they hurried, scurried down
    For a frolic,
    For a rolic,
  Through the country and the town,
  Brown and gold, and red and brown.




[Illustration: A bird in a tree]

A STORY OF BIRD LIFE

I


Once there came to our fields a pair of birds. They had never built a
nest nor seen a winter.

Oh, how beautiful was everything! The fields were full of flowers, the
grass was growing tall, and the bees were humming everywhere.

One of the birds fell to singing, and the other bird said, "Who told you
to sing?"

He answered, "The flowers and the bees told me. The blue sky told me,
and you told me."

"When did I tell you to sing?" asked his mate.

"Every time you brought in tender grass for the nest," he replied.
"Every time your soft wings fluttered off again for hair and feathers to
line it."

Then his mate asked, "What are you singing about?"

"I am singing about everything," he answered. "I sing because I am
happy."

By and by five little speckled eggs were in the nest, and the mother
bird asked, "Is there anything in all the world as pretty as my eggs?"

A week or two afterward, the mother said, "Oh, what do you think has
happened? One of my eggs has been peeping and moving."

Soon another egg moved, then another, and another, till five eggs were
hatched.

The little birds were so hungry that it kept the parents busy feeding
them. Away they both flew. The moment the little birds heard them coming
back, five yellow mouths flew open wide.

"Can anybody be happier?" said the father bird to the mother bird. "We
will live in this tree always. It is a tree that bears joy."


II


The very next day one of the birds dropped out of the nest, and in a
moment a cat ate it up. Only four remained, and the parent birds were
very sad. There was no song all that day, nor the next.

Soon the little birds were big enough to fly. The first bird that tried
his wings flew from one branch to another. His parents praised him, and
the other baby birds wondered how he had done it.

The little one was so proud of it that he tried again. He flew and flew
and couldn't stop flying. At last he fell plump! down by the kitchen
door. A little boy caught him and carried him into the house.

Now only three birds were left. The sun no longer seemed bright to the
birds, and they did not sing so often.

In a little time the other birds learned to use their wings, and they
flew away and away. They found their own food and made their own nests.

Then the old birds sat silent and looked at each other a long while. At
last the mother bird asked, "Why don't you sing?"

"I can't sing," the father bird answered. "I only think and think!"

"What are you thinking of?"

"I am thinking how everything changes. The leaves are falling, and soon
there will be no roof over our heads. The flowers are all gone. Last
night there was a frost. Almost all the birds have flown away, and I am
restless. Something calls me, and I feel that I must fly away, too."

[Illustration: Two birds flying over a field]

"Let us fly away together!" the mother bird said.

Then they rose silently up in the air. They looked to the north; far
away they saw the snow coming. They looked to the south; there they saw
green leaves.

All day they flew. All night they flew and flew, till they found a land
where there was no winter. There it was summer all the time; flowers
always blossomed and birds always sang.

--HENRY WARD BEECHER




BOB WHITE


  There's a plump little chap in a speckled coat,
  And he sits on the zigzag rails remote,
  Where he whistles at breezy, bracing morn,
  When the buckwheat is ripe, and stacked is the corn:
  "Bob White! Bob White! Bob White!"

  Is he hailing some comrade as blithe as he?
  Now I wonder where Robert White can be!
  O'er the billows of gold and amber grain
  There is no one in sight--but, hark again:
  "Bob White! Bob White! Bob White!"

  Ah! I see why he calls; in the stubble there
  Hide his plump little wife and babies fair!
  So contented is he, and so proud of the same,
  That he wants all the world to know his name:
  "Bob White! Bob White! Bob White!"

--GEORGE COOPER.




HOW MARY GOT A NEW DRESS


Mary lived a long time ago. She was a little girl when your
great-great-grandmother was a little girl.

In those days all cloth had to be made at home. Aunt Dinah, Aunt Chloe,
and Aunt Dilsey were kept busy spinning and weaving to make clothes for
the whole plantation.

One day Mary's mother said, "Aunt Dilsey, Mary needs a new dress, and I
want you to weave some cloth at once. Can you weave some very fine
cloth?"

"Yes, ma'am," said Aunt Dilsey. "I have some cotton I've been saving to
make her a dress."
