had kid mittens before from the Christmas tree, but never real kid
gloves with five fingers.  I take them out and try them on every little
while.  It's all I can do not to wear them to classes.

(Dinner bell.  Goodbye.)




                                               Friday

What do you think, Daddy?  The English instructor said that my last
paper shows an unusual amount of originality.  She did, truly.  Those
were her words.  It doesn't seem possible, does it, considering the
eighteen years of training that I've had?  The aim of the John Grier
Home (as you doubtless know and heartily approve of) is to turn the
ninety-seven orphans into ninety-seven twins.

The unusual artistic ability which I exhibit was developed at an early
age through drawing chalk pictures of Mrs. Lippett on the woodshed door.

I hope that I don't hurt your feelings when I criticize the home of my
youth?  But you have the upper hand, you know, for if I become too
impertinent, you can always stop payment of your cheques.  That isn't a
very polite thing to say--but you can't expect me to have any manners;
a foundling asylum isn't a young ladies' finishing school.

You know, Daddy, it isn't the work that is going to be hard in college.
It's the play.  Half the time I don't know what the girls are talking
about; their jokes seem to relate to a past that every one but me has
shared.  I'm a foreigner in the world and I don't understand the
language.  It's a miserable feeling.  I've had it all my life.  At the
high school the girls would stand in groups and just look at me.  I was
queer and different and everybody knew it.  I could FEEL 'John Grier
Home' written on my face.  And then a few charitable ones would make a
point of coming up and saying something polite.  I HATED EVERY ONE OF
THEM--the charitable ones most of all.

Nobody here knows that I was brought up in an asylum.  I told Sallie
McBride that my mother and father were dead, and that a kind old
gentleman was sending me to college which is entirely true so far as it
goes.  I don't want you to think I am a coward, but I do want to be
like the other girls, and that Dreadful Home looming over my childhood
is the one great big difference.  If I can turn my back on that and
shut out the remembrance, I think, I might be just as desirable as any
other girl.  I don't believe there's any real, underneath difference,
do you?

Anyway, Sallie McBride likes me!

                           Yours ever,
                                       Judy Abbott
                                           (Nee Jerusha.)




                                           Saturday morning

I've just been reading this letter over and it sounds pretty
un-cheerful. But can't you guess that I have a special topic due Monday
morning and a review in geometry and a very sneezy cold?




                                           Sunday

I forgot to post this yesterday, so I will add an indignant postscript.
We had a bishop this morning, and WHAT DO YOU THINK HE SAID?

'The most beneficent promise made us in the Bible is this, "The poor ye
have always with you."  They were put here in order to keep us
charitable.'

The poor, please observe, being a sort of useful domestic animal.  If I
hadn't grown into such a perfect lady, I should have gone up after
service and told him what I thought.




                                           25th October

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

I'm in the basket-ball team and you ought to see the bruise on my left
shoulder.  It's blue and mahogany with little streaks of orange.  Julia
Pendleton tried for the team, but she didn't get in.  Hooray!

You see what a mean disposition I have.

College gets nicer and nicer.  I like the girls and the teachers and
the classes and the campus and the things to eat.  We have ice-cream
twice a week and we never have corn-meal mush.

You only wanted to hear from me once a month, didn't you?  And I've
been peppering you with letters every few days!  But I've been so
excited about all these new adventures that I MUST talk to somebody;
and you're the only one I know.  Please excuse my exuberance; I'll
settle pretty soon.  If my letters bore you, you can always toss them
into the wastebasket.  I promise not to write another till the middle
of November.

                   Yours most loquaciously,
                                           Judy Abbott





                                       15th November

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

Listen to what I've learned to-day.

The area of the convex surface of the frustum of a regular pyramid is
half the product of the sum of the perimeters of its bases by the
altitude of either of its trapezoids.

It doesn't sound true, but it is--I can prove it!

You've never heard about my clothes, have you, Daddy?  Six dresses, all
new and beautiful and bought for me--not handed down from somebody
bigger.  Perhaps you don't realize what a climax that marks in the
career of an orphan?  You gave them to me, and I am very, very, VERY
much obliged.  It's a fine thing to be educated--but nothing compared
to the dizzying experience of owning six new dresses.  Miss Pritchard,
who is on the visiting committee, picked them out--not Mrs. Lippett,
thank goodness.  I have an evening dress, pink mull over silk (I'm
perfectly beautiful in that), and a blue church dress, and a dinner
dress of red veiling with Oriental trimming (makes me look like a
Gipsy), and another of rose-coloured challis, and a grey street suit,
and an every-day dress for classes.  That wouldn't be an awfully big
wardrobe for Julia Rutledge Pendleton, perhaps, but for Jerusha
Abbott--Oh, my!

I suppose you're thinking now what a frivolous, shallow little beast
she is, and what a waste of money to educate a girl?

But, Daddy, if you'd been dressed in checked ginghams all your life,
you'd appreciate how I feel.  And when I started to the high school, I
entered upon another period even worse than the checked ginghams.

The poor box.

You can't know how I dreaded appearing in school in those miserable
poor-box dresses.  I was perfectly sure to be put down in class next to
the girl who first owned my dress, and she would whisper and giggle and
point it out to the others.  The bitterness of wearing your enemies'
cast-off clothes eats into your soul.  If I wore silk stockings for the
rest of my life, I don't believe I could obliterate the scar.

                           LATEST WAR BULLETIN!

                      News from the Scene of Action.

At the fourth watch on Thursday the 13th of November, Hannibal routed
the advance guard of the Romans and led the Carthaginian forces over
the mountains into the plains of Casilinum.  A cohort of light armed
Numidians engaged the infantry of Quintus Fabius Maximus.  Two battles
and light skirmishing.  Romans repulsed with heavy losses.

                           I have the honour of being,
                           Your special correspondent from the front,
                                               J. Abbott


PS. I know I'm not to expect any letters in return, and I've been
warned not to bother you with questions, but tell me, Daddy, just this
once--are you awfully old or just a little old?  And are you perfectly
bald or just a little bald?  It is very difficult thinking about you in
the abstract like a theorem in geometry.

Given a tall rich man who hates girls, but is very generous to one
quite impertinent girl, what does he look like?

R.S.V.P.




                                           19th December

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

You never answered my question and it was very important.

                               ARE YOU BALD?


I have it planned exactly what you look like--very
satisfactorily--until I reach the top of your head, and then I AM
stuck.  I can't decide whether you have white hair or black hair or
sort of sprinkly grey hair or maybe none at all.

Here is your portrait:

But the problem is, shall I add some hair?

Would you like to know what colour your eyes are?  They're grey, and
your eyebrows stick out like a porch roof (beetling, they're called in
novels), and your mouth is a straight line with a tendency to turn down
at the corners.  Oh, you see, I know!  You're a snappy old thing with a
temper.

       (Chapel bell.)


                                               9.45 p.m.

I have a new unbreakable rule:  never, never to study at night no
matter how many written reviews are coming in the morning.  Instead, I
read just plain books--I have to, you know, because there are eighteen
blank years behind me.  You wouldn't believe, Daddy, what an abyss of
ignorance my mind is; I am just realizing the depths myself.  The
things that most girls with a properly assorted family and a home and
friends and a library know by absorption, I have never heard of.  For
example:

I never read Mother Goose or David Copperfield or Ivanhoe or Cinderella
or Blue Beard or Robinson Crusoe or Jane Eyre or Alice in Wonderland or
a word of Rudyard Kipling.  I didn't know that Henry the Eighth was
married more than once or that Shelley was a poet.  I didn't know that
people used to be monkeys and that the Garden of Eden was a beautiful
myth.  I didn't know that R. L. S. stood for Robert Louis Stevenson or
that George Eliot was a lady.  I had never seen a picture of the 'Mona
Lisa' and (it's true but you won't believe it) I had never heard of
Sherlock Holmes.

Now, I know all of these things and a lot of others besides, but you
can see how much I need to catch up.  And oh, but it's fun!  I look
forward all day to evening, and then I put an 'engaged' on the door and
get into my nice red bath robe and furry slippers and pile all the
cushions behind me on the couch, and light the brass student lamp at my
elbow, and read and read and read one book isn't enough.  I have four
going at once.  Just now, they're Tennyson's poems and Vanity Fair and
Kipling's Plain Tales and--don't laugh--Little Women.  I find that I am
the only girl in college who wasn't brought up on Little Women.  I
haven't told anybody though (that WOULD stamp me as queer). I just
quietly went and bought it with $1.12 of my last month's allowance; and
the next time somebody mentions pickled limes, I'll know what she is
talking about!

(Ten o'clock bell.  This is a very interrupted letter.)


                                               Saturday

Sir,

I have the honour to report fresh explorations in the field of
geometry.  On Friday last we abandoned our former works in
parallelopipeds and proceeded to truncated prisms.  We are finding the
road rough and very uphill.


                                               Sunday

The Christmas holidays begin next week and the trunks are up.  The
corridors are so filled up that you can hardly get through, and
everybody is so bubbling over with excitement that studying is getting
left out.  I'm going to have a beautiful time in vacation; there's
another Freshman who lives in Texas staying behind, and we are planning
to take long walks and if there's any ice--learn to skate.  Then there
is still the whole library to be read--and three empty weeks to do it
in!

Goodbye, Daddy, I hope that you are feeling as happy as I am.

                               Yours ever,
                                           Judy

PS.  Don't forget to answer my question.  If you don't want the trouble
of writing, have your secretary telegraph.  He can just say:

                          Mr. Smith is quite bald,

                                    or

                           Mr. Smith is not bald,

                                    or

                         Mr. Smith has white hair.


And you can deduct the twenty-five cents out of my allowance.

Goodbye till January--and a merry Christmas!




                                       Towards the end of
                                       the Christmas vacation.
                                       Exact date unknown

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

Is it snowing where you are?  All the world that I see from my tower is
draped in white and the flakes are coming down as big as pop-corns.
It's late afternoon--the sun is just setting (a cold yellow colour)
behind some colder violet hills, and I am up in my window seat using
the last light to write to you.

Your five gold pieces were a surprise!  I'm not used to receiving
Christmas presents.  You have already given me such lots of
things--everything I have, you know--that I don't quite feel that I
deserve extras.  But I like them just the same.  Do you want to know
what I bought with my money?

I. A silver watch in a leather case to wear on my wrist and get me to
recitations in time.

II.  Matthew Arnold's poems.

III.  A hot water bottle.

IV.  A steamer rug.  (My tower is cold.)

V. Five hundred sheets of yellow manuscript paper.  (I'm going to
commence being an author pretty soon.)

VI.  A dictionary of synonyms.  (To enlarge the author's vocabulary.)

VII.  (I don't much like to confess this last item, but I will.) A pair
of silk stockings.

And now, Daddy, never say I don't tell all!

It was a very low motive, if you must know it, that prompted the silk
stockings.  Julia Pendleton comes into my room to do geometry, and she
sits cross-legged on the couch and wears silk stockings every night.
But just wait--as soon as she gets back from vacation I shall go in and
sit on her couch in my silk stockings.  You see, Daddy, the miserable
creature that I am but at least I'm honest; and you knew already, from
my asylum record, that I wasn't perfect, didn't you?

To recapitulate (that's the way the English instructor begins every
other sentence), I am very much obliged for my seven presents.  I'm
pretending to myself that they came in a box from my family in
California.  The watch is from father, the rug from mother, the hot
water bottle from grandmother who is always worrying for fear I shall
catch cold in this climate--and the yellow paper from my little brother
Harry.  My sister Isabel gave me the silk stockings, and Aunt Susan the
Matthew Arnold poems; Uncle Harry (little Harry is named after him)
gave me the dictionary.  He wanted to send chocolates, but I insisted
on synonyms.

You don't object, do you, to playing the part of a composite family?

And now, shall I tell you about my vacation, or are you only interested
in my education as such?  I hope you appreciate the delicate shade of
meaning in 'as such'. It is the latest addition to my vocabulary.

The girl from Texas is named Leonora Fenton.  (Almost as funny as
Jerusha, isn't it?) I like her, but not so much as Sallie McBride; I
shall never like any one so much as Sallie--except you.  I must always
like you the best of all, because you're my whole family rolled into
one.  Leonora and I and two Sophomores have walked 'cross country every
pleasant day and explored the whole neighbourhood, dressed in short
skirts and knit jackets and caps, and carrying shiny sticks to whack
things with.  Once we walked into town--four miles--and stopped at a
restaurant where the college girls go for dinner.  Broiled lobster (35
cents), and for dessert, buckwheat cakes and maple syrup (15 cents).
Nourishing and cheap.

It was such a lark!  Especially for me, because it was so awfully
different from the asylum--I feel like an escaped convict every time I
leave the campus.  Before I thought, I started to tell the others what
an experience I was having.  The cat was almost out of the bag when I
grabbed it by its tail and pulled it back.  It's awfully hard for me
not to tell everything I know.  I'm a very confiding soul by nature; if
I didn't have you to tell things to, I'd burst.

We had a molasses candy pull last Friday evening, given by the house
matron of Fergussen to the left-behinds in the other halls.  There were
twenty-two of us altogether, Freshmen and Sophomores and juniors and
Seniors all united in amicable accord.  The kitchen is huge, with
copper pots and kettles hanging in rows on the stone wall--the littlest
casserole among them about the size of a wash boiler.  Four hundred
girls live in Fergussen.  The chef, in a white cap and apron, fetched
out twenty-two other white caps and aprons--I can't imagine where he
got so many--and we all turned ourselves into cooks.

It was great fun, though I have seen better candy.  When it was finally
finished, and ourselves and the kitchen and the door-knobs all
thoroughly sticky, we organized a procession and still in our caps and
aprons, each carrying a big fork or spoon or frying pan, we marched
through the empty corridors to the officers' parlour, where
half-a-dozen professors and instructors were passing a tranquil
evening.  We serenaded them with college songs and offered
refreshments.  They accepted politely but dubiously.  We left them
sucking chunks of molasses candy, sticky and speechless.

So you see, Daddy, my education progresses!

Don't you really think that I ought to be an artist instead of an
author?

Vacation will be over in two days and I shall be glad to see the girls
again.  My tower is just a trifle lonely; when nine people occupy a
house that was built for four hundred, they do rattle around a bit.

Eleven pages--poor Daddy, you must be tired!  I meant this to be just a
short little thank-you note--but when I get started I seem to have a
ready pen.

Goodbye, and thank you for thinking of me--I should be perfectly happy
except for one little threatening cloud on the horizon.  Examinations
come in February.

                                   Yours with love,
                                                   Judy

PS.  Maybe it isn't proper to send love?  If it isn't, please excuse.
But I must love somebody and there's only you and Mrs. Lippett to
choose between, so you see--you'll HAVE to put up with it, Daddy dear,
because I can't love her.




                                               On the Eve

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

You should see the way this college is studying!  We've forgotten we
ever had a vacation.  Fifty-seven irregular verbs have I introduced to
my brain in the past four days--I'm only hoping they'll stay till after
examinations.

Some of the girls sell their text-books when they're through with them,
but I intend to keep mine.  Then after I've graduated I shall have my
whole education in a row in the bookcase, and when I need to use any
detail, I can turn to it without the slightest hesitation.  So much
easier and more accurate than trying to keep it in your head.

Julia Pendleton dropped in this evening to pay a social call, and
stayed a solid hour.  She got started on the subject of family, and I
COULDN'T switch her off.  She wanted to know what my mother's maiden
name was--did you ever hear such an impertinent question to ask of a
person from a foundling asylum?  I didn't have the courage to say I
didn't know, so I just miserably plumped on the first name I could
think of, and that was Montgomery.  Then she wanted to know whether I
belonged to the Massachusetts Montgomerys or the Virginia Montgomerys.

Her mother was a Rutherford.  The family came over in the ark, and were
connected by marriage with Henry the VIII.  On her father's side they
date back further than Adam.  On the topmost branches of her family
tree there's a superior breed of monkeys with very fine silky hair and
extra long tails.

I meant to write you a nice, cheerful, entertaining letter tonight, but
I'm too sleepy--and scared.  The Freshman's lot is not a happy one.

           Yours, about to be examined,
                                            Judy Abbott




                                               Sunday

Dearest Daddy-Long-Legs,

I have some awful, awful, awful news to tell you, but I won't begin
with it; I'll try to get you in a good humour first.

Jerusha Abbott has commenced to be an author.  A poem entitled, 'From
my Tower', appears in the February Monthly--on the first page, which is
a very great honour for a Freshman.  My English instructor stopped me
on the way out from chapel last night, and said it was a charming piece
of work except for the sixth line, which had too many feet.  I will
send you a copy in case you care to read it.

Let me see if I can't think of something else pleasant--  Oh, yes!  I'm
learning to skate, and can glide about quite respectably all by myself.
Also I've learned how to slide down a rope from the roof of the
gymnasium, and I can vault a bar three feet and six inches high--I hope
shortly to pull up to four feet.

We had a very inspiring sermon this morning preached by the Bishop of
Alabama.  His text was:  'Judge not that ye be not judged.' It was
about the necessity of overlooking mistakes in others, and not
discouraging people by harsh judgments.  I wish you might have heard it.

This is the sunniest, most blinding winter afternoon, with icicles
dripping from the fir trees and all the world bending under a weight of
snow--except me, and I'm bending under a weight of sorrow.

Now for the news--courage, Judy!--you must tell.

Are you SURELY in a good humour?  I failed in mathematics and Latin
prose.  I am tutoring in them, and will take another examination next
month.  I'm sorry if you're disappointed, but otherwise I don't care a
bit because I've learned such a lot of things not mentioned in the
catalogue.  I've read seventeen novels and bushels of poetry--really
necessary novels like Vanity Fair and Richard Feverel and Alice in
Wonderland.  Also Emerson's Essays and Lockhart's Life of Scott and the
first volume of Gibbon's Roman Empire and half of Benvenuto Cellini's
Life--wasn't he entertaining?  He used to saunter out and casually kill
a man before breakfast.

So you see, Daddy, I'm much more intelligent than if I'd just stuck to
Latin.  Will you forgive me this once if I promise never to fail again?

                           Yours in sackcloth,
                                                   Judy




Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

This is an extra letter in the middle of the month because I'm rather
lonely tonight.  It's awfully stormy.  All the lights are out on the
campus, but I drank black coffee and I can't go to sleep.

I had a supper party this evening consisting of Sallie and Julia and
Leonora Fenton--and sardines and toasted muffins and salad and fudge
and coffee.  Julia said she'd had a good time, but Sallie stayed to
help wash the dishes.


I might, very usefully, put some time on Latin tonight but, there's no
doubt about it, I'm a very languid Latin scholar.  We've finished Livy
and De Senectute and are now engaged with De Amicitia (pronounced Damn
Icitia).
