was going to Texas. He was the father of his people. He would right
every wrong. He loved the Texans, these children of the north who had
come to his country for a home. No one could ever say that he appealed
in vain to Santa Anna for protection. Texans would be proud that they
were a part of Mexico, they would be glad to belong to a nation which
already had a glorious history, and to come to a capital which had more
splendor and romance than any other in America.

Ned literally withdrew his soul within itself. He sought to shut out the
influence that was radiating from this singular and brilliant figure,
but he saw that Mr. Austin was falling more deeply under it.

"Look!" said Santa Anna, taking the man by the arm in the familiar
manner that one old friend has with another and drawing him to the
window. "Is not this a prospect to enchant? Is not this a capital of
which you and I can well be proud?"

He lifted a forefinger and swept the half curve that could be seen from
the window. It was truly a panorama that would kindle the heart of the
dullest. Forty miles away the white crests of Popocatepetl and
Ixtaccihuatl still showed against the background of burning blue, like
pillars supporting the dome of heaven. Along the whole line of the half
curve were mountains in fold on fold. Below the green of the valley
showed the waters of the lake both fresh and salt gleaming with gold
where the sunlight shot down upon them. Nearer rose the spires of the
cathedral, and then the sea of tile roofs burnished by the vivid beams.

Santa Anna stood in a dramatic position, his finger still pointing.
There was scarcely a day that Ned did not feel the majesty of this
valley of Tenochtitlan, but Santa Anna deepened the spell. Could the
world hold another place its equal? Might not the Texans indeed have a
glorious future in the land of which this city was the capital? Poetry
and romance appealed powerfully to the boy's thoughtful mind, and he
felt that here in Mexico he was at their very heart. Nothing else had
ever moved him so much.

"You are pleased! It impresses you!" said Santa Anna to Austin. "I can
see it on your face. You are with us. You are one of us. Ah, my friend,
how noble it is to have a great heart."

"Do I go with your message to the Texans?" asked Austin.

"I must leave now, but I shall come again soon, and I will tell you
all. You shall carry words that will satisfy every one of them."

He threw his arms about Austin's shoulders, gave Ned a quick salute, and
then left the room, taking young de Zavala with him, Ned heard the heavy
bar fall in place on the outside of the door, and he knew that they were
shut in as tightly as ever. But Mr. Austin was in a glow.

"What a wonderful, flexible mind!" he said, more to himself than to the
boy. "I could have preferred a sort of independence for Texas, but since
we're to be ruled from the City of Mexico, Santa Anna will do the best
he can for us. As soon as he sweeps away the revolutionary troubles he
will repair all our injuries."

Ned was silent. He knew that the generous Austin was still under Santa
Anna's magnetic spell, but after his departure the whole room was
changed to the boy. He saw clearly again. There were no mists and clouds
about his mind. Moreover, the wonderful half curve before the window was
changing. Vapors were rolling up from the south and the two great peaks
faded from view. Trees and water in the valley changed to gray. The
skies which had been so bright now became somber and menacing.

The boy felt a deep fear at his heart, but Mr. Austin seemed to be yet
under the influence of Santa Anna, and talked cheerfully of their speedy
return to Texas. Ned listened in silence and unbelief, while the gloom
outside deepened, and night presently came over Anahuac. But he had
formed his resolution. He owed much to Mr. Austin. He had come a vast
distance to be at his side, and to serve him in prison, but he felt now
that he could be of more use elsewhere. Moreover, he must carry a
message, a warning to those who needed it sorely. One of the windows
opened upon the north, and he looked intently through it trying to
pierce, with the mind's eye at least, the thousand miles that lay
between him and those whom he would reach with the word.

Mr. Austin had lighted a candle. Noticing the boy's gloomy face, he
patted him on the head with a benignant hand and said:

"Don't be down of heart, Edward, my lad. We'll soon be on our way to
Texas."

"But this is Mexico, and it is Santa Anna who holds us."

"That is true, and it is Santa Anna who is our best friend."

Ned did not dispute the sanguine saying. He saw that Mr. Austin had his
opinion, and he had his. The door was opened again in a half hour and a
soldier brought them their supper. Young de Zavala, who was their
immediate guardian, also entered and stood by while they ate. They had
never received poor food, and to-night Mexican hospitality exerted
itself--at the insistence of Santa Anna, Ned surmised. In addition to the
regular supper there was an ice and a bottle of Spanish wine.

"The President has just given an order that the greatest courtesy be
shown to you at all times," said de Zavala, "and I am very glad. I, too,
have people in that territory of ours from which you come--Texas."

He spoke with undeniable sympathy, and Ned felt his heart warm toward
him, but he decided to say nothing. He feared that he might betray by
some chance word the plan that he had in mind. But Mr. Austin, believing
in others because he was so truthful and honest himself, talked freely.

"All our troubles will soon be over," he said to de Zavala.

"I hope so, Senor," said the young man earnestly.

By and by, when de Zavala and the soldier were gone, Ned went again to
the window, stood there a few moments to harden his resolution, and then
came back to the man.

"Mr. Austin," he said, "I am going to ask your consent to something."

The Texan looked up in surprise.

"Why, Edward, my lad," he said kindly, "you don't have to ask my consent
to anything, after the way in which you have already sacrificed yourself
for me."

"But I am not going to stay with you any longer, Mr. Austin--that is, if
I can help it. I am going back to Texas."

Mr. Austin laughed. It was a mellow and satisfied laugh.

"So you are, Edward," he said, "and I am going with you. You will help
me to bear a message of peace and safety to the Texans."

Ned paused a moment, irresolute. There was no change in his
determination. He was merely uncertain about the words to use.

"There may be delays," he said at last, "and--Mr. Austin, I have decided
to go alone--and within the next day or two if I can."

The Texan's face clouded.

"I cannot understand you," he said. "Why this hurry? It would in reality
be a breach of faith to our great friend, Santa Anna--that is, if you
could go. I don't believe you can."

Ned was troubled. He was tempted to tell what was in his mind, but he
knew that he would not be believed, so he fell back again upon his
infinite capacity for silence. Mr. Austin read resolution in the closed
lips and rigid figure.

"Do you really mean that you will attempt to steal away?" he asked.

"As soon as I can."

The man shook his head.

"It would be better not to do so," he said, "but you are your own
master, and I see I cannot dissuade you from the attempt. But, boy, you
will promise me not to take any unnecessary or foolish risks?"

"I promise gladly, and, Mr. Austin, I hate to leave you here."

Their quarters were commodious and Ned slept alone in a small room to
the left of the main apartment. It was a bare place with only a bed and
a chair, but it was lighted by a fairly large window. Ned examined this
window critically. It had a horizontal iron bar across the middle, and
it was about thirty feet from the ground. He pulled at the iron bar with
both hands but, although rusty with time, it would not move in its
socket. Then he measured the two spaces between the bar and the wall.

Hope sprang up in the boy's heart. Then he did a strange thing. He
removed nearly all his clothing and tried to press his head and
shoulders between the bar and the wall. His head, which was of the long
narrow type, so common in the scholar, would have gone through the
aperture, had it not been for his hair which was long, and which grew
uncommonly thick. His shoulders were very thick and broad and they, too,
halted him. He drew back and felt a keen thrill of disappointment.

But he was a boy who usually clung tenaciously to an idea, and, sitting
down, he concentrated his mind upon the plan that he had formed. By and
by a possible way out came to him. Then he lay down upon the bed, drew a
blanket over him because the night was chill in the City of Mexico, and
calmly sought sleep.




CHAPTER II

A HAIR-CUT


The optimism of Mr. Austin endured the next morning, but Ned was gloomy.
Since it was his habit to be silent, the man did not notice it at first.
The breakfast was good, with tortillas, frijoles, other Mexican dishes
and coffee, but the boy had no appetite. He merely picked at his food,
made a faint effort or two to drink his coffee and finally put the cup
back almost full in the saucer. Then Mr. Austin began to observe.

"Are you ill, Ned?" he asked. "Is this imprisonment beginning to tell
upon you? I had thought that you were standing it well. Can't you eat?"

"I don't believe I'm hungry," replied the boy, "but there is nothing
else the matter with me. I'll be all right, Uncle Steve. Don't you
bother about me."

He ate a little breakfast, about one half of the usual amount, and then,
asking to be excused, went to the window, where he again stared out at
the tiled roofs, the green foliage in the valley of Mexico and the
ranges and peaks beyond. He was taking his resolution, and he was
carrying it out, but it was hard, very hard. He foresaw that he would
have to strengthen his will many, many times. Mr. Austin took no further
worry on Ned's account, thinking that he would be all right again in a
day or two.

But at the dinner which was brought to them in the middle of the day
Ned showed a marked failure of appetite, and Mr. Austin felt real
concern. The boy, however, was sure that he would be all right before
the day was over.

"It must be the lack of fresh air and exercise," said Mr. Austin. "You
can really take exercise in here, Ned. Besides, you said that you were
going to escape. If you fall ill you will have no chance at all."

He spoke half in jest, but Ned took him seriously.

"I am not ill, Uncle Steve," he said. "I really feel very well, but I
have lost my appetite. Maybe I am getting tired of these Mexican
dishes."

"Take exercise! take exercise!" said Mr. Austin with emphasis.

"I think I will," said Ned.

Physical exercise, after all, fitted in with his ideas, and that
afternoon he worked hard at all the gymnastic feats possible within the
three rooms to which they were confined. De Zavala came in and expressed
his astonishment at the athletic feats, which Ned continued with
unabated zeal despite his presence.

"Why do you do these things?" he asked in wonder.

"To keep myself strong and healthy. I ought to have begun them sooner.
The Mexican air is depressing, and I find that I am losing my appetite."

De Zavala's eyes opened wide while Ned deftly turned a handspring. Then
the young American sat down panting, his face flushed with as healthy a
color as one could find anywhere.

"You'll have an appetite to-night," said Mr. Austin. But to his great
amazement Ned again played with his food, eating only half the usual
amount.

"You're surely ill," said Mr. Austin. "I've no doubt de Zavala would
allow us to have a physician, and I shall ask him for one."

"Don't do it, Uncle Steve," begged Ned. "There's nothing at all the
matter with me, and anyhow I wouldn't want a Mexican doctor fussing over
me. I've probably been eating too much."

Mr. Austin was forced to accede. The boy certainly did not look ill, and
his appetite was bound to become normal again in a few days. But it did
not. As far as Mr. Austin could measure it, Ned was eating less and
less. It was obvious that he was thinner. He was also growing much
paler, except for a red flush on the cheek bones. Mr. Austin became
alarmed, but Ned obstinately refused any help, always asserting with
emphasis that he had no ailment of any kind. But the man could see that
he had become much lighter, and he wondered at the boy's physical
failure. De Zavala, also, expressed his sorrow in sonorous Spanish, but
Ned, while thanking them, steadily disclaimed any need of sympathy.

The boy found the days hard, but the nights were harder. For the first
time in his life he could not sleep well. He would lie for hours so wide
awake that his eyes grew used to the dark, and he could see everything
in his room. He was troubled, too, by bad dreams and in many of these
dreams he was a living skeleton, wandering about and condemned to live
forever without food. More than once he bitterly regretted the
resolution he had taken, but having taken it, he would never alter it.
His silent, concentrated nature would not let him. Yet he endured
undoubted torture day by day. Torture was the only name for it.

"I shall send an application to President Santa Anna to have you allowed
a measure of liberty," said Mr. Austin finally. "You are simply pining
away here, Edward, my lad. You cannot eat, that is, you eat only a
little. I have passed the most tempting and delicate things to you and
you always refuse. No boy of your age would do so unless something were
very much wrong with his physical system. You have lost many pounds, and
if this keeps on I do not know what will happen to you. I shall not ask
for more liberty for you, but you must have a doctor at once."

"I do not want any doctor, Uncle Steve," said the boy. "He cannot do me
any good, but there is somebody else whom I want."

"Who is he?"

"A barber."

"A barber! Now what good can a barber do you?"

"A great deal. What I crave most in the world is a hair-cut, and only a
barber can do that for me. My hair has been growing for more than three
months, Uncle Steve, and you've seen how extremely thick it is. Now it
is so long, too, that it's falling all about my eyes. Its weight is
oppressing my brain. I feel a little touch of fever now and then, and I
believe it's this awful hair."

He ran his fingers through the heavy locks until his head seemed to be
surrounded with a defense like the quills of a porcupine. Beneath the
great bush of hair his gray eyes glowed in a pale, thin face.

"There is a lot of it," said Mr. Austin, surveying him critically, "but
it is not usual for anybody in our situation to be worrying about the
length and abundance of his hair."

"I'm sure I'd be a lot better if I could get it cut close."

"Well, well, if you are taking it so much to heart we'll see what can be
done. You are ill and wasted, Edward, and when one is in that condition
a little thing can affect his spirits. De Zavala is a friendly sort of
young fellow and through him we will send a request to Colonel Sandoval,
the commander of the prisons, that you be allowed to have your hair
cut."

"If you please, Uncle Steve," said Ned gratefully.

Mr. Austin was not wrong in his forecast about Lieutenant de Zavala. He
showed a full measure of sympathy. Hence a petition to Colonel Martin
Sandoval y Dominguez, commander of prisons in the City of Mexico, was
drawn up in due form. It stated that one Edward Fulton, a Texan of
tender years, now in detention at the capital, was suffering from the
excessive growth of hair upon his head. The weight and thickness of said
hair had heated his brain and destroyed his appetite. In ordinary cases
of physical decline a physician was needed most, but so far as young
Edward Fulton was concerned, a barber could render the greatest service.

The petition, duly endorsed and stamped, was forwarded to Colonel Martin
Sandoval y Dominguez, and, after being gravely considered by him in the
manner befitting a Mexican officer of high rank and pure Spanish
descent, received approval. Then he chose among the barbers one Joaquin
Menendez, a dark fellow who was not of pure Spanish descent, and sent
him to the prison with de Zavala to accomplish the needed task.

"I hope you will be happy now, Edward," said Mr. Austin, when the two
Mexicans came. "You are a good boy, but it seems to me that you have
been making an undue fuss about your hair."

"I'm quite sure I shall recover fast," said Ned.

It was hard for him to hide his happiness from the others. He felt a
thrill of joy every time the steel of the scissors clicked together and
a lock of hair fell to the floor. But Joaquin Menendez, the barber, had
a Southern temperament and the soul of an artist. It pained him to
shear away--"shear away" alone described it--such magnificent hair. It
was so thick, so long and so glossy.

"Ah," he said, laying some of the clipped locks across his hand and
surveying them sorrowfully, "so great is the pity! What senorita could
resist the young senor if these were still growing upon his head!"

"You cut that hair," said Ned with a vicious snap of his teeth, "and cut
it close, so close that it will look like the shaven face of a man. I
think you will find it so stated in the conditions if you will look at
the permit approved in his own handwriting by Colonel Sandoval y
Dominguez."

Joaquin Menendez, still the artist, but obedient to the law, heaved a
deep sigh, and proceeded with his sad task. Lock by lock the abundant
hair fell, until Ned's head stood forth in the shaven likeness of a
man's face that he had wished.

"I must tell you," said Mr. Austin, "that it does not become you, but I
hope you are satisfied."

"I am satisfied," replied Ned. "I have every cause to be. I know I shall
have a stronger appetite to-morrow."

"You are certainly a sensitive boy," said Mr. Austin, looking at him in
some wonder. "I did not know that such a thing could influence your
feelings and your physical condition so much."

Ned made no reply, but that night he ate supper with a much better
appetite than he had shown in many days, bringing words of warm approval
and encouragement from Mr. Austin.

An hour or two later, when cheerful good-nights had been exchanged, Ned
withdrew to his own little room. He lay down upon his bed, but he was
fully clothed and he had no intention of sleep. Instead the boy was
transformed. For days he had been walking with a weak and lagging gait.
Fever was in his veins. Sometimes he became dizzy, and the walls and
floors of the prison swam before him. But now the spirit had taken
command of the thin body. Weakness and dizziness were gone. Every vein
was infused with strength. Hope was in command, and he no longer doubted
that he would succeed.

He rose from the bed and went to the window. The city was silent and the
night was dark. Floating clouds hid the moon and stars. The ranges and
the city roofs themselves had sunk into the dusk. It seemed to him that
all things favored the bold and persevering. And he had been
persevering. No one would ever know how he had suffered, what terrific
pangs had assailed him. He could not see now how he had done it, and he
was quite sure that he could never go through such an ordeal again. The
rack would be almost as welcome.

Ned did not know it, but a deep red flush had come into each pale cheek.
He removed most of his clothes, and put his head forward between the
iron bar and the window sill. The head went through and the shoulders
followed. He drew back, breathing a deep and mighty breath of triumph.
Yet he had known that it would be so. When he first tried the space he
had been only a shade too large for it. Now his head and shoulders would
go between, but with nothing to spare. A sheet of paper could not have
been slipped in on either side. Yet it was enough. The triumph of
self-denial was complete.

He had thought several times of telling Mr. Austin, but he finally
decided not to do so. He might seek to interfere. He would put a
thousand difficulties in the way, some real and some imaginary. It would
save the feelings of both for him to go quietly, and, when Mr. Austin
