"Your word is of no value," said Ford, scornfully.

"That is a matter for Mr. Reynolds to consider," answered Grant,
with composure.

"Mr. Ford," said the broker, gravely, "I attach more importance to
the testimony of this telegraph boy than you appear to; but then it
is to be considered that you are an interested party."

"Am I to be discredited on account of what a wretched telegraph boy
chooses to say?" asked Ford, bitterly. "Even supposing him worthy of
credence, my two friends sustain me, and it is three against one."

"They are your friends, then?" asked Mr. Reynolds, significantly.

Willis Ford flushed. It was not to his credit to admit that an
acknowledged gambler was his friend, yet he knew that to deny it
would make Morrison angry, and perhaps lead him to make some awkward
revelations.

"I have not known them long, sir," he answered, embarrassed, "but I
believe they feel friendly to me. One of them," he added,
maliciously, "is an old friend of Grant Thornton."

"Yes," answered Grant, by no means disconcerted. "Tom Calder is from
the same town as myself, and I wish him well."

Tom looked pleased at this friendly declaration on the part of
Grant, whom, indeed, he personally liked better than Willis Ford,
who evidently looked down upon him, and had more than once snubbed
him.

"You see," said Ford, adroitly, "that Grant Thornton's old friend
testifies against him. I don't think I need say any more except to
deny, in toto, the statement of that low telegraph boy."

"I'm no lower than you are," retorted Johnny, angrily.

"None of your impertinence, boy!" said Ford, loftily.

"I must say," interposed the housekeeper, "that this seems a very
discreditable conspiracy against my stepson. I am sure, Mr.
Reynolds, you won't allow his reputation to be injured by such a
base attack."

"Mr. Ford," said the broker, "I have listened attentively to what
you have said. I ought to say that a telegraph boy has as much right
to be believed as yourself."

"Even when there are three against him?"

"The three are interested parties."

"I have no doubt he is also. I presume he has an understanding with
Grant Thornton, who is a suspected thief."

"I deny that, Mr. Ford," exclaimed Grant, indignantly.

"You are certainly suspected of stealing my stepmother's bonds."

"And I have no doubt you took them," declared the housekeeper,
venomously.

At this time the doorbell was heard to ring.

"Excuse me for a moment," said the broker. "I will be back
directly."

When he had left the room, the parties left behind looked at each
other uncomfortably. Willis Ford, however, was too angry to keep
silence.

He turned to Grant, and made an attack upon him.

"You won't accomplish anything, you young rascal, by your plotting
and contriving! I give you credit for a good deal of cunning in
bringing this boy to give the testimony he has; but it won't do you
any good. Mr. Reynolds isn't a fool, and he will see through your
design."

"That he will, Willis," said the housekeeper. "After all the
kindness that boy has received in this house, he might be better
employed than in stealing my bonds, and then trying to throw it upon
a man like you."

"I don't care to argue with you, Mr. Ford," said Grant, quietly.
"You know as well as I do that I didn't steal the bonds, and you
know," he added, significantly, "who did."

"I have a great mind to break your head, you impudent boy!"

"That would be a very poor argument. The truth has already come out,
and I am vindicated."

"I don't know whether you expect Mr. Reynolds to shield you or not,
but, if my mother takes my advice, she will have you arrested,
whatever happens."

"I intend to," said the housekeeper, nodding spitefully. "If you had
returned the bonds, I did not mean to let the matter drop, but since
you have tried to throw suspicion on my son, who has always been
devoted to me, I mean to punish you as severely as the law allows."

"I think you will change your mind, Mrs. Estabrook, and let the
thief go unpunished," said Grant, in no ways disturbed.

"Not unless you make a full confession; and even then I think you
ought to suffer for your base wickedness."

"You are making a mistake, Mrs. Estabrook. I referred to the thief."

"That is yourself."

Grant shrugged his shoulders. He was spared the necessity of
answering the attack, for just then the door opened, and Mr.
Reynolds re-entered. He did not enter alone, however.

A small man of quiet manner, attired in a sober suit of brown,
closely followed him.

All present looked at him in surprise. Who was this man, and what
had he to do with the matter that concerned them all?

They were not destined to remain long in doubt,

"Mr. Graham, gentlemen!" said the broker, with a wave of the hand.

The detective bowed courteously.

"Mr. Graham, permit me to ask," continued the broker, "if you have
seen any of these gentlemen before?"

"Yes," answered Graham, and he indicated Grant Thornton, Jim
Morrison and Tom Calder.

"When did you see them, and where?"

"At the Fifth Avenue Hotel this morning."

"What passed between them?"

"They were talking about some bonds, which that gentleman,"
indicating Morrison, "acknowledged giving to the boy to sell. He
asked for the proceeds, but the boy told him there was something
wrong about the bonds, and his employer wouldn't allow him to pass
over the money. Upon this, Morrison, as I understand him to be
called, said they were given him by a party that owed him money, and
threatened that, if he had played a trick upon him, it would be the
worse for him."

"Who is that man, Mr. Reynolds?" asked Ford, in nervous excitement.

"One of the best known detectives in the city," quietly answered the
broker. "What have you to say to his evidence?"

"That it doesn't concern me. I may be wrong about the boy taking the
bonds, but that doesn't involve me. There may have been another
party."

"You forget the testimony of the telegraph boy--that he saw you give
the bonds to your friend there."

"The boy told a falsehood!"

"I am in a position to confirm the boy's testimony," said the
detective.

Willis Ford gasped for breath and seemed ready to sink into the
floor. What was coming next?



CHAPTER XXIII -- JUSTICE TRIUMPHS



Mr. Graham turned to the broker and addressed further remarks to
him.

"Your statement that four hundred dollars remained to be accounted
for, led me to conclude that they would be found in the possession
of the party who had abstracted the others. I therefore obtained a
search warrant and visited the room occupied by that gentleman,
whose name I believe is Willis Ford."

This was an unexpected stroke. Ford did not speak, but kept his eyes
fixed upon the detective in evident panic.

"I have just come from Mr. Ford's room," he resumed. "These are what
I found there."

He drew from his pocket a long envelope, from which he took four
government bonds.

"Will you be kind enough, Mrs. Estabrook," said the broker, gravely,
"to examine these bonds and determine whether they are yours?"

The housekeeper took them mechanically and examined them.

"They are mine," she said; "but I cannot believe Willis took them."

"I did not," said Ford, hoarsely, but his eyes were downcast.

"Will you account for their being in your room, then, Mr. Ford?"
inquired the broker, sternly.

"That boy must have put them there. I know nothing of them. I am as
much surprised as you are."

"We have had enough of this, Mr. Ford," said the broker, coldly.
"Your guilt is evident. In robbing your stepmother you have
committed a serious crime; but in attempting to throw the guilt upon
an innocent boy, you have been guilty of an offense still more
detestable, and one which I cannot forgive. You cannot remain in my
employment another day. If you will call at the office in the
morning, I will pay your salary to the end of the month. That will
end all relations between us."

Willis Ford looked like a convicted criminal. For the moment all his
hardihood and bravado deserted him.

"Can this be true, Willis?" wailed his stepmother. "Is it possible
that you took my bonds, and would have left me to an old age of
poverty?"

"No," answered Ford, with a return of his usual assurance. "I am as
innocent as a babe unborn. I am the victim of a conspiracy. As Mr.
Reynolds is determined to shield his favorite by throwing the blame
on it, I must submit. The time will come when he will acknowledge my
innocence. Mother, I will satisfy you later, but I do not believe
you will think me guilty. Gentlemen, I bid you all good-evening."

No one spoke as he withdrew from the room, and not even Morrison
offered to follow him.

When he was fairly out of the room, the broker turned to Morrison.

"Mr. Morrison," he said, "I have a question or two to put to you. I
think you will find it to your interest to answer correctly. Do you
still maintain that these bonds were given you by Grant Thornton?"

"I may as well make a clean breast of it," said Morrison. "They were
given me by Willis Ford."

"To satisfy a gambling debt, was it not?"

"Yes, sir."

"I take it for granted you did not know they were stolen?"

"If I had known it I wouldn't have touched them. I might have been
suspected of stealing them myself."

"I believe you."

"You're a gentleman," said Morrison, gratified that his word was
accepted.

"Of course you have lost the amount which you consider due you. To
be entirely candid with you, I do not feel any sympathy with you.
Money won at play must be classed among ill-gotten gains. I hope you
will realize this, and give up a discreditable profession."

"I have no doubt your advice is good, sir. Do you want me and Tom
any longer?"

"You are at liberty to go. I am indebted to you for coming. You have
helped to clear up the mystery of the theft."

"He's a little hard on us, Tom," said Morrison, as they went down
the front steps, "but he's treated us like a gentleman. That Ford is
a rascal."

"I think so, too," Tom assented.

"And I shall never see a cent of that six hundred dollars,"
continued Jim Morrison, ruefully.

"If you'll excuse me, I'll go to my own room," said Mrs. Estabrook,
pertly. "I want to think quietly of all this."

"Go, by all means," said the broker, courteously. "To-morrow morning
your property shall be restored to you."

Next the detective and the telegraph boy withdrew, the latter rich
by a five-dollar note, which Mr. Reynolds presented him.

Johnny's eyes sparkled.

"That will make mother happy," he said. "She'll think I am in luck."

"Keep your eyes open, my boy, and be faithful to your employer, and
this won't be the last piece of luck that will come your way."

When they were alone Mr. Reynolds turned to Grant and said kindly,
"I congratulate you, Grant, on your complete vindication. Those who
have wickedly conspired against you have come to grief, and you come
out of the trial unscathed. As I am to part with Willis Ford, though
you are not competent to take his place, your duties will be
somewhat enlarged, and I will take care that your compensation shall
be increased."

"I am afraid, Mr. Reynolds, I already receive more than I earn."

"That may be, but I am only anticipating a little. How much do I pay
you now?"

"Six dollars a week, sir."

"I will allow you four dollars more, but this additional sum I will
keep in my own hands, and credit you with. It is time you were
saving something for future use. Will this be satisfactory to you?"

"You are very kind, Mr. Reynolds," said Grant. "I don't know how to
thank you."

"Then I will tell you--be faithful in your duties in the office and
continue your kindness to Herbert."

"Gladly, sir."

Grant decided not to write to his mother about his increase in
salary. He preferred to wait till his savings amounted to a
considerable sum, and then surprise her by the announcement of his
good fortune. In six months, he estimated, he would have more than a
hundred dollars, and this to the country minister's son seemed a
large sum. At any rate, when he was twenty-one he might hope to be
the possessor of a thousand dollars. This opened to Grant a
brilliant prospect. It was probably all his father was worth,
including all his possessions.

"In spite of my uncle's opposition," thought Grant, "I think I acted
wisely in preferring business to college. Now I shall be able to
make the family more comfortable."

When Willis Ford called at the office the next morning Grant was
gone to the post office. As he returned he met Ford coming out with
a check in his hand.

"So it's you, is it?" sneered Ford, stopping short.

"Yes, Mr. Ford."

"I suppose you are exulting over your victory?"

"You are mistaken," said Grant. "It was not my wish that anything
unpleasant should happen."

"I suppose not," said Ford, in an unpleasant tone.

"For some reason you have shown a dislike to me from the first,"
Grant proceeded. "I don't know why. I have always treated you with
respect and tried to do my duty faithfully."

"You are a little angel, to be sure."

"Have you any objection to telling me why you dislike me?" he asked.

"Yes, I'll tell you. It is because I see how you are trying to worm
yourself into the confidence of Mr. Reynolds. You have plotted
against me, and now, thanks to you, I have lost my place."

"I don't consider myself the cause of that, Mr. Ford."

"I do. But you needn't exult too much. I generally pay my debts, and
I shan't forget what I owe you. I will be even with you some day."

So saying, he walked off, and Grant returned to his work.

"I can't understand why Mr. Ford should hate me so," he thought.



CHAPTER XXIV -- STARTLING NEWS



Willis Ford's feelings were far from enviable when he took leave of
the office in which he had long enjoyed an excellent position. He
was conscious, though scarcely willing to admit it, that his
misfortunes had been brought upon him by his own unwise, not to say
criminal, course. None the less, however, was he angry with those
whom he had connected with the disaster that had come upon him. He
had always disliked Grant Thornton. Now he hated him, and thirsted
for an opportunity to do him mischief. Next he felt embittered
against Mr. Reynolds, who had discharged him, though it is hardly
possible to see how the broker could have done otherwise. This
dislike was increased within a few days, and for this reason.

Ford addressed a letter to Mr. Reynolds, requesting a certificate of
good character, which would enable him to procure a new situation.

To this request the broker answered substantially as follows:

"I shall be glad to hear that you have changed your course, and have
decided to lead an honest lift; but, for the same reason that I am
not willing to retain you in my employment, I am unwilling to
recommend you without reserve to another business man. If you are
willing to refer him to me, on condition that I tell the truth, I
will cheerfully testify that you have discharged your office duties
to my satisfaction."

"The old fool!" muttered Ford, angrily crushing the letter in his
hand. "What use would such a recommendation be to me? Not content
with discharging me, he wants to keep me out of employment."

In truth, Willis Ford hardly knew where to turn. He had saved no
money, and was earning nothing. In his dilemma he turned to his
stepmother.

One forenoon, after he knew the broker and Grant would be out of the
