He did not refer to him with the bow and arrow, but to one of the
others, who stealthily turned aside and vanished among the trees.
Being in the Professor's line of vision the latter observed the
suspicious movement, and it cannot be said that it added to his comfort.

Meanwhile the archer advanced, but with such tardy step that it was
evident he was timing his pace to that of his comrade who had so
stealthily entered the wood.  Convinced that his real peril lay among
those trees, Grimcke began a backward movement with such caution that
he hoped it would not be noticed by the native who was approaching with
a sluggish pace.

The forest, like all those in South America, was so dense that great
care was necessary for one to pick his way through it.  The Professor's
theory was that the savage with the spear would regulate his movements
on the theory that the white man would not stir from the place where he
had first halted.  He would thus aim to secure a position from which he
could hurl his javelin at him without detection.  Grimcke conceived
this was certain to take place, and, if he remained where he was,
nothing could save him from the treacherous assault.  It was a matter,
therefore, of self preservation that dictated the brief retreat with
the hope of thus disconcerting the savage.

The task which Grimcke had given himself was difficult indeed.  The
ground was unfavorable for the peculiar twitching movement which he
hoped would carry him out of danger.  He had gone barely a couple of
yards when the bowman evidently suspected something of the kind, for he
stopped short and stared inquiringly at the white man.

The latter extended his right hand as if to shake that of the savage,
who stood motionless, making no sign of pleasure or displeasure.
Indeed, he remained so fixed in his position that Grimcke was convinced
he was listening for the sound of the other miscreant stealing through
the wood.  He plainly saw the black eyes cast a single inquiring glance
in that direction.

"This is getting a little too threatening," reflected the Professor,
satisfied that the three natives were as venomous as so many serpents;
"at the first move war is declared."

His situation was so critical that he did not dare turn his head to
look behind him, but never was there a more welcome sound to him than
that made by the footsteps of the lank New Englander.

"Keep moving hack!" called Long, "but don't try to hide what you're
doing."

The Professor saw the sense of this advice and he followed it, lifting
his feet so high that the action was plainly seen, but doing so with a
certain dignity that was not lacking in impressiveness.  His aim was to
give the act the appearance of a strategic movement, as it may be
called.  It was not that he was afraid of the natives, but he was
seeking a better place from which to open hostilities against them.

This was the impression which he sought to give the fierce savages, and
whether he succeeded, or not was certain to become apparent within the
following five minutes.  He himself believed, the chances were against
the success of his plan.




CHAPTER III.

LIVELY WORK.

Now took place an unprecedented incident.

The air of comity, or at least neutrality, which brooded over the two
parties had given way to that of silent but intense hostility.  The
prowling movement of the native with the spear as he slipped into the
wood, the sudden advance of Jared Long, whose face became like a
thunder-cloud, when every hope of a friendly termination vanished, and
the abrupt halt of the bowman, showed that all parties had thrown off
the cloak of good will and become deadly enemies.

The third savage kept his place farther down the stream, his black eyes
fixed on the archer in front, while he doubtless was waiting for some
action on the part of his comrade who had stolen into the wood.  As has
been stated, he was nigh enough to hurl his javelin, so that both the
white men were too wise to eliminate him from the curiously involved
problem that confronted them.

The bowman having halted, stood a moment with his piercing black eyes
fixed on the nearest white man, as if seeking to read in his face the
meaning of his action or rather abrupt cessation of action.

"Professor," called Jared, "I'll attend to the one in front of you; but
look out for the scamp among the trees."

Grimcke was relieved to hear this, and had there been only the two
natives to confront, he would have been disturbed by no misgiving, but
there were signs that the third one down the stream was preparing to do
his part in the treacherous business.  He too began advancing, but
instead of doing so with the quick, angry stride of the New Englander,
he stepped slowly and softly, as if seeking to conceal his movement.

Grimcke would have been glad to turn the archer over to the care of
Long, but he was so frightfully close, that he did not dare do so.  A
moment's delay on the part of his friend would be fatal.  At the same
time, it was not to be forgotten that the most stealthy foe of all was
prowling among the trees on the right.

The Professor's hope, as has been explained, was that his own
retrogression had disconcerted the plans of this special miscreant for
whom, however, he kept a keen watch.

The archer still held his bow, with the arrow in place grasped by his
right hand, the long weapon resting against his hip.  Provided he was
right-handed, the bow would have to be shifted to his left hand, the
arrow drawn back with the right and the missile then launched at his
foe.  This, it would seem, involved enough action to give both Grimcke
and Long abundance of time in which to anticipate him.

But there remained the possibility that the savage was left-handed, in
which event, the necessary action on his part would be much less,
though sufficiently complicated to afford the white men abundance of
time to anticipate him.

The native _was_ left-handed, with a quickness that surpassed all
expectation, the bow was suddenly raised, the end of the arrow drawn
back and the missile driven directly at the breast of Grimcke.

At precisely the same instant, the latter's strained ear caught the
crackling of a twig, above the din of the rapids (which was much less
there than below), and something was discerned moving among the trees
on his right.  His frightened glance in that direction gave him a
glimpse of a dusky figure in the act of hurling his javelin.

Thus it was that the spearman and archer let fly at precisely the same
instant, and Jared Long, who was so anxious to help his friend, saw
only the deft movements of the archer.  Grimcke could not fire at both
in time to save himself, but he instinctively did the very best and
indeed the only thing that could be done.  Without moving his feet, he
dropped to a sitting posture, instantly popping up again like a
jack-in-the-box.

The movement took place at precisely the right instant, and both the
javelin and arrow whizzed over his head, without grazing him, but the
arrow shot by Long's temple so close that he blinked and for an instant
believed he had been hit.

But, like the hunter when bitten by a rattlesnake, he determined to
crush his assailant and to attend to his hurt afterwards.

The sharp crack of the Winchester, the shriek of the smitten savage and
his frenzied leap in the air, followed in such instant succession that
they seemed simultaneous.  When the wretch went back on the ground he
was as dead as Julius Caesar.

A man can fire with amazing rapidity, when using a Winchester repeater,
but some persons are like cats in their own movements.  The New
Englander leveled his weapon as quickly as he could bring it to his
shoulder, but the native along the side of the Xingu had vanished as
though he never existed.

Whether he knew anything about fire-arms or not, he was quick to
understand that some kind of weapon in the hands of the white men had
knocked the bowman out of time, and he bounded among the trees at his
side, as though he, too, was discharged from the bow.  He was just
quick enough to escape the bullet that would have been after him an
instant later.

The moment Grimcke knew that he was safe from the javelin, which sped
over his head, he straightened up, and, still maintaining his removable
posture, discharged his gun at the point whence came the well-nigh
fatal missile.

But the shot was a blind one, for he did not see the native at the
instant of firing.  Nothing could have surpassed the alertness of these
strange savages.  The one with the javelin disappeared with the same
suddenness as did his brother down the bank, and, had the archer but
comprehended his danger he, too, would have escaped.

The affray roused the wrath of both Long and Grimcke.  They had offered
the hand of friendship, only to be answered with an attempt upon their
lives.  One of their assailants had eluded them, and the other would
have been an assailant had the opportunity been given.

"Let's shoot him too!"

He alluded to the man who hurled the javelin and who, so far as they
could see, was left without any weapon with which to defend himself.
In their natural excitement over their victory, the friends forgot
themselves for the moment.  Heedless of consequences, they dashed among
the trees, in pursuit of the savage who had flung his spear with
well-nigh fatal effect.

The undergrowth was frightfully tangled, and, as the first plunge, the
Professor went forward on his hands and knees.  The wonder was how Long
kept his feet; but it will be remembered that he was much more
attenuated than his companion, and seemed to have picked up a skill
elsewhere which now stood him well.

The moon was shining and despite the dense vegetation around him,
enough rays found their way to the ground to give him a partial view
for few paces in front.  He had not gone far when he caught a glimpse
of the dusky figure slipping through the undergrowth ahead, and at no
great distance.

Strange as it may seem, the impetuosity of the American caused him to
gain upon the terrified native, who, having flung his poisoned weapon,
was without the means of defending himself.  It was not in the nature
of things, however, that Long should overtake the fugitive, who was
more accustomed to making his way through such obstructions.  The first
burst of pursuit caused the white man to believe he would win in the
strange race, but the next minute he saw he was losing ground.

Determined that the wretch should not escape, he checked his pursuit
for an instant, and, bringing his Winchester to his shoulder, let fly.

But brief as was his halt, it give the savage time to make one terrific
bound which shut him almost from sight, and rendered the hasty aim of
Long so faulty that his intended victim was not so much as scratched.

Had the savage dashed deeper into the forest, he would have passed
beyond all peril at this moment, but he was seeking to do that which
Long did not discover until after discharging his gun.  He headed
toward the river, where he was first seen.  It must have been that he
was actuated by a desire to go to the help of his comrade, or more
likely he was anxious to recover his javelin, in which he placed
unbounded faith, and believed he could do it without undue risk.

Whatever his purpose, he quickly burst from the forest, while Long, who
was pushing furiously after him, discovered from the increasing light
in front, that he was close to the Xingu again.

Suspecting his purpose, the white man tore forward at the most reckless
speed, and, before the native could recover his weapon and dart back to
cover, he himself had dashed into the moonlight.

"Now, we've got him!" he shouted; "there's no getting away _this_ time!"

This exultant exclamation was uttered to a form which appeared on his
right, and who he was certain was the Professor; but to his
consternation, as he turned his head, he saw that it was the other
native, javelin in hand!




CHAPTER IV.

HOW IT ENDED.

It will be recalled that the Professor started in pursuit of the flying
native with as much ardor as his friend, but, less skilful than he, he
had taken but a step or two, when an obstruction flung him to the
ground with discouraging emphasis.

Concluding that he had undertaken a futile task, he hastily climbed to
his feet to await the return of Long who, he was satisfied, would
attempt only a brief pursuit.

Remembering the javelin which had whizzed so near his crown, he cast
about for a moment and picked it up from the earth where it lay but a
few feet distant.  As he balanced it in his hand, he observed that it
was about six feet in length, was made entirely of wood, which was
heavy and as hard and smooth as polished ebony.

The light of the moon was like that of the day itself.  It would have
been easy to read ordinary print by it.  He had no trouble, therefore,
in closely examining the novel implement of war.  As he suspected, the
point was made of stone or flint, ground almost to needle-like
sharpness and securely fastened in place by a fine tendon wound around
the portion of the stick that held the harder part.  This was covered
with a gummy substance extending to the end.

This he was satisfied was among the most virulent of substances known
to toxicology.  A puncture of the skin was sure to be fatal unless some
remedy, of whose existence he held no suspicion, was instantly
obtainable.

He had set down his rifle white examining the weapon, but quickly
caught it up again, still retaining the javelin in his right band.  He
had been startled by the sound of the terrific threshing among the
trees on his right.

He supposed that his friend was coming back, but, glancing toward the
point where he expected him to appear, he was amazed to see the third
native, who whisked off before Long could draw a bead on him, step from
the wood not twenty paces away.  His back was toward the Professor,
and, strangely enough, he did not observe the white man--an oversight
that never could have occurred, but for the tumult in the undergrowth
which held his attention.

Grimcke had hardly caught sight of him, when the other native came
flying to view, so astonishing his waiting comrade that he stood a
moment irresolute after the white pursuer burst into sight.

Brief as was this pause, it gave the Professor time for some
exceedingly fine work.  He uttered a shout which caused the native to
turn his affrighted gaze behind him, just in time to observe the white
man with javelin raised and apparently in the very act of launching it
at him.

The savage knew what a prick from that frightful thing meant, and with
a howling shriek he ducked his head as though he had caught its whizz
through the air, and shot among the trees with as much celerity as his
companion had shown in coming from them.

Neither of the explorers wished to slay the natives, no matter how
savage, unless compelled to do so in actual self-defence.  Long had
recovered from his first burst of fury, and, though the Professor could
have sunk the javelin in the naked body, he withheld it, not unwilling
that his assailant, now that he had started to flee, should escape.

The one who had so foolishly come back to the river side was left in
the worst possible situation, for both his enemies stood between him
and the sheltering forest and he was defenceless.  He was at their
mercy, and such people as those natives neither gave nor expected
quarter, when engaged in their savage warfare.

The fellow acted like a bewildered animal.  The white strangers were
standing a few paces apart, so as to form the two angles of a triangle,
while he made the third.  The nearest point to the forest way midway
between Grimcke and Long, as was apparent to the savage, who was fairly
cornered.

Had the Xingu behind him been as placid as farther above or below the
rapids, he would not have hesitated to plunge into its waters, trusting
to his skill in swimming; but, to dive into the raging current would
have been as certain destruction as for a man to undertake to swim
unaided through the whirlpool below Niagara.

Grimcke and Long were not unwilling to torment the fellow, because of
his cowardly attempt a few minutes before, though, as has been stated,
neither intended to do him any special harm.

The affrighted native crouched down, as though seeking to draw himself
into such a narrow compass that the terrible javelin could not reach
him.  Despite the proof he had seen of the power of the civilized
weapons, he held his own in greater dread.

Grimcke raised the spear, as if poising it aloft to hurl at the savage.
The latter uttered a howl of terror, and, with his head still low,
attempted to dart between the strangers.  Naturally he shied as far
away as possible from the Professor, and thereby brought himself almost
close enough to touch Jared.

"That's what I want," muttered the latter, hurriedly concentrating his
strength in his good right leg, and delivering the most powerful kick
at his command.

It was well aimed and most effectively landed.  The Professor was sure
he heard the "dull thud," and always insisted that the recipient was
lifted clear of the ground and propelled among the trees with an
impetus sufficient to break his neck.

"There!" exclaimed the New Englander, looking around, "I guess I'm
through!"

"I am sure that last fellow hopes so," said the Professor with a laugh,
"for it's safe to conclude he was never handled with such vigor before."

The levity which both felt over their triumphant routing of their
assailants was checked by the sight of the stark, lifeless form on the
ground, only a few paces distant.

They had the best plea in the world for shooting the fierce savage, but
the consciousness that the necessity existed and that the deed had been
done, rendered them serious and thoughtful.

There was reason for believing the other natives would watch them from
the forest, and the one who retained his javelin was likely to seek the
chance to use it again.  He certainly had strong temptation to do so,
with the prospect of little risk to himself.

Besides, as the explorers followed the rapids, their uproar increased
to that extent that the savages could move freely without danger of any
noise being overheard.

The most prudent thing to do seemed for the friends to walk so briskly
as to disconcert any plan their enemies might have formed.  This was
quite easy, because of the open space, already mentioned, as lining
both banks of the Xingu.

Fortunately the distance to camp was not far, and, with the hurried
pace adopted by the Professor and Long, it ought not to occupy more
than a few minutes, provided no interruption occurred.  Strange
emotions tortured both, as they kept their eyes fixed on the dark wood
at their side, from which they expected the sweep of the fearful
javelin, whose touch was death.

The keenest hearing could not detect the faint whizz, while the roar of
the rapids was in their ears, and they had to depend, therefore, on
their eyes, which promised to be of little more service.

But the entire distance was almost passed, and the hearts of the two
were beating high with increasing hope, when Long, with a gasp of
terror, grasped the arm of the Professor with incredible force, and
jerking him backward, pointed with his extended finger to the camp in
front of them.




CHAPTER V.

THE NATIVE VILLAGE.

