CHAPTER VIII

A COMBAT IN THE TOWER


"I see that you are safe against fire, sir," Edgar said, when the stone
slab had descended and they had closed the door behind it; "but were
the walls of the house to fall in you might be buried here, as I hear
many drunken wretches were yesterday in the cellars of the Savoy."

"I have means of escape," the merchant said, going to the other side of
the apartment, where there was a massive iron door, which they had not
before noticed. "Here," he said, "is a passage leading under the
street; at the end it ascends, and is closed at the top by a massive
panel in the hall of the house opposite. When I took this house a
compatriot lived there, and it was with his consent that I made the
passage, which might be useful in case of need, to him as well as to
me. He returned to Flanders three years since, and the house has been
occupied by an English trader, who knows naught of the passage, so
that, at will, I can sally out by that way."

"And how is your dame, sir?" Albert asked. "I trust that she is none
the worse for her transport here."

"I trust not, young sir; she swooned as I brought her down, but I at
once poured some cordial between her lips, and when she opened her
eyes, just before you came down, I assured her that we were all safe,
and that there was no cause for the least fear; thereupon she closed
her eyes again, and is, methinks, asleep. When she wakes I shall give
her the medicine that my daughter brought. I trust that she will
erelong recover. Her attack was doubtless brought on by the news that
we received yesterday of the murder of so many of our countrymen. We
had already talked of taking refuge here, but deemed not that there was
any pressing need of haste, for the front door is a very strong one,
and could have resisted any attacks long enough to give us ample time
to retire here."

"How do you manage to breathe here, sir, now that the stone slab is
down and the door closed? I see not how you obtain air."

"For that I made provision at the time it was built. Here are two
shafts, six inches square; this one runs up into the chimney of the
kitchen and draws up the air from here; the other goes up to a grating
in the outer wall of the house in the yard behind. It looks as if made
for giving ventilation under the floors or to the cellar, and through
this the air comes down to take the place of that drawn upwards by the
heat of the chimney."

"And now, Mynheer Van Voorden," for such they had learned was the
Fleming's name, "as there is a way of escape, we shall be glad to use
it."

"I pray you do not think of doing so at present," the Fleming said. "We
know not yet whether the evil-doers have cleared off, and methinks it
is not likely that they will have gone yet. First they will search high
and low for us, then they will demolish the furniture, and take all
they deem worth carrying; then, doubtless, they will quench their
thirst in the cellar above, and lastly they will fire the house,
thinking that although they cannot find us, they will burn us with it.
They will wait some time outside to see if we appear at one of the
windows, and not until the roof has fallen in will they be sure that we
have perished. Moreover, you cannot well appear in the streets for the
present in that attire, for you might well be recognized and denounced.
First of all, let me persuade you to take such poor refreshments as I
can offer you."

"Thanks, sir; of that we shall be glad, for 'tis now past noon, and we
have had but a loaf we bought at a baker's as we entered the city."

The Fleming gave orders to the servant, and they speedily had a
snow-white cloth of the finest damask on the table, and placed on it a
service of silver dishes.

"'Tis well that I had my plate brought down here yesterday," the
merchant said, smiling, "though it hardly consorts well with the fare
that I have to offer you. To-morrow, should you pay us a visit, you
will find us better prepared, for, as you see, we have a fireplace at
the bottom of the flue opening into the kitchen chimney. This was done,
not only that we might have warmth, and be able, if need be, to cook
here, but to increase the draught upwards, and so bring down more air
from the other flue."

The lads, however, found that there was no need for apology, for there
were upon the dishes two chickens, a raised pasty large enough for a
dozen people, and a variety of sweets and conserves. The wine, too, was
superb. They made a hearty meal. When they had finished, the Fleming
said: "Now we will go upstairs; there is a peephole in the carving of
the panel, and we can see how matters stand."

Opening the door, they pushed up the massive stone. As they ascended
the stairs they smelt smoke, which grew thicker at each step.

"We need go no further, sirs; the house is clearly on fire, and smoke
has made its way through the peephole that I spoke of."

They waited for another half hour, and then they heard a heavy crash on
the other side of the stone barrier.

"The roof has doubtless fallen in or one of the walls," Van Voorden
said. "There is, be sure, a mob gathered to watch the flames, but in
another half hour it will have gone elsewhere; still, I should advise
you to wait until nightfall."

They saw that this would be prudent, for their attire would certainly
render them obnoxious to the rioters. They were, however, impatient to
be off and see what was being done. The Fleming's wife was still
sleeping soundly, and her husband said that he was convinced that the
crisis was passed, and that she would now recover. The Fleming asked
them many questions about themselves, and where they could be found.
They told them where they were at present lodging, but said they
thought that as soon as the present troubles were over they should
return to their home in the country.

"I myself shall be returning to Flanders, sirs. I have talked of it
many times these last five years, and after this outburst it will be
long before any of my people will be able to feel that they are safe in
London. Had it not been that the populace are as much masters in Bruges
as they are here, I should have gone long ago.

"There is, indeed, no change for the better there, but I shall settle
in Brussels or Louvain, where I can live in peace and quiet."

At the end of half an hour Edgar said: "I think that they must have
cleared off by this time. When we sally out, do you, Albert, go one
way, and I will go another. There is naught in our dress to distinguish
us from other citizens, and methinks that most of those who would have
known us again are lying under the ruins above."

They had, on first arriving below, washed the blood from their faces,
and bathed their wounds, which were by no means of a serious character.
The Fleming agreed with them that, if they separated, there would be no
great danger of their being recognized. After taking farewell of the
girl, who had all this time been sitting silently by her mother's
bedside, they passed through the iron door, preceded by the Fleming
carrying a lamp. After passing through the passage they went up a long
flight of narrow steps until their course was arrested by a wooden
panel. The Fleming applied first his eye and then his ear to a tiny
peephole.

"Everything is quiet," he said; then touched a spring, pushed the panel
open a short distance, and looked out.

"All is clear; you have but to open the door and go out."

He pushed the panel farther back, pressed the lads' hands as they went
out, and then closed the entrance behind them. There was but a single
bolt to undraw; then they opened the door and stepped into the street,
Edgar waiting for half a minute to let Albert get well away before he
went out.

The front wall of the opposite house, having fallen inward, quickly
smothered the fire, and although a light smoke, mingled with tongues of
flame, rose from the ruin, the place had ceased to have any attraction
for the mob, who had wandered away to look for more exciting amusement
elsewhere.

Scenes of this kind were being enacted throughout the city. Already the
restriction against plundering was disregarded, and although the men
from the counties still abstained from robbery, the released prisoners
from the jail and the denizens of the slums of the city had no such
scruples, and the houses of the Flemings were everywhere sacked and
plundered. The two friends met again at Aldgate. When they reached
Tower Hill, it was, they found, occupied by a dense throng of people,
who beleaguered the Tower and refused to allow any provisions to be
taken in, or any person to issue out.

"What had best be done, Edgar? So menacing is the appearance of the
rabble that methinks this attire would be as much out of place among
them as would our own."

"I agree with you there, Albert, and yet I know not what we are to do.
What we need is either a craftsman's dress or that of a countryman, but
I see not how the one or the other is to be obtained. Assuredly nothing
is to be bought, save perhaps bread, for the rioters have ordered that
all bakers' shops are to stand open."

He stood for a minute thinking. "I tell you what we might do," he went
on. "Let us go back into Aldgate, and then down on to the wharf. There
are many country boats there, and we might buy what we need from the
sailors."

"That is a good idea indeed, Edgar."

In a quarter of an hour they were on the wharf. Many of the craft there
had no one on board, the men having gone either to join the rioters or
to look on at what had been done. The skipper of a large fishing-boat
was sitting on the wharf looking moodily down into his vessel.

"Are you the captain of that craft?" Edgar asked him.

"I used to think so," he said; "but just at present no one obeys
orders, as every Jack thinks that he is as good as his master. I ought
to have gone out with the morning's tide, but my men would not have it
so, and just at present they are the masters, not I. A murrain on such
doings, say I. I was with them when it was but a talk of rights and
privileges, but when it comes to burning houses and slaying peaceable
men, I, for one, will have naught to do with it."

"Captain," Edgar said, "I see that you are an honest man, and maybe you
will aid us. We find that there is peril in going about attired as we
are, for we aided a short time since in saving a Flemish family from
massacre by these fellows, and we need disguises. We want two
countrymen's suits--it matters not whether they be new or old. We are
ready to pay for them, but every shop is closed, and we have come down
to the wharves to find someone who will sell."

"There is no difficulty about that," the skipper said, rising from his
seat. "My own clothes would scarce fit you, but two of my crew are
somewhat of your size. Step on board, and I will overhaul their
lockers, and doubt not that I shall find something to serve your
purpose. They will not mind if they find that there is money sufficient
to buy them new ones. Indeed, there is no need for that, for if you
leave behind you the clothes you wear they will sell at Colchester for
enough to buy them two or three suits such as those you take."

There was in those days no distinctive dress worn by sailors. The
captain went down into the little cabin forward and opened two lockers.

"There," he said, "suit yourselves out of these. They are their best,
for they thought that aught would do for mixing up with the mob in the
city."

So saying he went on deck again. The citizen's clothes were soon
stripped off, and the lads dressed in those they took from the lockers,
and in a few minutes they rejoined the skipper, looking like two young
countrymen.

"That will do well," he said, with a laugh. "Hob and Bill would scarce
know their clothes again if they saw them on you. No, no," he added, as
Albert put his hand into his pouch, "there is no need for money, lads;
they will be mightily content with the clothes you have left. Well,
yes; I don't care if I do take a stoup of liquor. There is a tavern
over there where they keep as good ale as you can find anywhere about
here."

After drinking a pint of beer with the honest skipper, they again went
off to the Tower, and mingled in the crowd. It was easy to see that it
was composed of two different sections--the one quiet and orderly, the
men looking grave and somewhat anxious, as if feeling that it was a
perilous enterprise upon which they were embarked, although still bent
upon carrying it out; the other noisy and savage--the men from the
jails, the scum of Canterbury and Rochester, and the mob of the city.
Between these classes there was no sympathy, the one was bent only upon
achieving their deliverance from serfdom, the other was solely
influenced by a desire for plunder, and a thirst for the blood of those
obnoxious to them. Presently there was a loud shout from the crowd as
the drawbridge was lowered.

"Perhaps they are going to make a sally, Albert. If so, we had best
make off to our lodgings, throw off these garments, and appear in our
own."

"'Tis the king!" Albert exclaimed; "and see, there is De Vere, the Earl
of Kent, and other nobles riding behind him."

"Yes; and there is your father. The king and those with him are without
armour or arms; if they had seen as much as we have seen the last two
days, they would scarce trust themselves in such a garb."

A great shout arose as the boy king rode across the drawbridge. The
lads noticed that the shout proceeded from the men who had hitherto
been silent, and that the noisy portion of the crowd now held their
peace. The king held up his hand for silence.

"My friends," he said, in a loud, clear voice, "there is no room here
for conference. Follow me to Mile End Fields, and I will then hear what
you wish to say to me, and will do what I can to give you satisfaction."

A great shout arose, and as the king rode off, most of the country
people followed him. A great mob, however, still remained. These
consisted principally of Wat the Tyler's following, who had ever been
in the front in the doings that had taken place, together with the
released malefactors and the town rabble. A few minutes after the king
and his followers had left, there was a movement forward, and a moment
later, with loud shouts, they began to pour across the drawbridge.

"What madness is this?" Edgar exclaimed. "There are twelve hundred men
there, and yet no bow is bent. It must be treachery!"

"It may be that, Edgar; but more like, orders have been issued that
none should shoot at the rioters or do them any harm, for were there
any killed here it might cost the king his life."

"That may be it," Edgar muttered; "but come on, there is no saying what
may happen."

They were now near the drawbridge, for when a part of the gathering had
left to follow the king, they had taken advantage of it to press
forward towards the gates, and in a few minutes were inside the Tower.
All was in confusion. The men-at-arms and archers remained immovable on
the walls, while a crowd of well-nigh twenty thousand men poured into
the Tower with shouts of "Death to the archbishop! Death to the
treasurer!" Knowing their way better than others, Edgar and Albert ran
at full speed towards the royal apartments. Finding themselves in a
deserted passage they threw off their upper garments.

"Throw them in here," Edgar said, opening a door; "they may be useful
to us yet."

Finding the king's chamber empty, they ran into the princess's
apartment. The princess was sitting pale and trembling, surrounded by a
group of ladies, among whom was Dame Agatha. A few gentlemen were
gathered round. Just as the lads entered, Sir Robert Hales, the
treasurer, ran in.

"Madam," he said, "I beseech you order these gentlemen to sheathe their
swords. Resistance is impossible. There are thousands upon thousands of
these knaves, and were a sword drawn it would cost your life and that
of all within the Tower. They have no ill-will against you, as they
showed when you passed through them at Blackheath. I implore you, order
all to remain quiet whatever happens, and it were best that all save
your personal attendants dispersed to their apartments. Even the
semblance of resistance might excite these people to madness, and serve
as an excuse for the most atrocious deeds."

"Disperse, I pray you, knights and ladies," the princess said. "I
order--nay, I implore you, lose not a moment."

"Come," Dame Agatha said, firmly, taking hold of Aline's hand; "and do
you follow, my son, with Edgar."

They hurried along the passages, one of which was that by which the
lads had entered.

"Go on with them," Edgar said to his friend; "I will follow in a
moment. This is the room where we left our disguises."

Running in he gathered the clothes, made them into a rough bundle, and
then followed. He overtook his friends as they were mounting a
staircase which led to a room in one of the turrets. As they reached
the chamber, and the door closed behind them, Dame Agatha burst into
tears.

"I have been in such anxiety about you both!" she exclaimed.

"We have fared well, mother," Albert said; "but do you lose no moment
of time. We have disguises here. I pray you put on the commonest
garment that you have, you and Aline. If you can pass as servants of
the palace, we can conduct you safely out of the crowd."

Edgar ran up a narrow flight of stone stairs, at the top of which was a
trap-door. He forced back the bolts and lifted it.

"Bring up the clothes, Albert," he called down. "We will put them on
while the ladies are changing, and we can watch from this platform what
is doing without."

They soon slipped on the countrymen's clothes over their own, and then
looked out at the scene below. Every space between the buildings was
crowded by the mob shouting and yelling. The garrison still stood
immovable on the outer walls.

"You must be right, Albert. Even if there be some traitors among them
there must also be some true men, and never would they stand thus
impassive had not the strictest orders been laid upon them before the
king's departure."

In a minute or two they saw a number of men pour out, hauling along the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Robert Hales, the king's confessor, and
four other gentlemen. Then with exulting shouts they dragged their
prisoners to Tower Hill, and then forced them to kneel.

"They cannot be going to murder them!" Albert exclaimed with horror.

"That is surely their intent," Edgar said, sternly. "Would that we were
there with but a hundred men-at-arms. Assuredly there would be a stout
fight before they had their way."

"I cannot look on!" Albert exclaimed, hurrying to the other side of the
platform as a man armed with a heavy sword faced the prisoners.

Edgar did not move, but stood gazing with scowling brow and clenched
hand. Presently he turned.

"There is naught more to see, Albert. All are murdered! God assoil
their souls."

At this moment Dame Agatha called out from below that they were ready,
and they ran down at once into the chamber. Dame Agatha and her
daughter were both dressed in rough garments with hoods pulled over
their faces, and might well have passed unnoticed as being the wife and
daughter of some small trader, or superior domestics of the palace.
Just as they were about to start they heard an uproar on the stairs
below. The door had been already fastened.

"Best to open it," Edgar said; "they would but break it in."

Seven rough fellows, whose flushed faces showed that they had already
been drinking, rushed into the room.

"Who have we here?" one shouted roughly. "Two wenches and two country
