Now Curdie himself had not heard a word of His Majesty's illness, and
had no ground for believing that a single soul in any place he had
visited on his journey had heard of it.  Moreover, although mention had
been made of His Majesty again and again in his hearing since he came
to Gwyntystorm, never once had he heard an allusion to the state of his
health.  And now it dawned upon him also that he had never heard the
least expression of love to him.  But just for the time he thought it
better to say nothing on either point.

'Does the king wander like this every night?' he asked.

'Every night,' answered Irene, shaking her head mournfully.  'That is
why I never go to bed at night.  He is better during the day--a little,
and then I sleep--in the dressing room there, to be with him in a
moment if he should call me.  It is so sad he should have only me and
not my mamma!  A princess is nothing to a queen!'

'I wish he would like me,' said Curdie, 'for then I might watch by him
at night, and let you go to bed, Princess.'

'Don't you know then?' returned Irene, in wonder.  'How was it you
came?  Ah!  You said my grandmother sent you.  But I thought you knew
that he wanted you.'

And again she opened wide her blue stars.

'Not I,' said Curdie, also bewildered, but very glad.

'He used to be constantly saying--he was not so ill then as he is
now--that he wished he had you about him.'

'And I never to know it!' said Curdie, with displeasure.

'The master of the horse told papa's own secretary that he had written
to the miner-general to find you and send you up; but the miner-general
wrote back to the master of the horse, and he told the secretary, and
the secretary told my father, that they had searched every mine in the
kingdom and could hear nothing of you. My father gave a great sigh, and
said he feared the goblins had got you, after all, and your father and
mother were dead of grief.  And he has never mentioned you since,
except when wandering.  I cried very much.  But one of my grandmother's
pigeons with its white wing flashed a message to me through the window
one day, and then I knew that my Curdie wasn't eaten by the goblins,
for my grandmother wouldn't have taken care of him one time to let him
be eaten the next.  Where were you, Curdie, that they couldn't find
you?'

'We will talk about that another time, when we are not expecting the
doctor,' said Curdie.

As he spoke, his eyes fell upon something shining on the table under
the lamp.  His heart gave a great throb, and he went nearer. Yes, there
could be no doubt--it was the same flagon that the butler had filled in
the wine cellar.

'It looks worse and worse!'he said to himself, and went back to Irene,
where she stood half dreaming.

'When will the doctor be here?' he asked once more--this time hurriedly.

The question was answered--not by the princess, but by something which
that instant tumbled heavily into the room.  Curdie flew toward it in
vague terror about Lina.

On the floor lay a little round man, puffing and blowing, and uttering
incoherent language.  Curdie thought of his mattock, and ran and laid
it aside.

'Oh, dear Dr Kelman!' cried the princess, running up and taking hold of
his arm; 'I am so sorry!'  She pulled and pulled, but might almost as
well have tried to set up a cannon ball.  'I hope you have not hurt
yourself?'

'Not at all, not at all,' said the doctor, trying to smile and to rise
both at once, but finding it impossible to do either.

'If he slept on the floor he would be late for breakfast,' said Curdie
to himself, and held out his hand to help him.

But when he took hold of it, Curdie very nearly let him fall again, for
what he held was not even a foot: it was the belly of a creeping thing.
He managed, however, to hold both his peace and his grasp, and pulled
the doctor roughly on his legs--such as they were.

'Your Royal Highness has rather a thick mat at the door,' said the
doctor, patting his palms together.  'I hope my awkwardness may not
have startled His Majesty.'

While he talked Curdie went to the door: Lina was not there.

The doctor approached the bed.

'And how has my beloved king slept tonight?' he asked.

'No better,' answered Irene, with a mournful shake of her head.

'Ah, that is very well!' returned the doctor, his fall seeming to have
muddled either his words or his meaning.  'When we give him his wine,
he will be better still.'

Curdie darted at the flagon, and lifted it high, as if he had expected
to find it full, but had found it empty.

'That stupid butler!  I heard them say he was drunk!' he cried in a
loud whisper, and was gliding from the room.

'Come here with that flagon, you!  Page!' cried the doctor. Curdie came
a few steps toward him with the flagon dangling from his hand, heedless
of the gushes that fell noiseless on the thick carpet.

'Are you aware, young man,' said the doctor, 'that it is not every wine
can do His Majesty the benefit I intend he should derive from my
prescription?'

'Quite aware, sir, answered Curdie.  'The wine for His Majesty's use is
in the third cask from the corner.'

'Fly, then,' said the doctor, looking satisfied.

Curdie stopped outside the curtain and blew an audible breath--no more;
up came Lina noiseless as a shadow.  He showed her the flagon.

'The cellar, Lina: go,' he said.

She galloped away on her soft feet, and Curdie had indeed to fly to
keep up with her.  Not once did she make even a dubious turn.  From the
king's gorgeous chamber to the cold cellar they shot.  Curdie dashed
the wine down the back stair, rinsed the flagon out as he had seen the
butler do, filled it from the cask of which he had seen the butler
drink, and hastened with it up again to the king's room.

The little doctor took it, poured out a full glass, smelt, but did not
taste it, and set it down.  Then he leaned over the bed, shouted in the
king's ear, blew upon his eyes, and pinched his arm: Curdie thought he
saw him run something bright into it.  At last the king half woke.  The
doctor seized the glass, raised his head, poured the wine down his
throat, and let his head fall back on the pillow again.  Tenderly
wiping his beard, and bidding the princess good night in paternal
tones, he then took his leave.  Curdie would gladly have driven his
pick into his head, but that was not in his commission, and he let him
go.  The little round man looked very carefully to his feet as he
crossed the threshold.

'That attentive fellow of a page has removed the mat,' he said to
himself, as he walked along the corridor.  'I must remember him.'



CHAPTER 20

Counterplotting

Curdie was already sufficiently enlightened as to how things were
going, to see that he must have the princess of one mind with him, and
they must work together.  It was clear that among those about the king
there was a plot against him: for one thing, they had agreed in a lie
concerning himself; and it was plain also that the doctor was working
out a design against the health and reason of His Majesty, rendering
the question of his life a matter of little moment.  It was in itself
sufficient to justify the worst fears, that the people outside the
palace were ignorant of His Majesty's condition: he believed those
inside it also--the butler excepted--were ignorant of it as well.
Doubtless His Majesty's councillors desired to alienate the hearts of
his subjects from their sovereign.  Curdie's idea was that they
intended to kill the king, marry the princess to one of themselves, and
found a new dynasty; but whatever their purpose, there was treason in
the palace of the worst sort: they were making and keeping the king
incapable, in order to effect that purpose.  The first thing to be seen
to, therefore, was that His Majesty should neither eat morsel nor drink
drop of anything prepared for him in the palace.  Could this have been
managed without the princess, Curdie would have preferred leaving her
in ignorance of the horrors from which he sought to deliver her.  He
feared also the danger of her knowledge betraying itself to the evil
eyes about her; but it must be risked and she had always been a wise
child.

Another thing was clear to him--that with such traitors no terms of
honour were either binding or possible, and that, short of lying, he
might use any means to foil them.  And he could not doubt that the old
princess had sent him expressly to frustrate their plans.

While he stood thinking thus with himself, the princess was earnestly
watching the king, with looks of childish love and womanly tenderness
that went to Curdie's heart.  Now and then with a great fan of peacock
feathers she would fan him very softly; now and then, seeing a cloud
begin to gather upon the sky of his sleeping face, she would climb upon
the bed, and bending to his ear whisper into it, then draw back and
watch again--generally to see the cloud disperse.  In his deepest
slumber, the soul of the king lay open to the voice of his child, and
that voice had power either to change the aspect of his visions, or,
which was better still, to breathe hope into his heart, and courage to
endure them.

Curdie came near, and softly called her.

'I can't leave Papa just yet,' she returned, in a low voice.

'I will wait,' said Curdie; 'but I want very much to say something.'

In a few minutes she came to him where he stood under the lamp.

'Well, Curdie, what is it?' she said.

'Princess,' he replied, 'I want to tell you that I have found why your
grandmother sent me.'

'Come this way, then, she answered, 'where I can see the face of my
king.'

Curdie placed a chair for her in the spot she chose, where she would be
near enough to mark any slightest change on her father's countenance,
yet where their low-voiced talk would not disturb him. There he sat
down beside her and told her all the story--how her grandmother had
sent her good pigeon for him, and how she had instructed him, and sent
him there without telling him what he had to do.  Then he told her what
he had discovered of the state of things generally in Gwyntystorm, and
especially what he had heard and seen in the palace that night.

'Things are in a bad state enough,' he said in conclusion--'lying and
selfishness and inhospitality and dishonesty everywhere; and to crown
all, they speak with disrespect of the good king, and not a man knows
he is ill.'

'You frighten me dreadfully,' said Irene, trembling.

'You must be brave for your king's sake,' said Curdie.

'Indeed I will,' she replied, and turned a long loving look upon the
beautiful face of her father.  'But what is to be done?  And how am I
to believe such horrible things of Dr Kelman?'

'My dear Princess,' replied Curdie, 'you know nothing of him but his
face and his tongue, and they are both false.  Either you must beware
of him, or you must doubt your grandmother and me; for I tell you, by
the gift she gave me of testing hands, that this man is a snake.  That
round body he shows is but the case of a serpent. Perhaps the creature
lies there, as in its nest, coiled round and round inside.'

'Horrible!' said Irene.

'Horrible indeed; but we must not try to get rid of horrible things by
refusing to look at them, and saying they are not there.  Is not your
beautiful father sleeping better since he had the wine?'

'Yes.'

'Does he always sleep better after having it?'

She reflected an instant.

'No; always worse--till tonight,' she answered.

'Then remember that was the wine I got him--not what the butler drew.
Nothing that passes through any hand in the house except yours or mine
must henceforth, till he is well, reach His Majesty's lips.'

'But how, dear Curdie?' said the princess, almost crying.

'That we must contrive,' answered Curdie.  'I know how to take care of
the wine; but for his food--now we must think.'

'He takes hardly any,' said the princess, with a pathetic shake of her
little head which Curdie had almost learned to look for.

'The more need,' he replied, 'there should be no poison in it.' Irene
shuddered.  'As soon as he has honest food he will begin to grow
better.  And you must be just as careful with yourself, Princess,'
Curdie went on, 'for you don't know when they may begin to poison you,
too.'

'There's no fear of me; don't talk about me,' said Irene.  'The good
food!  How are we to get it, Curdie?  That is the whole question.'

'I am thinking hard,' answered Curdie.  'The good food?  Let me
see--let me see!  Such servants as I saw below are sure to have the
best of everything for themselves: I will go an see what I can find on
their table.'

'The chancellor sleeps in the house, and he and the master of the
king's horse always have their supper together in a room off the great
hall, to the right as you go down the stairs,' said Irene. 'I would go
with you, but I dare not leave my father.  Alas!  He scarcely ever
takes more than a mouthful.  I can't think how he lives!  And the very
thing he would like, and often asks for--a bit of bread--I can hardly
ever get for him: Dr Kelman has forbidden it, and says it is nothing
less than poison to him.'

'Bread at least he shall have,' said Curdie; 'and that, with the honest
wine, will do as well as anything, I do believe.  I will go at once and
look for some.  But I want you to see Lina first, and know her, lest,
coming upon her by accident at any time, you should be frightened.'

'I should like much to see her,' said the princess.

Warning her not to be startled by her ugliness, he went to the door and
called her.

She entered, creeping with downcast head, and dragging her tail over
the floor behind her.  Curdie watched the princess as the frightful
creature came nearer and nearer.  One shudder went from head to foot,
and next instant she stepped to meet her.  Lina dropped flat on the
floor, and covered her face with her two big paws.  It went to the
heart of the princess: in a moment she was on her knees beside her,
stroking her ugly head, and patting her all over.

'Good dog!  Dear ugly dog!' she said.

Lina whimpered.

'I believe,' said Curdie, 'from what your grandmother told me, that
Lina is a woman, and that she was naughty, but is now growing good.'

Lina had lifted her head while Irene was caressing her; now she dropped
it again between her paws; but the princess took it in her hands, and
kissed the forehead betwixt the gold-green eyes.

'Shall I take her with me or leave her?' asked Curdie.

'Leave her, poor dear,' said Irene, and Curdie, knowing the way now,
