'And didn't you find it very cold?'

The King had come to request Prince Mannikin and the Princess to follow
him to the Council Chamber, which they did, not knowing that he meant to
present the Prince to all the nobles assembled there as his son-in-law
and successor. But when Mannikin perceived his intention, he begged
permission to speak first, and told his whole story, even to the fact
that he believed himself to be a peasant's son. Scarcely had he finished
speaking when the sky grew black, the thunder growled, and the lightning
flashed, and in the blaze of light the good Fairy Genesta suddenly
appeared. Turning to Prince Mannikin, she said:

'I am satisfied with you, since you have shown not only courage but a
good heart.' Then she addressed King Farda-Kinbras, and informed him of
the real history of the Prince, and how she had determined to give
him the education she knew would be best for a man who was to command
others. 'You have already found the advantage of having a faithful
friend,' she added to the Prince 'and now you will have the pleasure
of seeing King Bayard and his subjects regain their natural forms as a
reward for his kindness to you.'

Just then arrived a chariot drawn by eagles, which proved to contain the
foolish King and Queen, who embraced their long-lost son with great
joy, and were greatly struck with the fact that they did indeed find
him covered with fur! While they were caressing Sabella and wringing
her hands (which is a favourite form of endearment with foolish
people) chariots were seen approaching from all points of the compass,
containing numbers of Fairies.

'Sire,' said Genesta to Farda-Kinbras, 'I have taken the liberty of
appointing your Court as a meeting-place for all the Fairies who could
spare the time to come; and I hope you can arrange to hold the great
ball, which we have once in a hundred years, on this occasion.'

The King having suitably acknowledged the honour done him, was next
reconciled to Gorgonzola, and they two presently opened the ball
together. The Fairy Marsontine restored their natural forms to King
Bayard and all his subjects, and he appeared once more as handsome a
king as you could wish to see. One of the Fairies immediately despatched
her chariot for the Queen of the Spice Islands, and their wedding took
place at the same time as that of Prince Mannikin and the lovely and
gracious Sabella. They lived happily ever afterwards, and their vast
kingdoms were presently divided between their children.

The Prince, out of grateful remembrance of the Princess Sabella's
first gift to him bestowed the right of bearing her name upon the most
beautiful of the martens, and that is why they are called sables to this
day.

Comte de Caylus.





THE ENCHANTED RING



Once upon a time there lived a young man named Rosimond, who was as good
and handsome as his elder brother Bramintho was ugly and wicked. Their
mother detested her eldest son, and had only eyes for the youngest. This
excited Bramintho's jealousy, and he invented a horrible story in order
to ruin his brother. He told his father that Rosimond was in the habit
of visiting a neighbour who was an enemy of the family, and betraying to
him all that went on in the house, and was plotting with him to poison
their father.

The father flew into a rage, and flogged his son till the blood came.
Then he threw him into prison and kept him for three days without food,
and after that he turned him out of the house, and threatened to kill
him if he ever came back. The mother was miserable, and did nothing but
weep, but she dared not say anything.

The youth left his home with tears in his eyes, not knowing where to go,
and wandered about for many hours till he came to a thick wood. Night
overtook him at the foot of a great rock, and he fell asleep on a bank
of moss, lulled by the music of a little brook.

It was dawn when he woke, and he saw before him a beautiful woman seated
on a grey horse, with trappings of gold, who looked as if she were
preparing for the hunt.

'Have you seen a stag and some deerhounds go by?' she asked.

'No, madam,' he replied.

Then she added, 'You look unhappy; is there anything the matter? Take
this ring, which will make you the happiest and most powerful of men,
provided you never make a bad use of it. If you turn the diamond inside,
you will become invisible. If you turn it outside, you will become
visible again. If you place it on your little finger, you will take the
shape of the King's son, followed by a splendid court. If you put it on
your fourth finger, you will take your own shape.'

Then the young man understood that it was a Fairy who was speaking to
him, and when she had finished she plunged into the woods. The youth was
very impatient to try the ring, and returned home immediately. He found
that the Fairy had spoken the truth, and that he could see and hear
everything, while he himself was unseen. It lay with him to revenge
himself, if he chose, on his brother, without the slightest danger to
himself, and he told no one but his mother of all the strange things
that had befallen him. He afterwards put the enchanted ring on his
little finger, and appeared as the King's son, followed by a hundred
fine horses, and a guard of officers all richly dressed.

His father was much surprised to see the King's son in his quiet little
house, and he felt rather embarrassed, not knowing what was the proper
way to behave on such a grand occasion. Then Rosimond asked him how many
sons he had.

'Two,' replied he.

'I wish to see them,' said Rosimond. 'Send for them at once. I desire to
take them both to Court, in order to make their fortunes.'

The father hesitated, then answered: 'Here is the eldest, whom I have
the honour to present to your Highness.'

'But where is the youngest? I wish to see him too,' persisted Rosimond.

'He is not here,' said the father. 'I had to punish him for a fault, and
he has run away.'

Then Rosimond replied, 'You should have shown him what was right, but
not have punished him. However, let the elder come with me, and as for
you, follow these two guards, who will escort you to a place that I will
point out to them.'

Then the two guards led off the father, and the Fairy of whom you have
heard found him in the forest, and beat him with a golden birch rod,
and cast him into a cave that was very deep and dark, where he lay
enchanted. 'Lie there,' she said, 'till your son comes to take you out
again.'

Meanwhile the son went to the King's palace, and arrived just when the
real prince was absent. He had sailed away to make war on a distant
island, but the winds had been contrary, and he had been shipwrecked on
unknown shores, and taken captive by a savage people. Rosimond made his
appearance at Court in the character of the Prince, whom everyone wept
for as lost, and told them that he had been rescued when at the point
of death by some merchants. His return was the signal for great
public rejoicings, and the King was so overcome that he became quite
speechless, and did nothing but embrace his son. The Queen was even more
delighted, and fetes were ordered over the whole kingdom.

One day the false Prince said to his real brother, 'Bramintho, you know
that I brought you here from your native village in order to make your
fortune; but I have found out that you are a liar, and that by your
deceit you have been the cause of all the troubles of your brother
Rosimond. He is in hiding here, and I desire that you shall speak to
him, and listen to his reproaches.'

Bramintho trembled at these words, and, flinging himself at the Prince's
feet, confessed his crime.

'That is not enough,' said Rosimond. 'It is to your brother that you
must confess, and I desire that you shall ask his forgiveness. He will
be very generous if he grants it, and it will be more than you deserve.
He is in my ante-room, where you shall see him at once. I myself will
retire into another apartment, so as to leave you alone with him.'

Bramintho entered, as he was told, into the anteroom. Then Rosimond
changed the ring, and passed into the room by another door.

Bramintho was filled with shame as soon as he saw his brother's face. He
implored his pardon, and promised to atone for all his faults. Rosimond
embraced him with tears, and at once forgave him, adding, 'I am in great
favour with the King. It rests with me to have your head cut off, or to
condemn you to pass the remainder of your life in prison; but I desire
to be as good to you as you have been wicked to me.' Bramintho, confused
and ashamed, listened to his words without daring to lift his eyes or to
remind Rosimond that he was his brother. After this, Rosimond gave out
that he was going to make a secret voyage, to marry a Princess who
lived in a neighbouring kingdom; but in reality he only went to see his
mother, whom he told all that had happened at the Court, giving her at
the same time some money that she needed, for the King allowed him to
take exactly what he liked, though he was always careful not to abuse
this permission. Just then a furious war broke out between the King his
master and the Sovereign of the adjoining country, who was a bad man and
one that never kept his word. Rosimond went straight to the palace of
the wicked King, and by means of his ring was able to be present at
all the councils, and learnt all their schemes, so that he was able to
forestall them and bring them to naught. He took the command of the
army which was brought against the wicked King, and defeated him in a
glorious battle, so that peace was at once concluded on conditions that
were just to everyone.

Henceforth the King's one idea was to marry the young man to a Princess
who was the heiress to a neighbouring kingdom, and, besides that, was
as lovely as the day. But one morning, while Rosimond was hunting in the
forest where for the first time he had seen the Fairy, his benefactress
suddenly appeared before him. 'Take heed,' she said to him in severe
tones, 'that you do not marry anybody who believes you to be a Prince.
You must never deceive anyone. The real Prince, whom the whole nation
thinks you are, will have to succeed his father, for that is just and
right. Go and seek him in some distant island, and I will send winds
that will swell your sails and bring you to him. Hasten to render this
service to your master, although it is against your own ambition, and
prepare, like an honest man, to return to your natural state. If you do
not do this, you will become wicked and unhappy, and I will abandon you
to all your former troubles.'

Rosimond took these wise counsels to heart. He gave out that he had
undertaken a secret mission to a neighbouring state, and embarked on
board a vessel, the winds carrying him straight to the island where the
Fairy had told him he would find the real Prince. This unfortunate youth
had been taken captive by a savage people, who had kept him to guard
their sheep. Rosimond, becoming invisible, went to seek him amongst the
pastures, where he kept his flock, and, covering him with his mantle, he
delivered him out of the hands of his cruel masters, and bore him
back to the ship. Other winds sent by the Fairy swelled the sails, and
together the two young men entered the King's presence.

Rosimond spoke first and said, 'You have believed me to be your son. I
am not he, but I have brought him back to you.' The King, filled with
astonishment, turned to his real son and asked, 'Was it not you, my son,
who conquered my enemies and won such a glorious peace? Or is it true
that you have been shipwrecked and taken captive, and that Rosimond has
set you free?'

'Yes, my father,' replied the Prince. 'It is he who sought me out in my
captivity and set me free, and to him I owe the happiness of seeing you
once more. It was he, not I, who gained the victory.'

The King could hardly believe his ears; but Rosimond, turning the ring,
appeared before him in the likeness of the Prince, and the King gazed
distractedly at the two youths who seemed both to be his son. Then he
offered Rosimond immense rewards for his services, which were refused,
and the only favour the young man would accept was that one of his posts
at Court should be conferred on his brother Bramintho. For he feared
for himself the changes of fortune, the envy of mankind and his own
weakness. His desire was to go back to his mother and his native
village, and to spend his time in cultivating the land.

One day, when he was wandering through the woods, he met the Fairy, who
showed him the cavern where his father was imprisoned, and told him what
words he must use in order to set him free. He repeated them joyfully,
for he had always longed to bring the old man back and to make his last
days happy. Rosimond thus became the benefactor of all his family, and
had the pleasure of doing good to those who had wished to do him evil.
As for the Court, to whom he had rendered such services, all he asked
was the freedom to live far from its corruption; and, to crown all,
fearing that if he kept the ring he might be tempted to use it in order
to regain his lost place in the world, he made up his mind to restore it
to the Fairy. For many days he sought her up and down the woods and at
last he found her. 'I want to give you back,' he said, holding out the
ring, 'a gift as dangerous as it is powerful, and which I fear to use
wrongfully. I shall never feel safe till I have made it impossible for
me to leave my solitude and to satisfy my passions.'

While Rosimond was seeking to give back the ring to the Fairy,
Bramintho, who had failed to learn any lessons from experience, gave
way to all his desires, and tried to persuade the Prince, lately
become King, to ill-treat Rosimond. But the Fairy, who knew all about
everything, said to Rosimond, when he was imploring her to accept the
ring:

'Your wicked brother is doing his best to poison the mind of the King
towards you, and to ruin you. He deserves to be punished, and he must
die; and in order that he may destroy himself, I shall give the ring to
him.'

Rosimond wept at these words, and then asked:

'What do you mean by giving him the ring as a punishment? He will only
use it to persecute everyone, and to become master.'

'The same things,' answered the Fairy, 'are often a healing medicine to
one person and a deadly poison to another. Prosperity is the source of
all evil to a naturally wicked man. If you wish to punish a scoundrel,
the first thing to do is to give him power. You will see that with this
rope he will soon hang himself.'

Having said this, she disappeared, and went straight to the Palace,
where she showed herself to Bramintho under the disguise of an old woman
covered with rags. She at once addressed him in these words:

'I have taken this ring from the hands of your brother, to whom I had
lent it, and by its help he covered himself with glory. I now give it to
you, and be careful what you do with it.'

Bramintho replied with a laugh:

'I shall certainly not imitate my brother, who was foolish enough to
bring back the Prince instead of reigning in his place,' and he was
as good as his word. The only use he made of the ring was to find out
family secrets and betray them, to commit murders and every sort of
wickedness, and to gain wealth for himself unlawfully. All these crimes,
which could be traced to nobody, filled the people with astonishment.
The King, seeing so many affairs, public and private, exposed, was at
first as puzzled as anyone, till Bramintho's wonderful prosperity and
amazing insolence made him suspect that the enchanted ring had become
his property. In order to find out the truth he bribed a stranger just
arrived at Court, one of a nation with whom the King was always at war,
and arranged that he was to steal in the night to Bramintho and to offer
him untold honours and rewards if he would betray the State secrets.

Bramintho promised everything, and accepted at once the first payment of
his crime, boasting that he had a ring which rendered him invisible, and
that by means of it he could penetrate into the most private places. But
his triumph was short. Next day he was seized by order of the King,
and his ring was taken from him. He was searched, and on him were found
papers which proved his crimes; and, though Rosimond himself came back
to the Court to entreat his pardon, it was refused. So Bramintho was put
to death, and the ring had been even more fatal to him than it had been
useful in the hands of his brother.

To console Rosimond for the fate of Bramintho, the King gave him back
the enchanted ring, as a pearl without price. The unhappy Rosimond did
not look upon it in the same light, and the first thing he did on his
return home was to seek the Fairy in the woods.

'Here,' he said, 'is your ring. My brother's experience has made me
understand many things that I did not know before. Keep it, it has only
led to his destruction. Ah! without it he would be alive now, and my
father and mother would not in their old age be bowed to the earth with
shame and grief! Perhaps he might have been wise and happy if he had
never had the chance of gratifying his wishes! Oh! how dangerous it is
to have more power than the rest of the world! Take back your ring, and
as ill fortune seems to follow all on whom you bestow it, I will implore
you, as a favour to myself, that you will never give it to anyone who is
dear to me.'

Fenelon.





THE SNUFF-BOX



As often happens in this world, there was once a young man who spent all
his time in travelling. One day, as he was walking along, he picked up
a snuff-box. He opened it, and the snuff-box said to him in the Spanish
language, 'What do you want?' He was very much frightened, but, luckily,
instead of throwing the box away, he only shut it tight, and put it in
his pocket. Then he went on, away, away, away, and as he went he said to
himself, 'If it says to me again "What do you want?" I shall know better
what to say this time.' So he took out the snuff-box and opened it, and
again it asked 'What do you want?' 'My hat full of gold,' answered the
youth, and immediately it was full.

Our young man was enchanted. Henceforth he should never be in need of
anything. So on he travelled, away, away, away, through thick forests,
till at last he came to a beautiful castle. In the castle there lived
a King. The young man walked round and round the castle, not caring who
saw him, till the King noticed him, and asked what he was doing there.
'I was just looking at your castle.' 'You would like to have one like
it, wouldn't you?' The young man did not reply, but when it grew dark he
took his snuff-box and opened the lid. 'What do you want?' 'Build me a
castle with laths of gold and tiles of diamond, and the furniture all of
silver and gold.' He had scarcely finished speaking when there stood
in front of him, exactly opposite the King's palace, a castle built
precisely as he had ordered. When the King awoke he was struck dumb at
the sight of the magnificent house shining in the rays of the sun. The
servants could not do their work for stopping to stare at it. Then the
King dressed himself, and went to see the young man. And he told him
plainly that he was a very powerful Prince; and that he hoped that they
might all live together in one house or the other, and that the King
would give him his daughter to wife. So it all turned out just as the
King wished. The young man married the Princess, and they lived happily
in the palace of gold.

But the King's wife was jealous both of the young man and of her own
daughter. The Princess had told her mother about the snuff-box, which
gave them everything they wanted, and the Queen bribed a servant to
steal the snuff-box. They noticed carefully where it was put away every
night, and one evening, when the whole world was asleep, the woman stole
it and brought it to her old mistress. Oh how happy the Queen was! She
opened the lid, and the snuff-box said to her 'What do you want?'
And she answered at once 'I want you to take me and my husband and my
servants and this beautiful house and set us down on the other side of
the Red Sea, but my daughter and her husband are to stay behind.'

When the young couple woke up, they found themselves back in the old
castle, without their snuff-box. They hunted for it high and low, but
quite vainly. The young man felt that no time was to be lost, and he
mounted his horse and filled his pockets with as much gold as he could
carry. On he went, away, away, away, but he sought the snuff-box in vain
all up and down the neighbouring countries, and very soon he came to the
end of all his money. But still he went on, as fast as the strength of
his horse would let him, begging his way.

Someone told him that he ought to consult the moon, for the moon
travelled far, and might be able to tell him something. So he went away,
away, away, and ended, somehow or other, by reaching the land of the
moon. There he found a little old woman who said to him 'What are you
doing here? My son eats all living things he sees, and if you are wise,
you will go away without coming any further.' But the young man told her
all his sad tale, and how he possessed a wonderful snuff-box, and how it
had been stolen from him, and how he had nothing left, now that he was
parted from his wife and was in need of everything. And he said that
perhaps her son, who travelled so far, might have seen a palace with
laths of gold and tiles of diamond, and furnished all in silver and
gold. As he spoke these last words, the moon came in and said he smelt
mortal flesh and blood. But his mother told him that it was an unhappy
man who had lost everything, and had come all this way to consult him,
and bade the young man not to be afraid, but to come forward and show
himself. So he went boldly up to the moon, and asked if by any accident
he had seen a palace with the laths of gold and the tiles of diamond,
and all the furniture of silver and gold. Once this house belonged
to him, but now it was stolen. And the moon said no, but that the sun
travelled farther than he did, and that the young man had better go and
ask him.

So the young man departed, and went away, away, away, as well as his
horse would take him, begging his living as he rode along, and, somehow
or other, at last he got to the land of the sun. There he found a little
old woman, who asked him, 'What are you doing here? Go away. Have you
not heard that my son feeds upon Christians?' But he said no, and that
he would not go, for he was so miserable that it was all one to him
whether he died or not; that he had lost everything, and especially a
splendid palace like none other in the whole world, for it had laths of
gold and tiles of diamond, and all the furniture was of silver and gold.
