quickly divining that Anne was not pleased at her remark. "I hope to
know her better."

"You are lucky to get 'Heartsease,'" said Grace. "Mrs. Gray has refused
over and over again to rent it. It belonged to her favorite brother, who
willed it to her when he died. She has always kept it in repair. Even
the furniture has not been changed. I have been there with her, and
I love every bit of it. I am glad to know that it has a tenant at last."

"Mrs. Gray knew my aunt years ago. They have kept up a correspondence
for ever so long. It was due to her that we came here," said Eleanor.

"Is your aunt Miss Margaret Nevin?" asked Anne quietly.

"Why, how did you know her name?" cried Eleanor, apparently mystified.
"'This is getting curiouser and curiouser.'"

The four girls laughed merrily.

"Anne is Mrs. Gray's private secretary," explained Jessica. "She tends
to all her correspondence. I suppose you have written more than one
letter to Miss Savell's aunt, haven't you, Anne!"

"Yes, indeed," replied Anne. "Her name is very familiar to me."

"What class are you girls in?" said Eleanor, abruptly changing the
subject. "Or aren't you all in the same class?"

"We are all juniors," laughed Nora, "and proud of it. Our green and
callow days are over, and we have entered into the realm of the upper
classes."

"Then I shall enter the junior class, too, for I choose to hob-nob with
you girls. Don't say you don't want me, for I have made up my mind; and
it is like the laws of the Medes and Persians, unchangeable."

"We shall be glad to welcome a new classmate, of course," responded
Grace. "I hope you will soon be one of us. Did Miss Thompson say that
you would have to take examinations?"

"She did, she did," answered Eleanor ruefully. "Still I'm not much
afraid. I've studied with a tutor, so I'm pretty well up in mathematics
and English. I can speak French, German, Italian and Spanish almost as
well as English. You know I've lived most of my life abroad. I'll manage
to pass somehow."

"I should think you would," exclaimed Anne admiringly. "I hope you pass,
I'm sure. Perhaps you'll be too far advanced for our class."

"Never fear, my dear," said Eleanor. "My heart is with the juniors, and
leave it to me not to land in any other class. But, really, I've bothered
you long enough. I must go back to your principal and announce myself
ready to meet my fate. I hope to know you better when examinations have
ceased to be a burden and the weary are at rest. That is, if I survive."

With a gay little nod, and a dazzling smile that revealed almost perfect
teeth, she walked quickly down the long room and out the door, leaving
the girl chums staring after her.

"What an extraordinary girl!" said Jessica. "She acts as though she'd
known us all her life, and we never set eyes on her until she marched in
and calmly interrupted us ten minutes ago."

"It doesn't seem to make much difference whether or not we like her. She
has decided she likes us, and that settles it," said Grace, smiling.
"What do you think of her, Anne? You are a pretty good judge of
character."

"I don't know yet," replied Anne slowly. "She seems charming. She must
be awfully clever, too, to know so many languages, but----"

"But what?" queried Nora.

"Oh, I don't know just what I want to say, only let's proceed slowly
with her, then we'll never have anything to regret."

"Come on, girls," said Jessica impatiently. "Let's hurry. You know we
promised to meet the boys as soon as school was over."

The girl chums walked out of the study hall, each with her mind so full
of the new girl, who had so suddenly appeared in their midst, that the
proposed call upon Miss Thompson was entirely forgotten.




CHAPTER II

CONFIDENCES


"I am the bearer of an invitation," announced Anne Pierson as the four
girls collected in one corner of the locker-room during the brief recess
allowed each morning.

"Mrs. Gray wishes to see us all at four o'clock this afternoon. We are
to dine with her and spend the evening, and the boys are invited for the
evening, too. So we will have just time enough after school to go home
and dress."

"You had better meet at my house, then," said Grace, "for it's on the
way to Mrs. Gray's. Good-bye. Be sure and be there at a quarter of four
at the latest."

Promptly at the appointed time the girls hurried up the Harlowe walk.
They were met at the door by Grace, who had been standing at the window
for the last ten minutes with hat and gloves on, impatiently waiting
their arrival.

As they neared Mrs. Gray's beautiful home, Anne said in a low tone to
Grace, who was walking with her, "I suppose Mrs. Gray has a double
motive in asking us up here to-day. I believe she wants to talk to us
about Eleanor Savell. Miss Nevin called on Mrs. Gray yesterday and they
were in the parlor together for a long time. After Miss Nevin had gone,
Mrs. Gray told me that Miss Nevin was anxious that Eleanor should
associate with girls of her own age. That is the reason she brought her
to Oakdale."

"Hurry up, you two," called Nora, who had reached the steps. "How you do
lag to-day."

"You will hear more of this later," whispered Anne.

Mrs. Gray stood in the wide hall with hands outstretched in welcome. She
kissed each girl affectionately, but her eyes lingered upon Anne, who
was plainly her favorite. The old lady had become so accustomed to the
sympathetic presence of the quiet, young girl that it seemed, at times,
as though her own daughter had come back to her once more.

"Come right into the library and make yourself comfy," cried Mrs. Gray
cheerily. "I spend most of my time there. The view from the windows is
so beautiful, and as one grows old, one resorts more and more to book
friendships."

"What shall we do with you, Mrs. Gray, if you keep on insisting that you
are old?" said Grace. "You're not a day older at heart than any of the
rest of us. Here, sit down in this nice, easy chair, while we take turns
telling you just how young you are."

"It is due to my adopted children that I am not a cross, crotchety,
complaining old woman," said Mrs. Gray, allowing Grace to seat her in
the big leather-covered arm chair.

"Now, what does your Majesty crave of her loyal subjects?" inquired
Grace, bowing low before the little, old lady.

"Very well, if I am queen, then I must be obeyed. Draw up your chairs
and sit in a circle. I want to tell you a little story. That is partly
my reason for inviting you here this afternoon, although you know you
are welcome whenever you choose to come."

"Is it a fairy story, dear Mrs. Gray, and does it begin with 'Once upon
a time'?" queried Jessica.

"It is a story of real life, my child, but I'll begin it like a fairy
tale if you wish it."

"Oh, please begin at once," said Grace, who, at eighteen, was as fond of
a story as she had been at six.

"Well, 'once upon a time,' there were two sisters. They were really only
half sisters, and the one was almost twenty years older than the other.
The mother of the elder sister had died when she was about fifteen years
of age, and two years later the father had married a beautiful young
Irish girl of very good family, who loved him dearly in spite of the
difference in their ages.

"After they had been married a little over two years, a little girl came
to them, and the older sister loved the tiny baby as dearly as she loved
her beautiful, young step-mother."

"Why, that sounds very much like Grimm's fairy tales!" exclaimed Nora.
"Only the book people are all kings and queens, but this is even better
because the heroine is actually Irish."

There was a general laugh over Nora's remark in which Mrs. Gray joined.

"It's a case of Ireland forever, isn't it Nora?" said Grace teasingly.

"'Fine and dandy are the Irish,'" said Nora with a grin, quoting from a
popular song she had heard in a recent musical comedy. "But stop teasing
me, and let Mrs. Gray go on with her story."

"When the baby sister, whose name was Edith, was about three years old,
the beautiful young mother died and left the husband inconsolable. A
year later he was killed in a railroad accident, and the elder sister,
named Margaret, was left with only little Edith to comfort her. The
father had been a rich man, so they had no anxiety about money, and
lived on year after year in their beautiful old home, with everything
heart could wish.

"As Edith grew older, she developed a decided talent for music, and
when she was fifteen Margaret decided to take her abroad and allow her
to enter one of the great conservatories of Europe. They went to
Leipsic, and Edith, who had high hopes of one day becoming a concert
pianiste, continued her studies under the best instructors that money
could procure. Things ran along smoothly until Edith met a young Italian
named Guido Savelli, who was studying the violin at the same
conservatory. His brilliant playing had already created a sensation
wherever he appeared, and he gave promise of being a virtuoso.

"He fell violently in love with Edith, who had her mother's beautiful blue
eyes and the combination of white skin and black hair that go to make an
Irish beauty. She returned his love, and after a brief engagement they
were married, much against the wishes of Margaret, who thought them both
too young and impressionable to know their own minds."

"And did they live happy ever after?" asked Grace eagerly.

"That is the sad part of my story," said Mrs. Gray, sighing. "They were
anything but happy. They both had too much of the artistic temperament
to live peaceably. Besides, Guido Savelli was thoroughly selfish at
heart. Next to himself, his music was the only thing in the world that
he really cared for. When they had been married for about a year and a
half he played before the king, and soon became the man of the hour. He
neglected his beautiful young wife, who, in spite of their frequent
quarrels, loved him with a pure and disinterested affection.

"Finally he went on a concert tour through the principal European
cities, and she never saw him again. She wrote him repeatedly, but he
never answered her letters, and she was too proud to follow him. She had
one child, a baby girl, named Eleanor, who was the sole comfort of the
heartbroken mother."

At this juncture Anne and Grace exchanged significant glances.

"When Eleanor was about a year old, the mother wrote Guido Savelli once
more, begging him to come to her, if only for the sake of his child, but
either he never received the letter or else paid no attention to it, for
she received no reply. She relapsed into a dull, apathetic state, from
which the repeated efforts of her sister failed to arouse her. The
following winter she contracted pneumonia and died, leaving her sister
the sole guardian of Eleanor."

"How long ago did all this happen, dear Mrs. Gray?" queried Nora
eagerly, "and is little Eleanor living?"

"It was sixteen years ago, my dear," replied Mrs. Gray, "and the reason
that I have told you this long tale is because the baby girl is almost a
woman now, and----"

"The girl is Eleanor Savell and we met her the other day," broke in
Grace excitedly, forgetting for an instant that she had interrupted Mrs.
Gray. "She is going to live at 'Heartsease' and---- oh, Mrs. Gray,
please pardon me for interrupting you, I was so excited that I didn't
realize my own rudeness."

"Granted, my dear," smiled the old lady. "But how did you happen to meet
Eleanor? They arrived only a few days ago."

Grace rapidly narrated their meeting and conversation with Eleanor,
while Mrs. Gray listened without comment. When Grace repeated Eleanor's
remark about having made up her mind, the old lady looked a little
troubled. Then her face cleared and she said softly:

"My dear Christmas children, I am very anxious that for her own sake you
should become well acquainted with Eleanor. Her aunt was here yesterday,
and we had a long talk regarding her. Eleanor is an uncommon girl in
many respects. She has remarkable beauty and talent, but she is
frightfully self-willed. Her aunt has spoiled her, and realizes too
late the damage she has done by having allowed her to grow up on the
continent. They have lived in France, Germany, Italy and Spain, with an
occasional visit to America, and Eleanor has always done just as she
pleased. For years her aunt has obeyed her slightest whim, but as she
grows older she grows more like her father, and her aunt wants her to
have some steadying influence that will put a curb on her unconventional
tendencies.

"When she wrote me of Eleanor, I wrote her about my girls, and offered
her 'Heartsease.' She was delighted with the whole thing and lost no
time in getting here. So now you understand why I have told you all
this. I want you to promise me that you will do what you can for this
motherless girl."

"But we felt sure we should like her when we saw her the other day,"
said Nora. "She seemed so sweet and winning."

"So she is. She has her father's winning personality, and a good deal of
his selfishness, too," replied Mrs. Gray. "You won't find her at all
disagreeable. But she is reckless, self-willed, defiant of public
opinion and exceedingly impulsive. I look to you girls to keep her out
of mischief."

"Well, we'll try, but I never did pride myself on being a first-class
reformer," said Grace, laughing.

"Where is her father now?" asked Anne. "Is it possible that he is the
great Savelli who toured America two years ago?"

"He is the man," said Mrs. Gray. "He is a wonderful musician. I heard
him in New York City. I shall never forget the way he played one of
Liszt's 'Hungarian Rhapsodies.' I must caution you, girls, never to
mention Eleanor's father to her. She has been kept in absolute ignorance
of him. When she is twenty-one her aunt will tell her about him. If she
knew he was the great Savelli, she would rush off and join him
to-morrow, she is so impulsive. She has the music madness of both father
and mother. Her aunt tells me she is a remarkable performer on both
violin and piano."

"But why shouldn't she go to her father if he is a great musician?" said
Jessica. "And why is she called Savell, if her name is Savelli?"

"Because, my dear, her father has never evinced the slightest desire to
look up his own child. Even if he had, he is too irresponsible and too
temperamental to assume the care of a girl like Eleanor," Mrs. Gray
answered. "No, Eleanor is better off with her aunt. As to her name, her
aunt hates everything Italian, so she dropped the 'I' and made the name
Savell."

"My," said Nora with a sigh. "She is almost as remarkable as a fairy
princess, after all."

"Oh, I don't know," replied Grace quickly. "Her life, of course, has
been eventful, but I believe if we are to do her any good we shall just
have to act as though she were an everyday girl like the rest of us. If
we begin to bow down to her, we shall be obliged to keep it up. Besides,
I have an idea that I am as fond of having my own way as she is."

"Dinner is served," announced John, the butler.

The four girls arose and followed Mrs. Gray to the dining room. During
the dinner Eleanor was not again mentioned, although she occupied more
or less of the four girls' thoughts.

Later on, David, Hippy and Reddy appeared and a merry frolic ensued. It
was after ten o'clock before the little party of young folks prepared to
take their departure.

"Remember, I rely upon you," whispered Mrs. Gray to Grace as she kissed
her good night. Grace nodded sympathetically, but went home with an
uneasy feeling that playing the guardian angel to Eleanor would be
anything but a light task.




CHAPTER III

AN AUTUMN WALKING EXPEDITION


"It is simply too lovely to go home to-day," exclaimed Grace Harlowe to
her three chums as they strolled down High School Street one sunny
afternoon in early October. "I move that we drop our books at my house
and go for a walk."

"I'm willing to drop my books anywhere and never see them again,"
grumbled Nora O'Malley, who was not fond of study.

"I ought to go straight home," demurred Anne Pierson, "but I'll put
pleasure before duty and stay with the crowd."

"What about you, Jessica?" asked Grace.

"You couldn't drive me home," replied Jessica promptly.

"Very well," laughed Grace, "as we are all of the same mind, let's shed
these books and be off."

