
'She means,' explained Robert, 'that English kings only have one
wife--at least, Henry the Eighth had seven or eight, but not all at
once.'

'In our country,' said the Queen scornfully, 'a king would not reign
a day who had only one wife. No one would respect him, and quite right
too.'

'Then are all the other thirteen alive?' asked Anthea.

'Of course they are--poor mean-spirited things! I don't associate with
them, of course, I am the Queen: they're only the wives.'

'I see,' said Anthea, gasping.

'But oh, my dears,' the Queen went on, 'such a to-do as there's been
about this last wife! You never did! It really was TOO funny. We wanted
an Egyptian princess. The King may-he-live-for-ever has got a wife from
most of the important nations, and he had set his heart on an Egyptian
one to complete his collection. Well, of course, to begin with, we
sent a handsome present of gold. The Egyptian king sent back some
horses--quite a few; he's fearfully stingy!--and he said he liked the
gold very much, but what they were really short of was lapis lazuli, so
of course we sent him some. But by that time he'd begun to use the gold
to cover the beams of the roof of the Temple of the Sun-God, and he
hadn't nearly enough to finish the job, so we sent some more. And so it
went on, oh, for years. You see each journey takes at least six months.
And at last we asked the hand of his daughter in marriage.'

'Yes, and then?' said Anthea, who wanted to get to the princess part of
the story.

'Well, then,' said the Queen, 'when he'd got everything out of us that
he could, and only given the meanest presents in return, he sent to
say he would esteem the honour of an alliance very highly, only
unfortunately he hadn't any daughter, but he hoped one would be born
soon, and if so, she should certainly be reserved for the King of
Babylon!'

'What a trick!' said Cyril.

'Yes, wasn't it? So then we said his sister would do, and then there
were more gifts and more journeys; and now at last the tiresome,
black-haired thing is coming, and the King may-he-live-for-ever has gone
seven days' journey to meet her at Carchemish. And he's gone in his best
chariot, the one inlaid with lapis lazuli and gold, with the gold-plated
wheels and onyx-studded hubs--much too great an honour in my opinion.
She'll be here tonight; there'll be a grand banquet to celebrate her
arrival. SHE won't be present, of course. She'll be having her baths and
her anointings, and all that sort of thing. We always clean our foreign
brides very carefully. It takes two or three weeks. Now it's dinnertime,
and you shall eat with me, for I can see that you are of high rank.'
She led them into a dark, cool hall, with many cushions on the floor. On
these they sat and low tables were brought--beautiful tables of smooth,
blue stone mounted in gold. On these, golden trays were placed; but
there were no knives, or forks, or spoons. The children expected the
Queen to call for them; but no. She just ate with her fingers, and as
the first dish was a great tray of boiled corn, and meat and raisins all
mixed up together, and melted fat poured all over the tray, it was found
difficult to follow her example with anything like what we are used to
think of as good table manners. There were stewed quinces afterwards,
and dates in syrup, and thick yellowy cream. It was the kind of dinner
you hardly ever get in Fitzroy Street.

After dinner everybody went to sleep, even the children.

The Queen awoke with a start.

'Good gracious!' she cried, 'what a time we've slept! I must rush off
and dress for the banquet. I shan't have much more than time.'

'Hasn't Ritti-Marduk got back with our sister and the Psammead yet?'
Anthea asked.

'I QUITE forgot to ask. I'm sorry,' said the Queen. 'And of course
they wouldn't announce her unless I told them to, except during justice
hours. I expect she's waiting outside. I'll see.'

Ritti-Marduk came in a moment later.

'I regret,' he said, 'that I have been unable to find your sister. The
beast she bears with her in a basket has bitten the child of the guard,
and your sister and the beast set out to come to you. The police say
they have a clue. No doubt we shall have news of her in a few weeks.' He
bowed and withdrew.

The horror of this threefold loss--Jane, the Psammead, and the
Amulet--gave the children something to talk about while the Queen was
dressing. I shall not report their conversation; it was very gloomy.
Everyone repeated himself several times, and the discussion ended in
each of them blaming the other two for having let Jane go. You know the
sort of talk it was, don't you? At last Cyril said--

'After all, she's with the Psammead, so SHE'S all right. The Psammead is
jolly careful of itself too. And it isn't as if we were in any danger.
Let's try to buck up and enjoy the banquet.'

They did enjoy the banquet. They had a beautiful bath, which was
delicious, were heavily oiled all over, including their hair, and that
was most unpleasant. Then, they dressed again and were presented to the
King, who was most affable. The banquet was long; there were all sorts
of nice things to eat, and everybody seemed to eat and drink a good
deal. Everyone lay on cushions and couches, ladies on one side and
gentlemen on the other; and after the eating was done each lady went and
sat by some gentleman, who seemed to be her sweetheart or her husband,
for they were very affectionate to each other. The Court dresses had
gold threads woven in them, very bright and beautiful.

The middle of the room was left clear, and different people came and did
amusing things. There were conjurers and jugglers and snake-charmers,
which last Anthea did not like at all.

When it got dark torches were lighted. Cedar splinters dipped in oil
blazed in copper dishes set high on poles.

Then there was a dancer, who hardly danced at all, only just struck
attitudes. She had hardly any clothes, and was not at all pretty. The
children were rather bored by her, but everyone else was delighted,
including the King.

'By the beard of Nimrod!' he cried, 'ask what you like girl, and you
shall have it!'

'I want nothing,' said the dancer; 'the honour of having pleased the
King may-he-live-for-ever is reward enough for me.'

And the King was so pleased with this modest and sensible reply that he
gave her the gold collar off his own neck.

'I say!' said Cyril, awed by the magnificence of the gift.

'It's all right,' whispered the Queen, 'it's not his best collar by any
means. We always keep a stock of cheap jewellery for these occasions.
And now--you promised to sing us something. Would you like my minstrels
to accompany you?'

'No, thank you,' said Anthea quickly. The minstrels had been playing off
and on all the time, and their music reminded Anthea of the band she and
the others had once had on the fifth of November--with penny horns,
a tin whistle, a tea-tray, the tongs, a policeman's rattle, and a toy
drum. They had enjoyed this band very much at the time. But it was quite
different when someone else was making the same kind of music.
Anthea understood now that Father had not been really heartless and
unreasonable when he had told them to stop that infuriating din.

'What shall we sing?' Cyril was asking.

'Sweet and low?' suggested Anthea.

'Too soft--I vote for "Who will o'er the downs". Now then--one, two,
three.

   'Oh, who will o'er the downs so free,
   Oh, who will with me ride,
   Oh, who will up and follow me,
   To win a blooming bride?

   Her father he has locked the door,
   Her mother keeps the key;
   But neither bolt nor bar shall keep
   My own true love from me.'

Jane, the alto, was missing, and Robert, unlike the mother of the lady
in the song, never could 'keep the key', but the song, even so, was
sufficiently unlike anything any of them had ever heard to rouse the
Babylonian Court to the wildest enthusiasm.

'More, more,' cried the King; 'by my beard, this savage music is a new
thing. Sing again!'

So they sang:

   'I saw her bower at twilight gray,
   'Twas guarded safe and sure.
   I saw her bower at break of day,
   'Twas guarded then no more.

   The varlets they were all asleep,
   And there was none to see
   The greeting fair that passed there
   Between my love and me.'

Shouts of applause greeted the ending of the verse, and the King would
not be satisfied till they had sung all their part-songs (they only knew
three) twice over, and ended up with 'Men of Harlech' in unison. Then
the King stood up in his royal robes with his high, narrow crown on his
head and shouted--

'By the beak of Nisroch, ask what you will, strangers from the land
where the sun never sets!'

'We ought to say it's enough honour, like the dancer did,' whispered
Anthea.

'No, let's ask for IT,' said Robert.

'No, no, I'm sure the other's manners,' said Anthea. But Robert, who was
excited by the music, and the flaring torches, and the applause and the
opportunity, spoke up before the others could stop him.

'Give us the half of the Amulet that has on it the name UR HEKAU
SETCHEH,' he said, adding as an afterthought, 'O King, live-for-ever.'

As he spoke the great name those in the pillared hall fell on their
faces, and lay still. All but the Queen who crouched amid her cushions
with her head in her hands, and the King, who stood upright, perfectly
still, like the statue of a king in stone. It was only for a moment
though. Then his great voice thundered out--

'Guard, seize them!'

Instantly, from nowhere as it seemed, sprang eight soldiers in bright
armour inlaid with gold, and tunics of red and white. Very splendid they
were, and very alarming.

'Impious and sacrilegious wretches!' shouted the King. 'To the dungeons
with them! We will find a way, tomorrow, to make them speak. For without
doubt they can tell us where to find the lost half of It.'

A wall of scarlet and white and steel and gold closed up round the
children and hurried them away among the many pillars of the great hall.
As they went they heard the voices of the courtiers loud in horror.

'You've done it this time,' said Cyril with extreme bitterness.

'Oh, it will come right. It MUST. It always does,' said Anthea
desperately.

They could not see where they were going, because the guard surrounded
them so closely, but the ground under their feet, smooth marble at
first, grew rougher like stone, then it was loose earth and sand, and
they felt the night air. Then there was more stone, and steps down.

'It's my belief we really ARE going to the deepest dungeon below the
castle moat this time,' said Cyril.

And they were. At least it was not below a moat, but below the river
Euphrates, which was just as bad if not worse. In a most unpleasant
place it was. Dark, very, very damp, and with an odd, musty smell rather
like the shells of oysters. There was a torch--that is to say, a copper
basket on a high stick with oiled wood burning in it. By its light the
children saw that the walls were green, and that trickles of water ran
down them and dripped from the roof. There were things on the floor that
looked like newts, and in the dark corners creepy, shiny things moved
sluggishly, uneasily, horribly.

Robert's heart sank right into those really reliable boots of
his. Anthea and Cyril each had a private struggle with that inside
disagreeableness which is part of all of us, and which is sometimes
called the Old Adam--and both were victors. Neither of them said to
Robert (and both tried hard not even to think it), 'This is YOUR doing.'
Anthea had the additional temptation to add, 'I told you so.' And she
resisted it successfully.

'Sacrilege, and impious cheek,' said the captain of the guard to the
gaoler. 'To be kept during the King's pleasure. I expect he means to get
some pleasure out of them tomorrow! He'll tickle them up!'

'Poor little kids,' said the gaoler.

'Oh, yes,' said the captain. 'I've got kids of my own too. But it
doesn't do to let domestic sentiment interfere with one's public duties.
Good night.'

The soldiers tramped heavily off in their white and red and steel and
gold. The gaoler, with a bunch of big keys in his hand, stood looking
pityingly at the children. He shook his head twice and went out.

'Courage!' said Anthea. 'I know it will be all right. It's only a dream
REALLY, you know. It MUST be! I don't believe about time being only a
something or other of thought. It IS a dream, and we're bound to wake up
all right and safe.'

'Humph,' said Cyril bitterly. And Robert suddenly said--

'It's all my doing. If it really IS all up do please not keep a down on
me about it, and tell Father--Oh, I forgot.'

What he had forgotten was that his father was 3,000 miles and 5,000 or
more years away from him.

'All right, Bobs, old man,' said Cyril; and Anthea got hold of Robert's
hand and squeezed it.

Then the gaoler came back with a platter of hard, flat cakes made of
coarse grain, very different from the cream-and-juicy-date feasts of the
palace; also a pitcher of water.

'There,' he said.

'Oh, thank you so very much. You ARE kind,' said Anthea feverishly.

'Go to sleep,' said the gaoler, pointing to a heap of straw in a corner;
'tomorrow comes soon enough.'

'Oh, dear Mr Gaoler,' said Anthea, 'whatever will they do to us
tomorrow?'

'They'll try to make you tell things,' said the gaoler grimly, 'and my
advice is if you've nothing to tell, make up something. Then perhaps
they'll sell you to the Northern nations. Regular savages THEY are. Good
night.'

'Good night,' said three trembling voices, which their owners strove in
vain to render firm. Then he went out, and the three were left alone in
the damp, dim vault.

'I know the light won't last long,' said Cyril, looking at the
