Adventure with a Whale
       _Frank T. Bullen_
              174

_The Maple_
       _H. F. Darnell_
              179

Damon and Pythias
       _Charlotte M. Yonge_
              181

_The Wreck of the Orpheus_
       _C. A. L._
              184

_The Tide River_
       _Charles Kingsley_
              185

Wisdom the Supreme Prize
       _Bible_
              187

_The Orchard_
       _Jean Blewett_
              188

Inspired by the Snow
       _Samuel T. Wood_
              189

_The Squirrel_
       _William Cowper_
              192

_Soldier, Rest_
       _Sir Walter Scott_
              192

Fishing
       _Thomas Hughes_
              193

_The Fountain_
       _James Russell Lowell_
              199

_Break, Break, Break_
       _Alfred, Lord Tennyson_
              201

The Bed of Procrustes
       _Charles Kingsley_
              202

_"Bob White"_
       _George Cooper_
              208

Radisson and the Indians
       _Beckles Willson_
              209

_The Brook_
       _Alfred, Lord Tennyson_
              212

"Do Seek Their Meat From God"
       _Charles G. D. Roberts_
              215

_A Song of the Sea_
       _"Barry Cornwall"_
              222

Little Daffydowndilly
       _Nathaniel Hawthorne_
              223

_The Sandpiper_
       _Celia Thaxter_
              234

From "The Sermon on the Mount"
       _Bible_
              236

_The Legend of Saint Christopher_
       _Helen Hunt Jackson_
              237

William Tell and His Son
       _Chamber's "Tracts"_
              241

_A Midsummer Song_
       _Richard Watson Gilder_
              244

The Relief of Lucknow
       _"Letter from an officer's wife"_
              246

_The Song in Camp_
       _Bayard Taylor_
              250

_Afterglow_
       _William Wilfred Campbell_
              252

King Richard and Saladin
       _Sir Walter Scott_
              253

_England's Dead_
       _Felicia Hemans_
              258

_Hohenlinden_
       _Thomas Campbell_
              260

The Dream of the Oak Tree
       _Hans Christian Andersen_
              262

A Prayer
       _Robert Louis Stevenson_
              266

_The Death of the Flowers_
       _William Cullen Bryant_
              267

_'Tis the Last Rose of Summer_
       _Thomas Moore_
              269

A Roman's Honour
       _Charlotte M. Yonge_
              270

_The Fighting Temeraire_
       _Henry Newbolt_
              273

Don Quixote's Fight with the Windmills
       _Miguel de Cervantes_
              275

_The Romance of the Swan's Nest_
       _Elizabeth Barrett Browning_
              281

Moonlight Sonata
       _Unknown_
              285

_The Red-Winged Blackbird_
       _Ethelwyn Wetherald_
              290

_To the Cuckoo_
       _John Logan_
              291

The Story of a Stone
       _D. B._
              293

_The Snow-Storm_
       _John G. Whittier_
              298

The Heroine of Vercheres
       _Francis Parkman_
              301

_Jacques Cartier_
       _Thomas D'Arcy M'Gee_
              307

Ants and Their Slaves
       _Jules Michelet_
              310

_Lead, Kindly Light_
       _John Henry Newman_
              315

The Jolly Sandboys
       _Charles Dickens_
              316

_The Gladness of Nature_
       _William Cullen Bryant_
              324

Old English Life
       _William F. Collier_
              325

_Puck's Song_
       _Rudyard Kipling_
              330

The Battle of Queenston Heights
       _Unknown_
              332

_The Bugle Song_
       _Alfred, Lord Tennyson_
              337

Charity
       _Bible_
              338

_A Christmas Carol_
       _James Russell Lowell_
              339

The Barren Lands
       _E. B. Osborn_
              341

_A Spring Morning_
       _William Wordsworth_
              345

_Crossing the Bar_
       _Alfred, Lord Tennyson_
              346




EMPIRE DAY


I want you to remember what Empire Day means. Empire Day is the festival
on which every British subject should reverently remember that the
British Empire stands out before the whole world as the fearless
champion of freedom, fair play and equal rights; that its watchwords are
responsibility, duty, sympathy and self-sacrifice, and that a special
responsibility rests with you individually to be true to the traditions
and to the mission of your race.

I also want you to remember that one day Canada will become, if her
people are faithful to their high British traditions, the most powerful
of all the self-governing nations, not excluding the people of the
United Kingdom, which make up the British Empire, and that it rests with
each one of you individually to do your utmost by your own conduct and
example to make Canada not only the most powerful, but the noblest of
all the self-governing nations that are proud to owe allegiance to the
King.

Earl Grey.
Governor-General of Canada




THIRD READER




TO-DAY


    So here hath been dawning
      Another blue day;
    Think, wilt thou let it
      Slip useless away?

    Out of Eternity
      This new day is born;
    Into Eternity
      At night will return.

    Behold it aforetime
      No eye ever did;
    So soon it forever
      From all eyes is hid.

    Here hath been dawning
      Another blue day;
    Think, wilt thou let it
      Slip useless away?

CARLYLE




FORTUNE AND THE BEGGAR


One day a ragged beggar was creeping along from house to house. He
carried an old wallet in his hand, and was asking at every door for a
few cents to buy something to eat. As he was grumbling at his lot, he
kept wondering why it was that folks who had so much money were never
satisfied but were always wanting more.

"Here," said he, "is the master of this house--I know him well. He was
always a good business man, and he made himself wondrously rich a long
time ago. Had he been wise he would have stopped then. He would have
turned over his business to some one else, and then he could have spent
the rest of his life in ease. But what did he do instead? He built ships
and sent them to sea to trade with foreign lands. He thought he would
get mountains of gold.

"But there were great storms on the water; his ships were wrecked, and
his riches were swallowed up by the waves. Now all his hopes lie at the
bottom of the sea, and his great wealth has vanished.

"There are many such cases. Men seem to be never satisfied unless they
gain the whole world.

"As for me, if I had only enough to eat and to wear, I would not want
anything more."

Just at that moment Fortune came down the street. She saw the beggar and
