is--when once she has made up her mind there's no turning her; and if
this fellow were out of the way, likely enough she would take up with
another in no time."

"But it couldn't been as bad as if wur Foxey," Bill urged, "he be the
very worsest lot about Marsden."

"I would do it," Ned said passionately; "I would do it over and over
again, but for the disgrace it would bring on Charlie and Lucy."

"But there would be no disgrace if oi was to do it, Maister Ned."

"Yes, there would, Bill--a worse disgrace than if I did it myself. It
would be a nice thing to let you get hanged for my affairs; but let him
look out--let him try to ill treat Charlie and Lucy, and he will see
if I don't get even with him. I am not so much afraid of that--it's the
shame of the thing. Only to think that all Marsden should know my mother
is going to be married again within a year of my father's death, and
that after being his wife she was going to take such a man as this! It's
awful, downright awful, Bill!"

"Then what art thou going to do, Maister Ned--run away and 'list for a
soldier, or go to sea?"

"I wish I could," Ned exclaimed. "I would turn my back on Marsden and
never come back again, were it not for the little ones. Besides," he
added after a pause, "father's last words were, 'Be kind to mother;' and
she will want it more than he ever dreamed of."

"She will that," Bill agreed; "leastways unless oi be mistaken. And what
be'st going to do now, lad? Be'st agoing whoam?"

"No, I won't go home tonight," Ned replied. "I must think it over
quietly, and it would be worse to bear there than anywhere else. No, I
shall just walk about."

"Thou canst not walk abowt all night, Maister Ned," Bill said
positively; "it bain't to be thowt of. If thou don't mind thou canst
have moi bed and oi can sleep on t' floor."

"No, I couldn't do that," Ned said, "though I do feel awfully tired and
done up; but your brothers would be asking me questions and wondering
why I didn't go home. I could not stand that."

"No, Maister Ned, oi can see that wouldn't do; but if we walk about for
an hour or two, or--no, I know of a better plan. We can get in at t'
window of the school; it bain't never fastened, and bain't been for
years, seeing as thar bain't been neither school nor schoolers since
auld Mother Brown died. Oi will make a shift to light a fire there.
There be shutters, so no one will see the light. Then oi will bring ee
up some blankets from our house, and if there bain't enough Polly will
lend me some when oi tell her who they are for. She bain't a one to
blab. What dost thou say?"

Ned, who felt utterly worn out, assented gladly to the proposal, and an
entrance was easily effected into the desolate cottage formerly used
as a day school. Bill went off at once and soon returned with a load of
firewood; the shutters were then carefully closed, and a fire quickly
blazed brightly on the hearth. Bill then went away again, and in a
quarter of an hour returned with Mary Powlett. He carried a bundle of
rugs and blankets, while she had a kettle in one hand and a large basket
in the other.

"Good evening! Master Sankey," she said as she entered. "Bill has told
me all about it, and I am sorry indeed for you and for your mother. It
is worse for her, poor lady, than for you. You will soon be old enough
to go out into the world if you don't like things at home; but she will
have to bear what trouble comes to her. And now I thought you would like
a cup of tea, so I have brought the kettle and things up. I haven't
had tea yet, and they don't have tea at Bill's; but I like it, though
feyther grumbles sometimes, and says it's too expensive for the likes of
us in sich times as these; but he knows I would rather go without
meat than without tea, so he lets me have it. Bill comes in for a cup
sometimes, for he likes it better than beer, and it's a deal better for
him to be sitting taking a cup of tea with me than getting into the way
of going down to the 'Spotted Dog,' and drinking beer there. So we will
all have a cup together. No one will disturb us. Feyther is down at the
'Brown Cow,' and when I told the children I had to go out on special
business they all promised to be good, and Jarge said he would see them
all safely into bed. I told him I should be back in an hour."

While Polly was speaking she was bustling about the room, putting
things straight; with a wisp of heather she swept up the dust which had
accumulated on the floor, in a semicircle in front of the fire, and
laid down the rugs and blankets to form seats. Three cups and saucers,
a little jag of milk, a teapot, and basin of sugar were placed in the
center, and a pile of slices of bread and butter beside them, while from
a paper bag she produced a cake which she had bought at the village shop
on her way up.

Ned watched her preparations listlessly.

"You are very good, Polly," he said, "and I shall be very glad of the
cup of tea, but I cannot eat anything."

"Never mind," she said cheerfully. "Bill and I can do the eating, and
perhaps after you have had a cup of tea you will be able to, for Bill
tells me you have had nothing to eat since breakfast."

Ned felt cheered by the warm blaze of the fire and by the cheerful sound
of the kettle, and after taking a cup of tea found that his appetite
was coming, and was soon able to eat his share. Mary Powlett kept up a
cheerful talk while the meal was going on, and no allusion was made to
the circumstances which had brought Ned there. After it was done she sat
and chatted for an hour. Then she said:

"I must be off now, and I think, Bill, you'd best be going soon too, and
let Maister Ned have a good night of it. I will make him up his bed on
the rugs; and I will warrant, after all the trouble he has gone through,
he will sleep like a top."




CHAPTER IX: A PAINFUL TIME


When Ned was left alone he rolled himself up in the blankets, placed a
pillow which Polly had brought him under his head, and lay and looked
at the fire; but it was not until the flames had died down, and the last
red glow had faded into blackness that he fell off to sleep.

His thoughts were bitter in the extreme. He pictured to himself the
change which would take place in his home life with Mulready the
manufacturer, the tyrant of the workmen, ruling over it. For himself he
doubted not that he would be able to hold his own.

"He had better not try on his games with me," he muttered savagely.
"Though I am only sixteen he won't find it easy to bully me; but of
course Charlie and Lucy can't defend themselves. However, I will take
care of them. Just let him be unkind to them, and see what comes of it!
As to mother, she must take what she gets, at least she deserves to.
Only to think of it! only to think of it! Oh, how bitterly she will come
to repent! How could she do it!

"And with father only dead a year! But I must stand by her, too. I
promised father to be kind to her, though he could never have guessed
how she would need it. He meant that I would only put up, without losing
my temper, with her way of always pretending to be ill, and never doing
anything but lie on the sofa and read poetry. Still, of course, it meant
I was to be kind anyhow, whatever happened, and I will try to be so,
though it is hard when she has brought such trouble upon us all.

"As for Mulready I should like to burn his mill down, or to break his
neck. I hate him: it's bad enough to be a tyrant; but to be a tyrant and
a hypocrite, too, is horrible. Well, at any rate he shan't lord it over
me;" and so at last Ned dropped off to sleep.

He was still soundly asleep when Bill Swinton came in to wake him. It
was half past six, a dull October morning, with a dreary drizzling rain.
Bill brought with him a mug of hot tea and some thick slices of bread
and butter. Ned got up and shook himself.

"What o'clock is it, Bill?"

"Half past six--the chaps went off to t' mill an hour gone; oi've kept
some tea hot for ee."

"Thank you, Bill, my head aches, and so do all my bones, and I feel as
if I hadn't been asleep all night, although, indeed, I must have slept
quite as long as usual. Can't I have a wash?"

"Yes," Bill said, "thou canst come to our place; but thou had best take
thy breakfast whilst it be hot. It will waken thee up like."

Ned drank the tea and ate a slice of bread and butter, and felt
refreshed thereat. Then he ran with Bill to his cottage and had a wash,
and then started for the town. It was eight o'clock when he reached
home. Abijah was at the door, looking down the road as he came up.

"Oh! Master Ned, how can you go on so? Not a bit of sleep have I
had this blessed night, and the mistress in strong hystrikes all the
evening. Where have you been?"

Ned gave a grunt at the news of his mother's hysterics--a grunt which
clearly expressed "served her right," but he only answered the last part
of the question.

"I have been up at Varley, and slept at the schoolhouse. Bill Swinn and
Polly Powlett made me up a bed and got me tea and breakfast. I am right
enough."

"But you shouldn't have gone away, Master Ned, in that style, leaving us
to wait and worry ourselves out of our senses."

"Do you know what she told me, Abijah? Wasn't it enough to make any
fellow mad?"

"Ay, ay," the nurse said. "I know. I have seen it coming months ago; but
it wasn't no good for me to speak. Ay, lad, it's a sore trouble for you,
surely a sore trouble for you, and for us all; but it ain't no manner
of use for you to set yourself agin it. Least said sooner mended, Master
Ned; in a case like this it ain't no good your setting yourself up agin
the missis. She ain't strong in some things, but she's strong enough in
her will, and you ought to know by this time that what she sets her mind
on she gets. It were so allus in the captain's time, and if he couldn't
change her, poor patient lamb--for if ever there were a saint on arth
he was that--you may be sure that you can't. So try and take it quietly,
dearie. It be main hard for ye, and it ain't for me to say as it isn't;
but for the sake of peace and quiet, and for the sake of the little
ones, Master Ned, it's better for you to take it quiet. If I thought as
it would do any good for you to make a fuss I wouldn't be agin it: but
it ain't, you know, and it will be worse for you all if you sets him
agin you to begin with. Now go up and see your mother, dearie, afore you
goes off to school. I have just taken her up her tea."

"I have got nothing to say to her," Ned growled.

"Yes, you have, Master Ned; you have got to tell her you hopes she will
be happy. You can do that, you know, with a clear heart, for you do hope
so. Fortunately she didn't see him yesterday; for when he called I told
him she was too ill to see him, and a nice taking she was in when I told
her he had been and gone; but I didn't mind that, you know, and it was
better she shouldn't see him when she was so sore about the words you
had said to her. It ain't no use making trouble aforehand, or setting
him agin you. He knows, I reckon, as he won't be welcomed here by you.
The way he has always come when you would be out showed that clear
enough. But it ain't no use making matters worse. It's a pretty kettle
of fish as it stands. Now, go up, dearie, like a good boy, and make
things roight."

Ned lingered irresolute for a little time in the hall, and then his
father's words, "Be kind to her," came strongly in his mind, and he
slowly went upstairs and knocked at his mother's door.

"Oh! here you are again!" she said in querulous tones as he entered,
"after being nearly the death of me with your wicked goings on! I don't
know what you will come to, speaking to me as you did yesterday, and
then running away and stopping out all night."

"It was wrong, mother," Ned said quietly, "and I have come to tell you
I am sorry; but you see the news was very sudden, and I wasn't prepared
for it. I did not know that he had been coming here, and the news took
me quite by surprise. I suppose fellows never do like their mothers
marrying again. It stands to reason they wouldn't; but, now I have
thought it over, I am sorry I spoke as I did, and I do hope, mother, you
will be happy with him."

Mrs. Sankey felt mollified. She had indeed all along dreaded Ned's
hearing the news, and had felt certain it would produce a desperate
outbreak on his part. Now that it was over she was relieved. The storm
had been no worse than she expected, and now that Ned had so speedily
come round, and was submissive, she felt a load off her mind.

"Very well, Ned," she said more graciously than usual, "I am glad that
you have seen the wickedness of your conduct. I am sure that I am acting
for the best, and that it will be a great advantage to you and your
brother and sister having a man like Mr. Mulready to help you push your
way in life. I am sure I am thinking of your interest as much as my
own; and I have spoken to him over and over again about you, and he has
promised dozens of times to do his best to be like a father to you all."

Ned winced perceptibly.

"All right, mother! I do hope you will be happy; but, please, don't let
us talk about it again till--till it comes off; and, please, don't let
him come here in the evening. I will try and get accustomed to it in
time; but you see it's rather hard at first, and you know I didn't
expect it."

So saying Ned left the room, and collecting his books made his way off
to school, leaving his mother highly satisfied with the interview.

His absence from afternoon school had, of course, been noticed, and
Smithers had told his friends how Ned had flown at him on his speaking
to him about the talk of his mother and Mulready. Of course before
afternoon school broke up every boy knew that Ned Sankey had cut up
rough about the report; and although the great majority of the boys did
not know Mr. Mulready by name there was a general feeling of sympathy
with Ned, The circumstances of his father's death had, of course,
exalted him greatly in the eyes of his schoolfellows, and it was the
unanimous opinion, that after having had a hero for his father, a fellow
would naturally object to having a stepfather put over him.

Ned's absence was naturally associated with the news, and caused much
comment and even excitement. His attack upon Mr. Hathorn had become a
sort of historical incident in the school, and the younger boys
looked up with a sort of respectful awe upon the boy who had defied a
headmaster. There were all sorts of speculations rife among them as to
what Ned had done, there being a general opinion that he had probably
killed Mr. Mulready, and the debate turning principally upon the manner
in which this act of righteous vengeance had been performed.

There was, then, a feeling almost of disappointment when Ned walked into
the playground looking much as usual, except that his face was pale
and his eyes looked heavy and dull. No one asked him any questions; for
although Ned was a general favorite, it was generally understood that he
was not the sort of fellow to be asked questions that might put him out.
When they went in school, and the first class was called up, Ned, who
was always at its head, took his place at the bottom of the class,
saying quietly to the master:

"I have not prepared my lesson today, sir, and I have not done the
exercises."

Mr. Porson made no remark; he saw at once by Ned's face that something
was wrong with him. When several questions went round, which Ned could
easily have answered without preparation, the master said:

"You had better go to your desk, Sankey; I see you are not well. I will
speak to you after school is over."

Ned sat down and opened a book, but he did not turn a page until school
was over; then he followed his master to the study.

"Well, my boy," he asked kindly, "what is it?"

"My mother is going to marry Mr. Mulready," Ned said shortly. The words
seemed to come with difficulty from his lips.

"Ah! it is true, then. I heard the report some weeks ago, but hoped that
it was not true. I am sorry for you, Ned. I know it must be a sore trial
for you; it is always so when any one steps into the place of one we
have loved and lost."

"I shouldn't care so much if it wasn't him," Ned said in a dull voice.

"But there's nothing against the man, is there?" Mr. Porson asked. "I
own I do not like him myself; but I believe he stands well in the town."

"Only with those who don't know him," Ned replied; "his workpeople say
he is the worst master and the biggest tyrant in the district."

"We must hope it's not so bad as that, Ned; still, I am sorry--very
sorry, at what you tell me; but, my boy, you must not take it to heart.
You see you will be going out into the world before long. Your brother
will be following you in a few years. It is surely better that your
mother should marry again and have some one to take care of her."

"Nice care of her he is likely to take!" Ned laughed bitterly. "You
might as well put a fox to take care of a goose."

"You are severe on both parties," Mr. Porson said with a slight smile;
"but I can hardly blame you, my boy, for feeling somewhat bitter at
first; but I hope that, for your own sake and your mother's, you
will try and conquer this feeling and will make the best of the
circumstances. It is worse than useless to kick against the pricks.
Any show of hostility on your part will only cause unhappiness, perhaps
between your mother' and him--almost certainly between you and her. In
this world, my boy, we have all our trials. Some are very heavy ones.
This is yours. Happily, so far as you are concerned, you need only look
forward to its lasting eighteen months or so. In that time you may hope
to get your commission; and as the marriage can hardly take place for
some little time to come, you will have but a year or so to bear it."

"I don't know, sir," Ned said gloomily; "everything seems upset now. I
don't seem to know what I had best do."

"I am sure at present, Ned," Mr. Porson said kindly--for he saw that the
boy was just now in no mood for argument--"the best is to try and think
as little of it as possible. Make every allowance for your mother; as
you know, my boy, I would not speak disrespectfully to you of her on any
account; but she is not strong minded. She has always been accustomed
to lean upon some one, and the need of some one to lean on is imperative
with her. Had you been a few years older, and had you been staying at
home, it is probable that you might have taken your place as her support
and strength. As it is, it was almost inevitable that something of this
sort would happen.

