   AR IS TOC' RA CY, (ARISTO, _the best_; CRACY, _government_,)
   government by the best, or nobles. See SANDERS' ANALYSIS,
   page 200, Ex. 283.

[Headnote 1: SOC' RA TES, the most celebrated philosopher of antiquity,
was born at Athens, 470 years before Christ. The purity of his doctrines,
and his independence of character, rendered him popular with the most
enlightened Athenians, though they created him many enemies. He was
_falsely accused_, arraigned, and condemned to drink _hemlock_, the
juice of a poisonous plant. When the hour to take the poison had come,
the executioner handed him the cup, with tears in his eyes. Socrates
received it with composure, drank it with unaltered countenance, and,
in a few moments, expired.]

[Headnote 2: DE MOS' THE NES, a great Grecian orator, who, rather than
fall into the hands of his enemies, destroyed himself by taking poison.
It is said that, when a youth, he frequently declaimed on the sea-shore,
while the waves were roaring around him, in order to secure a large
compass of voice, and to accustom himself to the tumult of a popular
assembly.]

[Headnote 3: KING DA' VID, the sweet singer and poet of Israel. For the
interesting account of his triumph over Goliath, the great champion of
the Philistines, see I Sam., chap. 17.]


MY FIRST JACK-KNIFE.

1. I remember it well! Its horn handle, so smooth and clear, glowing
with the unmeaning, but magic word, "_Bunkum;_" and the blade
significantly inviting you to the test, by the two monosyllables, "_Try
me_."

2. I know not how it is, but I never could take half the comfort in any
thing which I have since possessed, that I took in this _jack-knife_. I
earned it myself; and, therefore, I had a feeling of independence; it
was bought with my _own money_,--not teazed out of my uncle, or still
kinder father,--_money_ that I had silently earned on the afternoons of
those days set apart for boys to amuse themselves.

3. Yes! with a spirit of persevering industry and self-denial, at which
I now wonder, I went, every afternoon, during "berry-time," and picked
the ripened fruit with eagerness; for my heart was in the task. I sold
my berries, and, carefully reserving the proceeds, shortly accumulated
enough to purchase the treasure, for which I so eagerly longed.

4. I went to one of the village-stores, and requested the clerk to show
me his jack-knives; but he, seeing that I was only a boy, and thinking
that I merely meant to amuse myself in looking at the nicest, and
wishing it was mine, told me not to plague him, as he was otherwise
engaged.

5. I turned with indignation; but I felt the inward comfort of a man who
has _confidence_ in his own resources, and knows he has the power in his
own hands. I quietly jingled the money in my pockets, and went to the
opposite store. I asked for jack-knives, and was shown a lot fresh from
the city, which were temptingly laid down before me, and left for me to
select one, while the trader went to another part of his store to wait
upon an older customer. I looked over them, opened them, breathed upon
the blades, and shut them again.

6. One was too hard to open, another had no spring; finally, after
examining them with all the judgment which, in my opinion, the extent of
the investment required, I selected one with a hole through the handle;
and, after a dissertation with the owner upon jack-knives in general,
and _this one_ in particular,--upon hawk-bill, and dagger-blades,--and
handles, iron, bone, and buck-horn,--I succeeded in closing a bargain.

7. I took the instrument I had purchased, and felt a sudden expansion of
my boyish frame! It was my world! I deposited it in my pocket among
other valuables,--twine, marbles, slate-pencils, &c. I went home to my
father; I told him how long I had toiled for it, and how eagerly I had
spent time, which others had allotted to play, to possess myself of my
treasure.

8. My father gently chided me for not telling him of my wants; but I
observed his glistening eye turn affectionately to my mother and then to
me, and I thought that his manly form seemed to straighten up and to
look prouder than I had ever before seen him. At any rate, he came to
me, and, patting my curly head, told me there was no object in life,
which was reasonably to be desired, that _honesty, self-denial,
well-directed industry_, and _perseverance_ would not place within my
reach; and if, through life, I carried the spirit of independent
exertion into practice, which I had displayed in the purchase of the
jack-knife, I should become a "_great man_."

9. From that moment, I was a new being. I had discovered that I could
_rely upon myself_. I took my jack-knife, and many a time, while cutting
the walnut-saplings for my bow, or the straight pine for my arrow, or
carving my mimic ship, did I muse upon these words of my father,--so
deeply are the kind expressions of a judicious parent engraven on the
heart and memory of boyhood.

10. My knife was my constant companion. It was my carpenter, my
ship-builder, and my toy-manufacturer. It was out upon all occasions,
never amiss, and always "handy;" and, as I valued it, I never let it
part from me. I own my selfishness; I would divide my apples among my
playmates, my whole store of marbles was at their service,--they might
knock my bats, kick my foot-ball as they chose; but I had no partnership
of enjoyments in my jack-knife. Its possession was connected in my mind
with something so _exclusive_, that I could not permit another to take
it for a moment. Oh! there is a wild and delicious luxury in one's
boyish anticipations and youthful day-dreams!

11. If, however, the _use_ of my jack-knife afforded me pleasure, the
idea of its possession was no less a source of enjoyment. I was, for the
time being, a little prince among my fellows,--a perfect monarch. Let no
one exclaim against aristocracy; were we all perfectly _equal to-day_,
there would be an _aristocracy to-morrow_. Talent, judgment, skill,
tact, industry, perseverance, will place some on the top, while the
contrary attributes will place others at the bottom of fortune's
ever-revolving wheel!

12. The plowman is an aristocrat, if he excels in his vocation: he is an
aristocrat, if he turns a better or a straighter furrow than his
neighbor. The poorest poet is an aristocrat, if he writes more
feelingly, in a purer language, or with more euphonic jingle than his
cotemporaries. The fisherman is an aristocrat, if he wields his harpoon
with more skill, and hurls it with a deadlier energy than his messmates,
or has even learned to fix his bait more alluringly on his barbed hook.

13. All _have_ had, and _still_ have their foibles; all have some
possession, upon which they pride themselves, and I was proud of my
jack-knife! Spirit of Socrates, [Headnote 1] forgive me! was there no
pride in dying like a philosopher'? Spirit of Demosthenes, [Headnote 2]
forgive me! was there no pride in your addresses to the boundless and
roaring ocean'? Spirit of David! [Headnote 3] was there no pride in the
deadly hurling of the smooth pebble, which sank deep into the forehead
of your enemy'?

14. But I must take my jack-knife and _cut short_ this digression. Let
no man say _this_ or _that_ occurrence "will make _no difference fifty
years hence_,"--a common, but dangerous phrase. I am _now_ a man of
three-score years. I can point my finger _here_ to my ships, _there_ to
my warehouse. My name is well known in two hemispheres. I have drank
deeply of intellectual pleasures, have served my country in many
important stations, have had my gains and my losses.

15. I have seen many, who started with fairer prospects, but with no
compass, wrecked before me; but I have been impelled in my operations,
no matter how extensive, by the _same spirit_ which conceived and
executed the purchase of the jack-knife. And I have found my reward in
it; and, perhaps, in after years, there will be those who will say that
the predictions of my father were fulfilled in their case; and that,
from _small beginnings_, by "_honesty, self-denial, well-directed
industry_, and _perseverance_," they also, BECAME TRULY "GREAT MEN."

QUESTIONS.--1. How did this boy obtain his first jack-knife? 2. What did
his father say to him, when he told how he had earned it? 3. What use
did he make of his knife? 4. What is said about _aristocracy_? 5. What
is said of this boy when he came to be three-score years old?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XXXVII.

   COIN' ED, stamped.
   BAR' TER, trade; exchange.
   COM MOD' I TIES, goods; wares.
   BULL'ION, uncoined silver or gold.
   BUC' CA NEERS, pirates; freebooters.
   IM MENSE', very great; enormous.
   DAIN' TIES, delicacies.
   SMALL-CLOTHES, breeches.
   AT TIR' ED, dressed; arrayed.
   PE' ONY, plant and beautiful flower.
   PER' SON A BLE, handsome; graceful.
   ES PE' CIAL LY, mainly; chiefly.
   RE CEP' TA CLE, that which receives or holds.
   PON' DER OUS, heavy; bulky.
   RE SUM' ING, taking again.


THE PINE-TREE SHILLINGS.

1. Captain John Hull was the mint-master of Massachusetts, and coined
all the money that was made there. This was a new line of business; for,
in the earlier days of the colony, the current coinage consisted of gold
and silver money of England, Portugal, and Spain.

2. These coins being scarce, the people were often forced to barter
their commodities, instead of selling them. For instance, if a man
wanted to buy a coat, he, perhaps, exchanged a bear-skin for it. If he
wished for a barrel of molasses, he might purchase it with a pile of
pine-boards. Musket-bullets were used instead of farthings.

3. The Indians had a sort of money, called _wampum_, which was made of
clam-shells; and this strange sort of specie was, likewise, taken in
payment of debts, by the English settlers. Bank-bills had never been
heard of. There was not money enough of any kind, in many parts of the
country, to pay the salaries of the ministers; so that they sometimes
had to take quintals of fish, bushels of corn, or cords of wood, instead
of silver or gold.

4. As the people grew more numerous, and their trade one with another
increased, the want of current money was still more sensibly felt. To
supply the demand, the general court passed a law for establishing a
coinage of shillings, sixpences, and threepences. Captain John Hull was
appointed to manufacture this money, and was to have _one shilling_, out
of every twenty, to pay him for the trouble of making them.

5. Hereupon, all the old silver in the colony was handed over to Captain
John Hull. The battered silver cans, and tankards, and silver-buckles,
and broken spoons, and silver-buttons of worn-out coats, and silver
hilts of swords that had figured at courts,--all such curious old
articles were, doubtless, thrown into the melting-pot together. But by
far the greater part of the silver consisted of bullion from the mines
of South America, which the English buccaneers, (who were little better
than pirates,) had taken from the Spaniards, and brought to
Massachusetts.

6. All this old and new silver being melted down and coined, the result
was an immense amount of splendid shillings, sixpences, and threepences.
Each had the date, 1652, on the one side, and the figure of a
_pine-tree_ on the other. Hence, they were called _pine-tree shillings_.
And, for every _twenty shillings_ that he coined, you will remember,
Captain John Hull was entitled to put _one shilling_ into his own
pocket.

7. The magistrates soon began to suspect that the mint-master would have
the best of the bargain. They offered him a large sum of money, if he
would but give up that _twentieth shilling_, which he was continually
dropping into his own pocket. But Captain Hull declared himself
perfectly satisfied with the shilling. And well he might be; for, so
diligently did he labor, that, in a few years, his pockets, his
money-bags, and his strong box, were overflowing with pine-tree
shillings. This was probably the case when he came into possession of
Grandfather's chair; and, as he had worked so hard at the mint, it was
certainly proper that he should have a comfortable chair to rest himself
in.

8. When the mint-master had grown very rich, a young man, Samuel Sewell
by name, fell in love with his only daughter. His daughter, whom we will
call Betsey, was a fine, hearty damsel, by no means so slender as some
young ladies of our own days. As Samuel was a young man of good
character, industrious in his business, and a member of the church, the
mint-master very readily gave his consent.

9. "Yes; you may take her," said he, in his rough way; "and you'll find
her a heavy burden enough!" On the wedding-day, we may suppose that
honest John Hull dressed himself in a plum-colored coat, all the buttons
of which were made of pine-tree shillings. The buttons of his waistcoat
were sixpences; and the knees of his small-clothes were buttoned with
silver threepences.

10. Thus attired, he sat with great dignity in Grandfather's chair; and,
being a portly old gentleman, he completely filled it from elbow to
elbow. On the opposite side of the room, between her bridemaids, sat
Miss Betsey, blushing like a full-blown peony.

11. There, too, was the bridegroom, dressed in a fine purple coat, and
gold-lace waistcoat, with as much other finery as the Puritan laws and
customs would allow him to put on. His hair was cropped close to his
head, because Governor Endicott had forbidden any man to wear it below
the ears. But he was a very personable young man; and so thought the
bridemaids and Miss Betsey herself.

12. The mint-master, also, was pleased with his new son-in-law;
especially as he had courted Miss Betsey out of pure love, and had said
nothing at all about her portion. So, when the marriage ceremony was
over, Captain Hull whispered a word to two of his men-servants, who
immediately went out, and soon returned, lugging in a large pair of
scales. They were such a pair as wholesale merchants use for weighing
bulky commodities; and quite a bulky commodity was now to be weighed in
them.

13. "Daughter Betsey," said the mint-master, "get into one side of these
scales." Miss Betsey, or Mrs. Sewell, as we must now call her, did as
she was bid, like a dutiful child, without any question of the why and
wherefore. But what her father could mean, unless to make her husband
pay for her by the pound, (in which case she would have been a dear
bargain,) she had not the least idea.

14. "And now," said honest John Hull to the servants, "bring that box
hither." The box, to which the mint-master pointed, was a huge, square,
iron-bound, oaken chest. The servants tugged with might and main; but
could not lift this enormous receptacle, and were finally obliged to
drag it across the floor.

15. Captain Hull then took a key from his girdle, unlocked the chest,
and lifted its ponderous lid. Behold! _it was full to the brim of bright
pine-tree shillings_, fresh from the mint; and Samuel Sewell began to
think that his father-in-law had got possession of all the money in the
Massachusetts' treasury. But it was only the mint-master's honest share
of the coinage.

16. Then the servants, at Captain Hull's command, heaped double handfuls
of shillings into one side of the scales, while Betsey remained in the
other. Jingle, jingle, went the shillings, as handful after handful was
thrown in, till, plump and ponderous as she was, they fairly weighed the
young lady from the floor.

17. "There, son Samuel," said the honest mint-master, resuming his seat
in Grandfather's chair, "take these shillings for my daughter's portion.
Use her kindly, and thank Heaven for her. _It is not every wife that's
worth her weight in silver!_"

QUESTIONS.--1. What was Captain John Hull's business? 2. What portion of
the money coined, was he to receive? 3. How did he get silver to coin?
4. Describe the shillings he coined. 5. How did he become wealthy? 6.
Describe his dress on his daughter's wedding-day. 7. What did he say to
his son-in-law, after weighing her with shillings?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XXXVIII.

   LODG' ES, dens; caves.
   MAR' VEL OUS, wonderful.
   TIP' PED, pointed.
   HERD, gather in herds.
   FA' MOUS, noted; remarkable.
   ROE' BUCK, small species of deer.
   STRAIGHT' WAY, immediately.
   E RECT', upright.
   FROL' IC, fun; play.
   FORD, place where water can be waded.
   FLECK' ED, spotted; striped.
   FLUT' TER ED, quivered.
   PAL' PI TA TED, beat; throbbed.
   WA' RY, watchful; cautious.
   FA' TAL, deadly; mortal.
   EX ULT' ED, (_x_ like _gz_,) greatly rejoiced.


HIAWATHA'S HUNTING.

LONGFELLOW.

This lesson is taken from "The Song of Hiawatha," a poem, founded upon
traditions current among some tribes of North American Indians,
respecting an imaginary being of more than mortal powers and gifts,
named Hiawatha. The scene of the poem is laid among the Ojibways, or
Chippewas, a tribe of Indians, occupants, from the period of our
earliest history, of the basin of Lake Superior.

   1.
   Then the little Hiawatha
   Learned of every bird its language,
   Learned their names and all their secrets,
   How they built their nests in summer,
   Where they hid themselves in winter,
   Talked with them where'er he met them,
   Called them "Hiawatha's chickens."

   2.
   Of all beasts he learned the language,
   Learned their names and all their secrets,
   How the beavers built their lodges,
   Where the squirrels hid their acorns,
   How the reindeer ran so swiftly,
   Why the rabbit was so timid,
   Talked with them whene'er he met them,
   Called them "Hiawatha's brothers."

   3.
   Then Ia'goo, the great boaster,
   He, the marvelous story-teller,
   He, the traveler and the talker,
   Made a bow for Hiawatha;
   From a branch of ash he made it,
   From an oak-bough made the arrows,
   Tipped with flint, and winged with feathers,
   And the cord he made of deer-skin.

   4.
   Then he said to Hiawatha,
   "Go, my son, into the forest,
   Where the red deer herd together,
   Kill for us a famous roebuck,
   Kill for us a deer with antlers."
   Forth into the forest straightway
   All alone walked Hiawatha
   Proudly with his bow and arrows.

   5.
   And the birds sang round him, o'er him
   "Do not shoot us, Hiawatha."
   Sang the robin, sang the bluebird,
   "Do not shoot us, Hiawatha."
   Up the oak-tree, close beside him,
   Sprang the squirrel, lightly leaping
   In and out among the branches;
   Coughed and chattered from the oak-tree,
   Laughed, and said between his laughing,
   "Do not shoot me, Hiawatha."

   6.
   And the rabbit from his pathway
   Leaped aside, and, at a distance,
   Sat erect upon his haunches,
   Half in fear, and half in frolic,
   Saying to the little hunter,
   "Do not shoot me, Hiawatha."

   7.
   But he heeded not nor heard them,
   For his thoughts were with the red deer;
   On their tracks his eyes were fastened,
   Leading downward to the river,
   To the ford across the river,
   And as one in slumber walked he.

   8.
   Hidden in the alder bushes,
   There he waited till the deer came,
   Till he saw too antlers lifted,
   Saw two eyes look from the thicket,
   Saw two nostrils point to windward,
   And the deer came down the pathway,
   Flecked with leafy light and shadow.
   And his heart within him fluttered,
   Trembled like the leaves above him,
   Like the birch leaf palpitated,
   As the deer came down the pathway.

   9.
   Then, upon one knee uprising,
   Hiawatha aimed an arrow;
   Scarce a twig moved with his motion,
   Scarce a leaf was stirred or rustled,
   But the wary roebuck started,
   Stamped with all his hoofs together,
   Listened with one foot uplifted,
   Leaped as if to meet the arrow;
   Ah, the singing, fatal arrow,
   Like a wasp it buzzed and stung him.

   10.
   Dead he lay there in the forest,
   By the ford across the river;
   Beat his timid heart no longer;
   But the heart of Hiawatha
   Throbbed, and shouted, and exulted,
   As he bore the red deer homeward.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XXXIX.

   TRAIL, track; footprints.
   IN' DICATED, pointed out; shown.
   MURK' Y, dark; gloomy.
   FLAM' BEAU, (_flam' bo_,) lighted torch.
   RE FLECT' ING, throwing back.
   LU' RID LY, gloomily; dismally.
   SUS PECT' ING, mistrusting.
   AS SAIL' ANTS, assaulters.
   ECH' O, (_ek' o_,) sound reverberated.
   RE LAPS' ED, fell back; returned.
   EN VEL' OPED, inwrapped.
   SUF FO CATED, smothered.
   BRAND' ISHING, flourishing; waving.
   RIG' ID, stiff.
   BIV' OUAC, (_biv' wak_,) pass the night without tents.
   PEER' ED, came in sight; appeared.
   DE CLIV' I TY, gradual descent.
   PRO LONG' ED, lengthened; continued.
   COM' RADE, companion; associate.


A DESPERATE ENCOUNTER WITH A PANTHER.

BOY'S BOOK OF ADVENTURES.

1. I had left the hunting party more than an hour, when I came upon the
track of my old friend Konwell, who was, with his dogs, on the bloody
trail of a panther. The animal must have had one of his legs broken;
this was indicated by the marks on the soft ground; and it was plain
that the tracks were made by three feet instead of four, and accompanied
by blood at every leap.

2. I determined to follow; and, after a tramp of nearly an hour, I
overtook my friend at the entrance of a cavern, where he stood waiting
for me. The wounded animal had taken refuge in this cave, leaving us to
do whatever we thought best. The poor beast doubtless supposed that
within this murky recess he was safe from pursuit; but he was mistaken.
Konwell informed me that he had hidden a bundle of pine splinters in a
gulley, about half a mile distant, and that if I would keep guard over
the mouth of the cave, he would go and bring it.

3. I agreed to this measure; and, with ready gun and drawn knife,
prepared for any attack that might be made. I lay down at the entrance
of the panther's cave. My friend soon returned, bringing the pine, as he
had promised. His next movement was to kindle a large fire at the mouth
of the cave, at which we lighted our torches; and, having taken the
flambeaus in our left hand, while we carried our guns in the right, we
cautiously entered the cave. I crept on before; but the space within
soon became so high and roomy, that we could stand upright, and keep
close to each other.

4. Bending toward the left, the cavity extended a considerable distance
within the hill. After we had advanced about two hundred steps, we saw
the glaring eyes of the wounded beast, which gleamed forth like two
fiery balls, reflecting most luridly the light of our torches. Konwell
now took my flambeau and stepped behind me. I leveled my gun in the
direction of those flaming eyes, and fired. After the report, we heard a
bustle; but could not exactly make out what it meant.

5. I reloaded my gun, resumed my torch, and Konwell now took his place
in front. But, as those flaming eyes were no longer to be seen, we felt
obliged to go farther. Our guns ready loaded, we believed ourselves to
be prepared for anything. We proceeded carefully, as men are likely to
do when suspecting danger, when, instantly, the panther started up from
a hollow, in which he was lying, quite close to our feet.

6. It was a fearful sight to look upon him as he stood with ears laid
back, his white teeth set together, as if in intense anger, and those
wide open eyes glowing and sparkling as they rested upon us, his
assailants. I can never forget his appearance. In a moment our guns were
discharged, and the cave returned the thundering echo. We had both fired
so precisely at the same moment, that neither of us could believe the
other had discharged his gun.

7. We were certain that our enemy had been struck, but we knew not
whether killed or only disabled. Quick as thought, we dropped our guns
and drew our knives from the sheath. And haste was necessary; for the
echo had not relapsed into silence, before we felt the weight of the
panther against us; and we began cutting at him with our knives, and, at
the same moment, in consequence of our hurried movements, our torches
died out, and we were left in utter darkness.

8. Deafened by the noise and utterly bewildered, I turned to fly from
the now raging enemy, and only became perfectly aware of what I was
doing, when I found myself standing beside Konwell outside the cave in
the open air. I only know now, that, enveloped in thick darkness, and
almost suffocated with the smoke of gunpowder, I groped about, not
knowing what I wished or intended; and that Konwell, at last, drew me
forcibly to the mouth of the cave.

9. There we stood, each one brandishing his hunting-knife in his right
hand, and holding the extinguished torch in the left; as we looked on
each other, we scarcely knew whether to laugh or to be frightened at the
strange figures we made. We were black with powder-smoke, covered with
sweat and blood, and our clothing torn to rags.

10. Konwell complained of a pain in his breast. I opened the bosom of
his shirt, and found two deep gashes made by the panther's claws,
extending from the left shoulder to the pit of the stomach. I also
received a few scratches, but our stout hunting-shirts were torn to
shreds.

11. Until this moment, neither of us had felt that he was wounded; and
even now, before we began to think of dressing those wounds, we made a
large fire at the mouth of the cavern, in order to prevent the panther
from coming forth. This done, we sat down beside the genial blaze to
wash and bind up our scratches, and consult on what plan it was now best
to proceed.

12. That the panther was still in the cave we were certain; but, whether
living or dead, we did not know; at all events, he was wounded; for our
hunting-knives were covered with blood quite up to the hilt. But we had
no choice left; we must return; for our guns and Konwell's powder-flask,
which the animal dragged off with him, still lay within the cavern. We
therefore plucked up new courage; and, having relighted our torches, we
