to say, it made him rather vain. When he first came, he was too busy
drinking milk and learning to walk, to think about tails, but as he grew
older and stronger he began to know that he had the longest one. Because
he was a very young Lamb he was so foolish as to tease the others and
call out, "Baa! your tails are snippy ones!"

Then the others would call back, "Baa! Don't care if they are!"

After a while, his mother, who was a sensible Sheep and had seen much of
life, said to him: "You must not brag about your tail. It is very rude
of you, and very silly too, for you have exactly such a tail as was
given to you, and the other Lambs have exactly such tails as were given
to them, and when you are older you will know that it did not matter in
the least what kind of tail you wore when you were little." She might
have told him something else, but she didn't.

The Lamb didn't dare to boast of his tail after this, but when he passed
the others, he would look at his mother, and if he thought she wouldn't
see, he would wiggle it at them. Of course that was just as bad as
talking about it, and the other Lambs knew perfectly well what he meant;
still, they pretended not to understand.

One morning, when his mother's back was turned, he was surprised to see
that she had only a short and stumpy tail. He had been thinking so much
of his own that he had not noticed hers. "Mother," he cried, "why didn't
you have a long tail too?"

"I did have once," she answered with a sheepish smile.

"Did it get broken?" he asked in a faint little voice. He was thinking
how dreadful it would be if he should break his.

"Not exactly," said his mother. "I will tell you all about it. All
little Lambs have long tails----"

"Not so long as mine, though," said he, interrupting.

"No, not so long as yours," she replied, "but so long that if they were
left that way always they would make a great deal of trouble. As the
wool grows on them, they would catch burrs and sharp, prickly things,
which would pull the wool and sting the skin. The farmer knows this, so
when the little Lambs are about as old as you are now, he and his men
make their tails shorter."

"Oh!" cried the Lamb, curling his tail in as far between his legs as he
could, "do you mean that they will shorten my tail, my beautiful long
tail?"

"That is just what I mean," said his mother, "and you should be very
glad of it. When that is done, you will be ready to go out into the
field with me. A lot of trouble we should have if the men did not look
after such things for us; but that is what men are for, they say,--to
look after us Sheep."

"But won't they laugh at me when my tail is shorter?" asked her son.

"They would laugh at you if you wore it long. No Lamb who pretends to be
anybody would be seen in the pasture with a dangling tail. Only wild
Sheep wear them long, poor things!"

Now the little Lamb wished that he had not boasted so much. Now, when
the others passed him, he did not put on airs. Now he wondered why they
couldn't have short tails in the beginning. He asked his uncle, an old
Wether Sheep, why this was and his uncle laughed. "Why, what would you
have done all these days if things happened in that way? What would you
have had to think about? What could you have talked about?" The little
Lamb hung his head and asked no more questions.

"What do you think?" he called to a group of Lambs near by. "I'm going
to have one of the men shorten my tail. It is such a bother unless one
does have it done, and mine is so very long!"




THE WONDERFUL SHINY EGG


"CUT-CUT-CA-DAH-CUT! Cut-cut-cut-ca-dah-cut!" called the Dorking Hen, as
she strutted around the poultry-yard. She held her head very high, and
paused every few minutes to look around in her jerky way and see whether
the other fowls were listening. Once she even stood on her left foot
right in the pathway of the Shanghai Cock, and cackled into his very
ears.

Everybody pretended not to hear her. The people in the poultry-yard did
not like the Dorking Hen very well. They said that she put on airs.
Perhaps she did. She certainly talked a great deal of the place from
which she and the Dorking Cock came. They had come in a small cage from
a large poultry farm, and the Dorking Hen never tired of telling about
the wonderful, noisy ride that they took in a dark car drawn by a great,
black, snorting creature. She said that this creature's feet grew on to
his sides and whirled around as he ran, and that he breathed out of the
top of his head. When the fowls first heard of this, they were much
interested, but after a while they used to walk away from her, or make
believe that they saw Grasshoppers whom they wanted to chase.

When she found that people were not listening to her, she cackled louder
than ever, "Cut-cut-ca-dah-cut! Look at the egg--the egg--the egg--the
egg that I have laid."

"Is there any particular reason why we should look at the egg--the
egg--the egg--the egg that you have laid?" asked the Shanghai Cock, who
was the grumpiest fowl in the yard.

Now, usually if the Dorking Hen had been spoken to in this way, she
would have ruffled up her head feathers and walked away, but this time
she had news to tell and so she kept her temper. "Reason?" she cackled.
"Yes indeed! It is the finest egg that was ever laid in this
poultry-yard."

"Hear her talk!" said a Bantam Hen. "I think it is in very poor taste to
lay such large eggs as most of the Hens do here. Small ones are much
more genteel."

"She must forget an egg that I laid a while ago with two yolks," said a
Shanghai Hen. "That was the largest egg ever laid here, and I have
always wished that I had hatched it. A pair of twin chickens would have
been so interesting."

"Well," said the Dorking Hen, who could not keep still any longer,
"small eggs may be genteel and large ones may be interesting, but my
last one is bee-autiful."

"Perhaps you'd just as soon tell us about it as to brag without
telling?" grumbled the Shanghai Cock. "I suppose it is grass color, or
sky color, or hay color, or speckled, like a sparrow's egg."

"No," answered the Dorking Hen, "it is white, but it is shiny."

"Shiny!" they exclaimed. "Who ever heard of a shiny egg?"

"Nobody," she replied, "and that is why it is so wonderful."

"Don't believe it," said the Shanghai Cock, as he turned away and began
scratching the ground.

Now the Dorking Hen did get angry. "Come to see it, if you don't believe
me," she said, as she led the others into the Hen-house.

She flew up to the row of boxes where the Hens had their nests, and
picked her way along daintily until she reached the farthest one. "Now
look," said she.

One by one the fowls peeped into the box, and sure enough, there it
lay, a fine, shiny, white egg. The little Bantam, who was really a
jolly, kind-hearted creature, said, "Well, it is a beauty. I should be
proud of it myself."

"It is whiter than I fancy," said the Shanghai Cock, "but it certainly
does shine."

"I shall hatch it," said the Dorking Hen, very decidedly. "I shall hatch
it and have a beautiful Chicken with shining feathers. I shall not hatch
all the eggs in the nest, but roll this one away and sit on it."

"Perhaps," said one of her friends, "somebody else may have laid it
after all, and not noticed. You know it is not the only one in the
nest."

"Pooh!" said the Dorking Hen. "I guess I know! I am sure it was not
there when I went to the nest and it was there when I left. I must have
laid it."

The fowls went away, and she tried to roll the shiny one away from the
other eggs, but it was slippery and very light and would not stay where
she put it. Then she got out of patience and rolled all the others out
of the nest. Two of them fell to the floor and broke, but she did not
care. "They are nothing but common ones, anyway," she said.

When the farmer's wife came to gather the eggs she pecked at her and was
very cross. Every day she did this, and at last the woman let her alone.
Every-day she told the other fowls what a wonderful Chicken she expected
to have. "Of course he will be of my color," said she, "but his feathers
will shine brightly. He will be a great flyer, too. I am sure that is
what it means when the egg is light." She came off the nest each day
just long enough to stroll around and chat with her friends, telling
them what wonderful things she expected, and never letting them forget
that it was she who had laid the shiny egg. She pecked airily at the
food, and seemed to think that a Hen who was hatching such a wonderful
Chicken should have the best of everything. Each day she told some new
beauty that was to belong to her child, until the Shanghai Cock fairly
flapped his wings with impatience.

Day after day passed, and the garden beyond the barn showed rows of
sturdy green plants, where before there had been only straight ridges of
fine brown earth. The Swallows who were building under the eaves of the
great barn, twittered and chattered of the wild flowers in the forest,
and four other Hens came off their nests with fine broods of downy
Chickens. And still the Dorking Hen sat on her shiny egg and told what a
wonderful Chicken she expected to hatch. This was not the only egg in
the nest now, but it was the only one of which she spoke.

At last a downy Chicken peeped out of one of the common eggs, and
wriggled and twisted to free himself from the shell. His mother did not
hurry him or help him. She knew that he must not slip out of it until
all the blood from the shell-lining had run into his tender little body.
If she had pushed the shell off before he had all of this fine red
blood, he would not have been a strong Chicken, and she wanted her
children to be strong.

The Dorking Cock walked into the Hen-house and stood around on one foot.
He came to see if the shiny egg had hatched, but he wouldn't ask. He
thought himself too dignified to show any interest in newly hatched
Chickens before a Hen. Still, he saw no harm in standing around on one
foot and letting the Dorking Hen talk to him if she wanted to. When she
told him it was one of the common eggs that had hatched, he was quite
disgusted, and stalked out of doors without a word.

The truth was that he had been rather bragging to the other Cocks, and
only a few minutes later he spoke with pride of the time when "our"
shiny egg should hatch. "For," he said, "Mrs. Dorking and I have been
quite alone here as far as our own people are concerned. It is not
strange that we should feel a great pride in the wonderful egg and the
Chicken to be hatched from it. A Dorking is a Dorking after all, my
friends." And he flapped his wings, stretched his neck, and crowed as
loudly as he could.

"Yes," said the Black Spanish Cock afterward, "a Dorking certainly is a
Dorking, although I never could see the sense of making such a fuss
about it. They are fat and they have an extra toe on each foot. Why
should a fowl want extra toes? I have four on each foot, and I can
scratch up all the food I want with them."

"Well," said the grumpy old Shanghai Cock, "I am sick and tired of this
fuss. Common eggs are good enough for Shanghais and Black Spanish and
Bantams, and I should think----"

Just at this minute they heard a loud fluttering and squawking in the
Hen-house and the Dorking Hen crying, "Weasel! Weasel!" The Cocks ran to
drive the Weasel away, and the Hens followed to see it done. All was
noise and hurry, and they saw nothing of the Weasel except the tip of
his bushy tail as he drew his slender body through an opening in the
fence.

The Dorking Hen was on one of the long perches where the fowls roost at
night, the newly hatched Chicken lay shivering in the nest, and on the
floor were the pieces of the wonderful shiny egg. The Dorking Hen had
knocked it from the nest in her flight.

The Dorking Cock looked very cross. He was not afraid of a Weasel, and
he did not see why she should be. "Just like a Hen!" he said.

The Black Spanish Hen turned to him before he could say another word.
"Just like a Cock!" she exclaimed. "I never raise Chickens myself. It is
not the custom among the Black Spanish Hens. We lay the eggs and
somebody else hatches them. But if I had been on the nest as long as
Mrs. Dorking has, do you suppose I'd let any fowl speak to me as you
spoke to her? I'd--I'd--" and she was so angry that she couldn't say
another word, but just strutted up and down and cackled.

A motherly old Shanghai Hen flew up beside Mrs. Dorking. "We are very
sorry for you," she said. "I know how I should have felt if I had broken
my two-yolked egg just as it was ready to hatch."

The Bantam Hen picked her way to the nest. "What a dear little Chicken!"
she cried, in her most comforting tone. "He is so plump and so bright
for his age. But, my dear, he is chilly, and I think you should cuddle
him under your wings until his down is dry."

The Dorking Hen flew down. "He is a dear," she said, "and yet when he
was hatched I didn't care much for him, because I had thought so long
about the shiny egg. It serves me right to lose that one, because I have
been so foolish. Still, I do not know how I could stand it if it were
not for my good neighbors."

While Mrs. Dorking was talking with the Bantam by her nest, the Black
Spanish Hen scratched a hole in the earth under the perches, poked the
pieces of the shiny egg into it, and covered them up. "I never raise
Chickens myself," she said, "but if I did----"

The Shanghai Cock walked away with the Dorking Cock. "I'm sorry for
you," he said, "and I am more sorry for Mrs. Dorking. She is too fine a
Hen to be spoken to as you spoke to her this morning, and I don't want
to hear any more of your fault-finding. Do you understand?" And he
ruffled his neck feathers and stuck his face close to that of the
Dorking Cock. They stared into each other's eyes for a minute; then the
Dorking Cock, who was not so big and strong as the Shanghai, shook his
head and answered sweetly, "It was rude of me. I won't do it again."

From that day to this, nobody in the poultry yard has ever spoken of the
shiny egg, and the Dorkings are much liked by the other fowls. Yet if it
had not been for her trouble, Mrs. Dorking and her neighbors would never
have become such good friends. The little Dorkings are fine,
fat-breasted Chicks, with the extra toe on each foot of which all that
family are so proud.




THE DUCKLING WHO DIDN'T KNOW WHAT TO DO


"Quack! Quack!" called the Duck who had been sitting on her nest so
long. "My first egg is cracked, and I can see the broad yellow bill of
my eldest child. Ah! Now I can see his downy white head." The Drake
heard her and quacked the news to every one around, and flapped his
wings, and preened his feathers, for was not this the first Duckling
ever hatched on the farm?

The Drake had not been there long himself. It was only a few days before
the Duck began sitting that she and her five sisters had come with him
to this place. It had not taken them long to become acquainted with the
other farmyard people, and all had been kind to them. The Geese had
rather put on airs, at first, because they were bigger and had longer
legs, but the Ducks and Drake were too wise to notice this in any way,
and before long the Geese were as friendly as possible. They would have
shown the Ducks the way to the water if it had been necessary, but it
was not, for Ducks always know without being told just where to find it.
They know, and they do not know why they know. It is one of the things
that are.

Now that the first Duckling had chipped the shell, everybody wanted to
see him, and there was soon a crowd of fowls around the nest watching
him free himself from it. The Drake stood by, as proud as a Peacock. "I
think he looks much like his mother," said he.

"Yes, yes," cackled all the Hens. "The same broad yellow bill, the same
short yellow legs, and the same webbed feet."

The mother Duck smiled. "He looks more like me now than he will by and
by," she said, "for when his feathers grow and cover the down, he will
have a stiff little one curled up on his back like the Drake's. And
really, except for the curled feather, his father and I look very much
alike."

"That is so," said the Black Spanish Cock. "You do look alike; the same
white feathers, the same broad breast, the same strong wings, the same
pointed tail, the same long neck, the same sweet expression around the
bill!" That was just like the Black Spanish Cock. He always said
something pleasant about people when he could, and it was much better
than saying unpleasant things. Indeed, he was the most polite fowl in
the poultry-yard, and the Black Spanish Hen thought his manners quite
perfect.

Then the Duckling's five aunts pushed their way through the crowd to the
nest under the edge of the strawstack. "Have you noticed what fine
large feet he has?" said one of them. "That is like his mother's people.
See what a strong web is between the three long toes on each foot! He
will be a good swimmer. The one toe that points backward is small, to be
sure, but he does not need that in swimming. That is only to make
waddling easier."

"Yes, yes," "A fine web," and "Very large feet," cried the fowls around
the nest, but most of them didn't care so much about the size of his
feet as the Ducks did. Large feet are always useful, you know, yet
nobody needs them so badly as Geese and Ducks. The Geese were off
swimming, and so could not see the Duckling when first he came out of
the shell.

"Tap-tap, tap-tap," sounded inside another shell, and they knew that
there would soon be a second damp little Duckling beside the first. The
visitors could not stay to see this one come out, and they went away
for a time. The eldest Duckling had supposed that this was life, to have
people around saying, "How bright he is!" "What fine legs!" or "He has a
beautiful bill!" And now that they all walked away and his mother was
looking after the Duckling who was just breaking her shell, he didn't
like it--he didn't like it at all.

Still, it was much better so. If he had had no brothers and sisters, he
would have been a lonely little fellow; besides, he would have had his
own way nearly all the time, and that is likely to make any Duckling
selfish. Then, too, if all the other fowls had petted him and given him
the best of everything, he would have become vain. Truly, it was a good
thing for him not to be the only child, and he soon learned to think so.

After there were two Ducklings, a third one came, and a fourth, and a
fifth, and so on until, when the broken shells were cleared away and
the mother had counted bills, she could call to the Drake and her
sisters, "Nine Ducklings hatched, and there were only nine eggs in the
nest."

"Then come to the brook," said the Drake, "and let the children have a
bath. I have been swimming a great many times to-day, and they have not
even set foot in water yet. Why, our eldest son was out of his shell
before the Horses were harnessed this morning, and here it is nearly
time for their supper."

"I couldn't help it," said the mother Duck. "I couldn't leave the nest
to take him swimming until the rest were ready to go. I am doing the
best I can."

"I didn't mean to find fault," said the Drake, "and I suppose you
couldn't get away, but we know that Ducklings should be taught to bathe
often, and there is nothing like beginning in time."

"I might have taken some of them to the brook," said one of the aunts.
The mother straightened her neck and held her head very high, while she
answered, "You? You are very kind, but what do you know about bringing
up Ducklings?"

Now the aunt might have said, "I know just as much as you do," for it
was the young mother's first brood, yet she kept still. She thought, "I
may hatch Ducklings of my own some day, and then I suppose I shall want
to care for them myself."

"Wait," said the Drake, as they reached the brook. "Let us wait and see
what the children will do." The words were hardly out of his bill
when--flutter--splash--splash!--there were nine yellow-white Ducklings
floating on the brook and murmuring happily to each other as though they
had never done anything else.

The Dorking Cock stood on the bank. "Who taught them to swim?" said he.

"Nobody," answered their mother proudly. "They knew without being told.
That is the way a Duck takes to water." And she gave a dainty lurch and
was among her brood.

[Illustration: THEY HAD A GOOD SWIM.]

"Well!" exclaimed the Dorking Cock. "I thought the little Dorkings were
as bright as children could be, but they didn't know as much as that. I
must tell them." He stalked off, talking under his breath.

"They know more than that," said the Drake. "Did you see how they ran
ahead of us when we stopped to talk? They knew where to find water as
soon as they were out of the shell. Still, the Cock might not have
believed that if I had told him."

They had a good swim, and then all stood on the bank and dried
themselves. This they did by squeezing the water out of their down with
their bills. The Drake, the mother Duck, the five aunts, and the nine
Ducklings all stood as tall and straight as they could, and turned and
twisted their long necks, and flapped their wings, and squeezed their
down, and murmured to each other. And their father didn't tell the
little ones how, and their mother didn't tell them how, and their five
aunts didn't tell them how, but they knew without being told.

The Ducklings grew fast, and made friends of all the farmyard people.
Early every morning they went to the brook. They learned to follow the
brook to the river, and here were wonderful things to be seen. There was
plenty to eat, too, in the soft mud under the water, and it was easy
enough to dive to it, or to reach down their long necks while only their
pointed tails and part of their body could be seen above the water. Not
that they ate the mud. They kept only the food that they found in it,
and then let the mud slip out between the rough edges of their bills.
They swam and ate all day, and slept all night, and were dutiful
Ducklings who minded their mother, so it was not strange that they were
plump and happy.

At last there came a morning when the eldest Duckling could not go to
the brook with the others. A Weasel had bitten him in the night, and if
it had not been for his mother and the Drake, would have carried him
away. The rest had to go in swimming, and his lame leg would not let him
waddle as far as the brook, or swim after he got there.

"I don't know what to do," he said to his mother. "I can't swim and I
can't waddle far, and I've eaten so much already that I can't eat
anything more for a long, long time."

"You might play with the little Shanghais," said his mother.

"They run around too much," he replied. "I can't keep up with them."

"Then why not lie near the corn crib and visit with the Mice?"

"Oh, they don't like the things that I like, and it isn't any fun."

"How would it suit you to watch the Peacock for a while?"
