GOSSE, EDMUND WILLIAM                                      437

GRAY, THOMAS                                               111


HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER                                239

HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL                                       262

HEAVYSEGE, CHARLES                                         349

HERRICK, ROBERT                                             55

HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL                                     364

HOOD, THOMAS                                          234, 237

HOUGHTON, LORD (RICHARD MONCKTON MILNES)                   320

HUME, DAVID                                                102

HUNT, LEIGH                                                217

HUXLEY, THOMAS HENRY                                       412


JONES, AMANDA T.                                           412

JOWETT, BENJAMIN                                           384


KEATS, JOHN                                                222

KEBLE, JOHN                                                233

KINGSLEY, CHARLES                                          354


LEVER, CHARLES JAMES                                       284

LOCKER, FREDERICK                                          400

LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH                                336

LOVELACE, RICHARD                                       55, 61

LOVER, SAMUEL                                              246

LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL                                 397, 411

LYTTON, LORD (EDWARD BULWER)                               294


MACAULAY, LORD (THOMAS BABINGTON)                          247

MAIR, CHARLES                                              426

MILTON, JOHN                                                67

MOORE, THOMAS                                    214, 215, 216


NAIRN, BARONESS (CAROLINA OLIPHANT)                       177

NEWMAN, CARDINAL (JOHN HENRY)                              299


POE, EDGAR ALLAN                                           258

POPE, ALEXANDER                                             96

PRAED, WINTHROP MACKWORTH                                  246


READE, JOHN                                           420, 421

ROBERTS, CHARLES GEORGE DOUGLAS                            440

ROBINSON, A. MARY F.                                  438, 439

ROSSETTI, CHRISTINA GEORGINA                               417

ROSSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL                               293, 359

RUSKIN, JOHN                                               390


SANGSTER, CHARLES                                          408

SCOTT, SIR WALTER                                          179

SHAKESPEARE, WILLIAM                                        40

SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE                                 218, 219

SHERIDAN, RICHARD BRINSLEY                                 159

SMITH, GOLDWIN                                             409

SOUTHEY, ROBERT                                            209

STANLEY, DEAN (ARTHUR PENRHYN)                             350

STEDMAN, EDMUND CLARENCE                                   418

STEELE, SIR RICHARD                                         83

SWIFT, JONATHAN                                             93

SWINBURNE, ALGERNON CHARLES                                422


TAYLOR, BISHOP (JEREMY)                                     56

TENNYSON, LORD (ALFRED)                366, 370, 373, 377, 407

THACKERAY, WILLIAM MAKEPEACE                          306, 308

THOMSON, JAMES                                             101


WALTON, IZAAK                                               62

WHITTIER, JOHN GREENLEAF                              361, 372

WILSON, PRESIDENT (DANIEL)                                 383

WORDSWORTH, WILLIAM                                        202




INTRODUCTORY.


The ability to read well cannot be attained without much pains and
study. For even a moderate proficiency in the art of reading two
requirements are essential: (1) A cultivated mind quick to perceive the
sequence of thoughts which the words to be read logically express, and
equally quick in its power sympathetically to appreciate the sentiment
with which the words are informed--the feeling, emotion, passion, which
pervades them--but which they suggest rather than actually portray; and
(2) a voice so perfected that its utterances fall upon the ear of the
listener with pleasing effect, and so flexible that it can be managed
skilfully to convey to him the full meaning and force of all the ideas
and sentiments formally expressed by the words or latent in them. Of
these two requirements the first is undeniably the more important; and
that training in the art of reading in which the close, persistent, and
liberal study of literature for its own sake has not proceeded _pari
passu_ with the requisite exercises for the development of the powers of
the voice and with the study of the principles of vocal interpretation,
has resulted in a meretricious accomplishment of very illusive value.

Nor will the special study and accurate mastery of a number of
individual selections give that readiness of mental apprehension which
is indispensable to a good reader. The ability quickly to recognize
word-forms and to utter them with ease, to catch the drift of ideas, and
to feel ready sympathy with change and flow in sentiment, is not to be
had without a long course of wide and varied reading. No one can become
a good reader by passing through, no matter how carefully, a set of
reading text-books merely. Pupils should be encouraged to read for
themselves. They should, of course, be guided in their selection of
reading matter, and they should be helped to acquire a taste for that
which is purest and most helpful in literature; but unless they form a
_habit_ of reading, and of reading thoughtfully and with precision, they
can never become good readers.

In oral reading, readiness and accuracy depend largely upon the
alertness and flexibility of the vocal organs, and to secure ease and
excellence in the working of their delicate mechanism much practice is
necessary. The pupil should persistently read aloud. A practice of this
sort, watchfully pursued, with a reasonable degree of self-discipline in
the correction or avoidance of errors, is helpful not alone in obtaining
a mastery of the reading art, and in mental culture,--it is equally
beneficial as a physical exercise. It will, however, be much more
efficacious of good, both of mind and of body, if pursued in accordance
with those principles of voice culture and of vocal interpretation,
which experience and special study have established.

But only a small proportion of all the reading that is done, is oral
reading. It is _silent_ reading that is universally employed as an
instrument of study, of business, of amusement. As a rule, however, very
little provision is made for the acquirement of a facility in silent
reading; this, it is thought, will result as a by-product of the regular
training in oral reading. Almost the reverse of this is true. Ease and
flexibility of articulation, quickness in catching the drift of ideas,
and readiness in varying the tones of the voice in the utterance of
words so as impressively to portray their latent sentiment,--all this is
possible with those alone to whom difficult word-forms, complex
sentence-structures, and the infinite variety and play of thought and
emotion, are more or less familiar through such a wide range of reading
as only the silent prosecution of it makes possible.

The art of oral reading, however, though not so generally needful as
silent reading, is still of great importance to everyone in respect of
its practical utility simply,--though few of those whose duty it is to
read aloud in public, do so either with accuracy or grace; as an
accomplishment which may be used to give pleasure to others, it is, when
perfectly possessed, not excelled by any other; so that as an
acquisition which puts one in a position of vantage either for
benefitting one's self or for bestowing delight or benefit upon others,
it is worth every necessary struggle for its attainment.

One of the most valuable results of oral reading when systematically
pursued as a school study, is the effect which it has in improving the
tones of the voice for ordinary conversation and discourse, and in
securing some measure of orthoepy as a fixed habit of utterance.
Conversational speech is notoriously slovenly. The sonority of our
vowels is lost, and their distinguishing qualities are obscured;
and with unnoticed frequency our consonants are either dropped or
amalgamated with one another. Yet, while amendment in these matters
is to be striven for, there is nothing that the teacher who wishes
to establish habits of orthoepy has to be more watchful in guarding
against, than bestowing upon his pupils an affected or mincing
utterance, all the more ludicrous and objectionable, it may be,
in that a certain set of words are pronounced with over-nicety,
while almost all others are left in a state of neglected vulgarity.

Too frequently the study of oral reading is pursued with reference
solely to the prospective public use of the art in the declamation of
prepared passages; and the elocution-master's science has been brought
into some discredit by wide discrepancies between the performances of
his pupils in their well-drilled and often hackneyed selections and
their ability to read unfamiliar pieces at sight. It is quite true that
voice culture is greatly aided by the close study and frequent rendering
of selections suitably chosen for the elocutionary difficulties which
they present; but it should never be forgotten that good reading, the
sort of reading which the schoolmaster should above all else endeavor to
make his pupils proficient in, implies the ability so to read a plain
account, a story, an oration, a play, or what not, _at sight_, with
absolute correctness as to pronunciation, with such clearness of
articulation and appropriateness of sentence utterance as will make it
perfectly audible and intelligible to one's auditors, and with such
suitable and impressive intonations as will put them in full possession
of those emotions which may be said to be the essence or spirit of the
piece;--and, moreover, to do all this with pleasure to one's hearers and
with ease to one's self. Now as comparatively few readers are ever
required to read in public, and as in the home-circle everyone ought to
read, it is plain that the first duty of the teacher of elocution is to
develop in his pupils a mastery of such a style of reading as is
appropriate to small audiences; and, _then_, if he have time and
opportunity, to extend and amplify the practice of his art so as to fit
such as are capable of fuller mastery of it to appear before greater
audiences. For though all voices are capable of being much improved
through cultivation, few only can be adapted to the requirements of
a large auditorium; and the care and attention which should be devoted
to the benefit of all should not be spent for the advantage merely of
the few.

And moreover, those practices and studies which voice culture and the
attainment of a knowledge of the principles of vocal interpretation
demand, may be pursued by all in common. That alone which is necessary
for the public reader or orator, is a more extended, and, perhaps, a
more earnest and thoughtful practice.

Although practices for the improvement of the voice cannot proceed far
without attention to the principles of vocal interpretation, and though
the study of the latter necessarily includes the former, yet for the
sake of clearness the elementary principles of voice culture may be
discussed separately from their application in the interpretation of
thought and sentiment.

With respect both to articulation and expression _the generic properties
of the voice are five_, namely: _Quality_, _Pitch_, _Force_, _Time_,
_Abruptness_. Of these properties there are, of course, many modes or
degrees, but the voice must, in every tone that it utters, manifest
itself in some mode or other of each; and it is the possibility of
infinite choice in the ways of combining the modes that gives to vocal
expression its infinite possibility of variety. The principles of voice
culture will be best understood, however, if these properties be
considered separately.

=Quality= has reference to the _kind_ of the voice in respect of its
smoothness or roughness, sonority or thinness, musicalness or harshness;
also in respect of the completeness of its vocality.

=Pitch= has reference to the degree of elevation or depression in what
is called in music the _scale_. It may be used specifically, in
reference to single tones or syllables (either as to their opening, or
as to their whole utterance), or generally, as descriptive of the
prevailing tone or note which the voice assumes in reading a sentence or
passage.

=Force= has reference to the power or intensity with which the sounds of
the voice are uttered. When force is used in the utterance of single
syllables, in whole or in part, it is spoken of as =Stress=.

=Time= is rate of utterance. It is used with reference both to single
syllables, and to phrases, sentences, and passages. In regard to single
syllables it is sometimes called =Quantity=. In the consideration of
time may be included that of _pauses_ and _rhythms_.

=Abruptness= has reference to the relative suddenness with which
syllables may be uttered. It may vary from the most delicate opening to
a forcible explosion.

Vocality depends upon respiration. All exercises, therefore, which are
effective in increasing the vigor, freedom, and elasticity of the
breathing apparatus, may be taken as initiatory steps in voice culture;
and, in moderation, they should be practised continually. Full, slow
inspirations followed by slow, and, as far as possible, complete
expirations; full, quick inspirations similarly followed; full
inspirations followed by sudden and forcible expirations; full, deep
inspirations, followed by slow, slightly but distinctly audible
expirations, as in deep sighing; these and similar practices may be
pursued. What is to be aimed at is to secure complete control of the
breath, especially to the degree that, with perfect deliberateness, it
can be equably and smoothly effused.

In all exercises where vocality is required it is best _first_ to use
the sound of _ae_, as in _far_, for in this sound the quality of the
human voice is heard in most perfection, and in uttering it the vocal
organs are most flexible and most easily adapt themselves to change. It
may be preceded by the aspirate _h_, or by some consonant, as may be
thought necessary.

In effective speaking or reading, _with respect to the abruptness and
rapidity of expiration there are three modes of utterance_: the
=effusive=, by which the voice is poured forth smoothly and equably, the
=expulsive= and the =explosive=. Of these three modes the effusive is by
far the most important, but the others, and especially the expulsive,
have their uses also. These modes will be illustrated in the following
exercise:

    EXERCISE.--1. After a full and deliberate inspiration let the
    expiration of the element _h_ be gently effected, until the
    lungs are exhausted--the aspiration coming from the very depths
    of the throat. Let this be repeated with the syllable _haeh_,
    audibly whispered. This is _effusive_ utterance.

    2. After a full and deliberate inspiration let the expiration of
    the element _h_ be suddenly effected, the expiration being
    continued until the whispering sound vanishes in the bottom of
    the throat. Let this be repeated with the syllable _haeh_,
    audibly whispered. This is _expulsive_ utterance.

    3. Let the exercise be the same as in (2) except that the
    expiration is to be much more forcibly effected, and completed
    almost instantaneously. This is _explosive_ utterance.

In the cultivation of the voice either one of two ends is generally kept
in view--its improvement for speaking or its improvement for singing;
but progress may be made towards both ends by the same study, and those
exercises which benefit the singing voice benefit the speaking voice,
and _vice versa_. _The distinction between speaking tones and singing
tones should be clearly understood._ Musical tones are produced by
isochronous (equal-timed) vibrations of the vocal organs continued for
some length of time. Hence, a musical tone is a _note_, which may be
prolonged at will without varying in pitch, either up or down. A
speaking tone, on the contrary, is produced by vibrations which are not
isochronous; it is not a _note_, properly so called, and can not be
prolonged, without varying in pitch. Musical tones are _discrete_,--the
voice passes from pitch to pitch through the intervals silently. In
speaking, _every_ tone, however short the time taken in uttering it,
passes from one pitch to some other through an interval _concretely_,
that is, with continuous vocality; though, with respect to one another,
speech syllables, like notes in music, are discrete. This may be
exemplified by uttering the words, "_Where are you going?_" In singing
these words, they may be uttered on the same note, or on different
notes, or, indeed, with different notes for the same word; but the voice
_skips_ from note to note through the intervals. In speaking the words,
each is uttered with an inflection or intonation in which the voice
varies in pitch, but passes through the interval concretely; the
separate words, however, and the separate syllables (if there were any)
being uttered discretely. Musical utterance might be graphically
illustrated by a series of horizontal lines of less or greater length
succeeding one another at different distances above or below a fixed
horizontal line. In a similar notation for speech utterance the lines
would all be curved, to represent the concrete passage through the
various intervals. _It is the concrete intonation of every syllable and
monosyllabic word which gives to speech its distinctive character from
music._ Each syllable and monosyllabic word is called a =concrete=, and
_it is with the concrete in all its various possibilities of utterance
that voice culture has mainly to do_.

The intervals traversed by the voice in uttering the concrete are very
variable. Using the musical scale for reference it may be said that in
ordinary speech they are generally of but one, or, at most, two notes.
In animated discourse or passionate utterance the intervals may be
greater. For illustration, let the pronoun "_I_" be uttered in a tone of
interrogative surprise; a concrete with a rising interval will be the
result. The more the surprise is emphasized, especially if indignation
be conjoined with it, the greater will be the interval that the voice
passes through in uttering the concrete. If the word "_lie_" be given
immediately after the pronoun with the same intensity of feeling, the
voice discretely descends from the high pitch heard at the end of the
utterance of the pronoun, and in uttering the next concrete, again
ascends through an interval, of less or more extent according to the
emphasis which is imparted to it.

Again, in speech of sorrow, murmuring, piteous complaint, and the like,
concrete intervals of less extent than those used in ordinary discourse
are often heard. Thus, if the sentence "_Pity me, kind lady, I have no
mother_," be uttered with a plaintive expression, concretes with small
intervals will be distinctly noticeable; but it will be also noticed
that with respect to one another the syllables are discretely uttered,
just as in the sentence where the concrete intervals were much greater.

Without intending a scientifically accurate and rigid statement, it may
be said (again borrowing the terminology of music) that in ordinary
speech the concretes are uttered with intervals of a _second_, or at
most a _third_; that in very expressive or impassioned utterance
intervals of a _fifth_ or an _octave_ are frequently used; and that the
mode of progression from syllable to syllable is _diatonic_, that is,
not concretely, but discretely from tone to tone; and further, that in
plaintive language, the syllables are uttered concretely with intervals
of a _semitone_ only, but that the mode of progression from syllable to
syllable is still discrete.

Sometimes, but rarely, syllables are uttered _tremulously_, or with a
_tremor_; that is, with constituent intervals of less than a semitone,
uttered discretely in rapid succession, and passing, in the aggregate,
through an interval of more or less width. An exaggerated form of this
utterance may be heard in the neighing of a horse.

    EXERCISE.--1. Utter the syllable _pae_ as a concrete, with rising
    and falling intervals, severally, of a _second_, _third_,
    _fifth_, and an _octave_; also with intervals of a _semitone_;
    also with a _tremor_. Let the exercise be varied so as to
    include many degrees of initial pitch. Use a diagram of a
    musical staff for reference.

    2. Read with exaggerated impressiveness, "_Am_ =I= _to be your
    slave?_ =No!="

In the pronunciation of the letter [=a], as in _pate_, two sounds are
heard: the first is that of the name of the letter, which is uttered
with some degree of fulness; the second is that of _[=e]_ in _mete_,
but, as it were, tapering and vanishing;--in the meantime the voice
traverses a rising interval of one tone, that is, of a second. The
utterance of these two sounds, although the sounds themselves are
distinct, is completely continuous, from the full opening of the one to
the vanishing close of the other, and it is impossible to say where the
first ends and where the last begins. It is essential, however, to
consider them separately. The first is called the =radical movement=,
and the second the =vanishing movement=; and these together constitute
the entire concrete.

All the vowels do not equally well exemplify in their utterance a
_distinction of sound_ in their radical and vanishing movements, because
some vowel sounds are less diphthongal than others, and some, again, are
pure monophthongs; but _these two movements and the concrete variation
of pitch, the result of one impulse of the voice, are the essential
structure of every syllable_, and are characteristic of speech-notes as
contradistinguished from those of song.

When the radical and vanishing movements are effected smoothly,
distinctly, and without intensity or emotion, commencing fully and with
some abruptness, and terminating gently and almost inaudibly, the result
is the =equable concrete=. This of course may be produced with
intervals, either upward or downward, of any degree--tone, semitone,
third, fifth, or octave. It must be said, however, that some syllables,
and even some vowels, lend themselves more easily than others to that
prolonged utterance which is essential to the production of wide
intervals and the perfectness of the vanishing movement.

The equable concrete is the natural, simple mode of utterance; but under
the influence of interest, excitement, passion, and so on, the utterance
of the concrete may be greatly varied from this by means of _stress_, or
force applied to some part or to all of its extent. The different
variations may be described as follows:

(1) =Radical Stress=, where force is applied to the opening of the
concrete. (It should be said that a slight degree of radical stress is
given even in the equable concrete, producing its full, clear opening.)

(2) =Loud Concrete=, where force is applied throughout the whole
concrete, the proportion of the radical to the vanish remaining
unaltered.

(3) =Median Stress=, where force is applied to the middle of the
concrete, producing a swell, or impressive fulness.

(4) =Compound Stress=, where force is applied in an unusual degree
to each extremity of the concrete.

(5) =Final Stress=, where force is applied to the end of the concrete,
the radical stress being somewhat diminished in fulness.

(6) =Thorough Stress=, where force is so applied that the concrete has
the same fulness throughout.

    EXERCISE.--With the syllable _pae_ exemplify the _equable
    concrete_ and the several varieties of _stress_, using different
    degrees of initial or radical pitch, and the various intervals
    of the tone, semitone, third, fifth, and octave. The exercises
    for the radical stress should be first aspirated, then repeated
    with full vocality.

Besides the forms of the simple rising and falling intervals in which
the concrete is generally uttered, there is another form, called the
=wave=, effected by a union of these modes. It is of two varieties: (1)
where a rising movement is continued into a falling movement, called the
=direct wave=; (2) where a falling movement is continued into a rising
movement, called the =inverted wave=. Waves may pass through all
varieties of intervals, and may be either (1) _equal_, where the voice
in both members passes through the same interval; or (2) _unequal_,
where in one flexion the interval traversed by the voice is greater than
in the other.

    EXERCISE.--With the syllable _p[=a]_ exemplify the different
    kinds of _waves_, with the same variations of radical pitch,
    interval, and stress, as before.

The elementary sounds of speech are of three natural divisions; the
_tonics_, the _subtonics_, and the _atonics_.

The =Tonics= are the simple vowels and diphthongs. They are of perfect
vocality; they admit the concrete rise and fall through all the
intervals of pitch; they may be uttered with more abruptness than the
other elements; and being capable of indefinite prolongation they can
receive the most perfect exemplification of the vanishing movement. They
may be said to be: _[a:]_, as in _all_; _ae_, as in _arm_; _[.a]_, as in
_ask_; _[)a]_, as in _an_; _[=a]_, as in _ate_; _a_, as in _air_;
_[=e]_, as in _eve_; _[)e]_, as in _end_; _e_, as in _err_; _[=i]_, as
in _ice_; _[)i]_, as in _inn_; _[=o]_, as in _old_; _oe_, as in _or_;
_[)o]_, as in _odd_; _[=u]_, as in _use_; _[)u]_, as in _up_;
_[=o][=o]_, as in _ooze_; _[)o][)o]_, as in _book_; _oi_, as in _oil_;
_ou_, as in _out_. (There are various ways of arranging and classifying
these.)

    EXERCISE.--Exemplify generally the equable concrete, loud
    concrete, radical stress, and median stress, with upward and
    downward intervals, with clear, sharp openings, and with
    gradually attenuated vanishes, upon each of the _tonic
    elements_.

The =Subtonics= possess the properties of vocality and prolongation in
some degree, but much less perfectly than the tonics, and their vocality
(known as the _vocal murmur_) is the same for all. They are as
follows:--_b_, _d_, _g_, _v_, _z_, _y_, _w_ (as in _woe_), _th_ (as in
_then_), _zh_ (as _z_ in _azure_), j (as in _judge_, by some considered
not elementary), _l_, _m_, _n_, _ng_ (as in _sing_), _r_ (as in _ran_),
and _r_ (as in _far_). They can not, without great effort, be given an
abrupt opening, and so are not capable of much radical fulness, but from
their property of vocality they can receive, to a considerable degree,
an exemplification of the vanishing movement.

    EXERCISE.--Utter the word _bud_ slowly, and detach from the rest
    of the word the obscure murmur heard in pronouncing the first
    letter: this is the _subtonic_ represented by _b_. Utter this
    sound with different degrees of initial pitch, and with
    different intervals, both downward and upward. Produce as full
    an opening of the radical movement as possible, but do not
    attempt to give it much stress. Obtain in every case a distinct
    vanish. Be careful not to convert the subtonic into a tonic.
    Proceed in a similar manner with the other subtonics. Then,
    distinctly obtaining the subtonics, unite them severally with
    the sound of _ae_, first forcibly, then more gently, producing
    such syllables as _bae_, _dae_, etc., which may be rendered with
    upward and downward intervals, and with different degrees of
    initial pitch. Finally, with such syllables as _aeb_, _aed_, _aeg_,
    _aev_, etc., exemplify all the varieties of stress.

