Dora, the first wooed, was, at a hasty glance, a mere shadow of Annie.
She was pale, though it was a healthy paleness. Her hair was lighter in
tint, her eyes, too, were considerably lighter--granted that they were
clear as crystal. It was difficult to think of Dora as preferred before
Annie, if one did not take into account that there are people who will
turn away from June roses to gather a cluster of honeysuckle, or pick
a sweet pea--people to whom there is an ineffable charm in simple
maidenliness and sweetness. Dora's modest unhesitating acceptance of the
second part in the family and social circle, and her perfect content to
play it, would be a crowning attraction in such people's eyes. So would
her gentle girlish diffidence, which moved her rather to meet and
reflect the tastes and opinions of others than to exercise her own,
though she was by no means without individual capacity and character.

Rose was the least handsome of the family at this stage of her
existence. The family features in her had taken a slightly bizarre
cast, and she had a bad habit of wrinkling her smooth low forehead and
crumpling up her sharpish nose, in a manner which accentuated the
peculiarity. But Annie, who was an authority on the subject of looks,
maintained, behind Rose's back, that there was something _piquante_ and
_recherchee_ about Rose's face and figure. Not one of the Millars was
tall--not even May, though she came nearest to it; but Rose's slight
pliant figure had a natural grace and elegance which its quick,
careless movements did not dispel. When she held herself up, uncreased
her forehead and nose, showed to advantage her very fine, true chestnut
hair, and was full of animation--as to do Rose justice she generally
was--giving fair play to her dimples and little white teeth, Annie said
Rose had a style of her own which did no discredit to the family
reputation for more than a fair share of beauty. In addition to Annie's
high spirit and ready tongue, Rose had a decided turn for art, which
her father had taken pride in cultivating.

"Little May" was like Annie, and promised to be as pretty; but she was a
rose in the bud still, with the unfilled out outlines and crude
angularities of a girl not done growing. She was very much of a child in
many things, and she had Dora's soft clinging nature, yet under it all
she was the born scholar of the family, with a simple aptitude and taste
for learning which surprised and delighted her father still more than
Rose's achievements in pastilles and water-colours pleased him. It was
seeing May at her books, when she was a very different May from the girl
who ran about with Rose, and was kept in her proper place by Annie,
which revived in Doctor Millar the old regret that Providence had not
blessed him with a son. He could not exactly make a son of May, since
from her early childhood she was a little sensitive woman all over, but
he did what he could. He had her taught Latin, Greek, and mathematics
just to afford her the chance of being a scholar. He never told himself,
and nobody else did, in the meantime, what she was to do with her
scholarship when she was a little older. Whether it was merely to grace
her womanhood, or whether the youngest of the family, her father and
mother's last pet, was to summon up courage, tear herself away from
familiar and dear surroundings, and carry her gifts and acquirements out
into the world, in order to win for them the best distinction of
usefulness.

Dora's lightly held suitor was the head of "Robinson's." "Robinson's"
was a great and time-honoured institution in Redcross, while it and its
masters were somewhat of anomalies. The first Robinson whom the town
troubled to remember was as good as anybody in it, the proprietor of a
silk-mill, and latterly of a wool-factory in the neighbourhood. As a
mere convenient adjunct to the mill and the factory he had started a
shop in the town, and kept it going by means of a manager. Even in that
light it was a handsome old shop. The walls were lined with polished
oak, so was the low ceiling, and there was an oak staircase leading
from one storey to another which a connoisseur in staircases might have
coveted. "Robinson's" was a positive feature in Redcross, and if it had
been anything else than a good shop of its kind would have been greatly
admired. The son of the founder of the shop was also reckoned, to begin
with, as good as his professional neighbours. He was college-bred, like
his father, as Dora in her jealousy for the dignity of her first lover
had stated. This was "all to begin with." Whether because it was
advisable, or from mere grovelling instincts, he dropped in turn both
the mill and the factory, neither of which did more than pay its way,
and retained the shop, which was understood to be a lucrative concern.
He did worse; though Redcross continued to acknowledge him--somewhat
dubiously to be sure--as a gentleman, because of the fine presence which
Tom had not inherited, and the perfect good breeding which had descended
to the son. In spite of the magnanimity which forgave frostily the
second Robinson for so far forgetting himself as to take the management
of his great shop into his own hands, walk up and down and receive
customers, and be seen working at his books in the glass office if he
did not go behind the counter, he went and married for his second wife a
farmer's daughter. She was an honest, sensible, comely young woman, but
she had no pretensions to be a lady, and no more inclination to enter
the society of the Redcross upper class than the upper class had a mind
to receive her as an equal. Charles Robinson's first wife had been all
very well, though she was penniless. She had been a curate's daughter,
educated to fill the post of governess in high families. She had died
young, without children, and he had filled her place with the farmer's
daughter, who was the mother of Tom. Thenceforth the Robinson's house,
a good, old-fashioned house, though not so handsome as the shop in an
adjacent street, was effaced, nominally, from the visiting-lists of
those who had visiting-lists in Redcross. The family were ostracised,
and left to their own devices, receiving their sentence, in the case of
the farmer's daughter and her husband, with apparent equanimity.

But there was an exception made in favour of Tom. He went to the Grammar
School along with the other better-class boys in the town and
neighbourhood, and was accepted as their companion and playfellow. He
was sent to college according to the traditions of his family, just as
Cyril Carey, of Carey's Bank, and Ned Hewett, of the Rectory, were sent
according to the traditions of theirs. Presumably the three young men
were on one footing at Cambridge, unless, indeed, Tom had the advantage.
He was slightly the elder of the three, and he took his degree with a
fair amount of honour; while, sad to say, for the credit of Redcross,
neither Cyril nor Ned made their last pass. It was confidently believed
that Tom Robinson would cut the shop, so far as any active management of
it was concerned, and enter either a gallant or a learned profession. If
he had ever entertained the intention, it was put a stop to in the first
place by the death of his father, followed within three months by that
of his mother, shortly after Tom had completed his course at the
university. He stayed at home for a time, to put his house in order it
was supposed. Then all at once, in the most cold-blooded fashion, he
told those who asked him that "Robinson's" was a good business, which he
did not see himself justified in throwing up in these hard times. He was
not such a conceited ass as to believe he must necessarily succeed in
the crowded ranks of the professions, for none of which had he any
particular bent, while he had, he added, with a certain manliness and
doggedness for a pacific fellow like Robinson, a considerable interest
in the great old shop. It had been in the family for three generations;
he had known it from childhood; many of his father's old trusted
servants still served in it. In short, he meant to keep it in his own
hands, and not to let it go to sticks and staves, possibly, in the hands
of others. He did not, for his part, see any mark of gentle breeding
and fine feeling in devolving his responsibilities on others, and only
reserving that tie to the shop which had to do with pecuniary profits.
As for his university training and academic degree, if they did not
benefit him in all circumstances they were not much worth. The town of
Redcross was caught in a trap. The gentle-folks of the place had already
received him as a man and a brother, and they could not refuse to know
him any longer because he stuck to the paternal shop, though they might
exercise their discretion in looking coldly on him in future. For that
matter, there was another opinion among the older professional men--the
Rector, whose tithes were only quarter paid; Dr. Millar, whose paying
patients were no longer able to call him in on all occasions; Carey, the
banker, whose private bank, it was whispered darkly, was struggling in
deep waters; Colonel Russell, who had come home from India on half-pay
and his savings, which every year he found more inadequate for the
expenses of an increasing family. All these gray-headed men, growing
haggard and careworn, agreed that in the present depressed state of the
commercial world, young Robinson was showing himself a sensible fellow
and ought to be commended for his decision. They declared that they were
the more inclined to take him up because of it. It was their wives,
where they had wives, and especially their daughters, with the young men
who had not known the brunt of the battle, and felt inclined to clutch
their professional dignities and privileges, that were of a different
mind. Girls like the Millars turned up their saucy little noses at the
shop. They thought it was mean-spirited and vulgar-minded, "low" of Tom
Robinson to sit down with such a calling. They held it audacious of him
to lift his eyes to Dora, and to follow his eyes with his voice, silent
fellow though he was generally, in asking her from her father.

Certainly it did not help to redeem Tom Robinson's drawbacks in the
judgment of a rash young world that he lacked his late father's fine
presence. Though gentleman-like enough, he was insignificant in person,
and he had little to say for himself. Probably it would have struck his
critics as little short of profane to make the comparison, otherwise
there is a great example that might have stood him and all men not
giants and glib of tongue in good stead. It is written of an apostle,
and he not the least of the apostles, that he might have been termed in
bodily presence mean, and in speech contemptible. But boys and girls are
not wont to take up such examples and ponder their meaning in foolish
young hearts.

The Millars, as one of the girls had said, were brought up in the Old
Doctor's House at Redcross. It would seem that professions and trades
were hereditary in the old-fashioned, stationary town. Dr. Millar's
father had not only been a doctor before him, he had been _the_ doctor
in Redcross, with a practice extending from an aristocratic county to a
parish-poor class of patients. His pretty sister Penny, whom Annie was
not unlike, had married into the county, General Beauchamp of Wayland's
younger son. The marriage, with all its consequences, was a thing of the
long past, leaving little trace in the present. For young Beauchamp,
though he was a squire's son, had not been able to get on at the bar,
and had emigrated with his wife while emigration was still comparatively
untried in Australia, where it was to be hoped his county extraction had
served him in the Bush at least as well as Tom Robinson's university
education would avail him in the shop. It had all happened an age before
the young Millars could remember, still the tradition of a marriage of a
member of a former generation of the Millars into the squirearchy had
its effect on her collateral descendants. It did not signify that the
reigning Beauchamps of Waylands had almost ceased to remember the
ancient alliance in their dealings with their doctor. That dim and
distant distinction established the superior position of the Millars in
their native town, to the girls' entire satisfaction. Dora to marry
Robinson, of "Robinson's," a farthing candle of a man, when her
Grand-aunt Penny had married a Beauchamp of Waylands, by all accounts
the handsomest, most dashing member of the Hunt in his day, was a
descent not to be thought of for a moment.




CHAPTER II.

THE "COUP DE GRACE."


The crisis had come. Dr. Millar had granted a final formal interview,
not without some agitation on the father's part, to the still more
agitated suitor; and after assuring him of the paternal good-will, had
turned him over to the daughter--the whole being done with a sorrowful
prescience, shared by the unfortunate young man, of what the answer
would be.

Poor Dora was hardly less to be pitied, for she had to be brought up to
the supreme effort of dealing the _coup de grace_. Nobody could do it
for her, even her mother told her that severely, in order to brace the
girlish nerves, when Dora gave way to the first cowardly instinct of
seeking to shirk the ordeal. If a girl was old enough to receive an
offer of marriage, she was old enough to answer it for herself in
person. It was the least return she could make for the high compliment
which had been paid to her, to see the man and tell him with her own
lips that she would have nothing to say to the honest heart and liberal
hand, for he had hinted at generous settlements, which he had been only
too eager to lay at her feet.

It was little use even for mild Dora to protest that she had not
wished for such a compliment, and had done nothing to provoke it, so
that the reckless compliment-payer was but receiving his deserts in an
unconditional refusal. It did not make the step easier for her. It was
no joke to her, whatever it might be to her hard-hearted young sisters.

To tell the truth, Rose and May, aye, even Annie, took much lively
diversion, as Dora guessed, in secretly watching the entire proceeding.
The sisters found out the hour of the compulsory interview. They
covertly looked out for the arrival of the commonplace wooer--anything
save their idea of a lover and hero. They keenly took note of him from
an upper window as he walked with a certain studied composure, yet with
a blankness of aspect, through the shrubbery. They even deigned--Annie
as well as Rose and May--surreptitiously to inspect the poor wretch
between the bannisters of the staircase, as he ran desperately up the
stairs, thrusting one hand through his foxy hair and carrying his hat
in the other, and vanished into the drawing-room.

After this brutal behaviour on the part of a trio of English girls, one
must show a little moderation in condemning the cruel conduct of the
Roman dames, who contemplated with zest the deadly contests of the
gladiators in the arena; at least the gladiators were strangers and
barbarians, not fellow-townsmen and near relations.

As for the present victim, he was happily unconscious of any spectator
beyond Bella the house-maid, but he felt relieved to be delivered from
her compassionate stare. He had an instinctive sense that she knew as
well as he did what he had come there for, and was pitying him--an
inference in which he was quite correct. For Bella was older than the
unseen "chorus" on the landing, who did not think of pitying him. She
had seen more of the world, and was better acquainted with its cares
and troubles. She called him in her own mind "the poor young gent!" It
occurred to her as it did not occur to the others, that he might take
to bad ways and be a lost man, like Jem Wade the carpenter, after her
pretty, flighty sister Lotty had given him the sack. Nothing less than
that might be the end of this day's work.

But such a way of looking on a lover and his woes was far from the
thoughts of Bella's young mistresses. On the contrary, they had
difficulty in restraining merry little titters, though Annie did take
herself to task and murmur "For shame!" when Rose made a solemn, stupid
face like what she considered Tom Robinson's on this occasion.

To do the girls justice, however, they did not laugh when Dora, who had
been with her mother, came slowly across the lobby and followed the
visitor into the drawing-room in order to administer the _coup de
grace_. It might have been a veritable dagger-thrust to be dealt by a
weak little shrinking hand, with the owner's head turned and face
averted--such a white, grieved, frightened girl's face it was.

Her companions' eyes were opened, for the instant a fellow-feeling smote
them. This was no light jest or piece of child's play; it might be their
turn next. Oh! who would not be sorry for Dora to have to inflict real
pain and bitter disappointment, to be condemned to kill a man's faith
in woman, perhaps, certainly to murder his peace and happiness for the
present, to extinguish the sweetest, brightest dream of his early
manhood, for he would never have another quite so tender and radiant?
Would Dora ever be quite the same again after she had done so hard a
thing?

Annie pulled herself up and accused herself of getting absolutely
maudlin. The idea of Tom Robinson of "Robinson's," with his middle size,
matter-of-fact air, and foxy hair and moustache, entertaining such a
dream and relinquishing it with a pang of mortal anguish that would
leave a long sickening heart-ache behind! It was the infection of all
the silly love stories she had ever read which had received a kind of
spurious galvanic life from the very ordinary circumstance, the feather
in her cap, as so many girls would have regarded it, of Dora, having to
receive and refuse an offer of marriage. Why, she--Annie--and her
sisters, including Dora herself, had been much diverted by it, as well
as interested in it, until the dramatic crisis had somehow taken their
breath away also, and startled them by a glimpse of the other side of
the question. But though Annie strove to recover her equanimity, and
Rose tried to hum a tune softly as the girls still loitered behind the
bannisters, to see the end of the play, they said nothing more to each
other; a sort of shyness and shame had stolen over them. It was not
enough to make them run away, especially as each did not realize that
what she felt was common to all. Only their lips were chained
simultaneously, and they were disposed to turn aside their heads and
avert their eyes, like Dora when she killed her man.

The deed did not take long--not more than was necessary for him to plead
once or twice with small variation on the words, "Will you not think of
it, Dora? Can you not give it a little consideration? Perhaps if I were
to wait, and you were to try----"

And for Dora to answer with drooping head, panting breast, and still
less variety in her phrases, "Oh, no, no, Mr. Tom. Of course, I am very
much obliged to you for thinking a great deal more of me than I deserve.
But, indeed, indeed, it cannot be--you must give it up--this foolish
fancy. It is a great pity that you have wasted time on such an absurd
idea."

"Wasted time!" he repeated, with a little irony and a little pathos.
"Well, I don't think it wasted even at this moment--and--and the idea
does not seem so absurd to me; but I will not distress you by forcing my
wishes upon you when you are so averse to them. You will allow me to
continue your friend, Miss Dora?"

"Yes, oh yes," sighed Dora, who would have said anything, short of
