
Marian was the busy girl of the class, and always made herself useful.

"Is everyone here?" demanded Nora, scanning the crowd of freshmen with a
view to ascertaining what her chum's chances were.

"All that intend coming," replied Miriam. "The softies stayed away, as
usual."

"Suppose we wait five minutes," said Grace, looking at her watch, "and
then, if no one comes, we will cast the votes."

"No, no," exclaimed Miriam impatiently. "I have an engagement and can't
spare any more time. I vote that we have the election at once, without
waiting another moment."

"Very well," assented Grace. "I only suggested waiting because Anne
Pierson promised to come, and, of course, every girl in the class has a
right to vote at the class elections."

"Anne Pierson?" cried Miriam, turning crimson with suppressed rage.

"Yes," answered Grace calmly; "but, if everybody is agreeable, suppose
we go ahead."

"Agreed!" cried the others and the ballots were cast.

There was not much parliamentary practice in these class elections. Each
girl wrote the name of her choice on a slip of paper and dropped it in a
hat. Four of the girls then counted the votes, and the one receiving the
most slips was declared elected.

The slips were dropped into the hat, amid the silence of the company.
Some of the sophomores and juniors, perched on parallel bars, watched
the scene with superior amusement, but no notice was taken of their
half-whispered jeers.

The four girls then retired to count the votes.

"It's a tie," announced Marian Barber, returning presently; "a tie
between Grace and Miriam. I wish some of the others would come and
settle the matter."

"Here's some one," cried Nora. "Here's Anne Pierson. Let her cast the
decisive vote."

Miriam's eyes blazed, but she held her peace. There was nothing to do
but submit with an uneasy grace. But who could doubt what the outcome
would be? However, she felt somewhat relieved when Grace said:

"I think we should cast the votes over again, and, according to the
rules we made last year, Miriam and I should not vote, since the
election rests between us."

The votes were cast again, Anne timidly dropping her slip in the hat
with the others, and, as might have been expected, Grace was elected
captain of the Freshman Basketball Team of the Oakdale High School.




CHAPTER II

THE SPONSOR OF THE FRESHMAN CLASS


"Grace," asked Mrs. Harlowe, the day of the famous freshman tea, "have
you asked some of the girls to help this afternoon? Bridget can attend
to the sandwiches, but some one ought to pour the lemonade and generally
look after the wants of the others."

Grace was arranging a bowl of China asters on the piano in her mother's
charming drawing room. The shining mahogany chairs and tables reflected
the glow of the wood fire, for the day was chilly, and bright chintz
curtains at the windows gave a cheerful note of color to the scene.

"Oh, yes, mother," replied Grace. "Nora and Jessica, of course, and Anne
Pierson."

"And who is Anne Pierson?"

"I don't know who she is," answered Grace. "I never knew her until she
entered the High School. But she is terribly poor. Her mother is an
invalid and her sister takes in plain sewing. I really asked her at
first because Miriam Nesbit was rude to her one day. But I'm beginning
to like her so much, now, that I'm glad I did it. She's as quiet as a
little mouse, but she is fast taking first place in class. I believe she
will outstrip Miriam before the end of the year. Don't ask me who she
is, though. I haven't the least idea, but she's all right, I can promise
you that. I'm sorry for her because she is poor. They live in a little
broken-down cottage on River Street."

Mrs. Harlowe looked dubious. Grace was always bringing home stray people
and animals, and the mother was accustomed to her daughter's whims. The
young girl was familiar to all the ragamuffins of the town slum, and
when she sometimes found one gazing wistfully through the fence palings
of her mother's old-fashioned garden, she promptly led him around to the
kitchen, gave him a plate of food on the back steps, picked him a small
bouquet and sent him off half-dazed with her gracious and impetuous
kindness.

"Well, my dear, I shall be prepared for anything," exclaimed Mrs.
Harlowe; "but remember that feeding people on the back steps and asking
them into the parlor to meet your friends and acquaintances are two
different matters altogether."

"Don't be afraid, mother," replied Grace. "You will like Anne as well as
I do, once you get to know her. You must be careful not to frighten her
at first. She is the most timid little soul I ever met."

Just then the front gate clicked and two girls strolled up the red-brick
walk, their light organdie dresses peeping out from the folds of their
long capes.

"Here come Nora and Jessica," cried Grace excitedly, running to the door
to meet her friends.

Mrs. Harlowe smiled. In spite of Grace's sixteen years she was still her
little girl.

There was another click at the gate and Mrs. Harlowe saw through the
parlor window a little, dark figure, pathetically plain in its shabby
coat and hat.

"Poor little soul," thought the good woman. "How I wish I could put her
into one of Grace's muslins, but, of course, I couldn't think of
offering to do such a thing."

"Mother," said Grace some minutes later, when the girls had laid aside
their wraps and descended into the drawing room, "this is Anne Pierson,
our new friend."

Anne Pierson, small and shrinking, was dressed in a queer, old-fashioned
black silk that had evidently been taken up and made short for the
occasion. Mrs. Harlowe's heart was touched to the quick and she bent and
kissed the young girl gently.

"How do you do, my dear?" she said kindly. "I am always glad to meet
Grace's friends, and you are most welcome."

Anne was too frightened almost to speak. This was the first party she
had ever attended, and the beautiful room, the girls in their light,
pretty dresses, the bowls of flowers and the cheery firelight nearly
stupefied her.

Mrs. Harlowe disappeared into the little conservatory off the dining
room, returning in a moment with two big red roses which she pinned to
Anne's dress.

"These red roses have been waiting for you all morning," she said, "and
they're just in their prime now."

More guests began to arrive, and soon the room was full of young girls
talking gayly together in groups or walking about, their arms around
each other's waists after the manner of fifteen and sixteen.

Grace had seated Anne at the dining room table behind a large cut glass
bowl which almost hid her small figure. Grace knew from experience that
this would be the most popular spot in the room, and she cautioned many
of her friends to be kind to the timid little stranger. She knew also
that giving Anne something to keep her occupied would relieve her
embarrassment. Anne conscientiously filled and refilled the glasses, and
in the intervals answered the questions put to her; but never asked any
herself.

Miriam Nesbit came in late with her two most intimate friends. She wore
a resplendent dress of old rose crepe and a big black hat. Anne forgot
her resentment when she caught sight of the vision and was lost in
admiration. But she was brought sharply to her senses by a rude,
sneering laugh from the ill-bred girl, who was staring insolently at the
old black silk gown.

Anne flushed and hung her head.

"I am glad Mrs. Harlowe gave me the flowers," she thought. "They hide it
a little, I think."

Meantime there was the bustle of a new and important arrival. Grace and
her mother ushered in a charming little old lady and seated her in the
place of honor, a big leather chair between the windows. She wore a gray
silk dress and a lavender bonnet daintily trimmed in lace and white
ostrich tips.

"Girls," said Grace, as a hush fell over the room, "there is no need for
me to introduce any of you to Mrs. Gray, who is the sponsor for the
freshman class."

There was a buzz of laughter and conversation again, and through the
double doors Anne caught sight of the little old lady, talking gayly to
her subjects, seated, like a diminutive queen, on a large throne.

"Why is she the sponsor of the class?" Anne asked of Jessica, who was
hovering near by.

"Oh, have you never heard?" returned Jessica. "Mrs. Gray's daughter died
during her freshman year at High School, long ago, and ever since then,
Mrs. Gray has offered a prize of twenty-five dollars for the girl who
makes the highest average in her examinations at the end of the freshman
year. She was made sponsor of the freshman class about ten years ago, so
each year, soon after school opens, some one of the freshmen gives a tea
and invites her to meet the new girls. You must come in and be
introduced, too, as soon as you are through here."

"A prize of twenty-five dollars," repeated Anne. "How I wish I might win
it!"

"It's even more than that," said Jessica. "For a perfect examination she
offers one hundred dollars. But, needless to say, no one has ever won
the hundred. It is considered impossible to pass a perfect examination
in every subject."

"One hundred dollars!" exclaimed Anne. "Oh, if I only could!"

"Well, you may win the twenty-five dollars, anyway, Anne," said Jessica.
"I suppose the one hundred dollar prize is beyond the reach of human
beings."

"And now, young ladies," Mrs. Gray was saying, smiling at the group of
girls who surrounded her, as she examined them through her lorgnette,
"most of you I have known since you were little tots, and your fathers
and mothers before you; but I don't know which of you excels in her
studies. Is it you, Grace, my dear?"

Grace shook her head vigorously.

"No, indeed, Mrs. Gray," she replied. "I could never be accused of
overstudy. I suppose I'm too fond of basketball."

"It won't hurt you, my dear," said the old lady, tapping the girl
indulgently with her lorgnette; "the open air is much better than that
of the schoolroom, and so long as you keep up an average, I daresay you
won't disappoint your mother. But none of you have told me yet who leads
the freshman class in her studies."

"Miriam Nesbit," said several voices in unison.

"Ah!" said Mrs. Gray, looking intently at Miriam. "So you are the gold
medal girl, Miriam? Dear me, what a young lady you are growing to be!
But you must not study too hard. Don't overdo it."

Mrs. Gray had gone through this same conversation every year since any
of the girls could remember, and never failed to caution the head girl
not to overstudy.

"There's no fear of that, Mrs. Gray," replied Miriam boastfully. "My
lessons give me very little trouble."

"Mrs. Gray," broke in Nora O'Malley mischievously, "Miriam Nesbit has a
close second in the class. The first girl who has ever been known to
come up to her."

Miriam flushed, half-angry and half-pleased at the adroit compliment.

"And who may that be, my dear?" queried Mrs. Gray, searching about the
room with her nearsighted blue eyes.

"It's Anne Pierson" replied Nora.

"Pierson, Pierson?" repeated the little old lady. "Why have I not met
her? I do not seem to remember the name in Oakdale. But where is this
wonderful young woman who is outstripping our brilliant Miriam? I feel a
great curiosity to see her."

"Anne Pierson, Anne Pierson!" called several voices, while Grace began
to search through the rooms and hall.

At the first mention of her name Anne had darted from her seat behind
the lemonade bowl, and rushed to the nearest shelter, which was the
conservatory.

Grace found her, at last, in the conservatory crouched behind a palm.

"Come here, you foolish child!" exclaimed Grace. "You are wanted at
once. Why did you run and hide? Mrs. Gray--the great Mrs. Gray--wishes
to meet you. Think of that!"

Anne clasped the girl's strong hand with her two small ones.

"Oh, Grace," she whispered, "won't you excuse me? I--I----"

"You what? Silly, come right along!"

Grace fairly dragged the trembling little figure into the drawing room,
where a silence had fallen over the group of young girls who watched the
scene.

"Tut, tut, my dear!" exclaimed Mrs. Gray gently. "You mustn't be afraid
of me. I'm the most harmless old woman in the world."

Then she tried to get a glimpse of Anne's downcast, crimson face.

"I wanted particularly to meet you, child," went on Mrs. Gray, "because
I hear you are a formidable rival of the best pupil in the freshman
class. That is a great boast for your friends to make for you, my dear.
Miriam Nesbit is a famously smart girl, I'm told. But I wanted to meet
you, too, because you bear the name I love best in the world."

Here the old lady's voice became very soft, and the girls suddenly
remembered that the young daughter had been called Anne. Was there not a
memorial window, in the chapel of the High School, of an angel carrying
a lily and underneath an inscription familiar to them all: "In Memory of
Anne Gray, died in her freshman year, aged sixteen"?

The girls moved off quietly, conversing in low voices, leaving Anne
alone with her new friend.

"You are a very little girl to be so clever," said Mrs. Gray, patting
one of Anne's small wrists as she looked into the dark eyes. "Where do
you live, dear?"

"On River Street," replied Anne undergoing the scrutiny calmly, now she
found herself alone.

"River Street?" repeated Mrs. Gray, trying to recall whom she had ever
known living in that strange quarter of the town. "Have you been long in
Oakdale?" she went on.

"A few years, ma'am," replied Anne.

"And what is your father's business, my child?" continued the old lady
remorselessly.

Anne blushed and hung her head, and for a moment there was no reply to
the question. Presently she drew a sharp breath as if it hurt her to
make the confession.

"My father does not live here," was what she said. "My mother is an
invalid. My sister supports us with sewing. As soon as I finish in the
High School, I shall teach."

Mrs. Gray put an arm around the girl's waist and drew her down beside
her.

"I'm a stupid old woman, child. You must forgive me. Old people forget
their manners sometimes. Will you come and see me very soon? Perhaps
to-morrow after church you will take luncheon with me? I want to know
you better."

She drew a card from the beaded reticule that hung at her side.

"Remember, at half-past twelve," she said, giving the girl's hand an
extra squeeze as she rose to go.

After Mrs. Gray had taken her departure a free and easy atmosphere was
restored and the girls began talking and laughing without the
restriction of an older person's presence. Mrs. Harlowe shortly after
this also left them to themselves.

"Let's do some stunts," proposed Grace. "Nora, will you give us your
imitations?"

"Certainly," replied Nora, "if Miriam will promise to sing, and Jessica
will do her Greek dance, and Georgie will play for us."

"All right!" came a chorus of voices.

"We've done it oft before, but we'll do it o'er again if the company so
wishes," said Georgie Pine, one of the brightest and gayest girls in the
class.

The others seated themselves in a semicircle, while each girl gave her
little performance, and, at the conclusion, was applauded
enthusiastically. Nora had a real talent for mimicry; she convulsed her
audience with imitations of some of the High School teachers. When it
came Miriam's turn she sat down at the piano with a queer look on her
face.

"I believe she means mischief," thought Grace to herself, as she watched
the girl curiously.

Miriam ran a brilliant scale up the piano, for music was another of her
many accomplishments. Then she paused and turned to the others.

"I won't sing," she said, "unless Miss Pierson promises to recite us
