
And Philip said he didn't mind. What else could he say, without being
naughty and making Helen cry again?

Lucy was not a bit like the Sugar-Bread child. She had fair hair, it is
true, and it was plaited in two braids, but they were very long and
straight; she herself was long and lean and had a freckled face and
bright, jolly eyes.

'I'm so glad you've come,' she said, meeting him on the steps of the
most beautiful house he had ever seen; 'we can play all sort of things
now that you can't play when you're only one. I'm an only child,' she
added, with a sort of melancholy pride. Then she laughed. '"Only" rhymes
with "lonely," doesn't it?' she said.

'I don't know,' said Philip, with deliberate falseness, for he knew
quite well.

He said no more.

Lucy tried two or three other beginnings of conversation, but Philip
contradicted everything she said.

'I'm afraid he's very very stupid,' she said to her nurse, an extremely
trained nurse, who firmly agreed with her. And when her aunt came to see
her next day, Lucy said that the little new boy was stupid, and
disagreeable as well as stupid, and Philip confirmed this opinion of his
behaviour to such a degree that the aunt, who was young and
affectionate, had Lucy's clothes packed at once and carried her off for
a few days' visit.

So Philip and the nurse were left at the Grange. There was nobody else
in the house but servants. And now Philip began to know what loneliness
meant. The letters and the picture post-cards which his sister sent
every day from the odd towns on the continent of Europe, which she
visited on her honeymoon, did not cheer the boy. They merely
exasperated him, reminding him of the time when she was all his own, and
was too near to him to need to send him post-cards and letters.

The extremely trained nurse, who wore a grey uniform and white cap and
apron, disapproved of Philip to the depths of her well-disciplined
nature. 'Cantankerous little pig,' she called him to herself.

To the housekeeper she said, 'He is an unusually difficult and
disagreeable child. I should imagine that his education has been much
neglected. He wants a tight hand.'

She did not use a tight hand to him, however. She treated him with an
indifference more annoying than tyranny. He had immense liberty of a
desolate, empty sort. The great house was his to go to and fro in. But
he was not allowed to touch anything in it. The garden was his--to
wander through, but he must not pluck flowers or fruit. He had no
lessons, it is true; but, then, he had no games either. There was a
nursery, but he was not imprisoned in it--was not even encouraged to
spend his time there. He was sent out for walks, and alone, for the park
was large and safe. And the nursery was the room of all that great house
that attracted him most, for it was full of toys of the most fascinating
kind. A rocking-horse as big as a pony, the finest dolls' house you
ever saw, boxes of tea-things, boxes of bricks--both the wooden and the
terra-cotta sorts--puzzle maps, dominoes, chessmen, draughts, every kind
of toy or game that you have ever had or ever wished to have.

And Pip was not allowed to play with any of them.

'You mustn't touch anything, if you please,' the nurse said, with that
icy politeness which goes with a uniform. 'The toys are Miss Lucy's. No;
I couldn't be responsible for giving you permission to play with them.
No; I couldn't think of troubling Miss Lucy by writing to ask her if you
may play with them. No; I couldn't take upon myself to give you Miss
Lucy's address.'

For Philip's boredom and his desire had humbled him even to the asking
for this.

For two whole days he lived at the Grange, hating it and every one in
it; for the servants took their cue from the nurse, and the child felt
that in the whole house he had not a friend. Somehow he had got the idea
firmly in his head that this was a time when Helen was not to be
bothered about anything; so he wrote to her that he was quite well,
thank you, and the park was very pretty and Lucy had lots of nice toys.
He felt very brave and noble, and like a martyr. And he set his teeth
to bear it all. It was like spending a few days at the dentist's.

And then suddenly everything changed. The nurse got a telegram. A
brother who had been thought to be drowned at sea had abruptly come
home. She must go to see him. 'If it costs me the situation,' she said
to the housekeeper, who answered:

'Oh, well--go, then. I'll be responsible for the boy--sulky little
brat.'

And the nurse went. In a happy bustle she packed her boxes and went. At
the last moment Philip, on the doorstep watching her climb into the
dog-cart, suddenly sprang forward.

'Oh, Nurse!' he cried, blundering against the almost moving wheel, and
it was the first time he had called her by any name. 'Nurse, do--do say
I may take Lucy's toys to play with; it _is_ so lonely here. I may,
mayn't I? I may take them?'

Perhaps the nurse's heart was softened by her own happiness and the
thought of the brother who was not drowned. Perhaps she was only in such
a hurry that she did not know what she was saying. At any rate, when
Philip said for the third time, 'May I take them?' she hastily
answered:

'Bless the child! Take anything you like. Mind the wheel, for goodness'
sake. Good-bye, everybody!' waved her hand to the servants assembled at
the top of the wide steps, and was whirled off to joyous reunion with
the undrowned brother.

Philip drew a deep breath of satisfaction, went straight up to the
nursery, took out all the toys, and examined every single one of them.
It took him all the afternoon.

The next day he looked at all the things again and longed to make
something with them. He was accustomed to the joy that comes of making
things. He and Helen had built many a city for the dream island out of
his own two boxes of bricks and certain other things in the house--her
Japanese cabinet, the dominoes and chessmen, cardboard boxes, books, the
lids of kettles and teapots. But they had never had enough bricks. Lucy
had enough bricks for anything.

He began to build a city on the nursery table. But to build with bricks
alone is poor work when you have been used to building with all sorts of
other things.

'It looks like a factory,' said Philip discontentedly. He swept the
building down and replaced the bricks in their different boxes.

'There must be something downstairs that would come in useful,' he told
himself, 'and she did say, "Take what you like."'

By armfuls, two and three at a time, he carried down the boxes of bricks
and the boxes of blocks, the draughts, the chessmen, and the box of
dominoes. He took them into the long drawing-room where the crystal
chandeliers were, and the chairs covered in brown holland--and the many
long, light windows, and the cabinets and tables covered with the most
interesting things.

He cleared a big writing-table of such useless and unimportant objects
as blotting-pad, silver inkstand, and red-backed books, and there was a
clear space for his city.

He began to build.

A bronze Egyptian god on a black and gold cabinet seemed to be looking
at him from across the room.

'All right,' said Philip. 'I'll build you a temple. You wait a bit.'

The bronze god waited and the temple grew, and two silver candlesticks,
topped by chessmen, served admirably as pillars for the portico. He made
a journey to the nursery to fetch the Noah's Ark animals--the pair of
elephants, each standing on a brick, flanked the entrance. It looked
splendid, like an Assyrian temple in the pictures Helen had shown him.
But the bricks, wherever he built with them alone, looked mean, and like
factories or workhouses. Bricks alone always do.

Philip explored again. He found the library. He made several journeys.
He brought up twenty-seven volumes bound in white vellum with marbled
boards, a set of Shakespeare, ten volumes in green morocco. These made
pillars and cloisters, dark, mysterious, and attractive. More Noah's Ark
animals added an Egyptian-looking finish to the building.

'Lor', ain't it pretty!' said the parlour-maid, who came to call him to
tea. 'You are clever with your fingers, Master Philip, I will say that
for you. But you'll catch it, taking all them things.'

'That grey nurse said I might,' said Philip, 'and it doesn't hurt things
building with them. My sister and I always did it at home,' he added,
looking confidingly at the parlour-maid. She had praised his building.
And it was the first time he had mentioned his sister to any one in that
house.

'Well, it's as good as a peep-show,' said the parlour-maid; 'it's just
like them picture post-cards my brother in India sends me. All them
pillars and domes and things--and the animals too. I don't know how you
fare to think of such things, that I don't.'

[Illustration: 'Lor', ain't it pretty!' said the parlour-maid.]

Praise is sweet. He slipped his hand into that of the parlour-maid as
they went down the wide stairs to the hall, where tea awaited him--a
very little tray on a very big, dark table.

'He's not half a bad child,' said Susan at her tea in the servants'
quarters. 'That nurse frightened him out of his little wits with her
prim ways, you may depend. He's civil enough if you speak him civil.'

'But Miss Lucy didn't frighten him, I suppose,' said the cook; 'and look
how he behaved to her.'

'Well, he's quiet enough, anyhow. You don't hear a breath of him from
morning till night,' said the upper housemaid; 'seems silly-like to me.'

'You slip in and look what he's been building, that's all,' Susan told
them. 'You won't call him silly then. India an' pagodas ain't in it.'

They did slip in, all of them, when Philip had gone to bed. The building
had progressed, though it was not finished.

'I shan't touch a thing,' said Susan. 'Let him have it to play with
to-morrow. We'll clear it all away before that nurse comes back with her
caps and her collars and her stuck-up cheek.'

So next day Philip went on with his building. He put everything you can
think of into it: the dominoes, and the domino-box; bricks and books;
cotton-reels that he begged from Susan, and a collar-box and some
cake-tins contributed by the cook. He made steps of the dominoes and a
terrace of the domino-box. He got bits of southernwood out of the garden
and stuck them in cotton-reels, which made beautiful pots, and they
looked like bay trees in tubs. Brass finger-bowls served for domes, and
the lids of brass kettles and coffee-pots from the oak dresser in the
hall made minarets of dazzling splendour. Chessmen were useful for
minarets, too.

'I must have paved paths and a fountain,' said Philip thoughtfully. The
paths were paved with mother-of-pearl card counters, and the fountain
was a silver and glass ash-tray, with a needlecase of filigree silver
rising up from the middle of it; and the falling water was made quite
nicely out of narrow bits of the silver paper off the chocolate Helen
had given him at parting. Palm trees were easily made--Helen had shown
him how to do that--with bits of larch fastened to elder stems with
plasticine. There was plenty of plasticine among Lucy's toys; there was
plenty of everything.

And the city grew, till it covered the table. Philip, unwearied, set
about to make another city on another table. This had for chief feature
a great water-tower, with a fountain round its base; and now he stopped
at nothing. He unhooked the crystal drops from the great chandeliers to
make his fountains. This city was grander than the first. It had a grand
tower made of a waste-paper basket and an astrologer's tower that was a
photograph-enlarging machine.

The cities were really very beautiful. I wish I could describe them
thoroughly to you. But it would take pages and pages. Besides all the
things I have told of alone there were towers and turrets and grand
staircases, pagodas and pavilions, canals made bright and water-like by
strips of silver paper, and a lake with a boat on it. Philip put into
his buildings all the things out of the doll's house that seemed
suitable. The wooden things-to-eat and dishes. The leaden tea-cups and
goblets. He peopled the place with dominoes and pawns. The handsome
chessmen were used for minarets. He made forts and garrisoned them with
lead soldiers.

He worked hard and he worked cleverly, and as the cities grew in beauty
and interestingness he loved them more and more. He was happy now. There
was no time to be unhappy in.

'I will keep it as it is till Helen comes. How she will _love_ it!' he
said.

The two cities were connected by a bridge which was a yard-stick he had
found in the servants' sewing-room and taken without hindrance, for by
this time all the servants were his friends. Susan had been the
first--that was all.

He had just laid his bridge in place, and put Mr. and Mrs. Noah in the
chief square to represent the inhabitants, and was standing rapt in
admiration of his work, when a hard hand on each of his shoulders made
him start and scream.

It was the nurse. She had come back a day sooner than any one expected
her. The brother had brought home a wife, and she and the nurse had not
liked each other; so she was very cross, and she took Philip by the
shoulders and shook him, a thing which had never happened to him before.

'You naughty, wicked boy!' she said, still shaking.

'But I haven't hurt anything--I'll put everything back,' he said,
trembling and very pale.

'You'll not touch any of it again,' said the nurse. 'I'll see to that. I
shall put everything away myself in the morning. Taking what doesn't
belong to you!'

'But you said I might take anything I liked,' said Philip, 'so if it's
wrong it's your fault.'

'You untruthful child!' cried the nurse, and hit him over the knuckles.
Now, no one had ever hit Philip before. He grew paler than ever, but he
did not cry, though his hands hurt rather badly. For she had snatched up
the yard-stick to hit him with, and it was hard and cornery.

'You are a coward,' said Philip, 'and it is you who are untruthful and
not me.'

'Hold your tongue,' said the nurse, and whirled him off to bed.

'You'll get no supper, so there!' she said, angrily tucking him up.

'I don't want any,' said Philip, 'and I have to forgive you before the
sun goes down.'

'Forgive, indeed!' said she, flouncing out.

'When you get sorry you'll know I've forgiven you,' Philip called after
her, which, of course, made her angrier than ever.

Whether Philip cried when he was alone is not our business. Susan, who
had watched the shaking and the hitting without daring to interfere,
crept up later with milk and sponge-cakes. She found him asleep, and she
says his eyelashes were wet.

When he awoke he thought at first that it was morning, the room was so
light. But presently he saw that it was not yellow sunlight but white
moonshine which made the beautiful brightness.

He wondered at first why he felt so unhappy, then he remembered how
Helen had gone away and how hateful the nurse had been. And now she
would pull down the city and Helen would never see it. And he would
never be able to build such a beautiful one again. In the morning it
would be gone, and he would not be able even to remember how it was
built.

The moonlight was very bright.

'I wonder how my city looks by moonlight?' he said.

And then, all in a thrilling instant, he made up his mind to go down and
see for himself how it did look.

He slipped on his dressing-gown, opened his door softly, and crept along
the corridor and down the broad staircase, then along the gallery and
into the drawing-room. It was very dark, but he felt his way to a window
and undid the shutter, and there lay his city, flooded with moonlight,
just as he had imagined it.

He gazed on it for a moment in ecstasy and then turned to shut the door.
As he did so he felt a slight strange giddiness and stood a moment with
his hand to his head. He turned and went again towards the city, and
when he was close to it he gave a little cry, hastily stifled, for fear
some one should hear him and come down and send him to bed. He stood and
gazed about him bewildered and, once more, rather giddy. For the city
had, in a quick blink of light, followed by darkness, disappeared. So
had the drawing-room. So had the chair that stood close to the table. He
could see mountainous shapes raising enormous heights in the distance,
and the moonlight shone on the tops of them. But he himself seemed to be
in a vast, flat plain. There was the softness of long grass round his
feet, but there were no trees, no houses, no hedges or fences to break
the expanse of grass. It seemed darker in some parts than others. That
was all. It reminded him of the illimitable prairie of which he had read
in books of adventure.

'I suppose I'm dreaming,' said Philip, 'though I don't see how I can
have gone to sleep just while I was turning the door handle.
However----'

He stood still expecting that something would happen. In dreams
something always does happen, if it's only that the dream comes to an
end. But nothing happened now--Philip just stood there quite quietly and
felt the warm soft grass round his ankles.

Then, as his eyes became used to the darkness of the plain, he saw some
way off a very steep bridge leading up to a dark height on whose summit
the moon shone whitely. He walked towards it, and as he approached he
saw that it was less like a bridge than a sort of ladder, and that it
rose to a giddy height above him. It seemed to rest on a rock far up
against dark sky, and the inside of the rock seemed hollowed out in one
vast dark cave.

[Illustration: Beyond it he could see dim piles that looked like
churches and houses.]

And now he was close to the foot of the ladder. It had no rungs, but
narrow ledges made hold for feet and hands. Philip remembered Jack and
the Beanstalk, and looked up longingly; but the ladder was a very very
long one. On the other hand, it was the only thing that seemed to lead
anywhere, and he had had enough of standing lonely in the grassy
prairie, where he seemed to have been for a very long time indeed. So he
put his hands and feet to the ladder and began to go up. It was a very
long climb. There were three hundred and eight steps, for he counted
them. And the steps were only on one side of the ladder, so he had to
be extremely careful. On he went, up and on, on and up, till his feet
ached and his hands felt as though they would drop off for tiredness. He
could not look up far, and he dared not look down at all. There was
nothing for it but to climb and climb and climb, and at last he saw the
ground on which the ladder rested--a terrace hewn in regular lines, and,
as it seemed, hewn from the solid rock. His head was level with the
ground, now his hands, now his feet. He leaped sideways from the ladder
and threw himself face down on the ground, which was cold and smooth
like marble. There he lay, drawing deep breaths of weariness and relief.

There was a great silence all about, which rested and soothed, and
presently he rose and looked around him. He was close to an archway with
very thick pillars, and he went towards it and peeped cautiously in. It
seemed to be a great gate leading to an open space, and beyond it he
could see dim piles that looked like churches and houses. But all was
deserted; the moonlight and he had the place, whatever it was, to
themselves.

'I suppose every one's in bed,' said Philip, and stood there trembling a
little, but very curious and interested, in the black shadow of the
strange arch.




