An hour later, Robah again entered the room.

"I have been thinking, sahib, of a better plan. You wish to see
fighting, do you not?"

"Certainly I do."

"Well, sahib, if you go in the baggage train you might be miles
away, and see nothing of it. Now, it seems to me that it would be
almost as easy for you to go as a soldier in the regiment, as in
the transport train."

"Do you think so, Robah?" Lisle exclaimed excitedly.

"I think so, sahib. You see, you know all the native officers, and
your father was a great favourite among them. If you were dressed
in uniform, and took your place in the ranks, it is very unlikely
that any of the English officers would notice you. These matters
are left in the hands of the native officers.

"Yesterday a young private died, who had but just passed the
recruit stage, and had been only once or twice on parade. You might
take his name. It is most unlikely that any of the white officers
will notice that your face is a fresh one and, if they did ask the
question, the native officer would give that name. The English
officer would not be at all likely to notice that this was the name
of a man who had died. Deaths are not uncommon and, as the regiment
is just moving, the matter would receive no attention. The book of
this man would be handed to you, and it would all seem regular."

"That is a splendid idea, Robah. Which officer do you think I had
better speak to?"

"I should speak to Risaldar Gholam Singh. He was the chief native
officer in your father's wing of the regiment. If he consents, he
would order all the native officers under him to hold their tongues
and, as you are a favourite with them all, your secret would be
kept."

"It is a grand idea, and I certainly don't see why it should not
work out properly."

"I have no doubt that the risaldar major will do all he can for
you."

"Do you think so, Robah?"

"I am sure he will. He was very much attached to your father, and
felt his loss as much as anyone. Indeed, I think that every one of
the native officers will do all he can for you."

"That would make it very easy for me," Lisle said. "Till you
suggested it, the idea of going as a soldier never occurred to me
but, with their assistance, it will not be difficult."

"Shall I go and fetch the risaldar here, sahib?"

"Do so. I shall be on thorns until I see him."

In a few minutes the officer, a tall and stately Punjabi, entered.

"Risaldar," Lisle said, "I know you were very much attached to my
father."

"I was, sahib."

"Well, I want you to do something for me."

"It would be a pleasure for me to do so, and you have only to ask
for me to grant it, if it is in my power."

"I think it is in your power," Lisle said. "I will tell you what I
want. I have made up my mind to go with this expedition. I thought
of disguising myself, and going as a baggage coolie; but in that
case I should be always in the rear and see none of the fighting,
and I have made up my mind to go as a private in the ranks."

"As a private, sahib?" the officer exclaimed, in astonishment.
"Surely that would be impossible. You would be detected at the
first halt. Besides, how could the son of our dear captain go as a
private?"

"I do not object to go as a private, risaldar. Of course I should
stain myself and, in uniform, it is not likely that any of the
white officers would notice a strange face."

"But you would have to eat with the others, to mix with them as one
of themselves, to suffer all sorts of hardships."

"All that is nothing," Lisle said. "I have been with the regiment
so long that I know all the ways of the men, and I don't think that
I should be likely to make any mistake that would attract their
attention. As to the language, I know it perfectly."

"I hardly dare do such a thing, sahib. If you were discovered on
the march, the colonel and officers would be very angry with me."

"Even if I were discovered, it need not be known that you had
assisted me, risaldar. You may be sure that I should never tell. If
you were questioned, you could declare that you had taken me for an
ordinary recruit. If I deceived everyone else, I might very well
deceive you."

The risaldar stood thoughtful for some time.

"It might possibly be managed," he said at last. "I would do much
for Captain Bullen's son, even risk the anger of the colonel."

"I understand that a sepoy died yesterday. He was quite a young
recruit, and the white officers had not come to know his face. I
might say that I am a relation of his, and am very anxious to take
his place."

"You could take his place in the ranks under his name."

"That would certainly be a good plan, if it could be carried out. I
should only be asked a few questions by the sepoys of my company.
It would seem to them natural that I should take my cousin's place;
and that, as the regiment was moving, and there was no time to
teach me drill, I should be expected to pick up what I could on the
way. But indeed, I have watched the regiment so often that I think
I know all the commands and movements, and could go through them
without hesitation. Besides, there won't be much drilling on the
march. There will probably be a good deal of skirmishing, and
perhaps some rough fighting."

"But if you were to be killed, sahib, what then?"

"I don't mean to be killed if I can help it," Lisle said; "but if I
am, I shall be buried as one of the sepoys. The officers will all
believe that I have gone home and, though they may wonder a little
that I never write to them, they will think it is because I am too
busy. It will be a long time, indeed, before any of my friends
write to ask about me; and then it will be supposed that I have
been accidentally killed or drowned.

"At any rate, I should have the satisfaction of being killed in the
Queen's service. All the men are delighted at going, and they will
run the same risk as I do."

"Well, sahib," the risaldar said, "I will do it. I would very much
prefer that you had never asked me, but I cannot say 'no' to you. I
will think it over; and tell you, tomorrow morning, what seems to
me the best plan. I don't see, at present, how you are to disappear
and join the regiment."

"That is easy enough," Lisle said. "I am going to start tomorrow
with the sick convoy; but shall slip away from them, after I have
gone a short distance. Robah will meet me with my uniform and
rifle; and I shall come into the camp again, in uniform, after it
is dark."

"You appear to have thought it all out," the officer said, "and if
your scheme can be carried out, there should be no difficulty,
after the first day or two. You are more likely to pass unnoticed,
on a march, than you would be if you were staying here. The men
will have other things to think about, and you will only have three
men marching with you in the column to ask questions. Indeed, there
is very little talking on the line of march.

"Well, I will think it over, and see you in the morning."

This was as good as consent, and Lisle was highly delighted. In the
morning, the risaldar called again.

"I have spoken," the risaldar said, "to the three officers of the
company to which the soldier Mutteh Ghar belonged; and they all
agreed, willingly, to help you to carry out your scheme, and think
that there is very little probability of the fact that you are a
new recruit being noticed. The general discipline of the regiment
is in our hands. The British officers direct, but we carry out
their orders. As the man was only on parade twice and, on neither
of these occasions, came under general inspection of the white
officers, it is probable that they do not know his face. It is
certainly best that you should take Mutteh Ghar's name, as the
soldiers will see nothing strange in our placing a young recruit in
the ranks, after his cousin had died in the regiment. We are all of
opinion, therefore, that you can take your place without
difficulty; and that the chance of the change being detected by the
British officers is extremely slight. We think, however, that it
will be next to impossible for you always to keep up your
character, and believe that you will find it so hard to live under
the same conditions as the others that you yourself will tire of
it."

"I can assure you that there is no fear of that," Lisle said
earnestly. "I want to take part in the expedition, and am quite
prepared to share in the habits and hardships of the men, whatever
they may be. You know, if I were discovered I should be sent off at
once, even if a fight were imminent. I think I can say that, when I
undertake a thing, I will carry it through.

"I cannot tell you how grateful I feel to you all, for aiding me to
carry out my wish. Will you kindly convey my thanks to the officers
of the company, and particularly urge upon them that they must show
me no favour, and pay no more attention to me than to the other
men? Anything of that sort would certainly give rise to comment and
suspicion."

"I have already told them that," the officer said, "and I think
they thoroughly understand how they must act.

"The sick party are to start tomorrow morning. How do you wish the
uniform of your supposed cousin to be sent to you?"

"If you hand it over to Robah, he will bring it out to me. The
rifle, of course, should be handed quietly to me when I return to
camp. I cannot march in with it. I shall not come in till after
dark. Then the havildar must take me to one of the sepoy tents, and
mention to the men there that I am Mutteh Ghar's cousin; and that,
as a great favour, I am to be allowed to accompany the regiment."

"Of course, you will take with you the usual underclothes to put
on, when you lay aside your uniform; and especially the loincloth,
and light linen jacket, which the men use in undress."

"I will see to all that, risaldar. I can assure you that, so far
from finding it a trouble to act as a native, I shall really enjoy
it; and shall make very light of any hardships that I may have to
undergo. When it comes to fighting I am, as you know, a very good
shot; and should certainly be able to do my part, with credit."

"I will tell the havildar to be on the lookout for you, when you
come into camp, and to bring you straight to me. I will then see
that your uniforms and belts are properly put on, before I send you
off under his charge. I hope the matter may turn out well. If it
does not, you must remember that I have done my part because you
urged it upon me, and prayed me to assist you for your father's
sake."

"I shall never forget that, Gholam Singh, and shall always feel
deeply indebted to you."

When the risaldar had left, Lisle called Robah in.

"All is arranged, Robah; and now it remains only to carry out the
details. In the first place, you must get me the stain; in the
second, you must go into the bazaar and buy me a loincloth and
light jacket, such as the soldiers wear when they lay aside their
uniforms. As to the uniform, that is already arranged for; and I
shall, of course, have one of the sheepskin greatcoats that have
just been served out, and which I expect I shall find indispensable.
Put in my kit bag one pair of my thickest woollen vests and drawers.
I cannot carry more, for I mean to take one suit of my own clothes
to put on in case, by any accident, I should be discovered and sent
back. I can get that carried on the baggage waggon.

"Tomorrow we shall start at five o'clock in the morning and, at the
first halt, I shall leave the party quietly. I have no doubt that
Gholam Singh will give orders, to the native officer in charge,
that I am to be permitted to do so without remark. As soon as I
leave the convoy you must join me with my uniform and, above all,
with the stain. You can bring out a bag with some provisions for
the day, for I shall not return to camp until after dark."

When Robah went away to make the necessary purchases, Lisle packed
up his baggage and labelled it. His father's effects had all been
sold, a few days after his death; as it would not have paid to send
them home. They had fetched good prices, and had been gladly bought
up by the other officers; some as mementoes of their late comrade,
and some because they were useful.

Several of the officers came in and chatted with him while he was
packing, all expressing regret that he was leaving. At mess that
evening they drank his health, and a pleasant journey; and he
gravely returned thanks. When the mess broke up he returned to the
bungalow, and packed a small canvas bag with the suit he was going
to take with him.

Then he examined and tried on the uniform of the dead sepoy; which
Robah had, that evening, received from the risaldar. It fitted him
fairly well. In addition to the regular uniform there was a
posteen, or sheepskin coat; loose boots made of soft skin, so that
the feet could be wrapped up in cloth before they were put on; and
putties, or leggings, consisting of a very long strip of cloth
terminating with a shorter strip of leather. These things had been
served out that day to the troops, and were to be put on over the
usual leg wrappings when they came to snow-covered country. They
were to be carried with the men's kits till required. For ordinary
wear there were the regular boots, which were strapped on like
sandals.

"Well, I think I ought to be able to stand anything in the way of
cold, with this sheepskin coat and the leggings, together with my
own warm underclothing."

"You are sure," Robah said, "that you understand the proper folding
of your turban?"

"I think so, Robah. I have seen them done up hundreds of times but,
nevertheless, you shall give me a lesson when you join me tomorrow.
We shall have plenty of time for it.

"Now, can you think of anything else that would be useful? If so,
you can buy it tomorrow before you come out to meet me."

"No, sahib. There are the warm mittens that have been served out
for mountain work; and you might take a pair of your own gloves to
wear under them for, from all I hear, you will want them when you
are standing out all night on picket work, among the hills."

"No, I won't take the gloves, Robah. With two pairs on, my fingers
would be so muffled that I should not be able to do good shooting."

"Well, it will be cold work, for it is very late in the season and,
you know, goggles have been served out to all the men to save them
from snow blindness, from which they would otherwise suffer
severely. I have been on expeditions in which a third of the men
were quite blind, when they returned to camp."

"It must look very rum to see a whole regiment marching in
goggles," Lisle laughed; "still, anything is better than being
blinded."

"I shall see you sometimes, sahib; for the major engaged me, this
morning, to go with him as his personal servant, as his own man is
in feeble health and, though I am now getting on in years, I am
still strong enough to travel with the regiment."

"I am delighted, indeed, to hear that, Robah. I shall be very glad
to steal away sometimes, and have a chat with you. It will be a
great pleasure to have someone I can talk to, who knows me. Of
course, the native officer in command of my company will not be
able to show me any favour, nor should I wish him to do so. It
seems like keeping one friend, while I am cut off from all others;
though I dare say I shall make some new ones among the sepoys. I
have no doubt you will be very comfortable with the major."

"Yes, sahib, I am sure that he is a kind master. I shall be able, I
hope, sometimes to give you a small quantity of whisky, to mix with
the water in your bottle."

"No, no, Robah, when the baggage is cut down there will be very
little of that taken and, however much there might be, I could not
accept any that you had taken from the major's store. I must fare
just the same as the others."

"Well, sahib, I hope that, at any rate, you will carry a small
flask of it under your uniform. You may not want it but, if you
were wounded and lying in the snow, it would be very valuable to
you for, mixed with the water in your bottle, and taken from time
to time, it would sustain you until you could be carried down to
camp."

"That is a very good idea, Robah, and I will certainly adopt it. I
will carry half a pint about with me, for emergencies such as you
describe. If I do not want it, myself, it may turn out useful to
keep up some wounded comrade. It will not add much to the load that
I shall have to carry, and which I expect I shall feel, when we
first march. As I am now, I think I could keep up with the best
marcher in the regiment but, with the weight of the clothes and
pouches, a hundred and twenty rounds of ammunition, and my rifle,
it will be a very different thing; and I shall be desperately
tired, by the time we get to the end of the day's march.

"Now it is twelve o'clock, and time to turn in, for we march at
five."

The next morning, when the sick convoy started, the white officers
came up to say goodbye to Lisle; and all expressed their regret
that he could not accompany the regiment. The butler had gone on
ahead and, as soon as Lisle slipped away, he came up to him and
assisted him to make his toilet. He stained him from head to foot,
dyed his hair, and fastened in it some long bunches of black horse
hair, which he would wear in the Punjabi fashion on the top of his
head. With the same dye he darkened his eyelashes and, when he had
put on his uniform, he said:

"As far as looks go, sahib, it is certain that no one would suspect
that you were not a native. There is a large bottle of stain. You
will only have to do yourself over, afresh, about once in ten days.
A little of this mixed with three times the amount of water will be
sufficient for, if you were to put it on by itself, it would make
you a great deal too dark."

They spent the day in a grove and, when evening approached,
returned to camp.

"And now, goodbye, sahib! The regiment will march tomorrow morning,
at daybreak. I may not have an opportunity of seeing you again,
before we start. I hope I have done right, in aiding you in your
desire to accompany the expedition; but I have done it for the
best, and you must not blame me if harm comes of it."

"That you may be sure I will not, and I am greatly obliged to you.
Now, for the present, goodbye!"



Chapter 2: The Start.


The havildar was on the lookout for Lisle when he entered the camp;
but he did not know him, in his changed attire and stained face,
until the lad spoke to him.

"You are well disguised, indeed, sahib," he said. "I had no idea
that it was you. Now, my instructions are to take you to Gholam
Singh's tent."

Here Lisle found the risaldar and the other two native officers. He
saluted as he entered. The risaldar examined him carefully, before
speaking.

"Good!" he said; "I did not think that a white sahib could ever
disguise himself to pass as a native, though I know that it has
been done before now. Certainly I have no fear of any of the white
officers finding that you are not what you seem to be. I am more
afraid, however, of the men. Still, even if they guessed who you
are, they would not, I am sure, betray you.

"Here are your rifle and bayonet. These complete your outfit. I see
that you have brought your kit with you. It is rather more bulky
than usual, but will pass with the rest.

"The subadar will take you down to the men's lines. I have arranged
that you shall be on the baggage guard, at first, so that you will
gradually begin to know a few men of your company. They will report
to the rest the story you tell them, and you will soon be received
as one of themselves.

"I will see that that sack of yours goes with the rest of the kits
in the baggage waggon. These officers of your company all
understand that you are to be treated like the rest of the men, and
not to be shown any favour. At the same time, when in camp, if
there is anything that you desire, or any complaint you have to
make, you can talk quietly to one of them; and he will report it to
me, in which case you may be sure that I shall set the matter
right, if possible."

"I don't think there is any fear of that, risaldar. I am pretty
well able to take care of myself. My father gave me many lessons in
boxing; and I fancy that, although most of the men are a great deal
bigger and stronger than I am, I shall be able to hold my own."

"I hope so, Bullen," the havildar said gravely, "but I trust that
there will be no occasion to show your skill. We Punjabis are a
quiet race of men; and though, of course, quarrels occasionally
occur among us, they generally end in abuse, and very seldom come
to blows. The greater portion of the regiment has been with us for
some years. They know each other well, and are not given to
quarrelling. They will scarcely even permit their juniors to go to
extremes, and I need not say that the officers of the company would
interfere, at once, if they saw any signs of a disturbance.

"I have had a meal cooked, which I hope you will eat with us. It is
the last you are likely to be able to enjoy, for some time. We
shall feel honoured if you will sit down with us."

An excellent repast was served, and Lisle did it full justice. Then
the officers all shook him by the hand, and he started with the
subadar for the men's lines, with hearty thanks to the others. When
they arrived at the huts, the subadar led the way in.

