verandah.

They are differently occupied.  The Colonel himself is engaged feeding
his pets.  Hugot is helping him, and carries the basket containing their
food.

You would call the Colonel a fine-looking man.  His hair is as white as
bleached flax.  So, too, are his moustaches.  He wears no beard.  His
face is cleanly shaved, showing a complexion bronzed and somewhat ruddy.
The expression of his countenance is mild, though firm.  He is much
thinner than he has been in his time, on account of the amputation of
his leg, which often produces this effect.  His dress is simple.  A
jacket of yellow nankeen, a striped cotton shirt, with loose cottonade
trousers of bright sky colour.  A Panama hat, with very broad brim,
shades his eyes from the sun, and his shirt is open at the throat, for
the day is warm.  Thus is the Colonel attired.  Hugot is dressed after a
somewhat similar fashion; but the material of his jacket and trousers is
coarser, and his hat is of the common palmetto leaf.

Look at Basil, the oldest of the boys.  He is at work fixing some straps
to a hunting-saddle, that lies on the grass beside him.  Basil is
exactly seventeen years of age.  He is a fine-looking lad, though not
what you might call handsome.  His face has a courageous expression, and
his form betokens strength.  His hair is straight, and black as jet.  He
is more like an Italian than either of his brothers.  He is, in fact,
the son of his father--a true Corsican.  Basil is a "mighty hunter."  He
is more fond of the chase than of aught else.  He loves hunting for
itself, and delights in its dangers.  He has got beyond the age of
bird-catching and squirrel shooting.  His ambition is not now to be
satisfied with anything less exciting than a panther, bear, or buffalo
hunt.

How very unlike him is Lucien, the second in age!  Unlike in almost
everything.  Lucien is delicately formed, with a light complexion and
very fair hair.  He is more like what his mother was, for she was
fair-haired and _blonde_, as are many of her people--the Basques.
Lucien is passionately fond of books and study.  He is busy with a book
just now in the verandah.  He is a student of natural history in
general, but botany and geology are his favourite sciences, and he has
made considerable progress in both.  He accompanies Basil on all hunting
expeditions; but, in the midst of the most exciting chase, Lucien would
leap down from his horse if a rare plant or flower, or an odd-looking
rock, was to fall under his eye.  Lucien talks but little--not half so
much as most boys--but although habitually silent he possesses a rare
good sense; and when he offers his advice upon any question, it is
usually received with respect by the others.  Such is the secret
influence of intellect and education.

Next and last, we have Francois, a quick-witted, curly-haired urchin--
merry to madness--cheerful at all times--changeable in his tastes and
likings--versatile in talents--in short, more of a Frenchman than any of
them.  Francois is a great bird-catcher.  He is at this moment engaged
in repairing his nets; and his double-barrel shot gun, which he has just
finished cleaning, rests beside him.  Francois is a favourite with
everybody, but a great pest to Hugot, upon whom he plays numerous
tricks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

While the naturalist and his family were thus engaged, a loud booming
noise was heard at some distance off, down the river.  It somewhat
resembled the regular firing of great guns, though the explosions
sounded softer and more hollow.

"A steamboat!" cried Francois, whose ear first caught the sounds.

"Yes," muttered Basil, "from New Orleans, I expect, and bound to Saint
Louis."

"No, brother," said Lucien, quietly raising himself from his book.  "She
is an Ohio boat."

"How can you tell that, Luce?" inquired Francois.

"From the sound of her 'scape, of course.  I can distinguish the boat.
She is the `Buck-eye'--mail-boat for Cincinnati."

In a short time the white cloud of steam was seen ascending over the
trees; and then the huge vessel came "bulging" around a bend of the
river, cleaving the brown current as she went.  She was soon opposite
the lawn; and, sure enough, proved to be what Lucien had said she was--
the mail-steamer "Buck-eye."  This was a triumph for Lucien, although he
bore it with characteristic modesty.

The boat had not passed many minutes, when the loud screeching of her
steam was heard in the direction of Point Coupee.  They could tell from
this that she was putting in at the landing.

"Hugot!" cried the Colonel, "their may be something for us.  Go and
see."

Without waiting for further orders, Hugot started on his errand.  He was
a brisk walker, Hugot; and was back again in a trice.  He brought with
him a letter of goodly size and appearance.

"From Prince Lucien!" cried Francois, who was sure to have the first
word in everything.  "It is from the Prince, papa; I know the seal."

"Quiet, Francois! quiet!" said his father, reprovingly; at the same time
hobbling into the verandah, and calling for his spectacles.

The letter was soon opened, and perused.

"Hugot!" cried the Colonel, after he had finished reading it.

Hugot made no reply, but threw himself in front of his master, with his
hand raised to his eyebrows _a la militaire_.

"Hugot, you must go to Saint Louis."

"_Bien, mon Colonel_!"

"You must start by the first boat."

"_Tres-bien, mon Colonel_!"

"You must procure for me the skin of a _white buffalo_."

"That will not be difficult, monsieur."

"More difficult than you imagine, I fear."

"With money, monsieur?"

"Ay, even with money, Hugot.  Look you!  It is a _skin_ I want--not a
robe--but a perfect skin with the head, feet, and all complete, and fit
for stuffing."

"Ah! mon Colonel! that is different."

"Ah! you may say so.  I fear it will be difficult, indeed," soliloquised
the Colonel, with a thoughtful air.  "I very much doubt whether we can
get it at all; but it must be had, cost _what it may_--ay, _cost what it
may_."

"I will do my best, Colonel."

"Try at every fur-store in Saint Louis,--inquire among the hunters and
trappers--you know where to find them.  If these fail you, put an
advertisement in the newspapers--advertise both in English and French.
Go to Monsieur Choteau--anywhere.  Spare no expense, but get me the
skin."

"_Restez tranquille, mon Colonel_; I shall do all that."

"Make ready, then, to start.  There may be a steamer going up before
night.  Hush!  I hear one this very moment.  It may be a Saint Louis
boat."

All stood for a moment silent and listening.  The 'scape of another boat
coming up the river could be heard plain enough.

"It is a Saint Louis boat," said Lucien.  "It is the `Belle of the
West.'"

Lucien, who had a quick talent in that way, could tell, by the sound of
their steam-pipe, almost every boat that plied upon the Mississippi.  In
half-an-hour the steamer hove in sight, and it was seen that he had
again guessed correctly.  It was a Saint Louis boat, and the "Belle of
the West," too!

Hugot had not many preparations to make; and before the boat had arrived
opposite to the house, he had arranged everything--received some further
instructions, with a purse of money, from his master--and was off to
Point Coupee, to meet the steamer at the landing.



CHAPTER FOUR.

GOING ON A GREAT HUNT.

It was full three weeks before Hugot returned.  They were a long three
weeks to the old Colonel,--who was troubled with apprehensions that
Hugot would not succeed in his errand.  He had written in reply to the
letter of Prince Bonaparte.  He had written promising to procure--_if
possible_--a white buffalo-skin--for this was what the Prince's letter
was about;--and not for half what he was worth would the Colonel have
failed to accomplish this object.  No wonder, then, he was impatient and
uneasy during Hugot's absence.

Hugot returned at length, after night.  The Colonel did not wait until
he entered the house, but met him at the door, candle in hand.  He need
not have put any question, as Hugot's face answered that question before
it was asked.  The moment the light fell upon it, any one could have
told that Hugot had come back _without the skin_.  He looked quite
crest-fallen; and his great moustachios appeared bleached and drooping.

"You have not got it?" interrogated the Colonel, in a faltering voice.

"No, Colonel," muttered Hugot, in reply.

"You tried everywhere?"

"Everywhere."

"You advertised in the papers?"

"In all the papers, monsieur."

"You offered a high price?"

"I did.  It was to no purpose.  I could not have procured a white
buffalo's skin if I had offered ten times as much.  I could not have got
it for a thousand dollars."

"I would give five thousand!"

"It would have been all the same, monsieur.  It is not to be had in
Saint Louis."

"What says Monsieur Choteau?"

"That there is but little chance of finding what you want.  A man, he
says, may travel all over the prairies without meeting with a _white_
buffalo.  The Indians prize them beyond anything, and never let one
escape when they chance to fall in with it.  I found two or three among
the fur packs of the traders; but they were not what you desire,
monsieur.  They were robes; and even for them a large sum was asked."

"They would be of no use.  It is wanted for a different purpose--for a
_great museum_.  Ah!  I fear I cannot obtain it.  If not to be had in
Saint Louis, where else?"

"Where else, papa?" interrupted Francois, who, with his brothers, had
stood listening to the above dialogue.  "Where else, but _on the
prairies_?"

"On the prairies!" mechanically echoed his father.

"Yes, papa.  Send Basil, and Lucien, and myself.  We'll find you a white
buffalo, I warrant you."

"Hurrah, Francois!" cried Basil; "you're right, brother.  I was going to
propose the same myself."

"No, no, my lads; you've heard what Monsieur Choteau says.  You need not
think of such a thing.  It cannot be had.  And I have written to the
Prince, too.  I have as good as promised him!"

As the old Colonel uttered these words, his countenance and gestures
expressed disappointment and chagrin.

Lucien, who had observed this with a feeling of pain, now interposed.

"Papa," he said, "it is true that Monsieur Choteau has great experience
in the fur-trade; but the facts do not correspond with what he has
stated,"--(Lucien, you will observe, was a keen reasoner).  "Hugot has
seen two or three of these skins in Saint Louis.  Some one must have
found the animals to which these belonged.  Moreover, I have heard, as
Monsieur Choteau asserts, that they are highly prized by the Indian
chiefs, who wear them as robes; and that they are often seen among the
tribes.  This, then, proves that there _are_ white buffaloes upon the
prairies; and why should _we_ not happen upon them as well as others?  I
say with Francois and Basil, let us go in search of them."

"Come in, my lads; come in!" said their father, evidently pleased, and
to some extent comforted, with the proposal of his boys.  "Come in to
the house--we can talk over it better when we have had our suppers."

And so saying, the old Colonel hobbled back into the house followed by
his three boys; while Hugot, looking very jaded and feeling very hungry,
brought up the rear.

During the supper, and after it, the subject was discussed in all its
bearings.  The father was more than half inclined to consent to the
proposal of his sons from the first; while they, but particularly Basil
and Francois, were enthusiastic in proving its practicability.  I need
hardly tell you the result.  The Colonel at length gave his consent--the
_expedition was agreed upon_.

The naturalist was greatly influenced by the desire he felt to gratify
his friend the Prince.  He was influenced, too, by another feeling.  He
felt secretly pleased at the bold and enterprising character thus
exhibited in his children, and he was not the man to throw cold water
upon any enterprise they might design.  Indeed, he often boasted to his
neighbours and friends how he had trained them up to be men, calling
them his "boy-men," and his "_jeunes chasseurs_."  And truly had he
trained them to a complete self-reliance, as far as lay in his power.
He had taught them to ride, to swim, to dive deep rivers, to fling the
lasso, to climb tall trees, and scale steep cliffs, to bring down birds
upon the wing, or beasts upon the run, with the arrow and the unerring
rifle.  He had trained them to sleep in the open air--in the dark
forest--on the unsheltered prairie--along the white snow-wreath--
anywhere--with but a blanket or a buffalo-robe for their beds.  He had
taught them to live upon the simplest food; and the knowledge of
practical botany which he had imparted to them--more particularly to
Lucien--would enable them, in case of need, to draw sustenance from
plants and trees, from roots and fruits--to find resources where
ignorant men might starve.  They knew how to kindle a fire without
either flint, steel, or detonating powder.  They could discover their
direction without a compass--from the rocks, and the trees, and the
signs of the heavens; and, in addition to all, they had been taught, as
far as was then known, the geography of that vast wilderness that
stretched from their own home to the far shores of the Pacific Ocean.

The Colonel knew that he might safely trust them upon the prairies; and,
in truth, it was with a feeling of pride, rather than anxiety, that he
consented to the expedition.  But there was still another motive that
influenced him--perhaps the most powerful of all.  He was inspired by
the pride of the naturalist.  He thought of the triumph he would obtain
by sending such a rare contribution to the great museum of Europe.  If
ever, my young reader, you should become a naturalist, you will
comprehend how strong this feeling may be; and with our
hunter-naturalist it was so.

At first he proposed that Hugot should accompany them.  This the boys
would not hear of, and all three stoutly opposed it.  They could not
think of taking Hugot--their father would require Hugot at home--Hugot
would be of no use to them, they said.  They would do as well, if not
better, without him.

The truth was, that these ambitious young hunters did not wish to be
robbed of any part of the credit of their enterprise--which they knew
would be the case if Hugot were to accompany them.  Not that Hugot was
by any means a noted hunter--quite the contrary--nor a warrior neither,
notwithstanding he had been a _chasseur a cheval_, and wore such fierce
moustachios.  All this his old Colonel knew very well; and therefore did
not much insist upon sending Hugot with them.

Hugot's talents shone best in another sphere of action--in the
_cuisine_.  There Hugot was at home, for he could compound an omelette,
fricassee a chicken, or dress a _canard aux olives_, with Monsieur Soyer
himself.  But Hugot--although for many years he had accompanied his old
and young masters in the chase--had no taste whatever for hunting.  He
had a wholesome dread of bears and panthers, and as to Indians ...  Ha!
_Indians_!

