and other servants around the stables, with domestics in the dwelling--
all, male and female, being Indians of the race known as "Indios
mansos"--brown-skinned and obedient.

But though at this time there was no living lady to make her soft
footsteps heard within the walls of the commandant's dwelling, the
portrait of a lovely girl hung against the side of the main _sola_, and
on this his American guest had more than once gazed in silent
admiration.  It showed signs of having been recently painted, which was
not strange, since it was the likeness of Colonel Miranda's sister, a
few years younger than himself--at the time on a visit to some relatives
in a distant part of the Republic.  Frank Hamersley's eyes never rested
on it without his wishing the original at home.

The two gentlemen upon the housetop were leisuring away the time in the
indulgence of a cigar, watching the water-fowl that swam and plunged on
the bosom of the broad shallow stream, listening to the hoarse croakings
of pelicans and the shriller screams of the _guaya_ cranes.  It was the
hour of evening, when these birds become especially stridulent.

"And so you must go to-morrow, Senor Francisco?" said his host, taking
the cigaritto from between his teeth, and looking inquiringly into the
face of the Kentuckian.

"There is no help for it, colonel.  The caravan with which I came out
will be leaving Santa Fe the day after to-morrow, and there's just time
for me to get there.  Unless I go along with it, there may be no other
opportunity for months to come, and one cannot cross the plains alone."

"Well, I suppose I must lose you.  I am sorry, and selfishly, too, for,
as you see, I am somewhat lonely here.  There's not one of my officers,
with the exception of our old _medico_, exactly of the sort to be
companionable.  True, I have enough occupation, as you may have by this
time discovered, in looking after our neighbours, the _Indios bravos_,
who, knowing the skeleton of a regiment I've got, are growing saucier
every day.  I only wish I had a score or two of your stalwart trappers,
who now and then pay a visit to Albuquerque.  Well, my sister will soon
be here, and she, brave girl, has plenty of life in her, though she be
but young.  What a joyous creature she is, wild as a mustang filly fresh
caught.  I wish, Don Francisco, you could have stayed to make her
acquaintance.  I am sure you would be delighted with her."

If the portrait on the wall was anything of a faithful likeness,
Hamersley could not have been otherwise.  This was his reflection,
though, for certain reasons, he did not in speech declare it.

"It is to be hoped we shall meet again, Colonel Miranda," was his
ingenious rejoinder.  "If I did not have this hope, I should now be
parting from you with greater regret.  Indeed, I have more than a
presentiment we shall meet again; since I've made up my mind on a
certain thing."

"On what, Don Francisco?"

"On returning to New Mexico."

"To settle in the country?"

"Not exactly that; only for a time--long enough to enable me to dispose
of a cargo of merchandise in exchange for a bag of your big Mexican
dollars."

"Ah! you intend to become one of the prairie merchants, then?"

"I do.  That intention has been the cause of my visiting your country.
I am old enough to think of some calling, and have always had a fancy
for the adventurous life of the prairie trader.  As I have sufficient
means to stock a small caravan for myself, I think now of trying it.  My
present trip has been merely one of experiment and exploration.  I am
satisfied with the result, and, if no accident arise, you may see me
back on the Del Norte before either of us be twelve months older."

"Then, indeed, is there a hope of our meeting again.  I am rejoiced at
it.  But, Senor Don Francisco," continued his host, changing to a
serious tone, "a word lest I might forget it--a word of counsel, or
warning, I may call it.  I have observed that you are too unsuspicious,
too regardless of danger.  It does not all lie upon the prairies, or
among red-skinned savages.  There is as much of it here, amid the abodes
of our so-called civilisation.  When you are travelling through this
country bear your late antagonist in mind, and should you at any time
meet, beware of him.  I have given you some hints about the character of
Gil Uraga.  I have not told you all.  He is worse than you can even
imagine.  I know him well.  Do you see that little house, out yonder on
the other side of the river?"

Hamersley nodded assent.

"In that hovel he was born.  His father was what we call a _pelado_--a
poor devil, with scarce a coat to his back.  Himself the same, but
something worse.  He has left in his native place a record of crimes
well known, with others more than suspected.  In short, he is, as I have
told you, a robber.  No doubt you wonder that such a man should be an
officer in our army.  That is because you are ignorant of the state of
our service--our society as well.  It is but the result of constantly
recurring changes in our political system.  Still you may feel surprise
at his holding this commission, with the patriotic party--the pure one--
in power, as it now is.  That might be inexplicable even to myself,
since I know that he will be traitor to our cause when convenient to
him.  But I also know the explanation.  There is a power, even when the
party exercising it is not in the ascendant--an influence that works by
sap and secrecy.  It is that of our hierarchy.  Gil Uraga is one of its
tools, since it exactly suits his low instincts and treacherous
training.  Whenever the day is ripe for a fresh _pronunciamento_ against
our liberties--if we are so unfortunate as to have one--he will be
amongst the foremost of the traitors.  _Carrai_!  I can think of him
only with disgust and loathing.  Would you believe it, senor, that this
fellow, now that epaulettes have been set on his shoulders--placed there
for some vile service--has the audacity to aspire to the hand of my
sister?  Adela Miranda standing in bridal robes by the side of Gil
Uraga!  I would rather see her in her shroud!"

Hamersley's bosom heaved up as he listened to the last words, and with
emotion almost equalling that which excited his host.  He had just been
thinking about the portrait upon the wall, and how beautiful the
original must be.  Now hearing her name coupled with that of the ruffian
whose blow he had felt, and whose blood he had spilled, he almost
regretted not having ended that duel by killing his adversary outright.

"But surely, Colonel Miranda," he said at length, "there could be no
danger of such an event as that you speak of?"

"Never, so long as I live.  But, amigo, as you have learnt, this is a
strange land--a country of quick changes.  I am here to-day, commanding
in this district, with power, I may almost say, over the lives of all
around me.  To-morrow I may be a fugitive, or dead.  If the latter,
where is she, my poor sister, going to find the arm that could protect
her?"

Again the breast of Hamersley heaved in a convulsive manner.  Strange as
it might appear, the words of his newly-made friend seemed like an
appeal to him.  And it is just possible some such thought was in the
mind of the Mexican colonel.  In the strong man by his side he saw the
type of a race who can protect; just such an oak as he would wish to see
his sister extend her arms tendril-like around, and cling on to for
life.

Hamersley could not help having vague and varied misgivings; yet among
them was one purpose he had already spoken of--a determination to return
to Albuquerque.

"I am sure to be back here," he said, as if the promise was meant to
tranquillise the apprehensions of the colonel.  Then, changing to a more
careless tone, he added,--

"I cannot come by the spring caravans; there would not be time enough to
make my arrangements.  But there is a more southern route, lately
discovered, that can be travelled at any season.  Perhaps I may try
that.  In any case, I shall write you by the trains leaving the States
in the spring, so that you may know when to expect me.  And if, Colonel
Miranda," he added, after a short reflective pause, in which his
countenance assumed a new and graver form of expression, "if any
political trouble, such as you speak of, should occur, and you may find
it necessary to flee from your own land, I need not tell you that in
mine you will find a friend and a home.  After what has happened here,
you may depend upon the first being true, and the second hospitable,
however humble."

On that subject there was no further exchange of speech.  The two
individuals, so oddly as accidentally introduced, flung aside the stumps
of their cigars; and, clasping hands, stood regarding one another with
the gaze of a sincere, unspeakable friendship.

Next morning saw the Kentuckian riding away from Albuquerque towards the
capital of New Mexico, an escort of dragoons accompanying him, sent by
the Mexican colonel as a protection against marauding Indians.

But all along the road, and for months after, he was haunted with the
memory of that sweet face seen upon the _sola_ wall; and instead of
laughing at himself for having fallen in love with a portrait, he but
longed to return, and look upon its original--chafing under an
apprehension, with which the parting words of his New Mexican host had
painfully inspired him.



CHAPTER FOUR.

A PRONUNCIAMENTO.

A little less than a quarter of a century ago the Navajo Indians were
the terror of the New Mexican settlements.  It was no uncommon thing for
them to charge into the streets of a town, shoot down or spear the
citizens, plunder the shops, and seize upon such women as they wanted,
carrying these captives to their far-off fastnesses in the land of
Navajoa.

In the _canon_ de Chelley these savages had their headquarters, with the
temple and _estufa_, where the sacred fire of _Moctezuma_ was never
permitted to go out; and there, in times past, when Mexico was misruled
by the tyrant Santa Anna, might have been seen scores of white women,
captives to the Navajo nation, women well born and tenderly brought up,
torn from their homes on the Rio del Norte, and forced to become the
wives of their red-skinned captors--oftener their concubines and slaves.
White children, too, in like manner, growing up among the children of
their despoilers; on reaching manhood to forget all the ties of kindred,
with the _liens_ of civilised life--in short, to be as much savages as
those who had adopted them.

At no period was this despoliation more rife than in the time of which
we write.  It had reached its climax of horrors, day after day
recurring, when Colonel Miranda became military commandant of the
district of Albuquerque; until not only this town, but Santa Fe, the
capital of the province itself, was menaced with destruction by the red
marauders.  Not alone the Navajoes on the west, but the Apaches on the
south, and the Comanches who peopled the plains to the east, made
intermittent and frequent forays upon the towns and villages lying along
the renowned Rio del Norte.  There were no longer any outlying
settlements or isolated plantations.  The grand _haciendas_, as the
humble _ranchos_, were alike lain in ruins.  In the walled town alone
was there safety for the white inhabitants of Nuevo Mexico, or for those
Indians, termed _mansos_, converted to Christianity, and leagued with
them in the pursuits of civilisation.  And, indeed, not much safety
either within towns--even in Albuquerque itself.

Imbued with a spirit of patriotism, Colonel Miranda, in taking charge of
the district--his native place, as already known--determined on doing
his best to protect it from further spoliation; and for this purpose had
appealed to the central government to give him an increase to the forces
under his command.

It came in the shape of a squadron of lancers from Chihuahua, whose
garrison only spared them on their being replaced by a troop of like
strength, sent on from the capital of the country.

It was not very pleasant to the commandant of Albuquerque to see Captain
Gil Uraga in command of the subsidy thus granted him.  But the lancer
officer met him in a friendly manner, professing cordiality, apparently
forgetful of their duelling feud, and, at least outwardly, showing the
submission due to the difference of their rank.

Engaged in frequent affairs with the Indians, and expeditions in pursuit
of them, for a while things seemed to go smoothly enough.

But as Adela Miranda had now returned home, and was residing with her
brother, in the interludes of tranquillity he could not help having some
concern for her.  He was well aware of Uraga's aspirations; and, though
loathing the very sight of the man, he was, nevertheless, compelled to
tolerate his companionship to a certain extent, and could not well deny
him the _entree_ of his house.

At first the subordinate bore himself with becoming meekness.  Mock
humility it was, and soon so proved itself.  For, as the days passed,
rumours reached the distant department of New Mexico that the old tyrant
Santa Anna was again returning to power.  And, in proportion as these
gained strength, so increased Gil Uraga's confidence in himself, till at
length he assumed an air of effrontery--almost insolence--towards his
superior officer; and towards the sister, in the interviews he was
permitted with her, a manner significantly corresponding.

These were few, and still less frequent, as his brusque behaviour began
to manifest itself.  Observing it, Colonel Miranda at length came to the
determination that the lancer captain should no longer enter into his
house--at least, by invitation.  Any future relations between them must
be in the strict execution of their respective military duties.

"Yes, sister," he said, one afternoon, as Adela was buckling on his
sword-belt, and helping to equip him for the evening parade, "Uraga must
come here no more.  I well understand the cause of his contumacious
behaviour.  The priest party is again getting the ascendency.  If they
succeed, heaven help poor Mexico.  And, I may add, heaven help us!"

Drawing the girl to his bosom with a fond affectionate embrace, he gave
her a brother's kiss.  Then, striding forth, he sprang upon a saddled
horse held in waiting, and rode off to parade his troops on the _plaza_
of Albuquerque.

A ten minutes' trot brought him into their presence.  They were not
drawn up in line, or other formation, to receive him.  On the contrary,
as he approached the _cuartel_, he saw strange sights, and heard sounds
corresponding.  Everything was in confusion--soldiers rushing to and
fro, uttering seditious cries.  Among these were "Viva Santa Anna!"

"Viva el General Armijo!"

"Viva el _Coronel_ Uraga!"

Beyond doubt it was a _pronunciamento_.  The old regime under which
Colonel Miranda held authority was passing away, and a new one about to
be initiated.

Drawing his sword and putting spur to his horse, he dashed in among the
disaffected men.

A few of the faithful ran up, and ranged themselves by his side.

Then commenced a struggle, with shouting, shooting, sabring, and
lance-thrusts.  Several fell--some dead, some only disabled; among the
last, Colonel Miranda himself, gravely wounded.

In ten minutes it was all over; and the commandant of Albuquerque, no
longer commanding, lay lodged in the garrison _carcel_; Captain Gil
Uraga, now colonel, replacing him as the supreme military officer of the
district.

While all around ran the rumour that Don Antonio Lopes de Santa Anna was
once more master of Mexico; his satellite, Manuel Armijo, again Governor
of Santa Fe.



CHAPTER FIVE.

"WHY COMES HE NOT?"

"What delays Valerian?  What can be keeping him?"

These questions came from Adela Miranda, on the evening of that same
day, standing in the door of her brother's house, with eyes bent along
the road leading to Albuquerque.  Valerian was her brother's baptismal
name, and it was about his absence she was anxious.

For this she had reasons--more than one.  Though still only a young
girl, she quite understood the political situation of the Mexican
Republic; at all times shifting, of late more critical than usual.  In
her brother's confidence, she had been kept posted up in all that
transpired in the capital, as also the district over which he held
military command, and knew the danger of which he was himself
apprehensive--every day drawing nigher and nigher.

Shortly after his leaving her she had heard shots, with a distant murmur
of voices, in the direction of the town.  From the _azolea_, to which
she had ascended, she could note these noises more distinctly, but
fancied them to be salutes, vivas, and cheers.  Still, there was nothing
much in that.  It might be some jubilation of the soldiery at the
ordinary evening parade; and, remembering that the day was a _fiesta_,
she thought less of it.

But, as night drew down, and her brother had not returned, she began to
feel some slight apprehension.  He had promised to be back for a dinner
that was long since due--a repast she had herself prepared, more
sumptuous than common on account of the saint's day.  This was it that
elicited the anxious self-asked interrogatories.

After giving utterance to them, she paced backward and forward; now
standing in the portal and gazing along the road; now returning to the
_sola de comida_, to look upon the table, with cloth spread, wines
decantered, fruits and flowers on the epergne--all but the dishes that
waited serving till Valerian should show himself.

To look on something besides--a portrait that hung upon the wall,
underneath her own.  It was a small thing--a mere photographic
carte-de-visite.  But it was the likeness of one who had a large place
in her brother's heart, if not in her own.  In hers, how could it?  It
was the photograph of a man she had never seen--Frank Hamersley.  He had
left it with Colonel Miranda, as a souvenir of their short but friendly
intercourse.

Did Colonel Miranda's sister regard it in that light?  She could not in
any other.  Still, as she gazed upon it, a thought was passing through
her mind somewhat different from a sentiment of simple friendship.  Her
brother had told her all--the circumstances that led to his acquaintance
with Hamersley; of the duel, and in what a knightly manner the
Kentuckian had carried himself; adding his own commentaries in a very
flattering fashion.  This, of itself, had been enough to pique curiosity
in a young girl, just escaped from her convent school; but added to the
outward semblance of the stranger, by the sun made lustrous--so lustrous
inwardly--Adela Miranda was moved by something more than curiosity.  As
she stood regarding the likeness of Frank Hamersley she felt very much
as he had done looking at hers--in love with one only known by portrait
and repute.

In such there is nothing strange nor new.  Many a reader of this tale
could speak of a similar experience.

While gazing on the carte-de-visite she was roused from the sweet
reverie it had called up by hearing footsteps outside.  Someone coming
in through the _saggan_.

"Valerian at last!"

The steps sounded as if the man making them were in a hurry.  So should
her brother be, having so long delayed his return.

She glided out to meet him with an interrogatory on her lips.

"Valerian?"--this suddenly changing to the exclamation, "_Madre de
Dios_!  'Tis not my brother!"

It was not, but a man pale and breathless--a _peon_ of the
establishment--who, on seeing her, gasped out,--

"Senorita!  I bring sad news.  There's been a mutiny at the cuartel--a
_pronunciamento_.  The rebels have had it all their own way, and I am
sorry to tell you that the colonel, your brother--"

"What of him?  Speak!  Is he--"

"Not killed, _nina_; only wounded, and a prisoner."

Adela Miranda did not swoon nor faint.  She was not of the nervous kind.
Nurtured amid dangers, most of her life accustomed to alarms from
Indian incursions, as well as revolutionary risings, she remained calm.

She dispatched messengers to the town, secretly, one after another; and,
while awaiting their reports, knelt before an image of the Virgin, and
prayed.

Up till midnight her couriers went, and came.  Then one who was more
than a messenger--her brother himself!

As already reported to her, he was wounded, and came accompanied by the
surgeon of the garrison, a friend.  They arrived at the house in hot
haste, as if pursued.

And they were so, as she soon after learnt.

There was just time for Colonel Miranda to select the most cherished of
his _penates_; pack them on a _recua_ of mules, then mount, and make
away.

They had scarce cleared the premises when the myrmidons of the new
commandant, led by the man himself, rode up and took possession of the
place.

By this time, and by good luck, the ruffian was intoxicated--so drunk he
could scarce comprehend what was passing around him.  It seemed like a
dream to him to be told that Colonel Miranda had got clear away; a more
horrid one to hear that she whom he designed for a victim had escaped
from his clutches.

When morning dawned, and in soberer mood he listened to the reports of
those sent in pursuit--all telling the same tale of non-success--he
raved like one in a frenzy of madness.  For the escape of the late
Commandant of Albuquerque had robbed him of two things--to him the
sweetest in life--one, revenge on the man he heartily hated; the other,
possession of the woman he passionately loved.



CHAPTER SIX.

SURROUNDED.

A plain of pure sand, glaring red-yellow under the first rays of the
rising sun; towards the east and west apparently illimitable, but
interrupted northward by a chain of table-topped hills, and along its
southern edge by a continuous cliff, rising wall-like to the height of
several hundred feet, and trending each way beyond the verge of vision.

About half-distance between this prolonged escarpment and the outlying
hills six large "Conestoga" waggons, locked tongue and tail together,
enclosing a lozenge-shaped or elliptical space--a _corral_--inside which
are fifteen men and five horses.

Only ten of the men are living; the other five are dead, their bodies
lying a-stretch between the wheels of the waggons.  Three of the horses
have succumbed to the same fate.

Outside are many dead mules; several still attached to the protruding
poles, that have broken as their bodies fell crashing across them.
Fragments of leather straps and cast gearing tell of others that have
torn loose, and scoured off from the perilous spot.

Inside and all around are traces of a struggle--the ground scored and
furrowed by the hoofs of horses, and the booted feet of men, with here
and there little rivulets and pools of blood.  This, fast filtering into
the sand, shows freshly spilled--some of it still smoking.

All the signs tell of recent conflict.  And so should they, since it is
still going on, or only suspended to recommence a new scene of the
strife, which promises to be yet more terrible and sanguinary than that
already terminated.

A tragedy easy of explanation.  There is no question about why the
waggons have been stopped, or how the men, mules, and horses came to be
killed.  Distant about three hundred yards upon the sandy plain are
other men and horses, to the number of near two hundred.  Their
half-naked bodies of bronze colour, fantastically marked with devices in
chalk-white, charcoal-black, and vermillion red--their buckskin
breech-clouts and leggings, with plumes sticking tuft-like above their
