quickly, too. He runs round from gun to gun, takes aim, and fires.
The crew shout, and yell, and bang away with their muskets. I take
the command, and give a few pice among them, if the firing has been
accurate.

"We have been attacked, once or twice, in the upper waters; but
have always managed to beat the robbers off, without much
difficulty. The captain fires away, till they get pretty close; and
I pepper them with my rifles--I have three of them. When they get
within fifty yards, the crew open fire and, as they have three
muskets each, they can make it very hot for the pirates. I have a
store of hand grenades and, if they push on, I throw two or three
on board when they get within ten yards; and that has always
finished the matter. They don't understand the things bursting in
the middle of them. I don't mean to say that my armament would be
of much use, if we were trading along the coast of the Malay
Peninsula or among the Islands, but it is quite enough to deal with
the petty robbers of these rivers."

"But I thought that you had a boat that you went up the rivers in,
uncle?"

"Yes; we tow a rowboat and a store boat up, behind this craft, as
far as she can go; that is, as long as she has wind enough to make
against the sluggish stream. When she can go no further, I take to
the rowboat. It has eight rowers, carries a gun--it is a
twelve-pounder howitzer--that I have had cut short, so that it is
only about a foot long. Of course it won't carry far, but that is
not necessary. Its charge is a pound of powder and a ten-pound bag
of bullets and, at a couple of hundred yards, the balls scatter
enough to sweep two or three canoes coming abreast and, as we can
charge and fire the little thing three times in a minute, it is all
that we require, for practical purposes.

"It is only on a few of the rivers we go up that there is any fear
of trouble. On the river from Sylhet to the east and its branches
in Kathee or, as it is sometimes called, Kasi, the country is
comparatively settled. The Goomtee beyond Oudypore is well enough,
until it gets into Kaayn, which is what they call independent. That
is to say, it owns no authority; and some villages are peaceable
and well disposed, while others are savage. The same may be said of
the Munnoo and Fenny rivers.

"For the last two years I have done a good deal of trade in Assam,
up the Brahmaputra river. As far as Rungpoor there are a great many
villages on the banks, and the people are quiet and peaceable."

"Then you don't go further south than Chittagong, uncle?"

"No. The Burmese hold Aracan on the south and, indeed, for some
distance north of it there is no very clearly-defined border. You
see, the great river runs from Rangoon very nearly due north,
though with a little east in it; and extends along at the back of
the districts I trade with; so that the Burmese are not very far
from Manipur which, indeed, stands on a branch of the Irrawaddy, of
which another branch runs nearly up to Rungpoor.

"We shall have big trouble with them, one of these days; indeed, we
have had troubles already. You see, the Burmese are a great and
increasing power, and have so easily conquered all their neighbours
that they regard themselves as invincible. Until the beginning of
the eighteenth century, the Burmese were masters of Pegu; then the
people of that country, with the help of the Dutch and Portuguese,
threw off their yoke. But the Burmese were not long kept down for,
in 1753, Alompra--a hunter--gathered a force round him and, after
keeping up an irregular warfare for some time, was joined by so
many of his countrymen that he attacked and captured Ava, conquered
the whole of Pegu and, in 1759, the English trading colony at
Negrais were massacred.

"This, however, was not the act of Alompra, but of the treachery of
a Frenchman named Levine, and of an Armenian; who incited the
Burmese of the district to exterminate the English--hoping, no
doubt, thus to retrieve, in a new quarter, the fortunes of France,
which in India were being extinguished by the genius of Clive. The
English were, at the time, far too occupied with the desperate
struggle they were having, in India, to attempt to revenge the
massacre of their countrymen at Negrais.

"Very rapidly the Burman power spread. They captured the valuable
Tenasserim coast, from Siam; repulsed a formidable invasion from
China; annexed Aracan, and dominated Manipur, and thus became
masters of the whole tract of country lying between China and
Hindustan. As they now bordered upon our territory, a mission was
sent in 1794 to them from India, with a proposal for the settlement
of boundaries, and for the arrangement of trade between the two
countries. Nothing came of it, for the Burmese had already
proposed, to themselves, the conquest of India; and considered the
mission as a proof of the terror that their advance had inspired
among us.

"After the conquest by them of Aracan, in 1784, there had been a
constant irritation felt against us by the Burmese; owing to the
fact that a great number of fugitives from that country had taken
refuge in the swamps and islands of Chittagong; from which they,
from time to time, issued and made raids against the Burmese. In
1811 these fugitives, in alliance with some predatory chiefs,
invaded Aracan in force and, being joined by the subject population
there, expelled the Burmese. These, however, soon reconquered the
province. The affair was, nevertheless, unfortunate, since the
Burmese naturally considered that, as the insurrection had begun
with an invasion by the fugitives in Chittagong, it had been
fomented by us.

"This was in no way the fact. We had no force there capable of
keeping the masses of fugitives in order; but we did our best, and
arrested many of the leaders, when they returned after their
defeat. This, however, was far from satisfying the Burmese. A
mission was sent, to Ava, to assure them of our friendly
intentions; and that we had had nothing whatever to do with the
invasion, and would do all we could to prevent its recurrence. The
Burmese government declined to receive the mission.

"We, ourselves, had much trouble with the insurgents for, fearful
of re-entering Burma after their defeat, they now carried on a
series of raids in our territory; and it was not until 1816 that
these were finally suppressed. Nevertheless, the court of Ava
remained dissatisfied; and a fresh demand was raised for the
surrender of the chiefs who had been captured, and of the whole of
the fugitives living in the government of Chittagong. The Marquis
of Hastings replied that the British government could not, without
a violation of the principles of justice, deliver up those who had
sought its protection; that tranquillity now existed, and there was
no probability of a renewal of the disturbances; but that the
greatest vigilance should be used, to prevent and punish the
authors of any raid that might be attempted against Aracan.

"A year later a second letter was received, demanding on the part
of the king the cession of Ramoo, Chittagong, Moorshedabad, and
Dacca; that is to say, of the whole British possessions east of the
Ganges. Lord Hastings simply replied that if it was possible to
suppose that the demand had been dictated by the King of Ava, the
British government would be justified in regarding it as a
declaration of war. To this the Burmese made no reply. Doubtless
they had heard of the successes we had gained in Central India, and
had learned that our whole force was disposable against them.

"Three years ago the old king died, and a more warlike monarch
succeeded him. Since 1810 they have been mixed up in the troubles
that have been going on in Assam, where a civil war had been
raging. One party or other has sought their assistance, and
fighting has been going on there nearly incessantly and, two months
ago, the Burmese settled the question by themselves taking
possession of the whole country.

"This has, of course, been a serious blow to me. Although disorder
has reigned, it has not interfered with my trading along the banks
of the river; but now that the Burmese have set up their authority,
I shall, for a time anyhow, be obliged to give up my operations
there; for they have evinced considerable hostility to us--have made
raids near Rungpoor, on our side of the river, and have pulled down
a British flag on an island in the Brahmaputra. We have taken, in
consequence, the principality of Cachar under our protection--indeed
its two princes, seeing that the Burmese were beginning to invade
their country, invited us to take this step--and we thus occupy the
passes from Manipur into the low country of Sylhet."

"I wonder that you have been able to trade in Manipur, uncle, as
the Burmese have been masters there."

"I am not trading with the capital itself, and the Burmese have
been too occupied with their affairs in Assam to exercise much
authority in the country. Besides, you see, there has not been war
between the two countries. Our merchants at Rangoon still carry on
their trade up the Irrawaddy; and in Assam, this spring, the only
trouble I had was that I had to pay somewhat higher tolls than I
had done before. However, now that Cachar is under our protection,
I hope that I shall make up for my loss of trade, in Assam, by
doing better than before in that province."

"I thought you called it Kathee, uncle?"

"So it is generally named but, as it is spoken of as Cachar in the
proclamation assuming the protectorate, I suppose it will be called
so in future; but all these names, out here, are spelt pretty much
according to fancy."

While this conversation had been going on, the boat had been
running fast down the river, passing several European vessels
almost as if they had been standing still.

"I should not have thought that a boat like this would pass these
large ships," Stanley said.

"We have a good deal to learn in the art of sailing, yet," his
uncle replied. "A great many of these Indian dhows can run away
from a square-rigged ship, in light weather. I don't know whether
it is the lines of their hulls or the cut of the sails, but there
is no doubt about their speed. They seem to skim over the water,
while our bluff-bowed craft shove their way through it. I suppose,
some day, we shall adopt these long sharp bows; when we do, it will
make a wonderful difference in our rate of sailing. Then, too,
these craft have a very light draft of water but, on the other
hand, they have a deep keel, which helps them to lie close to the
wind; and that long, overhanging bow renders them capital craft in
heavy weather for, as they meet the sea, they rise over it
gradually; instead of its hitting them full on the bow, as it does
our ships. We have much to learn, yet, in the way of ship
building."

The trader had his own servant with him, and the man now came up
and said that a meal was ready, and they at once entered the cabin.
It was roomy and comfortable, and was, like the rest of the boat,
of varnished teak. There were large windows in the stern; it had a
table, with two fixed benches; and there were broad, low sofas on
each side. Above these the muskets were disposed, in racks; while
at the end by the door were Tom Pearson's own rifles, four brace of
pistols, and a couple of swords. Ten long spears were suspended
from the roof of the cabin, in leather slings. The floor, like the
rest of the cabin, was varnished.

"It looks very comfortable, uncle."

"Yes; you see, I live quite half my time on board, the rest being
spent in the boat. My man is a capital cook. He comes from
Chittagong, and is a Mug."

"What are Mugs, uncle?"

"They are the original inhabitants of Aracan. He was one of those
who remained there, after the Burmese had conquered it, and speaks
their language as well as his own. I recommend you to begin it with
him, at once. If things settle down in Assam, it will be very
useful for you in arranging with the Burmese officials. You won't
find it very easy, though of course your knowledge of three or four
Indian tongues will help you. It is said to be a mixture of the old
Tali, Sanscrit, Tartar, and Chinese. The Tartar and Chinese words
will, of course, be quite new to you; the other two elements will
resemble those that you are familiar with.

"I talk to the man in Hindustani. He picked up a little of it at
Chittagong, and has learned a good deal more, during the two years
that he has been with me; and through that you will be able to
learn Burmese."

A week later the dhow entered the harbour. Stanley had passed most
of his time in conversation with Khyen, Tom's servant. The facility
his tongue had acquired in the Indian languages was of great
benefit to him, and he speedily picked up a good many Burmese
sentences.

For the next six months he continued, with his uncle, the work the
latter had carried on; and enjoyed it much. They sailed up the
sluggish rivers, with their low, flat shores, in the dhow; towing
the rowboat and the store boat behind them. The crews of these
boats lived on board the dhow until their services were required,
helping in its navigation and aiding the crew when the wind dropped
and sweeps were got out.

The villages along the banks were for the most part small, but were
very numerous. At each of these the dhow brought up. There was, in
almost all cases, sufficient water to allow of her being moored
alongside the banks and, as soon as she did so, the natives came on
board to make their purchases and dispose of their produce. In
addition to the European and Indian goods carried, the dhow was
laden with rice, for which there was a considerable demand at most
of the villages.

As soon as he had learned the price of the various goods, and their
equivalent in the products of the country, Stanley did much of the
bartering; while his uncle went ashore and talked with the head men
of the village, with all of whom he made a point of keeping on good
terms, and so securing a great portion of the trade that might,
otherwise, have been carried by native craft.

Three times during the six months the dhow had gone back to
Calcutta, to fetch fresh supplies of goods and to take in another
cargo of rice; while the trader proceeded higher up the river, in
his own boats. While on the voyage, Stanley always had the rifle
and fowling piece that his uncle had handed over, for his special
use, leaning against the bulwark, close at hand; and frequently
shot waterfowl, which were so abundant that he was able to keep not
only their own table supplied, but to furnish the crew and boatmen
with a considerable quantity of food. They had had no trouble with
river pirates, for these had suffered so heavily, in previous
attacks upon the dhow, that they shunned any repetition of their
loss. At the same time every precaution was taken for, owing to the
intestine troubles in Cachar and Assam, fugitives belonging to the
party that happened, for the time, to be worsted, were driven to
take refuge in the jungles near the rivers; and to subsist largely
on plunder, the local authorities being too feeble to root them
out. The boats, therefore, were always anchored in the middle of
the stream at night and two men were kept on watch.

To the south as well as in the north, the trading operations were
more restricted; for the Burmese became more and more aggressive.
Elephant hunters, in the hills that formed the boundary of the
British territory to the east, were seized and carried off;
twenty-three in one place being captured, and six in another--all
being ill treated and imprisoned, and the remonstrances of the
Indian government treated with contempt by the Rajah of Aracan. It
was evident that the object of the Burmese was to possess
themselves of this hill country in order that they might, if they
chose, pour down at any time into the cultivated country round the
town of Ramoo.

"There is no doubt, Stanley," said his uncle one day, "we shall
very shortly have a big war with the Burmese. The fact that these
constant acts of aggression are met only by remonstrances, on our
part, increases their arrogance; and they are convinced that we are
in mortal terror of them. They say that in Assam their leaders are
openly boasting that, ere long, they will drive us completely from
India; and one of their generals has confidently declared that,
after taking India, they intend to conquer England. With such
ignorant people, there is but one argument understood--namely,
force; and sooner or later we shall have to give them such a hearty
thrashing that they will be quiet for some time.

"Still, I grant that the difficulties are great. Their country is a
tremendous size, the beggars are brave, and the climate, at any
rate near the sea coast, is horribly unhealthy. Altogether it will
be a big job; but it will have to be done, or in a very short time
we shall see them marching against Calcutta."



Chapter 2: The Outbreak of War.


On the last day of September, 1823--just a year after Stanley had
joined his uncle--the dhow sailed into Chittagong; which had now
taken the place of Sylhet as the traders' chief depot, the latter
place being too near the Burmese, in Assam, for him to care about
keeping a large stock of his goods there. He went ashore as soon as
the dhow cast anchor, Stanley remaining on board.

"The fat is all in the fire, Stanley," Tom Pearson said, when he
returned. "The Burmese have attacked and killed some of our troops,
and it is certain that the government cannot put up with that."

"Where was it, uncle?"

"Down at the mouth of the Naaf. As you know, that is the southern
boundary of the province, and there was a row there in January. One
of our native boats laden with rice was coming up the river, on our
side of the channel, when an armed Burmese boat came across and
demanded duty. Of course, our fellows said they were in their own
waters, whereupon the Burmese fired upon them and killed the
steersman. There were reports, then, that bodies of Burmese troops
were moving about on their side of the river, and that it was
feared they would cross over and burn some of our villages.
Accordingly, our guard at the mouth of the river was increased to
fifty men, and a few of these were posted on the island of
Shapuree.

"This island lies close to our shore and, indeed, the channel
between can be forded at low water. It has always formed part of
the province of Chittagong, and there has never been any question
raised by the Burmese as to this. However, the Viceroy of Aracan
called upon our resident here to withdraw the guard, asserting the
right of the King of Ava to the island.

"Since then letters have passed to and fro, but I hear that the
Burmese have settled the question by landing on Shapuree. One night
last week they attacked our post there, killed and wounded four of
the sepoys, and drove the rest off the island. The Indian
government have put up with a great deal, rather than engage in so
costly and difficult an operation as a war with Burma, but it is
impossible that we can stand this."

The Indian government, however, used every endeavour to avert the
necessity for war; although the Rajah of Aracan lost no time in
writing a letter to the government of Calcutta, stating that he had
occupied the island of Shapuree, and that unless they submitted
quietly to this act of justice, the cities of Dacca and
Moorshedabad would be forcibly seized. In order, however, to
postpone, at any rate, the outbreak of war, the government of
Bengal resolved to give the court of Ava an opportunity to withdraw
from the position taken up. They therefore acted as if the attack
on the guard at Shapuree had been the action of the Viceroy of
Aracan alone, and addressed a declaration to the Burmese
government, recapitulating the facts of the case, pointing out that
Shapuree had always been acknowledged by Burma as forming part of
the province of Chittagong, and calling upon the government to
disavow the action of the local authorities. The Burmese considered
this, as it was in fact, a proof that the government of India was
reluctant to enter upon a contest with them; and confirmed Burma in
its confident expectation of annexing the eastern portions of
Bengal, if not of expelling the English altogether.

In the meantime, Shapuree had been reoccupied by us. The
Burmese--after driving out the little garrison--had retired and,
two months after the attack, two companies of the 20th Native
Infantry arrived by sea, from Calcutta, and landed there. A
stockade was built, and two six-pounders placed in position.
Another company was stationed on the mainland, and the Planet and
three gunboats, each carrying a twelve-pounder, were stationed in
the river.

The Burmese at once collected large bodies of troops, both in
Aracan and Assam. The government of Bengal made preparations to
defend our frontier, and especially the position in the north, as
an advance of the Burmese in this direction would not only threaten
the important towns of Dacca and Moorshedabad, but would place the
invaders in dangerous proximity to Calcutta. Accordingly, a portion
