
"But what for?" cried Singh.  "We never did him any harm."

"Love of conquest, I suppose, so as to make us humble ourselves to him
same as the other fellows do.  He wants to be cock of the school."

"Oh--oh!" cried Singh.  "It does make me feel so hot.  What did he say
to me: was I going to ride on the elephant?--Yes.  Well, suppose I was.
It wouldn't be the first time."

"Not by hundreds," cried Glyn.  "I say, used it not to be grand?  Don't
you wish we were going over the plains to-day on the back of old
Sultan?"

He pronounced it Sool-tann.

"Ah, yes!" cried Singh, with his eyes flashing now.  "I do, I do!
instead of being shut up in this old school to be bullied by a boy like
that.  I should like to knock his head off."

"No, you wouldn't.  There, don't think anything more about it.  He isn't
worth your notice."

"No, I suppose not," said the Indian boy;--"but what makes me so angry
is that he despises me, and has treated me ever since we came here as if
I were his inferior.  It is not the first time he has called me a
nigger.--There, I won't think anything more about it.  Tell me, what's
this grand procession to-day?  Is it to be like a durbar at home, when
all the rajahs and nawabs come together with their elephants and
trains?"

"Oh, no, no, no!" cried Glyn, laughing.  "Nothing of the kind."

"Then, why are they making all this fuss?  It said on the bills we saw
yesterday in the town, `Ramball's Wild-Beast Show.  Grand Procession.'"

"I don't know much about it," said Glyn; "only here in England in
country places they make a great fuss over things like this.  I asked
Wrench yesterday, and he said that this was a menagerie belonging to a
man who lives near and keeps his wild-beasts at a big farm-like place
just outside the town."

"But why a procession?" said Singh impatiently.

"Oh, he takes them all round the country, going from town to town, and
they are away for months, and now they are coming back."

"Menagerie! beast show!" said Singh thoughtfully.  "They are all tame,
of course?"

"Yes, of course," said Glyn.  "It said lions and tigers and elephants
and camels, and a lot more things on the bills.  I should like to see
them."

"You English are a wonderful people.  My father used to have tigers--
three of them--a tiger, a tigress, and a nearly full-grown cub.  But
they were so fierce he got tired of keeping them, and when the tigress
killed one of the keepers, you remember, he asked your father about it,
and they settled that it would be best to kill them."

"Of course, I remember," said Glyn; "and they had a tiger-hunt, and let
one out at a time, and had beaters to drive them out of the nullahs, and
shot all three."

"Yes," said Singh thoughtfully; "and my father wouldn't let me go with
him on his elephant, because he said it wouldn't be safe.  Then these
will all be tame tigers and lions?  Well, I shall like to see them all
the same, because it will make me feel like being at home once more.  I
say, when is your father coming down again?"

"Don't know," said Glyn quietly.  "I did ask in my last weekly letter."

"Ah!" said the Indian boy with a sigh, "I wish I were you."

"Well, let's change," said Glyn laughing.  "You envy me!  Why, I ought
to envy you."

"Why?" said Singh, staring.

"Why, because you are a maharajah, a prince; and when you grow old
enough you are going back to Dour to rule over your subjects and be one
of the biggest pots in Southern India."

"Well, what of that?" said Singh quietly.  "What good will that do me?
But of course the Colonel will come too."

"Ah, that remains to be seen," said Glyn.  "That'll be years to come,
and who knows what will happen before then?"

"I don't care what happens," cried Singh hotly.  "He's coming back to
India when I go.  Why, he told me himself that my father made him my
guardian, and that he promised to look after me as long as he lived.  He
said he promised to be a father to me.  It was that day when I got into
a passion about something, and made him so cross.  But I was very sorry
afterwards," said the boy quietly, "he's such a good old fellow, and
made me like him as much as I did my own father."

"Well," said Glyn merrily, "you have always had your share of him.  It
has made me feel quite jealous sometimes."

"Jealous!  Why?" said Singh wonderingly.

"Because he seemed to like you better than he did me."

"What a shame!" cried Singh.  "Oh, I say, you don't mean that, do you,
Glyn, old chap?  Why, you don't know how fond he is of you."

"Don't I?"

"No; you should hear what he says about you sometimes."

"Says about me?  What does he say about me?"

"Oh, perhaps I oughtn't to tell you," said Singh, showing his white
teeth.

"Yes, do, there's a good fellow," cried Glyn, catching the other by the
arm.

"Well, he said he should be proud to see me grow up such a boy as you
are, and that my father wished me to take you for an example, for he
wanted me to become thoroughly English--oh, and a lot more like that."

Glyn Severn was silent, and soon after, as the two boys turned, they saw
a group of their schoolfellows coming down the field laden with bats and
stumps, while one carried a couple of iron-shod stakes round which was
rolled a stout piece of netting.

"Here," said Glyn suddenly, "let's go round the other side of the field.
Old Slegge's along with them, and he'll be getting up a quarrel again.
I don't want to fight; but if he keeps on aggravating like he did this
morning I suppose I shall have to."

"But if we go now," said Singh, "it will look as if we are frightened.
We seemed to run away before, only you made me come."

"Oh, it doesn't matter what seems," cried Severn irritably.  "We know we
are not frightened, and that's enough.  Come on."

The two boys began to move slowly away; but they had not gone far before
Slegge shouted after them, "Hi, you, sirs!  I want you to come and
field."

"Then want will be your master," said Severn between his teeth.--"Come
on, Singh.  Don't look round.  Let's pretend we can't hear."

They walked steadily on for a few paces, Severn making-believe to be
talking earnestly to his companion, when:

"Do you hear, there, you, sirs?  Come here directly.  I want you to
field!"

"I dare say you do; cheeky great bully!" said Glyn softly.  "I shan't
come and field for you.  The Doctor did not give us a holiday to-day to
come and be your slaves."

"Hi, there!  Are you coming, or am I to come and fetch you?" shouted
Slegge, without any effect, and the big lad turned to Burney and gave
him an order.  The next minute the boy, armed with a stump, came running
at full speed across the grass, shouting to the two companions to stop,
but without their paying the slightest heed or increasing their pace.

The consequence was that the lad soon overtook them, to cry, rather out
of breath, "Did you hear the captain call to you to come and field?"

Singh glanced at Glyn, who gave him a sharp look as he replied, "Yes, I
heard him quite plainly."

The messenger stared with open eyes and mouth, as if it was beyond his
comprehension.

"Then, why don't you come?" he cried.

"Because we are going up to the house," replied Glyn coolly, "to our
dormitory."

"That you are not," cried Burney.  "The rules say that the fellows are
not to go up to their rooms between hours, and you have been here long
enough to know that.  Now then, no nonsense.  Here, you, Singh, you've
got to come and field while old Slegge practises batting, and Tompkins
has got to bowl."

As the boy spoke in an unpleasant dictatorial way he made a thrust at
Singh with the pointed stump he held; but quick as thought and before it
was driven home, this third-part of a wicket was wrenched from his hand
by Severn and sent flying through the air.

"How dare you!" shouted Burney, and he made a rush at Glyn to collar him
and make him prisoner; but before he could reach the offending lad a
foot was thrust out by Singh, over which he tripped and fell sprawling
upon his face.

"Oh!" he shouted, half-beside himself with rage; and, scrambling up, he
made a rush with clenched fists at the two boys, who now stood perfectly
still awaiting his onslaught.

It was a thoroughly angry charge, but not a charge home; for Burney
stopped some three or four yards short of the distance, with his rage
evaporating fast and beginning to feel quite discreet.

For quite a minute the opponents stood gazing fiercely, and then what
had threatened to become a cuffing encounter became verbal.

"Look here," cried Burney, "you two will get it for this.  What am I to
say to the captain?"

"Tell him to bowl for himself," said Singh sharply.

"Here!  Hi!  Burney, bring 'em along!" came from across the field and
from between Slegge's hands.  "Tell these beggars they had better not
keep me waiting much longer!"

"All right!" shouted back Burney; and then to the two lads, "There, you
hear.  Come on at once, and as you are new chaps I won't tell on you.
You had better come, or he'll pay you out by keeping you on bowling so
that you can't go and see the show."

"Yes," said Glyn quietly.  "Go back and tell him what Singh said."

"What!" cried Burney, staring with wonder.  "Tell the captain he's to
bowl for himself?"

"Yes," said Glyn coolly, "as long as he likes.--Come along, Singh;" and,
throwing his arm over his Indian companion's shoulder, the two lads fell
into military step and marched slowly towards the Doctor's mansion-like
house.

"I am afraid it means a fight, Singh," said Glyn quietly.  "Well, I dare
say we can get over it.  I am not going to knuckle down to that fellow.
Are you?"

"Am I?" cried the boy, flashing a fierce look at his English companion.
"What do you think?"

Glyn laughed softly and merrily.

"Shall I tell you?" he said.

"Yes, of course," cried the Indian boy hotly.

"Well, I think you will."

"What!"

"When you can't lift hand or foot, and your eyes are closing up so as
you can hardly see."

"And I won't give up then!" cried the boy passionately.

"Well, don't get into a wax about it, old chap," said Glyn in a dry,
slow way.  "I don't suppose you'll have to, for the big chuckle-headed
bully will have to lick me first, and I dare say I can manage to tire
him so that you can easily lick him in turn."

"You are not going to fight him," cried Singh hotly.

"Yes, I am."

"You are not.  He insulted my dead father.  A mahout indeed!"

"So he did mine," said Glyn.  "A shabby half-pay military officer
indeed!  I'll make _him_ look shabby before I have done."

"Now, look here," cried Singh, "don't be a beast, Glynny, and make me
more angry than I am.  I am bad enough as it is."

"So am I, so don't you get putting on the Indian tyrant.  Recollect you
are in England now.  This is my job, and I know if father were here he'd
say I was to have the first go in.  He's such a big fellow that I
believe he'll lick me easily.  But, as I said before, I shall pretty
well tire him out, and then you being the reserve, he'll come at you,
and then he'll find out his mistake.  And I say, Singhy, old chap, I do
hope that my eyes won't be so closed that I can't see.  Now then, come
up to our room.  It's a holiday, and the rules won't count to-day.  Come
on, and we'll talk it over."

"But--" began Singh.

"Now, don't be obstinate.  You promised father you'd try and give way to
me over English matters.  Now, didn't you?"

"Well," said the lad hesitatingly, "I suppose I did."

"Come on, then.  You see war's begun, and we have got to settle our plan
of campaign."

The young Maharajah nodded his head and smiled.

"Yes," he said, "come up to our room.  We ought to dress, oughtn't we,
to see the procession?  I say, I don't know how it is, I always like
fighting against any one who tries to bully.  I am not sorry that war
has begun."

"Neither am I," said the English lad quietly, "for things have been very
unpleasant ever since we came here, and when we've got this over perhaps
we shall be at peace."



CHAPTER THREE.

THE PRINCE'S REGALIA.

The bedroom shared by Glyn Severn and Singh was one of a series, small
and particularly comfortable, in the new annexe the Doctor had built
expressly for lecture-room and dormitories when his establishment began
to increase.

The comfortably furnished room just sufficed for two narrow beds and the
customary furniture; and as soon as the two lads had entered, Singh
hurried to his chest of drawers, unlocked one, took out a second bunch
of keys to that he carried in his pocket, and was then crossing to a
sea-going portmanteau standing in one corner, when Glyn, who was looking
very thoughtful and abstracted, followed, and as Singh knelt down and
threw open the travelling-case, laid his hand upon the lad's shoulder.
"What are you going to do?" he said shortly.  "Only look out two or
three things that there's not room for in the drawer."

"What for?"

"Why, to dress for the procession."

"Stuff and nonsense!  You are quite right as you are," cried Glyn
half-mockingly.  "You must learn to remember that you are in England,
where nobody dresses up except soldiers.  Why, what were you going to
do?"

"I was going to put on a white suit and belt."

"Nonsense!" cried Glyn.  "This isn't India, but Devonshire.  Why, if you
were to come down dressed like that the boys would all laugh at you, and
the crowd out in the road shout and cheer."

"Well, of course," said Singh; "they'd see I was a prince."

"Oh, what a rum fellow you are!" cried Glyn, gripping his companion's
shoulders and laughingly shaking him to and fro.  "I thought that I had
made you understand that now we are over here you were to dress just the
same as an English boy.  Why, don't you know that when we had a king in
England he used to dress just like any ordinary gentleman, only
sometimes he would wear a star on his breast."

"Oh, but surely," began Singh, in a disappointed tone, "he must have--"

"Yes, yes, yes; sometimes," cried Glyn.  "I know what you mean.  On
state occasions, or when he went to review troops, he would wear grand
robes or a field-marshal's uniform."

"But didn't he wear his crown?"

"No," cried Glyn, bursting out laughing.  "That's only put on for a
little while when he's made king."

"What does he do with it, then, at other times?"

"Nothing," cried Glyn merrily.  "It's kept shut up in a glass case at
the Tower, for people to go and see."

"England seems a queer place," said Singh quietly.

"Very," cried Glyn drily.  "You never want those Indian clothes, and you
ought to have done as I told you--left them behind."

"But the Colonel didn't say so," replied the boy warmly.  "He said that
some day he might take me with him to Court.  It was when I asked him
for the emeralds."

"What do you mean--the belt?" said Glyn quickly.

