      Is, like your mountains, still bedewed with tears?
            .   .   .   .   .   .   .
      Forgive! forget! lest harsher lips should say,
      Like your turf fire, your rancour smoulders long,
      And let Oblivion strew Time's ashes o'er your wrong.'
                                          Alfred Austin.

At tea-time, and again after our simple dinner--for Bridget Thunder's
repertory is not large, and Benella's is quite unsuited to the Knockcool
markets--we wend our way to a certain house that stands by itself on
the road to Lisdara. It is only a whitewashed cabin with green window
trimmings, but it is a larger and more comfortable one than we commonly
see, and it is the perfection of neatness within and without. The stone
wall that encloses it is whitewashed too, and the iron picket railing at
the top is painted bright green; the stones on the posts are green also,
and there is the prettiest possible garden, with nicely cut borders of
box. In fine, if ever there was a cheery place to look at, Sarsfield
Cottage is that one; and if ever there was a cheerless gentleman, it is
Mr. Jordan, who dwells there. Mrs. Wogan Odevaine commended him to us
as the man of all others with whom to discuss Irish questions, if we
wanted, for once in a way, to hear a thoroughly disaffected, outraged,
wrong-headed, and rancorous view of things.

"He is an encyclopaedia, and he is perfectly delightful on any topic in
the universe but the wrongs of Ireland," said she; "not entirely sane
and yet a good father, and a good neighbour, and a good talker. Faith,
he can abuse the English government with any man alive! He has a smaller
grudge against you Americans, perhaps, than against most of the other
nations, so possibly he may elect to discuss something more cheerful
than our national grievances; if he does, and you want a livelier topic,
just mention--let me see--you might speak of Wentworth, who destroyed
Ireland's woollen industry, though it is true he laid the foundation
of the linen trade, so he wouldn't do, though Mr. Jordan is likely to
remember the former point and forget the latter. Well, just breathe the
words 'Catholic Disqualification' or 'Ulster Confiscation,' and you will
have as pretty a burst of oratory as you'd care to hear. You remember
that exasperated Englishman who asked in the House why Irishmen were
always laying bare their grievances. And Major O'Gorman bawled across
the floor, 'Because they want them redressed!'"

Salemina and I went to call on Mr. Jordan the very next day after our
arrival at Knockcool. Over the sitting-room or library door at Sarsfield
Cottage is a coat of arms with the motto of the Jordans, 'Percussus
surgam'; and as our friend is descended from Richard Jordan of Knock,
who died on the scaffold at Claremorris in the memorable year 1798, I
find that he is related to me, for one of the De Exeter Jordans married
Penelope O'Connor, daughter of the king of Connaught. He took her
to wife, too, when the espousal of anything Irish, names, language,
apparel, customs, or daughters, was high treason, and meant instant
confiscation of estates. I never thought of mentioning the relationship,
for obviously a family cannot hold grievances for hundreds of years and
bequeath a sense of humour at the same time.

The name Jordan is derived, it appears, from a noble ancestor who was
banner-bearer in the Crusades and who distinguished himself in many
battles, but particularly in one fought against the infidels on the
banks of the River Jordan in the Holy Land. In this conflict he was
felled to the ground three times during the day, but owing to his
gigantic strength, his great valour, and the number of the Saracens
prostrated by his sword, he succeeded in escaping death and keeping
the banner of the Cross hoisted; hence by way of eminence he was called
Jordan; and the motto of this illustrious family ever since has been,
'Though I fall I rise.'

Mr. Jordan's wife has been long dead, but he has four sons, only one of
them, Napper Tandy, living at home. Theobald Wolfe Tone is practising
law in Dublin; Hamilton Rowan is a physician in Cork; and Daniel
O'Connell, commonly called 'Lib' (a delicate reference to the
Liberator), is still a lad at Trinity. It is a great pity that Mr.
Jordan could not have had a larger family, that he might have kept fresh
in the national heart the names of a few more patriots; for his library
walls, 'where Memory sits by the altar she has raised to Woe,' are hung
with engravings and prints of celebrated insurgents, rebels, agitators,
demagogues, denunciators, conspirators,--pictures of anybody, in a word,
who ever struck a blow, right or wrong, well or ill judged, for the
green isle. That gallant Jacobite, Patrick Sarsfield, Burke, Grattan,
Flood, and Robert Emmet stand shoulder to shoulder with three Fenian
gentlemen, names Allan, Larkin, and O'Brien, known in ultra-Nationalist
circles as the 'Manchester martyrs.' For some years after this trio was
hanged in Salford jail, it appears that the infant mind was sadly mixed
in its attempt to separate knowledge in the concrete from the more or
less abstract information contained in the Catechism; and many a bishop
was shocked, when asking in the confirmation service, "Who are the
martyrs?" to be told, "Allan, Larkin, and O'Brien, me lord!"

Francesca says she longs to smuggle into Mr. Jordan's library a picture
of Tom Steele, one of Daniel O'Connell's henchmen, to whom he gave the
title of Head Pacificator of Ireland. Many amusing stories are told
of this official, of his gaudy uniform, his strut and swagger, and his
pompous language. At a political meeting on one occasion, he attacked,
it seems, one Peter Purcell, a Dublin tradesman who had fallen out with
the Liberator on some minor question. "Say no more on the subject, Tom,"
cried O'Connell, who was in the chair, "I forgive Peter from the bottom
of my heart."

"You may forgive him, liberator and saviour of my country," rejoined
Steele, in a characteristic burst of his amazingly fervent rhetoric.
"Yes, you, in the discharge of your ethereal functions as the moral
regenerator of Ireland, may forgive him; but, revered leader, I also
have functions of my own to perform; and I tell you that, as Head
Pacificator of Ireland, I can never forgive the diabolical villain that
dared to dispute your august will."

The doughty Steele, who appears to have been but poorly fitted by nature
for his office, was considered at the time to be half a madman, but as
Sir James O'Connell, Daniel's candid brother, said, "And who the divil
else would take such a job?" At any rate, when we gaze at Mr. Jordan's
gallery, imagining the scene that would ensue were the breath of life
breathed into the patriots' quivering nostrils, we feel sure that the
Head Pacificator would be kept busy.

Dear old white-haired Mr. Jordan, known in select circles as 'Grievance
Jordan,' sitting in his library surrounded by his denunciators,
conspirators, and martyrs, with incendiary documents piled mountains
high on his desk--what a pathetic anachronism he is after all!

The shillelagh is hung on the wall now, for the most part, and faction
fighting is at an end; but in the very last moments of it there were
still 'ructions' between the Fitzgeralds and the Moriartys, and the
age-old reason of the quarrel was, according to the Fitzgeralds, the
betrayal of the 'Cause of Ireland.' The particular instance occurred in
the sixteenth century, but no Fitzgerald could ever afterward meet any
Moriarty at a fair without crying, "Who dare tread on the tail of me
coat?" and inviting him to join in the dishcussion with shticks. This
practically is Mr. Jordan's position; and if an Irishman desires to
live entirely in the past, he can be as unhappy as any man alive. He is
writing a book, which Mrs. Wogan Odevaine insists is to be called The
Groans of Ireland; but after a glance at a page of memoranda pencilled
in a collection of Swift's Irish Tracts that he lent to me (the
volume containing that ghastly piece of irony, The Modest Proposal for
Preventing the Poor of Ireland from being a Burden to their Parents
and Country), I have concluded that he is editing a Catalogue of Irish
Wrongs, Alphabetically Arranged. This idea pleased Mrs. Wogan Odevaine
extremely; and when she drove over to tea, bringing several cheerful
young people to call upon us, she proposed, in the most light-hearted
way in the world, to play what she termed the Grievance Game, an
intellectual diversion which she had invented on the instant. She
proposed it, apparently, with a view of showing us how small a knowledge
of Ireland's ancient wrongs is the property of the modern Irish girl,
and how slight a hold on her memory and imagination have the unspeakably
bitter days of the long ago.

We were each given pencil and paper, and two or three letters of the
alphabet, and bidden to arrange the wrongs of Ireland neatly under
them, as we supposed Mr. Jordan to be doing for the instruction and the
depression of posterity. The result proved that Mrs. Odevaine was a true
prophet, for the youngest members of the coterie came off badly enough,
and read their brief list of grievances with much chagrin at their lack
of knowledge; the only piece of information they possessed in common
being the inherited idea that England never had understood Ireland,
never would, never could, never should, never might understand her.

Rosetta Odevaine succeeded in remembering, for A, F, and H, Absenteeism,
Flight of the Earls, Famine, and Hunger; her elder sister, Eileen, fresh
from college, was rather triumphant with O and P, giving us Oppression
of the Irish Tenantry, Penal Laws, Protestant Supremacy, Poynings' Law,
Potato Rot, and Plantations. Their friend, Rhona Burke, had V, W, X, Y,
Z, and succeeded only in finding Wentworth and Woollen Trade Destroyed,
until Miss Odevaine helped her with Wood's Halfpence, about which
everybody else had to be enlightened; and there was plenty of laughter
when Francesca suggested for V, Vipers Expelled by St. Patrick. Salemina
carried off the first prize; but we insisted C and D were the easiest
letters; at any rate, her list showed great erudition, and would
certainly have pleased Mr. Jordan. C, Church Cess, Catholic
Disqualification, Crimes Act of 1887, Confiscations, Cromwell, Carrying
Away of Lia Fail (Stone of Destiny) from Tara. D, Destruction of Trees
on Confiscated Lands, Discoverers (of flaws in Irish titles), Debasing
of the Coinage by James I.

Mrs. Odevaine came next with R and S. R, Recall of Lord Fitzwilliams
by Pitt, Rundale Land Tenure, Rack-Rents, Ribbonism. S, Schism Act,
Supremacy Act, Sixth Act of George I.

I followed with T and U, having unearthed Tithes and the Test Act for
the first, and Undertakers, the Acts of Union and Uniformity, for the
second; while Francesca, who had been given I, J, K, L, and M, disgraced
herself by failing on all the letters but the last, under which she
finally catalogued one particularly obnoxious wrong in Middlemen.

This ignorance of the past may have its bright side, after all, though
to speak truthfully, it did show a too scanty knowledge of national
history. But if one must forget, it is as well to begin with the wrongs
of far-off years, those 'done to your ancient name or wreaked upon your
race.'



Part Fourth--Connaught.



Chapter XXII. The Weeping West.

     'Veiled in your mist, and diamonded with showers.'
                                     Alfred Austin.


                              Shan Van Vocht Hotel,
                                Heart of Connemara.


Shan Van Vocht means in English the 'Poor Little Old Woman,' one of the
many endearing names given to Ireland in the Gaelic. There is, too,
a well-known rebel song called by this title--one which was not only
written in Irish and English, but which was translated into French for
the soldiers at Brest who were to invade Ireland under Hoche.

We had come from Knockcool, Donegal, to Westport, in County Mayo, and
the day was enlivened by two purely Irish touches, one at the beginning
and one at the end. We alighted at a certain railway junction to
await our train, and were interested in a large detachment of
soldiers--leaving for a long journey, we judged, by the number of
railway carriages and the amount of luggage and stores. In every crowded
compartment there were two or three men leaning out over the locked
doors; for the guard was making ready to start. All were chatting gaily
with their sweethearts, wives, and daughters, save one gloomy fellow
sitting alone in a corner, searching the crowd with sad eyes for a
wished-for face or a last greeting. The bell rang, the engine stirred;
suddenly a pretty, rosy girl flew breathlessly down the platform,
pushing her way through the groups of onlookers. The man's eyes lighted;
he rose to his feet, but the other fellows blocked the way; the door was
locked, and he had but one precious moment. Still he was equal to
the emergency, for he raised his fist and with one blow shattered the
window, got his kiss, and the train rumbled away, with his victorious
smile set in a frame of broken glass! I liked that man better than any
one I've seen since Himself deserted me for his Duty! How I hope the
pretty girl will be faithful, and how I hope that an ideal lover will
not be shot in South Africa!

And if he was truly Irish, so was the porter at a little way station
where we stopped in the dark, after being delayed interminably at
Claremorris by some trifling accident. We were eight persons packed into
a second-class carriage, and totally ignorant of our whereabouts; but
the porter, opening the door hastily, shouted, "Is there anny one there
for here?"--a question so vague and illogical that none of us said
anything in reply, but simply gazed at one another, and then laughed as
the train went on.

We are on a here-to-day-and-gone-to-morrow journey, determined to avoid
the railways, and travel by private conveyance and the public 'long
cars,' just for a glimpse of the Weeping West before we settle down
quietly in County Meath for our last few weeks of Irish life.

Thus far it has been a pursuit of the picturesque under umbrellas;
in fact, we're desthroyed wid the dint of the damp! 'Moist and
agreeable--that's the Irish notion both for climate and company.' If
the barometer bore any relation to the weather, we could plan our drives
with more discretion; but it sometimes remains as steady as a rock
during two days of sea mist, and Francesca, finding it wholly regardless
of gentle tapping, lost her temper on one occasion and rapped it
so severely as to crack the glass. That this peculiarity of Irish
barometers has been noted before we are sure, because of this verse
written by a native bard:--

     'When the glass is up to thirty,
      Be sure the weather will be dirty.
      When the glass is high, O very!
      There'll be rain in Cork and Kerry.
      When the glass is low, O Lork!
      There'll be rain in Kerry and Cork!'

I might add:--

      And when the glass has climbed its best,
      The sky is weeping in the West.

The national rainbow is as deceitful as the barometer, and it is no
uncommon thing for us to have half a dozen of them in a day, between
heavy showers, like the smiles and tears of Irish character; though, to
be sure, one does not need to be an Irish patriot to declare that a fine
day in this country is worth three fine days anywhere else. The present
weather is accounted for partially by the fact that, as Horace Walpole
said, summer has set in with its usual severity, and the tourist is
abroad in the land.

I am not sure but that we belong to the hated class for the moment,
though at least we try to emulate tourist virtues, if there are any, and
avoid tourist vices, which is next to impossible, as they are the fruit
of the tour itself. It is the circular tour which, in its effect upon
the great middle class, is the most virulent and contagious, and which
breeds the most offensive habits of thought and speech. The circular
tour is a magnificent idea, a praiseworthy business scheme; it has
educated the minds of millions and why it should have ruined their
manners is a mystery, unless indeed they had none when they were at
home. Some of our fellow-travellers with whom we originally started
disappear every day or two, to join us again. We lose them temporarily
when we take a private conveyance or when they stop at a cheap hotel,
but we come altogether again on coach or long car; and although they
have torn off many coupons in the interval, their remaining stock seems
to assure us of their society for days to come.

We have a Protestant clergyman who is travelling for his health,
but beguiling his time by observations for a volume to be called The
Relation between Priests and Pauperism. It seems, at first thought,
as if the circular coupon system were ill fitted to furnish him with
corroborative detail; but inasmuch as every traveller finds in a country
only, so to speak, what he brings to it, he will gather statistics
enough. Those persons who start with a certain bias of mind in one
direction seldom notice any facts that would throw out of joint those
previously amassed; they instinctively collect the ones that 'match,'
all others having a tendency to disturb the harmony of the original
scheme. The clergyman's travelling companion is a person who possesses
not a single opinion, conviction, or trait in common with him; so we
conclude that they joined forces for economy's sake. This comrade we
call 'the man with the evergreen heart,' for we can hardly tell by his
appearance whether he is an old young man or a young old one. With his
hat on he is juvenile; when he removes it, he is so distinctly
elderly that we do not know whether to regard him as damaged youth or
well-preserved old age; but he transfers his solicitous attentions to
lady after lady, rebuffs not having the slightest effect upon his warm,
susceptible, ardent nature. We suppose that he is single, but we know
that he can be married at a moment's notice by anybody who is willing to
accept the risks of the situation. Then we have a nice schoolmaster, so
agreeable that Salemina, Francesca, and I draw lots every evening as
to who shall sit beside him next day. He has just had seventy boys down
with measles at the same time, giving prizes to those who could show the
best rash! Salemina is no friend to the competitive system in education,
but this appealed to her as being as wise as it was whimsical.

We have also in our company an indiscreet and inflammable Irishman from
Wexford and a cutler from Birmingham, who lose no opportunity to have
a conversational scrimmage. When the car stops to change or water the
horses (and as for this last operation, our steeds might always manage
it without loss of time by keeping their mouths open), we generally
hear something like this; for although the two gentlemen have never met
before, they fight as if they had known each other all their lives.

Mr. Shamrock. "Faith, then, if you don't like the hotels and the
railroads, go to Paris or London; we've done widout you up to now,
and we can kape on doing widout you! We'd have more money to spind in
entertainin' you if the government hadn't taken three million of pounds
out of us to build fortifications in China."

Mr. Rose. "That's all bosh and nonsense; you wouldn't know how to manage
an hotel if you had the money."

Mr. Shamrock. "If we can't make hotel-kapers, it's soldiers we can make;
and be the same token you can't manage India or Canada widout our help!
Faith, England owes Ireland more than she can pay, and it's not her
business to be thravelin' round criticisin' the throubles she's helped
to projuce."

Mr. Rose. "William Ewart Gladstone did enough for your island to make up
for all the harm that the other statesmen may or may not have done."

Mr. Shamrock, touched in his most vulnerable point, shrieks above the
rattle of the wheels: "The wurrst statesman that iver put his name to
paper was William Ewart Gladstone!"

Mr. Rose. "The best, I say!"

Mr. Shamrock. "I say the wurrst!"

Mr. Rose. "The best!!"

Mr. Shamrock. "The wurrst!!"

Mr. Rose (after a pause). "It's your absentee landlords that have done
the mischief. I'd hang every one of them, if I had my way."

Mr. Shamrock. "Faith, they'd be absent thin, sure enough!"

And at this everybody laughs, and the trouble is over for a brief space,
much to the relief of Mrs. Shamrock, until her husband finds himself,
after a little, sufficiently calm to repeat a Cockney anecdote, which is
received by Mr. Rose in resentful silence, it being merely a description
of the common bat, an unfortunate animal that, according to Mr.
Shamrock, "'as no 'ole to 'ide in, no 'ands to 'old by, no 'orns to 'urt
with, though Nature 'as given 'im 'ooks be'ind to 'itch 'imself up by."

The last two noteworthy personages in our party are a dapper Frenchman,
who is in business at Manchester, and a portly Londoner, both of whom
are seeing Ireland for the first time. The Frenchman does not grumble at
the weather, for he says that in Manchester it rains twice a day all the
year round, save during the winter, when it commonly rains all day.

Sir James Paget, in an address on recreation, defined its chief element
to be surprise. If that is true, the portly Londoner must be exhilarated
beyond words. But with him the sensation does not stop with surprise:
it speedily becomes amazement, and then horror; for he is of the
comparative type, and therefore sees things done and hears things said,
on every hand, that are not said and done at all in the same way in
London. He sees people--ay, and policemen--bicycling on footpaths and
riding without lamps, and is horrified to learn that they are seldom,
if ever, prosecuted. He is shocked at the cabins, and the rocks, and the
beggar children, and the lack of trees; at the lack of logic, also, and
the lack of shoes; at the prevalence of the brogue; above all, at the
presence of the pig in the parlour. He is outraged at the weather, and
he minds getting wet the more because he hates Irish whisky. He keeps a
little notebook, and he can hardly wait for dinner to be over, he is
so anxious to send a communication (probably signed 'Veritas') to the
London Times.
