to spy us out. I can see an officer standing up and watching us with
glasses."

"Let 'em come," said Willet. "There's no war--at least, not yet--and
there's plenty of water in the St. Lawrence for all the canoes, boats
and ships that England and France have."

"If they hail us," said Robert, "and demand, as they probably will, what
we're about, I shall tell them that we're going to the Marquis Duquesne
at Quebec and show our credentials."

The large boat rapidly came nearer, and as men on board furled the sail
others at the oars drew it alongside the little canoe, which seemed a
mere cork on the waves of the mighty St. Lawrence. But Robert, Tayoga
and Willet paddled calmly on, as if boats, barges and ships were
everyday matters to them, and were not to be noticed unduly. A tall
young man standing up in the boat hailed them in French and then in
English. Robert, watching out of the corner of his eye, saw that he was
fair, like so many of the northern French, that he was dressed in a
uniform of white with violet facings, and that his hat was black and
three-cornered. He learned afterward that it was the uniform of a
battalion of Languedoc. He saw also that the boat carried sixteen men,
all except the oarsmen being in uniform.

"Who are you?" demanded the officer imperiously.

Robert, to whom the others conceded the position of spokesman, had
decided already that his course should be one of apparent indifference.

"Travelers," he replied briefly, and the three bent to their paddles.

"What travelers are you and where are you going?" demanded the officer,
in the same imperious manner.

The wash of the heavy boat made the frail canoe rock perilously, but its
three occupants appeared not to notice it. Using wonderful skill, they
always brought it back to the true level and maintained a steady course
ahead. On board the larger boat the oarsmen, rowing hard, kept near, and
for the third time the officer demanded:

"Who are you? I represent the authority of His Majesty, King Louis of
France, upon this river, and unless you answer explicitly I shall order
my men to run you down."

"But we are messengers," said Robert calmly. "We bear letters of great
importance to the Marquis Duquesne at Quebec. If you sink us it's likely
the letters will go down with us."

"It's another matter if you are on such a mission, but I must demand
once more your names."

"The highest in rank among us is the young chief, or coming chief,
Tayoga, of the clan of the Bear, of the nation Onondaga, of the great
League of the Hodenosaunee. Next comes David Willet, a famous hunter and
scout, well known throughout the provinces of New York and Massachusetts
and even in Canada, and often called by his friends, the Iroquois, the
Great Bear. As for me, I am Robert Lennox, of Albany and sometimes of
New York, without rank or office."

The officer abated his haughty manner. The answer seemed to please him.

"That surely is explicit enough," he said. "I am Louis de Galisonniere,
a captain of the battalion Languedoc, stationed for the present at
Montreal and charged with the duty of watching the river for all
doubtful characters, in which class I was compelled to put the three of
you, if you gave no explanations."

"Galisonniere! That is a distinguished name. Was there not a Governor
General of Canada who bore it?"

"A predecessor of the present Governor General, the Marquis Duquesne. It
gives me pride to say that the Count de Galisonniere was my uncle."

Robert saw that he had found the way to young Galisonniere's good
graces through his family and he added with the utmost sincerity, too:

"New France has had many a great Governor General, as we of the English
colonies ought to know, from the Sieur de Roberval, through Champlain,
Frontenac, de Beauharnais and on to your uncle, the Count de
Galisonniere."

Willet and the Onondaga gave Robert approving looks, and the young
Frenchman flushed with pleasure.

"You have more courtesy and appreciation for us than most of the
Bostonnais," he said. "I would talk further with you, but conversation
is carried on with difficulty under such circumstances. Suppose we run
into the first cove, lift your canoe aboard, and we'll take you to
Montreal, since that's our own port of destination."

Robert agreed promptly. He wished to make a good impression upon de
Galisonniere, and, since the big boat was now far safer and more
comfortable than the canoe, two ends would be served at the same time.
Willet and the Onondaga also nodded in acquiescence, and a mile or two
farther on they and the canoe too went aboard de Galisonniere's stout
craft. Then the sail was set again, they steered to the center of the
stream and made speed for Montreal.




CHAPTER VIII

GUESTS OF THE ENEMY


Captain Louis de Galisonniere proved to be a genial host, pleased with
his guests, pleased with himself, and pleased with the situation. Brave
and alert, he had also a certain amount of vanity which Robert had
tickled. It was not for nothing that he was a nephew of Count de
Galisonniere, once Governor General of Canada, rank and birth counting
for so much then with the French nation, and it was not for nothing,
either, that he had won his captaincy by valiant and diligent service of
his own. So it afforded him great satisfaction to be hospitable now, and
also to patronize slightly these men from the south, with whom in all
probability New France would be at war before another year had passed.
It was well also to impress the Onondaga, whom his vigilant mind
recognized at once as a youth of station. None knew better than de
Galisonniere the power and importance of the Iroquois, and how they
might tip the scale in a great war between the French and British
colonies.

His boat, which he proudly called the _Frontenac_, after the early and
great Governor General of Canada, was equipped with supplies needed on
trips between ports on the St. Lawrence. After providing stools for his
guests, he offered them the light wine of France, even as de Courcelles
had done, but Robert and Tayoga declined, although Willet accepted a
glass.

"We appreciate your courtesy," said Robert, "but we descendants of the
English in America do not take much to wine. I find that my head is much
better without it."

"The intoxicating drinks of the white men are not good for the red
race," said Tayoga gravely. "The warriors of the Hodenosaunee are able
to fight anything else, but strong liquors take away their brains and
make them like little children who fly into passions over trifles."

De Galisonniere looked with great interest at the young Onondaga, being
impressed by the dignity of his manner and the soberness of his speech.

"You speak perfect English," he observed.

"I learned it in a white man's school at Albany," said Tayoga. "Lennox
was my comrade there, just as he has been in the woods."

"You will see a much greater town than Albany when you arrive at Quebec.
You will see a noble city, on a noble site, an impregnable fortress,
guarded by the most valiant troops in the world. For its like you would
have to cross the sea to our old land of France."

"I have heard much of Stadacona, which you call Quebec," said Tayoga,
without any alteration of tone. "Our old men speak often of it, when it
belonged to our brethren, the Ganeagaono, known to you as the Mohawks,
who never sold or ceded it to anybody."

De Galisonniere's face fell a little, but he recovered himself quickly.

"That was generations ago," he said, "and time makes many shifts and
changes. There is a flux and efflux of all people, including the white,
like the ceaseless movement of sand upon a beach."

The Onondaga was silent, but Robert saw that he did not unbend, and de
Galisonniere, feeling that it was unwise to pursue the topic, turned his
attention to the mighty river and its lofty wooded banks.

"I don't believe there's another river in the world the equal of this
giant French stream of ours," he said.

"Our noble British river, the Hudson, has much to say for itself," said
Robert.

"A grand river, in truth. I have seen it, but large and splendid as it
is it lacks the length and size of the St. Lawrence."

"It is beyond question a noble stream to travel on. One makes greater
speed here and suffers less hardship than in the forest."

"I am glad that I can take you to Montreal."

"Your hospitality to us, Captain de Galisonniere, is appreciated. I have
found French officers courteous and ready to share with us all they had.
You are not the first whom we have met on this journey. We encountered
far down in our province of New York the Chevalier Raymond de St. Luc."

"St. Luc! St. Luc! The very flower of French chivalry! He is a relative
of the famous La Corne de St. Luc, of whom you have doubtless heard, and
at Quebec he is considered a model of all the qualities that make a
soldier and a gentleman."

"He made a like impression upon me. Farther north we were so fortunate
as to meet more of your countrymen, Colonel de Courcelles and Captain de
Jumonville."

"I know them both! Brave officers!" said de Galisonniere.

But he turned away the conversation from the Frenchmen who had gone down
into territory that Robert considered a portion of the Province of New
York, and the lad surmised that, knowing a good deal about the nature of
their errands, he feared lest he might reveal something through chance
allusions. Instead, he talked of the St. Lawrence, Montreal, and the
glories of Quebec to which he hoped he might return soon. He addressed
most of his talk to Robert, but he spoke at times to Willet and Tayoga,
both of whom responded briefly. The wind meanwhile remained strong, and
it was not necessary to use the oars, the large sail carrying them
swiftly toward Montreal. Robert, while talking with de Galisonniere,
watched eagerly the two shores, seeing the smoke rise from the stout log
houses of the Canadians, and once the tall steeple of a church
dominating a little village, and seeming out of all proportion to the
congregation that surrounded it.

"Yes, the church is very powerful with us," said de Galisonniere,
following his eyes and noting his expression. "It suits our people,
particularly our good Canadian French. Our priests are patriotic, brave,
self-sacrificing, and are a power in our dealings with the Indians."

"I know it," said Robert.

At night they reached Montreal, then much inferior in size and
importance to Quebec, the canoe was lifted from the _Frontenac_, and
after many exchanges of courtesies, the three went to an inn.

"If chance offers," said Robert, "we shall be glad to help you as you
have helped us."

"One never knows," said de Galisonniere. "You and I need not conceal
from each other that there is much talk of war between England and
France, which, of course, would mean war also between the English and
French colonies. If it comes, and come it will, I think, I trust that no
ill luck will befall you upon the battlefield."

"And I wish you as well," said Robert, sincerely.

The canoe was left in trustworthy hands, it being their purpose to sell
it on the morrow and buy a larger boat, and they walked through the
streets of this town of Hochelaga toward their inn. There were other
Indians on the street--French Indians they were called to distinguish
them from those who formed a British alliance--but none could be
compared with Tayoga, arrayed in the full splendor of a coming chief of
the clan of the Bear, of the nation Onondaga, of the League of the
Hodenosaunee. Never had he borne himself more haughtily, never had his
height appeared greater or his presence grander. Robert, looking at him,
felt that if St. Luc was the very flower of French chivalry, this young
comrade of his was to an even greater degree the very spirit and
essence of all that was best in the great League of the Hodenosaunee.

The Indians--Hurons, Abenakis, St. Regis, Ottawas, and warriors from
farther west--watched Tayoga with fascinated eyes. They knew perfectly
well who the tall youth was, that he belonged to the great Iroquois
league, and they knew, too, in their secret hearts that he had the
superiority which Onondaga, Mohawk and their allied nations claimed.
Hence, while their looks sometimes expressed an unwilling admiration,
they were also charged always with hostility and hate. But Tayoga
apparently took no notice. Once more he was the Greek to whom all outer
peoples were barbarians.

"I don't think the French can make much progress with him," whispered
Willet to Robert. "As the Indian has no written language, his memory is
long. When we reach Quebec he'll never forget for an instant that it was
once Stadacona, a village of the Mohawks, the Keepers of the Eastern
Gate, and one of the great nations of the Hodenosaunee."

"No, he will not," said Robert, "and look who is waiting to meet us!"

Standing before a low house, which was crowded with the goods of a fur
trader, were a half-dozen Indians, wild and savage in looks to the last
degree, and in the center was one whose shoulder was bound tightly with
a great roll of deerskin. In stature he rose far above the other
warriors, and he had a thickness in proportion. The hate that the rest
had shown when they looked upon Tayoga was nothing to his, which was
the very concentrated essence of all malice.

"Our good friend, Tandakora, despite his wound seems to have arrived
ahead of us," said Willet to Robert.

"Yes, and he shows very clearly that he would like to give Tayoga to the
torture with himself as torturer, and yet he must know that it was you
who put the bullet through his shoulder."

"Quite true, Robert, but he resents the Onondaga more than he does us.
We are strangers, aliens to him, and he makes no comparisons with us,
but Tayoga is an Indian like himself, whom he has fought against, and
against whom he has failed. Watch us pass. For Tayoga, Tandakora will
not exist, and it will instill more poison into the heart of the
Ojibway."

Willet was a good prophet. The Onondaga walked within five feet of the
Ojibway, but he did not show by the slightest sign that he was aware of
the existence of Tandakora. The entire little drama, played by the
children of the forest, was perfectly clear. Tandakora was dirt under
the feet of Tayoga, and Tandakora felt that it was so. His heart burned
within him and a twinge through his shoulder added to his anger. Yet he
was powerless there in Montreal with the French troops about, and he
could merely glare impotently while the three walked by ignoring his
existence. But they did not forget him, and each in his heart resolved
to be on watch against treacherous attack.

They found on the slope of a high hill the inn to which de Galisonniere
had recommended them, and obtained quarters for the night. Monsieur
Jolivet, the proprietor, had lodged Indians before, great chiefs
treating with the French Government, and he did not think it strange
that Tayoga should come there. In truth, Monsieur Jolivet was a thrifty
man who despised no patronage for which the pay was assured, and since
peace still existed between France and Great Britain he was quite
willing to entertain any number of Bostonnais at his most excellent inn
on the slope of a high hill overlooking the St. Lawrence. Willet had
shown him the color of gold, and from natural ability and long
experience as an innkeeper being a shrewd reader of faces he was sure
that his three unusual guests could be trusted.

Willet knew Canada better than Robert, and now he acted as spokesman.

"We will sleep here only one night," he said, "because early tomorrow
morning we take boat for Quebec. We three will occupy one large room.
You have such a room with three beds, have you not?"

"I have the room," responded Monsieur Jolivet promptly, "and the beds
can be put in it at once. Then all will be arranged quickly by Lizette
and Marie, the maids. Will you permit my man, Francois, to carry your
weapons to the chamber now?"

"I think not," replied Willet, giving his rifle an affectionate look.
"I've lived so long with this good old rifle of mine that we hate to be
parted even for an hour. Tayoga and Mr. Lennox are younger than I am,
but they're beginning to feel the same way about their arms. If you
don't mind, Monsieur Jolivet, we'll keep our weapons with us."

"Ah, I see, sir, that you're a man of sentiment," said Monsieur Jolivet,
laughing and rubbing his hands. "It is well that one can feel it in this
rough world of ours. But will Monsieur see a young officer who has come
from the commandant? Merely a little inquiry about your identity and an
examination of your papers, if you have any. It's according to our
custom, and it's just a formality, nothing more."

Robert knew that it was far from being a formality, but his comrades and
he had nothing to fear, as their mission was duly accredited and they
carried the letters to the Marquis Duquesne. The young officer, a
Frenchman of Canadian birth, entered presently, and with the courtesy
characteristic of the French race, a trait that Robert liked, asked for
an account of themselves, which was given readily. As usual the effect
of the letters addressed to the Marquis Duquesne was magical, and, as
the officer withdrew, he tendered them all the help he could give for a
speedy and pleasant voyage to Quebec.

Monsieur Jolivet gave them a supper in his best style. Although a native
of New France he was of Provencal blood, and he had a poetic strain. He
offered to his guests not an excellent inn alone, but a magnificent view
also, of which he made full use. The evening being warm with a soft and
soothing wind, Marie and Lizette set the table in a little garden, in
which early flowers were blooming already, offering delicate colors of
pink and rose and pale blue. The table was spread with a white cloth,
and silver and china were not lacking. The eyes of Robert, who had a
fastidious taste, glistened.

"Monsieur Jolivet may be our enemy or not," he said, "but I like him. It
is not often that one can dine at such an inn, with such a view of
mountain, forest and magnificent river. In truth, the French do some
things well."
