"I'm sorry for him. He behaved first rate last year, though they say he
used to be a hard fellow."

"What's the use of a fellow doing as he has done?" said Haven, with
palpable disgust. "He can't make anything by it."

"Of course he can't."

"I would rather have him in the cabin than in the steerage, for he will
not obey orders; and when he is ugly, he is a perfect tiger. I wonder
what Mr. Lowington is going to do with him. There is no such thing as
expelling a fellow in this institution now. If he means to be
cross-grained, he can keep us in hot water all the time."

The officers were too much excited by the fact that the ship was outward
bound to remain long in the cabin, and they returned to the deck to
watch the progress of the vessel. At eight o'clock the Young America was
out of sight of land, though it would have been too dark to see it ten
miles distant. The quartermaster, at the helm, struck eight bells, which
were repeated on the forecastle.

"All the first part of the starboard watch, ahoy!" shouted the
boatswain, for it was now time to commence the programme of regular sea
duty.

The first lieutenant took his place, as officer of the deck, near the
helm; the second master on the forecastle and the third midshipman in
the waist. The first part of the starboard watch were stationed in
various parts of the deck. Of the four quartermasters, one was attached
to each quarter watch. The wheel was given to two hands for the first
hour, and two were placed on the top-gallant forecastle, to act as the
lookout men, to be relieved after one hour's service. The rest of the
boys were required to keep awake, but no special duty was assigned to
them. There were hands enough on deck to "tack ship," or to take in the
sails, one or two at a time.

Though the ship was nominally in the hands and under the direction of
her juvenile officers, who performed all the duties required in working
her, yet they were closely watched by the principal, who, if there was
anything wrong, informed the captain of the fact. The commander kept no
watch, but he was responsible for every manoeuvre, and for the regular
routine of duty. Mr. Lowington seldom spoke to any other officer in
regard to ship's duty or the navigation.

When the watch was set, at eight bells, most of the boys who were off
duty went into the steerage. Some of them turned in; but the novelty of
the occasion was too great to permit them to sleep. They collected in
groups, to talk over the prospects of the voyage, and the duties
required of them, as indicated by the watch bill.

Shuffles sat on a stool in the brig, still nursing his wrath. When his
supper was carried to him by the steward, his irons had been taken off.
He refused to eat, and the food was removed. As he was now quiet, the
irons were not replaced. The prisoner was far from penitent for his
offence.

Mr. Agneau, the chaplain, was very much concerned about the prisoner. He
was shocked by his disobedience, and pained to find that one who had
done so well could do so ill. The case had been fully considered in the
professors' cabin; and Mr. Lowington declared that Shuffles should stay
in the brig till he had repented of his folly, and promised obedience
for the future. The chaplain was a tender-hearted man, and he thought
that some gentle words might touch the feelings of the prisoner, and
bring him to a sense of duty. With the principal's permission,
therefore, he paid a visit to Shuffles in the evening.

"I am very sorry to find you here, Shuffles," said Mr. Agneau, when he
had locked the door behind him.

"Has Lowington sent you to torment me?" demanded the prisoner.

"Mr. Lowington, you mean," added the chaplain, gently.

"No, I mean Lowington. When a man has abused and insulted me, I can't
stop to put a handle to his name."

"I regret to find you in such an unhappy frame of mind, my young friend.
I came here of my own accord, to do what I might to help you."

"Did you, indeed!" sneered Shuffles.

"That was my only object."

"Was it? Well, if you want to help me, you will induce Lowington to let
me out of this crib, apologize for what he has done, and give me my
place in the after cabin."

"That is plainly impossible," replied the astonished chaplain.

"Then you can't do anything for me; and I think I can take care of
myself."

"I entreat you, my young friend, to consider the error of your ways."

"There is no error in my ways, Mr. Agneau."

"You are unreasonable."

"No, I'm not. I only want what is fair and right."

"Was it right for you, Shuffles, to refuse obedience to the principal,
when he told you to go aft?"

"I have always obeyed all proper orders; and under the circumstances, I
think it was right for me to refuse."

"You fill me with amazement!" exclaimed the chaplain.

"You know it was not fair to give out the offices by last year's marks,"
protested Shuffles.

"On the contrary, I think it was entirely fair."

"I haven't anything more to say if it was," replied Shuffles, in surly
tones.

The chaplain, finding the prisoner was not in a proper frame of mind for
edifying conversation, left him, and returned to the professors' cabin.
The boys had been forbidden to go near the brig, or to speak to the
prisoner; and thus far no one had exhibited any disposition to disregard
the order. Many of them, as they passed near the brig, glanced curiously
at him. After the departure of the chaplain, Wilton sat down on a stool
near the lock-up.

"How are you. Shuffles?" said he, in a low tone.

"Come here, Wilton--will you?" replied the prisoner.

"I can't; we are not allowed to speak to you."

"What do you care for that? No one can see you."

"What do you want?"

"I want to talk with you."

"I shall be punished if I'm caught."

"You won't be caught. How are our fellows now?"

"First rate," replied Wilton, walking up and down the berth deck, rising
and looking as though nothing was going on.

"You know what we were talking about just before the row," added
Shuffles, drawing his stool up to the palings.

"You said you wouldn't trust me," answered Wilton, still pacing the deck
in front of the brig.

"You told Lowington about something he had no business to know; but I
forgive you, Wilton."

"You are very willing to forgive me, now you are in a tight place."

"It was mean of you to do it, Wilton; you can't deny that. Lowington was
on the best of terms with me when I was in the after cabin, and I might
have told him a hundred things about you."

"Didn't you tell him anything?"

"Not a word."

"Well, you are a good fellow, and I always thought you were. I couldn't
see why you turned traitor to us when we intended to spend the Fourth of
July on shore."

"I was obliged to do what I did. If I hadn't, I should have been turned
out of my office."

"Perhaps you were right, Shuffles, and we won't say anything more about
the past," replied Wilton, who was too willing to be on good terms with
the powerful malcontent, even while he was a prisoner and in disgrace.

"Wilton, I am going to be captain of this ship within ten days," said
Shuffles, in a whisper. "Now you may go and tell Lowington of that."

"Of course I shall not tell him," added Wilton, indignantly.

"I told you merely to show you that I had full confidence in you--that's
all. You can betray me if you wish to do so."

"I don't wish to do anything of the kind. Of course we shall always go
together, as we did before you were an officer."

"I shall be an officer again soon."

"What's the use of talking about such a thing?"

"I shall."

"Do you mean to get up the mutiny?"

"I do. I feel more like it now than I ever did before," replied
Shuffles; and his low tones came from between his closed teeth.

"It's no use to think of such a thing. It's too wild."

"No matter if it is; it shall be carried out."

"The fellows won't go in for it; they won't dare to do it."

"Yes, they will. I know them better than you do, Wilton. It isn't quite
time yet; but in three or four days they will be ready for anything."

"You can't bring them up to what you mean."

"Yes, I can."

"What do you expect to do, locked up in that place?" demanded Wilton,
incredulously.

"When I get ready to go out of this place, I shall go. I needn't stay
here any longer than I please."

"Do you really mean to get up a mutiny?"

"Hush! Don't call it by that name."

"What shall I call it?"

"Call it making a chain."

"I don't understand you," answered Wilton, puzzled by the expression.

"I know what I'm about, and I have got more friends in the ship than
Lowington has. And I know exactly how to manage the whole thing," added
Shuffles, confidently.

"But the fellows are all perfectly satisfied with their condition. They
wish to go to Europe, and are pleased with the prospect before them."

"Perhaps they are; and they shall all go to Europe, and travel about
without being tied to Lowington's coat-tails. I shall come out of this
place to-morrow, and we will work the thing up."

"I'm in for a time with any good fellow; but I don't think we can make
this thing go," said Wilton. "Hush! Don't say another word. There comes
an officer."

One bell, indicating half past eight in the evening, struck on deck. It
was the duty of the master and midshipman on deck, alternately, to pass
through the steerage every half hour during the watch, to see that there
was no disorder, and that the lights were all secure, so as to avoid any
danger from fire. Henry Martyn, the second master, performed this office
on the present occasion. He descended the main ladder, and Wilton, who
expected the visit when he heard the stroke of the bell, retreated to
his mess room, and threw himself into his berth. Harry walked around the
steerage, and glanced into the gangways, from which the rooms opened.

"Harry," said Shuffles, in a low tone, as the master was about to return
to the deck.

"Did you speak to me?" asked Harry, stepping up to the bars of the cage.

"I did. Will you oblige me by telling the chaplain that I would like to
see him?" added the prisoner.

"I will;" and Harry knocked at the door of the professors' cabin.




CHAPTER X.

MAKING A CHAIN.


The chaplain was too glad of an opportunity to converse with the
prisoner to refuse his request, and he hastened to the brig, hoping to
find Shuffles in a better state of mind than when he had visited him
before. Mr. Agneau entered the lock-up, and was securing the door behind
him, when the prisoner spoke.

"You needn't lock it, sir; I will not attempt to escape," said he. "I
sent for you to apologize for my rudeness."

"Indeed! Then I am very glad to see you," replied the delighted
chaplain. "I have been sorely grieved at your misconduct, and I would
fain have brought you to see the error of your ways."

"I see it now, sir," replied Shuffles, with apparent penitence. "I'm
afraid I am a great deal worse than you think I am, sir."

"It is of no consequence what I think, Shuffles, if you are conscious of
the wrong you have done," added the worthy chaplain. "You behaved
exceedingly well last year, and it almost broke my heart to see you
relapsing into your former evil habits."

"I am grateful to you for the interest you have taken in me, and I
assure you I have often been encouraged to do well by your kind words,"
continued the penitent, with due humility. "I have done wrong, and I
don't deserve to be forgiven."

"'He that humbleth himself shall be exalted,'" said Mr. Agneau,
gratified at the great change which had apparently been wrought in the
prisoner. "If you are really sorry for your offence, Mr. Lowington, I
doubt not, will pardon you, and restore you to favor again."

"I don't deserve it, sir. Since you left me, I have been thinking of my
past life. I dare not tell you how bad I have been."

"You need not tell me. It is not necessary that you should confess your
errors to me. There is One who knows them, and if you are sincerely
repentant He will pity and forgive you."

"I think I should feel better if I told some one of my misdeeds."

"Perhaps you would; that is for you to judge. I will speak to Mr.
Lowington about you to-night. What shall I say to him?"

"I hardly know. I deserve to be punished. I have done wrong, and am
willing to suffer for it."

The tender-hearted chaplain thought that Shuffles was in a beautiful
state of mind, and he desired to have him released at once, that he
might converse with him on great themes under more favorable
circumstances; but Shuffles still detained him.

"I'm afraid I have ruined myself on board this ship," continued
Shuffles, persisting in his self-humiliation.

"If you manfully acknowledge your fault, you will be freely and
generously forgiven."

"Mr. Lowington hates me now, after what I have done."

"O, far from it!" exclaimed the chaplain. "It will be a greater
satisfaction to him than to you to forgive you. You are no longer of the
opinion that you were unfairly used in the distribution of the offices,
I suppose."

"Mr. Agneau, I was beside myself when I resisted the principal. I should
not have done it if I had been in my right mind."

"You were very angry."

"I was--I was not myself."

"Anger often makes men crazy."

"You don't understand me, Mr. Agneau."

"Indeed, I do. You mean that you deluded yourself into the belief that
you had been wronged, and that you ought not to obey the orders of your
officers, and of the principal. The force that was used made you so
angry that you did not know what you were about," added the sympathizing
chaplain.

"In one word, Mr. Agneau, I had been drinking," said Shuffles, with
something like desperation in his manner, as he bent his head, and
covered his face with his hands.

"Drinking!" gasped the chaplain, filled with horror at the confession.

"I told you I was worse than you thought I was," moaned Shuffles.

"Is it possible!"

"It is true, sir; I say it with shame."

"Are you in the habit of taking intoxicating drinks?" asked the
chaplain, confounded beyond measure at this complication of the
difficulty.

"I am not in the habit of it, because I can't get liquor all the time.
My father has wine on his table, and I always was allowed to drink one
glass."

"Can it be!" ejaculated the chaplain. "A youth of seventeen----"

"I'm eighteen now, sir."
