They did so, but the other ducks did not seem glad to see them.

"Look!" they cried. "Here comes another brood, as if there were not
enough of us already. And oh, dear, how ugly that large one is! We won't
stand him."

Then one of the ducks flew at the ugly duckling and bit him in the neck.

[Illustration: The ugly duckling and the other ducks]

"Let him alone," said the mother; "he is doing no harm."

"Perhaps not," said the duck who had bitten the poor duckling, "but he
is too ugly to stay here. He must be driven out."

"Those are pretty children that the mother has," said the old duck with
the rag around her leg. "They are all pretty but that one. What a pity!"

"Yes," replied the mother duck, "he is not handsome, but he is
good-tempered, and he swims as well as any of the others. I think he
will grow to be pretty. Perhaps he stayed too long in the egg."

"Well, make yourselves at home," said the old duck. "If you find an
eel's head, you may bring it to me."

And they did make themselves at home--all but the poor ugly duckling.
His life was made quite miserable. The ducks bit him, and the hens
pecked him. So it went on the first day, and each day it grew worse.

The poor duckling was very unhappy. At last he could stand it no longer,
and he ran away. As he flew over the fence, he frightened the little
birds on the bushes.

"That is because I am so ugly," thought the duckling.

He flew on until he came to a moor where some wild ducks lived. They
laughed at him and swam away from him.

Some wild geese came by, and they laughed at the duckling, too. Just
then some guns went bang! bang! The hunters were all around. The hunting
dogs came splash! into the swamp, and one dashed close to the duckling.
The dog looked at him and went on.

"Well, I can be thankful for that," sighed he. "I am so ugly that even
the dog will not bite me."

When all was quiet, the duckling started out again. A storm was raging,
and he found shelter in a poor hut. Here lived an old woman with her cat
and her hen. The old woman could not see well, and she thought he was a
fat duck. She kept him three weeks, hoping that she would get some duck
eggs, but the duckling did not lay.

After a while the fresh air and sunshine streamed in at the open door,
and the duckling longed to be out on the water. The cat and the hen
laughed when he told them of his wish.

"You must be crazy," said the hen. "I do not wish to swim. The cat does
not; and I am sure our mistress does not."

"You do not understand me," said the duckling. "I will go out into the
wide world."

"Yes, do go," said the hen.

And the duckling went away. He swam on the water and dived, but still
all the animals passed him by because he was so ugly; and the poor
duckling was lonesome.


III


Now the winter came, and soon it was very cold. Snow and sleet fell, and
the ugly duckling had a very unhappy time.

One evening a whole flock of handsome white birds rose out of the
bushes. They were swans. They gave a strange cry, and spreading their
great wings, flew away to warmer lands and open lakes.

The ugly duckling felt quite strange, and he gave such a loud cry that
he frightened himself. He could not forget those beautiful happy birds.
He knew not where they had gone, but he wished he could have gone with
them.

The winter grew cold--very cold. The duckling swam about in the water to
keep from freezing, but every night the hole in which he swam became
smaller and smaller. At last he was frozen fast in the ice.

Early the next morning a farmer found the duckling and took him to the
farmhouse. There in a warm room the duckling came to himself again. The
children wished to play with him, but he was afraid of them.

In his terror he fluttered into the milk pan and splashed the milk about
the room. The woman clapped her hands at him, and that frightened him
still more. He flew into the butter tub and then into the meal barrel.

How he did look then! The children laughed and screamed. The woman
chased him with the fire tongs. The door stood open, and the duckling
slipped out into the snow.

It was a cruel, hard winter, and he nearly froze. At last the warm sun
began to shine, and the larks to sing. The duckling flapped his wings
and found that they were strong. Away he flew over the meadows and
fields.

Soon he found himself in a beautiful garden where the apple trees were
in full bloom, and the long branches of the willow trees hung over the
shores of the lake. Just in front of him he saw three beautiful white
swans swimming lightly over the water.

"I will fly to those beautiful birds," he said. "They will kill me
because I am so ugly; but it is all the same. It is better to be killed
by them than to be bitten by the ducks and pecked by the hens."

So he flew into the water and swam towards the beautiful birds. They saw
the duckling and came sailing down toward him. He bowed his head saying,
"Kill me, oh, kill me."

But what was this he saw in the clear water? It was his own image, and
lo! he was no longer a clumsy dark-gray bird, but a--swan, a beautiful
white swan. It matters not if one was born in a duck yard, if one has
only lain in a swan's egg. The other swans swam around him to welcome
him.

[Illustration: The little children see the new swan]

Some little children came into the garden with corn and other grains
which they threw into the water. The smallest one cried, "Oh, see! there
is a new swan, and it is more beautiful than any of the others."

The ugly duckling was shy and at first hid his head under his wing. Then
he felt so happy that he raised his neck and said, "I never dreamed of
so much happiness when I was an ugly duckling."

--HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN.




THE WHITE BLACKBIRD

I


I was born a blackbird in a bushy thicket near a meadow. My father took
good care of his family and would peck about all day for insects. These
he brought home to my mother, holding them by the tail so as not to mash
them. He had a sweet voice, too, and every evening sang beautiful songs.

I should have been happy, but I was not. I ate little and was weak; and
from the first, I was different from my brothers and sisters. They had
glossy, black feathers, while mine were dirty gray. These made my father
angry whenever he looked at them.

When I moulted for the first time, he watched me closely. While the
feathers were falling out and while I was naked, he was kind; but my new
feathers drove him wild with anger. I did not wonder. I was no longer
even gray; I had become snow white. I was a white blackbird! Did such a
thing ever happen in a blackbird family before?

It made me very sad to see my father so vexed over me. But it is hard to
stay sad forever, and one sunshiny spring day I opened my bill and began
to sing. At the first note my father flew up into the air like a
sky-rocket.

"What do I hear?" he cried. "Is that the way a blackbird whistles? Do I
whistle that way?"

"I whistle the best I can," I replied.

"That is not the way we whistle in my family," my father said. "We have
whistled for many, many years and know how to do it. It is not enough
for you to be white; you must make that horrible noise. The truth is you
are not a blackbird."

"I will leave home," I answered with a sob. "I will go far away where I
can pick up a living on earthworms and spiders."

"Do as you please," my father said. "You are not a blackbird."


II


I flew away early the next morning, and was lucky enough to find shelter
under an old gutter. It rained hard that night. I was just about to go
to bed, when a very wet bird came in and sat down beside me. His
feathers were grayish like mine, but he was much larger than myself.

"Who are you?" he asked.

"I don't know," I replied. "I pass for a blackbird but I am white."

"I am the finest bird in the world," he said. "I am a carrier pigeon and
carry messages."

Then I saw that a traveling bag hung from his neck.

"Maybe I am a pigeon," I said, "since I am not a blackbird."

"No," he answered, "a runt like you could not be a pigeon."

The next morning the pigeon sprang from the gutter and flew away as fast
as the wind. As I was lonely, I followed him. He flew faster and faster,
but I kept up for a good while. At last my strength gave out and I fell
down into a meadow.

I was stunned by the fall. When I came to my senses, two birds stood
near by looking at me. One was a dainty little magpie; the other a
soft-eyed turtle dove. The magpie kindly offered me some berries she had
gathered.

"Who are you?" she asked.

[Illustration: The three birds meet]

"A blackbird or a pigeon," I said sadly. "I don't know which."

"Are you joking?" she cried. "You are a magpie."

"But magpies are not white," I said.

"Russian magpies are," she answered; "perhaps you belong to that
family."

My joy was great for a moment at finding out what I was. Still I was not
sure that I was a magpie and thought I might settle the matter by
singing. I burst into song and warbled and whistled, and whistled and
warbled.

The magpie looked at me in surprise. Then her face grew sad and she
backed off from me. At last she flew away without another word. Whatever
I might be, I was not a magpie--not even a Russian magpie.

I made up my mind not to rest until I found out what bird I was. So I
flew off to a place where birds of all kinds met to talk and enjoy
themselves. There were robins and sparrows and crows and wrens and
martins and every sort of bird. But I was not like any of them and
whenever I began to sing, they all laughed.

"You are not one of us," they said; "you are a white blackbird. That is
what you are."


III


I had now seen all the birds, but none of them were as fine as the
blackbirds. I did not want to be like any of these birds; I longed to be
a blackbird, a real blackbird. That was not possible. So I made up my
mind to be content with my lot, as I had the heart of a blackbird even
if I were not black.

A great flock of blackbirds lived on the edge of a cornfield. I went to
them and asked them to let me be their helper.

"I am only a white blackbird," I said, "but I have the heart of a true
blackbird."

They let me stay. I waited on them early and late, bringing straw to
make nests and tender little worms for the baby blackbirds. The old
birds were kind to me, and I began to be happy.

Hard work did me good. I soon grew strong, and when the crows tried to
drive us away, I led the blackbirds to victory. My sight was keen, and I
was the first to find out that the scarecrow was not a man. I caught
more worms, too, than any of the blackbirds.

By and by a strange thing happened. I saw one day that my white feathers
were speckled with brown dots. They grew larger and larger until the
dots covered me all over; I was no longer white but brown. And now,
little by little, my brown coat turned darker and darker until one
morning it was black--a rich, glossy black! I was a blackbird at last.

Then the other blackbirds hopped around me with joy, crying, "He is the
largest and bravest of the blackbirds. Let him be king! Long live the
king of the blackbirds!"

--ALFRED DE MUSSET (_Adapted_).




THE BROWN THRUSH


  There's a merry brown thrush sitting up in
      the tree,
  He's singing to me! He's singing to me!
  And what does he say, little girl, little boy?
  "Oh, the world's running over with joy!
    Don't you hear? don't you see?
    Hush! look! in my tree,
  I'm as happy as happy can be!"

  And the brown thrush keeps singing, "A nest
     do you see,
  And five eggs hid by me in the juniper tree?
  Don't meddle! don't touch! little girl, little boy,
  Or the world will lose some of its joy!
    Now I'm glad! now I'm free!
    And I always shall be,
  If you never bring sorrow to me."

  So the merry brown thrush sings away in the tree,
  To you and to me, to you and to me.

--LUCY LARCOM.




THE KING AND THE GOOSEHERD

ACT I


(King in plain clothes had gone out for a walk in the park. He sat under
a tree to read a book and fell asleep. When he waked up he walked on,
forgetting his book. He sees a lad looking after a flock of geese and
calls him.)

KING: Boy, I left a book lying under a tree in the park. Will you please
get it for me? If you do, I will give you a gold piece.

BOY: Give me a gold piece to go to the park, indeed! You must have a
pocketful of gold pieces. Or you must think me more stupid than I am.

KING: Stupid! Who thinks you stupid?

BOY: Why, who would be so foolish as to give me a gold piece just for
running half a mile for a book? No, no, you are joking. You couldn't
