  write from there. Love to the mother and Mab.--Your affectionate
  brother,

  "Loftus."


Mrs. Bertram looked up with a very startled expression in her eyes.

"Now, mother, there's nothing to fret you in this," said Kate, eagerly.
"Was not Loftie always the most changeable of mortals?"

"Yes, my dear, but not quite so changeable as not to know anything at
all about a recall in the afternoon yesterday, and to have to leave us
before we are out of bed in the morning. Did anybody see Loftus go? Had
he any breakfast?"

Catherine flew away to inquire of Clara, and Mabel said in an injured
voice:

"I dare say Loftie had a telegram sent to him to the club. Anyhow, he
has all the excitement and all the pleasure. I watched him through the
spy-glass last night. He was in the Bells' boat, and Beatrice was all
alone in hers. Beatrice was talking to Loftus and the boats were almost
touching. Mother, I wish we could have a boat."

"Yes, dear, I must try and manage it for you at some future time. Well,
Catherine, have you heard anything?"

"No, mother. Loftus must have gone away very, very early. No one saw him
go; he certainly had no breakfast."

Mrs. Bertram was silent for a few moments; then, suppressing a sigh, she
said, in a would-be cheerful tone:

"Well, my loves, we must enjoy our breakfasts, even without the recreant
Loftus. Mabel, my dear, what delicious raspberries! They give me quite
an appetite."

"Kitty picked them for you, mother," said Mabel. "She has been
treasuring a special bush for you for a week past."

Mrs. Bertram looked up at her eldest daughter and smiled at her. That
smile, very much treasured by Kate, was after all but a poor attempt,
gone as soon as it came. Mrs. Bertram leant back in her chair and toyed
with the dainty fruit. Her appetite was little more than a mockery.

"It was very thoughtful of Loftus not to waken any one up to give him
breakfast," said Catherine.

Her mother again glanced at her with a shadow of approval on her worn
face. Artful Kitty had made this speech on purpose; she knew that any
praise of Loftus was balm to her mother.

After breakfast Mrs. Bertram showed rather unwonted interest in her
daughters' plans.

"It is such a lovely day I should like you to go on the water," she
said. "At the same time, I must not think of hiring a boat this summer."

"Are we so frightfully poor, mother?" asked Mab.

Mrs. Bertram's brow contracted as if in pain, but she answered with
unwonted calm and gentleness:

"I have a fixed income, my dear Mabel, but, as you know, we have come to
Northbury to retrench."

She was silent again for a minute. Then she said:

"I see nothing for it but to cultivate the Meadowsweets."

"Mother!" said Catherine. The old fire and anger had come into her
voice. Unusual as it may be with any girl brought up in such a worldly
manner, Catherine hated to take advantage of people.

"You mistake me, Kate," said her mother, shrinking back from her
daughter's eyes, as if she had received a blow. "I want you to have the
pleasure of Beatrice Meadowsweet's friendship."

"Oh, yes," replied Catherine, relieved.

"And," continued the mother, her voice growing firm and her dark eyes
meeting her daughter's fully, "I don't mean to be out in the cold, so I
shall make a friend of Mrs. Meadowsweet."

Mabel burst into a merry girlish laugh. Catherine walked across the
grass to pick a rose. Mrs. Bertram took the rose from her daughter's
hand, although she knew and Catherine knew that it was never intended
for her. She smelt the fragrant, half-open bud, then placed it in her
dress, with a simple, "Thank you, my dear."

"I am going to write a note to Mrs. Meadowsweet," she said, after a
minute or two. "I know Beatrice is coming here this afternoon. It would
give me pleasure if her mother accompanied her."

"Shall we take the note to the Gray House, mother?" eagerly asked Mabel.
"It is not too long a walk. We should like to go."

"No, my dear. You and Kate can amuse yourselves in the garden, or read
in the house, just as you please. I will write my note quietly, and when
it is written take it down to Tester at the lodge. No, thank you, my
loves, I should really like the walk, and would prefer to take it
alone."

Mrs. Bertram then returned to her drawing-room, sat down by her
davenport, and wrote as follows:

  "Rosendale Manor.

  "Thursday.

  "Dear Mrs. Meadowsweet,--Will you and Miss Beatrice join the girls
  and me at dinner this afternoon? Your daughter has already kindly
  promised to come here to play tennis to-day--at least I understand
  from Kate that such is the arrangement. Will you come with her? We
  old people can sit quietly under the shade of the trees and enjoy
  our tea, while the young folks exert themselves. Hoping to see you
  both,

  "Believe me,

  "Yours sincerely,

  "Catherine de Clifford Bertram."


Mrs. Bertram put this letter into an envelope, directed it in her
dashing and lady-like hand, and then in a slow and stately fashion
proceeded to walk down the avenue to the lodge. She was always rather
slow in her movements, and she was slower than usual to-day. She
scarcely owned to herself that she was tired, worried--in short, that
the strong vitality within her was sapped at its foundation.

A man or a woman can often live for a long time after this operation
takes place, but they are never the same again. They go slowly, with the
gait of those who are halt, through life.

Mrs. Bertram reached the lodge, and after the imperious fashion of her
class did not even knock at the closed door before she lifted the latch
and went in.

It was a shabby, little, tumble-down lodge. It needed papering, and
white-washing, and cleaning; in winter the roof let in rain, and the
rickety, ill-fitting windows admitted the cold and wind. Now, however,
it was the middle of summer. Virginia creeper and ivy, honeysuckle and
jasmine, nearly covered the walls. The little place looked picturesque
without; and within, honest, hard-working Mrs. Tester contrived with
plentiful scouring and washing to give a clean and cosy effect.

Mrs. Bertram, as she stepped into the kitchen, noticed the nice little
fire in the bright grate (the lodge boasted of no range); she also saw a
pile of buttered toast on the hob, and the tiny kitchen was fragrant
with the smell of fresh coffee.

Mrs. Bertram was not wrong when she guessed that Tester and his wife did
not live on these dainty viands.

"I'm just preparing breakfast, ma'am, for our young lady lodger," said
good Mrs. Tester, dropping a curtsey.

"For your young lady lodger? What do you mean, Mrs. Tester?"

"Well, ma'am, please take a chair, won't you, Mrs. Bertram--you'll like
to be near the fire, my lady, I'm sure." (The Testers generally spoke to
the great woman in this way--she did not trouble herself to contradict
them.) "Well, my lady, she come last night by the train. It was Davis's
cab brought her up, and set her down, her and her bits of things, just
outside the lodge. Nothing would please her but that we should give her
the front bedroom and the little parlor inside this room and she is to
pay us fifteen shillings a week, to cover board and all. It's a great
lift for Tester and me, and she's a nice-spoken young lady, and pleasant
to look at, too. Oh, yes, miss---I beg your pardon, miss. I was just a
bringing of your breakfast in, miss."

The door had been opened behind Mrs. Bertram. She started and turned, as
a tall, slim girl with a head of ruddy gold hair, a rather pale, fair
face, and big bright eyes, came in.

The girl looked at Mrs. Bertram quickly and eagerly. Mrs. Bertram looked
back at her. Neither woman flinched as she gazed, only gradually over
Mrs. Bertram's face there stole a greeny-white hue.

The girl came a little nearer. Old Mrs. Tester bustled past her with the
hot breakfast.

"_You!"_ said Mrs. Bertram, when the old woman had left the room,
"you are Josephine Hart."

"I am Josephine; you know better than to call me Hart."

"Hush! that matter has been arranged between your grandfather and my
solicitor. Do you wish the bargain undone?"

"I sincerely wish it undone."

"I think you don't," said Mrs. Bertram, slowly. She laughed in a
disagreeable manner. "The old woman is coming back," she said suddenly;
"invite me into your parlor for a moment, I have a word or two to say to
you."

Josephine led the way into the little sitting-room; she offered a chair
to Mrs. Bertram, who would not take it. Then she went and shut the door
between the kitchen and the parlor, and standing with her back to the
shut door turned and faced Mrs. Bertram.

"How did you guess my name?" she said, suddenly.

"That was not so difficult. I recognized you by the description my
daughter gave of you. She saw you, remember, that night you hid in the
avenue."

"I did not know it was that," said Josephine softly; "I thought it was
the likeness. I am the image of _him_, am I not?"

She took a small morocco case out of her pocket and proceeded to open
it.

Mrs. Bertram put her hand up to her eyes as if she would shut away a
terrible sight.

"Hush, child! how dare you? Don't show me that picture. I won't look.
What a wicked impostor you are!"

"Impostor! You know better, and my grandfather knows better. What is the
matter, Mrs. Bertram?"

Mrs. Bertram sank down into the chair which at first she had obstinately
refused.

"Josephine," she said, "I am no longer a young woman; I have not got the
strength of youth. I cannot bear up as the young can bear up. Why have
you come here? What object have you in torturing me with your presence
here?"

"I won't torture you; I shall live quietly."

"But why have you come? You had no right to come."

"I had perfect right to live where I pleased. I had all the world to
choose from, and I selected to live at your gates."

"You did very wrong. Wrong! It is unpardonable."

"Why so? What injury am I doing you? I have promised to be silent; I
will be silent for a little. I won't injure you or yours by word or
deed."

"You have a story in your head, a false story; you will spread it
abroad."

"I have a story, but it is not false."

"False or true, you will spread it abroad."

"No, the story is safe. For the present it is safe, my lips are sealed."

"Josephine, I wish you would go away."

"I am sorry, I cannot go away."

"We cannot associate with you. You are not brought up like us. You will
be lonely here, you will find it very dull, you had better go away."

"I am not going away. I have come here and I mean to stay. I shall watch
you, and your son, and your daughters; that will be my amusement."

"I won't say any more to you, proud and insolent girl. My son, at least,
is spared your scrutiny, he is not at Rosendale; and my daughters, I
think, they can live through it."

Mrs. Bertram turned and left the little parlor. She gave her note to
Mrs. Tester, desired it to be taken at once to the Gray House, and then
returned quietly and steadily to the Manor. When she got in she called
Catherine to her.

"Kate, the girl you saw hiding in the avenue has come to live at the
lodge."

"Mother!"

"I have seen her and spoken to her, my dear daughter. She is nothing
either to you or me. Take no notice of her."

"Very well, mother."

Meanwhile, in her little parlor, in the old lodge, Josephine stood with
her hands clasped, and fiery lights of anger, disappointment, pain,
flashing from her eyes. Were that woman's words true? Had Loftus Bertram
gone away? If so, if indeed he had left because she had arrived,
then--Her eyes flashed once more, and with so wicked a light that Mrs.
Tester, who, unobserved, had come into the room, left it again in a
fright. She thought Josephine Hart looked dangerous. She was right. No
one could be more dangerous if she chose.




CHAPTER XVI.

A BRITISH MERCHANT.


Soon after four that afternoon, Davis's tumble-down cab might have been
seen standing outside the gate of the Gray House. Immediately afterwards
the door was opened, and Mrs. Meadowsweet, in her rose-colored satin,
with a black lace shawl, and a bonnet to match made her appearance.

She stepped into the cab, and was followed by Beatrice, Jane, the little
maid, handing in after them a small band-box, which contained the cap
trimmed with Honiton lace.

Mrs. Meadowsweet's cheeks were slightly flushed, and her good-humored
eyes were shining with contentment and satisfaction.

"Oh, there's Mrs. Morris!" she said to Beatrice. "I'd better tell her
where we are going. She's always so interested in the Manor folks.
Davis, stop the cab a minute! Call to him, Bee. Da-vis!"

The cap stopped, and Mrs. Morris, eager and bustling, drew nigh.

"How are you, dear?" she said. "How do you do, Beatrice? Isn't it bad
for you, dear love," turning again to the elder lady, "to have the
window of the fly open? Although it is summer, and the doctor makes a
fuss about the thermometer being over eighty in the shade, I know for a
positive fact that the wind is east, and very treacherous."

"I don't take cold easily, Jessie," replied Mrs. Meadowsweet. "No, I
prefer not to have the windows up, poor Bee would be over hot. We must
think of the young things, mustn't we, Jessie? Well, you'll wonder why I
am in my best toggery! Bee and I are off to the Manor, no less, I assure
you. And to dinner, too! There's news for you."

"Well, I'm sure!" responded Mrs. Morris. Envy was in every tone of her
voice, and on every line of her face. As usual, when excited, she found
her voice, which came out quite thin and sharp. "Well, I'm sure," she
repeated. "I wish you all luck, Lucy. Not that it's such a
condescension, oh, by no means. The doctor said the bedrooms were very
shabby in their furniture, and such a meal as those poor girls were
eating for breakfast. He said his heart quite ached for them. Nothing
but stale bread, and the name of butter, and tea like water bewitched.
He said he'd rather never have a child than see her put down to such
fare."

"Dear, dear, you don't say so," answered Mrs. Meadowsweet. "Bee, my
love, we must have those nice girls constantly to the Gray House, and
feed them up all we can. I'm very sorry to hear your news, Jessie. But
I'm afraid we can't wait to talk any longer now. Nothing could have been
more affable than Mrs. Bertram's letter, sent down by special messenger,
and written in a most stylish hand."

"You haven't got it in your pocket, I suppose?" asked Mrs. Morris.

"To be sure I have. You'd like to see it; well, here it is. You can let
me have it back to-morrow. Now, good-bye. Drive on, Davis."

The cab jumbled and rattled over the paving stones, and Mrs. Meadowsweet
lay back against the cushions, and fanned her hot face.

"I wonder if it's true about those poor girls being so badly fed," she
inquired of her daughter. "Dear, dear, and there's nothing young things
