
They soon reached an opening in the bushes at the roadside, and, at the
further end of a natural glade or track, observed a small wooden hut
thatched with rushes.  Towards this young Armstrong led the way.

He was evidently much affected, for his lips were compressed, and he
gave no heed to a remark made by his companion.  Entering the hut, he
stood for some time looking silently round.

It was but a poor place with bare walls; a carpenter's bench in one
corner, near to it a smith's forge, one or two chairs, and a few
tools;--not much to interest a stranger but to Lawrence full of tender
associations.

"It was here," he said in tones of deepest pathos, "that my father
showed me how to handle tools, and my mother taught me to read from the
Word of God."

Looking at his companions he observed that the large dark eyes of the
Indian girl were fixed on him with an expression of unmistakable
sympathy.  He felt grateful at the moment, for to most men sympathy is
sweet when unobtrusively offered whether it come from rich or poor--
civilised or savage.

"Come, this will do," said the Peruvian, looking round, "if you will
kindle a fire on the forge, Senhor Armstrong, Manuela will arrange a
sleeping chamber for herself in the closet I see there, while I look
after the beasts."

He spoke in cheering tones, which had the effect of rousing the poor
youth somewhat from his despondency.

"Well, then," he replied, "let us to work, and it is but just, as we are
to sup together, and you know my name, that I should be put on an equal
footing with yourself--"

"Impossible!" interrupted the other, with a slight curl of his
moustache, "for as I am only six feet one, and you are at least six feet
four, we can never be on an equal footing."

"Nay, but I referred to names, not to inches.  Pray, by what name shall
I call you?"

"Pedro," returned the Spaniard.  "I am known by several names in these
parts--some of them complimentary, others the reverse, according as I am
referred to by friends or foes.  Men often speak of me as a confirmed
rover because of my wandering tendencies, but I'm not particular and
will answer to any name you choose, so long as it is politely uttered.
The one I prefer is Pedro."

He went out as he spoke to look after the mules, while Lawrence set
about kindling a small fire and otherwise making preparations for
supper.

The Indian girl, Manuela, with that prompt and humble obedience
characteristic of the race to which she belonged, had gone at once into
the little closet which her companion had pointed out, and was by that
time busily arranging it as a sleeping chamber for the night.



CHAPTER TWO.

COMPACT WITH THE NEW FRIEND AND DISCOVERY OF AN OLD ONE.

Keeping the fire low in order to prevent its being seen by any of the
wandering bands of patriots--_alias_ soldiers, _alias_ banditti--who
might chance to be in the neighbourhood, the three travellers thus
thrown unexpectedly together ate their supper in comparative silence,
Lawrence and Pedro exchanging a comment on the viands now and then, and
the handsome Indian girl sitting opposite to them with her eyes for the
most part fixed on the ground, though now and then she raised them to
take a quick stealthy glance at the huge youth whose appetite did not
seem to be greatly affected by his misfortunes.  Perhaps she was
wondering whether all Englishmen, possessed such innocent kindly faces
and such ungainly though powerful frames.  It may be that she was
contrasting him with the handsome well-knit Pedro at his side.

Whatever her thoughts might have been, the short glances of her lustrous
eyes gave no clue to them, and her tongue was silent, save when she
replied by some brief monosyllable to a remark or query put in the
Indian language occasionally by Pedro.  Sometimes a gleam of the
firelight threw her fine brown features into bold relief, but on these
occasions, when Lawrence Armstrong chanced to observe them, they
conveyed no expression whatever save that of profound gravity, with a
touch, perhaps, of sadness.

The bench being awkwardly situated for a table, they had arranged a
small box, bottom up, instead.  Lawrence and his new acquaintance seated
themselves on the ground, and Manuela used her saddle as a chair.

Towards the end of their meal the two men became more communicative, and
when Pedro had lighted a cigarette, they began to talk of their
immediate future.

"You don't smoke?" remarked Pedro in passing.

"No," replied Lawrence.

"Not like the most of your countrymen," said the other.

"So much the worse," rejoined the youth.

"The worse for them or for you--which?" asked Pedro, with a significant
glance.

"No matter," returned Lawrence with a laugh.

"Well, now," resumed Pedro, after a few puffs, during the emission of
which his countenance assumed the expression of seriousness, which
seemed most natural to it, "what do you intend to do?  It is well to
have that point fairly settled to-night, so that there may be no
uncertainty or delay in the morning.  I would not urge the question were
it not that in the morning we must either go on together as travelling
companions, or say our final adieux and part.  I am not in the habit of
prying into men's private affairs, but, to speak the bare truth, I am
naturally interested in one whose father has on more than one occasion
done me good service.  You need not answer me unless you please,
senhor," added the man with the air of one who is prepared to retire
upon his dignity at a moment's notice.

"Thanks, thanks, Pedro," said the Englishman, heartily, "I appreciate
your kindness, and accept your sympathy with gratitude.  Moreover, I am
glad to find that I have been thrown at such a crisis in my fortunes
into the company of one who had regard for my dear father.  But I scarce
know what to do.  I will give you my confidence unreservedly.  Perhaps
you may be able to advise--"

"Stay," interrupted the other, on whose countenance a slightly stern
expression hovered.  "Before you give me unreserved confidence, it is
but fair that I should tell you candidly that I cannot pay you back in
kind.  As to private matters, I have none that would be likely to
interest any one under the sun.  In regard to other things--my business
is not my own.  Why I am here and what I mean to do I have no right to
reveal.  Whither I am bound, however, is not necessarily a secret, and
if you choose to travel with me you undoubtedly have a right to know."

Young Armstrong expressed himself satisfied.  He might have wished to
know more, but, like Pedro, he had no desire to pry into other men's
affairs, and, being of an open confiding nature, was quite ready to take
his companion on trust, even though he had been less candid and engaging
in manner than he was.  After explaining that he had been educated in
Edinburgh, and trained to the medical profession, he went on to say that
he had been hastily summoned to take charge of the sugar-mill at his
father's death, and that he had expected to find an old overseer, who
would have instructed him in all that he had to do in a business with
which he was totally unacquainted.

"You see," he continued, "my father always said that he meant to retire
on his fortune, and did not wish me to carry on the business, but, being
naturally an uncommunicative man on business matters, he never gave me
any information as to details.  Of course, I had expected that his
manager here, and his books, would reveal all that I required to know,
but the soldiers have settled that question.  Mill and books have gone
together, and as to manager, clerks, and servants, I know not where they
are."

"Scattered, no doubt," said Pedro, "here, there, and everywhere--only
too glad to escape from a neighbourhood which has been given up to fire
and sword by way of improving its political condition!"

"I know not," returned Lawrence, sadly.  "But it would be useless, I
fear, to try to ferret them out."

"Quite useless," said Pedro.  "Besides, what would it avail to talk with
any of them about the affairs of a place that is now in ashes?  But if
your father spoke of his fortune, he must have had at least some of it
in a bank somewhere."

"True, but I don't know where.  All I know is that he once mentioned
casually in one of his letters that he was going to Buenos Ayres, where
he had some property."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Pedro.  "Come, that may help you to decide, for I am
myself going to Buenos Ayres, and can guide you there if disposed to go.
Only, you will have to make up your mind to a pretty long and hard
journey, for duty requires me to go by a devious route.  You must know,"
he continued, lighting another cigarette, "that I am pledged to take
that girl to her father, who lives not far from Buenos Ayres."

He pointed as he spoke to Manuela, who, having laid her head on her
saddle, appeared to have fallen asleep.

"Her father must be a chief, I should think, to judge from her
dignified, graceful carriage, as well as her fine features," said
Lawrence in a low tone.

"Yes, he is a chief--a great chief," returned Pedro, gazing at his
cigarette in a meditative mood--"a very great chief.  You see, she
happened to be living with friends on the western side of the mountains
when this war between Chili and Peru broke out, and her father naturally
wants to get her out of danger.  The old chief once saved my life, so,
you see, I am bound both by duty and gratitude to rescue his daughter."

"Indeed you are, and a pleasant duty it must be," returned Lawrence with
an approving nod; "but don't you think it might have been wise to have
rescued some other female, a domestic for instance, to keep her company?
The poor girl will feel very lonely on such a long journey as you speak
of."

Pedro again looked musingly at his cigarette, and flipped off the ash
with his little finger.

"You have not had much experience of war, young man," he said, "if you
think that in cases of rescue men can always arrange things comfortably,
and according to the rules of propriety.  When towns and villages are in
flames, when plunder and rapine run riot everywhere, and little children
are spitted on the bayonets of patriots, as is often the case even in
what men have agreed to term civilised warfare, one is glad to escape
with the skin of one's teeth.  Yet I was not as regardless of Manuela's
comfort as you seem to think.  A poor woman who had nursed her when a
child volunteered to accompany us, and continued with us on the first
part of our journey; but the exertion, as I had feared, was too much for
her.  She caught a fever and died, so that we were forced to come on
alone.  If you join us, however, I shall be greatly pleased, for two can
always make a better fight than one, and in these unsettled times there
is no saying what we may fall in with in crossing the mountains."

"But why expose the poor girl to such risks?" asked Lawrence.  "Surely
there must be some place of safety nearer than Buenos Ayres, to which
you might conduct her?"

"Senhor Armstrong," replied the man, with a return of his stern
expression, "I have told you that my business is urgent.  Not even the
rescue of my old friend's daughter can turn me aside from it.  When
Manuela begged me to take her with me, I pointed out the difficulties
and dangers of the route, and the necessity for my pursuing a long and
devious course, but she said she feared to remain where she was; that,
being young, strong, and accustomed to an active life, she felt sure she
was equal to the journey; that she could trust me, and that she knew her
father would approve of her taking the step.  I agreed, with some
hesitation.  It turned out that the girl was right in her fears, for
before we left the town it was attacked by the troops of Chili.  The
Peruvians made but a poor resistance, and it was carried by assault.
When I saw that all hope of saving the place was gone, I managed to
bring Manuela and her nurse away in safety.  As I have told you, the
nurse died, and now--here we are alone.  Manuela chooses to run the
risk.  I will not turn aside from my duty.  If you choose to join us,
the girl will be safer--at least until we cross the mountains.  On the
other side I shall be joined by friends, if need be."

Pedro ceased, and rekindled his cigarette, which had gone out during the
explanation.

"I will go with you," said Lawrence, with decision, as he extended his
hand.

"Good," replied Pedro, grasping it with a hearty squeeze; "now I shall
have no fears for our little Indian, for robbers are cowards as a rule."

"Have we, then, much chance of meeting with robbers?"

"Well, I should say we have little chance of altogether escaping them,
for in times of war there are always plenty of deserters and other
white-livered scoundrels who seize the opportunity to work their will.
Besides, there are some noted outlaws in the neighbourhood of the pass
we are going to cross.  There's Conrad of the Mountains, for instance.
You've heard of him?"

"No, never."

"Ah, senhor, that proves you to be a stranger here, for his name is
known from the Atlantic to the Pacific--chiefly, however, on the east
side of the Cordillera, and on the Pampas.  He is an outlaw--at least he
is said to be so; but one cannot believe all one hears.  Some say that
he is cruel, others that he is ferocious among men, but never hurts
women or children."

"Well, it is to be hoped we may not fall in with him, or any of his
band," said Lawrence; "for it is better to hear of his qualities than to
put them to the test."

"Yet, methinks," resumed Pedro, "if you fell in with him alone you
should have no cause to fear him, for you must be more than his match."

"I don't think I should fear him," returned Lawrence, with a simple
look.  "As to being more than his match, I know not, for my spirit does
not prompt me to light, and I cannot boast of much capacity in the use
of arms--unless you count my good oak-cudgel a weapon.  I have acquired
some facility in the use of that, having practised singlestick as an
amusement at school."

As he spoke, the youth was surprised and somewhat startled by his
companion suddenly drawing a pistol from his belt, and pointing it
steadily at the open doorway of the hut.  Turning his eyes quickly in
that direction, he beheld, with increased astonishment, a pair of
glaring eyes, two rows of glittering teeth, and a pair of thick red
lips!  The flesh which united these striking objects was all but
invisible, by reason of its being nearly as black as its background.

Most eyes, if human, would have got away from a pistol's line of fire
with precipitancy, but the eyes referred to did not disappear.  On the
contrary, they paid no regard whatever to the owner of the pistol, but
continued to glare steadily at Lawrence Armstrong.  Seeing this, Pedro
hesitated to pull the trigger.  He was quick to defend himself, but not
prompt to kill.  When he saw that the eyes slowly advanced out of the
gloom, that they with the lips and teeth belonged to a negro who
advanced into the room unarmed and with outspread hands, he quietly
lowered his weapon, and glanced at Lawrence.  No doubt Pedro felt, as he
certainly looked, perplexed, when he observed that Lawrence returned the
intruder's gaze with almost equal intensity.

Suddenly the negro sprang towards the Englishman.  He was a short,
thick-set, and exceedingly powerful man; yet Lawrence made no move to
defend himself.

"Quashy!" he exclaimed, as the black fell on his knees, seized one of
his hands, and covered it with kisses, at the same time bursting into
tears.

"Oh! massa Lawrie--oh! massa Lawrie, why you no come sooner?  Why you so
long?  De sodger brutes nebber dar to touch de ole house if you was
dere.  Oh!  Massa Lawrie, you's too late--too late!--My! how you's
growed!"

In the midst of his sobs the young negro, for he was little more than a
youth, drew back his head to obtain a better view of his old companion
and playmate.

Need we say that Lawrence reciprocated the affection of the man?

"He was a boy like myself when I was here," said Lawrence in explanation
to the amused Peruvian.  "His father was one of my father's most
attached servants, whom he brought from Kentucky on his way to this
land, and to whom he gave his freedom.  Quashy himself used to be my
playmate.--But tell me about the attack on the mill, Quash.  Were you
present?"

"Prisint!  You bery sure I was, an' I poke some holes in de varmints
'fore dey hoed away."

"And how did you escape, Quash?  Come, sit down and tell me all about
it."

The negro willingly complied.  Meanwhile the Indian girl, who had been
roused by his sudden entrance, resumed her seat on the saddle, and,
looking intently into his black face, seemed to try to gather from the
expression of his features something of what he said.

We need not repeat the story.  It was a detailed account of murder and
destruction; the burning of the place and the scattering of the old
servants.  Fortunately Lawrence had no relatives to deplore.

"But don't you know where any of the household have gone?" he asked,
when the excited negro paused to recover breath.

"Don't know nuffin'.  Arter I poke de holes in de scoundrils, I was
'bleeged to bolt.  When I come back, de ole house was in flames, an'
eberybody gone--what wasn't dead.  I hollered--ay, till I was a'most
busted--but nobody reply.  Den I bury de dead ones, an' I've hoed about
eber since slobberin' an' wringin' my hands."

"Was our old clerk among the slain?" asked Lawrence.

"No, massa, but I tinks he's a dead one now, for he too ole to run far."

"And I suppose you can't even guess where any of those who escaped went
to?"

"Couldn't guess more nor a Red Injin's noo-born babby."

"Quashy," said Lawrence in a low voice, "be careful how you speak of
Indians."

He glanced, as he spoke, at Manuela, who now sat with grave face and
downcast eyes, having apparently found that the human countenance,
however expressive, failed to make up for the want of language.

And, truly, Quashy's countenance was unwontedly mobile and expressive.
Every feature seemed to possess the power of independently betraying the
thoughts and feelings of the man, so that when they all united for that
end the effect was marvellous.  Emotional, and full of quick sympathy,
Quashy's visage changed from grave to gay, pitiful to fierce, humorous
