Douglas motioned her to an empty desk in the back row, and went on
with the lesson as if nothing had happened. I am afraid Gwen was too
agitated to absorb much knowledge that morning. She had not brought
notebook or pencil with her, and though at Miss Douglas's request her
neighbour rather ungraciously lent her a sheet of paper and a stump of
pencil, the notes which she took were scrappy and inadequate. She kept
stealing peeps at the other girls, but turning away when she met the
anything but friendly glances directed at her. The teacher asked her
one or two questions, then, seeing that she did not quite grasp the
subject, kindly ignored her.

"Talk of a fish out of water," thought Gwen; "I feel like an eel in a
frying pan. I believe these girls are going to be detestable. I shall
have to look out for squalls."

Nor was she mistaken. At eleven o'clock the storm broke. Directly Miss
Douglas had left the room for the interval the seventeen members of
the Fifth turned upon the newcomer.

"What are you doing here, Gwen Gascoyne, I'd like to know?" demanded
Edith Arnold, opening the attack.

"We don't want any Fourth Form girls foisted on us!" proclaimed Rachel
Hunter.

"You don't belong to the Upper School!" urged Charlotte Perry hotly.

"I didn't yesterday, but I do now," retorted Gwen. "Miss Roscoe's
moved me up. Yes--and I mean to stay here, too!" she added, facing her
opponents stubbornly.

"Miss Roscoe must be mad!"

"What can she be thinking of?"

"Better go and ask her yourself," said Gwen, "if you think she's
likely to listen to you. She isn't generally very ready to enter into
explanations."

"But this is monstrous! It's an unheard-of thing!" exclaimed Louise
Mawson excitedly. "A chit like you to be brought into the Fifth! Why,
how old are you?"

"Exactly fourteen and a quarter--birthday on July 16th, if you want
exact date," returned Gwen smartly.

"Oh!" "What a shame!" "We shan't stand it!" rose in such a chorus from
all sides that Gwen took the opportunity to make her escape and go to
the dressing-room for her lunch. The interval was only ten minutes,
and she wished both to break the news to her old classmates and to
fetch some necessary books from her former desk before the bell rang.

The other members of the Fifth lingered behind in perturbed
consultation. They considered they had a just and most pressing
grievance. In all the annals of the school such a case had never
occurred before. It had been hitherto an inviolable though unwritten
law that no one under the age of fifteen should be admitted to the
Fifth Form, a law which they had believed as strict as that of the
Medes and Persians, and here was the headmistress actually breaking
it, and in favour of a girl only fourteen and a quarter. If Miss
Roscoe had not brought her herself into the room they would not have
credited it.

"It's abominably unfair!" broke out Rachel Hunter, a tall girl of
sixteen. "Because my birthday comes on October 4th I had to stop a
whole year longer in the Lower School. Yes--though my mother came and
begged Miss Roscoe to let me go up!"

"Well, you couldn't get moved up on your work, at any rate, Rachel!"
chirped Joan Masters. "It would have had to be favour in your case."

"That's not the point! It's a different question. If Miss Roscoe makes
a rule she ought to stick to it. Why, half the girls in the Form might
have come up sooner if it hadn't been for the age limit."

"You're right, and I can't see why Gwen Gascoyne should be so
specially noticed."

"She's supposed to be clever, I believe."

"She doesn't look it! Besides, what do we care whether she's clever or
not? It's the injustice of the thing that makes me angry. A kid like
her amongst us seniors! The idea!"

"Miss Roscoe may send Gwen up," declared Louise Mawson, "but she can't
make us accept her as one of ourselves. I vote we send her to
Coventry."

"We will! She's nothing but a Lower School girl, and we won't tolerate
her being imposed upon us!"

"She'll be so conceited at finding herself a Senior!"

"We'll soon take her pride down, then!"

"She'll meet with a few snubs here, I'll undertake to say!"

"If Miss Roscoe is going to bring up all the rank and file like that
there's no credit in being in the Fifth!"

"It's a positive insult to the rest of us!"

So decided Gwen's new classmates, jealous for the prestige of their
Form, and annoyed at the indignity which they considered they were
made to suffer in admitting a younger girl among their number. To Gwen
or her feelings they gave not a thought. If she met with an unpleasant
experience all the better; it might deter Miss Roscoe from repeating
the experiment. That the remove was not Gwen's fault, and therefore
that it was scarcely fair to visit the headmistress's act upon her
innocent head, did not enter into their calculations. Where they
consider their rights are concerned schoolgirls rarely hold mercy
before justice.

Meantime Gwen, who had gone to break the important tidings to the
Upper Fourth, did not find her old friends as responsive as she had
expected. They received her communication with marked coldness.

"Why should you have been moved up, Gwen Gascoyne, and not Daisy, or
Aileen, or I?" enquired Alma Richardson, with a distinctly aggrieved
note in her voice.

"Miss Roscoe always favoured Gwen!" said Eve Dawkins enviously.

"You're six months younger than Viola Sutton, so it seems absurd you
should be put above her."

"You'll be so grand now, I suppose you won't care to know us!"

"It's not fair to the rest of the Form!"

"Oh dear! I'm between two fires," thought Gwen, as she hastily cleared
her possessions from her old desk. "The Fifth don't want me, and the
Fourth are horribly jealous. You're going to have a bad time, Gwen
Gascoyne, I'm afraid! I see breakers ahead! Never mind. It's a great
honour to be moved up, and Father'll be glad and sympathize, if nobody
else does. The work will be pretty stiff: I expect it'll be all I can
do to manage it. But I mean to have a jolly good try. I'll show those
girls I can do something, though I am the youngest! Oh, I say! I've
only just remembered that Winnie'll be the under-mistress. I'll have
to call her 'Miss Gascoyne' whenever I speak to her. How perfectly
idiotic! I'm sure I shall laugh. I wonder if Miss Roscoe's told her
yet? What a surprise it would be for her to come into the room and
find me there!"

"I wish you'd be quick, Gwen Gascoyne," said Eve Dawkins; "I'm to have
your desk as soon as you've moved out. It's a nicer seat than mine."

"Right-o!" answered Gwen, piling her books on top of her big atlas.
"You're welcome to it, I'm sure. I think you might all have seemed a
trifle more sorry to lose me! I don't see any display of pocket
handkerchiefs. No, I can't say I'm shedding tears myself unless
they're crocodile ones. Please to recollect in future, my dears, when
you speak to me, that you're addressing a member of the Upper School!
You're only little Junior girls! Ta-ta!" and with a mock curtsy, in
process of which she nearly dropped her pile of books, Gwen retired
laughing from the Fourth Form to take her place and try her luck among
the Seniors.




CHAPTER II

The Gascoyne Girls


At fourteen and a quarter Gwen Gascoyne was at a particularly
difficult and hobbledehoy stage of her development. She was tall for
her age, and rather awkward in her manners, apt at present to be
slapdash and independent, and decidedly lacking in "that repose which
stamps the caste of Vere de Vere". Gwen could never keep still for
five seconds, her restless hands were always fidgeting or her feet
shuffling, or she was twisting in her chair, or shaking back a loose
untidy lock that had escaped from her ribbon. Gwen often did her hair
without the aid of a looking-glass, but when she happened to use one
the reflection of her own face gave her little cause for satisfaction.

"I'm plain, and there's no blinking the fact," she confessed to
herself. "Winnie says I'm variable, and I can look nice when I smile,
but I'm afraid no one would trouble to look at me twice. If only I
were Lesbia now, or even Beatrice! People talk about the flower of a
family--well, I expect I'm the weed, as far as appearances go! I
haven't had my fair share in the way of good looks."

It certainly seemed hard that Nature, which had been kind to the
Gascoynes in that respect, should have dowered her brothers and
sisters so liberally, and have left poor Gwen out in the cold. Her
bright little face had an attraction all of its own, of which she was
quite unconscious, but she was entirely accustomed to stand aside
while strangers noticed and admired her younger sister Lesbia. To do
Gwen justice, though she might lament her own plainness, it never
struck her to be jealous of the others. She was intensely proud of the
family reputation for beauty, and even if she could not include
herself among "the handsome Gascoynes", it certainly gave her a
reflected satisfaction to be aware of the epithet.

"I'm like Daddy," she said sometimes; "nobody ever calls him handsome,
but he's a dear all the same--the dearest dear in the world!"

The Reverend Maurice Gascoyne was curate-in-charge of the church of
St. John the Baptist in the little fishing village of Skelwick Bay, on
the coast of the North Sea. He was rich in the possession of seven
children, but there his luck ended, for his income, as is often the
case, was in exactly inverse ratio to the size of his family.

"The fact is, we're as poor as church mice," said Beatrice one day.
"Indeed, I think we're poorer, because the mouse we saw in church last
Sunday, that scared Winnie so, was very fat and sleek and prosperous
looking, and didn't bear out the old saying at all."

For the last four years, ever since pretty Mrs. Maurice Gascoyne had
gently laid down the burden that had grown too heavy for her,
Beatrice had been the clever, energetic "mother" of the establishment.
She managed the house, and the children, and the one maid, and the
parish, and her father, all included, with a business-like capacity
far in advance of her twenty years. She was a fine-looking girl, tall
and straight-limbed and ample, with blue eyes and dark brows, and a
clear creamy skin, and that air of noble strength about her which the
Greek sculptors gave to their statues of Artemis. Though she did her
best both for home and hamlet, Beatrice often chafed against the
narrowness of her limits. It was a sore point that she had been
obliged to leave school at sixteen, and devote herself to domestic
pursuits, and while not regretting the sacrifice, she often lamented
the two years lopped off her education.

"I'm so behind, I never could go in even for the matric. now," she
sighed sometimes. "If I could have realized my ambition, I'd have
studied for a lady doctor."

Since the profession of medicine was utterly and entirely out of the
question, Beatrice often consoled herself by planning that when the
children were old enough to do without her, she would go as a nurse to
a big London hospital, and rise to be a ward sister, or perhaps--who
knew?--even a matron. In the meanwhile her talent for administration
had to confine itself within the bounds of the Parsonage and the
parish, where it was apt to become just a trifle dictatorial and
overbearing. It is so hard for a young, keen, ardent nature, anxious
to set the world right, to remember that infinite patience must go
hand in hand with our best endeavours, and that the time of sowing is
an utterly different season from that of harvest.

Between Gwen and Beatrice there was often friction. The former
resented being ordered about by a sister of only twenty, and would
prove rebellious on occasion. Really, the two girls' dispositions were
much alike, but Beatrice's early position of responsibility had turned
into strength of character what was at present mere manifestation of
independence and often bravado in Gwen.

Winnie, a sweet-tempered, pretty girl of eighteen, had just been made
an under-mistress at "Rodenhurst", Miss Roscoe's school, which she and
Gwen and Lesbia attended daily. Teaching was not at all Winnie's
vocation, she hated it heartily, but as her services cancelled her
sisters' school fees, she was obliged to accept the unwelcome drudgery
for the sake of the help it gave to her father's narrow income. If it
was Beatrice's ambition to go out into the world and carve a career
for herself, it was certainly Winnie's ideal to stop at home. She was
a born housekeeper, and loved sewing and cake-baking and jam-making,
and dusting the best china, and gardening, and rearing poultry and
ducks. It seemed a great pity that she could not have changed places
with her elder sister, but Beatrice's education had been stopped too
soon for her to be of any use as a teacher, while Winnie, though not
clever, had been carefully trained in Rodenhurst methods. Fortunately
she had a very cheerful, sunny disposition, that was prone to make the
best of things, so she struggled along, taking Miss Roscoe's many
suggestions and reproofs so amiably that the Principal, often irate
at her lack of capacity, had not the heart to scold her too severely.
Of her own choice, I am afraid, Winnie would never have opened a book,
but she managed to get up her subjects for her classes, and was a
conscientious, painstaking mistress, if not a brilliant one.

After Gwen came the beauty of the family, twelve-year-old Lesbia, a
dear, delightful, smiling, lovable little lazybones, usually at the
bottom of her Form. Lesbia never attempted to work hard at school. She
scraped through her lessons somehow, generally with Gwen's help at home,
and took life in a happy-go-lucky fashion, with as little trouble to
herself as possible. Lesbia's chief virtue was an admirably calm and
unruffled temper: she would laugh philosophically over things that made
Gwen rage, and though she had not half the character of the latter, she
was a far greater general favourite. She was much petted at school, both
by her own Form and by the Seniors, for she had sweet, coaxing little
ways, and a helpless, confiding look in her blue eyes that was rather
fascinating, and her lovely fair flaxen hair gave her the appearance of
a large wax doll, just new from a toy shop. Lesbia had one great
advantage: she was always well dressed. She possessed a rich cousin of
exactly her own age, whose clothes were passed on to her. Irene grew
rapidly, so her handsome frocks and coats were scarcely worn when they
reached Lesbia, and as Aunt Violet invariably sent them first to the
cleaners, they would arrive wrapped in folds of dainty tissue paper, and
looking like new. It seemed rather hard that Lesbia should always be the
lucky recipient of the parcels, and Beatrice, with a strict sense of
justice, had often tried to adapt some of the things for Gwen. It was
quite impossible, however--Lesbia's neat, dainty little figure exactly
fitted into the clothes, while Gwen, tall and big-boned even for her
extra two and a half years, was so many sizes too large that she had to
resign all hope of "fineries", and content herself with plain blouses
and navy-blue serge skirts that could be lengthened easily. Not that
Gwen troubled much about dress at this period of her existence; indeed
she was apt to throw on her garments in a haphazard fashion that greatly
excited Beatrice's wrath, and would raise a remonstrance even from
Winnie. Life was so full of different things, and so many fresh
interests and new plans were crowding continually into her brain, that
she never had time to think whether her tie was neatly knotted or her
belt properly fastened; it is a sad admission to make, no doubt, but
then Gwen was no ideal heroine, only a very faulty, impetuous,
headstrong, human girl.

Three little brothers completed the Gascoyne family--Giles, Basil, and
Martin, aged respectively ten, nine, and five, bonny mischievous
urchins, who were alternately Beatrice's pride and despair. By vigorous
