"Take 'em off!" exclaimed John, pulling down the leg of his trouser and
rising with a laugh.  "No, no, Loo; why, it's only just bin done up all
snug by the doctor, who'd kick up a pretty shindy if he found I had
undid it.  There's one good will come of it anyhow, I shall have a day
or two in the house with you all; for the doctor said I must give it a
short rest.  So, off to bed again, Loo.  This is not an hour for a
respectable young woman to be wanderin' about in her night-dress.  Away
with you!"

"Was any one else hurt, father?" said Loo.  She asked the question
anxiously, but there was a slight flush on her cheek and a peculiar
smile which betrayed some hidden feeling.

"No one else," returned her father.  "I tell 'ee it wasn't an accident
at all--it was only a engine that brushed up agin me as I was comin' out
o' the shed.  That's all; so I just came home and left Will Garvie to
look after our engine.  There, run away."

Loo smiled, nodded and disappeared, followed by Mrs Marrot, who went,
like a sensible woman, to see that her alarmed domestic was all right.
While she was away John went to the crib and kissed the rosy cheek of
his sleeping boy.  Then he bent over the bed with the white dimity
curtains to Miss Gertie's forehead, for which purpose he had to remove a
mass of curly hair with his big brown hand.

"Bless you, my darling," he said in silent speech, "you came near bein'
fatherless this night--nearer than you ever was before."  He kissed her
again tenderly, and a fervent "thank the Lord!" rose from his heart to
heaven.

In less than half-an-hour after this the engine-driver's family sank
into profound repose, serenaded by the music of a mineral train from the
black country, which rushed laboriously past their dwelling like an
over-weighted thunderbolt.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE DRIVER VISITS A LITTLE ELDERLY GENTLEWOMAN AND PREPARES THE IRON
HORSE FOR ACTION.

Next day John Marrot spent the brief period of repose accorded by the
doctor to his leg in romping about the house with the baby in his arms.
Being a large man, accustomed to much elbow-room and rapid motion, and
the house being small, John may be said to have been a dangerous
character in the family on such occasions.  Apart from baby, no elephant
was ever more sluggish in his motions; but when coupled--professionally
speaking--to his own tender infant, John knew no bounds, his wife knew
no rest and his baby knew no higher earthly bliss.

Sometimes it was on his shoulder, sometimes on his head and often on his
foot, riding with railway speed to "Banbury Cross."  Again it was on its
back in the crib or on the bed being tickled into fits of laughter,
which bid fair at times to merge into fits of convulsion, to the horror
of little Gertie, who came in for a large share of that delightful
holiday's enjoyment, but whose spirit was frequently harrowed with alarm
at the riotous conduct of her invalid father.  In his glee the man might
have been compared to a locomotive with a bad driver, who was constantly
shutting off the steam and clapping on the brakes too soon or too late,
thus either falling short of or overshooting his mark.  What between the
door and the dresser, the fire, the crib, the window, and the furniture,
John showed himself a dreadfully bad pilot and was constantly running
into or backing out of difficulties.  At last towards the afternoon of
that day, while performing a furious charge round the room with baby on
his head, he overturned the wash-tub, which filled the baby with
delirious joy, and Gertie with pleasurable alarm.

As for Mrs Marrot, she was too happy to have her husband at home for a
whole day to care much about trifles, nevertheless she felt it her duty
to reprove him, lest the children should learn a bad lesson.

"There now, John, I knew you'd do it at last.  You're much too violent,
and you shouldn't ought to risk the baby's neck in that way.  Such a
mess!  How _can_ you expect me to keep things tidy if you go on so?"

John was very penitent.  He did not reply at first, but putting baby
into the crib--where it instantly drowned with a great yell the shriek
of a passing train--he went down on his knees and began to "swab" up the
water with a jack-towel.  Loo ran laughingly from the corner where she
had been sewing, and insisted on doing it for him.

"You'll hurt your leg, father, if you bend it so, and I'm sure it must
be swelled and pained enough already with so much romping."

"Not a bit, Loo," objected John.  "It was me as caused the mess, an'
justice requires that I should swab it up.  There, go sew that sentiment
into a sampler an' hang it up over yer bed."

But Loo would not give in.  While they were still engaged in the
controversy the door opened, and young Bob Marrot stood before them with
his eyes wide open and his hair straight up on end, as if he had
recently seen a ghost.  This aspect, however, was no sign of alarm,
being his normal condition.

"Ha! seems to me, somehow, that somebody's bin up to somethin'."

"Right Bob," replied his father, rising from his knees and throwing the
jack-towel at him.

The lad easily evaded the shot, being well accustomed to elude much more
deadly missiles, and, picking up the towel, quietly set to work to
perform the duty in dispute.

"You're wanted," he said, looking up at his father while he wrung the
towel over a tin basin.

"Eh!  Where?"

"Up at the shed."

"I'm on sick leave," said John.

"Can't help that.  The 6:30 p.m. passenger train must be drove, and
there's nobody left but you to drive it.  Jones is away with a goods
train owin' to Maxwell having sprained his ankle, and Long Thompson is
down with small-pox, so you'll have to do it.  I offered 'em my
services, but the manager he said that intelligent lads couldn't be
spared for such menial work, and told me to go and fetch you."

"Maxwell had no business to sprain his ankle," said John Marrot.
"Hows'ever," he added cheerfully, "I've had a rare good holiday, an' the
leg's all but right again, so, Molly, let's have an early tea; I'll give
it a good rest for another half-hour and then be ready for the 6:30
p.m-ers.  Cut off your steam, will you?"

This last observation was made to the baby, and was accompanied by a
shake and a toss towards the ceiling which caused him to obey instantly,
under the impression, no doubt that the fun was to be renewed.  Being,
however, consigned to the care of Gertie he again let on the steam and
kept it up during the whole time the family were at tea--which meal they
enjoyed thoroughly, quite regardless of the storm.

He was asleep when his father rose at last and buttoned his heavy coat
up to the chin, while Mrs Marrot stood on tiptoe to arrange more
carefully the woollen shawl round his neck.

"Now, don't stand more than you can help on your hurt leg, John."

"Certainly not, duckie," said John, stooping to kiss the upturned face;
"I'll sit on the rail as much as I can, like a 'Merican racoon.  By the
way," he added, turning suddenly to Loo, "you delivered that note from
young Mr Tipps to his mother?"

"Yes, immediately after I got it from you; and I waited to see if there
was an answer, but she said there wasn't.  It must have contained bad
news, I fear, for she turned pale while she read it."

"H'm, well," said John, putting on his cap, "don't know nothin' about
what was in it, so it's no bizzness o' mine."

With a hearty good-evening to all, and a special embrace to Gertie, the
engine-driver left his home, accompanied by Bob his hopeful son.

"Mr Sharp," said Bob, as they walked along, "has bin makin' oncommon
partikler inquiries among us about some o' the porters.  I raither think
they're a bad lot."

"Not at all," replied his father severely.  "They're no more a bad lot
than the drivers, or, for the matter of that, than the clerks or the
directors, or the lamp-boys.  You ought to be gittin' old enough by this
time, Bob, to know that every lot o' fish in this world, however good,
has got a few bad uns among 'em.  As a rule railway directors and
railway clerks, and railway porters and railway officials of all sorts
are good--more or less--the same may be said of banks an' insurances,
an' all sorts of things--but, do what ye may, a black sheep or two
_will_ git in among 'em, and, of course, the bigger the consarn, the
more numerous the black sheep.  Even the clergy ain't free from that
uniwersal law of natur.  But what's Mr Sharp bin inquiring arter?"

"Ah--wot indeed!" replied Bob; "'ow should I know?  Mr Sharp ain't the
man to go about the line with a ticket on his back tellin' wot he's
arter.  By no means.  P'lice superintendents ain't usually given to
that; but he's arter _somethin'_ partickler."

"Well, that ain't no bizzness of ours, Bob, so we don't need to trouble
our heads about it.  There's nothin' like mindin' yer own bizzness.
Same time," added John after a short pause, "that's no reason why, as a
sea-farin' friend o' mine used to say, a man shouldn't keep his
weather-eye open, d'ye see?"

Bob intimated that he did see, by winking with the eye that chanced to
be next his parent; but further converse between father and son was
interrupted at a turn in the road, where they were joined by a stout,
broad-shouldered young man, whose green velveteen jacket vest, and
trousers bespoke him a railway porter.

"Evenin', Sam," said our driver with a friendly nod; "goin' on night
dooty, eh?"

"Yes, worse luck," replied Sam, thrusting his powerful hands into his
pockets.

"Why so, Sam, you ain't used to mind night dooty?"

"No more I do," said Sam testily, "but my missus is took bad, and
there's no one to look after her properly--for that old 'ooman we got
ain't to be trusted.  'Tis a hard thing to have to go on night dooty
when a higher dooty bids me stay at home."

There was a touch of deep feeling in the tone in which the latter part
of Sam Natly's remark was uttered.  His young wife, to whom he had been
only a year married, had fallen into bad health, and latterly the
doctors had given him little encouragement to hope for her recovery.

"Sam," said John Marrot stopping, "I'll go an' send a friend, as I knows
of, to look after yer wife."

"A friend?" said Sam; "you can't mean any o' your own family, John, for
you haven't got time to go back that length now, and--"

"Well, never mind, I've got time to go where I'm agoin'.  You run on to
the shed, Bob, and tell Garvie that I'll be there in fifteen minutes."

The engine-driver turned off abruptly, and, increasing his pace to a
smart walk, soon stood before the door of one of those uncommonly small
neat suburban villas which the irrigating influence of the Grand
National Trunk Railway had caused to spring up like mushrooms around the
noisy, smoky, bustling town of Clatterby--to the unspeakable advantage
of that class of gentlefolk who possess extremely limited incomes, but
who, nevertheless, prefer fresh air to smoke.

"Is your missus at 'ome?" he inquired of the stout elderly woman who
answered to his modest summons--for although John was wont to clatter
and bang through the greater part of his daily and nightly career, he
was tender of touch and act when out of his usual professional beat.

"Yes; do you wish to see her?"

"I does, my dear.  Sorry I 'aven't got a card with me, but if you'll
just say that it's John Marrot, the engine-driver, I dessay that'll do
for a free pass."

The elderly woman went off with a smile, but returned quickly with an
anxious look, and bade the man follow her.  He was ushered into a small
and poorly furnished but extremely neat and clean parlour, where sat a
thin little old lady in an easy-chair, looking very pale.

"Ev'nin', ma'am," said John, bowing and looking rougher and bigger than
usual in such a small apartment.

"You--you--don't bring bad news, I hope!--my son Joseph--"

"Oh no, Mrs Tipps, not by no means," said Marrot, hasting to relieve
the timid old lady's feelings, "Mr Joseph is all right--nothing wotiver
wrong with him--nor likely to be, ma'am.  Leastwise he wos all right
w'en I seed 'im last."

"And when might that be?" asked the timid old lady with a sigh of relief
as she clasped her hands tightly together.

"W'y, let me see," said John, touching his forehead, "it was yesterday
evenin' w'en I came up with the northern express."

"But many accidents might have happened since yesterday evening," said
Mrs Tipps, still in an anxious tone.

"That's true, ma'am.  All the engines on the Grand Trunk from the
Pentland Firth to the Channel might have bu'sted their bilers since that
time--but it ain't likely," replied John, with a bland smile.

"And--and what was my son doing when you passed him?  Did you speak to
him?"

"Speak to him!  Bless your heart, ma'am," said John, with another
benignant smile, "I went past Langrye station at sixty mile an hour, so
we hadn't much chance to speak to each other.  It would have been as
much as we could have managed, if we'd tried it, to exchange winks."

"Dreadful!" exclaimed Mrs Tipps in a low tone.  "Is that the usual rate
of travelling on your railway?"

"Oh dear no, ma'am.  It's only _my_ express train as goes at that rate.
Other expresses run between forty and fifty miles, an' or'nary trains
average about thirty miles an hour--goods, they go at about twenty, more
or less; but they varies a good deal.  The train I drives is about the
fastest in the kingdom, w'ich is pretty much the same as sayin' it's the
fastest in the world, ma'am.  Sometimes I'm obleeged to go as high as
nigh seventy miles an hour to make up time."

"The fastest mail-coaches in _my_ young days," said Mrs Tipps, "used to
go at the rate of ten miles an hour, I believe."

"Pretty much so," said John.  "They did manage a mile or two more, I'm
told, but that was their average of crawlin' with full steam on."

"And _you_ sometimes drive at sixty or seventy miles an hour?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"With people in the carriages?"

"Cer'nly, ma'am."

"How I _wish_ that I had lived a hundred years ago!" sighed poor Mrs
Tipps.

"You'd have bin a pretty old girl by this time if you had," thought the
engine-driver, but he was too polite to give utterance to the thought.

"And what was my son doing when you passed him at that frightful speed--
you could _see_ him, I suppose?"

"Oh yes, ma'am, I could see him well enough.  He was talkin' an'
laughin', as far as I could make out, with an uncommon pretty girl."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Mrs Tipps, flushing slightly--for she was extremely
sensitive,--and evidently much relieved by this information.  "Well, my
good man, what do you wish me to do for you? anything that is in my
power to--"

"Thankee, ma'am, but I don't want you to do nothin' for _me_."

"Then what have you to say to me?" added the old lady with a little
smile that was clearly indicative of a kind little heart.

"I've come to take the liberty, ma'am, of askin' you to do one of my
mates a favour."

"Most willingly," said Mrs Tipps with animation.  "I shall never forget
that you saved my dear Joseph's life by pulling him off the line when
one of your dreadful engines was going straight over him.  Anything that
I am capable of doing for you or your friends will be but a poor return
for what you have done for me.  I have often asked you to allow me to
make me some such return, Mr Marrot, and have been grieved at your
constant refusal.  I am delighted that you come to me now."

"You're very good to say so, ma'am.  The fact is that one o' my friends,
a porter on the line, named Sam Natly, has a young wife who is, I fear,
far gone wi' consumption; she's worse to-night an' poor Sam's obliged to
