flown.  He was a superb specimen of humanity, this constable, with a
chest and shoulders like Hercules, and the figure of Apollo.  He turned
the corner just as the child had completed her somersault, and received
her two little feet fairly in the centre of his broad breast, driving
him flat on his back more effectively than could have been done by the
best prize-fighter in England!

Number 666 proved a most effectual buffer, for Di, after planting her
blow on his chest, sat plump down on his stomach, off which she sprang
in an agony of consternation, exclaiming--

"Oh!  I have killed him!  I've killed him!" and burst into tears.

"No, my little lady," said Number 666, as he rose with one or two coughs
and replaced his helmet, "you've not quite done for me, though you've
come nearer the mark than any _man_ has ever yet accomplished.  Come,
now, what can I do for you?  You're not hurt, I hope?"

This sally was received with a laugh, almost amounting to a cheer, by
the half-horrified crowd which had quickly assembled to witness, as it
expected, a fatal accident.

"Hurt? oh! no, I'm not hurt," exclaimed Di, while tears still converted
her eyes into blue lakelets as she looked anxiously up in the face of
Number 666; "but I'm quite sure you must be hurt--awfully.  I'm _so_
sorry!  Indeed I am, for I didn't mean to knock you down."

This also was received by the crowd with a hearty laugh, while Number
666 sought to comfort the child by earnestly assuring her that he was
not hurt in the least--only a little stunned at first, but that was
quite gone.

"Wot does she mean by knockin' of 'im down?" asked a small butcher's
boy, who had come on the scene just too late, of a small baker's boy who
had, happily, been there from the beginning.

"She means wot she says," replied the small baker's boy with the
dignified reticence of superior knowledge, "she knocked the constable
down."

"Wot! a leetle gurl knock a six-foot bobby down?--walk-_er_!"

"Very good; you've no call to b'lieve it unless you like," replied the
baker's boy, with a look of pity at the unbelieving butcher, "but she
did it, though--an' that's six month with 'ard labour, if it ain't five
year."

At this point the crowd opened up to let a maniac enter.  He was
breathless, hatless, moist, and frantic.

"My child! my darling! my dear Di!" he gasped.

"Papa!" responded Diana, with a little scream, and, leaping into his
arms, grasped him in a genuine hug.

"Oh!  I say," whispered the small butcher, "it's a melly-drammy--all for
nuffin!"

"My!" responded the small baker, with a solemn look, "won't the Lord
left-tenant be down on 'em for play-actin' without a licence, just!"

"Is the pony killed?" inquired Sir Richard, recovering himself.

"Not in the least, sir.  'Ere 'e is, sir; all alive an' kickin',"
answered the small butcher, delighted to have the chance of making
himself offensively useful, "but the hinsurance offices wouldn't 'ave
the clo'se-baskit at no price.  Shall I order up the remains of your
carriage, sir?"

"Oh!  I'm so glad he's not dead," said Diana, looking hastily up, "but
this policeman was nearly killed, and _I_ did it!  He saved my life,
papa."

A chorus of voices here explained to Sir Richard how Number 666 had come
up in the nick of time to receive the flying child upon his bosom.

"I am deeply grateful to you," said the knight, turning to the
constable, and extending his hand, which the latter shook modestly while
disclaiming any merit for having merely performed his duty--he might
say, involuntarily.

"Will you come to my house?" said Sir Richard.  "Here is my card.  I
should like to see you again, and pray, see that some one looks after my
pony and--"

"And the remains," suggested the small butcher, seeing that Sir Richard
hesitated.

"Be so good as to call a cab," said Sir Richard in a general way to any
one who chose to obey.

"Here you are, sir!" cried a peculiarly sharp cabby, who, correctly
judging from the state of affairs that his services would be required,
had drawn near to bide his time.

Sir Richard and his little daughter got in and were driven home, leaving
Number 666 to look after the pony and the remains.

Thus curiously were introduced to each other some of the characters in
our tale.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE IRRESISTIBLE POWER OF LOVE.

Need we remark that there was a great deal of embracing on the part of
Di and her nurse when the former returned home?  The child was an
affectionate creature as well as passionate.  The nurse, Mrs Screwbury,
was also affectionate without being passionate.  Poor Diana had never
known a mother's love or care; but good, steady, stout Mrs Screwbury
did what in her lay to fill the place of mother.

Sir Richard filled the place of father pretty much as a lamp-post might
have done had it owned a child.  He illuminated her to some extent--
explained things in general, stiffly, and shed a feeble ray around
himself; but his light did not extend far.  He was proud of her,
however, and very fond of her--when good.  When not good, he was--or
rather had been--in the habit of dismissing her to the nursery.

Nevertheless, the child exercised very considerable and ever-increasing
influence over her father; for, although stiff, the knight was by no
means destitute of natural affection, and sometimes observed, with moist
eyes, strong traces of resemblance to his lost wife in the beautiful
child.  Indeed, as years advanced, he became a more and more obedient
father, and was obviously on the high road to abject slavery.

"Papa," said Di, while they were at luncheon that day, not long after
the accident, "I _am_ so sorry for that poor policeman.  It seems such a
dreadful thing to have actually jumped upon him! and oh! you should have
heard his poor head hit the pavement, and seen his pretty helmet go
spinning along like a boy's top, ever so far.  I wonder it didn't kill
him.  I'm _so_ sorry."

Di emphasised her sorrow by laughing, for she had a keen sense of the
ludicrous, and the memory of the spinning helmet was strong upon her
just then.

"It must indeed have been an unpleasant blow," replied Sir Richard,
gravely, "but then, dear, you couldn't help it, you know--and I dare say
he is none the worse for it now.  Men like him are not easily injured.
I fear we cannot say as much for the boy who was holding the pony."

"Oh!  I quite forgot about him," exclaimed Di; "the naughty boy! he
wouldn't let go the pony's reins when I bid him, but I saw he tumbled
down when we set off."

"Yes, he has been somewhat severely punished, I fear, for his
disobedience.  His leg had been broken.  Is it not so, Balls?"

"Yes, sir," replied the butler, "'e 'as 'ad 'is--"

Balls got no farther, for Diana, who had been struck dumb for the moment
by the news, recovered herself.

"His leg broken!" she exclaimed with a look of consternation; "Oh! the
poor, poor boy!--the dear boy! and it was me did that too, as well as
knocking down the poor policeman!"

There is no saying to what lengths the remorseful child would have gone
in the way of self-condemnation if her father had not turned her
thoughts from herself by asking what had been done for the boy.

"We sent 'im 'ome, sir, in a cab."

"I'm afraid that was a little too prompt," returned the knight
thoughtfully.  "A broken leg requires careful treatment, I suppose.  You
should have had him into the house, and sent for a doctor."

Balls coughed.  He was slightly chagrined to find that the violation of
his own humane feelings had been needless, and that his attempt to do as
he thought his master would have wished was in vain.

"I thought, Sir Richard, that you didn't like the lower orders to go
about the 'ouse more--"

Again little Di interrupted the butler by asking excitedly where the
boy's home was.

"In the neighbour'ood of W'itechapel, Miss Di."

"Then, papa, we will go straight off to see him," said the child, in the
tone of one whose mind is fully made up.  "You and I shall go together--
won't we? good papa!"

"That will do, Balls, you may go.  No, my dear Di, I think we had better
not.  I will write to one of the city missionaries whom I know, and ask
him to--"

"No, but, papa--dear papa, we _must_ go.  The city missionary could
never say how very, _very_ sorry I am that he should have broken his leg
while helping me.  And then I should _so_ like to sit by him and tell
him stories, and give him his soup and gruel, and read to him.  Poor,
_poor_ boy, we _must_ go, papa, won't you?"

"Not to-day, dear.  It is impossible to go to-day.  There, now, don't
begin to cry.  Perhaps--perhaps to-morrow--but think, my love; you have
no idea how dirty--how _very_ nasty--the places are in which our lower
orders live."

"Oh! yes I have," said Di eagerly.  "Haven't I seen our nursery on
cleaning days?"

A faint flicker of a smile passed over the knight's countenance.

"True, darling, but the places are far, far dirtier than that.  Then the
smells.  Oh! they are very dreadful--"

"What--worse than _we_ have when there's cabbage for dinner?"

"Yes, much worse than that."

"I don't care, papa.  We _must_ go to see the boy--the poor, _poor_ boy,
in spite of dirt and smells.  And then, you know--let me up on your knee
and I'll tell you all about it.  There!  Well, then, you know, I'd tidy
the room up, and even wash it a little.  Oh, you can't think how nicely
I washed up my doll's room--her corner, you know,--that day when I spilt
all her soup in trying to feed her, and then, while trying to wipe it
up, I accidentally burst her, and all her inside came out--the sawdust,
I mean.  It was the worst mess I ever made, but I cleaned it up as well
as Jessie herself could have done--so nurse said."

"But the messes down in Whitechapel are much worse than you have
described, dear," expostulated the parent, who felt that his powers of
resistance were going.

"So much the better, papa," replied Di, kissing her sire's lethargic
visage.  "I should like _so_ much to try if I could clean up something
worse than my doll's room.  And you've promised, you know."

"No--only said `perhaps,'" returned Sir Richard quickly.

"Well, that's the same thing; and now that it's all nicely settled, I'll
go and see nurse.  Good-bye, papa."

"Good-bye, dear," returned the knight, resigning himself to his fate and
the newspaper.



CHAPTER THREE.

POVERTY MANAGES TO BOARD OUT HER INFANT FOR NOTHING.

On the night of the day about which we have been writing, a woman,
dressed in "unwomanly rags" crept out of the shadow of the houses near
London Bridge.  She was a thin, middle-aged woman, with a countenance
from which sorrow, suffering, and sin had not been able to obliterate
entirely the traces of beauty.  She carried a bundle in her arms which
was easily recognisable as a baby, from the careful and affectionate
manner in which the woman's thin, out-spread fingers grasped it.

Hurrying on to the bridge till she reached the middle of one of the
arches, she paused and looked over.  The Thames was black and gurgling,
for it was intensely dark, and the tide half ebb at the time.  The
turbid waters chafed noisily on the stone piers as if the sins and
sorrows of the great city had been somehow communicated to them.

But the distance from the parapet to the surface of the stream was
great.  It seemed awful in the woman's eyes.  She shuddered and drew
back.

"Oh! for courage--only for one minute!" she murmured, clasping the
bundle closer to her breast.

The action drew off a corner of the scanty rag which she called a shawl,
and revealed a small and round, yet exceedingly thin face, the black
eyes of which seemed to gaze in solemn wonder at the scene of darkness
visible which was revealed.  The woman stood between two lamps in the
darkest place she could find, but enough of light reached her to glitter
in the baby's solemn eyes as they met her gaze, and it made a pitiful
attempt to smile as it recognised its mother.

"God help me!  I can't," muttered the woman with a shiver, as if an
ice-block had touched her heart.

She drew the rag hastily over the baby's head again, pressed it closer
to her breast, retraced her steps, and dived into the shadows from which
she had emerged.

This was one of the "lower orders" to whom Sir Richard Brandon had such
an objection, whom he found it, he said, so difficult to deal with, (no
wonder, for he never tried to deal with them at all, in any sense worthy
of the name), and whom it was, he said, useless to assist, because all
_he_ could do in such a vast accumulation of poverty would be a mere
drop in the bucket.  Hence Sir Richard thought it best to keep the drop
in his pocket where it could be felt and do good--at least to himself,
rather than dissipate it in an almost empty bucket.  The bucket,
however, was not quite empty--thanks to a few thousands of people who
differed from the knight upon that point.

The thin woman hastened through the streets as regardless of passers-by
as they were of her, until she reached the neighbourhood of Commercial
Street, Spitalfields.

Here she paused and looked anxiously round her.  She had left the main
thoroughfare, and the spot on which she stood was dimly lighted.
Whatever she looked or waited for, did not, however, soon appear, for
she stood under a lamp-post, muttering to herself, "I _must_ git rid of
it.  Better to do so than see it starved to death before my eyes."

Presently a foot-fall was heard, and a man drew near.  The woman gazed
intently into his face.  It was not a pleasant face.  There was a scowl
on it.  She drew back and let him pass.  Then several women passed, but
she took no notice of them.  Then another man appeared.  His face seemed
a jolly one.  The woman stepped forward at once and confronted him.

"Please, sir," she began, but the man was too sharp for her.

"Come now--you've brought out that baby on purpose to humbug people with
it.  Don't fancy you'll throw dust in _my_ eyes.  I'm too old a cock for
that.  Don't you know that you're breaking the law by begging?"

"I'm _not_ begging," retorted the woman, almost fiercely.

"Oh! indeed.  Why do you stop me, then?"

"I merely wished to ask if your name is Thompson."

"Ah hem!" ejaculated the man with a broad grin, "well no, madam, my name
is _not_ Thompson."

"Well, then," rejoined the woman, still indignantly, "you may move on."

She had used an expression all too familiar to herself, and the man,
obeying the order with a bow and a mocking laugh, disappeared like those
who had gone before him.

For some time no one else appeared save a policeman.  When he
approached, the woman went past him down the street, as if bent on some
business, but when he was out of sight she returned to the old spot,
which was near the entrance to an alley.

At last the woman's patience was rewarded by the sight of a burly little
elderly man, whose face of benignity was unmistakably genuine.
Remembering the previous man's reference to the baby, she covered it up
carefully, and held it more like a bundle.

Stepping up to the newcomer at once, she put the same question as to
name, and also asked if he lived in Russell Square.

"No, my good woman," replied the burly little man, with a look of
mingled surprise and pity, "my name is _not_ Thompson.  It is Twitter--
Samuel Twitter, of Twitter, Slime and--, but," he added, checking
himself, under a sudden and rare impulse of prudence, "why do you ask my
name and address?"

The woman gave an almost hysterical laugh at having been so successful
in her somewhat clumsy scheme, and, without uttering another word,
darted down the alley.  She passed rapidly round by a back way to
another point of the same street she had left--well ahead of the spot
where she had stood so long and so patiently that night.  Here she
suddenly uncovered the baby's face and kissed it passionately for a few
moments.  Then, wrapping it in the ragged shawl, with its little head
out, she laid it on the middle of the footpath full in the light of a
lamp, and retired to await the result.

When the woman rushed away, as above related, Mr Samuel Twitter stood
for some minutes rooted to the spot, lost in amazement.  He was found in
that condition by the returning policeman.

"Constable," said he, cocking his hat to one side the better to scratch
his bald head, "there are strange people in this region."

"Indeed there are, sir."

"Yes, but I mean _very_ strange people."

"Well, sir, if you insist on it, I won't deny that some of them are
_very_ strange."

"Yes, well--good-night, constable," said Mr Twitter, moving slowly
forward in a mystified state of mind, while the guardian of the night
continued his rounds, thinking to himself that he had just parted from
one of the very strangest of the people.
