"You shan't!" cried Jane.

"I _will_!" replied the captain.

There was a pause here of considerable length, during which the captain
observed that Martha's nostrils began to twitch nervously.  Jane,
observing the fact, became similarly affected.  To the captain's
practised eye these symptoms were as good as a barometer.  He knew that
the storm was coming, and took in all sail at once (mentally) to be
ready for it.

It came!  Martha and Jane Dunning were for once driven from the shelter
of their wonted propriety--they burst simultaneously into tears, and
buried their respective faces in their respective pocket-handkerchiefs,
which were immaculately clean and had to be hastily unfolded for the
purpose.

"Now, now, my dear girls," cried the captain, starting up and patting
their shoulders, while poor little Ailie clasped her hands, sat down on
a footstool, looked up in their faces--or, rather, at the backs of the
hands which covered their faces--and wept quietly.

"It's very cruel, George--indeed it is," sobbed Martha; "you know how we
love her."

"Very true," remarked the obdurate captain; "but you _don't_ know how
_I_ love her, and how sad it makes me to see so little of her, and to
think that she may be learning to forget me--or, at least," added the
captain, correcting himself as Ailie looked at him reproachfully through
her tears--"at least to do without me.  I can't bear the thought.  She's
all I have left to me, and--"

"Brother," interrupted Martha, looking hastily up, "did you ever before
hear of such a thing as taking a little girl on a voyage to the
whale-fishing?"

"No, never," replied the captain; "what has that got to do with it?"

Both ladies held up their hands and looked aghast.  The idea of any man
venturing to do what no one ever thought of doing before was so utterly
subversive of all their ideas of propriety--such a desperate piece of
profane originality--that they remained speechless.

"George," said Martha, drying her eyes, and speaking in tones of deep
solemnity, "did you ever read _Robinson Crusoe_?"

"Yes, I did, when I was a boy; an' that wasn't yesterday."

"And did you," continued the lady in the same sepulchral tone, "did you
note how that man--that beacon, if I may use the expression, set up as a
warning to deter all wilful boys and men from reckless, and wicked, and
wandering, and obstreperous courses--did you note, I say, how that man,
that beacon, was shipwrecked, and spent a dreary existence on an
uninhabited and dreadful island, in company with a low, dissolute,
black, unclothed companion called Friday?"

"Yes," answered the captain, seeing that she paused for a reply.

"And all," continued Martha, "in consequence of his resolutely and
obstinately, and wilfully and wickedly going to sea?"

"Well, it couldn't have happened if he hadn't gone to sea, no doubt."

"Then," argued Martha, "will you, can you, George, contemplate the
possibility of your only daughter coming to the same dreadful end?"

George, not exactly seeing the connection, rubbed his nose with his
forefinger, and replied--"Certainly not."

"Then you are bound," continued Martha, in triumph, "by all that is
upright and honourable, by all the laws of humanity and _propriety_, to
give up this wild intention--and you _must_!"

"There!" cried Miss Jane emphatically, as if the argument were
unanswerable--as indeed it was, being incomprehensible.

The last words were unfortunate.  They merely riveted the captain's
determination.

"You talk a great deal of nonsense, Martha," he said, rising to depart.
"I've fixed to take her, so the sooner you make up your minds to it the
better."

The sisters knew their brother's character too well to waste more time
in vain efforts; but Martha took him by the arm, and said
earnestly--"Will you promise me, my dear George, that when she comes
back from this voyage, you will never take her on another?"

"Yes, dear sister," replied the captain, somewhat melted, "I promise
that."

Without another word Martha sat down and held out her arms to Ailie, who
incontinently rushed into them.  Propriety fled for the nonce,
discomfited.  Miss Martha's curls were disarranged beyond repair, and
Miss Martha's collar was crushed to such an extent that the very
laundress who had washed and starched and ironed it would have utterly
failed to recognise it.  Miss Jane looked on at these improprieties in
perfect indifference--nay, when, after her sister had had enough, the
child was handed over to her, she submitted to the same violent
treatment without a murmur.  For once Nature was allowed to have her
way, and all three had a good hearty satisfactory cry; in the midst of
which Captain Dunning left them, and, proceeding on board his ship,
hastened the preparations for his voyage to the Southern Seas.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE TEA-PARTY--ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS OF A MINOR KIND--GLYNN PROCTOR
GETS INTO TROUBLE.

On the evening of the day in which the foregoing scenes were enacted,
the Misses Dunning prepared a repast for their brother and one or two of
his officers, who were to spend the last evening in port there, and
discuss various important and unimportant matters in a sort of
semi-convivio-business way.

An event of this kind was always of the deepest interest and productive
of the most intense anxiety to the amiable though starched sisters;
first, because it was of rare occurrence; and second, because they were
never quite certain that it would pass without some unhappy accident,
such as the upsetting of a tea-cup or a kettle, or the scalding of the
cat, not to mention visitors' legs.  They seemed to regard a tea-party
in the light of a firearm--a species of blunderbuss--a thing which, it
was to be hoped, would "go off well"; and, certainly, if loading the
table until it groaned had anything to do with the manner of its "going
off," there was every prospect of its doing so with pre-eminent success
upon that occasion.

But besides the anxieties inseparable from the details of the pending
festivities, the Misses Dunning were overwhelmed and weighed down with
additional duties consequent upon their brother's sudden and unexpected
determination.  Little Ailie had to be got ready for sea by the
following morning!  It was absolute and utter insanity!  No one save a
madman or a sea-captain could have conceived such a thing, much less
have carried it into effect tyrannically.

The Misses Dunning could not attempt any piece of duty or work
separately.  They always acted together, when possible; and might, in
fact, without much inconvenience, have been born Siamese twins.
Whatever Martha did, Jane attempted to do or to mend; wherever Jane
went, Martha followed.  Not, by any means, that one thought she could
improve upon the work of the other; their conduct was simply the result
of a desire to assist each other mutually.  When Martha spoke, Jane
echoed or corroborated; and when Jane spoke, Martha repeated her
sentences word for word in a scarcely audible whisper--not after the
other had finished, but during the course of the remarks.

With such dispositions and propensities, it is not a matter to be
wondered at that the good ladies, while arranging the tea-table, should
suddenly remember some forgotten article of Ailie's wardrobe, and rush
simultaneously into the child's bedroom to rectify the omission; or,
when thus engaged, be filled with horror at the thought of having left
the buttered toast too near the fire in the parlour.

"It is really quite perplexing," said Martha, sitting down with a sigh,
and regarding the tea-table with a critical gaze; "quite perplexing.
I'm sure I don't know how I shall bear it.  It is too bad of George--
darling Ailie--(dear me, Jane, how crookedly you have placed the urn)--
it is really too bad."

"Too bad, indeed; yes, isn't it?" echoed Jane, in reference to the
captain's conduct, while she assisted Martha, who had risen to readjust
the urn.

"Oh!" exclaimed Martha, with a look of horror.

"What?" cried Jane, who looked and felt equally horrified, although she
knew not yet the cause.

"The eggs!"

"The eggs?"

"Yes, the eggs.  You know every one of the last dozen we got was bad,
and we've forgot to send for more," said Martha.

"For more; so we have!" cried Jane; and both ladies rushed into the
kitchen, gave simultaneous and hurried orders to the servant-girl, and
sent her out of the house impressed with an undefined feeling that life
or death depended on the instant procuring of two dozen fresh eggs.

It may be as well to remark here, that the Misses Dunning, although
stiff, and starched, and formal, had the power of speeding nimbly from
room to room, when alone and when occasion required, without in the
least degree losing any of their stiffness or formality, so that we do
not use the terms "rush," "rushed," or "rushing" inappropriately.
Nevertheless, it may also be remarked that they never acted in a rapid
or impulsive way in company, however small in numbers or unceremonious
in character the company might be--always excepting the servant-girl and
the cat, to whose company, from long habit, they had become used, and
therefore indifferent.

The sisters were on their knees, stuffing various articles into a large
trunk, and Ailie was looking on, by way of helping, with very red and
swollen eyes, and the girl was still absent in quest of eggs, when a
succession of sounding blows were administered to the green door, and a
number of gruff voices were heard conversing without.

"_There_!" cried Martha and Jane, with bitter emphasis, looking in each
other's faces as if to say, "We knew it.  Before that girl was sent away
for these eggs, we each separately and privately prophesied that they
would arrive, and that we should have to open the door.  And you see, so
it has happened, and we are not ready!"

But there was no time for remark.  The case was desperate.  Both sisters
felt it to be so, and acted accordingly, while Ailie, having been
forbidden to open the door, sat down on her trunk, and looked on in
surprise.  They sprang up, washed their hands simultaneously in the same
basin, with the same piece of soap broken in two; dried them with the
same towel, darted to the mirror, put on two identically similar clean
tall caps, leaped down-stairs, opened the door with slow dignity of
demeanour, and received their visitors in the hall with a calmness and
urbanity of manner that contrasted rather strangely with their flushed
countenances and heaving bosoms.

"Hallo!  Ailie!" exclaimed the captain, as his daughter pulled down his
head to be kissed.  "Why, you take a fellow all aback, like a white
squall.  Are you ready, my pet?  Kit stowed and anchor tripped?  Come
this way, and let us talk about it.  Dear me, Martha, you and Jane--look
as if you had been running a race, eh?  Here are my messmates come to
talk a bit with you.  My sisters, Martha and Jane--Dr Hopley."  (Dr
Hopley bowed politely.) "My first mate, Mr Millons" (Mr Millons also
bowed, somewhat loosely); "and Rokens--Tim Rokens, my chief harpooner."
(Mr Rokens pulled his forelock, and threw back his left leg, apparently
to counterbalance the bend in his body.) "He didn't want to come; said
he warn't accustomed to ladies' society; but I told him you warn't
ladies--a--I don't mean that--not ladies o' the high-flyin' fashionable
sort, that give themselves airs, you know.  Come along, Ailie."

While the captain ran on in this strain, hung up his hat, kissed Ailie,
and ran his fingers through his shaggy locks, the Misses Dunning
performed a mingled bow and courtsey to each guest as his name was
mentioned, and shook hands with him, after which the whole party entered
the parlour, where the cat was discovered enjoying a preliminary meal of
its own at one of the pats of butter.  A united shriek from Martha
and Jane, a nautical howl from the guests, and a rolled-up
pocket-handkerchief from Rokens sent that animal from the table as if it
had received a galvanic shock.

"I ax yer parding, ladies," said Mr Rokens, whose aim had been so
perfect that his handkerchief not only accelerated the flight of the
cat, but carried away the violated pat of butter along with it.  "I ax
yer parding, but them brutes is sich thieves--I could roast 'em alive,
so I could."

The harpooner unrolled his handkerchief, and picking the pat of butter
from its folds with his fingers, threw it into the fire.  Thereafter he
smoothed down his hair, and seated himself on the extreme edge of a
chair, as near the door as possible.  Not that he had any intention
whatever of taking to flight, but he deemed that position to be more
suited to his condition than any other.

In a few minutes the servant-girl returned with the eggs.  While she is
engaged in boiling them, we shall introduce Captain Dunning's friends
and messmates to the reader.

Dr Hopley was a surgeon, and a particular friend of the captain's.  He
was an American by birth, but had travelled so much about the world that
he had ceased to "guess" and "calculate," and to speak through his nose.
He was a man about forty, tall, big-boned, and muscular, though not
fat; and besides being a gentlemanly man, was a good-natured, quiet
creature, and a clever enough fellow besides, but he preferred to laugh
at and enjoy the jokes and witticisms of others rather than to
perpetrate any himself.  Dr Hopley was intensely fond of travelling,
and being possessed of a small independence, he indulged his passion to
the utmost.  He had agreed to go with Captain Dunning as the ship's
doctor, simply for the sake of seeing the whale-fishery of the South
Seas, having already, in a similar capacity, encountered the dangers of
the North.

Dr Hopley had few weaknesses.  His chief one was an extravagant belief
in phrenology.  We would not be understood to imply that phrenology is
extravagant; but we assert that the doctor's belief in it was
extravagant, assigning, as he did, to every real and ideal facility of
the human mind "a local habitation and a name" in the cranium, with a
corresponding depression or elevation of the surface to mark its
whereabouts.  In other respects he was a commonplace sort of a man.

Mr Millons, the first mate, was a short, hale, thick-set man, without
any particularly strong points of character.  He was about thirty-five,
and possessed a superabundance of fair hair and whiskers, with a large,
broad chin, a firm mouth, rather fierce-looking eyes, and a hasty, but
by no means a bad temper.  He was a trustworthy, matter-of-fact seaman,
and a good officer, but not bright intellectually.  Like most men of his
class, his look implied that he did not under-estimate his own
importance, and his tones were those of a man accustomed to command.

Tim Rokens was an old salt; a bluff, strong, cast-iron man, of about
forty-five years of age, who had been at sea since he was a little boy,
and would not have consented to live on dry land, though he had been
"offered command of a seaport town all to himself," as he was wont to
affirm emphatically.  His visage was scarred and knotty, as if it had
been long used to being pelted by storms--as indeed it had.  There was a
scar over his left eye and down his cheek, which had been caused by a
slash from the cutlass of a pirate in the China Seas; but although it
added to the rugged effect of his countenance, it did not detract from
the frank, kindly expression that invariably rested there.  Tim Rokens
had never been caught out of temper in his life.  Men were wont say he
had no temper to lose.  Whether this was true or no, we cannot presume
to say, but certainly he never lost it.  He was the best and boldest
harpooner in Captain Dunning's ship, and a sententious deliverer of his
private opinion on all occasions whatsoever.  When we say that he wore a
rough blue pilot-cloth suit, and had a large black beard, with a
sprinkling of silver hairs in it, we have completed his portrait.

"What's come of Glynn?" inquired Captain Dunning, as he accepted a large
cup of smoking tea with one hand, and with the other handed a plate of
buttered toast to Dr Hopley, who sat next him.

"I really cannot imagine," replied Miss Martha.

"No, cannot imagine," whispered Miss Jane.

"He promised to come, and to be punctual," continued Miss Martha
("Punctual," whispered Miss J), "but something seems to have detained
him.  Perhaps--"

Here Miss Martha was brought to an abrupt pause by observing that Mr
Rokens was about to commence to eat his egg with a teaspoon.

"Allow me, Mr Rokens," she said, handing that individual an ivory
eggspoon.

"Oh, cer'nly, ma'am.  By all means," replied Rokens, taking the spoon
and handing it to Miss Jane, under the impression that it was intended
for her.

"I beg pardon, it is for yourself, Mr Rokens," said Martha and Jane
together.

"Thank'ee, ma'am," replied Rokens, growing red, as he began to perceive
he was a little "off his course" somehow.  "I've no occasion for _two_,
an' this one suits me oncommon."

"Ah! you prefer big spoons to little ones, my man, don't you?" said
Captain Dunning, coming to the rescue.  "Let him alone, Martha, he's
used to take care of himself.  Doctor, can you tell me now, which is the
easiest of digestion--a hard egg or a soft one?"

Thus appealed to, Dr Hopley paused a moment and frowned at the teapot,
as though he were about to tax his brain to the utmost in the solution
of an abstruse question in medical science.

"Well now," he replied, stirring his tea gently, and speaking with much
deliberation, "that depends very much upon circumstances.  Some
digestions can manage a hard egg best, others find a soft one more
tractable.  And then the state of the stomach at the time of eating has
to be taken into account.  I should say now, that my little friend
Ailie, here, to judge from the rosy colour of her cheeks, could manage
hard or soft eggs equally well; couldn't you, eh?"

Ailie laughed, as she replied, "I'm sure I don't know, Doctor Hopley;
but I _like_ soft ones best."

To this, Captain Dunning said, "Of course you do, my sensible little
pet;" although it would be difficult to show wherein lay the sensibility
of the preference, and then added--"There's Rokens, now; wouldn't you,
doctor--judging from his rosy, not to say purple cheeks--conclude that
he wasn't able to manage even two eggs of any kind?"

"Wot, _me_!" exclaimed Mr Rokens, looking up in surprise, as indeed he
well might, having just concluded his fourth, and being about to
commence his fifth egg, to the no small anxiety of Martha and Jane, into
whose limited and innocent minds the possibility of such a feat had
never entered.  "Wot, _me_!  Why, capting, if they was biled as hard as
the head of a marline-spike--"

The expanding grin on the captain's face, and a sudden laugh from the
mate, apprised the bold harpooner at this point of his reply that the
captain was jesting, so he felt a little confused, and sought relief by
