
"It's a fair offer," said Andrew, when he had subdued the poor youth a
second time, "an' reflec's favourably on yer courage, but I'm a man o'
peace, an' have no thirst for bloodshed--whilk is more than ye can say,
young man; but if ye'll let me tie yer hands thegither, an' gang
peaceably hame wi' me, I's promise that nae mischief'll befa' ye."

"No man shall ever tie my hands together as long as there is life in my
body," replied the youth.

"Stop, stop, callant!" exclaimed Andrew, as Will was about to renew the
struggle.  "The pride o' youth is awful.  Hear what I've gotten to say
to ye, man, or I'll hae to throttle ye ootright.  It'll come to the same
thing if ye'll alloo me to tie ane o' _my_ hands to ane o' yours.  Ye
canna objec' to that, surely, for I'll be your prisoner as muckle as
you'll be mine--and that'll be fair play, for we'll leave the swurd
lyin' on the brae to keep the bit stick company."

"Well, I agree to that," said Wallace, in a tone that indicated surprise
with a dash of amusement.

"An' ye promise no' to try to get away when you're tied to--when _I'm_
tied to _you_?"

"I promise."

Hereupon the farmer, reaching out his hand, picked up the black silk
neckcloth which he had laid aside, and with it firmly bound his own left
wrist to the right wrist of his captive, talking in a grave, subdued
tone as he did so.

"Nae doot the promise o' a spy is hardly to be lippened to, but if I
find that ye're a dishonourable man, ye'll find that I'm an
uncomfortable prisoner to be tied to.  Noo, git up, lad, an' we'll gang
hame thegither."

On rising, the first thing the trooper did was to turn and take a steady
look at the man who had captured him in this singular manner.

"Weel, what d'ye think o' me?" asked Andrew, with what may be termed a
grave smile.

"If you want to know my true opinion," returned Wallace, "I should say
that I would not have thought, from the look of you, that you could have
taken mean advantage of a sleeping foe."

"Ay--an' I would not have thought, from the look o' _you_," retorted
Andrew, "that ye could hae sell't yersel' to gang skulkin' aboot the
hills as a spy upon the puir craters that are only seekin' to worship
their Maker in peace."

Without further remark Andrew Black, leaving his coat and plaid to keep
company with the sword and stick, led his prisoner down the hill.

Andrew's cottage occupied a slight hollow on the hillside, which
concealed it from every point of the compass save the high ground above
it.  Leading the trooper up to the door, he tapped gently, and was
promptly admitted by some one whom Wallace could not discern, as the
interior was dark.

"Oh, Uncle Andrew!  I'm glad ye've come, for Peter hasna come back yet,
an' I'm feared somethin' has come ower him."

"Strike a light, lassie.  I've gotten haud o' a spy here, an' canna weel
do't mysel'."

When a light was procured and held up, it revealed the pretty face of
Jean Black, which underwent a wondrous change when she beheld the face
of the prisoner.

"Uncle Andrew!" she exclaimed, "this is nae spy.  He's the man that cam'
to the help o' Aggie an' me against the dragoon."

"Is that sae?" said Black, turning a look of surprise on his prisoner.

"It is true, indeed, that I had the good fortune to protect Jean and her
friend from an insolent comrade," answered Wallace; "and it is also true
that that act has been partly the cause of my deserting to the hills,
being starved for a day and a night, and taken prisoner now as a spy."

"Sir," said Andrew, hastily untying the kerchief that bound them
together, "I humbly ask your pardon.  Moreover, it's my opeenion that if
ye hadna been starvin' ye wadna have been here 'e noo, for ye're
uncommon teuch.  Rin, lassie, an' fetch some breed an' cheese.  Whar's
Marion an' Is'b'l?"

"They went out to seek for Peter," said Jean, as she hastened to obey
her uncle's mandate.

At that moment a loud knocking was heard at the door, and the voice of
Marion, one of the maid-servants, was heard outside.  On the door being
opened, she and her companion Isabel burst in with excited looks and the
information, pantingly given, that the "sodgers were comin'."

"Haud yer noise, lassie, an' licht the fire--pit on the parritch pat.
Come, Peter, let's hear a' aboot it."

Ramblin' Peter, who had been thus named because of his inveterate
tendency to range over the neighbouring hills, was a quiet, undersized,
said-to-be weak-minded boy of sixteen years, though he looked little
more than fourteen.  No excitement whatever ruffled his placid
countenance as he gave his report--to the effect that a party of
dragoons had been seen by him not half an hour before, searching
evidently for his master's cottage.

"They'll soon find it," said the farmer, turning quickly to his
domestics--"Away wi' ye, lassies, and hide."

The two servant-girls, with Jean and her cousin Aggie Wilson, ran at
once into an inner room and shut the door.  Ramblin' Peter sat stolidly
down beside the fire and calmly stirred the porridge-pot, which was
nearly full of the substantial Scottish fare.

"Noo, sir," said Black, turning to Will Wallace, who had stood quietly
watching the various actors in the scene just described, "yer
comrades'll be here in a wee while.  May I ask what ye expect?"

"I expect to be imprisoned at the least, more probably shot."

"Hm! pleasant expectations for a young man, nae doot.  I'm sorry that
it's oot o' my power to stop an' see the fun, for the sodgers have
strange suspicions aboot me, so I'm forced to mak' mysel' scarce an'
leave Ramblin' Peter to do the hospitalities o' the hoose.  But before I
gang awa' I wad fain repay ye for the guid turn ye did to my bairns.  If
ye are willin' to shut yer eyes an' do what I tell ye, I'll put you in a
place o' safety."

"Thank you, Mr. Black," returned Wallace; "of course I shall only be too
glad to escape from the consequences of my unfortunate position; but do
not misunderstand me: although neither a spy nor a Covenantor I am a
loyal subject, and would not now be a deserter if that character had not
been forced upon me, first by the brutality of the soldiers with whom I
was banded, and then by the insolence of my comrade-in-arms to your
daughter--"

"Niece; niece," interrupted Black; "I wish she _was_ my dauchter, bless
her bonny face!  Niver fear, sir, I've nae doot o' yer loyalty, though
you an' yer freends misdoot mine.  I claim to be as loyal as the best o'
ye, but there's nae dictionary in _this_ warld that defines loyalty to
be slavish submission o' body an' sowl to a tyrant that fears naether
God nor man.  The quastion noo is, Div ye want to escape and wull ye
trust me?"

The sound of horses galloping in the distance tended to quicken the
young trooper's decision.  He submitted to be blindfolded by his captor.

"Noo, Peter," said Andrew, as he was about to lead Wallace away, "ye ken
what to dae.  Gie them plenty to eat; show them the rum bottle, let them
hae the rin o' the hoose, an' say that I bade ye treat them weel."

"Ay," was Ramblin' Peter's laconic reply.

Leading his captive out at the door, round the house, and re-entering by
a back door, apparently with no other end in view than to bewilder him,
Andrew went into a dark room, opened some sort of door--to enter which
the trooper had to stoop low--and conducted him down a steep, narrow
staircase.

The horsemen meanwhile had found the cottage and were heard at that
moment tramping about in front, and thundering on the door for
admittance.

Wallace fancied that the door which closed behind him must be of amazing
thickness, for it shut out almost completely the sounds referred to.

On reaching the foot of the staircase, and having the napkin removed
from his eyes, he found himself in a long, low, vaulted chamber.  There
was no one in it save his guide and a venerable man who sat beside a
deal table, reading a document by the light of a tallow candle stuck in
the mouth of a black bottle.

The soldiers, meanwhile, having been admitted by Ramblin' Peter,
proceeded to question that worthy as to Andrew Black and his household.
Not being satisfied of the truth of his replies they proceeded to apply
torture in order to extract confession.  It was the first time that this
mode of obtaining information had been used in Black's cottage, and it
failed entirely, for Ramblin' Peter was staunch, and, although inhumanly
thrashed and probed with sword-points, the poor lad remained dumb,
insomuch that the soldiers at length set him down as an idiot, for he
did not even cry out in his agonies--excepting in a curious,
half-stifled manner--because he knew well that if his master were made
aware by his cries of what was going on he would be sure to hasten to
the rescue at the risk of his life.

Having devoured the porridge, drunk the rum, and destroyed a
considerable amount of the farmer's produce, the lawless troopers, who
seemed to be hurried in their proceedings at that time, finally left the
place.

About the time that these events were taking place in and around Black's
cottage, bands of armed men with women and even children were hastening
towards the same locality to attend the great "conventicle," for which
the preparations already described were being made.

The immediate occasion of the meeting was the desire of the parishioners
of the Reverend John Welsh, a great-grandson of John Knox, to make
public avowal, at the Communion Table, of their fidelity to Christ and
their attachment to the minister who had been expelled from the church
of Irongray; but strong sympathy induced many others to attend, not only
from all parts of Galloway and Nithsdale, but from the distant Clyde,
the shores of the Forth, and elsewhere; so that the roads were crowded
with people making for the rendezvous--some on foot, others on
horseback.  Many of the latter were gentlemen of means and position,
who, as well as their retainers, were more or less well armed and
mounted.  The Reverend John Blackadder, the "auld" minister of
Troqueer--a noted hero of the Covenant, who afterwards died a prisoner
on the Bass Rock--travelled with his party all the way from Edinburgh,
and a company of eighty horse proceeded to the meeting from Clydesdale.

Preliminary services, conducted by Mr. Blackadder and Mr. Welsh, were
held near Dumfries on the Saturday, but at these the place of meeting on
the Sabbath was only vaguely announced as "a hillside in Irongray," so
anxious were they to escape being disturbed by their enemies, and the
secret was kept so well that when the Sabbath arrived a congregation of
above three thousand had assembled round the Communion stones in the
hollow of Skeoch Hill.

Sentinels were posted on all the surrounding heights.  One of these
sentinels was the farmer Andrew Black, with a cavalry sword belted to
his waist, and a rusty musket on his shoulder.  Beside him stood a tall
stalwart youth in shepherd's costume.

"Yer ain mother wadna ken ye," remarked Andrew with a twinkle in his
eyes.

"I doubt that," replied the youth; "a mother's eyes are keen.  I should
not like to encounter even Glendinning in my present guise."

As he spoke the rich melody of the opening psalm burst from the great
congregation and rolled in softened cadence towards the sentinels.

CHAPTER THREE.

THE TRUE AND THE FALSE AT WORK.

The face of nature did not seem propitious to the great gathering on
Skeoch Hill.  Inky clouds rolled athwart the leaden sky, threatening a
deluge of rain, and fitful gusts of wind seemed to indicate the approach
of a tempest.  Nevertheless the elements were held in check by the God
of nature, so that the solemn services of the day were conducted to a
close without discomfort, though not altogether without interruption.

Several of the most eminent ministers, who had been expelled from their
charges, were present on this occasion.  Besides John Welsh of Irongray,
there were Arnot of Tongland, Blackadder of Troqueer, and Dickson of
Rutherglen--godly men who had for many years suffered persecution and
imprisonment, and were ready to lay down their lives in defence of
religious liberty.  The price set upon the head of that "notour traitor,
Mr. John Welsh," dead or alive, was 9000 merks.  Mr. Arnot was valued at
3000!

These preached and assisted at different parts of the services, while
the vast multitude sat on the sloping hillside, and the mounted men drew
up on the outskirts of the congregation, so as to be within sound of the
preachers' voices, and, at the same time, be ready for action on the
defensive if enemies should appear.

Andrew Black and his companion stood for some time listening, with bowed
heads, to the slow sweet music that floated towards them.  They were too
far distant to hear the words of prayer that followed, yet they
continued to stand in reverent silence for some time, listening to the
sound--Black with his eyes closed, his young companion gazing wistfully
at the distant landscape, which, from the elevated position on which
they stood, lay like a magnificent panorama spread out before them.  On
the left the level lands bordering the rivers Cairn and Nith stretched
away to the Solway, with the Cumberland mountains in the extreme
distance; in front and on the right lay the wild, romantic hill-country
of which, in after years, it was so beautifully written:--

  "O bonnie hills of Galloway oft have I stood to see,
  At sunset hour, your shadows fall, all darkening on the lea;
  While visions of the buried years came o'er me in their might--
  As phantoms of the sepulchre--instinct with inward light!
  The years, the years when Scotland groaned beneath her tyrant's hand!
  And 'twas not for the heather she was called `the purple land.'
  And 'twas not for her _loveliness_ her children blessed their God--
  _But for secret places of the hills, and the mountain heights_
  _untrod_."

"Who was the old man I found in what you call your hidy-hole?" asked
Wallace, turning suddenly to his companion.

"I'm no' sure that I have a right to answer that," said Black, regarding
Will with a half-serious, half-amused look.  "Hooever, noo that ye've
ta'en service wi' me, and ken about my hidy-hole, I suppose I may trust
ye wi' a' my secrets."

"I would not press you to reveal any secrets, Mr. Black, yet I think you
are safe to trust me, seeing that you know enough about my own secrets
to bring me to the gallows if so disposed."

"Ay, I hae ye there, lad!  But I'll trust ye on better grunds than that.
I believe ye to be an honest man, and that's enough for me.  Weel, ye
maun ken, it's saxteen year since I howkit the hidy-hole below my hoose,
an' wad ye believe it?--they've no fund it oot yet!  Not even had a
suspeecion o't, though the sodgers hae been sair puzzled, mony a time,
aboot hoo I managed to gie them the slip.  An' mony's the puir body,
baith gentle and simple, that I've gien food an' shelter to whae was
very likely to hae perished o' cauld an' hunger, but for the hidy-hole.
Among ithers I've often had the persecuited ministers doon there,
readin' their Bibles or sleepin' as comfortable as ye like when the
dragoons was drinkin', roarin', an' singin' like deevils ower their
heids.  My certies! if Clavers, or Sherp, or Lauderdale had an inklin'
o' the hunderd pairt o' the law-brekin' that I've done, it's a gallows
in the Gressmarkit as high as Haman's wad be ereckit for me, an' my heed
an' hauns, may be, would be bleachin' on the Nether Bow.  Humph! but
they've no' gotten me yet!"

"And I sincerely hope they never will," remarked Wallace; "but you have
not yet told me the name of the old man."

"I was comin' to him," continued Black; "but wheniver I wander to the
doin's o' that black-hearted Cooncil, I'm like to lose the threed o' my
discoorse.  Yon is a great man i' the Kirk o' Scotland.  They ca' him
Donald Cargill.  The adventures that puir man has had in the coorse o'
mair nor quarter o' a century wad mak' a grand story-buik.  He has no
fear o' man, an' he's an awfu' stickler for justice.  I'se warrant he
gied ye some strang condemnations o' the poors that be."

"Indeed he did not," said Wallace.  "Surely you misjudge his character.
His converse with me was entirely religious, and his chief anxiety
seemed to be to impress on me the love of God in sending Jesus Christ to
redeem a wicked world from sin.  I tried to turn the conversation on the
state of the times, but he gently turned it round again to the
importance of being at peace with God, and giving heed to the condition
of my own soul.  He became at last so personal that I did not quite like
it.  Yet he was so earnest and kind that I could not take offence."

"Ay, ay," said Black in a musing tone, "I see.  He clearly thinks that
yer he'rt needs mair instruction than yer heed.  Hm! maybe he's right.
Hooever, he's a wonderfu' man; gangs aboot the country preachin'
everywhere altho' he kens that the sodgers are aye on the look-oot for
him, an' that if they catch him it's certain death.  He wad have been at
this communion nae doot, if he hadna engaged to preach somewhere near
Sanquhar this vera day."

"Then he has left the hidy-hole by this time, I suppose?"

"Ye may be sure o' that, for when there is work to be done for the
Master, Donal' Cargill doesna let the gress grow under his feet."

"I'm sorry that I shall not see him again," returned the ex-trooper in a
tone of regret, "for I like him much."

Now, while this conversation was going on, a portion of the troop of
dragoons which had been out in search of Andrew Black was sent under
Glendinning (now a sergeant) in quest of an aged couple named Mitchell,
who were reported to have entertained intercommuned, iueu outlawed,
persons; attended conventicles in the fields; ventured to have family
worship in their cottages while a few neighbours were present, and to
have otherwise broken the laws of the Secret Council.

This Council, which was ruled by two monsters in human form, namely,
Archbishop Sharp of Saint Andrews and the Duke of Lauderdale, having
obtained full powers from King Charles the Second to put down
conventicles and enforce the laws against the fanatics with the utmost
possible rigour, had proceeded to carry out their mission by inviting a
host of half, if not quite, savage Highlanders to assist them in
quelling the people.  This host, numbering, with 2000 regulars and
militia, about 10,000 men, eagerly accepted the invitation, and was let
loose on the south and western districts of Scotland about the beginning
of the year, and for some time ravaged and pillaged the land as if it
had been an enemy's country.  They were thanked by the King for so
readily agreeing to assist in reducing the Covenanters to obedience to
"Us and Our laws," and were told to take up free quarters among the
disaffected, to disarm such persons as they should suspect, to carry
with them instruments of torture wherewith to subdue the refractory, and
in short to act very much in accordance with the promptings of their own
desires.  Evidently the mission suited these men admirably, for they
treated all parties as disaffected, with great impartiality, and
plundered, tortured, and insulted to such an extent that after about
three months of unresisted depredation, the shame of the thing became so
obvious that Government was compelled to send them home again.  They had
accomplished nothing in the way of bringing the Covenanters to reason;
but they had desolated a fair region of Scotland, spilt much innocent
blood, ruined many families, and returned to their native hills heavily
laden with booty of every kind like a victorious army.  It is said that
the losses caused by them in the county of Ayr alone amounted to over
11,000 pounds sterling.

The failure of this horde did not in the least check the proceedings of
Sharp or Lauderdale or their like-minded colleagues.  They kept the
regular troops and militia moving about the land, enforcing their
idiotical and wicked laws at the point of the sword.  We say idiotical
advisedly, for what could give stronger evidence of mental incapacity
than the attempt to enforce a bond upon all landed proprietors, obliging
themselves and their wives, children, and servants, as well as all their
tenants and cottars, with their wives, children, and servants, to
abstain from conventicles, and not to receive, assist, or even speak to,
any forfeited persons, intercommuned ministers, or vagrant preachers,
but to use their utmost endeavours to apprehend all such?  Those who
took this bond were to receive an assurance that the troops should not
be quartered on their lands--a matter of considerable importance--for
this quartering involved great expense and much destruction of property
in most cases, and absolute ruin in some.

After the battle of the Pentland Hills (in 1666), in which the
Covenanters, driven to desperation, made an unsuccessful effort to throw
off the tyrannical yoke, severer laws were enacted against them.  Their
wily persecutor, also being well aware of the evil influence of
disagreement among men, threw a bone of contention among them in the
shape of royal acts of _Indulgence_, as they were styled, by which a
certain number of the ejected ministers were permitted to preach on
certain conditions, but only within their own parishes.  To preach at a
separate meeting in a private house subjected the minister to a fine of
5000 merks (about 278 pounds).  To preach in the fields was to incur the
penalty of death and confiscation of property.  And these arbitrary laws
were not merely enacted for intimidation.  They were rigorously
enforced.  The curates in many cases became mere spies and Government
informers.  Many of the best men in the land laid down their lives
rather than cease to proclaim the Gospel of love and peace and goodwill
in Jesus Christ.  Of course their enemies set them down as self-willed
and turbulent fanatics.  It has ever been, and ever will be, thus with
men who are indifferent to principle.  They will not, as well as cannot,
understand those who are ready to fight, and, if need be, die for truth!
Their unspoken argument seems to be: "You profess to preach peace,
love, submission to authority, etcetera; very good, stand to your
principles.  Leave all sorts of carnal fighting to us.  Obey us.
Conform humbly to our arrangements, whatever they are, and all will be
well; but dare to show the slightest symptom of restiveness under what
you style our injustice, tyranny, cruelty, etcetera, and we will teach
you the submission which you preach but fail to practise by means of
fire and sword and torture and death!"

Many good men and true, with gentle spirits, and it may be somewhat
exalted ideas about the rights of Royalty, accepted the Indulgence as
being better than nothing, or better than civil war.  No doubt, also,
there were a few--neither good men nor true--who accepted it because it
afforded them a loophole of escape from persecution.  Similarly, on the
other side, there were good men and true, who, with bolder hearts,
perhaps, and clearer brains, it may be, refused the Indulgence as a
presumptuous enactment, which cut at the roots of both civil and
religious liberty, as implying a right to withhold while it professed to
give, and which, if acquiesced in, would indicate a degree of abject
slavery to man and unfaithfulness to God that might sink Scotland into a
condition little better than that of some eastern nations at the present
day.  Thus was the camp of the Covenanters divided.  There were also
more subtle divisions, which it is not necessary to mention here, and in
both camps, of course there was an infusion, especially amongst the
young men, of that powerful element--love of excitement and danger for
their own sake, with little if any regard to principle, which goes far
in all ages to neutralise the efforts and hamper the energies of the
wise.

Besides the acts of Indulgence, another and most tyrannical measure,
already mentioned, had been introduced to crush if possible the
Presbyterians.  _Letters of intercommuning_ were issued against a great
number of the most distinguished Presbyterians, including several ladies
of note, by which they were proscribed as rebels and cut off from all
society.  A price, amounting in some instances to 500 pounbds sterling,
was fixed on their heads, and every person, not excepting their nearest
of kin, was prohibited from conversing with or writing to them, or of
aiding with food, clothes, or any other necessary of life, on pain of
being found guilty of the same crimes as the intercommuned persons.

The natural result of such inhuman laws was that men and women in
hundreds had to flee from their homes and seek refuge among the dens and
caves of the mountains, where many were caught, carried off to prison,
tried, tortured, and executed; while of those who escaped their foes,
numbers perished from cold and hunger, and disease brought on by lying
in damp caves and clefts of the rocks without food or fire in all
weathers.  The fines which were exacted for so-called offences tempted
the avarice of the persecutors and tended to keep the torch of
persecution aflame.  For example, Sir George Maxwell of Newark was fined
a sum amounting to nearly 8000 pounds sterling for absence from his
Parish Church, attendance at conventicles, and disorderly baptisms--iueu
for preferring his own minister to the curate in the baptizing of his
children!  Hundreds of somewhat similar instances might be given.  Up to
the time of which we write (1678) no fewer than 17,000 persons had
suffered for attending field meetings, either by fine, imprisonment, or
death.

Such was the state of matters when the party of dragoons under command
of Sergeant Glendinning rode towards the Mitchells' cottage, which was
not far from Black's farm.  The body of soldiers being too small to
venture to interrupt the communion on Skeoch Hill, Glendinning had been
told to wait in the neighbourhood and gather information while his
officer, Captain Houston, went off in search of reinforcements.

"There's the auld sinner himsel'," cried the Sergeant as the party came
in sight of an old, whitehaired man seated on a knoll by the side of the
road.  "Hallo!  Jock Mitchell, is that you?  Come doon here directly, I
want to speak t'ye."

The old man, being stone deaf, and having his back to the road, was not
aware of the presence of the dragoons, and of course took no notice of
the summons.

"D'ye hear!" shouted the Sergeant savagely, for he was ignorant of the
old man's condition.

Still Mitchell did not move.  Glendinning, whose disposition seemed to
have been rendered more brutal since his encounter with Wallace, drew a
pistol from his holster and presented it at Mitchell.

"Answer me," he shouted again, "or ye're a deed man."

Mitchell did not move...  There was a loud report, and next moment the
poor old man fell dead upon the ground.

It chanced that Ramblin' Peter heard the report, though he did not
witness the terrible result, for he was returning home from the
Mitchells' cottage at the time, after escorting Jean Black and Aggie
Wilson thither.  The two girls, having been forbidden to attend the
gathering on Skeoch Hill, had resolved to visit the Mitchells and spend
the Sabbath with them.  Peter had accompanied them and spent the greater
part of the day with them, but, feeling the responsibility of his
position as the representative of Andrew Black during his absence, had
at last started for home.

A glance over a rising ground sufficed to make the boy turn sharp round
and take to his heels.  He was remarkably swift of foot.  A few minutes
brought him to the cottage door, which he burst open.

"The sodgers is comin', grannie!"  (He so styled the old woman, though
she was no relation.)

"Did ye see my auld man?"

"No."

"Away wi' ye, bairns," said Mrs. Mitchell quickly but quietly.  "Oot by
the back door an' doon the burnside; they'll niver see ye for the
busses."

