had also let our Spark go free, and cruelly dashed, for a time at least,
the budding hopes of two nations--but so it was.  He bore his prize in
triumph to Boulogne, where he exhibited it as a specimen of rare seaweed
with its centre filled with gold, while the telegraph clerks at both
ends sat gazing in dismay at their useless instruments.

Thus was the first submarine electric cable destroyed.  And with the
details of its destruction little Robin was intimately acquainted, for
cousin Sam had been a member of the staff that had worked that
telegraph--at least he had been a boy in the office,--and in after years
he so filled his cousin's mind with the importance of that cable, and
the grandeur and difficulty of the enterprise, that Robin became
powerfully sympathetic--so much so that when Sam, in telling the story,
came to the point where the Frenchman accomplished its destruction,
Robin used to grieve over it as though he had lost a brother, or a
kitten, or his latest toy!

We need scarcely add that submarine cable telegraphy had not received
its death-blow on that occasion.  Its possibility had been demonstrated.
The very next year (1851) Mr T.R. Crampton, with Messrs. Wollaston,
Kuper, and others, made and laid an improved cable between Dover and
Calais, and ere long many other parts of the world were connected by
means of snaky submarine electric cables.



CHAPTER THREE.

EARLY ASPIRATIONS.

One pleasant summer afternoon, Mr Wright, coming in from the office,
seated himself beside his composed little wife, who was patching a pair
of miniature pantaloons.

"Nan," said the husband, with a perplexed look, "what _are_ we to do
with our Robin when he grows up?"

"George," answered the composed wife, "don't you think it is rather soon
to trouble ourselves with that question?  Robin is a mere child yet.  We
must first give him a good education."

"Of course, I know that," returned the perplexed husband, "still, I
can't help thinking about what is to be done after he has had the good
education.  You know I have no relation in the world except brother
Richard, who is as poor as myself.  We have no influential friends to
help him into the Army or the Navy or the Indian Civil Service; and the
Church, you know, is not suitable for an imp.  Just look at him _now_!"

Mrs Wright looked through the window, over one of those sunny
landscapes which are usually described as "smiling," across a winding
rivulet, and at last fixed her gorgeous eyes on a tall post, up which a
small black object was seen to be struggling.

"What can he be up to?" said the father.

"He seems to be up the telegraph-post," said the mother, "investigating
the wires, no doubt.  I heard him talking about telegraphy to Madge this
morning--retailing what cousin Sam tries to teach him,--and I shouldn't
wonder if he were now endeavouring to make sure that what he told her
was correct, for you know he is a thorough investigator."

"Yes, I know it," murmured the father, with a grim pursing of his lips;
"he investigated the inside of my watch last week, to find out, as he
said, what made the noise in its `stummick,' and it has had intermittent
fever ever since.  Two days ago he investigated my razor,--it is now
equal to a cross-cut saw; and as to my drawers and papers, excepting
those which I lock up, there is but one word which fully describes the
result of his investigations, and that is--chaos."

There was, in truth, some ground for that father's emotions, for Master
Robin displayed investigative, not to say destructive, capacities far in
advance of his years.

"Never mind, George," said Mrs Wright soothingly, "we must put up with
his little ways as best we may, consoling ourselves with the reflection
that Robin has genius and perseverance, with which qualities he is sure
to make his way in the world."

"He has at all events made his way up the telegraph-post," said Mr
Wright, his smile expanding and the grimness of it departing; "see! the
rascal is actually stretching out his hand to grasp one of the wires.
Ha! hallo!"

The composed wife became suddenly discomposed, and gave vent to a
scream, for at that moment the small black object which they had been
watching with so much interest was seen to fall backward, make a wild
grasp at nothing with both hands, and fall promptly to the ground.

His father threw up the window, leaped out, dashed across the
four-feet-wide lawn, cleared the winding rivulet, and cut, like a hunted
hare, over the smiling landscape towards the telegraph-post, at the foot
of which he picked up his unconscious though not much injured son.

"What made you climb the post, Robin?" asked his cousin Madge that
evening as she nursed the adventurous boy on her knee--and Madge was a
very motherly nurse, although a full year younger than Robin.

"I kimed it to see if I could hear the 'trissity," replied the injured
one.

"The lek-trissity," said Madge, correcting.  "You must learn to
p'onounce your words popperly, dear.  You'll never be a great man if you
are so careless."

"I don't want to be a g'eat man," retorted Robin.  "I on'y want
t'understand things whats puzzlesum."

"Well, does the telegraph puzzle you?"

"Oh! mos' awfully," returned Robin, with a solemn gaze of his earnest
eyes, one of which was rendered fantastic by a yellow-green ring round
it and a swelling underneath.  "I's kite sure I's stood for hours beside
dat post listin' to it hummin' an hummin' like our olianarp--"

"Now, Robin, _do_ be careful.  You know mamma calls it an olian _harp_."

"Yes, well, like our olian _h_arp, only a deal louder, an' far nicer.
An' I's often said to myself, Is that the 'trissity--?"

"Lek, Robin, lek!"

"Well, yes, _lek_-trissity.  So I thought I'd kime up an' see, for, you
know, papa says the 'trissity--lek, I mean--runs along the wires--"

"But papa also says," interrupted Madge, "that the sounds you want to
know about are made by the vi--the vi--"

"Bratin'," suggested the invalid.

"Yes, vibratin' of the wires."

"I wonder what vi-bratin' means," murmured Robin, turning his lustrous
though damaged eyes meditatively on the landscape.

"Don'no for sure," said Madge, "but I think it means tremblin'."

It will be seen from the above conversation that Robert Wright and his
precocious cousin Marjory were of a decidedly philosophical turn of
mind.



CHAPTER FOUR.

EXTRAORDINARY RESULT OF AN ATTEMPT AT AMATEUR CABLE-LAYING.

Time continued to roll additional years off his reel, and rolled out
Robin and Madge in length and breadth, though we cannot say much for
thickness.  Time also developed their minds, and Robin gradually began
to understand a little more of the nature of that subtle fluid--if we
may venture so to call it--under the influence of which he had been
born.

"Come, Madge," he said one day, throwing on his cap, "let us go and play
at cables."

Madge, ever ready to play at anything, put on her sun-bonnet and
followed her ambitious leader.

"Is it to be land-telegraphs to-day, or submarine cables?" inquired
Madge, with as much gravity and earnestness as if the world's welfare
depended on the decision.

"Cables, of course," answered Robin, "why, Madge, I have done with
land-telegraphs now.  There's nothing more to learn about them.  Cousin
Sam has put me up to everything, you know.  Besides, there's no mystery
about land-lines.  Why, you've only got to stick up a lot o' posts with
insulators screwed to 'em, fix wires to the insulators, clap on an
electric battery and a telegraph instrument, and fire away."

"Robin, what _are_ insulators?" asked Madge, with a puzzled look.

"Madge," replied Robin, with a self-satisfied expression on his pert
face, "this is the three-hundred-thousandth time I have explained that
to you."

"Explain it the three-hundred-thousand-and-first time, then, dear Robin,
and perhaps I'll take it in."

"Well," began Robin, with a hypocritical sigh of despair, "you must know
that everything in nature is more or less a conductor of electricity,
but some things conduct it so well--such as copper and iron--that they
are called _conductors_, and some things--such as glass and
earthenware--conduct it so _very_ badly that they scarcely conduct it at
all, and are called _non-conductors_.  D'ee see?"

"Oh yes, I see, Robin; so does a bat, but he doesn't see well.  However,
go on."

"Well, if I were to run my wire through the posts that support it, my
electricity would escape down these posts into the earth, especially if
the posts were wet with rain, for water is a good conductor, and Mister
Electricity has an irresistible desire to bolt into the earth, like a
mole."

"Naughty fellow!" murmured Madge.

"But," continued Robin impressively, "if I fix little lumps of glass
with a hole in them to the posts, and fix my wires to these, Electricity
cannot bolt, because the glass lumps are non-conductors, and won't let
him pass."

"How good of them!" said Madge.

"Yes, isn't it?  So, you see," continued Robin, "the glass lumps are
insulators, for they cut the electricity off from the earth as an island
is, or, at all events, appears to be, cut off from it by water; and
Mister Electricity _must_ go along the wires and do what I tell him.  Of
course, you know, I must make my electricity first in a battery, which,
as I have often and often told you, is a trough containing a mixture of
acid and water, with plates or slices of zinc and copper in it, placed
one after the other, but not touching each other.  Now, if I fix a piece
of wire to my first copper slice or plate, and the other end of it to my
last zinc slice or plate, immediately electricity will begin to be made,
and will fly from the copper to the zinc, and so round and round until
the plates are worn out or the wire broken.  D'ee see?"

"No, Robin, I don't see; I'm blinder than the blindest mole."

"Oh, Madge, what a wonderful mind you must have!" said Robin, laughing.
"It is _so_ simple."

"Of course," said Madge, "I understand what you mean by troughs and
plates and all that, but what I want to know is _why_ that arrangement
is necessary.  Why would it not do just as well to tempt electricity out
of its hiding-hole with plates or slices of cheese and bread, placed one
after the other in a trough filled with a mixture of glue and melted
butter?"

"What stuff you do talk, Madge!  As well might you ask why it would not
do to make a plum-pudding out of nutmegs and coal-tar.  There are some
things that no fellow can understand, and of course I don't know
_everything_!"

The astounding modesty of this latter remark seemed to have furnished
Madge with food for reflection, for she did not reply to it.  After a
few minutes' walk the amateur electricians reached the scene of their
intended game--a sequestered dell in a plantation, through which brawled
a rather turbulent stream.  At one part, where a willow overhung the
water, there was a deep broad pool.  The stream entered the pool with a
headlong plunge, and issued from it with a riotous upheaval of wavelets
and foam among jagged rocks, as if rejoicing in, and rather boastful
about, the previous leap.

The game was extremely simple.  The pool was to be the German Ocean, and
a piece of stout cord was to serve as a submarine cable.

The boy and girl were well-matched playmates, for Madge was ignorant and
receptive--in reference to science,--Robin learned and communicative,
while both were intensely earnest.

"Now, this is the battery," said Robin, when he had dug a deep hole
close to the pool with a spade brought for the purpose.

"Yes, and the muddy water in it will do for the mixture of acid and
water," said Madge.

As she spoke, Robin's toe caught on a root, and he went headlong into
the battery, out of which he emerged scarcely recognisable.  It was a
severe, though not an electric, shock, and at first Robin seemed
inclined to whimper, but his manhood triumphed, and he burst into a
compound laugh and yell, to the intense relief of Madge, who thought at
first that he had been seriously injured.

"Never mind, Madge," said Robin, as he cleansed his muddy head; "cousin
Sam has often told me that nothing great was ever done except in the
face of difficulties and dangers.  I wonder whether this should be
counted a difficulty or a danger?"

"At first I thought it a danger," said Madge, with a laugh, "but the
trouble you now have with the mud in your hair looks like a difficulty,
doesn't it?"

"Why, then, it's both," cried Robin.  "Come, that's a good beginning.
Now, Madge, you get away round to the opposite side of the pool, and
mind you don't slip in, it's rather steep there."

"This is England," cried Robin, preparing to throw the line over to his
assistant, who stood eager to aid on the other side, "and you are
standing on--on--what's on the other side of the German Ocean?"

"I'm not sure, Robin.  Holland, I think, or Denmark."

"Well, we'll say Denmark.  Look-out now, and be ready to catch.  I'm
going to connect England and Denmark with a submarine cable."

"Stay!" cried Madge, "is that the way submarine cables are laid, by
throwing them over the sea?"

"N-no, not exactly.  They had a steamboat, you know, to carry over the
telegraph from England to France; but we haven't got a steamer--not even
a plank to make-believe one.  Cousin Sam says that a good workman can do
his work with almost any tools that come to hand.  As we have no tools
at all, we will improve on that and go to work without them.  Now,
catch!"

Robin made a splendid heave--so splendid indeed that it caused him to
stagger backward, and again he stumbled into his own _battery_!  This
time, however, only one leg was immersed.

"Another danger!" shouted Madge in great glee, "but I've caught the
cable."

"All right.  Now make fast the shore-end to a bush, and we'll commence
telegraphing.  The first must be a message from the Queen to the King of
Denmark--Or is it the President?"

"King, I think, Robin, but I'm not sure."

"Well, it won't matter.  But--I say--"

"What's wrong now?"

"Why, the cable won't sink.  It is floating about on the top of the
pool, and it can't be a submarine cable, you know, unless it sinks."

"Another difficulty, Robin."

"We will face and overcome it, Madge.  Cast off the shore-end and I'll
soon settle that."

Having fastened a number of small stones to the cable, this persevering
electrician would certainly have overcome the difficulty if the line had
not, when thrown, unfortunately caught on a branch of the willow, where
it hung suspended just out of Madge's reach.

"How provoking!" she said, stretching out her hand to the utmost.

"Take care--you'll--ha!"

The warning came too late.  The edge of the bank gave way, and Madge
went headlong into the pool with a wild shriek and a fearful plunge.

Robin stood rooted to the spot--heart, breath, blood, brain, paralysed
for the moment--gazing at the spot where his playmate had disappeared.

Another moment and her head and hands appeared.  She struggled bravely
for life, while the circling current carried her quickly to the lower
end of the pool.

Robin's energies returned, as he afterwards said, like an electric
shock, but accompanied with a terrible sinking of the heart, for he knew
that he could not swim!  His education in this important particular had
been neglected.  He sprang round to the lower end of the pool just in
time to hold out his hand to the drowning girl.  He almost touched her
outstretched hand as she swept towards the turbulent waters below, but
failed to grasp it.

For the first time in his life our little hero was called on to face
death voluntarily.  Another moment and Madge would have been caught in
the boiling stream that rushed towards the fall below.  He was equal to
the occasion.  He sprang right upon Madge and caught her in his arms.
There was no need to hold on to her.  In the agony of fear the poor
child clasped the boy in a deadly embrace.  They were whirled violently
round and hurled against a rock.  Robin caught it with one hand, but it
was instantly torn from his grasp.  The waters overwhelmed them, and
