going to twy. See, now, here is the bow"--she held up the crooked bow
as she spoke--"and I only want the arrow. Will you help me to make the
arrow? I thought--oh, I did think--that if you hated Aunt Jane you
would help me to make the arrow. Here's the stick, and if you have a
knife in your pocket you can just sharpen it, and it will make the
most perfect arrow in all the world. I'll love you then. I'll help you
always. I'll do my lessons if you ask me, and I'll twy to be good to
you; 'cos you and me we'll both have our enemies, and p'w'aps, if I'm
not stwong enough to use the bow, p'w'aps you could use it, and we
might go about together and sting our enemies, and be weal fwiends.
Will you twy? Will you make me the little arrow, p'ease, p'ease?"

"And what are you going to do with the arrow when it is made?" asked
Miss Ramsay. "I happen," she continued, without waiting for Diana's
reply, "to have a knife in my pocket, and I don't mind sharpening that
piece of wood for you. But bows and arrows are dangerous weapons for
little girls like you."

"Course they is dangerous," said Diana. "What would be the use of
'em, if they wasn't? They is to pwick our enemies and p'w'aps kill
'em."

"But look here, Diana, what do you want this special bow and arrow
for?"

"I want to have Aunt Jane Dolman and Simpson shotted. I'll tell you
why I want 'em both to be shotted--'cos Simpson killed my spiders and
beetles, and Aunt Jane Dolman is a poky old thing and she shut me up
in a punishment woom. Now wouldn't you like to help me--and then we'll
both have deaded our enemies, and we'll be as happy as the day is
long."

Miss Ramsay was so astounded at Diana's remarks that she slowly rose
from her seat and stared for nearly half a minute at the little girl.

"Well," she said at last, "I have seen in my lifetime all sorts of
children. I have taught little girls and boys since I was eighteen
years of age. I have seen good children and naughty children, and
clever children, and stupid children, but I have never met anyone like
you, little Diana Delaney. Do you really know what you are saying? Do
you know that you are a very, very wicked little girl?"

"Are I?" said Diana. "Well, then, I like being a wicked little girl. I
thought p'w'aps you would help me; but it don't matter, not one bit."

Before Miss Ramsay could say another word Diana had turned abruptly
and flown, as if on the wings of the wind, right down through the
wood.

The governess watched the little figure disappearing between the oaks
and elms until at last it quite vanished from view. She felt a
momentary inclination to go after the child, but her book was
interesting, and her seat under the overhanging elm extremely
comfortable. And this was a holiday, and she worked hard enough, poor
thing, on working days. And, after all, Diana was nothing but a silly
little child, and didn't mean half she said.

"It would be folly to take the least notice of her remarks," thought
the governess. "I'll just go on treating her like the others. I expect
I shall have a good deal of work breaking in that interesting little
quartette, for, after all, if my salary is to be raised, I may as well
stay at the Rectory as anywhere else. The house is comfortable, and I
have got used to Mrs. Dolman's queer ways by this time."

Accordingly Miss Ramsay reseated herself, and again took up her novel.
She turned the leaves, and soon got into a most interesting part of
the volume. Lost in the sorrows of her hero and heroine, she forgot
all about Diana Delaney and her bow and arrow.

Meanwhile, Diana, walking rapidly away by herself, was reflecting
hard.

"Miss Wamsay's a poor sort," she thought. "I aren't going to twouble
'bout anyone like her, but I must get that arrow made. The bow is
beautiful, but I can't do nothing 'cos I hasn't got an arrow."

At this moment, to her great delight, she saw Apollo coming to meet
her.

"There you is!" she shouted.

"What do you want with me?" asked Apollo.

"Look at my bow, 'Pollo! Aren't it beautiful? Aren't I just like the
weal Diana now?"

"Did you make this bow all by yourself?" asked Apollo.

"Yes; why shouldn't I?"

"Well, it's awfully crooked."

"Is it?" said Diana; "I thought it was beautiful. Can you stwaighten
it for me a little bit, 'Pollo?"

"I think I can make you a better bow than this," answered Apollo.

"Oh, can you? What a darlin' you is! And will you cut an arrow for me,
and will you make it very sharp? Will you make it awfu' sharp? The
kind that would pwick deep, you know, that would cut into things and
be like the arrow that the gweat Diana used."

Apollo was finding his afternoon somewhat dull. He had made no friends
as yet with the little Dolman children. Orion had disappeared with
both the boys; Iris was with Ann, Lucy, and Mary; he had been thrown
for the last hour completely on his own resources. The sight,
therefore, of Diana, with her flushed face and bright eyes and
spirited manner, quite cheered the little fellow. He and Diana had
often been chums, and he thought it would be rather nice to be chummy
with his little sister to-day.

"I may as well help you," he said, "but, of course, Di, you can't
expect me to do this sort of thing often. I shall most likely be very
soon going to school, and then I'll be with fellows, you know."

"What's fellows?" asked Diana.

"Oh, boys! Of course, when I get with boys, you can't expect me to be
much with you."

"All wight," answered Diana. "I hope you won't get with no fellows
this afternoon, 'cos you is useful to me. Just sit down where you is,
and help me to make a bow and arrow."

Apollo instantly seated himself on the grass, and Diana threw herself
on her face and hands by his side. She raised herself on her elbows
and fixed her bright black eyes on her brother's face. She stared
very hard at him, and he stared back at her.

"Well," she said, "isn't you going to begin?"

"Yes," he replied; "but what do you want the bow and arrow for?"

"To get my enemies shotted."

"Your enemies? What folly this is, Di. You have not got any enemies."

"Haven't I? I know better. I won't talk to you about it, 'Pollo."

"All right," replied Apollo; "you must tell me, or I won't help you."

"There, now!" said Diana, "you's got a howid fwown between your bwows.
I don't like it; you's going to be obs'nate. I don't like obs'nate
boys."

"I mean what I say," replied Apollo. "I know you of old, you monkey.
You are up to mischief, and I insist upon hearing all about it."

Diana gazed at him solemnly.

"Does you like Aunt Jane?" she said, after a pause.

"I can't say that I do," replied Apollo.

"Does you like that old thing in the nursery--Simpson, they calls
her?"

"I can't say that I do," replied the boy again.

"They is sort of enemies of yours, isn't they?" asked Diana.

"Oh! I don't know that I go as far as that," replied Apollo.

"But if Aunt Jane makes you do howid lessons all day, and if Simpson
is always fussing you and getting you to wash your face and hands, and
if you can't never go with _fellows_, and if you is kept in--and
if--and if--"

"Oh! don't begin all that, Di," said Apollo. "Where is the use of
making the worst of things?"

"Well, I want to make the best of things," said Diana. "I want to have
our enemies shotted wight off."

"Do you mean to tell me," said Apollo, laughing, "that you wish to
shoot Aunt Jane and that old woman in the nursery?"

"I wish to pwick 'em first time, and then, if they is naughty again,
to have 'em shotted down dead. Why not? Mother, who is up in the
heavens, called me after gweat Diana, and Diana always shotted her
enemies."

"Oh, dear me, Di! I think you are the queerest little thing in the
world," said Apollo. "But now, look here," he added, "I am older than
you, and I know that what you are thinking about is very wrong. I
can't make you a bow and arrow to do that sort of thing."

Diana looked bitterly disappointed. She could master, or she fancied
she could master, Aunt Jane, Simpson, and Miss Ramsay, but she knew
well, from past experience, that she could not master Apollo.

"What is to be done?" she said. She thought for a long time. "Would
not you like a bow and arrow just all your own, to shoot at the twees
with?" she asked at last artfully.

"Oh, I have no objection to that!" answered Apollo. "It seems right
that I should have one; does it not, Di? But of course I would never
do any mischief with it. Why, little thing, you have been talking the
most awful rot."

"Well, you can make a bow and arrow for your very own self," said
Diana.

"I don't see why I shouldn't, but you'll have to promise--"

"Oh, I won't make pwomises!" said Diana. "Why should I make pwomises
about your bow and arrows? I'll help you to make 'em. Do let me,
Apollo!"

Apollo seemed suddenly smitten with the idea. After all, it would be
fine to make a bow and arrow, and to try to shoot things in the wood.
How lovely it would be if he succeeded in shooting a rabbit; he would
certainly have a try. Accordingly, he rose and climbed into the lower
branches of an elm tree, and cut down a long, smooth young bough, and,
descending again to the ground, began to peel the bark off. When this
was done, Diana produced some more string out of her pocket, and a
very creditable bow was the result.

"Now, the arrow," said the little girl.

"We must get some strong wood for that," said Apollo, "something that
won't split. I'll just walk about and look around me." He did so, and
soon found a stick suitable for his purpose. He sat down again and
began whittling away. Very soon a fairly sharp arrow was the result.
"Of course it ought to be tipped," said Apollo, "but we have nothing
to tip it with. It is lucky that the wood is hard, and so it is really
sharp. Now, shall I have a few shots with it?"

"Please do, Apollo. Oh, how 'licious it all is! Don't you feel just as
if you was a heathen god?"

"I wish I were," said Apollo, throwing back his head. "Oh, Di, how hot
it is in the wood! What wouldn't I give to be back in the dear old
garden again?"

"Maybe we'll go soon," said Diana; "maybe they won't want to keep us
if--" But here she shut up her little mouth firmly.

Apollo was too much excited about the bow and arrows to think of
Diana's remarks. He stood up and began to practice shooting.

"You is doing it beautiful," said Diana, applauding his extremely poor
efforts. "Now, twy again. Think that you has lived long, long ago, and
that you is shotting things for our dinner."

The arrow went wide of the mark, the arrow went everywhere but where
it ought to. Diana clapped and laughed and shouted, and Apollo thought
himself the finest archer in the world.

"Now, let me have a teeny turn," she said.

"To be sure I will," he replied good-naturedly. He showed her how to
place the arrow, and she made one or two valiant attempts to send it
flying through the wood.

"It is hard," she panted; "the arrow don't seem even to make the least
little pwick. Now, I want to shoot stwaight at that oak twee, or would
you mind awfu', Apollo, if I was to shoot at you?"

"All right," replied Apollo; "you may aim at my hand, if you like." He
walked about a dozen yards away and held up his hand.

Diana made valiant efforts, and grew crimson in the face, but the
arrow still went wide of the mark.




CHAPTER XI.

JOG'APHY.


The next day lessons began with a vengeance. It was one thing for the
four Delaney children to work with Miss Stevenson at the old Manor
House. Lessons in mother's time were rather pleasant than otherwise;
as often as not they were conducted in the garden, and when the day
happened to be very hot, and the little people somewhat impatient of
restraint, Miss Stevenson gave them a certain amount of liberty; but
lessons at the Rectory were an altogether different matter. Miss
Ramsay, when she awoke the next day, had seemed emphatically to have
put on all her armor. During the holiday, neither Orion nor Diana,
neither Apollo nor Iris, thought Miss Ramsay of any special account.
They stared a good deal at Uncle Dolman, and they watched Aunt Jane
with anxious eyes, but Miss Ramsay did not matter, one way or the
other. The next day, however, they came to have a totally different
opinion with regard to her.

At breakfast, on the following morning, whenever Diana opened her
rosebud lips, she was told that she must not speak unless she could do
so in the French tongue. Now, all that Diana could manage to say in
French was 'Oui' and 'Non,' nor was she very certain when to say
either of these very simple words. She hated being silent, for she was
a very talkative, cheery little body, except when she was angry.
Accordingly, the meal was a depressing one, and Diana began to yawn
and to look wearily out on the sunshiny garden before it was
half-finished. But, of course, there was no play in the garden for any
of the children that morning. Immediately after breakfast they all
went up to the schoolroom. Now, the schoolroom was a very pleasant
room, nicely and suitably furnished, but in summer it was hot, and on
very sunshiny days it was painfully hot; its single large bay window
faced due south, and the sun poured in relentlessly all during the
hours of morning school. Miss Ramsay, seated at the head of the
baize-covered table with her spectacles on, looked decidedly
formidable, and each of the children gazed at their governess with
anxious eyes. Mary and Lucy were always good little girls, but Philip
and Conrad were as idle as boys could possibly be, and did their
utmost to evade Miss Ramsay's endeavors to instill learning into their
small heads. Orion sat between his two little boy cousins, but for
some reason or other Orion did not look well that morning. His little
face, not unlike Diana's in appearance, was bloated, his eyes were
heavy, he had scarcely touched his breakfast, and he earnestly, most
earnestly longed to get out of the hot schoolroom.

Miss Ramsay, when all the little people were seated round her, knocked
sharply on the table with her ruler, and proceeded to make a speech.
"My dear old pupils," she said, looking at the five little Dolmans as
she spoke, "on account of your cousins, who, I fear, are ignorant
little children, I mean on this occasion to speak to you in the
English tongue. I have now got nine pupils to instruct, and nine
