
"Then you may!" retorted Philip. "I wash my hands of it and of the
whole lot of you, and of every nursery entertainment henceforward!"
and he got the fragments of his gun together with much clatter. But
Charles had posted himself by the door to say his say, and to be ready
to escape when he had said it.

"You're ashamed of it, that's it," said he; "you want to sit among the
grown-ups with a spy-glass, now you've got Apothecary Clinton's son
for a friend,"--and after this brief and insulting summary of the
facts, Charles vanished. But Philip, white with anger, was too quick
for him, and at the top of the back-stairs he dealt him such a heavy
blow that Charles fell head-long down the first flight.

Alice and I flew to the rescue. I lived in dread of Philip really
injuring Charles some day, for his blows were becoming serious ones as
he grew taller and stronger, and his self-control did not seem to wax
in proportion. And Charles's temper was becoming very aggressive. On
this occasion, as soon as he had regained breath, and we found that no
bones were broken, it was only by main force that we held him back
from pursuing Philip.

"I'll hit him--I'll stick to him," he sobbed in his fury, shaking his
head like a terrier, and doubling his fists. But he was rather sick
with the fall, and we made him lie down to recover himself, whilst
Alice, Bobby, and I laid our heads together to plan a substitute for
Philip in the Dragon.

When bed-time came, and Philip was still absent, we became uneasy, and
as I lay sleepless that night I asked myself if I had been to blame
for the sulks in which he had gone off. In fits of passion Philip had
often threatened to go away and never let us hear of him again. I
knew that such things did happen, and it made me unhappy when he went
off like this, although his threats had hitherto been no more than a
common and rather unfair device of ill-temper.




CHAPTER VIII.

I HEAR FROM PHILIP--A NEW PART WANTED--I LOSE MY TEMPER--WE ALL LOSE
OUR TEMPERS.


Next morning's post brought the following letter from Philip:--

"MY DEAR ISOBEL,

"You need not bother about the Dragon--I'll do it. But I wish you
would put another character into the piece. It is for Clinton. He says
he will act with us. He says he can do anything if it is a leading
part. He has got black velvet knickerbockers and scarlet stockings,
and he can have the tunic and cloak I wore last year, and the flap
hat; and you must lend him your white ostrich feather. Make him some
kind of a grandee. If you can't, he must be the Prince, and Charles
can do some of the Travellers. We are going out on the marsh this
morning, but I shall be with you after luncheon, and Clinton in the
evening. He does not want any rehearsing, only a copy of the plan.
Let Alice make it, her writing is the clearest, and I wish she would
make me a new one; I've torn mine, and it is so dirty, I shall never
be able to read it inside the Dragon. Don't forget.

"Your affectionate brother,

"PHILIP."

There are limits to one's patience, and with some of us they are not
very wide. Philip had passed the bounds of mine, and my natural
indignation was heightened by a sort of revulsion from last night's
anxiety on his account. His lordly indifference to other people's
feelings was more irritating than the trouble he gave us by changing
his mind.

"You won't let him take the Woolly Beast from me, Isobel?" cried
Charles. "And you know you promised to lend _me_ your ostrich plume."

"Certainly not," said I. "And you shall have the feather. I promised."

"If Mr. Clinton acts--I shan't," said Alice.

"Mr. Clinton won't act," said I, "I can't alter the piece now. But I
wish, Alice, you were not always so very ready to drive things into a
quarrel."

"If we hadn't given way to Philip so much he wouldn't think we can
bear anything," said Alice.

I could not but feel that there was some truth in this, and that it
was a dilemma not provided against in Aunt Isobel's teaching, that
one may be so obliging to those one lives with as to encourage, if not
to teach them to be selfish.

Perhaps it would have been well if on the first day when Philip
deserted us Alice and I, had spent the afternoon with Lucy Lambent,
and if we had continued to amuse ourselves with our friends when
Philip amused himself with his. We should then have been forced into a
common decision as to whether the play should be given up, and,
without reproaches or counter-reproaches, Philip would have learned
that he could not leave all the work to us, and then arrange and
disarrange the plot at his own pleasure, or rather, he would never
have thought that he could. But a plan of this kind requires to be
carried out with perfect coolness to be either justifiable or
effective. And we have not a cool head amongst us.

One thing was clear. I ought to keep faith with the others who had
worked when Philip would not. Charles should not be turned out of his
part I rather hustled over the question of a new part for Mr. Clinton
in my mind. I disliked him, and did not want to introduce him. I said
to myself that it was quite unreasonable--out of the question in
fact--and I prepared to say so to Philip.

Of course he was furious--that I knew he would be; but I was firm.

"Charles can be the Old Father, and the Family Servant too," said he.
"They're both good parts."

"Then give them to Mr. Clinton," said I, well knowing that he would
not. "Charles has taken a great deal of pains with his part, and these
are his holidays as well as yours, and the Prince shall not be taken
from him."

"Well, I say it shall. And Charles may be uncommonly glad if I let him
act at all after the way he behaved yesterday."

"The way _you_ behaved, you, mean," said I--for my temper was slipping
from my grasp;--"you might have broken his neck."

"All the more danger in his provoking me, and in your encouraging
him."

I began to feel giddy, which is always a bad sign with us. It rang in
my mind's ear that this was what came of being forbearing with a bully
like Philip. But I still tried to speak quietly.

"If you think," said I through my teeth, "that I am going to let you
knock the others about, and rough-ride it over our theatricals, you
are mistaken."

"_Your_ theatricals!" cried Philip, mimicking me. "I like that! Whom
do the properties belong to, pray?"

"If it goes by buying," was my reply to this rather difficult
question, "most of them belong to Granny, for the canvas and the
paints and the stuff for the dresses, have gone down in the bills; and
if it goes by work, I think we have done quite as much as you. And if
some of the properties _are_ yours, the play is mine. And as to the
scene--you did the distance in the middle of the wood, but Alice and I
painted all the foreground."

"Then you may keep your foreground, and I'll take my distance," roared
Philip, and in a moment his pocket-knife was open, and he had cut a
hole a foot-and-a-half square in the centre of the Enchanted Forest,
and Bobby's amazed face (he was running a tuck in his cloak behind the
scenes) appeared through the aperture.

If a kind word would have saved the fruits of our week's hard labour,
hot one of us would have spoken it. We sacrifice anything we possess
in our ill-tempered family--except our wills.

"And you may take your play, and I'll take my properties," continued
Philip, gathering up hats, wigs, and what not from the costumes which
Alice and I had arranged in neat groups ready for the green-room.
"I'll give everything to Clinton this evening for his new theatre, and
we'll see how you get on without the Fiery Dragon."

"Clinton _can't_ want a fiery dragon when he's got you," said Charles,
in a voice of mock compliment.

The Fairy Godmother's crabstick was in Philip's hand. He raised it,
and flew at Charles, but I threw myself between them and caught
Philip's arm.

"You shall not hit him," I cried.

Aunt Isobel is right about one thing. If one _does_ mean to stop short
in a quarrel one must begin at a very early stage. It is easier to
smother one's feelings than to check one's words. By the time it comes
to blows it is like trying to pull up a runaway horse. The first pinch
Philip gave to my arm set my brain on fire. When he threw me heavily
against the cave with a mocking laugh, and sprang after Charles, I
could not have yielded an inch to him to save my life--not to earn
Fortunatus' purse, or three fairy wishes--not to save whatever I most
valued.

What would have induced me? I do not know, but I know that I am very
glad it is not quite so easy to sell one's soul at one bargain as
fairy-tales make out!

My struggle with Philip had given Charles time to escape. Philip could
not find him, and rough as were the words with which he returned to
me, I fancy they cost him some effort of self-control, and they
betrayed to Alice's instinct and mine that he would have been glad to
get out of the extremity to which our tempers had driven matters.

"Look here!" said he in a tone which would have been perfect if we
had been acting a costermonger and his wife. "Are you going to make
Clinton the Prince or not?"

"I am not," said I, nursing my elbow, which was cut by a nail on the
cask. "I am not going to do anything whatever for Mr. Clinton, and I
ought to be cured of working for you."

"You have lost an opening to make peace," said an inner voice. "You've
given the yielding plan a fair trial, and it has failed," said
self-justification--the swiftest pleader I know. "There are some
people, with self-satisfied, arbitrary tempers, upon whom gentleness
is worse than wasted, because it misleads them. They have that remnant
of savage notions which drives them to mistake generosity for
weakness. The only way to convince them is to hit them harder than
they hit you. And it is the kindest plan for everybody concerned."

I am bound to say--though it rather confuses some of my ideas--that
experience has convinced me that this last statement is not without
truth. But I am also bound to say that it was not really applicable to
Philip. He is not as generous as Alice, but I had no good reason to
believe that kindly concession would be wasted on him.

When I had flung my last defiance, Philip replied in violent words of
a kind which girls in our class of life do not (happily!) use, even
in a rage. They were partly drowned by the clatter with which he
dragged his big box across the floor, and filled it with properties of
all kinds, from the Dragon to the foot-light reflectors.

"I am going by the 4.15 to the town," said he, as he pulled the box
out towards his own room. "You need not wait for either Clinton or me.
Pray 'ring up' punctually!"

At this moment--having fully realized the downfall of the
theatricals--Bobby burst into a howl of weeping. Alice scolded him for
crying, and Charles reproached her for scolding him, on the score that
her antipathy to Mr. Clinton had driven Philip to this extreme point
of insult and ill-temper.

Charles's own conduct had been so far from soothing, that Alice had
abundant material for retorts, and she was not likely to be a loser in
the war of words. What she did say I did not hear, for by that time I
had locked myself up in my own room.




CHAPTER IX.

SELF-REPROACH--FAMILY DISCOMFORT--OUT ON THE MARSH--VICTORY.


If I could have locked myself up anywhere else I should have preferred
it. I would have justified my own part in the present family quarrel
to Aunt Isobel herself, and yet I would rather not have been alone
just now with the text I had made and pinned up, and with my new
picture. However, there was nowhere else to go to.

A restless way I have of pacing up and down when I am in a rage, has
often reminded me of the habits of the more ferocious of the wild
beasts in the Zoological Gardens, and has not lessened my convictions
on the subject of the family temper. For a few prowls up and down my
den I managed to occupy my thoughts with fuming against Philip's
behaviour, but as the first flush of anger began to cool, there was no
keeping out of my head the painful reflections which the sight of my
text, my picture, and my books suggested--the miserable contrast
between my good resolves and the result.

"It only shows," I muttered to myself, in a voice about as amiable as
the growlings of a panther, "it only shows that it is quite hopeless.
We're an ill-tempered family--a hopelessly ill-tempered family; and to
try to cure us is like patching the lungs of a consumptive family, I
don't even wish that I _could_ forgive Philip. He doesn't deserve it."

And then as I nursed the cut on my elbow, and recalled the long hours
of work at the properties, the damaged scene, the rifling of the
green-room, and Philip's desertion with the Dragon, his probable
industry for Mr. Clinton's theatricals, and the way he had left us to
face our own disappointed audience, fierce indignation got the upper
hand once more.

"I don't care," I growled afresh; "if I have lost my temper, I believe
I was right to lose it--at least, that no one could have been expected
not to lose it, I will never beg his pardon for it, let Aunt Isobel
say what she will. I should hate him ever after if I did, for the
injustice of the thing. Pardon, indeed!"

I turned at the top of the room and paced back towards the window,
towards the long illuminated text, and that

    "---- Noble face,
    So sweet and full of grace,"

which bent unchangeable from the emblem of suffering and
self-sacrifice.

I have a trick of talking to myself and to inanimate objects. I
addressed myself now to the text and the picture.

"But if I don't," I continued, "if after being confirmed with Philip
in the autumn, we come to just one of our old catastrophes in the very
next holidays, as bad as ever, and spiting each other to the last--I
shall take you all down to-morrow! I don't pretend to be able to
persuade myself that black is white--like Mrs. Rampant; but I am not a
hypocrite, I won't ornament my room with texts, and crosses, and
pictures, and symbols of Eternal Patience, when I do not even mean to
_try_ to sacrifice myself, or to be patient."

It is curious how one's faith and practice hang together. I felt very
doubtful whether it was even desirable that I should. Whether we did
not misunderstand GOD'S will, in thinking that it is well
that people in the right should ever sacrifice themselves for those
who are in the wrong. I did not however hide from myself, that to say
this was to unsay all my resolves about my besetting sin. I decided to
take down my texts, pictures, and books, and grimly thought that I
would frame a fine photograph Charles had given me of a lioness, and
would make a new inscription, the motto of the old Highland Clan
Chattan--with which our family is remotely connected--"_Touch not the
cat but a glove_."[1]

[Footnote 1: _Anglice_ "without a glove."]

"Put on your gloves next time, Master Philip!" I thought. "I shall
make no more of these feeble attempts to keep in my claws, which only
tempt you to irritate me beyond endurance. We're an ill-tempered
family, and you're not the most amiable member of it. For my own part,
I can control my temper when it is not running away with me, and be
fairly kind to the little ones, so long as they do what I tell them.
But, at a crisis like this, I can no more yield to your unreasonable
wishes, stifle my just anger, apologize for a little wrong to you who
owe apologies for a big one, and pave the way to peace with my own
broken will, than the leopard can change his spots."

"And yet--_if I could_!"

It broke from me almost like a cry, "If my besetting sin _is_ a sin,
if I have given way to it under provocation--if this moment is the
very hardest of the battle, and the day is almost lost--and if now,
even now, I could turn round and tread down this Satan under my feet.
If this were to-morrow morning, and I had done it--O my soul, what
triumph, what satisfaction in past prayers, what hope for the future!

"Then thou shouldest believe the old legends of sinners numbered with
the saints, of tyrants taught to be gentle, of the unholy learning to be
pure--for one believes with heartiness what he has experienced--then
text and picture and cross should hang on, in spite of frailty, and in
this sign shalt thou conquer."

One ought to be very thankful for the blessings of good health and
strong nerves, but I sometimes wish I could cry more easily. I should
not like to be like poor Mrs. Rampant, whose head or back is always
aching, and whose nerves make me think of the strings of an AEolian
harp, on which Mr. Rampant, like rude Boreas, is perpetually playing
with the tones of his voice, the creak of his boots, and the bang of
his doors. But her tears do relieve, if they exhaust her, and
back-ache cannot be as bad as heart-ache--hot, dry heart-ache, or
cold, hard heart-ache. I think if I could have cried I could have felt
softer. As it was I began to wish that I could do what I felt sure
that I could not.

If I dragged myself to Philip, and got out a few conciliatory words, I
should break down in a worse fury than before if he sneered or rode
the high horse, "as he probably would," thought I.

On my little carved Prayer-book shelf lay with other volumes a copy of
A Kempis, which had belonged to my mother. Honesty had already
whispered that if I deliberately gave up the fight with evil this
must be banished with my texts and pictures. At the present moment a
familiar passage came into my head:

    "When one that was in great anxiety of mind, often wavering
    between fear and hope, did once humbly prostrate himself in
    prayer, and said, 'O if I knew that I should persevere!' he
    presently heard within him an answer from GOD, which said,
    'If thou didst know it, what would'st thou do? Do what thou
    would'st do then, and thou shalt be safe.'"

Supposing I began to do right, and trusted the rest? I could try to
speak to Philip, and it would be something even if I stopped short and
ran away. Or if I could not drag my feet to him, I could take Aunt
Isobel's advice, and pray. I might not be able to speak civilly to
Philip, or even to pray about him in my present state of mental
confusion, but I could repeat _some_ prayer reverently. Would it not
be better to start on the right road, even if I fell by the way?

I crossed the room in three strides to the place where I usually say
my prayers. I knelt, and folded my hands, and shut my eyes, and began
to recite the Te Deum in my head, trying to attend to it. I did attend
pretty well, but it was mere attention, till I felt slightly softened
