Everybody took up the idea with enthusiasm. The difficulty was not so
much to find helpers as to decide who was to have the honor of
performing. There were many heart-burnings before the program was
finally fixed. It was decided that a musical selection should be given
first, followed by a piece by the Dramatic students. To cut these to
reasonable limits needed all Linda's discretion, tact and firmness.

"You can't have an entertainment beginning at three, and going on till
midnight," she urged, as the various desired items were submitted to
her. "You'd have to hire ambulances to take your exhausted audience
home! Very sorry, but we must keep some of the things for a future
occasion."

Linda, being wise in her generation, and having an eye to the sale of
tickets, insisted that the Lower School should take a share in the
performance.

"Who wants to bother to hear the kids?" objected Grace Olliver, who, by
the bye, was a member of the "Dramatic," and therefore not entirely
disinterested.

"If we don't bother with the kids, they mayn't bother to come and bring
friends, and we should look silly if we didn't sell all our tickets! Let
them do their flag display, and sing their Empire song. That will
content them and their mothers, and leaves quite time enough for other
people."

Miss Bishop allowed a special Wednesday afternoon to be set aside for
the entertainment; the tickets sold briskly, and expectation ran high.
All concerned in the program kept their parts a dead secret, but items
leaked out, and the wildest rumors were afloat. It was whispered that
some of the Governors were to be present, and even that Miss Bishop
would perform a sword dance, though not the most callow of juniors
really consented to swallow such an astounding piece of information. The
uncertainty as to what was in store, however, added largely to the
pleasurable anticipation, and though the Dramatic Society rehearsed with
locked door, and the keyhole carefully stopped up, juvenile spies, by
hoisting one another up to the level of the windows, obtained brief and
tantalizing peeps and spread news of gorgeosities in the way of
costumes.

When the great afternoon arrived, the hall was crammed. The little girls
were packed as tightly as sardines. A long line of them squatted on the
floor in front of the first row, and others sat on the window sills,
the latter positions having been scrambled for with enthusiasm.

Every one was at the tip-top of expectation. The concert opened with the
inevitable piano solo which seems indispensable for the starting of any
entertainment, and during the performance of which latecomers hurry to
their seats, programs are sold, and the audience, with a tremendous
amount of rustling and whispering, settles itself down to listen. This
initiatory ceremony being over, more interesting items followed. The
juveniles sang an Empire song, accompanied by a pretty flag drill; it
was a taking tune, and as Linda had prophesied was immensely applauded
by the visitors, who insisted on an encore. A violin solo came next, and
was followed by a charming Russian dance given by two members of Form
IV.a. Garnet played a piece on her mandoline, with piano
accompaniment. She had suggested a duet for mandoline and guitar, but
Winona had had no time to practice her instrument lately, and had begged
to be excused. The fact was that Winona had been busy with a special
item which she now brought out as a surprise to the school. She had
composed some verses in praise of hockey, and set them to one of the
tunes in the senior school song-book. The piece was sung by an eleven in
full hockey costume, and they waved their hockey-sticks with appropriate
actions to the music:

    "When autumn returns, and the trees are all bare,
      Our blue tunics are off to the field;
    No team in excitement with ours can compare,
      As our hockey-sticks wildly we wield.
        For hockey's the game to play
        When autumn has come to stay,
        And this is the reason we love the cold season,
        For hockey's the game to play.

    "Hurrah for goalkeepers, for forwards and halves!
      Hurrah for the clash of the sticks!
    Hurrah for the rapture of scoring a goal!
      (Who minds a few bruises or kicks?)
        For hockey's the game to play,
        When autumn has come to stay,
        And this is the reason we love the cold season,
        For hockey's the game to play.

    "But a team that is set upon scoring its goal,
      And winning a vict'ry or two,
    Must see that its field it should carefully roll,
      And that's what we're hoping to do!
        Oh! hockey's the game to play,
        When autumn has come to stay,
        Yes, this is the reason we love the cold season,
        When hockey's the game we play!

    "Hurrah for Form trophies! Hurrah for our badge!
      We'll make it an annual rule
    To hold a 'Sports' Concert,' to wish all success
      To the team of the Seaton High School!
        Oh! hockey's the game to play,
        And at Seaton we know the way!
        Yes, this is the reason we love the cold season,
        When hockey's the game we play!"

Winona's words would certainly not have passed muster as a literary
composition, but their extreme appropriateness to the occasion, combined
with the action of the hockey-sticks, completely brought down the
house. The applause was thunderous, and the last verse was encored twice
over. Undoubtedly it was the hit of the afternoon.

For the second part of the performance the Dramatic Society gave an
amusing little play, and the concert wound up with a lusty rendering of
certain patriotic songs.

Winona was highly gratified. Both artistically and financially the
entertainment had proved a success. The committee would be well able to
bear the expense of keeping the field in order. A gardener had been at
work there, and already a marked improvement was noticeable. The Games
Captain's enthusiasm was infectious. Under her leadership the girls
became wonderfully keen. To Winona the thrill of struggle when a game
seemed on the eve of being lost was one of the wildest excitements in
life, and the joy when she struck the ball home straight and true the
utmost triumph obtainable. During this autumn term she lived for hockey.
The crowd of school girls, in thick boots and blue tunics, struggling
and shouting in a somewhat muddy field might not be an altogether
picturesque sight, but to the Captain it was Marathon and Waterloo
combined. No colonel prided himself on a crack regiment more than Winona
on her team. Sometimes, of course, a practice was off color; the day
might be bleak or drizzly, or players might be penalized for "sticks,"
or grumblers might express their dissatisfaction audibly, but whatever
went wrong, Winona emerged cheerful from the fray, remonstrated with
"off-sides" and "sticks," and reminded growlers that it is unsporting
to murmur. By Kirsty's advice she had sent out challenges to several
good clubs in the neighborhood.

"While we were still in our callow infancy I should not have ventured,"
wrote Kirsty from Cornwall. "But one must begin some time to measure
one's strength. After the work we did last season, I certainly think you
might risk it. Nothing improves a team so much as playing plenty of
matches; you see in time you get to know the strokes of everybody at the
High, and you can calculate what others will do at certain turns of the
game; it's far better for you to meet all sorts and conditions of
opponents."

Winona had been afraid it was rather "cheek" to challenge the "West
Rytonshire Club" or "Oatlands College," but she ascertained that both
those august bodies had two teams, Number 1 and Number 2, and that while
the first only met foes worthy of their steel (or rather sticks!) the
second would graciously condescend to play a yet unknown High School.
The match with Oatlands College was fixed for December 16th, and Winona
looked forward to it with some anxiety. The last practice had not been
altogether satisfactory. The day had been wretchedly cold, and everybody
had been cross in consequence. The team, though proud of its fixture
with so celebrated an opponent, was not very sure of itself.

"I hope to goodness Peggie'll play up!" groaned Marjorie Kemp. "The way
she lost that last goal on Saturday was idiotic."

"She said she was cold!" commented Gladys Porter, witheringly. "She
wanted to change at half-time. She said her feet were solid ice, and her
nose was blue, and it was no fun watching the whole of the game being
played right away at the other end of the field."

"Most unsporting!" moralized Marjorie. "Besides, when she got her
chance, she hit the air! It will be very humiliating if the Oatlands
team walk over us!"

"Oh, don't be a Jeremiah! We're not beaten yet! If anybody can pull us
through, our Captain will!"

"Winona's a jewel!" agreed Marjorie. "And yet the best captain in the
world can't make up for an only moderately good team. I feel my own
deficiencies!"

Practically the whole of the High School assembled as spectators on the
great day of the match. Things were very different now from the old
times when a mere handful collected to cheer the Seaton team. Mistresses
and girls were alike keen, and most desirous of witnessing the combat.
They followed the game breathlesly.

"Oatlands isn't worth a toss!" commented Garnet exultantly.

"Don't make too sure!" replied Linda, looking with apprehension as the
red jerseys of their rivals massed round the ball.

A familiar figure dashed forward, a hockey stick struck, and the ball
swept out to safety. Linda heaved a long sigh of relief.

"Winona is just A1," she murmured. "Hello! Good gracious! what's that
idiot doing?"

For Ellinor Cooper, whose arm was the strongest in the school, wielding
her hockey stick with all her force, had hit Winona across the shin.

Instantly there was a commotion. Winona, white with the agony of the
blow, leaned hard against Bessie Kirk, and clenched her fists to avoid
crying out.

"Are you hurt?"

"What's happened?"

"You've had a nasty knock!"

There was quite a crowd round Winona, and a chorus of sympathy.

"Put in a substitute!" urged Bessie. "You're not fit to go on!"

"No, no! I'm better now," panted their captain, with a wan little smile.
"I'll manage, thanks! Yes, really! Please don't worry yourselves about
me!"

The game recommenced and Winona, with a supreme effort, continued to
play. The pain was still acute, but she realized that on her presence or
absence depended victory or defeat. Without her, the courage of the team
would collapse. How she lived through the time she never knew.

Inspired by the heroic example of their captain, the girls were playing
for all they were worth. The score, which had been against them, was now
even. Time was almost up. Winona set her teeth. The ball seemed a kind
of star which she was following--Following anyhow. As the French say,
she "did her possible." The ball went spinning. Next minute she was
leaning against a goal-post, trembling with the violence of her effort,
while the High School hoorayed itself hoarse in the joy of the hard-won
victory.

"I say, old girl, were you really hurt?" asked Bessie anxiously. "You're
looking the color of chalk!"

"Never mind, it's over now! Yes, I am hurt. Give me your arm, and I'll
go back to the hostel."

"You're an absolute Joan of Arc to-day!" purred Bessie.

Winona, with a barked shin and bad bruises, limped for more than a week,
but she was the heroine of the school.

"I can't think how you ran, after that awful whack Ellinor Cooper gave
you," sympathized Marjorie.

"It was easier to run then than after my leg grew stiff," laughed
Winona. "I suppose it's the excitement that keeps one up. Don't make
such a fuss, we've all had hard knocks in our time. Agnes Smith got a
black eye last spring!"

As the result of her wounds in the hockey field Winona made friends with
Miss Kelly. The latter was most prompt in applying lanoline and
bandages, and proved so kind in bringing Winona her breakfast in bed,
and making her rest on the sofa during preparation, that a funny little
sort of intimacy sprang up between them.

"She's fussy on the surface, but nice when you know her," confided
Winona to Garnet. "If I'd been staying at the hostel, I expect we should
have got on capitally next term!"




CHAPTER XV

Winona Turns Chauffeur


After the Christmas holidays Winona returned to Abbey Close. Miss Beach
was installed once more in her own home, though under strict orders from
the doctor not to over-exert herself. During her stay at Harrogate she
had bought a small two-seater car, and had learnt to drive it. She kept
it at a garage in the town, and used it almost every day. It was
invaluable to her as a means of getting about. She was anxious not to
relinquish all her work in Seaton, but she could not now bear the
fatigue of walking. In her car distance was no obstacle, and she could
continue her inspection of boarded-out workhouse children, attend
babies' clinics in country villages beyond the city area, visit the
wives of soldiers and sailors, regulate the orphanage, and superintend
the Tipperary Club. Miss Beach's energetic temperament made her
miserable unless fully occupied, so, the doctor having forbidden her
former strenuous round of duties, she adopted the car as a compromise,
assuring him that she would limit her list to a few of her pet schemes
only. It was probably her wisest course. It is very hard for elderly
people to be laid on the shelf, and to feel that their services are set
aside. Miss Beach had lived so entirely in her various philanthropic
occupations, that to give everything up would have been a severe mental
shock. As it was, she managed to obey medical orders, and at the same
time, to a certain extent, keep her old place in the work of the city.

As the days became longer and lighter, she sometimes took her
great-niece with her in the car. Winona had really very little time out
of school hours; her duties as Games Captain were paramount, and hockey
practices and matches absorbed most of her holiday afternoons. When she
had an occasional free hour, however, it was an immense treat to go
motoring. She loved the feeling of spinning along through the country
lanes. It was delightful to see new places and fresh roads. Seaton was
in the midst of a beautiful district, and there were charming villages,
woods, and lovely views of scenery within easy distance.

One Saturday, when for a wonder there was no event at school, Miss Beach
suddenly suggested that they should start in the car, take a luncheon
basket with them, and explore some of the country in the neighborhood.
It was a glorious spring morning, with a clear pale blue sky, and a
touch of warmth in the sunshine that set winter to flight, and brought
the buds out on the trees. On such a day the human sap, too, seems to
rise, there is an exhilaration, physical and spiritual, when we long to
run or to sing for the sheer vital joy of living, when our troubles
don't seem to matter, and the future looks rosy, and for the moment we
feel transferred to the golden age of the poets, when the world was
young, and Pan played his pipes in the meadows among the asphodels.
Winona, at any rate, was in an ecstatic frame of mind, and though Aunt
Harriet did not openly express her enthusiasm, the mere fact of her
suggesting such an outing proved that the spring had called her, and
that she was ready to go out and worship at Nature's shrine. Do not
imagine for a moment that Miss Beach, whatever her feelings, allowed any
romantic element to appear on the surface. She fussed over the car,
measured the amount of petrol left in the tank, debated whether she had
better go to the garage for an extra can in case of emergencies, called
out the cook to dust the seat, sent the housemaid flying to the attic
for an air-cushion, inspected the lunch basket, gave half-a-dozen
directions for things to be done in her absence, wrote last messages on
a slate for people who might possibly call on business, scolded Winona
for putting on her thin coat, and sent her to fetch her thick one and a
rug for her knees, and finally, after a very breathless ten minutes got
under way, and started forth. They drove slowly through the town
traffic, but soon they had left streets behind, and were spinning along
the high road in the direction of Wickborough.

Long as she had lived at Seaton, Miss Beach had never seen Wickborough
Castle, and to-day she was determined to pay it a visit. It was a very
ancient place, built originally by King Canute, in the days when red war
was waged between Saxon and Norseman. Little of the old Danish tower
remained, but successive generations had erected keep and turret,
bastion and guard house, crumbling now indeed into ruins, but
picturesque in their decay, and full of historical associations. Here
proud Queen Margaret, hard pressed by her enemies, had found a timely
shelter for herself and her little son, till an escort could convey her
to a spot of greater safety; here Richard II. had pursued sweet
unwilling Anne of Warwick, and forced her to accept his hated suit;
Princess Mary had passed a part of her unhappy childhood within its
walls, and Anne Boleyn's merry laugh had rung out there. The situation
of the Castle was magnificent. It stood on the summit of a wooded cliff
which ran sheer into the river, and commanded a splendid prospect of the
country round, and a bird's-eye view of the little town that clustered
at the foot of the crag.

"It's like an eagle's nest!" commented Winona, as leaving the car at the
bottom of the hill they climbed on foot up the zigzag pathway to the
keep. "It must have been a regular robber-baron's stronghold in the
Middle Ages!"

Miss Beach had bought a guide-book, and rejecting the services of a
persistent little girl who was anxious to point out the various spots of
interest, with an eye to a tip, they strolled about, trying to
reconstruct a fancy portrait of the place for themselves. Canute's tower
was still left, a squat solid piece of masonry, with enormously thick
walls and tiny lancet windows. It was rather dark, but as it was the
only portion remaining intact, it was used as a museum, and various
curiosities were preserved there. The great fire-place held a spit for
roasting an ox whole, and had a poker five feet long; stone
cannon-balls were piled up on the floor, and on the walls hung a
medieval armory of helmets, gorgelets, breast-plates, coats of mail,
shields and swords, daggers and lances. A special feature of the museum
was a wax-work figure of a knight clad in full armor which gave an
excellent idea of what Sir Bevis of Wickborough must have looked like
somewhere about the year 1217. Another figure, dressed in rich velvet
and fur, with flowered silk kirtle, represented his wife Dame Philippa,
in the act of offering him a silver goblet of wine, while a hound stood
with its head pressed to her hand. The group was so natural that it was
almost startling, and took the spectator back as nothing else could have
done to the ancient medieval days which it pictured. A small stair in
the corner of the tower led down to a dungeon, where, lying among the
straw, was an equally impressive wax-work figure of a prisoner,
wretched, unkempt, and bound hand and foot with chains. A pitcher of
water lay by his side, and a stuffed rat peering from the straw added a
further touch of realism. Winona shuddered. It was a ghastly sight, and
she was thankful to run up the stairs and go from the keep out into the
spring sunshine. She had always had a romantic admiration for the Middle
Ages, but this aspect of thirteenth-century life did not commend itself
to her. "They were bad old times, after all!" she decided, and came to
the conclusion that the twentieth century, even with its horrible war,
was a more humane period to live in.

At the foot of the crag, close by the river, lay the remains of the old
Priory Church, an ivy-covered fabric, whose broken chancel still gave a
shelter to the battered tombs of the knights who had lived in the Castle
above. Sir Bevis and Dame Philippa lay here in marble, their features
calm and rigid, their hands folded in prayer, less human indeed, but
infinitely grander than in their wax effigies of the tower. Seven
centuries of sunshine and storm had passed over their heads, and castle
and church were alike in ruins.

    "Their bones are dust,
    Their good swords rust,
    Their souls are with the Saints, we trust,"

thought Winona, as she took a photograph of the quiet scene. It was
deeply interesting, but on this glorious lovely spring day it seemed a
little too sad. With all the birds singing, and the hedges in bud, and
the daisies showing white stars among the grass, she wanted to live in
the present, and not in the past. And yet, if we think about it rightly,
the past is never really sad. Those who lived before us accomplished
their work, and have passed onwards--a part of the world scheme--to, we
doubt not, fuller and worthier work beyond. We, still in the preparatory
class of God's great school, cannot yet grasp the higher forms, but
those who have been moved up surely smile at our want of comprehension,
and look back on this earth as the College undergraduate remembers his
kindergarten; for the spiritual evolution goes ever on, working always
Godwards, and when the human dross falls away, the imperfect and the
partial will be merged into the perfect and the eternal. The broken
eggshells may lie in the old nest, but the fledged larks are singing in
the blue of the sky.

From the little town of Wickborough they drove along the old Roman road
towards Danestone. Part of their way lay across Wickland Heath, and
here, as it was now past mid-day, Miss Beach suggested that they should
stop and take their lunch. It was a most glorious spot for a picnic.
They were at the top of a tableland, and before them spread the Common,
a brown sea of last year's heather and bilberry, with gorse bushes
flaming here and there like golden fires. A sparrow-hawk, more majestic
than any aeroplane, sailed serenely overhead, and a pair of whinchats,
perturbed by his vicinity, flew with a sharp twitter over the low stone
wall, and sought cover among the brambles. Beyond stretched the Roman
road, broad and straight, a landmark for miles. Cities and civilization
were far away, and they were alone with the moor and the peaty little
brook, and the birds and the sun and the fresh spring wind. The joyous
influence was irresistible; even Miss Beach dropped ten years' burden of
cares, and waxed almost light-hearted. Winona had seldom seen her aunt
in such a mood, and she seized the opportunity as a favorable moment to
proffer a request which she had often longed, but had never hitherto
dared, to make. It was no less a suggestion than that she might be
allowed to try to drive the car. She put it in tentative fashion, fully
expecting a refusal, but Aunt Harriet received the idea quite
graciously.
