  Their watchman, the Glow-worm, came out with his light.
  So home let us hasten, while yet we can see,
  For no watchman is waiting for you or for me.

The Butterfly's Ball--by RM Ballantyne



CHAPTER TWO.

THE BUTTERFLY'S BALL AND THE GRASSHOPPER'S FEAST.

  Come, take up your hats, and away let us haste
  To the Butterfly's ball and the Grasshopper's feast;
  For the trumpeter Gadfly has summoned his crew,
  And the revels are now only waiting for you.

  On the smooth-shaven grass by the side of the wood,
  Beneath a broad oak that for ages has stood,
  See the children of earth, and the tenants of air,
  For an evening's amusement together repair.

It was very early one delightful morning in summer, when the trumpeter
Gadfly sounded his horn, inviting all the insects in the forest to the
Butterfly's ball and the Grasshopper's feast.  The sun shone brightly,
the air was mild and soft, and the scent of the wild flowers delicious,
so that not one of the insects thought of staying at home.  Butterflies,
Beetles, Bees, Wasps, Snails, Grasshoppers, Ants, all put on their best
coats and frocks, all, put on their sweetest smiles, and all hurried
off, in little bands, to the ball, talking and laughing, and humming and
buzzing, by the way, as if they were the happiest creatures in the wide
world.  Even the old Beetle, that had been run over by a cart-wheel and
squeezed nearly to death, got out of bed when he heard what was going
on, and limped along with the rest, though he had been confined to the
house for six months before.  One or two Butterflies, that were never
known to go out except in the very finest weather,--and even then,
carefully wrapped up,--determined to venture.  They were long in making
up their minds about it.  One thought it looked a very little like rain;
another feared that the light breeze might give them a cold.  However,
they put on a great many cloaks, and went.

From all directions they came, and assembled on a smooth, grassy spot,
under an old oak-tree, where the revels were to take place.  Some
crawled slowly along the ground, some bounded quickly over hill and
dale, some came running and tumbling, jumping and hitting against things
in their haste; some came swiftly through the air, and alighted so
suddenly as to tumble head over heels; others flew quietly to the scene
and fluttered lightly about, admiring the gay company they were about to
join.

  And there came the Beetle, so blind, and so black,
  Who carried the Emmet, his friend, on his back;
  And there came the Gnat, and the Dragonfly too,
  And all their relations, green, orange, and blue.

The Black Beetle was the first to make his appearance.  He carried his
dear friend the Emmet on his back, and a sad journey they had of it, to
be sure!  Being very blind, the Beetle was constantly falling over
twigs, knocking his shins against the edges of leaves, and tumbling into
ditches, so that the poor Emmet had many terrible falls, and once the
great beetle fell on the top of him and crushed him a good deal.  But it
was very pleasant to see how cheerful they were under all this.  On
getting up after a fall, the beetle always laughed so boisterously that
the tears ran down his cheeks, and his black sides nearly cracked; while
the little Emmet said gaily, "Ah! my friend, accidents will happen! not
hurt, I hope?  Come, get along once more;" and then he jumped up on his
friend's back again, and away they went as merrily as ever.

A Gnat and a Dragonfly, with a great many of their relations, arrived
about the same time with the Beetle.  They looked quite charming in
their brilliant dresses, the colours of which were chiefly green,
orange, and blue.  A large Blue-bottle Fly, with a very light waistcoat,
and a hat stuck on one side of his head, said that the Dragonflies were
lovely, and that Miss Gnat was quite killing.  This was an odd thing to
say, but Mr Blue-bottle meant by it, that she was very beautiful.
Indeed, it was said that he fell in love with Miss Gnat, for he danced
with nobody else during the whole afternoon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  And there came the Moth, with her plumage of down,
  And the Hornet, with jacket of yellow and brown,
  Who with him the Wasp, his companion, did bring--
  They promised that evening to lay by their sting.

The Moth was sound asleep when the Gadfly blew his trumpet.  She had sat
up too late the night before, and, owing to having indulged this bad
habit, had overslept herself the following morning.

However, she tried by her activity to make up for lost time; she saw the
other insects hurrying past her house in crowds, so she threw on her
clothes as fast as possible.  The Moth was prettily dressed in a soft
garment of down, and as she was a modest creature, every one loved her.
On leaving home, she observed the Wasp and the Hornet passing.  They
were dressed in rich suits of brown and yellow.  At sight of them she
was a little frightened, and endeavoured to run back to her house until
they should pass by; but they caught sight of her, and immediately gave
chase, screaming out loudly, "Oh! dear Mrs Moth, pray don't be alarmed.
We have laid by our stings for to-day, and won't hurt you."  They soon
caught her, although she ran as fast as she could.  So the Wasp and the
