

CHAPTER VIII

LITTLE FOES OF THE TRAILER

=Poisonous Insects, Reptiles, and Plants=


=Insects=


My first experience with wood-ticks, jiggers, and Jersey mosquitoes was
during the summer we spent at Bayville, near Toms River, N. J. In many
ways Bayville, with its sand, its pines, its beautiful wood roads, and
rare wild flowers, is an interesting and attractive place. The salty air
is fine when the thermometer is self-respecting and keeps the mercury
below 90 deg. in the shade, but the oak underbrush harbors wood-ticks, the
blackberry bushes cover you with jiggers, the woods are full of
deer-flies, and the vicious mosquito, whose name is Legion, is
everywhere where he is not barred out.


=Wood-Ticks=

I had been told of the ticks that infest the forests of the South, had
heard blood-curdling stories of how they sometimes bury themselves,
entire, in the flesh of animals and men and have to be cut out, and my
horror of them was great. In reality I found them unpleasant enough but,
as far as we were concerned, comparatively harmless.

The wood-tick is a small, rather disgusting-looking creature which, in
appearance and size, resembles the common bedbug. It fastens itself upon
you without your knowledge and you do not feel it even when it begins
to suck your blood, but something generally impels you to pass your
hand over the back of your neck, or cheek, where the thing is clinging,
and, feeling the lump, you pull it off and no great harm done. The tick
is supposed always to bury its head in the flesh, and it is said that if
the head is left in when the bug is pulled off an ugly sore will be the
result. We had no experience of that kind, however, nor, in our hurry to
get rid of it, did we stop to remove the bug scientifically by dropping
oil on it, as Kephart advises, but just naturally and simply, also
vigorously, we grasped it between thumb and forefinger and hastily
plucked it off. The effect of the bite was no worse on any of our party
than that of the Jersey mosquito.

Often your friends will see a tick on you and tell you of it even while
they have several, all unknown to themselves, decorating their own
countenance. The name by which science knows this unlovely bug is
_Ixodes leech_.


=Jigger. Redbug. Mite=

The tiny mite called by the natives jigger and redbug is more annoying
than the wood-tick, one reason being that there are so many more of him.
He really does penetrate the skin, and his wanderings under the surface
give one the feeling of an itching rash which covers the body. You won't
see the jigger--he is too small, but if you invade his domain you will
certainly feel him.


=Deer-Fly=

The deer-fly will bite and bite hard enough to hurt. It will drive its
sharp mandibles into your skin with such force as to take out a bit of
the flesh, sometimes causing the blood to flow, but the bite does not
seem particularly poisonous, though you feel it at the time and it
generally raises a lump on the flesh. The deer-fly belongs to the
family of gadflies. It is larger than a house-fly and its wings stand
out at right angles to its body. It will not trouble you much except in
the woods.


=Black-Fly=

The Adirondack and North Woods region is not only the resort of hunters,
campers, and seekers after health and pleasure, but it is also the haunt
of the maddening black-fly. From early spring until the middle of July
or first of August the black-fly holds the territory; then it evacuates
and is seen no more until next season, when it begins a new campaign.

Under the name of buffalo-fly the black-fly is found in the west, where,
on the prairies, it has been known to wage war on horses until death
ensued--death of the horses, not of the fly. It is a small fly about
one-sixth of an inch long, thick-bodied, and black. It is said to have
broad silvery circles on its legs, but no one ever stops to look at
these. Its proboscis is developed to draw blood freely, and it is always
in working order.

The only virtue the black-fly seems to have is its habit of quitting
operations at sundown and leaving to other tormenters the task of
keeping you awake at night. When the black-fly bites you will know it,
and it will leave its mark, when it does leave, which must generally be
by your help, for it holds on with commendable persistence. If you would
learn more of this charming insect, look for _Simulium molestum_ in a
book which treats the subject scientifically.


=No-see-um. Punky. Midge=

There is another pest of the North Woods which the guides call the
no-see-um. It is a very diminutive midge resembling the mosquito in
form and viciousness, but so small as to be almost invisible. Night and
day are the same to the no-see-um; its warfare is continuous and its
bite very annoying, but it disappears with the black-fly in July or
August. By September the mountains and woods are swept clear of all
these troublesome things, except at times and in some places the
ever-hungry mosquito, which will linger on for a last bite in his summer
feast.

The only way to relieve the irritation caused by the bites of these
pests, including the mosquito, is to bathe the affected parts with
camphor, alcohol, or diluted ammonia. When there are but one or two
bites they may be touched with strong ammonia, but it will not do to use
this too freely, as it will burn the skin.


=Gnats=

In the mountains of Pennsylvania the most troublesome insects I found
were the tiny gnats that persist in flying into one's eyes in a very
exasperating fashion. They swarm in a cloud in front of your face as you
walk and make constant dashes at your eyes, although to reach their goal
brings instant death.

It is not much trouble to get one of these gnats out of your eye when it
once gets in. All that is necessary is to take the eyelashes of the
upper eyelid between your thumb and first finger, and draw the upper
eyelid down _over_ the under eyelid. The under eyelashes sweep the upper
lid clear, and the rush of tears that comes to the eye washes the insect
out.


=Bees, Wasps, and Yellow-Jackets=

While honey-bees and wasps can make themselves most disagreeable when
disturbed, you can usually keep away from beehives and bee-trees as
well as from the great gray, papery nests of the wasp; but the hornets
or yellow-jackets have an uncomfortable habit of building in low bushes
and on the ground where you may literally put your foot in a hornets'
nest.

They are hot-tempered little people, these same hornets, as I have
reason to know. Twice I have been punished by them, and both times it
was my head they attacked. Once I found them, or they found me, in a
cherry-tree; and the second time we met was when I stepped in their nest
hidden on the ground. Their sting is like a hot wire pressed into the
flesh. When angered they will chase you and swarm around your head,
stinging whenever they can; but they may be beaten off if some friendly
hand will wield a towel or anything else that comes handy.

If the stings of any of these stinging insects are left in the wounds
they should be taken out with a _clean_ needle or _clean_ knife-blade.
In any case mix some mud into a paste and plaster it on the parts that
have been stung. If you are in camp and have with you a can of
antiphlogistine use that instead of the mud; it is at least more sightly
and is equally efficient in reducing inflammation.

Various things have been devised as protection against insect torments.

One is a veil of net to be worn over the hat. You will find this
described in Chapter IV under the heading of Personal Outfits.


=Dopes=

Then there are dopes to be rubbed over the face, neck, and hands. The
three said to be the best are Nessmuk's Dope, Breck's Dope, and H. P.
Wells's Bug-Juice. There is also a Rexall preparation which, I am told,
is good while it stays on, but will wash off with perspiration.


=Nessmuk's Dope=

In giving the recipe for his dope, Nessmuk says that it produces a glaze
over the skin and that in preventing insect bites he has never known it
to fail. This is the dope:

          Pine tar                            3 oz.
          Castor oil                          2 oz.
          Oil of pennyroyal                   1 oz.

          Simmer all together over a slow fire, and bottle.

          This is sufficient for four persons for two weeks.


=Breck's Dope=

          Pine tar                            3 oz.
          Olive (or castor oil)               2 oz.
          Oil of pennyroyal                   1 oz.
          Citronella                          1 oz.
          Creosote                            1 oz.
          Camphor (pulverized)                1 oz.
          Large tube of carbolated vaseline.

          Heat the tar and oil, and add the other
          ingredients; simmer over slow fire until well
          mixed. The tar may be omitted if disliked or for
          ladies' use.

Breck tells us that his dope was planned to be a counter-irritant after
being bitten as well as a preventer of bites.


=H. P. Wells's Bug-Juice=

          Olive oil                         1/2 pt.
          Creosote                            1 oz.
          Pennyroyal                          1 oz.
          Camphor                             1 oz.

          Dissolve camphor in alcohol and mix.

Any dope must be well rubbed in on face, neck, ears, and _behind ears_,
hands (on the backs), wrists, and arms; but be very careful not to get
it _in your eyes_.


=Smudges=

Smudges are said to afford relief in camp, but my own experience has
been that the insects can stand them better than I. A smudge is made by
burning things that make little flame and much smoke. Dead leaves, not
too dry, will make a fairly good smudge, but a better way is to burn
damp cedar bark, or branches, on piles of hot coals taken from the
camp-fire and kept alive at different sides of the camp.

The accounts of extreme suffering caused by insect bites come from
unusually sensitive people. All people are not affected alike. Two
persons from one camp will tell entirely different stories of their
experience with insects. The best way to encounter these, as all other
annoyances, is to protect yourself as well as you can and then, without
whimpering, make the best of the situation. All the pests described will
not fall upon you at once, and, taken singly or even doubly, you will
manage to survive the ordeal. If the pleasure of the trail did not
over-balance the pain there would be fewer campers to relate their
troubles.


=Snakes=

The bite of a poisonous snake is by all means to be avoided, and the
point is: you almost always can avoid it. With all the snakes in the
United States, Doctor William T. Hornaday, director of the Zoological
Park of New York City, tells us that out of seventy-five million people
not more than two die each year of snake-bites.

Snakes are not man-hunters; they will not track you down; they much
prefer to keep out of your way. What you have to do is to keep out of
theirs. In a region where poisonous snakes abound it is well to wear
khaki leggins as a protection in case you inadvertently step too near
and anger the creatures, for in such cases they sometimes strike before
you have time to beat a retreat. According to Doctor Hornaday, the
poisonous snakes of North America are:

          The rattlesnake,
          Water-moccasin,
          Copperhead,
          Sonora coral-snake,
          Harlequin snake.


=Rattlesnakes=

The rattlesnake appears to vary in color and markings in the different
localities where it is found, and there are fourteen or fifteen
varieties, but all carry the rattles, shake them warningly, and coil
before they strike. The rattlesnake does not want to fight and if you
keep at a safe distance it will glide off in another direction, but it
is safest not to venture within striking distance, which is said to be
two-thirds the length of the snake, even if the snake has not coiled,
for it moves quickly and strikes like a flash.

The rattles are at the extreme end of the tail and are composed of horny
joints. The sound of the rattle is much like the humming of a locust
(cicada). Rattlesnakes are often found sunning themselves on large
rocks, and stone-quarries are the chosen winter quarters where whole
colonies assemble. They are also found, during the summer, among
underbrush and in stubble-fields, where they probably go to hunt
field-mice and other small mammals.

[Illustration: BANDED RATTLESNAKE

POISONOUS

WATER-MOCCASIN

POISONOUS

RED-BELLIED WATER-SNAKE

STRIPED LENGTHWISE

HARMLESS

Poisonous and non-poisonous snakes.]


=Banded Rattlesnake=

The mountains of Pennsylvania are a favorite resort of the rattlesnake,
but, though I have passed many summers in Pike County, famous for its
snakes, the only live one I ever saw in that locality was in a box at
Rowland station. The men of our party occasionally killed one and
brought it to camp as a trophy, but one of our weekend guests spent most
of his time hunting the rattler that he might take its skin back to the
city, yet without success.

It is the banded rattlesnake that is usually found in Pennsylvania. The
color is yellowish and it is marked with irregular, wide bands of dark
brown. Sometimes the snake is almost black, and it is thought that it
turns dark with age.


=Diamond Rattlesnake=

The rattlesnake marked in diamond patterns of gold outline on brown is
of the south and is oftenest found in Florida. This is a very large
snake, and closely allied to it is the Texas rattlesnake, which is the
same in markings and color, but paler, as if faded out.


=Massasauga=

The massasauga is the rattlesnake occasionally found in the swamps from
western New York to Nebraska, but it is rare. Its color is light brown
with patches of dark brown its entire length.


=Copperhead=

The copperhead is not a rattler, though its vibrating tail amid dry
leaves will sometimes hum like one. (This is also true of the
blacksnake.) Its bite is very poisonous. It is found amid rocks and in
the woods, and is at home from New England and the Atlantic coast west
to Indiana and south to Texas. This snake is seldom more than three
feet long. Its color is light reddish-brown with bands of rich chestnut
which are narrow on the back and wide at the sides. The underpart is
whitish with dark spots on the abdomen. The head is generally coppery in
color but not always. In Texas the colors of the copperhead are
stronger, the bands and head are decidedly reddish, and the bands have
narrow white borders.


=Harlequin Snake and Coral-Snake=

The harlequin snake and the coral-snake are so similar in color and in
habits, one description for both will answer our purpose. They are
southern snakes, beginning in southern Indiana and extending south. They
are quite poisonous, but of such retiring habits as hardly to be classed
as dangerous. Most of their time is spent hidden under the sand and in
the ground, but when they do come out their colors are so brilliant as
not to be mistaken. On the harlequin snake the colors are bright
coral-red, yellow, and black, which alternate in stripes that encircle
the body. Its head is always banded with a broad yellow stripe. The
coral-snake is much the same in color, and only a close observer would
notice the difference. The coral-snake is also found in Arizona.


=Water-Moccasin, Cottonmouth=

The water-moccasin is ugly, and ugly all the way through. Its deadly
viciousness is not redeemed by any outward beauty. Its average length is
three and a half feet, though it is occasionally longer. Its unlovely
body is thick and the color of greenish mud; the sides are paler and
have wide, blackish bands. There are dark bands from the eyes to the
mouth and above them there are pale streaks. The top of the head is very
dark. The abdomen is yellow with splashes of brown or black. Heavy
shields overhang the eyes and give a sinister expression to their angry
glare. When suddenly approached the moccasin opens wide its white-lined
mouth, and one then understands why it is called cottonmouth.

This snake does not coil before its strikes, but vibrates its tail
slowly and watches its prey with mouth open. The moccasin is decidedly a
southern snake, and girls of the south know that its home is along the
edges of bayous and in the swamps. It is frequently seen with its head
and a small part of its body out of water while the rest is submerged,
but at times it will be found on a water-soaked log or on underbrush and
