It was Keziah who welcomed us, and I have always had an affection for
her in consequence. She was housemaid then, and took to the kitchen
afterwards. After she had been about five years at the Vicarage, she
announced one day that she wished to go. She had no reason to give but
that she "thought she'd try a change." She tried one--for a month--and
didn't like it. Mrs. Arkwright took her back again, and in kitchen and
back premises she reigns supreme to this day.

From her we learned that Mr. and Mrs. Arkwright, who had gone away for a
parson's fortnight, were still from home. We had no lack of welcome,
however.

It seems strange enough to speak of a fire as comfortable in July. And
yet I well remember that the heavy dew and evening breeze was almost
chilly after sunset, and a sort of vault-like feeling about the rooms,
which had been for a week or more unused, made us offer no resistance
when Keziah began to light a fire. While she was doing so Eleanor
exclaimed, "Let's go and warm ourselves in the kitchen."

Any idea of comfort connected with a kitchen was quite new to me, but I
followed Eleanor, and made my first acquaintance with the old room where
we have spent so many happy hours.

We found the door shut; much, it seemed, to Eleanor's astonishment. But
the reason was soon evident. As our footsteps sounded on the stone
passage there arose from behind the kitchen door an utterly
indescribable din of howling, yowling, squealing, scratching, and
barking.

"It's the dear boys!" said Eleanor, and she ran to open the door. For a
moment I thought of her brothers (who must, obviously, be maniacs!), but
I soon discovered that the "dear boys" were the dogs of the
establishment, who were at once let loose upon us _en masse_. I have a
faint remembrance of Eleanor and a brown retriever falling into each
other's arms with cries of delight; but I was a good deal absorbed by
the care of my own small person, under the heavy onslaught of dogs big
and little. I was licked copiously from chin to forehead by the more
impetuous, and smelt threateningly at the calves of my legs by the more
cautious of the pack.

They were subsiding a little, when Eleanor said, "Oh, cook, why did you
shut them up? Why didn't you let them come and meet us?"

"And how was I to know who it was at the door, Miss Eleanor?" replied an
elderly, stern-looking female, who, in her time, ruled us all with a rod
of iron, the dogs included. "Dear knows it's not that I want them in the
kitchen. The way them dogs behaves, Miss Eleanor, is _scandilus_."

"Dear boys!" murmured Eleanor; on which all the dogs, who were settling
down to sleep on the hearth, wagged their tails, and threatened to move.

"Much good it is me cleaning," cook continued, "when that great big
brown beast of yours goes roaming about every night in the shrubberies,
and comes in with his feet all over my clean floor."

"It makes rather pretty marks, I think," said Eleanor; "like
pot-moulding, only not white. But never mind, you've me at home now to
wipe their paws."

"They've missed you sorely," said the cook, who seemed to be softening.
"I almost think they knew it was you, they were so mad to get out."

"Dear boys!" cried Eleanor, once more; and the dogs, who were asleep
now, wagged their tails in their dreams.

"And there's more's missed you than them," cook continued. "But, bless
us, Miss Eleanor, you don't look much better for being in strange parts.
That young lady, too, looks as if she enjoyed poor health. Well, give me
native air, there's nothing like it; and you've not got back to yours
too soon."

Eleanor threw her arms round the cook, and danced her up and down the
kitchen.

"Oh, dear cookey!" she cried; "I am so glad to be back again. And do be
kind to us, and give us tea-cakes, and brown bread toast, and let the
dogs come in to tea."

Cook pushed her away, but with a relenting face.

"There, there, Miss Eleanor. Take that jug of hot water with you, and
take the young lady up-stairs; and when you've cleaned yourselves, I'll
have something for you to eat; and you may suit yourselves about the
dogs,--I'm sure I don't want them. You've not got so much more sensible
with all your schooling," she added.

We went off to do her bidding, and left her muttering, "And what folks
as can edicate their own children sends 'em all out of the house for,
passes me; to come back looking like a damp handkerchief, with dear
knows what cheap living and unwholesome ways, and want of native air."

Cook's bark was worse than her bite.

"She gives the dear boys plenty to eat," said Eleanor; and she provided
for us that evening in the same liberal spirit.

What a feast we had! Strong tea, and abundance of sugar and rich cream.
We laid the delicious butter on our bread in such thick clumps, that
sallow-faced Madame would have thought us in peril of our lives. There
was brown bread toast, too; and fried ham and eggs, and moor honey, and
Yorkshire tea-cakes. In the middle of the table Keziah had placed a
large punch-bowl, filled with roses.

And all the dogs were on the hearth, and they all had tea with us.

After tea we tried to talk, but were so sleepy that the words died away
on our heavy lips. So we took Keziah's advice and went to bed.

"Keziah has put the chair-bed into my room, Margery dear," said Eleanor.

"I am so glad," said I. "I would rather be with you."

"Would you like a dog to sleep with you?" Eleanor politely inquired. "I
shall have Growler inside, and my big boy outside. Pincher is a nice
little fellow; you'd better have Pincher."

I took Pincher accordingly, and Pincher took the middle of the bed.

We were just dropping off to sleep when Eleanor said, "If Pincher
snores, darling, hit him on the nose."

"All right," said I. "Good-night." I had begun a confused dream, woven
from my late experiences, when Eleanor's voice roused me once more.

"Margery dear, if Growler _should_ get out of my bed and come on to
yours, mind you kick him off, or he and Pincher will fight through the
bed-clothes."

But whether Pincher did snore, or Growler invade our bed, I slept much
too soundly to be able to tell.




CHAPTER XXI.

GARDENING--DRINKINGS--THE MOORS--WADING--BATRACHOSPERMA--THE
CHURCH--LITTLE MARGARET.


Both Eleanor and I were visited that night by dreams of terrible
complications with the authorities at Bush House. It was a curious
relief to us to wake to clear consciences and the absolute control of
our own conduct for the day.

It took me several minutes fairly to wake up and realize my new
position. The window being in the opposite direction (as regarded my
bed) from that of our room at Miss Mulberry's, the light puzzled me, and
I lay blinking stupidly at a spray of ivy that had poked itself through
the window as if for shelter from the sun, which was already blazing
outside. Pincher brought me to my senses by washing my face with his
tongue; which I took all the kindlier of him that he had been, of all
the dear boys, the most doubtful about the calves of my legs the evening
before.

As we dressed, I adopted Eleanor's fashion of doing so on foot, that I
might examine her room. As is the case with the "bowers" of most
English country girls of her class, it was rich in those treasures
which, like the advertised contents of lost pocket-books, are "of no
value to any one but the owner." Prints of sacred subjects in home-made
frames, knick-knacks of motley variety, daguerreotypes and second-rate
photographs of "the boys"--_i. e._ Clement and Jack--at different ages,
and of "the dear boys" also. "All sorts of things!" as I exclaimed
admiringly. But Eleanor threatened at last to fine me if I did not get
dressed instead of staring about me, so we went down-stairs, and had
breakfast with the dogs.

"The boys will be home soon," said Eleanor, as we devoured certain
plates of oatmeal porridge, which Keziah had provided, and which I
tasted then for the first time. "I must get their gardens tidied up
before they come. Shall you mind helping me, Margery?"

The idea delighted me, and after breakfast we tied on our hats, rummaged
out some small tools from the porch, and made our way to the children's
gardens. They were at some little distance from the big flower-garden,
and the path that led to them was heavily shaded by shrubbery on one
side, and on the other by a hedge which, though "quickset" as a
foundation, was now a mass of honeysuckle and everlasting peas. The
scent was delicious.

From this we came out on an open space at the top of the kitchen garden,
where, under a wall overgrown with ivy, lay the children's gardens.

"What a wilderness!" was Eleanor's first exclamation, in a tone of
dismay, and then she added with increased vehemence, "He's taken away
the rhubarb-pot. What will Clement say?"

"What is it, dear?" I asked.

"It's the rhubarb-pot," Eleanor repeated. "You know Clement is always
having new fads every holidays, and he can't bear his things being
disturbed whilst he's at school. But how can I help it if I'm at school
too?"

"Of course you can't," said I, gladly seizing upon the only point in her
story that I could understand, to express my sympathy.

"And he got one of the rhubarb-pots last holidays," Eleanor continued.
"It was rather broken, and Thomas gave in to his having it then, so it's
very mean of him to have moved it now, and I shall tell him so. And
Clement painted church windows on it, and stuck it over a plant of ivy
at the top of the garden. He thought it would force the ivy, and he
expected it would grow big by the time he came home. He wanted it to
hang over the top, and look like a ruin. Oh, he will be so vexed!"

The ivy plant was alive, though the "ruin" had been removed by the
sacrilegious hands of Thomas. I suggested that we should build a ruin of
stones, and train the ivy over that, which idea was well received by
Eleanor; the more so that a broken wall at the top of the croft supplied
materials, and Stonehenge suggested itself as an easy, and certainly
respectable, model.

Meanwhile we decided to "do the weeding first," as being the least
agreeable business, and so set to work; I in a leisurely manner,
befitting the heat of the day, and Eleanor with her usual energy. She
toiled without a pause, and accomplished about treble the result of my
labours. After we had worked for a long time, she sat up, pressing her
hand to her forehead.

"My head quite aches, Margery, and I'm so giddy. It's very odd;
gardening never made me so before I went away."

"You work so at it," said I, "you may well be tired. What makes you work
so at things?"

"I don't know," said Eleanor, laughing. "Cook says I do foy at things
so. But when one once begins, you know----"

"What's _foy_?" I interrupted. "Cook says you foy--what does she mean?"

"Oh, to foy at anything is to slave--to work hard at it. At least, not
merely hard-working, but to go at it very hotly, almost foolishly; in
fact, to foy at it, you know. Clement foys at things too. And then he
gets tired and cross; and so do I, often. What o'clock is it, Margery?"

I pulled out my souvenir watch and answered, "Just eleven."

"We ought to have some 'drinkings,' we've worked so hard," said Eleanor,
laughing again. "Haymakers, and people like that, always have drinkings
at eleven, you know, and dinner at one, and tea at four or five, and
supper at eight. Ah! there goes Thomas. Thomas!"

Thomas came up, and Eleanor (discreetly postponing the subject of the
rhubarb-pot for the present) sent a pleading message to cook, which
resulted in her sending us two bottles of ginger-beer and several slices
of thick bread-and-butter. The dear boys, who had been very sensibly
snoozing in the shade, divined by some instinct the arrival of our
lunch-basket, and were kind enough to share the bread-and-butter with
us.

"Drinkings" over, we set to work again.

I was surprised to observe that there were four box-edged beds, but as
Eleanor said nothing about it, I made no remark. Perhaps it belonged to
some dead brother or sister.

As the weeds were cleared away, one plant after another became
apparent. I called Eleanor's attention to all that I found, and she
seemed to welcome them as old friends.

"Oh, that's the grey primrose; I'm so glad! And there are Jack's
hepaticas; they look like old rubbish. Don't dig deep into Jack's
garden, please, for he's always getting plants and bulbs given him by
people in the village, and he sticks everything in, so his garden really
is crammed full; and you're sure to dig into tulips, or crocuses, or
lilies, or something valuable."

"Doesn't Clement get things given him?" said I.

"Oh, he has plenty of plants," said Eleanor, "but then he's always
making great plans about his garden; and the first step towards his
improvements is always to clear out all the old things, and make what he
calls 'a clean sweep of the rubbish.'"

By the time that the "twelve o'clock bell" rang from the church-tower
below, the heat was so great that we gathered up our tools and went
home.

In the afternoon Eleanor said, "Were you ever on the moors? Did you ever
wade? Do you care about water-weeds? Did you ever eat bilberries, or
carberries?--but they're not ripe yet. Shall we go and get some
Batrachosperma, and paddle a bit, and give the dear boys a bathe?"

"Delightful!" said I; "but do you go out alone?"

"What should we take anybody with us for?" said Eleanor, opening her
eyes.

I could not say. But as we dressed I said, "I'm so glad you don't wear
veils. Matilda and I used to have to wear veils to take care of our
complexion."

Eschewing veils and every unnecessary encumbrance, we set forth,
followed by the dogs. I had taken off my crinoline, because Eleanor said
we might have to climb some walls, and I had borrowed a pair of her
boots, because my own were so uncomfortable from being high-heeled and
narrow-soled. They were too thin for stony roads also, and, though they
were prettily ornamented, they pinched my feet.

We went upwards from the Vicarage along hot roads bordered by stone
walls. At last we turned and began to go downwards, and as we stood on
the top of the steep hill we were about to descend, Eleanor, with some
pride in her tone, asked me what I thought of the view.

It was very beautiful. The slopes of the purple hills were grand. I saw
"moors" now.

"The best part of it is the air, though," she said.

The air was, in fact, wind; but of a dry, soft, exhilarating kind. It
seemed to get into our heads, and we joined hands and ran wildly down
the steep hill together.

"What fun!" Eleanor cried, as we paused to gain breath at the bottom.
"Now you've come there'll be four of us to run downhill. We shall nearly
stretch across the road."

At last we came to a stone bridge which spanned the river. It was not a
very wide stream, and it was so broken with grey boulders, and clumps of
rushes and overhanging ferns, that one only caught sight of the water
here and there, in tiny torrents and lakes among the weeds.

My delight was boundless. I can neither forget nor describe those first
experiences of real country life, when Eleanor and I rambled about
together. I think she was at least as happy as I, and from time to time
we both wished with all our hearts that "the other girls" could be there
too. The least wisely managed of respectable schools has this good
point, that it enlarges one's sympathies and friendships!

We wandered some little way up the Ewden, as Eleanor called the river,
and then, coming to a clear, running bit of stream, with a big grey
boulder on the bank hard by to leave our shoes and stockings on, we took
these off, and also our hats, and, kilting up our petticoats, plunged
bravely into the stream.

"Wet your head!" shouted Eleanor; and following her example, as well as
I could for laughing, and for the needful efforts to keep my feet, I
dabbled my head liberally with water scooped up in the palms of my
hands.

"Oh!" I cried, "how strong the water is, and how deliciously cold it is!
And oh, look at the little fishes! They're all round my feet. And oh,
Eleanor, call the dogs, they're knocking me down! How hard the stones
are, and oh, how slippery!"

I fell against a convenient boulder, and Eleanor turned back, the dogs
raging and splashing around her.

"I hope you're not treading on the Batrachosperma?" she said, anxiously.

"What is it?" I cried.

"It's what I've chiefly come in for," said she. "I want some to lay out.
It's a water-weed; a fresh-water alga, you know, like seaweed, only a
fresh-water plant. I'm looking for the stone it grew near. Oh, that's it
you're on! Climb up on to it out of the way, Margery dear. It's rather a
rare kind of weed, and I don't want it to be spoiled. Call the dogs,
please. Oh, look at all the bits they've broken off!"

Eleanor dodged and darted to catch certain fragments of dark-looking
stuff that were being whirled away. With much difficulty she caught two
or three, and laid one of them in my hand. But I was not prepared for
the fact that it felt like a bit of jelly, and it slipped through my
fingers before I had time to examine the beauty of the jointed branches
pointed out by Eleanor, and in a moment more it was hopelessly lost. We
put what we had got into some dock-leaves for safety, and having waded
back to our stockings, we put on our hats and walked barefoot for a few
yards through the heather, to dry our feet, after which we resumed our
boots and stockings and set off homewards.

"We'll go by the lower road," said Eleanor, "and look at the church."

For some time after Eleanor had passed in through the rickety gates of
the south porch, I lingered amongst the gravestones, reading their
quaint inscriptions. Quaint both in matter and in the manner of rhyme
and spelling. As I also drew towards the porch, I looked up to see if I
could tell the time by the dial above it. I could not, nor (in spite of
my brief learning in Dr. Russell's grammar) could I interpret the Latin
motto, "_Fugit Hora. Ora_"--"The hour flies. Pray."

As I came slowly and softly up the aisle, I fancied Eleanor was
kneeling, but a strange British shame of prayer made her start to her
