blow on us some day."

"Do as you like," said Dick; "I don't care. I wash my hands of the
responsibility."

"That's all we want," said Bill. "We need a young one to help us in our
plans. If this nephew of yours is as brave as you say, he'll do. What
time was he to come here?"

"Twelve."

"Then it's a minute past the time. I don't think he'll come."

"The clock may be wrong." said Dick, but he glanced uneasily at the
clock, which now indicated a little past the hour.

His suspense was not a long one.

An old man, thin and shriveled, with a crafty eye, and a thin, squeaking
voice, here put his head in at the door.

"Is Mr. Mark Mortimer here?" he asked.

"That's me!" exclaimed Dick, jumping up eagerly.

"There's a boy wants to see you, Mr. Mark Mortimer," said the old man,
repeating the name as if he enjoyed it.

"It's my nephew," said Dick.

"Is his name Mortimer, too?" asked the proprietor of the establishment,
for such the old man was.

"Never mind," said Dick, impatiently. "Bring the boy in."

Almost directly Jasper was ushered into the room--fearlessly, but
looking about him with some curiosity.

The two men, who had not before seen him, surveyed him with equal
curiosity.

"He does you credit," said the stout man.

"He's what I was at his age," said Dick. "Now, boy, have you got the
money?"

"Yes," said Jasper.

"One hundred and fifty dollars?"

"Yes."

Dick's eyes glistened.

"Give it here. You're a trump. Did old Fitch make any difficulties?"

"No; he was glad to get the boy back."

"Did he ask you about me?"

"Yes."

"How much did you tell him?" demanded the kidnapper, hastily.

"Nothing. I told him that I had made a promise not to tell."

Dick looked triumphantly at his two companions.

"Didn't I tell you?" he said.

"You have the boy's word for it," said Jack, with a quiet sneer. "How
did you find your way here, boy?"

"I looked at a map of the city," answered Jasper.

"Where?"

"In the office of Mr. Fitch."

"Where did you pass last night?"

"At the house of Mr. Fitch."

"Where are you going when you leave here?"

"I have promised to go to Mr. Fitch's counting-room."

"You seem to be very intimate with this gentleman," said Jack.

"There's nothing strange in that," said Jasper, quietly. "It was I who
carried his boy home."

"The boy is right," said Dick, who, having obtained his money, felt
graciously disposed toward our hero, through whose agency he had
obtained it.

"What does he want of you?" asked Jack, continuing the
cross-examination.

"I hope he is going to help me to a place," answered Jasper.

"No need of going to him," said the stout man. "We'll give you
employment."

"You!" repeated Jasper, with an attentive glance, which took in the
man's disreputable appearance.

"Yes, if you deserve it. What do you say?"

"I feel obliged for your offer," said Jasper, "but having promised Mr.
Fitch to return, I would prefer to do so."

"Boys," interrupted Dick, at this point, "I'm sorry to leave this
festive crowd, but I've got other business to attend to, and must be
going."

"I'll go with you," said Jasper, who was anxious to leave the place.

"No, you don't, just yet," said Jack, rising, and striding between
Jasper and the door. "We'll have a drink all around first."

"Thank you," said Jasper, "I don't drink."

"You must drink now. It's the law of this establishment."

"All right, Jasper," said Dick. "I'll treat. You can drink what you
like, though."

Jasper felt that it would be politic to comply, and chose lemonade.

"I'll order the drinks," said Jack, and he left the room for that
purpose.




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE SLEEPING POTION.


Presently the old man already referred to appeared with the drinks. It
Is hardly necessary to say that Jasper was alone in his choice of
lemonade. The rest selected stronger liquors.

"Here's to you, Dick," said Jack, tossing off the contents of his glass,
"and may you live to treat us many times more!"

"Amen to that!" said Bill.

"Haven't you got anything to say, youngster?" asked Dick, turning to
Jasper.

"I wish you a pleasant journey," said Jasper, politely.

"As to that, it depends on my success with my sister."

"When do you leave?"

"To-night, if I can."

"What's all that about, Dick? Are you going to leave us?" asked Bill.

"I'm goin' East for the benefit of my health and my purse," said Dick,
with a grin. "Do you wish me success, mates?"

"To be sure. Is it anything we can help you in?"

"No, no. It's my private venture."

"Anything in my line?"

"No; it's a strictly virtuous and honest undertaking. I don't mind
giving you a hint of it. I've got a near relative that's come into a
fortune. Now I think I ought to come in for a share."

"To be sure!"

"Have another game of euchre, Dick?"

"I don't know--I ought to be going," said the kidnapper, hesitating.
"We'll make it poker, and the boy may take a hand."

"No," said Jasper, languidly. "I don't know how to play."

"We'll teach you."

"I don't care about it."

"You look sleepy, lad," said Dick.

"Yes, I feel so. It's strange. I didn't feel so when I came in."

"Oh, don't mind the boy's looks," said Jack. "Lay down on that settee,
if you want to, boy."

Jasper felt so heavy and drowsy that he accepted the permission and
stretched himself out, closing his eyes.

"Why am I so sleepy?" he thought, languidly. "I never was before, in the
middle of the day, except when I was sick."

He listened at first to the conversation between the players, but
gradually it sounded only like a confused hum, and at length he could
not hear it at all.

He was fast asleep.

When this became clear through his heavy breathing, Dick turned to the
younger man, and pointing to Jasper, asked:

"What have you been doing to him?"

"I put a sleeping potion into his drink," answered Jack.

"What for?"

"I mean to keep him for a while, and that saves a fuss."

"What do you want to do with him?"

"Prevent him from doing mischief."

"There's no need. He can be trusted."

"You can trust him, for you'll be a long way off. He might blow on us
any time."

Dick shrugged his shoulders.

"Oh, well, do as you please, but you're over careful. Don't hurt him."

"He'll be all right as long as he behaves himself. It's your deal."

The game was over at last, and Dick arose to go. Jasper was sleeping
soundly, and was wholly unconscious of his departure.

"Give me a hand, Bill, and we'll take the boy up stairs," said the
younger man.

"What's your plan, Jack?"

"To make him one of us. He'll come to it in time."

There was a windowless room on the second floor, in the centre of the
house, wholly dark, except when lighted by gas. It was to this room that
our hero was conveyed, and laid upon some bedding in the corner of the
room. There was a slide in the partition to admit air, and with it a few
faint rays of light. Jasper stirred a little while he was being moved,
but the sleeping potion had too much potency to allow him to wake.

"There," said Jack, in a tone of satisfaction, "he's safe now."

"He'll make a fuss when he gets up."

"Let him. He can't get out."

As they went down stairs, Jack called aside Nathan Gibson, the old man
who had charge of the house.

"Nathan," said he, "did you see the boy that was with us just now?"

"Yes."

"We've put him in the prison" (for this was the name by which the small
dark room was known). "He's not to be let out."

"Good! I understand."

"You may take him some supper at five or six o'clock. Look in before
that time to see if he's awake."

"All right!" said the old man, grinning. "What's your game?"

"It's your game as well as mine. The boy ought never to have come here.
He may blow on us."

The mean-faced little man looked by turns frightened and fierce.

"I'd slit his throat if he did!" he said.

"No need of that. We'll make him join us."

"That would be the best way; but can you?"

"We can try. Don't forget what I told you."

Nathan nodded.

Still Jasper slept, little suspecting into what a trap he had walked.




CHAPTER XXV.

JASPER FINDS HIMSELF A PRISONER.


It was after five o'clock when Jasper opened his eyes. As soon as
consciousness returned he looked around him with astonishment and
wonder.

"Where am I?"

A few rays of light entered at the sliding-door above, and to this his
eyes were naturally drawn.

Here was another puzzle. He explored his memory, and could recall no
such place as this. He had never before been in such a room.

At last he recalled the circumstances under which he fell asleep, and he
jumped to the conclusion that he was in the same house still.

"They must have put me to bed," he said to himself. "They were very
kind; but this is a queer room."

Thus far no thought that he was a prisoner had entered his mind.

He arose and began to feel his way around by the walls. He judged that
he was in a room not more than ten feet square. He could form no idea
what was the time. It might be the middle of the night, so far as he
knew.

"This is awkward," he thought. "I don't fancy being shut up like this.
Where's the door? There must be one somewhere."

He found it at last, and tried the lock, but it did not yield to his
efforts.

Then came the startling thought:

"Am I a prisoner?"

He stopped short and thought over the situation. He recalled all he
could of the men in whose company he had been at the time he went to
sleep. The longer he thought the more it seemed probable that it was as
he suspected.

Though a little startled at this view of the situation, Jasper was by no
means disposed to be despondent. His courage arose with the difficulties
of his position.

"I'll find out how matters stand," he said to himself. "I'll pound till
somebody comes."

He began to pound on the walls of the room with such effect that the old
man below heard him.

"The bird is beating against the walls of his cage," he thought. "I'll
go up and see him."

Presently Jasper heard steps ascending the stairs. Almost immediately
another sliding-door about four feet from the floor was drawn open, and
the old man's face was poked in.

"Did you knock?" he asked, grinning.

"Yes," said Jasper. "Open the door, and let me out."

"Won't you have some supper first?" asked Nathan, with a leer.

"No; I'd rather go out," said Jasper, in a tone of suspicion.

"I couldn't allow that. Oh, no!" said Nathan.

"What right have you to keep me here against my will?" exclaimed Jasper,
furiously.

"We like your company so much, my dear young man," said Nathan, nodding
his head waggishly.

"Who's 'we'?" demanded Jasper.

"Jack, and Bill, and me."

"Let me out, I say."

"Don't be agitated, my dear boy. You'll be taken good care of."

"I'd rather take care of myself. Will you open the door?"

"I couldn't, but I'll bring you up some supper directly."

The sliding-door was closed suddenly, and again Jasper found himself in
the dark, fully understanding now that he was a prisoner, but why, he
could not form a conjecture.




CHAPTER XXVI.

IN CONFINEMENT.


Soon the old man reappeared and opened the sliding-door. He carried a
small waiter containing a cup of tea, a plate of cold meat, and a slice
of white bread without butter.

"We don't want you to starve," he said. "Here's something to stay your
stomach. You're hungry, ain't you?"

Jasper admitted that he was.

"I thought so. When I was your age I was always eating. Never could get
enough."

Jasper wondered, if this were the case, why the old man had not grown
larger, but he did not say this. He took the waiter from Nathan and set
it on his lap, there being no table.

"I hope you don't mean to keep me long as a boarder," he said. "You
won't find it profitable, boarding me for nothing."

"That isn't for me to say," said Nathan. "Jack and Bill will see to
that."

"Did they tell you to confine me?"

"Yes; I told you that already."

"Will you ask them to come up and speak to me? I want to know why I am
here."

"They ain't at home now. I'll tell them when they come in."

"Thank you. Do you think that will be to-night?"

"Not likely. They'll come in so late you'll be abed and asleep."

"Don't let them go out to-morrow morning without seeing me."

"I'll tell them."

The old man waited till Jasper had finished eating, and then took the
waiter back through the window.

"Won't you let me have a light?" asked Jasper. "I don't want to stay
here in the dark."

"You'll set the house on fire," said the old man, hesitating.

