"Not far out," said Dick, "there's the Sprit Rock; two miles more will
do it."

"I shan't be sorry when I'm in bed," said Heathcote.

"I shan't be sorry when I see Tom White hung.  I say, we may as well
have a dip before we go on."

So they solaced themselves with a plunge in the moonlit sea, which,
after their dusty labours, was wonderfully refreshing.  Having dressed
again, all but their shoes and stockings, which they looped together and
hung over their shoulders, they tucked up their trousers, and started to
wade along the strand to their journey's end.

The tide had only just started to come in, so they had the benefit of
the hard sand, which, combined with the soft, refreshing water and the
bright moonlight, rendered their pilgrimage as pleasant as, under the
circumstances, they could have desired.  Their talk was of Thomas White,
for whom it was well he was not within earshot.  They arrested him,
tried him, sentenced him, flogged him, transported him, and yet were not
satisfied.

"You know, Georgie," said Dick, working himself into a fury, "he
collared my mother's photograph! the low cad!  I'd be a beast if I
didn't pay him out."

"Rather! and I'll back you up, old man.  I was going to get a tennis-bat
with that twelve bob; the blackguard!"

About a mile from home the lights of Templeton hove in sight; but still
our heroes' talk was of Tom White and the next assizes.

They had the beach to themselves, with only a few stranded boats for
company, over whose anchors they had to pick their way gingerly.

"The tide's coming in at a lick," said Dick.  "Half an hour later, we
should have had to tramp on the soft sand-- Lookout, you duffer!"

The last remark was caused by Heathcote tripping over a rope, and coming
down all fours on the wet sand.

"Bother that rope," said he, "I never saw it.  I say, it's rather a
small one for that big boat, isn't it?"

"It is," said Dick, walking round to the stern of the boat in question,
"its-- Hallo, I say, Georgie, look here!"

Georgie looked in the direction of Dick's finger, and read the words,
"'_Martha_,' _Thomas White, Templeton_" on the stern of the boat.

Both boys whistled.  Then Dick marched resolutely up to the bows, over a
thwart in which the anchor rope was hitched in a loop.

"Tom White must have been drunk when he anchored this boat," said Dick.
"She'll never hold if the wind gets up."

"Good job, too," said Heathcote.

"So I think," said Dick, thoughtfully.  "I say, Georgie," added he, with
his fingers playing on the end of the loop, "Tom White's a frightful
cad, isn't he?"

"Rather!"

"And a thief, too?"

"I should think so."

"It would serve him jolly well right if he lost his boat."

"He don't deserve to have a boat at all."

"This knot," said Dick, slipping the loop, "wouldn't hold against a
single lurch.  Why, it comes undone in a fellow's hand--"

And the end dropped idly on the floor of the boat as he spoke.

Heathcote nodded.

"Think of the cad having robbed two juniors like us, and collared
mother's photograph, too, the brute!" said Dick, taking his friend's arm
and walking on.

They talked no longer of Thomas White, but admired the moonlight, and
wondered how soon the tide would be up, and speculated as to whether
there wasn't a breeze getting up off the land.  Once they turned back,
and glanced at the black hull, lying, still aground, with the tide yards
away yet.  Then they thought a trot would warm them up before they put
on their boots, and mounted the cliff to Templeton.

The clock struck half-past eleven as they knocked modestly at the
porter's lodge.  The porter was up, and evidently expected them.

"Nice goings-on, young gentlemen," said he.  "The Doctor wishes to see
you after chapel in the morning.  In you go.  I'm sorry for you."

With fluttering hearts they stole across the moonlit Quadrangle, and
gazed round at the grim windows that peered down on them from every
side.  The housekeeper was up and ready for them, too.

"Bad boys," said she, as she opened the door; "go to bed quietly, and
make no noise.  The Doctor will be ready for you the moment chapel is
over."

They mounted the creaking stairs, and crawled guiltily along the passage
to their dormitory.

The dormitory monitor was sitting up in bed ready for them, too.

"Oh, you have turned up, have you?" said he.  "I hope you'll enjoy
yourselves with Winter in the morning.  Most of the fellows say it's
expulsion; but I rather fancy a licking, myself.  Cut into bed, and
don't make a noise."

And he curled himself up in his bedclothes, and slept the sleep of the
just, which was more than could be said for the fitful slumbers of our
heroes, which visions of Tom White's boat, and Ponty's pocket, and the
piece of string at the tail of the Eleven's coach, combined to make the
reverse of sound.

In the middle of the night Dick, as he lay awake, felt Heathcote's hand
nudging him.

"I say, Dick!" said the latter, "the wind's got up.  Do you hear it?"

"Shut up, Georgie.  I'm just asleep."

Nemesis handed in her last cheque to our heroes after chapel next
morning in the Doctor's study.  I will spare the reader the harrowing
details of that serious interview.  Suffice it to say that the dormitory
fag was right, and that Mrs Partlett was spared the trouble of packing
up the two young gentlemen's wardrobes.

But they emerged from the study wiser and sadder men.  They knew more
about the properties of a certain flexible wood than they had ever
dreamed of before.  They also felt themselves marked men in high
quarters, with a blot on their new boy's scutcheon which it would take a
heap of virtue to efface.

"By George!" said Dick that afternoon, "we got it hot--too hot,
Georgie."

"I think Winter might have let us down rather easier, myself," said
Georgie.

There was a pause.

"Was it windy last night?" asked Dick.

"Rather!" said Georgie.

"Anything new down town?"

"Couldn't hear anything."

"Hum!  I wonder what that beast's done with mother's photograph?  I say,
Georgie, what a howling brute he was!"

"He was; he deserves anything."

Strange, if so, that neither of our young heroes went to the police
station and informed against their man.  On the contrary, they went up
on to the cliffs after school, and scanned the bay from headland to
headland, doubtless lost in the wonders of the deep, and wishing very
much they could tell what the wild waves were saying as to the
whereabouts of the _Martha_.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

'TWIXT SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS.

Perhaps no epoch of a schoolboy's life is more critical--especially if
he be of the open-hearted nature of Dick and Heathcote--than that which
immediately follows his first punishment at the hands of the law.

On the one hand he has the sense of disgrace which attends personal
chastisement, as well as the discomfort of a forfeited good name, and
the feeling of being down on the black books of the school authorities
generally.  On the other hand, he is sure to meet with a certain number
of companions who, if they do not exactly admire what he has done,
sympathise with him in what he has suffered; and sympathy at such a time
is sweet and seducing.  A little too much sympathy will make him feel a
martyr, and a little martyrdom will make him feel a hero, and once a
hero on account of his misdeeds, he needs a stout heart and a steady
head to keep himself from going one step further and becoming a
professional evil-doer, and ending a fool and his own worst enemy.

Dick and Heathcote ran a serious risk of being shunted on to the road to
ruin after the escapade of the Grandcourt match.

The former discovered that his popularity with the Den was by no means
impaired by adversity.  In fact, he jumped at one bound to the hero
stage of his ordeal.  He was but a boy of flesh and blood, and sympathy
is a sweet salve for smarting flesh and blood.

After the first burst of contrition it pleased him to hear fellows say--

"Hard lines on you, old man.  Not another in a hundred would have
cheeked it the way you did."

It pleased him, too, to see boys smaller than himself look round as they
passed him, and whisper something which made their companions turn round
too.  Dick grew fond of small boys as the term went on.

It pleased him still more to be taken notice of by a few bigger boys, to
find himself claimed by Hooker and Duffield as a crony, to be bantered
by the aesthetic Wrangham, and patronised by the stout Bull.

All this made him go over the adventures of that memorable day often in
his mind, and think that after all it wasn't a bad day's sport, and
that, though he said so who shouldn't, he had managed things fairly
well, and got his money's worth.

His money's worth, however, reminded him of his lost half-sovereign and
his mother's photograph, and these reflections usually pulled him up
short in his reminiscences.

Heathcote, in a more philosophical and dismal way, had his perils, and
Pledge gave him no help through his difficulty.  On the contrary, he
encouraged his growing discontent.

"Dismals again?" said he, one evening.  "That cane of Winter's must be a
stiff one if it cuts you up like that."

"Winter always does lay it on thick to the kids, though," said Wrangham,
who happened to be present.  "His lickings are in inverse ratio to the
size of the licked."

It did comfort Heathcote to hear his case discussed in such learned and
mathematical terms, but that was all the consolation he got.

Dick was in far too exalted a frame of mind to give much assistance.

"What does it matter?" said he, recklessly.  "I don't mean to fret
myself."

And so the matter ended for the present.  The two friends were bearing
their ordeal in two such different ways that they might almost have
parted company, had there not been another common interest of still
greater importance to bind them together.

One day Heathcote came up from the "Tub" at a canter and caught his
friend at the chapel door.

"Dick," he said, "it's all out!  This bill was sticking on one of the
posts by the pier.  It was wet, so I took it off."

Dick read--"_L2_ reward.  Lost or stolen from her moorings, on Templeton
Strand, on the 4th inst, a lugger-rigged sailing boat, named the
_Martha_.  Any one giving information leading to the recovery of the
boat--or if stolen, to the conviction of the thief--will receive the
above reward.  Police Station, Templeton."

Dick handed the ominous paper back with a long face.

"Here, take it.  Whatever did you pull it off the post for?"

"I thought you'd like to see it," said Heathcote, putting the despised
document into his pocket.

"So I did.  Thanks, Georgie.  We didn't steal the boat, did we?"

"Rather not.  Not like what he did to our money."

"No.  That was downright robbery."

"With violence," added Heathcote.

"Of course.  It was really Tom White's fault the boat got adrift.  It
was so carelessly anchored."

"Yes.  A puff of wind would have slipped that knot."

There was a pause.

"It's plain he doesn't guess anything," said Dick.

"Not likely.  And he's not likely to say anything about it, if he does."

"Of course not.  It would mean transportation for him."

"After all, some one may have gone off with the boat.  We can't tell.
It was there all right when we saw it, wasn't it?"

Dick looked at his friend.  He could delude himself up to a certain
point, but this plea wouldn't quite wash.

"Most likely they'll find it.  It may have drifted round to Birkens, or
some place like that.  It'll be all right, Georgie."

But the thoughts of that unlucky boat haunted their peace.  That Tom
White had only got his deserts they never questioned; but they would
have been more comfortable if that loop had slipped itself.

Days went on, and still no tidings reached them.  The bills faced them
wherever they went, and once, as they passed the boat-house with a crowd
of other fellows, they received a shock by seeing Tom White himself
sitting and smoking on a bench, and looking contemplatingly out to sea.

"There's Tom White," said one of the group.  "I say," shouted he, "have
you found your boat, Tom?"

Tom looked up and scanned the group.  Our heroes' hearts were in their
boots as his eyes met theirs.  But to their relief he did not know them.
A half-tipsy man on a dark night is not a good hand at remembering
faces.

"Found her?  No, I aren't, young gentleman," said he.

"Hard lines.  Hope you'll get her back," said the boy.  "I say, do you
think any one stole her?"

"May be, may be not," replied the boatman.

"Jolly rum thing about that boat," said the spokesman of the party, as
the boys continued their walk.

"I expect it got adrift somehow," said another.

"I don't know," said the first.  "I was speaking to a bobby about her:
he says they think she was stolen; and fancy they've got a clue to the
fellow."

Heathcote stumbled for no apparent reason at this particular moment, and
it was quite amusing to see the concern on Dick's face as he went to the
rescue.

"Jolly low trick," continued the boy, who appeared to interest himself
so deeply in Tom's loss, "if any one really took the boat away.  Tom
will be ruined."

"Who do they think went off with her?" asked another.

"They don't say; but they're rather good at running things down, are our
police.  Do you recollect the way they bowled out the fellow who tried
to burn the boat-house last year, and got him six months?"

This police gossip was so alarming to our two heroes, that they gave up
taking walks along the beach, and retired to the privacy of the school
boundaries, where there was no lack of occupation, indoor and out, to
relieve the monotony of life.

A week after the Grandcourt match, a boy called Braider came up to Dick
and asked to speak to him.  Braider was in the Fourth, and Dick knew of
him as a racketty, roystering sort of fellow, very popular with his own
set--and thought something of by the Den, on account of some recent
offences against monitorial authority.

"I say," said he to Dick, confidentially, "what do you say to belonging
to our Club?"

"What Club?" asked Dick, scenting some new distinction, and getting
light-headed in consequence.

"You'll promise not to go telling everybody," said Braider.  "We're
called the 'Sociables,' It's a jolly enough lot.  Only twenty of us, and
we have suppers and concerts once a week.  The thing is, it's _awfully_
select, and a job to get into it.  But your name was mentioned the other
day, and I fancy you'd get in."

"I suppose Georgie Heathcote isn't in it?" said Dick.

"Rather not!" said the other, mistaking his meaning; "he'd have no
chance."

"He's not a bad fellow," said Dick.  "I wouldn't mind if he was on."

"Well, there are two vacancies.  What do you say for one?"

"Do I know the other fellows?"

"Most of them," and Braider repeated a string of names, among which were
those of a few well-known heroes of the Fifth and Fourth.

"They're all jolly fellows," said Braider, "and, back up one another
like one o'clock.  It was your plucky show up at Grandcourt that made
them think of having you; and if you join you'll just be in time for the
next concert.  What do you say?"

Dick didn't like to say no; and not being a youth who dallied much
between the positive and the negative, he said:

"All serene, Braider, if they really want it."

"Of course they do, old man," said Braider, in tones of satisfaction;
"they'll be jolly glad.  Mind you don't go talking about it to any one,
you know.  They're very select, and don't want all Templeton wanting to
join."

"When's the election?" asked Dick.

"Oh! to-day week.  There's one fellow, Culver, up against you; but he's
got no chance.  One black ball in six excludes, so it's always a close
run."

"Do you think there would be any chance for young Heathcote?"

"Doubt it.  But we might try when you're in.  Ta, ta! old man.  Mum's
the word."

Dick spent a troubled week.  He was uncomfortable with Heathcote, in
whom he was bursting to confide.  He was uneasy, too, in meeting the few
members of the "Sociables" whom he knew, and felt that they were
watching him critically, with a view to the election next Thursday.  And
he was vindictive in the presence of Culver, whose possible rivalry he
regarded as little short of an insult.

Indeed, the effect of the suspense on him was bad all round.  For having
somehow picked up the notion from Braider's hints that "spirit" was a
leading qualification for aspiring members of the club, he was very
nearly increasing that qualification notoriously, before the week was
out, by another row with headquarters.

He purposely shirked his work, and behaved disorderly in class, in order
to show his patrons what he was made of; and what was worse, he egged
the unsuspecting Georgie on to similar excesses by his example.
Georgie, as far as "spirit" went, stood better qualified for membership
of the club at the week's end than did the real candidate; for while the
latter escaped punishment, the former was dropped upon to the tune of
three hundred lines of Virgil, for throwing a book across the room
during class.

"Just my luck," said he defiantly to his leader afterwards.
"Everybody's down on me.  I'm bound to catch it, so I may as well have
my fling."

"You did have your fling, Georgie, and you caught it, too."

Georgie was too out of humour to notice the jest.  "You don't catch me
caring twopence about it, though," said he.

But his tones belied the valiant words, and Dick looked curiously at his
troubled, harried face.

"Why, Georgie," said he, "you're down on your luck, old man."

"Blow my luck!" said Georgie, "perhaps I am down on it.  It serves me
worse than yours."

Dick didn't say anything more just then.  Perhaps because he had nothing
to say.  But he didn't like this new state of things in his friend.
