School. The fairy godmother occupied the center of the stage while the
entire company of dolls were lined up on either side. Cinderella and the
prince, each held the end of an open scroll, which bore a printed
inscription that could be seen by the audience. It read:

"A MERRY CHRISTMAS TO THE FAIRY GODMOTHER OF THE FRESHMAN CLASS."

A scene of wild enthusiasm followed. The young people gave three cheers
for Mrs. Gray and ended with the High School yell. The actors came out
and were cheered each in turn.

Grace, Tom Gray and Reddy had worked the marionettes, it seemed,
standing on the back of the table where the theater was placed, while
the others, sitting on low stools at the sides where they could see and
not be seen, read their lines which had been composed by Anne.

"It wasn't so hard as you might think," said Grace, explaining the
marionettes to a group of friends. "Dressing the dolls was easy; we
glued on most of their clothes, and we made the step-sisters ugly by
giving them putty noses. Hippy painted the scenery and David supplied
the electric lights. The threads that moved the arms and bodies were
tied to little cross sticks something like a gallows, so that they could
be held from above without being seen."

But the marionette show was only the beginning of the party. There was
to be feasting and dancing, and, lastly, a big Christmas tree loaded
with presents.

The floors were cleared. The notes of a waltz rang out, and away whirled
the happy boys and girls. Anne and David, who did not dance, retired to
a sofa in the library to look on.

"Are you happy, Anne, in your beautiful pink dress?" asked David,
regarding her with open admiration.

"How can I help being happy?" she replied. "This is the first pretty
dress that I have ever had and I never went to a party before, either."

"I never enjoyed a party before," said David, "but I'm enjoying this
one. I hope, for Mrs. Gray's sake, it goes off without a hitch."

Just then Tom Gray waltzed by with Grace. They stopped when they saw
their friends, and came back.

"Our efforts are certainly crowned with success," exclaimed Grace. "It's
the most beautiful ball ever given in Oakdale. Everyone says so. By the
way," she added, "get your partners and fall in line for the grand march
to supper."

"I already have mine, all right," declared Tom Gray.

"And I think I have mine," observed David. "She's wearing a pink dress
and is just about as tall as a marionette."

Anne laughed and stood on tiptoe to make herself look taller. Suddenly
she caught the eye of Miriam Nesbit, who was lingering in the doorway,
watching the scene with an expression that the circumstances and holiday
surroundings hardly seemed to justify.

"I wonder if the party will go off without a hitch," thought Anne, as
they joined the grand march into the dining room.

When the beautiful, illuminated tree had been disburdened of all its
presents and the guests were well advanced on their supper, Mrs. Gray
approached Anne, carrying an oblong box, neatly done up in white tissue
paper tied with red ribbons. Pinned to the ribbon with a piece of holly
was a Christmas card on which was printed in fancy lettering "A
Christmas Thought."

"Why, what is this, Mrs. Gray?" demanded Anne, rather excited, while
many of the boys and girls gathered around her and some stood on chairs
in order to see what the mysterious box contained.

"I know no more than you, dear," replied the old lady. "A man left it at
the door a moment ago, and one of the servants gave it to me. Why don't
you open it and see?"

Anne hesitated. Something told her not to open the box, but how could
she help it with dozens of her friends waiting eagerly to see what was
in it?

"Hurry up, Anne, aren't you curious to see what it is?" some one called.

"It looks like flowers," said another.

"Or candy," observed a third.

And still Anne's fingers lingered on the bow of red ribbon. Was there
anyone in the world who could be sending her a box that night? Certainly
not her mother nor her sister, nor any of her friends who had exchanged
presents in the morning. Mrs. Gray evidently had not sent it and there
was no one else in her small list of friends who would have taken the
trouble.

"Anne, you funny child, don't you see we are all waiting impatiently?"
said Grace at last.

Anne slipped off the ribbons and opened the package. In the box was some
object, carefully done up in more tissue paper.

"It looks like a mummy," exclaimed Hippy.

Untying the wrappers, Anne held up to the curious view of the others a
large doll.

At first she hardly comprehended what it was and held it out at arms'
length looking at it wonderingly. It was dressed as a man in a black
suit with a long Prince Albert coat, very crudely made on close
inspection, but still cut and fitted to give the right effect. The face
had been cleverly changed with paint and putty, and pinned on the head
was a black felt hat, constructed out of the crown of an old one
evidently, in which had been sewn some lank black hair.

A card was tied around the doll's neck, and some one looking over Anne's
shoulder read aloud the following inscription written upon it:

"Why have imitation actors when you can get real ones?"

Anne gave a gasp.

Who could have played this cruel trick upon her? She knew her four
friends had never spoken of the happenings of Thanksgiving night, but
such secrets would leak out in spite of everything, and there may have
been others in the audience who had recognized her. Moreover, her father
himself would not have hesitated to tell who she was, so that it was not
difficult to understand how the story had spread.

But who would have the heart to hold her father up to ridicule in this
way, and to cause her such secret pain and unhappiness? While her
thoughts were busy, David had seized the doll and wrapped it up again.
He was very angry, but it was wiser to keep silent.

"What was it, dear?" demanded Mrs. Gray, who had not been able to hear
the message written on the card.

"Just a silly trick on Anne, Mrs. Gray," replied David, for Anne was too
near to tears to trust the sound of her own voice.

"Something about actors, wasn't it?" asked Julia Crosby, who was
hovering near, and before she could be stopped, she had snatched the
doll from Anne's lap. The covers fluttered to the floor and the others
pressed eagerly around to get a glimpse of it.

David leaped to his feet so vigorously that he upset a chair.

"Give that back!" he commanded. "It is not yours."

[Illustration: "Give That Back! It Is Not Yours."]

"I will not," answered Julia Crosby. "Neither is it yours."

"I say you will," cried David, furiously, losing his temper completely.

"Get it if you can!" challenged the girl, darting through the crowd with
David at her heels.

Suddenly there was a crash, a startled cry and the great fir tree with
all its ornaments and lighted candles fell to the floor.




CHAPTER XVII

AFTER THE BALL


Yes, here was the hitch that Anne had secretly dreaded and which the
other girls had anxiously hoped to avoid.

She had not dreamed what it would be, but she had felt it coming all
evening, ever since she had seen Miriam hovering near the library door.
And, in a way, Miriam was connected with the disaster. Had not Miriam's
guest and chum exceeded all bounds of politeness by prying into other
people's affairs? No doubt, as she fled from David, her dress had caught
in one of the branches of the tree and so pulled it over.

All this darted through Anne's head as she stood leaning against the
wall while the room was fast filling with smoke and the pungent odor of
burning pine.

Suddenly, some one at her elbow deliberately called "Fire! Fire!" These
were the same ominous words she had heard Thanksgiving night, only they
seemed now more alarming, more threatening. Who could be so foolish, so
ill-advised as to scream those agitating words in a roomful of girls and
boys already keyed up to a high pitch of excitement? Anne turned quickly
and confronted Miriam.

"Don't do that!" exclaimed Anne. "You will only make matters worse."

Miriam looked at her scornfully, although it was evident she had not
noticed her before.

"Be quiet, spy," she hissed, "and don't make trouble."

"I suspect you of making a great deal," returned Anne, calmly.

She was not afraid of this passionate, spoiled girl, and only the fact
that Miriam was the sister of David, her devoted friend, kept Anne from
saying more.

In another moment, the entire Christmas tree was in a bright blaze. Anne
had climbed up to a chair, and thence to the table that the crowd had
pushed against her as it ran. Anne was about to leap to the floor when
Grace and Tom Gray dashed in with an armful apiece of wet blankets. With
the help of the others they spread the blankets over the burning tree
and the blaze was extinguished almost as soon as it was born.

"No harm has been done," said Tom. "The canvas covering saved the floor
and fortunately all the furniture has been taken out anyhow. It's all
right, Aunt Rose. Nobody hurt; nothing damaged. I never heard of a more
accommodating fire in my life."

"Open the windows now and let out the smoke," ordered Mrs. Gray, "and,
if you have all finished eating, I think you had better come into the
drawing room while the servants clear out this debris. Tom, please tell
the musicians to play a waltz. I do not want my guests to carry away any
unpleasant impressions of this house."

The music struck up and the dance began again.

"Well," said Grace, "no one need feel badly about the fire, because a
Christmas tree generally has to be burned, anyway, and nothing of value
but the ornaments was destroyed. So everything is all right."

"It was all my fault," exclaimed David, in a contrite voice. "Mrs. Gray,
you will have to forgive me before I can enjoy a clear conscience again.
If it hadn't been for that lumbering sophomore, Julia Crosby, I should
never have lost my temper the way I did."

"My dear David," cried Mrs. Gray, patting him affectionately on the arm,
"you couldn't do anything I would disapprove of. If you wanted to rescue
Anne's doll I am sure you had some excellent reason for it."

Mrs. Gray had not heard the history of Anne's father, for Grace and her
friends had kept the secret well, and Anne, herself, had never cared to
tell the story. She was a quiet, reserved girl who talked little of her
own affairs.

"He _did_ have a good reason, Mrs. Gray," put in Grace, "and it was
enough to make him lose his temper. Julia Crosby is everlastingly
playing practical jokes and getting people into trouble. However, I
don't suppose she upset the tree on purpose," she added, thoughtfully.

"Well, well," exclaimed Mrs. Gray, "let us forget all about it and wind
up the party with a Virginia reel. Tom and Grace must lead it off, and
Anne, you and David watch the others so that when it comes your turn you
will be able to dance it yourselves."

So it was that Mrs. Gray's freshman Christmas ball ended as gayly as it
had started, with a romping, joyous Virginia reel. There was not a soul,
except the little old lady herself, who did not join the two long lines
stretching from one end of the rooms to the other and when it came
Anne's turn, she was not afraid to bow and curtsey as the others had
done, for she had quickly mastered the various figures of the dance.
Moreover, was she not wearing a beautiful dress of pink crepe de Chine?
After all a pretty dress does make a great difference. Anne felt she
could never have danced so well in the old black silk.

When the reel was over the boys and girls joined hands and formed an
immense circle about their charming hostess, whirling madly around her
as they cried:

"Three cheers for Mrs. Gray!"

The old lady was very happy. She waved her small, wrinkled hands at them
and called out over the din:

"Three cheers for my dear freshmen boys and girls!"

At length, when the hands of the clock pointed to two, and the last of
the dancers had departed, Mrs. Gray sank into a chair exhausted.

"I am tired," she said, "but I never in my life had such a good time!"

Was there ever a girl in the world who did not want to exchange
confidences with her best friends after a party?

Grace and Anne, therefore, were not surprised when two figures in
dressing gowns and slippers stole into their room, crouching on the rug
before the fire.

"We've all sorts of things to say," exclaimed Nora, "else we wouldn't
think of keeping you up so late. In the first place, wasn't it perfectly
delightful?"

"Grand!" sighed the others.

"Everything except that one accident, and the thing that caused it,"
answered Grace.

"By the way, Anne, where is the doll?" asked Jessica.

Anne produced it from its box.

"Here it is," she said sadly. "But it was a cruel joke. Can you imagine
who could have done it?"

"I have several suspicions," answered Grace, "but I make no accusations
without grounds."

The four girls examined the doll carefully.

"My poor father!" exclaimed Anne, her eyes filling with tears.

"I'll tell you what, girls," cried Nora suddenly, "there's more to this
than just Anne's secret. How did anyone know we were going to have a
marionette show? Didn't we keep it dark?"

"Yes," they answered.

"Perhaps it got out through the servants," suggested Jessica.

"It certainly is rather an underhanded business," cried Grace, "for
whoever did this not only must have bribed one of Mrs. Gray's servants,
but also must have some way or other raked up Anne's secret. It was
evidently some one who had a grudge against you, poor dear," she added,
patting Anne on the cheek.

"Girls!" exclaimed Jessica, who all this time had been looking the doll
over carefully, "where have you seen this material before?" She pointed
at the fancy red waistcoat the doll was wearing.

"It has a familiar look," answered Nora.

"It looks to me very much like a red velveteen suit I saw somewhere once
upon a time," observed Grace.

"You did see it, Grace. But it was--how long ago? Two or more years,
wasn't it?"

"I know," cried Nora. "Miriam Nesbit's!"

"Sh-h-h!" warned Grace. "Remember David. He's just across the hall."

"And he must never know," added Anne, "not if she sent me a dozen
dolls."

"But I haven't finished," continued Jessica. "I feel exactly like a
detective on the scent. This doll is wearing something else that is
familiar to us all. Anne, you have seen it, I am sure."

They scanned the doll eagerly. The shabby black suit was made of some
indescribable material that might have come from anywhere. The red
velveteen waistcoat they had already identified. Then came a little
white cotton dickey, with a high standing collar and then----

"The tie!" cried Nora. "The green tie! Is that it, Jessica?"

"You are right," answered Jessica. "Have you never seen that green silk
before?"

Grace was in a brown study.

Anne could not recall it and Nora was groping in the dark.

"I'll tell you this much," said Jessica, who loved a mystery; "It just
matches a certain veil----"

"Miss Leece!" exclaimed Grace. "It's a piece of the trimming on an old
dress she sometimes wears."

"Exactly," said Jessica. "Who, having once seen it could ever forget
it?"

And so Miss Leece and Miriam had combined forces against poor little
Anne!




CHAPTER XVIII

A WINTER PICNIC
