such a fleet here that it will be mighty difficult for even a boat
to find its way in between them."

"Do you know about the other sieges?" Mrs. O'Halloran asked. "Of
course, I know something about the last siege; but I know nothing
about the history of the Rock before that, and of course Gerald
doesn't know."

"And why should I, Carrie? You don't suppose that when I was at
school, at Athlone, they taught me the history of every bit of rock
sticking up on the face of the globe? I had enough to do to learn
about the old Romans--bad cess to them, and all their bothering
doings!"

"I can tell you about it, Mrs. O'Halloran," Teddy Burke said.
"Bob's professor, who comes to have a talk with me for half an hour
every day, has been telling me all about it; and if Gerald will
move himself, and mix me a glass of grog to moisten my throat, I
will give you the whole story of it.

"You know, no doubt, that it was called Mount Calpe, by Gerald's
friends the Romans; who called the hill opposite there Mount Abyla,
and the two together the Pillars of Hercules. But beyond giving it
a name, they don't seem to have concerned themselves with it; nor
do the Phoenicians or Carthaginians, though all of them had cities
out in the low country.

"It was when the Saracens began to play their games over here that
we first hear of it. Roderic, you know, was king of the Goths, and
seems to have been a thundering old tyrant; and one of his nobles,
Julian--who had been badly treated by him--went across with his
family into Africa, and put up Mousa, the Saracen governor of the
province across there, to invade Spain. They first of all made a
little expedition--that was in 711--with one hundred horse, and
four hundred foot. They landed over there at Algeciras and, after
doing some plundering and burning, sailed back again, with the news
that the country could be conquered. So next year twelve thousand
men, under a chief named Tarik, crossed and landed on the flat
between the Rock and Spain. He left a party here to build the
castle; and then marched away, defeated Roderic and his army at
Xeres, and soon conquered the whole of Spain, except the mountains
of the north.

"We don't hear much more of Gibraltar for another six hundred
years. Algeciras had become a fortress of great strength and
magnificence, and Gibraltar was a mere sort of outlying post.
Ferdinand the Fourth of Spain besieged Algeciras for years, and
could not take it; but a part of his army attacked Gibraltar, and
captured it. The African Moors came over to help their friends, and
Ferdinand had to fall back; but the Spaniards still held
Gibraltar--a chap named Vasco Paez de Meira being in command.

"In 1333 Abomelique, son of the Emperor of Fez, came across with an
army and besieged Gibraltar. Vasco held out for five months, and
was then starved into surrender, just as Alonzo the Eleventh was
approaching to his assistance. He arrived before the town, five
days after it surrendered, and attacked the castle; but the Moors
encamped on the neutral ground in his rear, and cut him off from
his supplies; and he was obliged at last to negotiate, and was
permitted to retire. He was not long away. Next time he attacked
Algeciras; which, after a long siege, he took in 1343.

"In 1349 there were several wars in Africa, and he took advantage
of this to besiege Gibraltar. He was some months over the business,
and the garrison were nearly starved out; when pestilence broke out
in the Spanish camp, by which the king and many of his soldiers
died, and the rest retired.

"It was not until sixty years afterwards, in 1410, that there were
fresh troubles; and then they were what might be called family
squabbles. The Africans of Fez had held the place, till then; but
the Moorish king of Grenada suddenly advanced upon it, and took it.
A short time afterwards, the inhabitants rose against the Spanish
Moors, and turned them out, and the Emperor of Morocco sent over an
army to help them; but the Moors of Grenada besieged the place, and
took it by famine.

"In 1435 the Christians had another slap at it; but Henry de
Guzman, who attacked by sea, was defeated and killed. In 1462 the
greater part of the garrison of Gibraltar was withdrawn to take
part in some civil shindy, that was going on at Grenada; and in
their absence the place was taken by John de Guzman, duke of
Medina-Sidonia, and son of the Henry that was killed. In 1540
Gibraltar was surprised and pillaged by one of Barossa's captains;
but as he was leaving some Christian galleys met him, and the
corsairs were all killed or taken.

"This was really the only affair worth speaking of between 1462,
when it fell into the hands of the Spaniards, and 1704, when it was
captured by us. Sir George Rooke, who had gone out with a force to
attack Cadiz--finding that there was not much chance of success in
that direction--resolved, with Prince George of Hesse and
Darmstadt--who commanded the troops on board the fleet--to make an
attack on Gibraltar.

"On the 21st of July, 1704, the English and Dutch landed on the
neutral ground and, at daybreak on the 23rd, the fleet opened fire.
The Spaniards were driven from their guns on the Molehead Battery.
The boats landed, and seized the battery, and held it in spite of
the Spaniards springing a mine, which killed two lieutenants and
about forty men. The Marquis de Salines, the governor, was then
summoned, and capitulated. So you see, we made only a day's work of
taking a place which the Spaniards thought that they had made
impregnable. The professor made a strong point of it that the
garrison consisted only of a hundred and fifty men; which certainly
accounts for our success, for it is no use having guns and walls,
if you haven't got soldiers to man them.

"The Prince of Hesse was left as governor; and it was not long
before his mettle was tried for, in October, the Spanish army, with
six battalions of Frenchmen, opened trenches against the town.
Admiral Sir John Leake threw in reinforcements, and six months'
provisions. At the end of the month, a forlorn hope of five hundred
Spanish volunteers managed to climb up the Rock, by ropes and
ladders, and surprised a battery; but were so furiously attacked
that they were all killed, or taken prisoners. A heavy cannonade
was kept up for another week, when a large number of transports
with reinforcements and supplies arrived and, the garrison being
now considered strong enough to resist any attack, the fleet sailed
away.

"The siege went on till the middle of March, when Sir John Leake
again arrived, drove away the French fleet, and captured or burnt
five of them; and the siege was then discontinued, having cost the
enemy ten thousand men. So, you see, there was some pretty hard
fighting over it.

"The place was threatened in 1720 and, in the beginning of 1727,
twenty thousand Spaniards again sat down before it. The
fortifications had been made a good deal stronger, after the first
siege; and the garrison was commanded by Lieutenant Governor
Clayton. The siege lasted till May, when news arrived that the
preliminaries of a general peace had been signed. There was a lot
of firing; but the Spaniards must have shot mighty badly, for we
had only three hundred killed and wounded. You would think that
that was enough; but when I tell you that the cannon were so old
and rotten that seventy cannon, and thirty mortars, burst during
the siege, it seems to me that every one of those three hundred
must have been damaged by our own cannon, and that the Spaniards
did not succeed in hitting a single man.

"That is mighty encouraging for you, Mrs. O'Halloran; for I don't
think that our cannon will burst this time and, if the Spaniards do
not shoot better than they did before, it is little work, enough,
that is likely to fall to the share of the surgeons."

"Thank you," Mrs. O'Halloran said. "You have told that very nicely,
Teddy Burke. I did not know anything about it, before; and I had
some idea that it was when the English were besieged here that the
Queen of Spain sat on that rock which is called after her; but I
see now that it was Ferdinand's Isabella, and that it was when the
Moors were besieged here, hundreds of years before.

"Well, I am glad I know something about it. It is stupid to be in a
place, and know nothing of its history. You are rising in my
estimation fast, Dr. Burke."

"Mistress O'Halloran," the doctor said, rising and making a deep
bow, "you overwhelm me, entirely; and now I must say goodnight, for
I must look in at the hospital, before I turn in to my quarters."



Chapter 8: The Siege Begins.


On the 19th of June General Eliott, accompanied by several of his
officers, paid a visit to the Spanish lines to congratulate General
Mendoza, who commanded there, on the promotion that he had just
received. The visit lasted but a short time, and it was remarked
that the Spanish officer seemed ill at ease. Scarcely had the party
returned to Gibraltar than a Swedish frigate entered the bay,
having on board Mr. Logie, H.M. Consul in Barbary, who had come
across in her from Tangier. He reported that a Swedish brig had put
in there. She reported that she had fallen in with the French
fleet, of twenty-eight sail of the line, off Cape Finisterre; and
that they were waiting there to be joined by the Spanish fleet,
from Cadiz.

The news caused great excitement; but it was scarcely believed, for
the Spanish general had given the most amicable assurances to the
governor. On the 21st, however, the Spaniards, at their lines
across the neutral ground, refused to permit the mail to pass; and
a formal notification was sent in that intercourse between
Gibraltar and Spain would no longer be permitted. This put an end
to all doubt, and discussion. War must have been declared between
Spain and England, or such a step would never have been taken.

In fact, although the garrison did not learn it until some time
later, the Spanish ambassador in London had presented what was
virtually a declaration of war, on the 16th. A messenger had been
sent off on the same day from Madrid, ordering the cessation of
intercourse with Gibraltar and, had he not been detained by
accident on the road, he might have arrived during General Eliott's
visit to the Spanish lines; a fact of which Mendoza had been
doubtless forewarned, and which would account for his embarrassment
at the governor's call.

Captain O'Halloran brought the news home, when he returned from
parade.

"Get ready your sandbags, Carrie; examine your stock of provisions;
prepare a store of lint, and plaster."

"What on earth are you talking about, Gerald?"

"It is war, Carrie. The Dons have refused to accept our mail, and
have cut off all intercourse with the mainland."

Carrie turned a little pale. She had never really thought that the
talk meant anything, or that the Spaniards could be really
intending to declare war, without having any ground for quarrel
with England.

"And does it really mean war, Gerald?"

"There is no doubt about it. The Spaniards are going to fight and,
as their army can't swim across the Bay of Biscay, I take it it is
here they mean to attack us. Faith, we are going to have some
divarshun, at last."

"Divarshun! You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Gerald."

"Well, my dear, what have I come into the army for? To march about
for four hours a day in a stiff stock, and powder and pigtail and a
cocked hat, and a red coat? Not a bit of it. Didn't I enter the
army to fight? And here have I been, without a chance of smelling
powder, for the last ten years. It is the best news I have had
since you told me that you were ready and willing to become Mrs.
O'Halloran."

"And to think that we have got Bob out here with us!" his wife
said, without taking any notice of the last words. "What will uncle
say?"

"Faith, and it makes mighty little difference what he says, Carrie,
seeing that he is altogether beyond shouting distance.

"As for Bob, he will be just delighted. Why, he has been working
till his brain must all be in a muddle; and it is the best thing in
the world for him, or he would be mixing up the Spaniards and the
Romans, and the x's and y's and the tangents, and all the other
things into a regular jumble--and it is a nice business that would
have been. It is the best thing in the world for him, always
supposing that he don't get his growth stopped, for want of
victuals."

"You don't mean, really and seriously, Gerald, that we are likely
to be short of food?"

"And that is exactly what I do mean. You may be sure that the Dons
know, mighty well, that they have no chance of taking the place on
the land side. They might just as well lay out their trenches
against the moon. It is just starvation that they are going to try;
and when they get the eighteen French sail of the line that Mr.
Logie brought news of, and a score or so of Spanish men-of-war in
the bay, you will see that it is likely you won't get your mutton
and your butter and vegetables very regularly across from Tangier."

"Well, it is very serious, Gerald."

"Very serious, Carrie."

"I don't see anything to laugh at at all, Gerald."

"I didn't know that I was laughing."

"You were looking as if you wanted to laugh, which is just as bad.
I suppose there is nothing to be done, Gerald?"

"Well, yes, I should go down to the town, and lay in a store of
things that will keep. You see, if nothing comes of it we should
not be losers. The regiment is likely to be here three or four
years, so we should lose nothing by laying in a big stock of wine,
and so on; while, if there is a siege, you will see everything will
go up to ten times its ordinary price. That room through ours is
not used for anything, and we might turn that into a storeroom.

"I don't mean that there is any hurry about it, today; but we ought
certainly to lay in as large a store as we can, of things that will
keep. Some things we may get cheaper, in a short time, than we can
now. A lot of the Jew and native traders will be leaving, if they
see there is really going to be a siege; for you see, the town is
quite open to the guns of batteries, on the other side of the
neutral ground.

"It was a mighty piece of luck we got this house. You see that
rising ground behind will shelter us from shot. They may blaze away
as much as they like, as far as we are concerned.

"Ah! There is Bob, coming out of his room with the professor."

"Well, take him out and tell him, Gerald. I want to sit down, and
think. My head feels quite in a whirl."

Bob was, of course, greatly surprised at the news; and the
professor, himself, was a good deal excited.

Illustration: The Professor gets excited.

"We have been living here for three hundred years," he said, "my
fathers and grandfathers. When the English came and took this
place--seventy-five years ago--my grandfather became a British
subject, like all who remained here. My father, who was then but a
boy, has told me that he remembers the great siege, and how the
cannons roared night and day. It was in the year when I was born
that the Spaniards attacked the Rock again; and a shell exploded in
the house, and nearly killed us all. I was born a British subject,
and shall do my duty in what way I can, if the place is attacked.
They call us Rock scorpions. Well, they shall see we can live under
fire, and will do our best to sting, if they put their finger on
us. Ha, ha!"

"The little man is quite excited," Captain O'Halloran said, as the
professor turned away, and marched off at a brisk pace towards his
home. "It is rather hard on these Rock people. Of course, as he
says, they are British subjects, and were born so. Still, you see,
in race and language they are still Spaniards; and their sympathies
must be divided, at any rate at present. When the shot and shell
come whistling into the town, and knocking their houses about their
ears, they will become a good deal more decided in their opinions
than they can be, now.

"Come along, Bob, and let us get all the news. I came off as soon
as I heard that our communication with Spain was cut off, and
therefore it was certain war was declared. There will be lots of
orders out, soon. It is a busy time we shall have of it, for the
next month or two."

There were many officers in the anteroom when they entered.

"Any fresh news?" Captain O'Halloran asked.

"Lots of it, O'Halloran. All the Irish officers of the garrison are
to be formed into an outlying force, to occupy the neutral ground.
It is thought their appearance will be sufficient to terrify the
Spaniards."

"Get out with you, Grant! If they were to take us at all, it would
be because they knew that we were the boys to do the fighting."

"And the drinking, O'Halloran," another young officer put in.

"And the talking," said another.

"Now, drop it, boys, and be serious. What is the news, really?"

"There is a council of war going on, at the governor's, O'Halloran.
Boyd, of course, and De la Motte, Colonel Green, the admiral, Mr.
Logie, and two or three others. They say the governor has been
gradually getting extra stores across from Tangier, ever since
there was first a talk about this business; and of course that is
the most important question, at present. I hear that Green and the
Engineers have been marking out places for new batteries, for the
last month; and I suppose fatigue work is going to be the order of
the day. It is too bad of them choosing this time of the year to
begin, for it will be awfully hot work.

"Everyone is wondering what will become of the officers who are
living out with their families, at San Roque and the other villages
across the Spanish lines; and besides, there are a lot of officers
away on leave, in the interior. Of course they won't take them
prisoners. That would be a dirty trick. But it is likely enough
they may ship them straight back to England, instead of letting
them return here.

"Well, it is lucky that we have got a pretty strong garrison. We
have just been adding up the last field state. These are the
figures--officers, noncommissioned officers, and men--artillery,
485; 12th Regiment, 599; 39th, 586; 56th, 587; 58th, 605; 72nd,
1046; the Hanoverian Brigade--of Hardenberg's, Reden's, and De la
Motte's regiments--1352; and 122 Engineers under Colonel Green:
which makes up, altogether, 5382 officers and men.

"That is strong enough for anything, but it would have been better
if there had been five hundred more artillerymen; but I suppose
they will be able to lend us some sailors, to help work the heavy
guns.

"They will turn you into a powder monkey, Repton."

"I don't care what they turn me into," Bob said, "so long as I can
do something."

"I think it is likely," Captain O'Halloran said gravely, "that all
women and children will be turned out of the place, before fighting
begins; except, of course, wives and children of officers."

There was a general laugh, at Bob.

"Well," he said quietly, "it will lessen the ranks of the
subalterns, for there must be a considerable number who are not
many months older than I am. I am just sixteen, and I know there
are some not older than that."

This was a fact, for commissions were--in those days--given in the
army to mere lads, and the ensigns were often no older than
midshipmen.

Late in the afternoon, a procession of carts was seen crossing the
neutral ground, from the Spanish lines; and it was soon seen that
these were the English officers and merchants from San Roque, and
the other villages. They had, that morning, received peremptory
orders to leave before sunset. Some were fortunate enough to be
able to hire carts, to bring in their effects; but several were
compelled, from want of carriage, to leave everything behind them.

The guards had all been reinforced, at the northern batteries;
pickets had been stationed across the neutral ground; the guard, at
the work known as the Devil's Tower, were warned to be specially on
the alert; and the artillery in the battery, on the rock above it,
were to hold themselves in readiness to open fire upon the enemy,
should they be perceived advancing towards it.

It was considered improbable, in the extreme, that the enemy would
attack until a great force had been collected; but it was possible
that a body of troops might have been collected secretly, somewhere
in the neighbourhood, and that an attempt would be made to capture
the place by surprise, before the garrison might be supposed to be
taking precautions against attack.

The next morning orders were issued, and large working parties were
told off to go on with the work of strengthening the fortifications;
and notice was issued that all empty hogsheads and casks in the town
would be bought, by the military authorities.  These were to be
filled with earth, and to take the places of fascines, for which
there were no materials available on the Rock.  Parties of men
rolled or carried these up to the heights. Other parties collected
earth, and piled it to be carried up in sacks on the back of
mules--there being no earth, on the rocks where the batteries would
be established--a fact which added very largely to the difficulties
of the Engineers.

On the 24th the Childers, sloop of war, brought in two prizes from
the west; one of which, an American, she had captured in the midst
of the Spanish fleet. Some of the Spanish men-of-war had made
threatening demonstrations, as if to prevent the sloop from
interfering with her; but they had not fired a gun, and it was
supposed that they had not received orders to commence hostilities.
Two English frigates had been watching the fleet; and it was
supposed to be on its way to join the French fleet, off Cape
Finisterre.

The Spaniards were seen, now, to be at work dragging down guns from
San Roque to arm their two forts--Saint Philip and Saint
Barbara--which stood at the extremities of their lines: Saint
Philip on the bay, and Saint Barbara upon the seashore, on the
eastern side of the neutral side. In time of peace, only a few guns
were mounted in these batteries.

Illustration: The Rock and Bay of Gibraltar.

Admiral Duff moved the men-of-war under his command, consisting of
the Panther--of sixty guns--three frigates, and a sloop, from their
usual anchorage off the Water Port--where they were exposed to the
fire of the enemy's forts--to the New Mole, more to the southward.

Bob would have liked to be out all day, watching the busy
preparations, and listening to the talk of the natives; who were
greatly alarmed at the prospect of the siege, knowing that the guns
from the Spanish forts, and especially from Fort Saint Philip,
could throw their shot and shell into the town. But Captain
O'Halloran agreed with his wife that it was much better he should
continue his lessons with Don Diaz, of a morning; for that it would
be absurd for him to be standing about in the sun, the whole day.
The evening lessons were, however, discontinued from the first; as
Dr. Burke had his hands full in superintending the preparations
making, at the hospitals, for the reception of large numbers of
wounded.

Bob did not so much mind this, for he had ceased to regard the time
spent with the professor as lessons. After he had once mastered the
conjugation of the verbs, and had learned an extensive vocabulary
by heart, books had been laid aside, altogether; and the three hours
with the professor had, for the last two months, been spent simply
