Karlsefin what we have seen.  We will follow as swiftly as may be, and
fetch your bear along with us."

Hake started off at a smart run without a word of reply, and never
paused a moment until he reached the hamlet, which he found in a
considerable state of confusion and excitement.

"What now?" demanded Karlsefin as Hake came forward.

"Strange footprints have been seen, and--"

"Strange footprints!" exclaimed Karlsefin.  "Why, man, strange _men_
have been seen by us, so I have stranger news to tell than thou.  Biarne
is returning, of course?"

"He is, with all the men, as fast as he can."

"That's well.  Now, Hake, get your weapons ready and help the men to
make preparations for the reception of the strangers.  I go to set the
ship in order."

Hake found, on inquiry, that one of a wood-cutting party having strayed
a little way beyond his fellows, but not far from the hamlet, had come
suddenly on a native who was crouching behind a rock and gazing intently
at the woodcutters.  He was at the moment fitting an arrow to the string
of a short bow which he carried, and was so absorbed that he did not at
first observe the Norseman.  The instant he saw him, however, he sprang
up and discharged an arrow, which the other avoided.  The savage
immediately turned to fly, but the Norseman sprang after him and struck
him to the ground.  At the same instant a dozen or more savages rushed
from the woods to the rescue, and the Norseman immediately ran back to
his comrades.  More savages appeared, and the Norsemen, seeing that they
were greatly outnumbered, retreated to the hamlet.  They were not
followed by the savages, but there could be no doubt that now the colony
had been discovered they were certain to receive a visit from them.
Whether that visit was likely to be amicable or otherwise remained to be
seen.

Meanwhile Karlsefin and his men did their best to put the place in a
state of defence.  A breastwork of large trees, which had been long ago
thrown all round the hamlet, was repaired and strengthened before dark,
and sentinels were posted around in all directions, so that when Biarne
arrived, somewhat late at night, he was amused as well as gratified to
find that unseen though well-known voices challenged him several times
as he drew near home, and that, finally, a rude but effectual barrier
stopped him altogether, until a friend from within conducted him to the
proper entrance.

Thus the night passed away without anything transpiring, and at last the
longed-for dawn appeared.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

A GREAT BUT COMPARATIVELY BLOODLESS FIGHT, WHICH ENDS PECULIARLY, AND
WITH SINGULAR RESULTS.

When the sun rose above the trees next day, Karlsefin began to think
that the natives had left the place, for there was no sign of them
anywhere, and he was about to issue from behind his defences and go out
to reconnoitre, when a man came running from the ship shouting
"Skraelingers!"

It is probable that by that term he meant savages generally, because the
men who had been seen bore very little resemblance to the hairy savages
of Greenland.  They were taller, though not stouter, and clothed in
well-dressed skins of animals, with many bright colours about them.  But
whatever they were, the sensation they created among the Norsemen was
considerable, for it was found, on going to the margin of the lake, that
they were now approaching in canoes by water.  This at once accounted
for the delay in their appearance.

That their intentions were hostile was plain from the fact that the
canoes came on abreast of each other in regular order, while the men
shouted fiercely and brandished their weapons.  There could not have
been fewer than three or four hundred of them.

Karlsefin saw at once that his only chance of saving the ship was to go
on board of it and fight on the water.

"Get on board all of you," he cried to those who stood beside him.
"Away, Biarne, Thorward, call in the outposts and have them on board
without delay.  Here, Swend, Heika, Tyrker, station the men as they
arrive.  Get up the war-screens round the sides of the ship; and,
harkee, give orders that the men use their weapons as little as
possible, and spare life.  I shall want you on the poop, Hake.  See that
no one throws down the gangway or loosens the ropes till the order is
given.  I will see to the women.--Away!"

Each man ran with speed to obey, for the case was urgent.

Karlsefin found the women, with Olaf, assembled in the large house
waiting for orders.

"Come," he cried; "not a moment to be lost.  Give me your hand, Gudrid."

He seized it as he spoke, and hurried down to the ship, where the men
were already trooping on board as fast as they could.  The women were
soon put under cover out of the reach of missiles, and in a few minutes
more all were on board.  Of course the cattle, and live stock generally,
being scattered about the hamlet, were left to their fate.  Then the
ropes were cast loose, the gangway was thrown down, the ship was pushed
out into the bay, and the anchor let go.

All this had barely been accomplished when the canoes came sweeping
round the nearest point of land and made straight for the ship, with the
foam curling at their bows.

Then Karlsefin's voice rose loud and clear as he issued his final
commands.

"My lads," he cried, "remember my orders about using your weapons as
little as possible.  Be careful to throw only the smaller stones.  Kill
no one if you can avoid it, but give as many of them the toothache as
you can.  We must be friends with these people if we are to live in
peace here, and that won't be possible if we kill many of them."

The men answered with a great shout, mingled with some laughter, which
latter was such a strange sound to hear on the eve of an engagement,
that the savages stopped short for a moment.  But soon they came on
again with redoubled impetuosity.

No sooner were they within range than the Norsemen rose up in a body and
hurled a shower of stones at them.  They were evidently not prepared for
such artillery, for they again stepped short, but after a brief pause
once more advanced.  Three times did they receive a shower of stones
before getting alongside.  These hurt many, but disabled none, for,
according to orders, no heavy stones were used.  When within a few yards
of the ship the canoes surrounded her and lay still while the savages
began to discharge arrows in abundance.  The Norsemen kept well behind
the shields, which formed a screen round the ship, and replied with
stones, only a few of the best marksmen using arrows, when they saw a
chance to wound without killing any of the foe.

Karlsefin stood exposed on the high poop with Hake and Heika beside him.
All three wore iron helmets, and the leader protected himself with his
shield.  Heika devoted his attention to warding off missiles from his
brother, who, having to use his bow, could not manage a shield.

Presently the savages made a grand assault.  But the moment they came to
close quarters they found that they had to cope with a formidable foe,
for the Norsemen, using only bludgeons, knocked them down whenever they
came within reach, and one or two of the boldest among them who
succeeded in clambering up the sides were seized by the legs and arms
and hurled back into the lake as if they had been mere puppets.

Thus beaten off they continued the arrow shower, and some of the
Norsemen were wounded.

All this time Karlsefin stood close to the helm, looking sharply about
him, and whenever he saw a savage who was bolder and stouter than his
fellows, he made Hake send an arrow through his right hand.  In this way
most of the best men among them were sent off howling with pain, and for
the time disabled.  Suddenly a very tall active savage succeeded in
clambering up by the rudder unobserved, and leaping on the poop, stood
behind Karlsefin with uplifted club.  Karlsefin, without turning quite
round, gave him a back-handed slap under the left ear and sent him
flying overboard.  He fell into a canoe in his descent and sank it.

At this juncture a number of the canoes were detached from the fight,
and Karlsefin observed, with much anxiety, that the savages were going
to ransack the houses.

"Would that I were on shore with twenty of my best men!" he said
bitterly.  "Send a shaft, Hake, at yonder fellow who leads.  It is out
of range, I fear, but--ha! well hit!" he exclaimed, on seeing an arrow
from Hake's prompt hand strike the man full in the back.  The savage
fell, and his comrades crowded round him.

By that time others of the canoes had put ashore, and their owners ran
up to the crowd who surrounded the fallen leader.

At this moment an incident occurred which put a most unexpected
termination to the fight.

For a considerable time Olaf's huge pet, Blackie, had viewed the fight
with calm indifference from the heart of a thicket close by, in which he
chanced to be cooling himself at the time.  Now, it happened that one of
the many arrows which were discharged by the savages on the offshore
side of the ship glanced from a neighbouring tree and hit the bull on
the flank.  Associating the pain resulting therefrom with the group of
savages before him, Blackie at once elevated his tail, lowered his head,
and, with a bellow that would have shamed a thousand trumpets, charged
furiously down upon the foe.

Horror-struck is but a feeble word to indicate the feelings of that foe!
Although, no doubt, some of them might have heard of, perhaps seen, the
ponderous and comparatively quiet bison of the Western prairies, none of
them had ever imagined anything so awful as a little black bull with
tremendous horns, blood-red nostrils, flashing eyes, and cat-like
activity.  One awe-struck look they gave it, and then fled howling into
the woods.  The sounds were so startling that those of the enemy still
round the ship were panic-stricken and made off by water as fast as
their fellows had escaped by land, leaving the Norsemen victorious!

"Hurrah for Blackie!" shouted Olaf, who was wild with excitement and
delight.

The cheer thus claimed was given with intense enthusiasm, and then the
ship was rowed back to the shore.

Here a great prize was found, in the shape of twenty canoes, which had
been left by the party that had fled to the woods.  These were carried
carefully up to the hamlet and placed in security.  On the way up
another prize was found, which afterwards turned out to be of the utmost
importance.  This was the wounded savage, who had been forsaken by his
friends when the bull charged, and who only escaped from the horns of
that infuriated animal by lying quite motionless beside a log which
fortunately chanced to be near him.

"Take care, Krake; lift him gently," said Biarne, as he came up and
found that worthy turning the poor savage over as if he had been already
a dead carcase.  "Let me see; the arrow does not seem to have gone far
in.  He'll recover, perhaps.  Come, Hake and Swend, lift his shoulders,
and run, Olaf, tell Astrid or one of the other women to--ha!  Bertha,
well met.  Here is a subject for your care.  You are a good nurse, I'm
told."

"I try to be," replied Bertha.

"She who tries to be is sure to be," returned Biarne; "nursing, like
fighting, is an art, and must be acquired; though, to say truth, some
folk seem born to learn more rapidly than others, whether as regards
nursing or fighting.  Have the poor fellow into the house, and do your
best for him, Bertha."

While this was being said the native was lying on his back, looking very
stern, but pale.  It is probable that the poor wretch expected to be
taken off summarily to have his eyes punched out, or to be roasted
alive,--for the natives of Vinland, no doubt, expected from their foes,
in those days, the same treatment that they accorded to them--although
the Saga says nothing to that effect.  When, therefore, he was put into
a comfortable bed, had his wound dressed, and an agreeable though
strange drink given to him by the fair hands of Bertha, the expression
of his countenance seemed to imply that he believed himself to have
passed from earth and got into the happy hunting-grounds of his fathers.
If so, the increasing pain of his wound must have perplexed him not a
little.  However, it is due to him to say that he bore his surprises and
pains with the uncomplaining resignation of a Stoic.

Karlsefin employed the remainder of that day in strengthening his
defences and connecting them in such a way with that part of the shore
where his vessel lay, that there would be no possibility of surrounding
him in the event of future hostilities.

This accomplished, he organised his men into three bands, which were to
be commanded respectively by Biarne, Thorward, and himself.  These were
appointed to particular localities and duties in the little fortress--
for it was now almost entitled to such an appellation.  When night drew
on, sentinels were posted as before.  But there was no alarm during the
night.  The savages appeared to have had enough of fighting for that
time, and next morning's sun arose, as it was wont to do, on a peaceful
scene.

"Do you think they will attack us again?" asked Gudrid as she sat at
breakfast.

"I think not," replied her husband.  "They cannot but know that we are
troublesome fellows to deal with, even when taken unawares."

"I hope they won't go off without giving us a chance to show that we
desire to be friendly," observed Thorward.

"No fear of that," said Biarne; "we have got one of their chiefs--at
least I think he is so, for he looks like one--and that is as good as a
string tied to their great toe."

"By the way, how _is_ the chief, Bertha?" asked Karlsefin.

"Much better this morning.  He slept well, and is even now sitting up on
his bed.  He looked so well, indeed, that I took the precaution to
fasten the door on the outside when I left him just now."

"Ha!  Didst fasten the window, wench?" cried Thorward, starting up and
hastening from the room.

"Truly, no," remarked the girl, with a somewhat confused look; "I never
thought of the window."

Thorward returned a minute later with a peculiar smile.

"He's all safe," said he; "I peeped through a small shot-hole in the
parchment, and saw him sitting there meditating as deeply as if he hoped
to meditate himself out of his prison."

"Not a difficult thing to do that," said Karlsefin.  "I suspect that
most prisoners manage to free themselves in that way pretty often!  But
who comes here in such hot haste?  Why, Swend, what's i' the wind now?"

"The Skraelingers are coming," said he.  "They come unarmed, and only
ten of them."

"Oho! good," exclaimed Karlsefin, rising.  "Come, methinks I see my way
out of this difficulty.  Fetch me nine of our smartest men, Biarne.  I
will go forth with them unarmed, to meet those messengers of peace.  You
and Thorward will keep the defences, to be ready for any emergency.  Let
the Scottish brothers be among the nine."

When the selected men had assembled, their leader took them aside and
conferred with them for a few minutes, after which he led them towards
that part of the defences nearest the woods, when they saw the ten
natives approaching holding up their empty hands and making other
demonstrations of a peaceful nature.  Far away on the heights in the
background the whole army of savages could be seen watching the
proceedings of their messengers.

When these latter had come within about a hundred yards of the hamlet,
they selected a low grassy knoll in an open spot, in full view of both
parties.  Here they sat down in a row and made signs to the Norsemen to
approach.

"Now, lads, we will accept their invitation," said Karlsefin; "follow
me."

With that he passed through the opening in the defences, holding up his
hands as he went to show that he was unarmed, his followers doing the
same.  Karlsefin went up to the native who appeared to be the chief of
the band, and, with a bland smile, took his hand gently and shook it.

If the savage did not understand the shake of the hand, he evidently
understood the smile, for he returned it and sat down again.  Karlsefin
and his men did the same, and for a few moments the two rows of men sat
looking benignantly at one another in silence.  The savage chief then
spoke.  Of course Karlsefin shook his head and touched his ear, brow,
and lips, by way of intimating that he heard, but could neither
understand nor reply.  He then spoke Norse, with similar results.  After
that the savage leader rose up, touched his back, and fell down as if
badly wounded.  Upon this one of his comrades rose, pointed to the
hamlet, lifted the wounded man in his arms, carried him behind his
companions, and laid him down exclaiming "Utway!" whereupon another
savage took a small bundle of beautiful furs from the ground, and laid
them at the feet of Karlsefin with much humility.

"Sure he wants to buy back the wounded chief with these furs," said
Krake, who found it difficult to conceal his amusement at all this dumb
show.

"No doubt of it, and I suppose Utway is his name," replied Karlsefin;
"but my object is to get them inside the defences, in order to show them
that when we have them in our power we will treat them well.  If I let
their chief go for these furs nothing will have been gained."

Karlsefin now did his best, by means of signs and encouraging looks, to
induce the ten natives to enter the hamlet, but no persuasion would
induce them to do this.  They held stoutly to their original
proposition, and kept constantly pointing to the bundle of furs and
