consigned to an empty glass aquarium, was put into it.

"You're sure he don't bite, Fred, and isn't poisonous?"

"Quite sure."

"Then here goes--whew! what a lively fellow he is!"

This was indeed true.  The animal, upwards of a yard in length, somewhat
resembled the eel in his efforts to elude the grasp of man, but Mr
Blurt fixed him, coiled him firmly down on his bed of straw and wadding,
pressed a similar bed on the top of him to keep him quiet, and shut the
lid.

"There; I've got him in all right.  Now for the screws.  He can't move
easily, and even if he could he wouldn't make much noise."

The box was finally secured with a piece of string, a label with the
address and the proper number of stamps was affixed, and then it was
committed to the care of George Aspel to post, in time for the evening
mail.

It was five minutes to six when Aspel ascended the steps of St.
Martin's-le-Grand.  The usual rush was in progress.  There was a
considerable crowd in front of the letter-box.  Instead of pushing
through, George took advantage of his height, stretched his long arm
over the heads of the people, and, with a good aim, pitched the box into
the postal jaws.

For a few seconds he stood still, meditating a call on Phil Maylands.
But he was not now as eager to meet his friend as he used to be.  He had
begun a course of dissipation, and, superior though he was in years,
physique, and knowledge to his friend, he felt a new and uncomfortable
sense of inferiority when in the presence of the straightforward, steady
boy.

At seventeen a year adds much to the manhood of a youth.  Phil's powers
of perception had been greatly quickened by his residence in London.
Although he regarded Aspel with as warm affection as ever, he could not
avoid seeing the change for the worse in him, and a new feeling of deep
anxiety and profound but respectful pity filled his heart.  He prayed
for him also, but did not quite believe that his prayers would be heard,
for as yet he did not fully realise or comprehend the grand truths of
the religion in which his mother had faithfully trained him.  He did not
at that time understand, as he afterwards came to understand, that the
prayer of faith--however weak and fluttering--is surely answered,
whether we see the answer or not, and whether the answer be immediate or
long delayed.

On one occasion, with feelings of timorous self-abasement, he ventured
to remonstrate with his friend, but the effort was repelled.  Possibly
the thought of another reproof from Phil was the cause of Aspel's
decision not to look him up on the present occasion.

As he descended the steps, a man as tall and powerful as himself met him
and stared him in the face.  Aspel fired up at once and returned the
stare.  It was Abel Bones, on his way to post a letter.  The glare
intensified, and for a moment it seemed as if the two giants were about
to fight.  A small street boy, observing the pair, was transfixed with
ardent hope, but he was doomed to disappointment.  Bones had clenched
his right hand.  If he had advanced another inch the blood of the
sea-kings would have declared for war on the spot, regardless of
consequences.  But Bones was too old a bird thus to come within reach of
his great enemy, the law.  Besides, a deeper though not immediate plan
of revenge flashed into his mind.  Relaxing the hand and frown
simultaneously, he held out the former.

"Come," he said, in a hearty tone, "I don't bear you no ill-will for the
crack on the nut you gave me, and you've surely no occasion to bear
ill-will to a man you floored so neatly.  Shake hands."

The familiarity, not to say insolence, of this proposal, from one so
much beneath him, would probably have induced the youth to turn aside
with scorn, but the flattering reference to his pugilistic powers from
one who was no mean antagonist softened his feelings.

"Well, I'm sure that I bear _you_ no ill-will," he said, with a smile,
extending his hand.

"Bah! chicken-livers," exclaimed the small boy, turning away in supreme
contempt.

"And I assure you," continued Aspel, "I had no intention of doing you
injury.  But no doubt a stout fellow like you didn't let a knock-down
blow interfere with his next day's work."

"His next day's work!" repeated Mr Bones, with a chuckle.  "It would be
a queer blow as would interfere with my work.  Why, guv'nor, I hain't
got no work at all" Here he put on a very lugubrious expression.
"P'r'aps you won't believe it, sir, but I do assure you that I haven't,
in them hard times, had a full day's work for ever so long.  And I
haven't earned a rap this day, except the penny I got for postin' this
here letter."

George Aspel, besides being, as we have said, a kind-hearted man, was
unusually ignorant of the ways of the world, especially the world of
London.  He believed Abel Bones at once, and spoke in quite a softened,
friendly tone as he replied--

"I'm sorry to hear that, and would gladly help you if I could, but, to
tell you the truth, Mr Bones, I'm not in flourishing circumstances
myself.  Still, I may perhaps think of some way of helping you.  Post
your letter, and I'll walk with you while we talk over it."

The man ran up the steps, posted his letter, which had missed the mail--
though he did not appear to care for that--and returned.

Although we have spoken of this man as a confirmed drunkard, it must not
be supposed that he had reached the lowest state of degradation.  Like
George Aspel, he had descended from a higher level in the social scale.
Of course, his language proved that he had never been in the rank of a
gentleman, but in manners and appearance he was much above the unhappy
outcasts amongst whom he dwelt.  Moreover, he had scarcely reached
middle life, and was, or had been, a handsome man, so that, when he
chose to dress decently and put on a sanctimonious look (which he could
do with much facility), he seemed quite a respectable personage.

"Now, guv'nor, I'm at your sarvice," he said.  "This is my way.  Is it
yours?"

"Yes--any way will do," continued Aspel.  "Now let me hear about you.  I
owe you some sort of reparation for that blow.  Have you dined?--will
you eat?"

"Well, no; thank 'ee all the same, but I've no objection to drink."

They chanced to be near a public-house as he spoke.  It would be
difficult in some thoroughfares of London to stop _without_ chancing to
be near a public-house!

They entered, and Aspel, resolving to treat the man handsomely, called
for brandy and soda.  It need scarcely be said that at that hour the
brandy and soda was by no means the first of its kind that either of the
men had imbibed that day.  Over it they became extremely confidential
and chatty.  Mr Bones was a lively and sensible fellow.  It was
noticeable, too, that his language improved and his demeanour became
more respectful as the acquaintance progressed.  After a time they rose.
Aspel paid for the brandy and soda, and they left the place in company.

Leaving them, we shall return to St. Martin's-le-Grand, and follow the
footsteps of no less a personage than Miss Lillycrop, for it so happened
that that enthusiastic lady, having obtained permission to view the
interior of the Post-Office, had fixed on that evening for her visit.
But we must go back a little in time--to that period when the postal
jaws were about to open for the reception of the evening mail.

Ever since Miss Lillycrop's visit to the abode of Solomon Flint, she had
felt an increasing desire to see the inside and the working of that
mighty engine of State about which she had heard so much.  A permit had
been procured for her, and her cousin, May Maylands, being off duty at
that hour, was able to accompany her.

They were handed over to the care of a polite and intelligent
letter-sorter named Bright.  The sorter seemed fully to appreciate and
enter into Miss Lillycrop's spirit of inquiry.  He led her and May to
the inside--the throat, as it were--of those postal jaws, the exterior
aspect of which we have already described.  On the way thither they had
to pass through part of the great letter-sorting hall.  It seemed to
Miss Lillycrop's excited imagination as if she had been suddenly plunged
over head and ears into a very ocean of letters.  From that moment
onwards, during her two hours' visit, she swam, as it were, among snowy
billows of literature.

"This is the receiving-box--the inside of it," said Mr Bright, as he
led the way through a glass door into a species of closet or compartment
about six feet by ten in dimension, or thereabouts, with a low roof.

"This way ladies.  Stand here on one side.  They are just going to open
it."

The visitors saw in front of them a recess, divided by a partition, in
which were two large baskets.  A few letters were falling into these as
they entered.  Glancing upwards, they saw a long slit, through which a
number of curious human eyes peeped for a moment, and disappeared, to be
replaced by other eyes.  Little spurts of letters came intermittently
through the slit and fell into the baskets.  These, when full, were
seized by two attendants, dragged away, and replaced by empty ones.

Suddenly the upper lip of the slit, or postal mouth, rose.

"Oh, May, look!" exclaimed Miss Lillycrop eagerly.

Not only the eyes but the heads and shoulders of the moving public now
became visible to those inside, while the intermittent spurts became
gradually a continuous shower of letters.  The full significance of the
old superscription, "Haste, post haste, for thy life," now began to dawn
on Miss Lillycrop.  The hurry, mentioned elsewhere in our description of
the outside view, increased as the minutes of grace flew by, and the
visitors fairly laughed aloud when they saw the cataract of
correspondence--the absolute waterfall, with, now and then, a bag or an
entire bandboxful of letters, like a loosened boulder--that tumbled into
the baskets below.

From this letter-fall Miss Lillycrop was led, speechless, by her
cicerone, followed by May, to whom the scene was not quite new, and
whose chief enjoyment of it consisted in observing her interested and
excitable friend's surprise.

Mr Bright led them back to the great sorting-room, where the energetic
labour of hundreds of men and boys--facing, carrying, stamping,
distributing, sorting, etcetera--was going on full swing.  Everywhere
there was rapid work, but no hurry; busy and varied action, but no
confusion; a hum of mingled voice and footfall, but no unnecessary
noise.  It was a splendid example of the power of orderly and united
action.  To Miss Lillycrop it conveyed the idea of hopeless and
irretrievable confusion!

Mounting a staircase, Mr Bright conducted the ladies to a gallery from
which they had a bird's-eye view of the entire hall.  It was, in truth,
a series of rooms, connected with the great central apartment by
archways.  Through these--extending away in far perspective, so that the
busy workers in the distance became like miniature men--could be seen
rows on rows of facing and sorting-tables, covered, heaped up, and
almost hidden, by the snows of the evening mail.  Here the chaos of
letters, books, papers, etcetera, was being reduced to order--the whole
under the superintendence of a watchful gentleman, on a raised platform
in the centre, who took good care that England should not only _expect_,
but also be _assured_, that every man and boy did his duty.

Miss Lillycrop glanced at the clock opposite.  It was a quarter to
seven.

"Do you mean to tell me," she said, turning full on Mr Bright, and
pointing downwards, "that that ocean of letters will be gone, and these
tables emptied by eight o'clock?"

"Indeed I do, ma'am; and more than what you see there, for the district
bags have not all come in yet.  By eight o'clock these tables will be as
bare as the palm of my hand."

Mr Bright extended a large and manly palm by way of emphasising his
remark.

Miss Lillycrop was too polite to say, "That's a lie!" but she firmly,
though mutely, declined to believe it.

"D'you observe the tables just below us, ma'am?"

He pointed to what might have been six large board-room tables,
surrounded by boys and men as close as they could stand.  As, however,
the tables in question were covered more than a foot deep with letters,
Miss Lillycrop only saw their legs.

"These are the facing-tables," continued Mr Bright.  "All that the men
and lads round 'em have got to do with the letters there is to arrange
them for the stampers, with their backs and stamps all turned one way.
We call that facing the letters.  They have also to pick out and pitch
into baskets, as you see, all book-packets, parcels, and newspapers that
may have been posted by mistake in the letter-box."

While the sorter went on expounding matters, one of the tables had begun
to show its wooden surface as its "faced" letters were being rapidly
removed, but just then a man with a bag on his shoulder came up, sent a
fresh cataract of letters on the blank spot, and re-covered it.
Presently a stream of men with bags on their backs came in.

"These are the district mails, ma'am," explained Mr Bright; "during the
last half-hour and more they have been hurrying towards us from all
quarters of London; the nearest being brought by men on foot, the more
distant bags by vans.  Some are still on their way; all will concentrate
here at last, in time for sorting."

The contents of these bags as they came in were shot out, and the
facing-tables--all of which had begun to show symptoms of the flood
going down and dry land appearing--were flooded and reflooded again and
again to a greater depth than before.

"The mail will be late to-night," observed Miss Lillycrop, with an
assured nod.

"O no, ma'am, it won't," replied Bright, with an easy smile, and May
laughed as they returned to the hall to inspect the work in detail.

"Here, you see, we stamp the letters."

Mr Bright stopped in front of a long table, at which was standing a row
of stampers, who passed letters under the stamps with amazing rapidity.
Each man or youth grasped a stamp, which was connected with a machine on
a sort of universal joint.  It was a miniature printing-machine, with a
little inking-roller, which was moved over the types each time by the
mere process of stamping, so the stamper had only to pass the letters
under the die with the one hand and stamp with the other as fast as he
could.  The rate varied, of course, considerably.  Nervous and anxious
stampers illustrated more or less the truth of the proverb, "The more
hurry the less speed," while quiet, steady hands made good progress.
They stamped on the average from 100 to 150 letters in the minute, each
man.

"You see, ma'am," remarked Mr Bright, "it's the way all the world over:
cool-headed men who know their powers always get on best.  The
stamping-machine is a great improvement on the old system, where you had
to strike the inker first, and then the letter.  It just doubled the
action and the time.  We have another ingeniously contrived stamp in the
office.  It might not occur to you that stamping parcels and other
articles of irregular shape is rather difficult, owing to the stamper
not striking flatly on them.  To obviate this, one of our own men
invented a stamp with an india-rubber neck, so that, no matter how
irregular the surface of the article may be, the face of the stamp is
forced flat upon it by one blow."

"When stamped," continued Mr Bright, moving on, "the letters are taken
by boys, as you see, to the sorters.  You observe that each sorter has a
compartment or frame before him, with separate divisions in it for the
great towns only, such as Manchester, Liverpool, Birmingham, Brighton,
etcetera.  Now, you know"--here he stopped and assumed an impressive
explanatory tone--"you couldn't expect any single man to sort the
letters for every town and village in the kingdom--could you, ma'am?"

Miss Lillycrop admitted that she could not indulge such an expectation,
and further expressed her belief that any man who could must be little
better than a lunatic.

"But every man you see here," continued Mr Bright, "has batch after
batch of letters put before him, which may contain letters from anywhere
to everywhere.  So, you see, we subdivide the work.  The sorters you are
now looking at sort the letters for the large towns into separate
sections, and all the rest into divisions representing the various parts
of the country, such as northern, southern, etcetera.  The letters are
then collected by the boys you see going up and down the hall."

"I don't see them," interrupted Miss Lillycrop.

"There, that's a northern division boy who has just backed against you,
ma'am."

The boy referred to turned, apologised, and gathering the letters for
the northern division from the sorter at their elbow, moved on to gather
more from others.

"The division letters," continued Bright, "are then conveyed to other
sorters, who subdivide them into roads, and then the final sorting takes
place for the various towns.  We have a staff of about a thousand
sorters, assistant sorters, and boy-sorters in this (Inland) office
alone, who have been, or are being, carefully trained for the work.
Some are smart, and some of course are slow.  They are tested
occasionally.  When a sorter is tested he is given a pack of five
hundred cards--dummies--to represent letters.  A good man will sort
these in thirteen or fifteen minutes.  There are always sure to be a few
mis-sorts, even in _our_ well-regulated family--that is, letters sorted
to the wrong sections or divisions.  Forty mis-sorts in the five hundred
is considered very bad work."

"But what if a sorter does not happen to know the division to which any
particular letter belongs?" asked Miss Lillycrop.

"He ought to know," replied her guide, "because all the sorters have to
undergo a strict examination once a year as to their knowledge of towns
and villages throughout England."

"Indeed! but," persisted Miss Lillycrop, "what does he do with a letter
if he chances to forget?"

"Why, he must get other sorters to help him."

"And what happens if he finds a letter so badly addressed that he cannot
read it?"

"Sends it to the blind division; we shall come to that presently," said
