the kite that had clawed him; and bounded aloft into the air with the
design of clutching it.

But the wary bird had foreseen this action on the part of the quadruped;
and, ere the latter could lay a fang upon it, had soared off--far beyond
the highest leap that any four-footed creature might accomplish.

Fritz, with a disappointed growl, turned round again to betake himself
to his piece of meat; but still more disappointed was his look, when he
perceived that the latter was no longer within reach!  Churk falcon
number one had clawed him over the croup, but churk falcon number two
had deprived him of his supper!

The last look Fritz ever had of that piece of ibex venison, was seeing
it in the beak of the bird, high up in air, growing smaller by degrees
and beautifully less--until it disappeared altogether in the dim
distance.



CHAPTER FORTY ONE.

FRITZ OFFENDED.

This odd little episode, between the boar-hound and the churk falcons,
had interrupted the conversation of the two brothers on the subject
which Caspar had introduced.  Nor was it resumed immediately, on the
termination of the affair: for the look with which Fritz regarded the
departure of the bird, that had so adroitly bilked him out of his bit of
venison, was so supremely ludicrous, as to elicit long loud peals of
laughter from the spectators.

Fritz's "countenance" betrayed the presence of rare emotions.  Profound
surprise and chagrin--strongly blended with a feeling of concentrated
rage--were visible not only in his eyes, but his attitude, and, for some
time, he stood with head erect and muzzle high in air, his glances
speaking unutterable vows of vengeance, as they followed the flight of
the falcons.

Never in all his life--not even when the trunk of the elephant was
trumpeting at his tail--had Fritz so sensibly felt the want of wings.
Never had he so regretted the deficiency in his structure that left him
without those useful appendages; and had he been gifted with the "wand
of a fairy," the use to which he would at that moment have applied it
would have been to furnish himself with a pair, not of "beautiful
wings"--for that was a secondary consideration--but of strong and long
ones, such as would have enabled him to overhaul those churk falcons,
and punish them for their unheard-of audacity.

For more than a minute Fritz preserved the attitude to which we have
alluded: the demeanour of a dog that had been regularly duped and "sold"
by a brace of beings, for whose strength and capacity he had exhibited
supreme contempt; and it was this mingling of surprise and rage that
imparted to him that serio-comic appearance that had set them all
a-laughing.  Nor was his countenance less ludicrous under the expression
with which, on turning round, he regarded his trio of human companions.
He saw that they were making merry at his expense; and his look of
half-reproach half-appeal had no other effect than to redouble their
mirth.  Glancing from one to the other, he appeared to seek sympathy
from each in turn--from Karl, Caspar, and Ossaroo.

It was an idle appeal.  All three had equally surrendered themselves to
hilarity--unsympathetic, as it was uncontrollable.  Fritz had not a
friend on the ground.

Full ten minutes must have elapsed before any of them could check his
loud cachinnations; but long before that time, the butt of their
ridicule had betaken himself out of sight--having moved away from the
spot, where he had been robbed of his supper, and retired, with an
offended and sneaking air, to the more friendly concealment of the
hovel.

It was some time before our adventurers could recover their serious
mood; but the subject of their mirth being now out of their sight, went
gradually also out of their minds.

It might be wondered that, circumstanced as they were, they had thus
given way to a fit of jollity.  But, indeed, there was nothing wonderful
about it.  On the contrary, it was perfectly natural--perfectly true to
the instincts of the human soul--to be thus stirred: joy and sorrow
following each other in periodic succession--as certainly as day follows
night, or fair weather succeeds to the storm.

Though we know not the why and the wherefore of this, we can easily
believe that a wise Providence has ordered it so.  A poet who has sung
sweetly says, that:--

  "Spring would be but gloomy weather,
  If we had nothing else but Spring;"

and our own experience proclaims the truth conveyed in the distich.

He who has lived in the tropical lands of ever-spring--where the leaves
never fall, and the flowers never fade--can well confirm the fact: that
even spring itself may in time become tiresome!  We long for the
winter--its frost and snow, and cold bitter winds.  Though ever so
enamoured of the gay green forest, we like at intervals to behold it in
its russet garb, with the sky in its coat of grey, sombre but
picturesque.  Strange as it may appear, it is true: the moral, like the
natural atmosphere, stands in need of the storm.



CHAPTER FORTY TWO.

A KITE!

As soon as their mirth had fairly subsided, Karl and Caspar resumed the
conversation, which had been broken off so abruptly.

"And so, brother," said Karl, who was the first to return to the
subject, "you say there is a bird of the eagle genus, that might carry a
rope over the cliff for us.  Of what bird are you speaking?"

"Why, Karl, you are dull of comprehension this morning.  Surely the
presence of the two _kites_ should have suggested what I mean."

"Ha! you mean a kite, then?"

"Yes, one with a very broad breast, a very thin body, and a very long
tail: such as you and I used to make not so many years ago."

"A _paper kite_," said Karl, repeating the phrase mechanically, at the
same time settling down, into a reflecting attitude.  "True, brother,"
he added, after a pause; "there might be something in what you have
suggested.  If we had a paper kite--that is, a very large one--it is
possible it would carry a rope over the summit of the cliff; but,
alas!--"

"You need not proceed further, Karl," said Caspar, interrupting him.  "I
know what you are going to say: that we have no paper out of which to
make the kite; and that, of course, puts an end to the matter.  It's no
use our thinking any more about it: since we have not got the materials.
The body and bones we could easily construct; and the tail too.  But
then the wings--ah, the wings.  I only wish we had a file of old
newspapers.  But what's the use of wishing?  We haven't."

Karl, though silent, did not seem to hear, or at all events heed, what
Caspar had been just saying.  He appeared to be buried either in a
reverie, or in some profound speculation.

It was the latter: as was very soon after made manifest by his speech.

"Perhaps," said he, with a hopeful glance towards the wood, "we may not
be so deficient in the material of which you have spoken."

"Of paper, do you mean?"

"We are in the very region of the world where it grows," continued Karl,
without heeding the interrogation.

"What! where paper _grows_?"

"No," replied Karl, "I do not mean that the paper itself grows here; but
a `fabric' out of which that useful article may be made."

"What is that, brother?"

"It is a tree, or rather a shrub, belonging to the order of the
_Thymelaceae_, or `Daphnads.'  The plants of this order are found in
many countries; but chiefly in the cooler regions of India and South
America.  There are even representatives of the order in England: for
the beautiful `spurge laurel' of the woods and hedges--known as a remedy
for the toothache--is a true daphnad.  Perhaps the most curious of all
the Thymelaceae is the celebrated Lagetta, or lace-bark tree of Jamaica;
out of which the ladies of that island know how to manufacture cuffs,
collars, and berthas, that, when cut into the proper shapes, and
bleached to a perfect whiteness, have all the appearance of real lace!
The Maroons, and other runaway negroes of Jamaica, before the abolition
of slavery, used to make clothing out of the lagetta; which they found
growing in plenty in the mountain forests of the island.  Previous also
to the same abolition of slavery, there was another, and less gentle,
use made of the lace-bark, by the masters of these same negroes.  The
cruel tyrants used to spin its tough fibres into thongs for their
slave-whips."

"And you think that paper can be made out of these trees?" asked Caspar,
impatient to know whether there might be any chance of procuring some
for the covering of a kite.

"There are several species of daphnads," replied the botanist, "whose
bark can be converted into paper.  Some are found at the Cape of Good
Hope, and others in the island of Madagascar; but the best kinds for the
purpose grow in these very mountains, and in China.  There is the
`Daphne Bholua,' in Nepaul; from which the Nepaulese make a strong,
tough, packing-paper; and I have reason to believe that it also grows in
the Bhotan Himalayas--at no very great distance from our position here.
Besides, in China and Japan, on the other side of these mountains, there
are two or three distinct kinds of the same plant--out of which the
Chinese make the yellowish-coloured paper, you may have seen in their
books, and pasted upon their tea-chests.  So then," added the botanist,
looking wistfully towards the woods, "since the paper-yielding daphne
grows in China, to the east of us, and in Nepaul and Bhotan to the west,
it is but reasonable to conclude that some species of it may be found in
this valley--where the climate is just that which it affects.  Its seed
may have been transported hither by birds: since many species of birds
are fond of its berries, and eat them without receiving any injury;
though, strange to say, they are poisonous to all kinds of quadrupeds!"

"Do you think you would know the shrub, if you saw it, brother?"

"Well, to say the truth, I do not think I could recognise it by its
general appearance; but if I had a flower of the _daphne_, I could no
doubt tell it by its botanical characteristics.  The leaves of the
paper-yielding species are of a lanceolate form and purplish hue,
glabrous and shining, like the leaves of laurels--to which genus the
_daphne_ is closely allied.  Unfortunately, the shrub would not be in
flower at this season; but if we can find one of the berries, and a leaf
or two, I fancy I shall be able to identify it.  Besides, the bark,
which is very tough, would help to guide us.  Indeed, I have some reason
to think that we shall find it not far off; and that is why I speak with
such confidence, in saying, that we might not be so deficient in the
materials for paper-making."

"What reason, brother Karl?  Perhaps you have seen something like it?"

"I have.  Some time ago, when I was strolling about, I passed through a
thicket of low shrubs--the tops of which reached up to my breast.  They
were then in flower--the flowers being of a lilac colour, and growing at
the tops of the branches in little cymes.  They had no corolla--only a
coloured calyx.  Now these characters correspond with those of the
daphne.  Besides, the leaves were lanceolate, velvety on the surface,
and of purplish colour; and the flowers were of an exceedingly sweet
scent--as is the case with all the daphnads.  I did not think of
examining them at the time; but, now that I recall these
characteristics, I feel almost certain that the shrubs were of this
genus."

"Do you think you can find the thicket again?"

"Oh! yes, easily enough.  It is not very distant from the place, where
we were so near fighting that fearful duel."

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Caspar, in reply to the significant remark of the
botanist.  "But, brother!" continued he, "suppose it should prove to be
the shrub you speak of, what good would there be in our finding it, so
long as we don't understand the process of manufacturing it into paper?"

"How do you know that we don't?" said Karl, challenging the too positive
declaration of Caspar.  "I am not so sure that we don't.  I have read
the whole account of the process, as given by one of the old writers
upon China.  It is very simple; and I think I remember enough to be able
to follow it.  Perhaps not to make fine paper, that one might write
upon; but something that would serve our purpose just as well.  We don't
want the best `cream-laid.'  Unfortunately, we have no post-office here.
I wish we had.  If we can fabricate anything as fine as the coarsest
packing-paper, it will do well enough for a kite, I fancy."

"True," replied Caspar.  "It would be all the better to be coarse and
strong.  But, dear Karl, suppose we go at once, and see if we can
discover the trees."

"That is just what we shall do," replied Karl, rising as he spoke, and
preparing to set out in search of the daphne.

All, of course, went together: for Ossaroo was as much interested in the
result of the exploration as any of them; and Fritz, from within the
hut, perceiving that they were about to depart upon some new expedition,
managed partially to coax himself out of his ill-humour; and, sallying
forth from his hiding-place, trotted silently after them.



CHAPTER FORTY THREE.

THE PAPER-TREE.

To the great delight of the party, it turned out just as Karl had
conjectured.  The thicket that he had spoken of was composed chiefly of
daphne shrubs--judging by the appearance of the fallen leaves, and some
berries that still remained on the branches, Karl believed them to be of
this species.  But the bark was also a characteristic: being exceedingly
tenacious, and moreover of a strongly acrid taste--so much so as to
cauterise he skin of Ossaroo's mouth, who had been foolish enough to
chew it too freely.

After duly examining the leaves, berries, and bark, the botanist came to
the conclusion that the shrub must be a true daphne; and so in reality
it was--that species known in Nepaul as the _Daphne Bholua_--from which,
as already stated, the Nepaulese manufacture a coarse, but soft paper.

As soon as this point was determined to their satisfaction, they
resolved upon carrying Caspar's hint into execution--by trying the
experiment of a paper kite.

But for Karl's practical education--which had made him acquainted not
only with the botanical characters of plants and trees, but also with
their uses--and in some cases with the mode of using them--the mere
discovery of the daphne would have availed them nothing.  As it stood in
the thicket, it was no more like paper than any of the trees that grew
around it.  Indeed, there were many others that would have yielded bark
in broader flakes than it, and much more resembling paper: for that of
the daphne, stripping off as it did in narrow pieces, looked like the
last thing in the world of which to make a kite out of.  But Karl knew
the process by which it could be metamorphosed into paper; and without
further delay, he entered upon the performance--the others placing their
services at his disposal, and acting in obedience to his orders.

The knife-blades of all three were called into requisition; and in an
incredibly short space of time, some scores of the little trees were
stripped of their bark--from their roots up to the lower branches.  The
trees themselves were not cut down; as that was not necessary.  They
could be peeled more readily, as they stood; and for this reason they
were left standing.

Up to the hour of sunset did these "cascarilleros" work--with only a few
minutes of interruption, while they went back to the hut, and ate a
hurried luncheon of ibex-meat--and just as the sun was sinking behind
the summit of the great Chumulari, they might have been seen trudging
homeward--each bearing a heavy bundle of bark, with Fritz following
gleefully at their heels.

The thicket from which they had taken their departure, gave evidence of
the industry with which they had been working all day long.  Over a
space, of nearly half an acre in extent, the trees were seen standing,
each with its tiny trunk completely divested of bark: as if a whole gang
of goats had been browsing upon them!

On reaching the hovel, our bark-gatherers did not desist from their
labour.  They only entered upon a new branch of industry: by becoming
_paper manufacturers_.

It was after night; and they had to work by the light of their torches
of cheel-pine, already prepared.  But as these burnt with a clear steady
flame, they served quite as well as candles would have done.

The first process in the paper-making did not require much nicety in its
execution; and, moreover, it could be performed as well inside the hut
as in the largest room of a paper-mill.  All they had to do was to pick
the bark to shreds.  This occupied them the whole evening--during which
there was much conversation of a cheerful kind, with a joke or two about
oakum-picking in a prison; and of this, not only the task in which they
were engaged, but the situation in which they were executing it, did not
fail to remind them.

When they had finished, they ate their frugal supper and retired to
rest--full of the idea of continuing the paper manufacture in the
morning.

When morning came, they had not much to do: for the next process was one
which required the exercise of patience rather than of labour.

When the bark of the daphne has been thoroughly picked to pieces, it is
put into a large pot or cauldron filled with water.  A lixivium of
wood-ashes is then thrown in along with it; and it is suffered to boil
for several hours.

As our manufacturers were without pot or cauldron of any kind, there
would have been here an interruption of an insurmountable kind: had it
not been that they had plenty of water already on the boil, and
perpetually boiling--in the hot-spring near the hut.

Apparently all they should have to do would be, to immerse the prepared
bark in the spring, and there leave it for a proper length of time.  But
then the water, where it was hottest, was constantly in motion--bubbling
up and running off; so that not only would the strings of bark be
carried away, but the ashes would be separated from the mass, and
consequently of no service in aiding to macerate it.

How was this difficulty to be got over?  Easily enough.  They had not
proceeded thus far without thinking of a plan; and this plan was, to
place the bark along with the ashes in one of the large yak-skins still
in good preservation, and after making it up into a sort of bundle--like
clothes intended for the laundry--to plunge the skin and its contents
into the spring, and there leave them--until the boiling water should
perform its part.  By this ingenious contrivance, did they get over the
difficulty, of not being provided with a not.

When Karl thought that the bark was sufficiently boiled, it was taken
out of the water, and also out of its yak-skin wrapper.  It was then
placed, in mass, upon a flat rock near by--where it was left to drip and
get dry.

During the time that it was in the water--and also while it was dripping
and drying on the rock--none of them were idle.  Caspar was engaged in
fashioning a stout wooden mallet--a tool which would be needed in some
after operations--while Ossaroo was equally busy upon an article of a
very different kind.  This was a sort of sieve made of thin splints of
cane, set in a frame of thicker pieces of the same cane--ringall bamboo.

Ossaroo had undertaken this special task: as none of the others knew so
well, how to fashion the bamboo into any required utensil; and although
he was now making something altogether new to him, yet, working under
the direction of Karl, he succeeded in making a sieve that was likely to
serve the purpose for which plant-hunter designed it.  That purpose will
presently be spoken of.

As soon as the fibre was nearly dry, the mallet was brought into
requisition; and with this the mass was pounded upon the flat surface of
the rock--until it became reduced to a complete state of "pulp."

This pulp was once more put into the yak-skin--which had been gathered
up around the edges so as to form a sort of concavity or rude vat--and
again immersed under water--not of the boiling spring, but the cool
water of the lake--until the bag became full.  The pulp was next stirred
with a stick--which brought the coarse dirty parts to the surface.
These were skimmed off, and thrown away as refuse; and the process was
repeated with fresh water--until the whole substance, which was of a
mucilaginous character, was rendered pure, and soft to the touch.  The
next and last operation was in fact the making of the paper; and was
performed by Karl himself.  It was simple enough, though requiring a
certain dexterity, or sleight of hand, to do it well.  It consisted in
placing a quantity of the pulp upon the sieve before mentioned; and
cradling the frame about--all the time held under water--until the
substance became equally and uniformly spread over the whole surface.
The sieve was then taken out of the water--being raised gently and kept
in a horizontal position--so as not to derange the even stratum of pulp
that severed it.  This done, nothing more remained but to place the
frame across a pair of bars, and leave the pulp to get drained and
eventually become dry.  When dry, it would be _paper_!

Of course, with one sieve, the whole quantity required could not be made
at a single cast; but, as soon as one sheet became sufficiently dry to
be taken off the frame, the sieve was again repulped; and so on, till
the whole of the boiled bark was converted into paper; and they found
themselves in possession of a sufficient number of broad sheets to make
a kite as big as a coach-house-door.

In consequence of their having to wait for the drying of each sheet, the
process occupied them for several days; but during this time they had
not been either idle or inactive.  Karl and Caspar had been hard at
work, in getting up the "bones" of the kite; while Ossaroo had
undertaken to fabricate the tail.

The rope with which it was to be "flyed," occupied more time, and
required more care, than any other portion of their work.  Every strand
had to be twisted with the greatest exactness; and almost every fibre
tested, as to its strength and fitness.  Could they have used a rope of
stouter build, it would not have been necessary to be so particular; but
