Rhoda in much the same way as it would have done to hear a chief mourner
laugh at a funeral.  Such levity was most unseemly, yet on the other
hand the pictures on the walls were surely unnecessarily depressing!
They were oil-coloured portraits of departed worthies, at that gloomy
stage of decay when frame, figure, and background have acquired the same
dirty hue, and the paint has cracked in a hundred broken lines.  One old
gentleman--the ugliest of all--faced Rhoda as she sat, and stared at her
with a mocking gaze, which seemed to say:

"You think you are going to pass in arithmetic, do you?  Wait until you
see the paper!  _You'll_ be surprised--!"

It was a relief to turn to the paper itself and know the worst, which
seemed very bad indeed.  She glanced from question to question, feeling
despair deepen at the sight of such phrases as--"Simplify the
expression"; "debenture stock at 140 1/8"; "at what rate per cent.?"
etcetera, etcetera.  In the present condition of mind and body it was an
effort to recall the multiplication table, not to speak of difficult and
elaborate calculations.  Poor Rhoda!  She dipped her pen into the ink,
and wrote the headline to her paper, hesitated for a moment, added
"Question A," and then it seemed as if she could do no more.  The
figures danced before her eyes, her knees shook, her hands were so
petrified with cold that she clasped them together to restore some
feeling of warmth, and the faintness of an hour ago seemed creeping on
once more.  She leant her elbows on the desk, bowed her hands in her
head, and remained motionless for ten minutes on end.  The other girls
would think that she was studying the paper, and deciding what question
she could best answer; but in reality she was fighting the hardest
battle of her life, a battle between the Flesh, which said, "Give in;
say you are too ill!  Think what bliss it would be to lie down and have
nothing to do!" and the Will, which declared, "No, never!  I must and
shall go on.  Brain!  Hands!  Eyes! you are my servants.  I will not
_let_ you fail!"  In the end Will conquered, and Rhoda raised her face,
pale to the lips, but with determination written on every feature.

The girl next to herself had covered half the sheet with figures, and
was ruling two neat little lines, which showed that Question A was
satisfactorily settled.  All over the room the girls were scribbling
away, alert and busy; there was plainly no time to be wasted, and Rhoda
began slowly to puzzle out the easiest problem.  The answer seemed
inappropriate; she tried again, with a different result; a third time,
with a third result; then the firm lips set, and she began doggedly the
fourth time over.  To her relief this answer was the same as number two,
so it was copied out without delay, and the next puzzle begun, and the
next, and the next.

Oh, the weariness of those two hours, the struggle against weakness, the
moments of despair when memory refused to work, and simplest facts
evaded her grasp!  Nobody ever knew all that it meant, and as she had
the presence of mind to tear up her blotting-paper, no examining eyes
were shocked by the sight of the expedients to which a senior candidate
had been reduced in order to discover the total of six multiplied by
six, or eight plus eleven.  There were other moments, however, when the
brain cleared and allowed a space for intelligent work.  More faintness
came on again, and at the end she could announce to her companions that
she had answered nine out of the twelve questions.

"What did you get for the square root?" enquired Kathleen anxiously.
"Irene's answer was different from mine; but I _did_ think I was right.
I went over it twice!"

The girls were all surging together in the ante-room, comparing answers,
and referring eagerly to Irene, who read aloud her own list with a self-
satisfied air.  Those whose numbers agreed with hers announced the fact
with whoops of joy, those who had differed knitted their brows and were
silent.  Kathleen looked worried and anxious, and could not think what
she had been about to get "that decimal wrong."

"But it was horrible, wasn't it?  The worst we have had."

"The wall-paper was vile," cried another voice indignantly.  "_Toujours_
wall-paper!  They might have a little originality, and think of
something else.  I longed to give Tom's answer!"

"It wasn't really difficult, but tricky!  Decidedly tricky!" said Irene,
with an air.  She could afford to be superior, for there was no doubt
that she had passed! and passed well.  "The square root was absurdly
easy."  Then her eye fell on Rhoda, and she asked, kindly enough, "What
did you make it, Rhoda?  I hope you got on all right, and feel better."

"Thanks, yes; but I didn't put down my answers.  I really can't remember
what they were."

"And a good thing too!  You have done your best, so don't worry over it
any more, but come along to lunch!" cried Miss Everett, cheerily; and
the girls obeyed with willing haste, for it was one of the "treats" of
examination time to lunch in a restaurant, and be allowed to order what
one chose.

Rhoda was so much revived by the walk and the joy of knowing the ordeal
over that she was able to eat a morsel of chicken, but the fascinations
of jam puffs had departed for the time being, and she could even look
unmoved at the spectacle of a dozen strawberry ices in a row.

"If every candidate indulges in an ice a day, state accurately the
number of bushels of fruit--" began Dorothy, with her mouth full of
Vanilla biscuit, but she was promptly elbowed into silence; no one being
in the mood for further calculations just then.

For the next four days the examination dragged its weary course, and
Rhoda was carefully nursed and coddled so as to be able to stand the
strain.  She was sent to bed immediately on her return from the train;
was not allowed to rise until eight o'clock; was dosed with nurse's pet
tonic, and with Bovril and sandwiches between the papers, and for once
she was sufficiently conscious of past errors to acknowledge that Nature
could not be defied, and to attempt no more four o'clock preparation
classes.  On the whole she got through fairly well, growing stronger
each day, and even feeling occasional bursts of exultation at the
conclusion of a paper which might have been written especially for her
benefit.  What rapture to be questioned about those very rules in French
grammar which one had rubbed up the week before; to have pet passages
selected from Shakespeare, and find the Latin prose for translation
become gradually intelligible, as one telling substantive gave the clue
to the whole!  Once assured of the meaning, it was easy to pick out the
words, skimming lightly over difficult phrases, but making a great show
of accuracy when opportunity arose.  As to the elegance of the
translation from English into Latin the less said the better, but even
with a realisation of its shortcomings, Rhoda was hopeful of the result.

"They will say, `She doesn't know much, poor thing, but she has worked
hard, and deserves to pass.  Her grammar is good, and she has mastered
the books.  Oh, yes; certainly she has enough marks to pass.'"

"I think I have done fairly well in Latin," she told Miss Mott on her
return, and that severe lady actually smiled, and said graciously:

"I hope you have.  You have certainly worked with a will."

Miss Bruce, however, was not nearly so encouraging, and her last
interview with her pupil was somewhat in the nature of a cold douche.

"Now that the week is over, Rhoda," she said, "I must tell you that I
have felt a good deal of anxiety on your account, which I would not
willingly have repeated.  There is a strain about examinations which
some girls feel more than others.  The head of your house, for instance,
Thomasina Bolderston, is a capital subject, and seems able to hit the
happy medium between working hard and over-working; but you appear to
suffer physically from the strain.  I thought you seemed ill even before
the breakdown on Monday, and I fear your parents will be far from
satisfied with your looks.  In the case of a girl who is preparing to
earn her livelihood, and to whom certificates are all-important, one
must take all reasonable precautions and then face the risk; but with
you it is different.  You are the only daughter of wealthy parents, and
as, in all probability, you will never need to work for yourself, it
would be wiser to content yourself with taking the ordinary school
course and leaving examinations alone.  I shall feel it my duty to
acquaint your mother with my opinions, and to advise--"

Rhoda gave a gasp of dismay, and stared at her with horrified eyes.

"You will forbid me to go in for any more exams.!  You won't allow me to
try again?"

The Principal smiled slightly.

"That is, perhaps, over-stating the case.  The final decision must, of
course, rest with your parents.  If, in opposition to my advice, they
should still desire--"

But Rhoda heard no more.  The idea that her father and mother should
wish her to go in for any work which interfered with health was so
impossible to conceive that it might as well be dismissed at once.  With
one fell crash her castle in the air had fallen to the ground and lay in
ruins at her feet.  If she had not done well this time, farewell for
ever to her dreams of distinction, for no other opportunity would be
granted!

For the first half of the holidays the thought weighed upon her with
depressing force, but gradually, as health improved, the outlook
lightened also, and she began to pose to herself in a new light.  If she
passed well--and, despite her illness, she looked back on most of the
papers with a feeling of complacency--if she won the scholarship, or
even gained distinction, her reputation among her class-mates would be
to a certain extent established, and the fact that the delicate nature
of her nervous system debarred her from further efforts would entitle
her to a tribute of peculiar sympathy.  When other girls succeeded,
their companions would shake their heads, and whisper among themselves,
"If Rhoda could only--"

"A good thing for her that Rhoda," etcetera, etcetera.  In imagination
she could hear the remarks, and her face unconsciously assumed the
expression of meek endurance with which she would listen.  And so more
and more did the result of that week's work fill the horizon of her
life; she thought of it day by day, and dreamt of it by night; she
talked of it to Ella, until even that patient listener wearied of the
theme; she counted the weeks, the days, the hours, until the report
should arrive.  And then one morning, half-way through breakfast, Mr
Chester looked up from his eggs and bacon and remarked casually--as if
it were an ordinary, commonplace subject, and not an affair of life and
death:

"By the way, Rhoda, there is something about your examination in the
paper to-day.  I noticed the heading.  You may like to see it!"

Rhoda leant back in her chair, and held out her hand in dumb entreaty.
The newspaper was open at the right page, and her eye fell at once on
the familiar heading, and, underneath, a long list of numbers.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

FAILED!

First Class, Second Class, and still no sign of the familiar number.
Third Class--it was not there!  Rhoda gave a little gulp, and began
again from the very beginning.  She had been too quick, too eager.  It
was so easy to miss a number.  One by one she conned them over, but it
was not there.  The long Pass List lay below, and she looked at it with
dreary indifference.  To scramble through with the rabble was a sorry
attainment, or it seemed so for one moment, but at the next it became,
suddenly, a wild, impossible dream, for--the number was not there!  No
fear of overlooking this time, for the figures stood out as if printed
in fire, and burned themselves into her brain.  The number was not in
the First Class, nor the Second, nor the Third; it was not in the Pass
List, it was not mentioned at all.

If she had ever permitted herself to anticipate such a situation, which
she had not, Rhoda would have pictured herself flying into a paroxysm of
despair; but in reality she felt icy cold, and it was in a tone almost
of indifference that she announced:

"I am plucked!  I have not passed at all."

"Never mind, dear; you did your best, and the work matters more than the
result.  Very uncertain tests, these examinations--I never cared about
them," said her father kindly, and Mrs Chester smiled in her usual
placid fashion, and murmured, "Oh, I expect it's a mistake.  It's so
easy to make a mistake in printing figures.  You will find it is all
right, darling, later on.  Have some jam!"

They were absolutely placid; absolutely calm; absolutely unconscious of
the storm of emotion raging beneath that quiet exterior; but Harold
glanced at his sister with the handsome eyes which looked so sleepy, but
which were in reality so remarkably wide-awake, and said slowly:

"I think Rhoda has finished, mother.  You don't want any jam, do you,
Ro?  Come into the garden with me instead.  I want a stroll."

He walked out through the French window, and Rhoda followed with much
the same feeling of relief as that with which a captive escapes from the
prison which seems to be on the point of suffocating him, mentally and
physically.  Brother and sister paced in silence down the path leading
to the rose garden.  Harold was full of sympathy, but, man-like, found
it difficult to put his thoughts into words, and Rhoda, after all, was
the first to speak.  She stopped suddenly in the middle of the path, and
confronted him with shining eyes.  Her voice sounded strange in her own
ears.

"Harold, I--have--failed!  I am plucked.  I have not passed at all--not
even a common pass."

"No?  I'm uncommonly sorry, but--"

"But do you realise it; do you understand what it means?  I _think_ I
do, but I don't.  If I did, I should not be here talking quietly to you.
I should go mad!  I should want to kill myself.  I should be
desperate!"

"Don't be silly now, Ro.  It's a big disappointment, and I'm sorry for
you, but it's not a bit of use working yourself into hysterics.  Face
the thing quietly, and see--"

"All that it means--.  It means a good deal, Harold; more than you can
understand.  I think I'd rather be alone, please.  You are very kind,
but I can't stand consolation just yet.  I'll sit in the arbour."

"Just as you please.  I don't want to force myself, but I'd like to help
you, old girl.  Is there nothing else I can do?"

"Yes; keep mother away!  Don't let her come near me until lunch.  I am
best left alone, and she doesn't understand--no one understands except
those who have been at school, and know how--how hard--"

The girl's voice trembled, and broke off suddenly, and she walked away
in the direction of the summer-house, while Harold thrust his hands into
his pockets and kicked the pebbles on the gravel path.  He was very fond
of his impetuous young sister, and the quivering sob which had strangled
her last word echoed painfully in his ears.  He realised as neither
father nor mother could do what such a failure meant to a proud,
ambitious girl, and how far-reaching would be its consequences.  It was
not to-day nor to-morrow that would exhaust this trouble; the bitterest
part was yet to come when she returned to school, and received the
condolences of her more successful companions; when she sat apart and
saw them receive their reward.  Harold longed to be able to help, but
there was nothing to do but persuade his parents to leave the girl
alone, and to return at intervals to satisfy himself that she was still
in her retreat, and not attempting to drown her sorrows in the lake.
Three times over he paced the path, and saw the white-robed figure
sitting immovable, with elbows planted on the table, and falling locks
hiding the face from view.  So still she sat that he retired silently,
hoping that she had fallen asleep, but on the fourth visit he was no
longer alone, but accompanied by a graceful, girlish figure, and they
did not halt until they stood on the very threshold of the arbour
itself.

"Rhoda!" he cried, then, "look up!  I have brought someone to you.
Someone you will be glad to see."

The flaxen mane was tossed back, and a flushed face raised in protest.
"I don't--" began Rhoda, and then suddenly sprang to her feet and
stretched out her arms.  "Oh, Evie--Evie!  You have come.  Oh, I wanted
you--I wanted you so badly!"

Miss Everett stepped forward and drew the girl to her side, and Harold
waited just long enough to see the fair head and the dark nestle
together, and then took himself off to the house, satisfied that comfort
had come at last.

"I have _failed_, Evie!" cried Rhoda, clasping her friend's hands, and
staring at her with the same expression of incredulous horror with which
she had confronted her brother a couple of hours earlier.  "Yes,
darling.  I know."

"And what are you going to say to me, then?"

"Nothing, I think, for the moment, but that I love you dearly, and felt
that I must come to be with you.  Aren't you surprised to see me,
Rhoda?"

"No, I don't think so.  I don't feel anything.  I wanted you, and then--
there you were!  It seemed quite natural."

"But it was rather peculiar all the same.  I have been staying with Tom,
and we were both asked down to D-- for a four days' visit.  That is only
half an hour's rail from here, as you know; so this morning when I saw
the list in the paper I thought at once--`I must see Rhoda!  I will go
down and chance finding her at home!'"

"Yes!"

"So I came, and am so glad to be with you, dear.  I have seen your
mother, and have promised to stay to lunch.  I need not go back until
four o'clock."

"Oh, that's nice.  I like to have you.  Evie, I believe it was the
arithmetic.  I was so ill, I could hardly think.  You might as well know
all now.  It was my own doing.  I had been working every morning before
getting up, and that day I began at four.  I tired myself out before the
gong rang."

"I guessed as much.  Dorothy told me that she heard someone turning over
leaves!"

"Why don't you say, `I told you so!' then, and tell me that it's my own
fault?"

"I--don't--know!  Perhaps because I do so many foolish things myself;
perhaps because I haven't the heart to scold you just now, you poor
dear."

Rhoda's face quivered, but she pressed her lips together, and said with
a gulp:

"I suppose--it's a childish trouble!  I suppose--when I am old--and
sensible--I shall look back on to-day, and laugh to think how I worried
myself over such an unimportant trial."

"I am sure you will do nothing of the kind.  You will be very, very
sorry for yourself, and very pitiful, and very proud, too, if you can
remember that you bore it bravely and uncomplainingly."

"But I can't!  I can't bear it at all.  It gets worse every moment.  I
keep remembering things that I had forgotten.  Miss Bruce preaching, and
