wooden ring round it near the water, and bore evidence of having
received many a rude buffet from ships passing in the dark.

"A nice little buoy this," said Billy, looking at it with the eye and
air of a connoisseur; "wot's its name?"

"The North Goodwin; can't 'ee read? don't 'ee see its name up there on
its side, in letters as long as yerself?" said Jack Shales, as he
stirred up the paint in one of the pots.

"Ah, to be sure; well, it might have bin named the Uncommon Good-win,"
said Billy, "for it seems to have seen rough service, and to have stood
it well.  Come, boys, look alive, mix yer colours an' go to work;
England expecks every man, you know, for to do his dooty."

"Wot a bag of impudence it is!" said Dick Moy, catching the ring-bolt on
the top of the buoy with the boat-hook, and holding the boat as close to
it as possible, while his mates dipped their brushes in the black and
white paint respectively, and began to work with the energy of men who
know that their opportunity may be cut short at any moment by a sudden
squall or increasing swell.

Indeed, calm though the water was, there was enough of undulation to
render the process of painting one of some difficulty, for, besides the
impossibility of keeping the boat steady, Dick Moy found that all his
strength could not avail to prevent the artists being drawn suddenly
away beyond reach of their object, and as suddenly thrown against it, so
that their hands and faces came frequently into contact with the wet
paint, and gave them a piebald appearance.

For some time Billy contented himself with looking on and chaffing the
men, diversifying the amusement by an occasional skirmish with Stanley,
who had armed himself with a brush, and was busy helping.

"It's raither heavy work, sir, to do all the judgment business by
myself;" he said.  "There's that feller Shales, as don't know how a
straight line should be draw'd.  Couldn't ye lend me your brush, Jack?
or p'raps Dick Moy will lend me his beard, as he don't seem to be usin'
it just now."

"Here, Dick," cried Stanley, giving up his brush, "you've had enough of
the holding-on business; come, I'll relieve you."

"Ay, that's your sort," said Billy; "muscle to the boat-'ook, an' brains
to the brush."

"Hold on tight, sir," cried Shales, as the boat gave a heavy lurch away
from the buoy, while the three painters stood leaning as far over the
gunwale as was consistent with safety, and stretching their arms and
brushes towards the object of their solicitude.

Stanley exerted himself powerfully; a reactionary swell helped him too
much, and next moment the three men went, heads, hands, and brushes,
plunging against the buoy!

"Och! morther!" cried Jerry, one of whose black hands had been forced
against a white stripe, and left its imprint there.  "Look at that,
now!"

"All right," cried Shales, dashing a streak of white over the spot.

"There's no preventing it," said Stanley, apologetically, yet laughing
in spite of himself.

"I say, Jack, this is 'igh art, this is," observed Moy, as he drew back
to take another dip, "but I'm free to confess that I'd raither go
courtin' the girls than painting the buoys."

"Oh!  Dick, you borrowed that from me," cried Billy; "for shame, sir!"

"Well, well," observed Jerry, "it's many a time I've held on to a
painter, but I niver thought to become wan.  What would ye call this
now--a landscape or a portrait?"

"I would call it a marine piece," said Stanley.

"How much, sir?" asked Dick Moy, who had got upon the wooden ring of the
buoy, and was standing thereon attempting, but not very successfully, to
paint in that position.

"A mareeny-piece, you noodle," cried Billy; "don't ye onderstand the
genel'm'n wot's a sittin' on judgment on 'ee?  A mareeny-piece is a
piece o' mareeny or striped kaliko, w'ich is all the same, and wery poor
stuff it is too.  Come, I'll stand it no longer.  I hold ye in sich
contempt that I _must_ look down on 'ee."

So saying, the active little fellow seized the boat-hook, and swung
himself lightly on the buoy, the top of which he gained after a severe
scramble, amid the indignant shouts of the men.

"Well, since you have gone up there, we'll keep you there till we are
done."

"All right, my hearties," retorted Billy, in great delight and
excitement, as the men went on with their work.

Just then another heave of the swell drew the boat away, obliging the
painters to lean far over the side as before, pointing towards their
"pictur," as Jerry called it, but unable to touch it, though expecting
every moment to swing within reach again.  Suddenly Billy Towler--while
engaged, no doubt, in some refined piece of mischief--slipped and fell
backwards with a loud cry.  His head struck the side of the boat in
passing, as he plunged into the sea.

"Ah, the poor craitur!" cried Jerry MacGowl, immediately plunging after
him.

Now, it happened that Jerry could not swim a stroke, but his liking for
the boy, and the suddenness of the accident, combined with his reckless
disposition, rendered him either forgetful of or oblivious to that fact.
Instead of doing any good, therefore, to Billy, he rendered it
necessary for the men to give their undivided attention to hauling his
unwieldy carcase into the boat.

The tide was running strong at the time.  Billy rose to the surface, but
showed no sign of life.  He was sinking again, when Stanley Hall plunged
into the water like an arrow, and caught him by the hair.

Stanley was a powerful swimmer, but he could make no headway against the
tide that was running to the southward at the time, and before the men
had succeeded in dragging their enthusiastic but reckless comrade into
the boat, Billy and his friend had been swept to a considerable
distance.  As soon as the oars were shipped, however, they were quickly
overtaken and rescued.

Stanley was none the worse for his ducking, but poor Billy was
unconscious, and had a large cut in his head, which looked serious.
When he was taken on board the tender, and restored to consciousness, he
was incapable of talking coherently.  In this state he was taken back to
Ramsgate and conveyed to the hospital.

There, in a small bed, the small boy lay for many weeks, with ample
leisure to reflect upon the impropriety of coupling fun--which is
right--with mischief--which is emphatically wrong, and generally leads
to disaster.  But Billy could not reflect, because he had received a
slight injury to the brain, it was supposed, which confused him much,
and induced him, as his attentive nurse said, to talk "nothing but
nonsense."

The poor boy's recently-made friends paid him all the attention they
could, but most of them had duties to attend to which called them away,
so that, ere long, with the exception of an occasional visit from Mr
Welton of the Gull light, he was left entirely to the care of the nurses
and house-surgeons, who were extremely kind to him.

Mr Morley Jones, who might have been expected to take an interest in
his _protege_, left him to his fate, after having ascertained that he
was in a somewhat critical condition, and, in any case, not likely to be
abroad again for many weeks.

There was one person, however, who found out and took an apparently deep
interest in the boy.  This was a stout, hale gentleman, of middle age,
with a bald head, a stern countenance, and keen grey eyes.  He came to
the hospital, apparently as a philanthropic visitor, inquired for the
boy, introduced himself as Mr Larks, and, sitting down at his bedside,
sought to ingratiate himself with the patient.  At first he found the
boy in a condition which induced him to indulge chiefly in talking
nonsense, but Mr Larks appeared to be peculiarly interested in this
nonsense, especially when it had reference, as it frequently had, to a
man named Jones!  After a time, when Billy became sane again, Mr Larks
pressed him to converse more freely about this Mr Jones, but with
returning health came Billy's sharp wit and caution.  He began to be
more circumspect in his replies to Mr Larks, and to put questions, in
his turn, which soon induced that gentleman to discontinue his visits,
so that Billy Towler again found himself in what might with propriety
have been styled his normal condition--absolutely destitute of friends.

But Billy was not so destitute as he supposed himself to be--as we shall
see.

Meanwhile Morley Jones went about his special business.  He reported the
loss of the sloop Nora; had it advertised in the _Gazette_; took the
necessary steps to prove the fact; called at the office of the Submarine
Insurance Company, and at the end of three weeks walked away, chuckling,
with 300 pounds in his pocket!

In the satisfaction which the success of this piece of business induced,
he opened his heart and mind pretty freely to his daughter Nora, and
revealed not only the fact of Billy Towler's illness, but the place
where he then lay.  Until the money had been secured he had kept this a
secret from her, and had sent Jim Welton on special business to
Gravesend in order that he might be out of the way for a time, but, the
motive being past, he made no more secret of the matter.

Nora, who had become deeply interested in the boy, resolved to have him
brought up from Ramsgate to Yarmouth by means of love, not being
possessed of money.  The moment, therefore, that Jim Welton returned,
she issued her commands that he should go straight off to Ramsgate, find
the boy, and, by hook or crook, bring him to the "Garden of Eden," on
pain of her utmost displeasure.

"But the thing an't possible," said Jim, "I haven't got money enough to
do it."

"Then you must find money somehow, or make it," said Nora, firmly.
"That dear boy _must_ be saved.  When he was stopping here I wormed all
his secrets out of his little heart, bless it--"

"I don't wonder!" interrupted Jim, with a look of admiration.

"And what do you think?" continued the girl, not noticing the
interruption, "he confessed to me that he had been a regular London
thief!  Now I am quite sure that God will enable me to win him back, if
I get him here--for I know that he is fond of me--and I am equally sure
that he will be lost if he is again cast loose on the world."

"God bless you, Nora; I'll do my best to fetch him to 'ee, even if I
should have to walk to Ramsgate and carry him here on my shoulders; but
don't you think it would be as well also to keep him--forgive me, dear
Nora, I _must_ say it--to keep him out of your father's way?  He might
teach him to drink, you know, if he taught him no worse, and that's bad
enough."

Nora's face grew pale as she said--

"Oh, Jim, are you _sure_ there is nothing worse that he is likely to
teach him?  My father has a great deal of money just now, I--I hope
that--"

"Why, Nora, you need not think he stole it," said Jim hurriedly, and
with a somewhat confused look; "he got it in the regular way from the
Insurance Company, and I couldn't say that there's anything absolutely
wrong in the business; but--"

The young sailor stopped short and sighed deeply.  Nora's countenance
became still more pale, and she cast down her eyes, but spoke not a word
for some moments.

"You _must_ bring the boy to me, Jim," she resumed, with a sudden start.
"He may be in danger here, but there is almost certain ruin before him
if he is left to fall back into his old way of life."

We need not trouble the reader with a detailed account of the means by
which Jim Welton accomplished his object.  Love prevailed--as it always
did, always does, and always will--and ere many days had passed Billy
Towler was once more a member of the drunkard's family, with the sweet
presence of Nora ever near him, like an angel's wing overshadowing and
protecting him from evil.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE ANCIENT CORPORATION OF TRINITY HOUSE OF DEPTFORD STROND.

As landmarks--because of their affording variety, among other reasons--
are pleasant objects of contemplation to the weary traveller on a long
and dusty road, so landmarks in a tale are useful as resting-places.  We
purpose, therefore, to relieve the reader, for a very brief period, from
the strain of mingled fact and fiction in which we have hitherto
indulged--turn into a siding, as it were--and, before getting on the
main line again, devote a short chapter to pure and unmitigated fact.

So much has been said in previous chapters, and so much has yet to be
said, about the lights, and buoys, and beacons which guard the shores of
Old England, that it would be unpardonable as well as ungracious were we
to omit making special reference to the ancient CORPORATION OF TRINITY
HOUSE OF DEPTFORD STROND, under the able management of which the whole
of the important work has been devised and carried into operation, and
is now most efficiently maintained.

It cannot be too urgently pressed upon un-nautical--especially young--
readers, that the work which this Corporation does, and the duties which
it performs, constitute what we may term _vital service_.

It would be too much, perhaps, to say that the life of the nation
depends on the faithful and wise conduct of that service, but assuredly
our national prosperity is intimately bound up with it.  The annual list
of ships wrecked and lives lost on the shores of the kingdom is
appalling enough already, as every observant reader of the newspapers
must know, but if the work of the Trinity House--the labours of the
Elder Brethren--were suspended for a single year--if the lights, fixed
and floating, were extinguished, and the buoys and beacons removed, the
writer could not express, nor could the reader conceive, the awful crash
of ruin, and the terrific cry of anguish that would sweep over the land
from end to end, like the besom of destruction.

We leave to hard-headed politicians to say what, or whether,
improvements of any kind might be made in connection with the Trinity
Corporation.  We do not pretend to be competent to judge whether or not
that work might be _better_ done.  All that we pretend to is a certain
amount of competency to judge, and right to assert, that it is _well_
done, and one of the easiest ways to assure one's-self of that fact is,
to go visit the lighthouses and light-vessels on the coast, and note
their perfect management; the splendid adaptation of scientific
discoveries to the ends they are designed to serve; the thoroughness,
the cleanliness, the beauty of everything connected with the _materiel_
employed; the massive solidity and apparent indestructibility of the
various structures erected and afloat; the method everywhere observable;
the perfect organisation and the steady respectability of the
light-keepers--observe and note all these things, we say, and it will be
impossible to return from the investigation without a feeling that the
management of this department of our coast service is in pre-eminently
able hands.

Nor is this to be wondered at, when we reflect that the Corporation of
Trinity House is composed chiefly (the acting part of it entirely) of
nautical men--men who have spent their youth and manhood on the sea, and
have had constantly to watch and guard against those very rocks and
shoals, and traverse those channels which it is now their duty to light
and buoy.  [See note 1.]

It has been sagely remarked by some philosopher, we believe--at least it
might have been if it has not--that everything must have a beginning.
We agree with the proposition, and therefore conclude that the
Corporation of Trinity House must have had a beginning, but that
beginning would appear to be involved in those celebrated "mists of
antiquity" which unhappily obscure so much that men would give their
ears to know now-a-days.

Fire--which has probably been the cause of more destruction and
confusion than all of the other elements put together--was the cause of
the difficulty that now exists in tracing this ancient Corporation to
its origin, as will be seen from the following quotation from a little
"Memoir, drawn up the present Deputy-Master, and printed for private
distribution," which was kindly lent to us by the present secretary of
the House, and from which most of our information has been derived.

"The printed information hitherto extant [in regard to the Corporation
of Trinity House] is limited to the charter of confirmation granted by
James the Second (with the minor concession, by Charles the Second, of
Thames Ballastage) and a compilation from the records of the Corporation
down to 1746, by its then secretary, Mr Whormby, supplemented by a
memoir drawn up, in 1822, by Captain Joseph Cotton, then Deputy-master.
But the _data_ of these latter are necessarily imperfect, as the
destruction by fire, in 1714, of the house in Water Lane had already
involved a disastrous loss of documentary evidence, leaving much to be
inferentially traced from collateral records of Admiralty and Navy
Boards.  These, however, sufficiently attest administrative powers and
protective influence scarcely inferior to the scope of those
departments."

More than a hundred years before the date of its original charter (1514)
the Corporation existed in the form of a voluntary association of the
"shipmen and mariners of England," to which reference is made in the
charter as being an influential body of long standing even at that time,
which protected maritime interests, and relieved the aged and indigent
among the seafaring community, for which latter purpose they had erected
an almshouse at Deptford, in Kent, where also were their headquarters.
This society had inspired confidence and acquired authority to establish
regulations for the navigation of ships and the government of seamen,
which, by general consent, had been adopted throughout the service.  It
