fun of thus roughing it rather than otherwise, to the amusement of his
amiable wife, who beheld his wasteful and daring culinary efforts
without a murmur, and to the horror of Miss Trim, who was called upon to
assist in and share the triumphs as well as the dangers of these
efforts.

"Fetch the pepper now, Miss Trim.  That's it, thank 'ee.--Hallo!  I say,
the top has come off that rascally thing, and half the contents have
gone into the pan!"

He was engaged in frying a mess of pemmican and flour, of which
provender he had secured enough to stand a siege of at least six months'
duration.

"Never mind," he continued; "in with more flour and more pemmican.
That's your sort.  It'll make it taste more like curry, which is hot
enough, in all conscience."

"But pepper is not like curry," said Miss Trim, who had a brother in
India, and was consequently a secondhand authority on Indian affairs.
"Curry is hot, no doubt, and what one may call a seasoning; but it has
not the flavour of pepper at all, and is not the colour of it, and--"

"Yes, yes, _I_ know all about that, Miss Trim.  Why, there's a box of
it, isn't there, in the little cupboard on the stair?  I quite forgot
it.  Fetch it, please, and we'll have real pemmican curry; and rouse up
my lazy girls as you pass.  Don't disturb Mrs R, though.  The proverb
says, `Let sleeping'--no, I don't mean _that_ exactly.  By the way,
don't slip on the stair.  The water's about up to that cupboard.  Mind,
there are six feet water or more in the passage now, and if--"

He stopped, for Miss Trim had already left the room, just as Lambert
entered it.

The cupboard to which Miss Trim had been sent was an angular one, let
into the wall to utilise a crooked corner.  The step of the stair
immediately below it was the last dry one of the flight.  From that step
to the bottom was held by the flood, which gurgled oilily through the
deserted basement.  Descending to that step with caution, and gazing
anxiously at her own image reflected below, she opened the cupboard
door.

Now, it chanced that Angus Macdonald's Cochin-China hen, having been
driven from its own home by the flood, had strayed into Mr Ravenshaw's
house and established itself, uninvited, in the cupboard.  It received
Miss Trim with a croak of indignation and a flutter.  Starting back with
a slight, "Oh!" the poor lady fell; and who shall adequately describe,
or even imagine, the effects of that fall?  Many a time had Miss Trim
descended that stair and passage on her feet, but never until then had
she done so on her back, like a mermaid or a seal!  Coming to the
surface immediately, she filled the house with a yell that almost choked
the hearers, caused old Ravenshaw to heave the pemmican curry into the
lap of Lambert, and induced Lambert himself to leap down-stairs to the
rescue like a harlequin.  The bold youth had to swim for it!  A gurgle
at the far end of the passage told where Miss Trim was going down, like
wedding announcements, for the third and last time.  Lambert went in
like an otter, caught the lady in his arms, and bore her to the
staircase, and thence to the upper floor in a few minutes.  She was at
once taken to the sisters' bedroom, and there restored to life and
lamentation.

"My dear," said Mr Ravenshaw to his wife when she appeared, "you'd
better look after our breakfast--I've made a mess of it, and I'll go
over to Angus Macdonald and invite him and his household to come and
stay with us.  Their house must be almost afloat by this time."

The old gentleman hailed Peegwish, who was outside in the canoe at the
moment.

That would-be brewer at once made for the house, paddled his canoe
through the doorway and up the passage to the staircase, where Wildcat,
who managed the bow paddle, held on by the bannister while Mr Ravenshaw
embarked.  Reissuing from the doorway, they made for their neighbour's
residence.

Macdonald's house had indeed become almost uninhabitable.  It stood so
deep in the water that only the upper windows were visible.  The
chimneys and roofs of some of the outhouses formed, with the main
building and a few tree-tops, a small Archipelago.

"You are fery kind, Mr Ruvnshaw," said Angus from an upper window,
beneath which the canoe floated.  "It iss not improbaple that my house
will pe goin' down the river like a post, but that iss nothing--not
anything at all--when there will pe such a destruction goin' on all over
the settlement whatever.  It iss fery coot of you, oo ay.  I will put my
fuddle into the canoe, an' my sister she will pe ready at wance.--Wass
you ready, Martha?"

A voice from the interior intimated that Miss Martha would be, "ready in
two minutes."

"Pe quick, then," said Macdonald, looking inwards while he lowered his
violin, to which he was passionately attached, into the canoe, "you hef
not much time to waste, Martha, for it wass time we will pe goin'."

In a few minutes Angus Macdonald's house was abandoned to its fate, and
himself and sister, with a couple of domestics, were added to the number
of refugees who crowded to the abode of hospitable Sam Ravenshaw.

"Hef you forgotten the cawtie?" asked Angus of his sister, while
assisting her to land on the steps from which Miss Trim had taken her
dive.

"No, Angus, I've got it in my basket, but I fear the poor old hen has
been lost.  It's all over the house I sought for it before comin' away,
but--"

A triumphant cackle from the cupboard overhead interrupted Miss Martha.

"Ha! ha!" shouted Mr Ravenshaw; "thats where the sound came from this
morning!  And I do believe it must have been that brute which caused
Miss Trim to fall into the water."

With a twinkle in his eye, the old gentleman related the incident of the
morning, while Angus, with a grim expression, kept his eye on Beauty,
who gazed inquiringly out at the half-open door of her retreat.

"It iss a pad craitur you've peen--fery pad--ever since I got you, but
it iss no more mischief you will pe dooin' after this--whatever."

Angus seized the unfortunate hen by the neck as he spoke, and flung it
along the passage, where it fell into the water, and went cackling and
choking through the doorway.

Beauty's powers were varied as well as surprising.  Although thus, for
the first time in her life, compelled to take to the water, she swam as
well as any duck, and went straight off as if by instinct, to the
forsaken house.  From the window of the lumber-room Angus saw her reach
it, scramble, somehow, on to its roof, and there utter a crow of
defiance that would have done credit to her defunct husband.  There was
one other object besides his own house and surroundings which Angus saw
from that window.  It was the smoking-box on the willow-clad knoll,
which formed a separate island in the flood.  The sight stirred up
unpleasant recollections.  He turned from the window, and gave his
attention to the substantial breakfast to which his host invited him.

The greater part of that day was spent in rearranging the habitable
parts of Willow Creek, and placing the more delicate valuables further
out of danger.  At night candles were lighted, fresh wood was heaped up
in the stove, and the lumber-room became comparatively comfortable.

"Will you play us a tune, Angus?" said Louis Lambert, drawing a stool
between Elsie and Cora and sitting down.  "The ladies, you know, never
tire of your music."

"I hef not anything new," replied Angus, with becoming modesty; "but if
the leddies wass willin' to listen to some o' the old tunes, my fuddle
an' I will try what we can do."

"We love the old tunes best," said Cora.

As every one else echoed the sentiment, Angus, nothing loath, began to
discourse sweet sounds, which, to say truth, were indeed very sweet, and
mingled not inharmoniously with the sound of waters which gurgled gently
underneath.

Angus could play Scotch reels in a manner that made dancing almost
unavoidable, but he preferred slow, plaintive music, and on this
occasion indulged his taste to the full, so as to fling a mantle of
quiescence and pathos over the family circle.

Samuel Ravenshaw had retired to a darkish corner to enjoy his pipe, but
the music awoke sad memories.  The lost Tony came vividly before him,
and beside his darling boy arose the dark form of the Red Man, whose
mode of taking his revenge had been to him so terrible, all the more
terrible that the nature of the old man was secretive in regard to
sorrow.  His joys he was ever ready to share with every one, but his
griefs he smothered in his own breast, and scorned to let his
countenance betray his heart.

No one knew how much he suffered.  Perhaps Elsie understood him best.
At all events she had become more earnest and thoughtful in her
attentions after that dark day when her little brother was spirited
away.  Leaving Lambert to Cora, she went over to her father, sat down
beside him, and, laying her head upon his shoulder, listened with a sort
of melancholy pleasure to the sweet strains of the violin.

They were suddenly and rudely awakened from this state of quiescence by
a blinding flash of lightning, followed almost instantaneously by a
tremendous clap of thunder which sounded like colliding worlds overhead,
and then rolled away in deep mutterings of discontent.  This was
repeated at short intervals, then the rain and hail came down in
torrents, and the wind rose so that soon the waves began to beat
violently on the house.  The day which had begun so calmly ended in
furious storm--emblematic of many a day in every human life.

Seated there with feelings of awe and anxiety, the Ravenshaw household
passed the night in silence.

And still the waters of the Red River continued to rise--slowly, it is
true, and inch by inch instead of foot by foot--until these settlers in
the great wilderness began to think, with something akin to
superstitious fear, of that mighty deluge which had been sent to
submerge the world in the days of old.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

OLD RAVENSHAW GOES EXPLORING AND RESCUING.

Another fine calm day came to comfort the victims of the flood in the
midst of that tempestuous time, with its April character of mingled
storm and sunshine.  The rise in the water on the previous night had
been almost imperceptible.  Feeling, therefore, somewhat easier in his
mind, old Mr Ravenshaw determined to embark in his boat for the purpose
of paying a visit to those unfortunates who, after being driven from
their homes, had taken refuge on the imperceptible eminence which had
been styled "The Mountain."  Taking with him Lambert and a stout crew,
he embarked from his upper bedroom window, bade his wife and daughters
an affectionate adieu, hoisted his sail, and pushed off.

The hoisting of the sail was a mere matter of form.

"It's of no use at present, but will be ready to catch the first puff
that may favour us," observed the old gentleman, as he sat down and took
the tiller.  "Give way, lads."

The oars were dipped, and the Willow Creek mansion was soon but a speck
on the horizon of the watery waste.

And now the old fur-trader learned the full extent of the desolation
with which it had pleased God to visit the settlement at that time.
While taken up with the cares and anxieties connected with Willow Creek,
he was of course aware that terrible destruction, if not death, must
have been going on around him; but now, when he rowed over the plains,
saw the state of things with his own eyes, and heard the accounts of
many settlers, some of whom he rescued from positions of danger, the
full extent of the damage done by the great flood of 1826 was borne
powerfully in upon his mind.

The varied stories which some had to tell of their escapes, others of
their losses, and all, of their sufferings, were sad as well as
interesting.  Some of the people had taken shelter in garrets or on
stages, where they had to wait anxiously till some boat or canoe should
turn up to rescue them.  Some had been surprised by the sudden rise of
the flood at night while asleep, and had wakened to find themselves and
their beds afloat.  Two men who had gone to sleep on a rick of hay found
themselves next morning drifting with the current some three miles below
the spot where they had lain down.  Others, like old Liz, had been
carried off bodily in their huts.  Not a few had been obliged to betake
themselves to the housetops until help came.  Some there were who took
to swimming, and saved themselves by clinging to the branches of trees;
yet, strange to say, during the whole course of that flood only one man
lost his life.  (See Note 1.)

It was very different, however, with regard to the lower animals.  When
at its height the water spread out on each side of the river to a
distance of six miles, and about fourteen miles of its length, so that
not only were many horses, cattle, pigs, and poultry drowned in the
general stampede, but the pretty little ground squirrels were driven out
of their holes, and along with rats, mice, snakes, and insects, perished
in thousands.  Even the frogs discovered that too much of a good thing
is bad, for they found no rest for the soles of their feet, except
floating logs, planks, and stray pieces of furniture, on which many of
them were seen by our voyagers gazing contemplatively at the situation.

Everywhere houses and barns were seen floating about, their owners gone,
but with dogs and cats in the doorways and windows, and poultry on the
roofs; and the barking, mewing, and cackling of these, with the
squealing of sundry pigs, tended to increase the general desolation.
Such of the contents of these houses as had been left behind in the
flight were washed out of them, and the waters were sprinkled here and
there with bedsteads, chairs, tables, feather-beds, and other property,
besides the carcasses of dead animals.

At certain points of the river, where there were shallows towards which
the currents set, carts, carioles, boxes, carriages, gigs, fencing, and
property of every description were stranded in large quantities and in
dire confusion, but much of the wreck was swept onward and engulfed in
Lake Winnipeg.

The unfortunate settlers found refuge ultimately, after being driven
from knoll to knoll, on the higher ground of the Assinaboine, on the
Little Mountain, and on a low hill twelve miles from the settlement.

On his way to the Little Mountain Mr Ravenshaw touched at the mission
station.  Here the various groups in the garret of the parsonage, the
gallery of the church, and on the stage, were greatly reduced in
numbers, many of the refugees having availed themselves of the visits of
several settlers and gone off to the mountain in their boats or canoes,
with what of their property they had managed to save.

Among those who remained there was a marked spirit of cheerful
submission.

"You see," said the pastor, in reply to an observation of Mr Ravenshaw
on this point, "I have endeavoured to impress upon my poor people that
mere quiet submission to the inevitable is not a Christian
characteristic, that men of all creeds and nations may and do thus
submit, and that it is the special privilege of the follower of Jesus to
submit _cheerfully_ to whatever befalls--pleasant or otherwise--because
he has the promise that _all_ things shall work together for his good."

"Humph!" said the trader with a shrug of his shoulders; "it seems to me
that some of us don't avail ourselves much of our privilege."

The pastor could scarcely repress a laugh at the grumpy tone in which
his visitor spoke.

"You are right, Mr Ravenshaw, none of us come nearly up to the mark in
our Christian course.  The effort to do so constitutes much of the
battle that we have to fight, but our comfort is, that we shall be more
than conquerors in the long-run.  There sits a widow now," he continued,
pointing to an Indian woman seated on the stage who was busy making a
pair of moccasins for a little child that played by her side, "who is
fighting her battle bravely at present.  Not a murmur has yet escaped
her lips, although she has lost all her possessions--except her boy."

"Ah! except her boy!"  The old trader did not speak.  He only thought of
Tony and quickly changed the drift of the conversation.

Soon after leaving the mission station a breeze sprang up; the sail
filled; the oars were pulled in, and they went more swiftly on.  Ere
long they sighted the stage on which the women had been previously
discovered singing hymns.  They did not sing now.  Their provisions were
failing, their hopes of an abatement in the flood were dying out, and
they no longer refused to accept deliverance from their somewhat
perilous position.

"Have you seen anything of Herr Winklemann lately?" asked Lambert of one
of the women.

"Nothing; but John Flett and David Mowat passed our stage yesterday in a
canoe, and they told us that the hut of old Liz Rollin has been carried
away with her and her father and Winklemann's mother, and they say that
her son has been seen in a small canoe rangin' about by himself like a
madman searchin' for her."

"The moment we reach the Mountain I'll get hold of a canoe and go in
search of him," said Lambert.

"Right, boy! right!" said Ravenshaw; "I fear that something may have
happened to the poor lad.  These small canoes are all very well when you
can run ashore and mend 'em if they should get damaged, but out here,
among sunk posts and fences, and no land to run to, it is dangerous
navigation.--Hist!  Did ye hear a cry, lads?"

The men ceased to talk, and listened intently, while they gazed round
the watery waste in all directions.

Besides a stranded house here and there, and a few submerged trees,
nothing was to be seen on the water save the carcasses of a few cattle,
above which a couple of ravens were wheeling slowly.

The cry was not repeated.

"Imagination," muttered old Ravenshaw to himself, after Lambert had
given a lusty shout, which, however, elicited no reply.

"It must have been; I hear nothing," said Lambert, looking round
uneasily.

"Come, out oars again, lads," said the old gentleman, as the sail
flapped in the failing breeze.  "Night will catch us before we reach--.
Hallo! back your oars--hard!  Catch hold of 'im."

A living creature of some sort came out from behind a floating log at
that moment, and was almost run down.  The man at the bow oar leaned
over and caught it.  The yell which followed left no shadow of doubt as
to the nature of the creature.  It was a pig.  During the next two
minutes, while it was being hauled into the boat, it made the air ring
with shrieks of concentrated fury.  Before dismissing this pig, we may
state that it was afterwards identified by its owner, who said it had
been swept way from his house two days before, and must therefore have
been swimming without relief for eight-and-forty hours.

"That accounts for the cry you heard," said Louis Lambert, when the
screams subsided.

"No, Louis; a pig's voice is too familiar to deceive me.  If it was not
imagination, it was the voice of a man."

The old trader was right.  One of the objects which, in the distance,
resembled so closely the floating carcass of an ox was in reality an
overturned canoe, and to the stern of that canoe Herr Winklemann was
clinging.  He had been long in the water, and was almost too much
exhausted to see or cry.  When the boat passed he thought he heard
voices.  Hope revived for a moment, and he uttered a feeble shout, but
he failed to hear the reply.  The canoe happened to float between him
and the boat, so that he could not see it as it passed slowly on its
course.

Poor Winklemann!  In searching wildly about the wide expanse of water
for his lost mother, he had run his canoe violently against the top rail
of a fence.  The delicate birch bark was ripped off.  In another minute
it sank and turned bottom up.  It was a canoe of the smallest size,
Winklemann having preferred to continue his search alone rather than
with an unwilling companion.  The German was a good swimmer; a mere
upset might not have been serious.  He could have righted the canoe, and
perhaps clambered into it over the stern, and baled it out.  But with a
large hole in its bottom there was no hope of deliverance except in a
passing boat or canoe.  Clinging to the frail craft, the poor youth
gazed long and anxiously round the horizon, endeavouring the while to
push the wreck towards the nearest tree-top, which, however, was a long
way off.

By degrees the cold told on his huge frame, and his great strength began
to fail.  Once, a canoe appeared in the distance.  He shouted with all
his might, but it was too far off.  As it passed on out of sight he
raised his eyes as if in prayer, but no sound escaped his compressed
lips.  It was noon when the accident occurred.  Towards evening he felt
as though his consciousness were going to forsake him, but the love of
life was strong; he tightened his grasp on the canoe.  It was just then
that he heard the voices of Ravenshaw's party and shouted, but the cry,
as we have said, was very feeble, and the poor fellow's sense of hearing
was dulled with cold and exhaustion, else he would have heard Lambert's
reply.

"Oh! mine moder! mine moder!" he sighed, as his head drooped helplessly
forward, though his fingers tightened on the canoe with the convulsive
grasp of a drowning man.

Night descended on the water.  The moon threw a fitful gleam now and
then through a rift in the sailing clouds.  All was still and dark and
desolate above and around the perishing man.  Nothing with life was
visible save a huge raven which wheeled to and fro with a solemn croak
