"No; I didn't observe him."

"Git out wid ye nonsense. But I felt him sure and it was meself that
thought once he'd pull me off into the darkness and make me a prey to
the beasts there--that I did think, did I."

"No danger," remarked Howard, as he and his cousin were unable to
restrain their laughter.

"What be ye spalpeens laughing at?" indignantly demanded the Irishman.

"But, Tim, are you sure you were not mistaken? We saw nothing of the
kind," pursued Howard.

The fellow looked too full of indignation to speak.

"What is getting into your heads? Ye saam to be losing your sinses
intirely."

"And I can say I saw none of them touch you."

"Then you was blind," was the indignant retort. "Ye harrd him sing out
at me heels, didn't you?"

"Of course, we heard them all the time, as we do now; but the one you
imagined so close may have been a dozen feet distant."

"_But he bit me!_" was the triumphant reply to this.

"Where?"

"On the hand."

"Let us see the mark!"

The boys arose and walked up to their friend, who bent over the fire,
held his hand close to his face, turning it over and over and
scrutinizing it with the closest attention. Concluding he was mistaken,
he exchanged it for its fellow, which was subjected to an equally severe
cross-examination. Still nothing confirmatory of his words could be
found.

The amazed Irishman now held up both his hands, turning them over and
over and pressing them close to his face.

"Do yees saa anything?" he abruptly asked, thrusting them toward the
boys.

They went through the form of a search for a scratch or a bite, but
declared themselves unable to discover any.

"Don't you feel any pain?" asked Howard.

"I thought I did," replied Tim, with a serious, puzzled look upon his
countenance.

"In what part of your body?"

"Whisht!"

He motioned to them to maintain silence, while he closed his eyes and
waited for some evidence of the pain he had so sharply felt a few
minutes before. As he stood thus, he stealthily brought each hand around
in front of his face and subjected them to the same examination.

Suddenly his eye sparkled, and he held out his left:

"That's the hand!" he exclaimed exultingly.

"Let's see?" asked the boys, stepping up to him.

"Yees'll find it somewhere there, if yees'll take the throuble to
examine it closely."

They did so, but declared themselves unable to find the wound.

Tim finally showed a small red spot upon one of the fingers, which he
affirmed was where the cruel tooth did bite him.

"That cannot be, for the skin is not broken."

"But it faals as if the same had been bit off."

"It looks more like a burn," added Elwood.

Tim now turned around and looked at the Pah Utah. The latter was smoking
his pipe, as if unconscious of the presence of any being or animal near
him. Perhaps they were mistaken, but Howard and Elwood always affirmed
that they detected a twitching at the corners of his mouth, as if he
were ready to explode with laughter.

But if it was that, it was nothing more, and it manifested itself in no
other manner. Tim gazed fixedly at him a moment, and then turning to the
boys, asked in a whisper:

_"But didn't ye hear it snarrl at meself?"_




CHAPTER XXXII.

AGAIN ON THE RIVER.


The Newfoundland, Terror, occasioned more apprehension to his friends
than did anything else. They came to see that no personal danger
threatened so long as the fire kept burning, and as there was an
abundance of fuel, this settled that point; but the dog grew enraged at
the furious uproar, which drove away all sleep, and appeared to give him
fear that the entire party were in danger.

Several times, when some of the wolverines came too close, he made a
spring at them, and they snapped back. But the good sense of the dog
kept him from venturing among the ravenous brutes, and they in turn were
in too much dread of the fire to do more than spring at him and then as
quickly dart back again.

It was an impressive sight and one which could never be forgotten. The
large, noble Newfoundland, standing out in relief against the glare of
the camp-fire, his eyes aflame with anger, every muscle braced, the jaws
parted and his eyes fixed upon the dark bodies plunging over each other,
darting forward and back again, snapping, snarling and furious; the Pah
Utah stretched upon the ground, deliberately smoking, all unheedful of
the deafening clangor and the savage brutes that sometimes approached
almost within striking distance; the two boys, so close to the fire that
they were often scorched by it, gazing at the animals with an expression
of half fear and half wonder, starting when one of them came unusually
near, and now and then sending the fatal bullet among them; the nervous
Irishman, darting hither and thither, taking great care that the fire
was kept fully burning; all these, we say, made a scene impressive in
the highest degree.

Terror, when sharply spoken to, would withdraw from his dangerous
proximity to the wolverines, but almost immediately he stepped forward
to the same spot he first occupied, and his obedience to the commands of
the boys was so sullen and ill-natured that they forebore speaking to
him except when his safety seemed absolutely to demand it.

At times there was an interruption in the clamor, but the wolverines did
not appear to relax their vigilance in the least. It was as if they had
determined to make their evening meal upon the party though they were
forced to wait until morning for it. During these intervals of
comparative silence our friends gained opportunity for the exchange of a
few words, but they were often compelled to shout at the top of their
voices to make themselves heard.

During one of these lulls Elwood spoke to Howard.

"What will take place in the morning, when these creatures are not
afraid of our fire?"

"I think they will go away."

"Perhaps so: but we are not so sure of that."

"Shasta will no doubt turn the whole thing over in his mind, and be
prompt enough to act when the danger comes. I suppose we can take to our
canoes and give them the slip in that manner."

"Yes; the Indian appears to have rather a contemptible opinion of them.
He scarcely heeds their wrangling."

"He is not so timid as we and Tim are; but he doesn't forget to look at
them once in a while, so as not to forget what they are doing."

"They are a savage set of animals. How angry Terror is! Don't you notice
that they are trying to entice him to venture out a little nearer them?
They hate him more than all of us."

"Do you think so?"

"You can see it in their manner. If they can once get hold of him they
will tear him to shreds."

"And they will catch him, too, if he isn't careful. He is so surly and
cross himself that it is dangerous to touch or speak to him."

"We can't afford to lose him. We must watch, and if he gets too close to
any of them, why, all we shall have to do is to crack them over, and
give the others warning to keep their distance."

While they were speaking a huge wolverine darted close enough to strike
Terror. Instantly the two closed and rolled upon the ground in the
fierce death struggle. Over and over, snapping, snarling, growling,
biting, scratching with lightning-like fierceness, now one below and
then the other, and finally the dog on top.

The conflict was as short as it was furious. The massive jaws of the
Newfoundland closed on the throat of his antagonist and his teeth met
through his windpipe. There they stuck for a minute, and when he relaxed
his hold it was all over with the reckless animal.

Still it would have fared ill with the dog but for Shasta, for the other
wolverines would have sprung upon him and destroyed him before he could
have escaped. At the moment the two closed the Indian darted forward,
seized a brand and flourished it over the combatants. This so terrified
the others that they kept their distance until the conqueror resumed his
place in triumph by the fire.

This encounter proved it lesson to both the dog and the wolverines. The
latter appeared to comprehend the disadvantage under which they were
placed, while Terror, having had a taste of their mettle, was satisfied
for the time, and kept a safe position further away from the brutes that
were so eager to fasten their teeth in him.

It was now verging toward morning, and the Pah Utah looked about him as
if he were going to make his preparations for moving. He looked toward
the raging creatures, still fierce and furious, and then glanced at the
canoes drawn up within a few feet of the camp-fire, and pointed toward
them and the river.

Fortunately but a few feet intervened between their present position and
the stream, so that the latter was easy of access in case it should
become necessary to retreat before the wolverines. Still the fire did
not protect this enough to make it a safe undertaking in their present
situation.

Shasta picked up several blazing sticks, and carrying them to the
water's edge, placed them together and covered them with some dry
brush-wood. They speedily fanned themselves into a flame, and the
gathering brutes withdrew and offered a fine approach to the river.

The Indian's next proceeding was to launch the two boats. This was done
easily and without difficulty. The blankets and guns were placed within,
and then motioned for the dog to follow; but Terror did not seem
disposed to leave his present quarters. Perhaps the idea worked its way
into his shaggy head that it savored too much of deserting his friends,
or it may be that he still coveted a taste for another collision with
the audacious animals that had pressed him so sorely.

Our brave soldier boys, who abhor bloodshed from a principle, still have
a love for the wild abandon of camp life, and many a one looks back with
a sigh to the rough experiences which we all pray may never come again.
So it may be the Newfoundland, naturally peaceful, having had his blood
fairly roused by his tussle and triumph, yet longed for more of victory.

Finally Howard and Elwood took their seats, and Tim O'Rooney followed;
then Terror, casting one reluctant look behind him, jumped into the boat
and lay down in his usual position; and so, at length, they all were
embarked in safety.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

A HALT.


It was just growing light as the two canoes shoved out in the river and
resumed their journey. The rapacious wolverines, enraged at the loss of
their expected prey, followed them to the very edge of the stream, where
their ear-splitting clamor grew more furious than ever. At one time,
indeed, it looked us though they were about to jump into the water and
swim out to them; and both the boys looked inquiringly at the face of
the Pah Utah. The stolid, indifferent expression that they there saw
relieved them, and they withdrew all further thought regarding the
troublesome animals.

Shasta had loosened the connection between the two boats--not, perhaps,
that he was unwilling to carry them also along, but because he judged it
was time that the party learned to navigate for themselves.

Tim O'Rooney grasped the paddle, and his handling of it showed no
ordinary skill. He had greatly improved upon his performance of
yesterday, and kept his position slightly in the rear of the other
canoe, whose owner, as a matter of course, timed his speed to that of
his pupil.

When the Irishman was tired he passed the paddle to Howard, who had been
carefully studying the "style" of Shasta, and whose efforts were modeled
after his. Practice alone can make perfect, no matter if the theory in
absolutely so. The mind may hold the exact idea, and may send the
precise message through the nerves to the muscles, but the latter must
make a good many trials before they can carry out orders with exactness.

And so the boy, although, as he believed, he imitated exactly the manner
of their dusky friend, was not long in finding that the paddle was by no
means as obedient. The reason was that the delicate play of the iron
muscles of the Pah Utah could not be seen. They had done this thing so
often that it became a matter of course with them.

But having started upon right principles, by the time the boy was so
exhausted that he could not move his arms, he could see that he had
improved, or as the sovereign people say, "he was getting the knack of
it." It was now Elwood's turn, and he caught the paddle with all the
enthusiasm which might be expected in a youngster who had been
impatiently waiting to take part in some game.

By the time Elwood needed rest, Tim O'Rooney was ready, and so the
paddle did unceasing work, each member having all the time necessary for
rest, until after they had been to work some hours, the boys found their
arms remained tired, and a longer cessation needed.

Shasta seemed to look upon these essays of his friends with no little
pleasure. He watched their movements all the time, and a horrible
suspicion once entered the head of Tim O'Rooney that he saw him come
very near smiling. Whether there were any grounds for this suspicion
probably will never be known, unless the Pah Utah takes it into his head
to write and tell us.

Shasta remained a few feet in advance, his back being placed toward the
prow of his own boat. This relative position--and our "pale faced"
friends, it may be said, labored savagely--was kept by him without any
effort. Now and then he touched the point of his paddle, but there was
scarcely a ripple. It was as a fish is sometimes seen to move through
the water with the slightest quiver of its fins.

When all three of our friends were used up, red in the face, panting and
sighing for a chance to take a good long rest, a tiny island came in
view round a bend in the river, and to their joy they saw Shasta fix his
eye upon it and then head his canoe toward the point. Cheered by the
prospect, they renewed their work with greater ardor, and in a few
moments the boats buried their points in the luxuriant undergrowth along
the shore.

The island was quite small, and offered no inducements in the way of
game, unless some animal in crossing the river had paused to rest itself
and make an exploration of the place. This was scarcely to be expected,
and none of the party based any hopes upon it.

After the inmates of the large canoe had stepped upon shore, Shasta sent
his backward into the river again by a sweep of his paddle, and headed
for the eastern bank, shooting over the surface with amazing speed. His
movements were watched with interest and some surprise.

"What can it mean?" asked Elwood.

"Perhaps he is going to leave us."

"I don't think he would do it in that manner. He will make an elaborate
good-by for us, for we are getting to understand each other quite well
by means of signs."

"Arrah now!" exclaimed Tim O'Rooney, "didn't ye saa that he was
disgusted wid our paddling and kaaping him back, and has gone out jist
that he may enj'y the pleasure of shtretching his arms in the
owld-fashioned manner, as Father O'Shaughnessy said when he tipped over
his brother?"

This may have satisfied the Irishman, but hardly the boys. It did not
look reasonable to them that the Indian, having just finished three
times the amount of work performed by each, was in so great need of
additional exercise that he must abandon his friends and paddle off over
the river.

"I think he is going to hunt for fish," said Elwood.

"But he could have caught them without going to land."

"Perhaps not. I noticed yesterday that he went where there was a sort of
eddy, and you see he can't find that very well unless it is close by
land."

Howard pointed to the lower end of the island:

"What better place could he find than that? It is just the spot to catch
fish."

By this time Shasta's canoe had reached the bank, but instead of landing
he turned the prow down stream, and slowly glided along as if in quest
of something. This to Tim O'Rooney was proof of the truth of his
declaration.

"What did I tell yees? The thrip to shore was not enough, and he's
taking a wee turn further."

"He is looking for a good fishing ground," affirmed Howard. "If it were
anything else he would not go so slowly."

"But, see! he has stopped?"

As Elwood spoke the Pah Utah rose in his canoe and stepped ashore. He
stooped and employed himself a moment with the canoe and then
disappeared.

"It cannot be that he has left us," said Elwood, in considerable alarm.

"No; I think he is hunting for game."

This seemed very reasonable, and the party waited patiently for his
return. No personal danger to himself could be expected, as he could not
be approached undiscovered by any hostile white man, and being an Indian
he could have no cause to fear anything from his own race.

Still there was a vague misgiving that everything was not right--that
something unusual would be the result of this separation--and each
member of the little party awaited, with more anxiety than he would have
confessed, some evidence of the intention of the Pah Utah.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

EXIT SHASTA.


The three whites were still gazing toward the eastern shore, intently
looking for some sign, or listening to some sound which might tell
something regarding Shasta, when they were startled by a loud whirring
or buzzing overhead, and looking up saw a large bird passing within a
few feet of them--so close that its claws could be seen curled up
against its body, as it made a sudden sweep to the right, frightened at
its near approach to its human enemies.

"Shoot it!" called out Elwood to Howard. "My gun isn't loaded, and it
will make us a good breakfast."

But the bird, whatever it was, did not choose to wait until the heavy
rifle could be brought to bear upon it; and by the time Howard had
fairly got the idea through his head, it was skimming away over the
country toward the Coast Range.

But a sharper eye and an unerring aim was leveled against it, and as
they were watching its flight it suddenly turned over and over, its
great wings going like the arms of a windmill as it dropped swiftly to
the earth; and, as it disappeared in the trees and undergrowth, the
crack of a rifle came across the intervening space.

"That was Shasta!" exclaimed Elwood in delight.

"Certainly, we might have known what he was after. He thinks we do not
admire fish as a steady diet and has gone after fowl for us."

