the wonderful necktie he had got on, replied, "Well, you see, I gave my
whole mind to it!" he probably spoke the truth.  But then you know a
mind that exhausts all its energy in the production of a "choker,"
however remarkable, cannot be a great one.

I should be sorry to hurt any one's feelings, but it is nevertheless a
fact that an unhealthy craving after finery is very often a symptom of
something not very far short of idiocy.  I do not mean to say Fred Fop
was an idiot.  He had a certain amount of sense; but he would have had a
vast deal more if he had not given so much of his mind to the decoration
of his person.  And with it all he never succeeded, at school at any
rate, in passing himself off for any one more important than he was.  It
is as much a sign of being no gentleman to over-dress as to dress like a
sloven, but, as in every other case, the secret is to find the golden
mean.  I have often seen working-men dressed in a more gentlemanly way
than certain gorgeous snobs of my acquaintance; not that their clothes
were grander or cost more, but because they were _neat_.  That really is
the secret.  It always seems to me a sign of a man being well dressed
when one never notices how he is dressed at all.  If he were badly
dressed, or if he were over-dressed, one would notice it; and it is a
sure sign of his having hit the happy mean when his dress leaves no
impression on your mind at all.

But I am not going to set up as a tailor, and so I will bring this paper
to a close with this one piece of advice; when there is nothing else
left to think about, then by all means let us give our whole mind to the
cut of our coats.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE GROWLER.

Who doesn't know Growler, of our school?  He was a sort of fellow
nothing and nobody could satisfy.  If Growler were a week in an African
desert without a drop of water to drink, and some one were then to come
and offer him a draught, you may depend upon it the fellow would have
something to find fault with.  The rim of the bowl would be too thick,
or there would be a flavour of sand in the water, or the Good Samaritan
who held it to his parched lips wouldn't tilt it up exactly when he
ought to do so.  If his rich uncle were to give him a splendid gold
hunter watch and chain, he would growl because there wasn't a seal
hanging on the latter.  If he were to succeed in getting a third prize,
he'd growl because he had not got the second.  If he got the second,
he'd growl because he had not got the first.  And if he should win the
first prize of all, then he would growl because there was not a higher
one possible.  Was ever such a hopeless fellow to have to deal with!

I dare say you have heard the story of the Scotch elder who, on the
question being raised what service he could render at the church
meetings, replied briskly, "I can always object."  Well, Growler's one
strong point was his talent for objecting, and gallantly he used it.

He was one of those fellows who think a great deal more about the thorn
of the rose than the flower, and who, feeing quite sure that nothing
under the sun is perfect, set themselves to discover the imperfections
in all things.

I remember once a lot of us had planned a most delightful picnic for a
certain holiday.  We were to take two boats some miles up the river to a
certain little island, where we proposed to land and erect a tent.  Each
fellow was to bring some contribution to the picnic, which we were to
partake of with grand ceremony under the willows.  Then we were to have
some music, and generally take it easy.  Afterwards we were to bathe,
and then row some mile or two farther up to the woods, and have a
squirrel hunt; and towards evening, after a picnic tea, drift down with
the stream in time for the nine o'clock bell.  It seemed a perfect plan,
and as we sat and discussed it our spirits rose, and we found ourselves
already enjoying our picnic in prospect.  But presently Growler came
into the room, and as he was to be one of the party, we had to go over
all the plans again to him.  Well, it was too bad!  Not a single detail
in our programme pleased him.

"Row?" he said; "don't we get enough rowing, without having to give up
holidays to it? besides, what's the fun of sitting in a tent, or eating
your food among all the wasps and gnats up in that place?  You surely
aren't going to take that wretched concertina; that'll be enough to give
us the blues, even if it doesn't rain, which it's pretty sure to do.  I
suppose you know the island's about the worst place for bathing--"

"Come, now, old man, it's a first-rate place."

"Well, you may think so; I don't.  In fact, I don't see the fun of
bathing after dinner at all.  You don't expect _me_ to make a fool of
myself hunting squirrels, do you, in those horrid woods?  And you'll
have to have tea, as you call it (though you might as well make one meal
do for both), jolly early if you expect to drift down here by nine.
Why, you won't do it in anything like the time, and fine fun it will be,
sitting like dummies in a boat going at a mile an hour."

This was cheerful, and no amount of argument would do away with our
desirable friend's objections.  The result was, we went, but tried to
alter our programme in some points to please him: But he growled all the
more, and would not enjoy the day himself, nor let us do so; and our
grand picnic, thanks to him, was quite a failure.

It wouldn't have been so bad if the result of Growler's grumblings had
been to give us something better in place of what he wanted us to give
up.  But that is a thing he never did.  He could pick holes to any
extent, but he couldn't fill them up.  There was no scheme or project he
couldn't pull to pieces with the utmost industry, but I never remember
his originating any scheme of his own to take its place.  This was
hardly fair.  If you take something away from a person, and give him
nothing in exchange, it is robbery, and in this respect Growler was an
awful thief.

Isn't it true that if you set yourself to it, you could find fault with
nearly everything?  But in order to do it, you would have to be very
selfish in the first place, and very hard-hearted in the next.  The dog
in the manger is a good type of this happy combination.  He trampled on
the hay that the cows thought so sweet, and wouldn't touch it himself,
and he wouldn't let them touch it either; and that is precisely the
charge to which Growler lays himself open.  Let us hope he is not quite
such a bad sort as this dog.  He had got into a regular habit of
growling, and it would be against his nature altogether to praise
anything cordially.

Supposing Growler to be grown to a man, now; what a desirable creature
he must be!  What a fine man to get on to a committee, or into
parliament!  What a delightful partner to have in business!  Why, he'd
wear out an ordinary man in a month.  What complainings, and
questionings, and disapprovals, and censures would he ever be loading on
the head of his colleagues!--how ready people would be to avoid him and
give him a wide berth!  For, assuredly, if in anything there was to be
found a fault, Growler was the boy to find it.  I remember a fairy tale
about some folk who wanted to find out if a certain lady were a fairy
princess or not; and the way they did it was to lay a pea on the floor
of her room, and cover it with twenty feather beds one on the top of the
other.  Next morning they asked how she slept.

"Not at all," said she, "for there was a dreadful lump in the bed."

Then they knew she must be a fairy!  Perhaps it would be a little too
much to compare Growler with a fairy; but he certainly had a wonderful
knack of discovering peas under the bed; and where there were none to
discover, he found out something else.  Now, you and I, I expect, in
talking of the sun, would speak of it as a glorious light and heat-
giving orb, without which we could none of us get on for a moment.  But
Growler's version of the thing would be quite different.

"A thing full of great ugly spots, that goes scorching up one part of
the earth and leaving another in the cold, and is generally hidden by
clouds from all the rest."

Such is the genial, bright view of things taken by our old schoolmate.

There are two sorts of growlers.  There is the man who honestly attacks
what is really wrong for the sake of making it right, and there is the
man who instinctively grumbles at everything for the mere sake of
growling.  The former class is as useful as the latter is tiresome, and
if we must growl, by all means let us find out some real grievance to
attack.  Grumbling is a habit that grows quickly and with very little
encouragement, and those who go in for it must make up their minds to
have to do with very few friends.  For who would consent to be the
friend of a growler?  It would be as bad as becoming the servant of a
man who kept an electrical machine--he would always be trying it on you!
And he must be content also to find that very few people sympathise
with him.  For when a man is a confirmed grumbler at everything, no one
afflicts himself much about his lamentations, but puts it all down to
his infirmity.

"Poor fellow, his digestion isn't good, or his liver's out of order!"
they will say, and think no more about it.

Growler of our school was an able fellow in his way; and successful,
too, but he wasn't liked.  Some were afraid of him, some detested him,
and most cared very little about him.  I don't suppose he will ever do
much good in the world, for this reason--his influence is so small.  One
would like to know if he is really as unhappy as he would make every one
believe.  I have a notion he is not, but is the victim of a habit which
he has allowed to grow on him till it is past shaking off.  Moral, boys:
When you catch yourselves grumbling, make sure the grievance is a real
one.  If it is, don't be content with grumbling, but follow it up till
the wrong is put right.  But if you find yourself growling merely
because it sounds a fine thing to do, then let growl number one be not
only the first but the last performance of the kind; and no one then
will be able to growl at you.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE BULLY.

There are bullies and bullies.  There is the big brother, for instance,
who considers it as much part of his duty to administer an occasional
cuff to his youthful relative, as he does to stroke his own chin for the
first sign of a beard, or to wear his tall hat on Sundays.  That is not
the sort of bullying any one complains of.  Pretty sort of fellows some
of us would have turned out if we hadn't come in for a little wholesome
knocking about in our day!  What's the use of big brothers, we should
like to know, if it's not to chastise youngsters! and what are younger
brothers made for, if they are not to be occasionally "whopped!"

When I first reached a "bullyable" age, I found myself number three of a
set of five boys.  I had looked on in awe at the discipline inflicted by
my eldest brother on number two; I had been a trembling spectator of
scuffles and tears, and pulled ears and sore knuckles, and knew my turn
for the same hardships was coming.  And so it did.  Number one went to
college, and then number two was cock of the walk, and didn't I catch it
then?  The ears that had recently smarted between another's finger and
thumb were now deaf to my lamentations, and the knuckles that I had seen
bruised and sore now played on my poor countenance as if it had been a
tambourine.  It wasn't pleasant while it lasted, of course; but then it
was all in the regular course of things, and had to be grinned at and
borne; and besides it was a splendid training for me, when I came to be
left ruler of the roost with young number four at my mercy.  Poor number
four! he had a hard time of it.  He was a meek sort of fellow, and took
a lot of bullying.  I've a broken-backed lexicon to this day which often
used to fly across the room at his devoted head, and which he as
regularly picked up and handed back to me.

Never was a czar more absolute than I during the brief years of my
supremacy.

But it was monotonous work bullying a fellow who never showed fight; and
one day, in reply to a touching lamentation on his part, I demanded,
"Why don't you say you won't, then, and stick to it?"  Would you believe
it? the ungrateful fellow took me at my word!  Next time I issued a
decree, he made my hair stand on end by shouting, "Shan't!"  I could not
believe my wits; and when he not only refused, but (in accordance with
my own unlucky advice) positively defied me, I was fairly nonplussed!
In vain the lexicon performed its airy flight; in vain my ruler
flourished over his knuckles; in rain I stormed and raged.  No martyr at
the stake was ever more sublimely firm; and from that day my reign was
over.

It was over as far as he was concerned; but as he resolutely declined to
do his duty in knocking about number five, I had to sacrifice myself for
the family good, and take that young scamp in hand too, and as he was
the youngest, he had nothing to do but wait till he grew up, and then--
when he suddenly discovered he was six feet high--he took a turn at
bullying me, who by that time was a married man with a family.

Now, perhaps, this sort of bullying within ordinary bounds does no great
harm.  In our case we almost seemed to like one another the better for
it, though each in his turn rent the air with his howls and
lamentations.  Perhaps, however, we were exceptional boys, and I am not
going to recommend the system.

The dog mother who routs up her little pup from his comfortable nap, and
shakes him with her teeth, and knocks him down and rolls him over and
worries him till he yaps and yelps as if his last day had come, is not
such a bully as the cat who holds a mouse under his paw, and plays with
it and torments it previous to making a meal of it.

In one case the discipline is salutary and serves a good end; in the
other it is sheer cruelty.

Just let me introduce you to a bully of the true sort--one whom we might
call a _professional_ bully--as contrasted with the _amateur_ big-
brother bullies of whom I have been speaking.

Bob Bangs of our school was a big, ill-conditioned, lazy, selfish,
cross-grained sort of fellow.  He was nearly the tallest fellow in the
fifth form, but by no means the strongest.  He was narrow across the
chest, and shaky about the knees, though we youngsters held him too much
in awe to take this into account at the time.  To the big boys of the
sixth form Bob was cringing and snivelling; nothing was too menial, so
only as he could keep in their good graces.  If he had known how, I dare
say he would have blacked their boots or parted their hair; as it was,
he laid himself out to fetch and carry, to go and come just as their
lordships should direct; and their lordships, I have a notion, winked at
one another and gave him plenty to do.

But to us youngsters Bob was wholly different.  For one of us to come so
much as across his path was sufficient provocation to his spite.  Like a
spider in its web, he would waylay and capture the wretched small fry of
our school and haul them away to his den.  There he would screw their
arms and kick them, just for the pleasure of seeing their faces and
hearing their howls.  Generally, indeed, he managed to invent some
pretext for his chastisement.  This one had made a grimace at him across
the room yesterday; that one had spilt some ink on his desk; poor Jack
Flighty had had the cheek to laugh outside his door while he was
reading; or Joe Tyler had bagged his straw hat instead of his own.

One day, I remember, I, a little unfortunate of ten summers, fell into
his awful clutches.

"Come here, you young beggar!"  I heard him call out.

I dared not disobey, and stood before him shaking in my shoes.

"What are you laughing at?" he says.

"I'm not laughing," I said, feeling anything but in the humour for
jocularity.

"Yes, you are, I tell you--take that!" and a smart box on the ear
followed.

I writhed, but tried hard to suppress my ejaculation of pain.

"What's that you called me?" demanded the bully.

"Nothing," I faltered, rubbing my head.

"Yes, you did," he said; "take that for telling a cram, and that for
calling me names!" and suiting the action to the word he bestowed one
cuff and one kick on my unoffending person, each of which I acknowledged
by a howl.

"Now then," said he, "what did you mean by borrowing Tom Groby's
_Gulliver's Travels_ yesterday when you knew I wanted to read it, eh?"

And he caught hold of my hand and gave my arm a suggestive preliminary
screw.

"I didn't," I said.

"Yes, you did," said he, tightening the pressure, so as to make me catch
my under lip in my teeth.  "You knew well enough I was half through it."

"I mean, I _didn't_ borrow it.  I never saw the book," I shrieked, truly
enough too, for this was clearly a case of mistaken identity.

"Yes, you did, for I was told so."

"I didn't; oh, let me go!"  I cried, twisting under the torture; "it
wasn't me!"

"I tell you it was;" another screw, and another dance and howl from me;
"and what's the use of you saying it wasn't?"

"Indeed it wasn't!"  I yelled, for by this time I was on my knees, and
half dead with agony.  "Oh!  You'll break my arm!  Oh!  Oh!"

"Say you took it, then," replied my tormentor.

"It wasn't me," I shrieked.  "Oh!  _Yes it was_!  Let go!"

Then he let go, and catching me by the collar of my coat with one hand,
pulled my ear with the other, saying--

"What do you mean by telling lies, you young cub?"

"I only said I took it," whimpered I, nursing my sore arm, "because you
made me."

"Then you mean to say you didn't, do you?" cried the bully, with another
grab at my hand.

What would have become of me I don't know, had not a sixth-form fellow
come by at that moment, at the sight of whom Master Bangs let go my arm,
smiled benevolently on me and cringingly on him, and then slunk away to
his den, never to find me again within reach of his ten fingers if I
could help it.

It would be hard to say what object Bob had in this conduct.  He
certainly had not much to gain.  Sometimes, indeed, he succeeded in
compelling his victims to empty their pockets to him, and hand over the
little treasures in the way of eatables, penknives, or india-rubber to
which he might take a fancy, but this was comparatively rare.  Nor was
his bullying actuated by the lofty motive of administering wholesome
discipline on his young schoolfellows.  In fact, so far from doing them
good, he made sneaks and cowards of a good many of them, and, as
happened in my case, led them to tell falsehoods in order to escape his
clutches.

I should be sorry to think that Bob Bangs was influenced by sheer spite
and cruelty of heart, or by a wanton delight in witnessing and
contributing to the suffering of others; yet so one was often forced to
believe.  It is bad enough when one fellow stands by and, without
lifting a finger to help, lets another suffer; but when, instead of
that, he actually makes himself the instrument of torture, he is nothing
short of a brute.

Perhaps, however, it would hardly be fair to say that Bob was quite so
bad as this.  We are bound to give the worst characters their due; and
without attempting to excuse or justify a single blow the Bully ever
struck, we must bear in mind this one thing.

There is a certain class of people to whom power becomes a ruling
passion.  Somebody must be made to feel, and somebody must be brought to
acknowledge it.  These people are generally those who have the greatest
possible aversion to enduring oppression in their own persons, or who
have themselves in their time been roughly handled.  They love to see
others quail before them, as they themselves would be ready to quail
before those they hold in awe; and it is no small set-off against their
own terrors to feel themselves in turn objects of terror to others.
People of this sort are of course generally cowards and toadies, and in
bullying they find the fullest gratification of their craving for power.

Bob may sometimes feel a passing pity for the poor little wretch he is
tormenting; but until that poor little wretch consents to knuckle under,
to apologise, to obey, to accuse himself, in the manner Bob selects, he
must not be spared.

Boys who want to understand what real bullying is, should call to mind
that parable about the servant who, having quailed and cringed and
implored before his lord until he was forgiven his huge debt, forthwith
pounced on a poor fellow-servant who happened to owe him a few
shillings, and, deaf to the very entreaties which he himself had but a
