from the oak tree.  But the enemy's quarter-back pinned him in a moment;
yet not before he had passed the ball neatly to Fisher on his left.
Fisher struggled on a few yards further with the captain and Dangle
backing up, but had to relinquish the ball to the former before he could
reach the half-backs.  Yorke, always wary and cool-headed, had measured
the forces against him, and as soon as he had the ball, ran back a step
or two, to break the ugly rush of two of the enemy who were nearest, and
then with a sweep distanced them, and charging through their half-backs
made a dash for the goal.  For a moment friend and foe held their
breath.  He looked like doing it.  But in his _detour_ he had given time
for Blackstone, the Rendlesham fast runner, to get under way and sweep
down to meet him just as he reeled out of the clutches of the half-
backs.  Next moment Yorke was down, and Dangle was not there to pick up
the ball.

This rush served pretty well to exhibit the strong and weak points of
either side.  It was evident, for instance, that both Ranger and Yorke
were men to be marked by the other side, and that Dangle, on the
contrary, was playing slack.

A series of scrimmages followed, in the midst of which the ball
gravitated back to the centre of the field.  Runs were attempted on
either side; once or twice the ball went out into touch, and once or
twice a drop-kick sent it flying over the forwards' heads.  But it came
back inevitably, so that after twenty minutes' hard play it lay in
almost the identical spot from which it had first been kicked off.

The onlookers began to feel a little depressed.  It was not to be a
walk-over for the School, at any rate.  Indeed, it seemed doubtful
whether from the last and toughest of these scrimmages the ball would
ever emerge again to the light of day.

Suddenly, however; it become evident that the _status quo_ was about to
give way, and that the fortunes of either side were going to take a new
turn.  No one in the game, still less outside, could at first tell what
had happened.  Then it occurred to Yorke and one or two others that
Rollitt, who had hitherto been playing listlessly and sleepily, was
waking up.  His head, high above his fellows, was seen violently
agitated in the middle of the scrimmage, and presently it struggled
forward till it came to where the ball lay.  A moment later, the
Rendlesham side of the scrimmage showed signs of breaking, and a moment
after that Rollitt, quickly picking up the ball, burst through both
friend and foe.

"Back up, Dangle! back up, Ranger!" shouted Yorke.

"Look out behind!" cried the Rendlesham captain.

Rollitt carried that ball pretty much as he had carried Dangle a day or
two before, almost contemptuously, indifferent as to who opposed him or
who got in his way.  The only difference was that whereas he then
walked, now he ran.  And when Rollitt chose to run, as Fellsgarth knew,
even Ranger, the swift-footed, was not in it.

The enemy's forwards were shaken off, and their quarter-backs distanced.
The half-backs closed on him with a simultaneous charge that made him
reel.  But he kept his feet better than they, and staggered on with one
of them hanging to his arm.

"Look out in goal!" shouted the Rendlesham men.

"Back up, you fellows!" cried Yorke.

In his struggle with the man on his arm, Rollitt lost pace enough to
enable Blackstone to overtake and make a wild dash, not at the man, but
the ball.  The onslaught was partly successful, for the ball fell.
Dangle, who was close behind, made an attempt to pick it up, but before
he could do so, Rollitt, like a hound momentarily checked, dashed back
to recover it himself, knocking over, as he did so, both Dangle and
Blackstone.

He had it again, and once more was off, this time with only the enemy's
back to intercept him.  The back did his best, and sacrificed himself
nobly for his side, but he was no match for the Fellsgarth giant, who
simply rode over him, and followed by a mighty roar of cheering from the
onlookers, carried the ball behind the goals, touching it down with
almost fastidious precision exactly half-way between the poles.

A minute later and Yorke, with one of his beautifully neat "places," had
sent the ball spinning over the bar, as unmistakable a goal as the
School had ever kicked.

The cheers which followed this exploit were completely lost on Rollitt,
who, having completed his run, dawdled back to his fellow-forwards, and
had not even the curiosity to watch the issue of the captain's kick.

As the sides changed ends, Dangle, with a black face, came up to him.

"You knocked me over on purpose then, you cad, I could see it!" snarled
he.

"Get out!" said Rollitt, shouldering the speaker aside.

This was too much for Dangle.  Full of rage, he went to Yorke.

"I don't mean to stand this, Yorke.  Rollitt--"

"Shut up!" said the captain.  "Spread out, you fellows, and be ready.
Go to your place, Dangle."

Dangle sullenly obeyed.

"I'll let you see if I'm to be insulted and made a fool of before all
the school," growled he.  "Catch me bothering myself any more."

As if to give him an opportunity of enforcing his protest, the kick-off
of the losing side fell close at his feet.  He picked it up, and for a
moment the sporting instinct prompted him to make a rush.  But he caught
sight of Yorke and Rollitt both looking his way, and the bad blood in
him prevailed.  He deliberately sent the ball with a little side-kick
into Blackstone's hands, who, running forward a step, sent it, with a
mighty drop, right over the School line.  It almost grazed the goal post
as it passed, and it was all Fullerton could do to save the touch-down
before the whole advance guard of the enemy were upon him.

The whole thing had been so wilfully done that there was no mistaking
its meaning.

"Hold the ball!" cried Yorke, as the side ranged out for the kick-off.
"Dangle, get off the field."

"What do you mean?" said Dangle, very white.

"What I say.  You'll either do that or be kicked off."

Here Clapperton interposed.

"Don't go, Dangle; he's no right to turn you off or talk to you like
that before the field because of an accident.  If you go, I'll go too."

"Go, both of you, then," said Yorke.

The two Modern boys looked for a moment as though they doubted their own
ears.  What could Yorke mean, in the middle of a critical match like
this?

He evidently meant what he said.

"Are you going or not?" said he.

It was a choice of evils.  To play now would be to surrender.  To stay
where they were would render them liable to a kicking in the presence of
all Fellsgarth.  They sullenly turned on their heels and walked behind
the goals.  Most of the spectators supposed it was a case of sprained
ankle or some such damage received in the cause of the School.  But the
acute little birds who sat in the oak tree were not to be deceived, and
took good care to point the moral of the incident for the public
benefit.

"Whiroo!  Cads!  Kicked out!  Serve 'em right!  Good riddance!  Play up,
you chaps!"

The chaps needed no encouragement.  With two men short it was next to
impossible to add to their present advantage.  But they contrived to
stand their ground and save the School goal.  And when at last the
welcome "No side" was called, the cheers which greeted them proclaimed
that the School had won that day one of the biggest victories on its
record.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE MODERNS ON STRIKE.

In the festivities with which the glorious victory of the School against
Rendlesham was celebrated Yorke took no part.

The captain was very decidedly down in the mouth.  This was the end of
his endeavour to administer rule with a perfectly even hand, and give no
ground for a whisper of anything like unfair play to the opposition!
This was what his popularity and authority were valued at!  For the
first time in her annals, Fellsgarth fellows had mutinied on the field
of battle and to their captain's face.

Had it been Dangle only, it would have mattered less.  His feud with
Rollitt was notorious, and would account for any ebullition of bad
temper.  But when Clapperton not only patronised the mutiny but joined
in it, things were come to a crisis which it required all Yorke's
courage and coolness to cope with.

It might have solaced him if he could have heard a discussion which was
taking place in the rebels' quarters.

"It served them precious well right," said Clapperton, trying to justify
what, to say the least of it, wanted some excuse.  "We'd stood it long
enough."

"It's bad enough," said Dangle, "to have the fifteen packed with Classic
fellows; but when they take to attacking us before the whole field, it's
time something was done.  I'm as certain as possible that Rollitt
deliberately knocked me over that time."

"It was rather warm measures, though," said Brinkman, "to walk off the
field.  We might have got licked."

"I'm not at all sure if it wouldn't have been a very good thing if we
had," said Clapperton.  "At any rate, it will be a lesson to them what
it might come to."

"Nothing like scuttling a ship in mid-ocean if you want to be attended
to.  The only awkward thing is, you are apt to go down with it," said
Fullerton.

"Do shut up, and don't try to be funny," said Clapperton.  "Of course no
one wants to wreck the clubs.  We shall play up hard next time, and then
they'll see it's worth their while to be civil to us."

"Yes," said Brinkman, "it won't do to let them say we aren't the friends
of the School."

"There's not the least fear of any one thinking that now," gibed
Fullerton.

"Well," said Dangle, "as we are to play the return with Rendlesham this
day week, we shall have a chance of letting them see what we can do.
Only if that cad Rollitt plays, it won't be easy to be civil."

These patriotic young gentlemen were a good deal disconcerted next
morning to find that they had been reckoning without their host.  The
captain had posted up the fifteen to play next week.  The list contained
the names of Fullerton, Brinkman, and two others on the Modern side, but
omitted those of Clapperton and Dangle.

In their wildest dreams the malcontents had never reckoned on the
captain taking such a step as this.  They knew that they were necessary
to the efficiency of any team, and that without them, especially against
Rendlesham, it would be almost a farce to go into the field at all.

At first they were disposed to laugh and sneer; then to bluster.  Then
it dawned on them gradually that for once in their lives they had made a
mistake.  They had not even the credit of refusing to play, but had been
ignominiously kicked out.

A council of war was held, in which mutual recriminations, assisted by
Fullerton's candid reflections on the situation, occupied a considerable
share of the time.

The result of their deliberations was that Clapperton and Dangle went
over in no very amiable frame of mind to the captain.

Yorke, as it happened, was having an uneasy conference with his own side
at the time.  Delighted as the Classics were at the blow which had been
struck at the mutineers, the prospect of almost certain defeat next
Saturday made them anxious for compromise.

"If I were you," said Fisher major, "I'd give them a chance of
explaining and apologising."

"There can be no apology," said Yorke.

"You are quite right in theory," said Denton; "but wouldn't it be rather
a crow for them to see that we are licked without them?"

"We mustn't be licked," said the captain.  "We held our own without them
yesterday."

"Yes; but we were on our own ground, and had a goal to the good before
they struck."

"I think old Yorke is quite right," said Ranger.  "We may be licked, and
if we are they'll crow.  On the other hand, if we let them play now
they'll crow worse.  I think we'd better be beaten by Rendlesham than by
traitors."

"Shan't you let them play at all this half?" said Fisher.

"That depends on themselves," said Yorke.

"Hullo! here they come," said Ranger.

The two Moderns were a little disconcerted to find themselves confronted
with the body of Classic seniors.

"Oh, you're engaged," said Clapperton; "we'll come again."

"No, we were talking about the team; I suppose that's what you've come
about."

"Yes," said Clapperton; "we want to know what it means!"

"Really I don't see how it could have been put plainer.  It means that
the fifteen men named are going to play on Saturday."

"Look here, Yorke," said Clapperton, "if you think I've come over here
to beg you to put Dangle and me into the team, you're mistaken--"

"I don't think it.  You know it's impossible."

"All I can say is, it's sheer spite and nothing else.  Dangle was
deliberately knocked over by that cad Rollitt--"

"Who is not present, and may therefore be called names with safety,"
said Ranger.

"Shut up, Ranger, there's a good fellow," said the captain.

"And Dangle had a right to object," continued Clapperton.

"He had no right to play into the hands of the other side," said Yorke.

"How do you know I did?" said Dangle.

"Do you mean to say you didn't?" said Yorke.

"I didn't come here to be catechised by you.  Are you going to put
Clapperton and me in the fifteen or not?  That's what we came to know."

"No--certainly not," said the captain; "and as that's all, you may as
well go."

"Very well," sneered Clapperton, who was in a high temper, "you'll be
sorry for it.  Come on, Dangle."

"There's only one thing to be done now," said he, when they had got back
to their own side; "we must none of us play.  That will bring them to
reason."

Brinkman approved of the idea.

"There's more sense in that," said he, "than you two sticking out.  That
will reduce the team to a Classic fifteen, and if they get licked it
won't matter."

"There's no possible chance of their making up a fifteen without us?"
asked Dangle.

"None at all.  They haven't the men," said Clapperton, brightening up.
"The fact is, we have them at our mercy; and if they want us to play
again they'll have to ask us properly."

"Meanwhile Fellsgarth will get on splendidly," said Fullerton.

"Shut up.  Don't you see it will be all the better for everybody in the
long run?"

"I can't say I do at present.  It may come by and by--"

"We must see that everybody backs up in this," said Brinkman.  "One
traitor would spoil everything."

"That's what Yorke said on Saturday, wasn't it?" asked Fullerton
innocently, "At least, he said two traitors.  Yorke will not see that
what's right for one fellow is naughty for another."

"Look here, Fullerton," said Clapperton, who was sensitive enough to
feel the sting of all this, "you don't suppose we're doing this for fun,
do you?  Will you promise not to play on Saturday, even if you are
asked?"

"What if I don't?" said Fullerton.

"You won't find it particularly comfortable on this side of the School,
that's all," said Brinkman.

Fullerton meditated and turned the matter over.

"I think on the whole," said he, mimicking Clapperton, "that as this is
for the highest good of the School, and as everybody is to be all the
better in the long run, and as we're all going to be noble and sacrifice
ourselves together, you may put me down as not playing on Saturday.
_Dulce et decorum est pro patria_--I beg pardon, I'm not on the Classic
side yet."

The other players named on the list consented more or less reluctantly
to follow the same example.  After morning school, therefore, when the
fellows looked at the notice board, they saw, to their bewilderment, the
names of the four Modern fellows struck out and the following note
appended to the captain's list--

"Notice.

"The following players protest against the exclusion of two names from
the above list, and decline to play on Saturday, viz., Brinkman,
Fullerton, Ramshaw major, and Smith."

Underneath this, a juvenile hand had carefully inscribed in bold
characters--

"Jolly good riddance of bad rubbish."  Signed, "Wheatfield, W., D'Arcy,
Ashby, Fisher minor."

Fisher minor, who signed this latter manifesto by proxy had hastened to
carry the news of it to his brother.

"The cads!" said the junior.  "We are sure to be beaten; I shall never
dare to get Rollitt twice running."

"What do you mean?" asked the elder brother, turning round.

"Oh, don't tell," said Fisher minor, "I didn't mean to say anything; you
see, I thought he wouldn't fly out, so I asked him last time."
