entirely jist now."

"There's little doubt of that, Peter," said Osman, pausing, and looking
meditatively at the ground.

"Moreober," suggested the negro, "when a man wid a cleber head an' a
purswavis tongue like you tackles a t'ing, it's bery strange indeed if
not'ing comes ob it."

"Well, you may be right after all," returned the Moor slowly.  "I will
go and see this father.  At all events it can do no harm."

"None whateber, massa.  An' I better run back and send Ali arter you."

"Why?  What has he to do with it?"

"Oh!  I only t'ought dat you was huntin' togidder.  It's ob no
consikence.  But I t'ink he knows de janissary officer what has charge
ob de gang, an' if _you_ don't know him Ali might be useful."

"There is wisdom in what you say."

"Eben zough I _is_ a `fool?'" asked the negro simply.

Osman laughed.

"At all events you are an honest fool, Peter, and I'm sorry I burned
your back the other day.  You didn't deserve it."

"Oh, nebber mind dat," returned Peter, feeling really uneasy.  "De
back's all right now.  Moreober I _did_ deserb it, for I's an awrful
sinner!  Wuss dan you t'ink!  Now, if you keep right up as you go, an'
when you comes to de Kasba turn to de right an' keep so till you comes
to de right angle ob de sout' wall.  De fadder he work dar.  I'll send
Ali arter you, quick's I can."

They parted, and while the Moor stalked sedately up the street, the
negro hurried back to the cellar with a message to Ali to follow Osman
without a moment's delay.

Meanwhile Ali had been cleverly engaged by the ready-witted Mrs Lilly,
who, after fiercely ordering the coffee-pounder to "stop her noise,"
come out of the hole, and retire to the kitchen, drew forth a large
leathern purse, which she wisely chinked, and, going towards the stairs,
invited her master to "come to de light an' receibe de money which she
hab made by de last sale ob slippers."

Of course the bait took--none other could have been half so successful.
But Hester apparently had not courage to take advantage of the
opportunity, for she did not quit the hole.  Fortunately Peter arrived
before the cash transaction was completed.  On receiving Osman's message
Ali balanced accounts promptly by thrusting the purse and its contents
into his pocket and hastening away.

Then Peter the Great and Lilly sat down, took a long grave look at each
other, threw back their heads, opened their cavernous mouths, and
indulged in a quiet but hearty laugh.

"Now you kin come out, dearie," said Lilly, turning to the coffee-hole
on recovering composure.

But no response came from the "vasty deep."

"De coast's cl'ar, my dear," said Peter, rising.

Still no response, so Peter descended the few steps, and found Hester
lying insensible on a heap of coffee-beans, and still firmly grasping
the big pestle.  The trial had been too much for the poor child, who had
fainted, and Peter emerged with her in his arms, and an expression of
solemn anxiety on his countenance.

In a few minutes, however, she revived, and then Peter, hurrying her
away from a locality which he felt was no longer safe, placed her under
the charge of his sister Dinah--to the inexpressible regret of Mrs
Lilly and her black maid-of-all-work.

In her new home the fugitive's circumstances were much improved.  Dinah
and her husband had great influence over their owner, Youssef, the
proprietor of the small coffee-house already described.  They not only
managed most of its details for him, but were permitted a good deal of
personal liberty.  Among other things they had been allowed to select
the top of the house as their abode.

To European ears this may sound rather strange, but those who have seen
the flat roofs of Eastern lands will understand it.  Youssef's house,
like nearly all the other houses of the city, had a flat roof, with a
surrounding parapet nearly breast-high.  Here had been placed a few
wooden boxes filled with earth and planted with flowering shrubs.  These
formed quite a little garden, to which Youssef had been wont to retreat
of an evening for meditative and, we may add, smokative purposes.  But
as Youssef had grown old, his eyes had nearly, and his legs had quite,
failed him.  Hence, being unable to climb to his roof, he had latterly
given it up entirely to the use of his black slaves, Samson and Dinah
White.

There was a small excrescence or hut on the roof--about ten feet by six
in dimensions--which formed--their residence.  Behind this, hiding
itself as it were and almost invisible, nestled a smaller excrescence or
offshoot.  It was a mere bandbox of a thing, measuring five feet by
four; it had a window about twelve inches square, and was entered by a
door inside the larger hut.  This was the apartment now assigned to
Hester, who was quietly introduced into the household without the
knowledge or consent of its blind proprietor.

There was a little bed in the small room.  True, it was only a trestle
frame, and a straw-stuffed mattress with a couple of blankets, but it
was clean, and the whole room was neat, and the sun shone brightly in at
the small window at the moment that the new occupant was introduced.
Poor Hester fell on her knees, laid her head on the bed, and thanked God
fervently for the blessed change.  Almost in the same moment she forgot
herself, and prayed still more fervently for the deliverance of her
father.

The view over the housetops from the little window was absolutely
magnificent, including as it did domes, minarets, mosques, palm-trees,
shipping, and sea!  Here, for a considerable time, Hester worked at her
former occupation, for Dinah had a private plan to make a little money
for her own pocket by means of embroidery.

In this pleasant retreat our fugitive was visited one day by Peter the
Great, the expression of whose visage betokened business.  After some
conversation, he said that he had come for the express purpose of taking
Hester to see her father.

"But not to talk to him," he added quickly--"not eben to make you'self
known to him, for if you did, not'ing would keep 'im quiet, an' you an'
he would be parted _for eber_.  Mind dat--for _eber_!"

"Yes, yes, I will remember," said the poor girl, who was profoundly
agitated at the mere thought of such a meeting.

"But you mus' _promise_," said Peter solemnly.

"Promise on you' word ob honour dat you not say one word; not make a
sound; not gib an unor'nary look; not try in any way to attrack his
attention.  Come--speak, else I go home ag'in."

"I promise," said Hester, in a low voice.

"An' you won't cry?"

"I'll try not to."

"Come 'long, den, wid me, an' see you' poor fadder."



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE MIDDY, BECOMING DEFIANT AND VIOLENT, COMES TO GRIEF, AND HESTER'S
BLACK FRIENDS DEVISE STRANGE THINGS.

On the afternoon of the day in which Peter the Great paid his visit to
Hester Sommers in the little boudoir, Ben-Ahmed sent for George Foster
and bade him make a portrait of a favourite dog.

It so happened that our artist had run short of some of his drawing
materials, and said that he could not get on well without them.

"Go to the town, then, got a supply, and return quickly," said
Ben-Ahmed, who was smoking his hookah in the court at the time and
playing gently with the lost Hester's pet gazelle.

The graceful little creature had drooped since the departure of his
mistress, as if he felt her loss keenly.  Perhaps it was sympathy that
drew it and Ben-Ahmed more together than in times past.  Certainly there
seemed to be a bond of some sort between them at that time which had not
existed before, and the Moor was decidedly more silent and sad since
Hester's flight.  In his efforts to recover the runaway he had at first
taken much trouble, but as time passed he left it in the hands of Osman,
who seemed even more anxious than his father to recover the lost slave.

As the midshipman was leaving the court the Moor called him back,
addressing him as usual in Lingua Franca, while the youth, taking his
cue from Peter the Great, answered in English.

"You know something about this English girl?" he suddenly said, with a
steady look at his slave.

"I--I--yes, I _do_ know something about her," replied Foster, in some
confusion.

"Do you know where she hides?"

"N-no; I do not."

"I have been led to understand that British officers never tell lies,"
returned the Moor sternly.

The blood rushed to the middy's face as he replied boldly, "You have
been correctly informed--at least, in regard to those officers who are
true gentlemen."

"Why, then, do you hesitate?" retorted the Moor.  "Do Englishmen blush
and stammer when they tell the truth?  Tell me the truth _now_.  Do you
know where the English girl hides?"

The Moor spoke very sternly, but his slave, instead of becoming more
confused, suddenly drew himself up, and replied in a voice and with a
look as stern as his own--

"Ben-Ahmed, I told you the truth at first.  I do _not_ know where she is
hiding.  I _did_, indeed, know some time ago, but the place of her abode
has been changed, and I do not know now.  I may as well however say at
once that, if I did know, nothing that you can do would induce me to
tell you where she hides.  You may imprison, torture, or slay me if you
choose, but in regard to Hester Sommers I am from this moment dumb!"

There was a curious smile on the Moor's lips while the midshipman
delivered this speech with flashing eyes and energetic action, but there
was no anger in his tone as he replied--

"Englishman," he said quietly, "you _love_ this girl."  If a bombshell
had exploded under his feet our middy could hardly have been taken more
by surprise.  But he had been put on his mettle now, and scorned to show
again a wavering front.

"Yes, Moor," he replied, "I _do_ love her, though I have never told her
so, nor have I the slightest reason to believe that she cares a fig for
_me_.  But I now tell you plainly that I will take advantage of every
opportunity that comes in my way to serve her and help her to escape.  I
now also recall the promise--the word of honour--I gave you, not to try
to escape.  There was a time," continued the middy, in a softened tone,
"when I thought of recalling this promise with defiance to you to do
your worst; but, Ben-Ahmed, I have lived to learn that, after a fashion,
you have been kind to me; that I might have fallen into worse hands;
therefore I am not ungrateful, and I now recall the promise only with
regret.  All the same, my resolve is fixed."

The curious smile still lingered on the Moor's lips as he said, almost
in a jesting tone--

"But you will not try to escape to-day if I let you go into the town for
colours?"

"I make no promise, Ben-Ahmed.  Yet this I may safely say, that I will
not try to clear off on my own account.  Unless to save Hester I will
not at present try to escape; so far you may be sure of my return; but
if I get the chance I will either rescue her or die for her--God helping
me."

The smile vanished from the Moor's lips as he turned, and said gravely--

"It is well, young man, that you confess to the true and only source of
all help.  You Christians, as you call yourselves, have ever seemed to
me unwilling to mention the name of God save when cursing your fellows,
and then you misuse it glibly enough.  Yet there are some among you who
are more consistent in their professions.  Go, fulfil your commission.
I will trust you."

"Thank you, Ben-Ahmed," returned the middy; "but remember, if I never
return, you will understand that I have not broken my word of honour."

The Moor bowed his head in acquiescence, and took a long pull at his
pipe as the midshipman went away.

George Foster was half-way to the town before he recovered from his
astonishment at the strange and unexpected way in which Ben-Ahmed had
received his very plain speaking.  He had expected that chains and the
bastinado, if not worse, would certainly follow, but he had made up his
mind to go through with it--if need be to die--for Hester's sake.  To
find himself, therefore, free to go where he pleased, and to help Hester
to escape if the opportunity to do so should come in his way, was an
amazing state of things which he could scarcely bring himself to
believe.

Of course, our hero had not the slightest expectation of encountering
Hester that day, when he thus freed himself from his parole, and we need
scarcely add that, even if he had met her, he could not have devised any
sudden scheme for her deliverance.  Nevertheless, the mere fact that he
was at liberty to act as he pleased in her behalf had such an effect on
him that he entered the town with a lighter heart than he had possessed
for many a day.  Humming a nautical air as he walked along, and almost
if not quite, for the moment, oblivious of the fact of his condition of
slavery, he became keenly interested in all that he saw as he passed
through the crowded streets, now stopping to admire a picturesque group
of figures with jars and pitchers, awaiting their turn to draw water
from a public fountain, or pausing in front of a turner's shop to
observe with curiosity and interest, the deft way in which the workman
used his toes as well as his fingers in the operations of his trade.

He was thus engaged, in calm contemplation with his back to the street,
when he was very slightly jostled by a passer-by.  He scarcely noticed
the incident, but if he had known who it was that touched him he would
not have remained so placid, for it was Hester herself, in company with
Peter the Great, on their way to the city walls.

As Hester's eyes were fixed on the ground and her thoughts on her
father, while Foster's attention was concentrated on the turner's toes,
neither observed the other, but Peter's sharp eyes had noted the middy,
and he hurried past to prevent a recognition, which might be awkward, if
not dangerous, at the moment.

Presently Foster's attention was attracted by a Moor who was riding
along the street, sitting side-wise as was the wont of Algerines of the
trading-class.  What struck Foster particularly about this man and his
donkey was that the latter was trotting very fast, although it was a
very small animal, and the man on its back a very large one.  He also
observed that the donkey tossed its head and put back its ears as if it
were suffering pain.  As the Moor's hand rested on the donkey's haunch,
the reason at once occurred to Foster, for he had noticed the same thing
before.  It was the practice, among cruel men, to create, and keep open,
a small sore on the haunch of each animal, by irritating which with a
little bit of stick they managed to make their donkeys go in a way that
a spur or a thick stick could not accomplish!

Now, our middy possessed a tender heart, which shrank sensitively from
the idea of giving pain to any living creature, and which almost
exploded with indignation at the sight of wanton cruelty to dumb
animals.

When, therefore, the Moor came alongside of him, Foster gave him a look
of tremendous indignation, at the same time exclaiming, "Shame on you!"

The Moor turned on him a look of mingled surprise and scorn.  At the
same time muttering, "Christian dog!" he brought a stick smartly down on
the middy's shoulders.

This was too much to bear meekly.  The boiling blood in the youth's
heart boiled over into his face.  He leaped forward, seized the donkey's
rein with one hand, caught the man's left leg with the other, and hurled
the rider backward to the ground.

The bump with which the Moor's head came down had the effect of keeping
it low, but the spectators of the incident, who were numerous, rushed
upon the poor middy, seized him, and carried him straight to a court of
justice.

They had a summary method of transacting business in those courts,
especially in simple cases like that of which we treat.  The
investigation was rapid; the evidence of the witnesses emphatic.  Almost
before he had recovered breath our hero was thrown down, his feet were
raised by two strong attendants, his shoes plucked off, and the soles of
his feet made to tingle as if they had been set on fire.

After a few strokes, which he bore in silence, he was led to the common
prison, thrust into it, and left to his meditations.

Meanwhile, Peter the Great conducted Hester to that part of the city
wall where her father was at work among the other slaves.  It chanced to
be the hour when the wretched creatures were allowed to cease work for a
brief space in order to rest and eat.

Poor Hugh Sommers chanced to have seated himself a little apart from the
others, so as to get the benefit of a large stone for a seat.  His
figure was, therefore, prominent, as he sat there worn, weary, and
dejected, consuming his allowance of black bread.  Peter the Great knew
him at once, having already, as the reader knows, seen him in his slave
garb; but Hester's anxious eyes failed for a few moments to pick out the
emaciated frame and strangely clad, ragged figure which represented her
once jovial, stalwart, and well-clothed father.

"Das him," whispered Peter, as he loosely grasped the girl's arm by way
of precaution.

"Where--oh, where?" asked the poor creature, glancing round among the
slaves.

"Now, 'member your promise.  Spoil eberyt'ing if you screech or run to
him.  Look, dis way!  De man what's settin' on de stone!"

"Yes, yes, I see!  Oh--"

She stopped abruptly and trembled, for at the moment her father turned
