"I am glad to hear it, Nat. Then there is nothing in the way of your
continuing here."

"No, sir."

"In that case I want to ask you a question. How would you like to take
up stenography and typewriting?"

"I'd like it first-rate, if I thought I could do anything with them
after I had learned them."

"I would like to have a private secretary who understood stenography,
and the use of the typewriter."

"Oh, Mr. Garwell, do you think I would do?"

"Perhaps. You are bright, and I feel that I can trust you."

"If you want me to, I'll go at stenography and typewriting at once."

"You'll have to have some time for it."

"I can go at night. There are several evening schools I know of."

"Very well, then, you may start in at once, and I will pay your tuition
fees."

"I can pay those out of my savings."

"No, bring the bills to me, Nat. And after this week your duties will be
wholly as my private clerk," added John Garwell.

This made quite a change for our hero. But it was an agreeable one, and
he went at his new duties with vigor. A good school was selected, which
Nat attended five nights in the week.

"This kind of knocks me out," said Dick, when our hero told him of the
change.

"No, it don't," said Nat, quickly. "I've made arrangements for you,
Dick."

"Me? How?"

"You are to come three nights a week, for lessons in arithmetic and
penmanship."

"Do they give the lessons free?"

"No, I am going to settle that."

"How much will you pay?"

"Three dollars a month."

"I ought to pay that."

"No, I am going to do it," said Nat, firmly, and he kept his word.

As John Garwell's private clerk, Nat received ten dollars per week, and
as he had no school bills to pay for himself he found it easy to pay for
Dick. The newsboy was making rapid progress, and this not only pleased
his mother, but also the man who had promised to give Dick a position in
his stationery store.

"I'm going to have a job in the store next month," said the newsboy one
day. "Mr. Andrews' clerk is going to leave, and I am to take his place."

"And how much will Mr. Andrews give you?" asked Mrs. Talcott.

"Six dollars a week to start on, and he says he will give me eight
dollars as soon as I can help on the books."

"I am glad to hear it, Dick."

"I guess I've got Nat to thank for the job," said the newsboy. "I had to
do some writing for Mr. Andrews, and he said the writing was all
right."

"Yes, you can certainly thank Nat," said Mrs. Talcott.

The days passed swiftly for Nat. He made good progress at the evening
school, and Mr. Garwell was correspondingly pleased. Every day the real
estate broker trusted Nat more and more, until the lad occupied a truly
responsible position.

One day Nat was sent to Brooklyn, to have a certain document signed by a
lady of wealth.

"You must get Mrs. Parloe's signature to this, Nat," said his employer,
"and get somebody to witness the signature, and sign here," he added.

"Yes, sir."

"The paper is valuable, and I don't want you to let it go out of your
sight," went on John Garwell.

"I'll take care to keep my eye on it," answered Nat.

He was soon on his way, and after crossing the Brooklyn Bridge, took a
street car to the address given him. It was a fine brownstone house,
with elegant lace curtains at the windows.

"Does Mrs. Parloe live here?" he asked of the girl who came to the door.

"Yes, sir."

"I would like to see her on business," and Nat handed out a card on
which was printed:

    JOHN WILBUR GARWELL,
    Real Estate Broker.

    _Represented by_
    NATHANIEL M. NASON.

The girl told Nat to take a seat, and went off with the card. He waited
for fully five minutes, during which he heard a low murmur of voices in
a back room. Then a tall, dark-eyed man came forward.

"What do you wish of Mrs. Parloe?" he questioned, abruptly.

"Excuse me, but my business is with the lady," answered Nat, politely.
He had been told to transact business with Mrs. Parloe and with nobody
else.

"Oh! I suppose you came about that property," went on the dark-eyed man,
surlily. "If you did, let me tell you, it won't do any good."

To this our hero made no reply.

"Mrs. Parloe will see you upstairs," said the girl, returning, and
showed Nat the way up. The dark-eyed man started to follow, but the girl
called him back.

"Mrs. Parloe wished you to remain below, Mr. Cameron," she said.

At this the man uttered something under his breath which Nat could not
catch. Evidently, he was very angry, and he went into a side room,
slamming the door after him.

Nat found Mrs. Parloe sitting in an easy chair by a front window. She
was something of an invalid and rather old.

"I am glad to see you, Mr. Nason," said she. "Take a seat."

"Thank you," returned Nat. "Here is a note for you from Mr. Garwell,"
and he passed it over.

The old lady read the communication carefully, nodding to herself as she
did so. Then she turned again to our hero.

"Have you the document with you?"

"Yes, ma'am," and Nat brought it forth. "You will have to have somebody
as a witness. Can I call somebody for you?"

The old lady mused for a moment.

"I don't believe Rufus will do it," she said, half aloud.

"Do you mean the gentleman I met downstairs?"

"Yes, my nephew, Rufus Cameron. He does not wish me to transact business
with Mr. Garwell. You may call John, my hired man. He is quite
intelligent."

"Where will I find him?"

"You will--but never mind, Mary can call him."

Mrs. Parloe touched a bell, and soon Mary appeared, and went off to find
the hired man. In the meantime, Nat fixed a reading stand so it could be
used as a writing table, and brought out a stylographic pen his employer
had given him.

Soon the hired man appeared. He was fairly well educated, and showed it
in his face and manner.

"I am going to sign this document, John," said the old lady. "I wish you
to witness my signature."

"Yes, ma'am."

Not without something of an effort, Mrs. Parloe affixed her signature to
the paper. Then Nat handed the document to John, and told him where to
place his own name in full, and also his address. In a minute the matter
was concluded, and Mrs. Parloe told the hired man to go, and he did so.

"I trust Mr. Garwell has no further difficulty in this matter," said the
old lady, as Nat stowed the document away in his pocket.

"He told me to say that he is going to put it through just as soon as
he can," answered Nat. "I don't know anything more about it than that."

"Are you one of his clerks?"

"Yes, ma'am--his private clerk."

"You are rather young for such a position."

"I suppose I am, but Mr. Garwell seems to like me, and I am doing what I
can to please him."

"Mr. Garwell is a good man," said the old lady, and there the interview
came to an end, and Nat left the room. He was just going to leave the
house when the dark-eyed man stepped into the lower hallway, and caught
him by the arm.




CHAPTER XX

RUFUS CAMERON'S BOLD MOVE


"What do you want?" demanded our hero. He did not like the idea of being
detained, now that his business was concluded.

"I want to talk to you a minute," said the man. "Come into the parlor."

"I am in something of a hurry, Mr.----"

"My name is Rufus Cameron. Mrs. Parloe is my aunt. I must talk to you.
Come in."

Rufus Cameron caught a firm hold of our hero and almost forced him into
the parlor. Then he shut the door tightly and stood in front of it.

"What do you want?" demanded Nat. He did not like the looks of Rufus
Cameron. The fellow's face was dissipated.

"You got my aunt to sign a certain document, didn't you?"

"What if I did?"

"I want to see that paper."

"If you do, you'll have to see my employer about it."

"You've got the paper right here. Why can't you show it to me?"

"Because I have no authority for so doing," answered our hero, firmly.

"Humph! It won't hurt you to let me look over the paper," growled Rufus
Cameron.

"I have my orders."

"Did John Garwell tell you not to show me the paper?"

"He told me to have it signed, and to bring it right back."

"Well, I want to see it, and I'm going to do it before you leave this
house."

"Are you going to take the paper away from me!" cried Nat, in alarm.

"I only want to look at it. As soon as I've read it, I'll give it back
to you."

"I can't allow the paper to go out of my possession, Mr. Cameron."

"Mrs. Parloe isn't entirely responsible for what she does. I must see to
it that everything is all right."

"Well, you had better call on Mr. Garwell."

"No, I must see the document while you have it here. Come! hand it
over."

"I will not."

Nat had scarcely spoken when Rufus Cameron caught him roughly by the
shoulder.

"Look here, boy, I am not a man to be trifled with!" he whispered,
fiercely. "Let me see the paper, and it will be all right. But if you
won't, I'll make a whole lot of trouble for you."

"Let go of me!" and Nat tried to pull himself away.

"You stole this ring while you were upstairs," said Rufus Cameron,
quickly, and, putting his hand in Nat's side pocket, he brought it out
again with a diamond ring.

"I--I never saw that ring before," gasped Nat.

"You stole it, I say, and unless you behave yourself, I'll have you
arrested," went on Rufus Cameron, coldly.

Nat was dumfounded, but like a flash he saw through the trick that the
man wanted to play on him.

"You can't fool me, Mr. Rufus Cameron," said he, sharply. "Let me go, or
I'll have you hauled up in court for this. Your dirty trick won't work
with me."

Rufus Cameron fell back, crestfallen. He had not anticipated such
bravery on our hero's part. He was a coward at heart, and too much
liquor had somewhat muddled his brain.

"Then you won't show me the document?" he muttered.

"No."

As Nat uttered the word, Rufus Cameron picked up a sea shell lying on a
mantelshelf, and swung it behind his head.

"If you don't let me see that----" he began.

Nat rushed at him, and pushed him to one side. Then our hero made for
the door. He was just opening it when the seashell was sent whizzing
forward. It hit Nat on the head, and the boy dropped unconscious across
an easy chair.

For the instant Rufus Cameron was startled. Then rushing to the door, he
locked it, and also locked some folding doors leading to a rear
apartment.

"I hope I didn't hurt him much," he muttered. "What a young fool he was
not to let me see the paper."

He propped Nat up in the easy chair, and placed his hand in the boy's
inside pocket. Soon he had the document in his possession, and was
looking over it rapidly.

"Just as I thought. I'm glad I got it. Now, we'll see if Shanley and I
can't outwit Mr. John Garwell."

Nat was already coming to his senses, and Rufus Cameron lost no time in
hurrying to the library of the house. Here he obtained an old document
of no consequence, but which still bore his aunt's signature. Rushing
back, he placed this in the envelope which had held the other paper of
importance.

Nat was just returning to his senses when he found himself being taken
out of the house by Rufus Cameron. The man supported him as far as the
corner and there placed him on a stone step leading to a church.

"Wha--what did you hit me for?" stammered our hero, feebly.

"I didn't mean to do that; really I didn't," said Rufus Cameron,
smoothly. "The shell slipped. I am very sorry--very sorry, indeed."

"It was a mean thing to do."

"It was an accident, I give you my word on it."

Nat felt in his pocket to learn if the document was still there.

"Did you look at that paper?" he questioned.

"No, I didn't. On second thought I have concluded to let my aunt do just
as she pleases in this matter."

Nat felt in no condition to argue. He took out the document, glanced at
it, and shoved it back into the envelope and then in his pocket.

"I'm sorry this happened. I was excited for the minute. Come and have a
drink with me. It will do you good," went on Rufus Cameron.

"I don't drink."

"Shall I show you to the car then?"

"Yes."

When Nat got up the rascal supported him, and thus they made their way
to the car line running to the Bridge. Here, our hero boarded a car, and
Rufus Cameron watched him ride out of sight.

"That was easy after all," muttered Rufus Cameron to himself. "I only
hope it don't make too much trouble in the future. I'll have to let
Shanley have this document without delay, and I'd better get out of
sight until the affair blows over."

Making his way to a neighboring cafe, Rufus Cameron treated himself to a
drink of strong liquor and a black-looking cigar. Then he returned to
his aunt's home. He lived with her, and was doing his best to get
certain of her properties away from her.

"Aunt Jane, what did that young man want?" he asked, as he entered her
room.

"He came to see me on private business, Rufus," was the quiet answer.
Mrs. Parloe did not fancy her nephew's habits, and had often warned him
that he must reform.

"Was there anything I could do for you?"

"No, Rufus."

