
"I am afraid I have nothing else which you would regard as satisfactory.
The loss of a cow will diminish my income. Instead of three, I ought to
have four or five. I shouldn't like to be reduced to two."

"Very likely not; but an honest man is willing to make a sacrifice in
order to meet his just liabilities. Besides, you expect to have the
money, you say, in a couple of months. When it has come, you may have
your cow back, on paying two months' interest on the deferred payment.
That is only fair."

"Say no more, Squire Hudson," said the farmer. "I must, of course,
consent to this arrangement since you insist upon it. How soon do you
wish for the cow?"

"You had better let your son Walter drive it over this afternoon."

"He is losing no time," thought Mark Nelson, bitterly. "He does not even
appear to be willing that I should have the benefit of this night's
milking."

"You may send me Whiteface," continued Squire Hudson, who knew that this
was the most valuable of the three cows.

"That is my best cow," protested the farmer "That makes little
difference, as you expect to redeem it in two months."

Mark Nelson was silent. He felt indignant with Squire Hudson for his
cruel exaction; but he felt that he was in his power, and that he must
submit to his exactions.

"You will attend to this matter?" asked the squire, as he rose and
prepared to go.

"Yes," answered the farmer, coldly.

When his creditor was gone he went into the kitchen and acquainted the
family with what had passed. Great were the grief and indignation of the
children, and Walter expressed a desire that Squire Hudson might lose
all his property as a fitting reward for his meanness.

"Heaven help me if I can't meet the next interest!" said Mark Nelson,
later in the day, to his wife.

"Don't be too much troubled about the future, Mark," said his wife, who
was of a more hopeful temperament than her husband; "I am sure that you
will get some help from Tom before six months are over."

"I hope so," answered her husband; but for the rest of the day he was
very grave.

Walter drove over Whiteface, at his father's request; but he came near
crying, stout boy as he was, at the loss of the faithful animal which
his father had reared from a calf.




CHAPTER XX.

AT SACRAMENTO.


After his escape from the grizzly Tom had no further adventures of an
exciting character. One afternoon he and his companions arrived at
Sacramento. It was but a small settlement, but was more town-like than
any place they had yet seen in California. They drove to a two-story
frame building, which was the chief hotel in the town. Taking the
precaution to inquire the price of board and lodging, they were dismayed
by the extravagance of the charges. Tom saw that his reserve fund of
twenty dollars would scarcely last him forty-eight hours.

"I can't stay here, Mr. Ferguson," he said. "I will take my chances and
camp out, if necessary."

"I agree with you, lad; I'm not inclined to waste my substance on
luxurious living."

"There won't be much luxurious living, I guess," said Ebenezer Onthank,
who, with Yankee curiosity, had already visited the kitchen and obtained
some idea of the fare to be expected. "I kin get better board at Green
Mountain Mills for three dollars a week, and folks are darned glad to
accommodate you for that price. These chaps seem to think and act as if
we were made of money."

"I wish some of your Green Mountain Mills boarding-houses were here,"
said Tom. "I could save plenty of money then."

"Well, gentlemen, do you want to stay here?" inquired the landlord.

"We'd like to, squire, but not bein' millionaires I guess we'll have to
put it off till times are better."

"Just as you say," said the landlord, indifferently. "There's others
waiting for the only room I have empty." Then, noticing for the first
time the express wagon which Tom had left outside, he asked, in a tone
of interest, "Who owns that team?"

"It belongs to this boy and myself," answered Ferguson.

"Where did it come from?"

"The States."

"You don't want to sell, do you?"

Tom was about to reply in the affirmative, but the Scot, more shrewd,
answered indifferently, "We may sell it when we get to San Francisco."

"I need just such a team as that," said the landlord, eagerly. "I'll
give you a good price for it. You can go down the river to Frisco."

"I suppose we might," said Ferguson, slowly, "if it was worth our
while."

"What'll you take, cash down?" inquired the landlord, earnestly.

"Nay, my friend, I prefer to hear your views as to the price."

"I will give you eight hundred dollars for the wagon."

This was certainly an excellent profit, for but three hundred had been
paid for horse and wagon. Tom's heart beat fast with excitement, for he
remembered that one-third of the money would come to him. If it had
depended upon him he would have clinched the bargain at once, but he
wisely left the matter in the hands of his companion and partner.

"That seems a fair offer," said Ferguson; "but I think we may as well
wait till we reach San Francisco. Besides, we want to sell the horse,
too."

"I will give you a thousand dollars for the two," said the landlord.

A man with his pantaloons tucked in his boots, a coarse woolen shirt,
and a wide-brimmed sombrero, which overshadowed a face bearing a beard
of a week's growth, was leaning against the door-post.

"Landlord," said he, "I see your price, and I'll go two hundred better."

Tom stared at the speaker in surprise. He looked like a man who would
have found it hard to raise twelve dollars, yet he had made an offer of
twelve hundred. Our hero did not learn till afterwards that the man had
"struck it rich" at the mines, sold out his claim for ten thousand
dollars, and for the time being was the lucky possessor of a large bank
account.

"Now, Tom Scott," expostulated the landlord, "this ain't fair. I want
the wagon more'n you do, and you're a-raisin' the price on me."

"How do you know that?" drawled Scott. "I've got a pile, and I mean to
take it easy while it lasts. I'm going back to the mines like a
gentleman, with my own team, you bet, if I've got money enough to buy
one."

The landlord was satisfied that, if he wanted the team, he must outbid
his competitor, and advanced his offer to thirteen hundred dollars. But
Tom Scott was not terrified. His money had come easily, and he would not
let two or three hundred dollars stand in the way of his wishes.

"I'll go fifteen," he drawled.

The landlord shrugged his shoulders, and said, in a disappointed tone,
"You'll have to take it, Scott. You've gone ahead of my pile."

"Well, stranger, is it a bargain?" asked Scott.

The Scotchman, though inwardly elated as well as astonished at the
extraordinary offer he had received, answered quietly, "If my partner
agrees."

"I guess we'd better sell," said Tom, trying not to betray his inward
satisfaction.

"All right," said Scott, appearing to be well pleased. "You can have
your money when you want it. If you are going to Frisco, I'll give you
an order on my banker there."

"Tom Scott's a square man, and his order will fetch the money," said the
landlord, observing Ferguson's prudent hesitation.

"That is satisfactory," replied Ferguson.

In five minutes more the business was concluded, and Ferguson and Tom,
longing to congratulate each other on their good fortune, walked off
together.

"We're in luck, Mr. Ferguson," said Tom. "I don't know whether I stand
on my head or my heels. I never expected such a price."

"Twelve hundred dollars is a great profit," said Ferguson. "I almost
doubt whether we are justified in asking such an extortionate price of
the poor man."

"He is pleased with his bargain, and I don't think we need to trouble
ourselves about that," answered Tom. "Besides, you know we can't compare
prices with those at home."

"No doubt there is reason in what you say, my lad; but it's not easy at
first to make allowance for the difference."

"That's so, Mr. Ferguson. When shall we go to San Francisco?"

"We will go to-morrow, if we can. I suppose you will wish to send some
money to your father."

"Yes, I am in a hurry to send to him, for I am sure he needs it already.
I can hardly realize that I am worth five hundred dollars."

"Five hundred?"

"Yes, I had a third share in the team."

"That isn't my way of looking at it, Tom."

"Is it possible Mr. Ferguson would cheat me out of my fair share?"
thought Tom, but he only harbored the suspicion for an instant. He had
seen too much of his friend to believe such a thing, and he quietly
waited for an explanation.

"I'll tell you how I propose that we divide it, Tom. First we'll take
out the money each of us put in, one hundred for you and two hundred for
me, and then we'll divide the profit equally."

"But," protested Tom, "you are entitled to two-thirds."

"Then I won't take it," said Ferguson, decidedly. "I only want half of
the profit. That will give me eight hundred dollars, and that ought to
satisfy me."

"And I shall have seven hundred," said Tom, his eyes sparkling.

"Precisely."

"How kind you are, Mr. Ferguson!" exclaimed Tom, eagerly seizing the
Scotchman's hand.

"No, my lad; I am only just. I am glad to help a boy who is working for
his father and family."

"I shouldn't deserve to succeed if I didn't," said Tom, earnestly.

"Always bear that in mind, my lad, and God will smile on your efforts,
and raise you up friends."

In spite of the high price, Tom and his partner felt justified now in
stopping over night at the hotel where they had met with such a piece of
good luck, and the next day started down the river for San Francisco.




CHAPTER XXI.

TOM BUYS A BUSINESS.


It was an interesting moment for our two friends when they landed in San
Francisco. The future Western metropolis was only a town of scattered
wooden and adobe houses, with irregular streets and a general lack of
uniformity in its buildings; but everybody seemed on the alert. The
number of drones was wonderfully small; even the constitutionally lazy
could not resist the golden incentives to labor. Money was looked upon
with very different eyes there and at the East. No one took the trouble
to dispute prices; and a man who landed with an article rare or
desirable could often obtain twenty times its value. Within ten minutes
of his arrival Tom witnessed a case of this kind.

Just as he was entering Montgomery street he noticed a man--evidently a
new-comer--with a fine bunch of pineapples in his hand. He had just
arrived in the steamer Columbus, then anchored out in the stream.

"I shouldn't mind having one of those pineapples," said Tom to Ferguson.

"Doubtless they are high-priced, being a rarity," said the Scotchman.

Just then a passer-by, attracted like Tom, and feeling a similar
longing, stepped up to the new-comer.

"Are those pineapples for sale?" he asked.

"Yes, if you'll pay enough," was the half-jocular reply.

"Name your price."

"Ten dollars."

"Here is your money;" and he put a gold piece into the hand of the
astounded passenger, which represented ten times the sum he had paid for
the fruit at San Blas.

"That's a pretty steep price," said Tom, "for six pineapples."

"It is very wasteful to spend such a sight of money to pamper the
appetite," said the canny Scot. "Truly, a fool and his money are soon
parted."

He was destined to be still more surprised. The purchaser within five
minutes transferred half his purchase to another for fifteen dollars.

"Gold seems to be plenty here," said Tom.

"I hope all provisions are not as high," said Ferguson, "or we shall
soon have a chance to spend all we have."

"Where shall we go first?" asked Tom.

"We had better go to a public house, and secure a lodging," said
Ferguson.

"I wish I knew some one here to direct me."

Scarcely had Tom uttered these words than he cried out in surprise,
"Why, there's John Miles!"

They were passing a little, unpainted, wooden building, of one and a
half stories, used as a grocery. A German name was on the sign; but
behind the rough counter stood the familiar form of John Miles.

Tom dashed into the store, followed by his more dignified companion.

"How are you, John?" he exclaimed.

"Why, if it isn't Tom," returned Miles, his face showing the joy he
felt. "And here's Mr. Ferguson, too."

Then there ensued a hearty shaking of hands, followed by the question,
"When did you get here?"

"About twenty minutes ago."

"And you came straight to me. That's good."

"So it is; but it's an accident. We had no idea where you were. So you
are a grocer, John. Is the place yours?"

"If it is, then I've changed my name," said Miles, pointing to the sign
