them,--the Jacks found little to complain of, a big inclosure with
plenty of good food, and no enemies to annoy them.

The very next morning their training began. A score of hatchways were
opened into a much larger field--the Park. After a number of Jacks had
wandered out through these doors a rabble of boys appeared and drove
them back, pursuing them noisily until all were again in the smaller
field, called the Haven. A few days of this taught the Jack-rabbits
that when pursued their safety was to get back by one of the hatches
into the Haven.

Now the second lesson began. The whole band were driven out of a side
door into a long lane which led around three sides of the Park to
another inclosure at the far end. This was the Starting Pen. Its door
into the arena--that is, the Park--was opened, the Rabbits driven
forth, and then a mob of boys and Dogs in hiding, burst forth and
pursued them across the open. The whole army went bobbing and bounding
away, some of the younger ones soaring in a spy-hop, as a matter of
habit; but low skimming ahead of them all was a gorgeous
black-and-white one; clean-limbed and bright-eyed, he had attracted
attention in the pen, but now in the field he led the band with easy
lope that put him as far ahead of them all as they were ahead of the
rabble of common Dogs.

"Luk at thot, would ye--but ain't he a Little Warhorse?" shouted a
villainous-looking Irish stable-boy, and thus he was named. When
halfway across the course the Jacks remembered the Haven, and all swept
toward it and in like a snow-cloud over the drifts.

This was the second lesson--to lead straight for the Haven as soon as
driven from the Pen. In a week all had learned it, and were ready for
the great opening meet of the Coursing Club.

The Little Warhorse was now well known to the grooms and hangers-on;
his colors usually marked him clearly, and his leadership was in a
measure recognized by the long-eared herd that fled with him. He
figured more or less with the Dogs in the talk and betting of the men.

"Wonder if old Dignam is going to enter Minkie this year?"

"Faix, an' if he does I bet the Little Warhorse will take the gimp out
av her an' her runnin' mate."

"I'll bet three to one that my old Jen will pick the Warhorse up before
he passes the grand stand," growled a dog-man.

"An' it's meself will take thot bet in dollars," said Mickey, "an',
moore than thot, Oi'll put up a hull month's stuff thot there ain't a
dog in the mate thot kin turrn the Warrhorrse oncet on the hull coorse."

So they wrangled and wagered, but each day, as they put the Rabbits
through their paces, there were more of those who believed that they
had found a wonderful runner in the Warhorse, one that would give the
best Greyhounds something that is rarely seen, a straight stern chase
from Start to Grand Stand and Haven.


VI

The first morning of the meet arrived bright and promising. The Grand
Stand was filled with a city crowd. The usual types of a racecourse
appeared in force. Here and there were to be seen the dog-grooms
leading in leash single Greyhounds or couples, shrouded in blankets,
but showing their sinewy legs, their snaky necks, their shapely heads
with long reptilian jaws, and their quick, nervous yellow eyes--hybrids
of natural force and human ingenuity, the most wonderful
running-machines ever made of flesh and blood. Their keepers guarded
them like jewels, tended them like babies, and were careful to keep
them from picking up odd eatables, as well as prevent them smelling
unusual objects or being approached by strangers. Large sums were
wagered on these Dogs, and a cunningly placed tack, a piece of doctored
meat, yes, an artfully compounded smell, has been known to turn a
superb young runner into a lifeless laggard, and to the owner this
might spell ruin. The Dogs entered in each class are paired off, as
each contest is supposed to be a duel; the winners in the first series
are then paired again. In each trial, a Jack is driven from the
Starting-pen; close by in one leash are the rival Dogs, held by the
slipper. As soon as the Hare is well away, the man has to get the Dogs
evenly started and slip them together. On the field is the judge,
scarlet-coated and well mounted. He follows the chase. The Hare,
mindful of his training, speeds across the open, toward the Haven, in
full view of the Grand Stand. The Dogs follow the Jack. As the first
one comes near enough to be dangerous, the Hare balks him by dodging.
Each time the Hare is turned, scores for the Dog that did it, and a
final point is made by the kill.

Sometimes the kill takes place within one hundred yards of the
start--that means a poor Jack; mostly it happens in front of the Grand
Stand; but on rare occasions it chances that the Jack goes sailing
across the open Park a good half-mile and, by dodging for time, runs to
safety in the Haven. Four finishes are possible: a speedy kill; a
speedy winning of the Haven; new Dogs to relieve the first runners, who
would suffer heart-collapse in the terrific strain of their pace, if
kept up many minutes in hot weather; and finally, for Rabbits that by
continued dodging defy and jeopardize the Dogs, and yet do not win the
Haven, there is kept a loaded shotgun.

There is just as much jockeying at a Kaskado coursing as at a Kaskado
horse-race, just as many attempts at fraud, and it is just as necessary
to have the judge and slipper beyond suspicion.

The day before the next meet a man of diamonds saw Irish Mickey--by
chance. A cigar was all that visibly passed, but it had a green wrapper
that was slipped off before lighting. Then a word: "If you wuz slipper
to-morrow and it so came about that Dignam's Minkie gets done,
wall,--it means another cigar."

"Faix, an' if I wuz slipper I could load the dice so Minkie would flyer
score a p'int, but her runnin' mate would have the same bad luck."

"That so?" The diamond man looked interested. "All right--fix it so; it
means two cigars."

Slipper Slyman had always dealt on the square, had scorned many
approaches--that was well known. Most believed in him, but there were
some malcontents, and when a man with many gold seals approached the
Steward and formulated charges, serious and well-backed, they must
perforce suspend the slipper pending an inquiry, and thus Mickey Doo
reigned in his stead.

Mickey was poor and not over-scrupulous. Here was a chance to make a
year's pay in a minute, nothing wrong about it, no harm to the Dog or
the Rabbit either.

One Jack-rabbit is much like another. Everybody knows that; it was
simply a question of choosing your Jack.

The preliminaries were over. Fifty Jacks had been run and killed.
Mickey had done his work satisfactorily; a fair slip had been given to
every leash. He was still in command as slipper. Now came the final for
the cup--the cup and the large stakes.


VII

There were the slim and elegant Dogs awaiting their turn. Minkie and
her rival were first. Everything had been fair so far, and who can say
that what followed was unfair? Mickey could turn out which Jack he
pleased.

"Number three!" he called to his partner.

Out leaped the Little Warhorse,--black and white his great ears, easy
and low his five-foot bounds; gazing wildly at the unwonted crowd about
the Park, he leaped high in one surprising spy-hop.

"Hrrrrr!" shouted the slipper, and his partner rattled a stick on the
fence. The Warhorse's bounds increased to eight or nine feet.

"Hrrrrrr!" and they were ten or twelve feet. At thirty yards the Hounds
were slipped--an even slip; some thought it could have been done at
twenty yards.

"Hrrrrrr! Hrrrrrrr!" and the Warhorse was doing fourteen-foot leaps,
not a spy-hop among them.

"Hrrrrr!" wonderful Dogs! how they sailed; but drifting ahead of them,
like a white sea-bird or flying scud, was the Warhorse. Away past the
Grand Stand. And the Dogs--were they closing the gap of start? Closing!
It was lengthening! In less time than it takes to tell it, that
black-and-white thistledown had drifted away through the Haven
door,--the door so like that good old hen-hole,--and the Grey-hounds
pulled up amidst a roar of derision and cheers for the Little Warhorse.
How Mickey did laugh! How Dignam did swear! How the newspaper men did
scribble--scribble--scribble!

Next day there was a paragraph in all the papers: "WONDERFUL FEAT OF A
JACKRABBIT. The Little Warhorse, as he has been styled, completely
skunked two of the most famous Dogs on the turf," etc.

There was a fierce wrangle among the dog-men. This was a tie, since
neither had scored, and Minkie and her rival were allowed to run again;
but that half-mile had been too hot, and they had no show for the cup.

Mickey met "Diamonds" next day, by chance.

"Have a cigar, Mickey."

"Oi will thot, sor. Faix, thim's so foine; I'd loike two--thank ye,
sor."


VIII

From that time the Little Warhorse became the pride of the Irish boy.
Slipper Slyman had been honorably reinstated and Mickey reduced to the
rank of Jack-starter, but that merely helped to turn his sympathies
from the Dogs to the Rabbits, or rather to the Warhorse, for of all the
five hundred that were brought in from the drive he alone had won
renown. There were several that crossed the Park to run again another
day, but he alone had crossed the course without getting even a turn.
Twice a week the meets took place; forty or fifty Jacks were killed
each time, and the five hundred in the pen had been nearly all eaten of
the arena.

The Warhorse had run each day, and as often had made the Haven. Mickey
became wildly enthusiastic about his favorite's powers. He begot a
positive affection for the clean-limbed racer, and stoutly maintained
against all that it was a positive honor to a Dog to be disgraced by
such a Jack.

It is so seldom that a Rabbit crosses the track at all, that when Jack
did it six times without having to dodge, the papers took note of it,
and after each meet there appeared a notice: "The Little Warhorse
crossed again today;  old-timers say it shows how our Dogs are
deteriorating."

After the sixth time the rabbit-keepers grew enthusiastic, and Mickey,
commander-in-chief of the brigade, became intemperate in his
admiration. "Be jabers, he has a right to be torned loose. He has won
his freedom loike ivery Amerikin done," he added, by way of appeal to
the patriotism of the Steward of the race, who was, of course, the real
owner of the Jacks.

"All right, Mick; if he gets across thirteen times you can ship him
back to his native land," was the reply.

"Shure now, an' won't you make it tin, sor?"

"No, no; I need him to take the conceit out of some of the new Dogs
that are coming."

"Thirteen toimes and he is free, sor; it's a bargain."

A new lot of Rabbits arrived about this time, and one of these was
colored much like Little Warhorse. He had no such speed, but to prevent
mistakes Mickey caught his favorite by driving him into one of the
padded shipping-boxes, and proceeded with the gate-keeper's punch to
earmark him. The punch was sharp; a clear star was cut out of the thin
flap, when Mickey exclaimed: "Faix, an' Oi'll punch for ivery toime ye
cross the coorse." So he cut six stars in a row. "Thayer now,
Warrhorrse, shure it's a free Rabbit ye'll be when ye have yer thirteen
stars like our flag of liberty hed when we got free."

Within a week the Warhorse had vanquished the new Greyhounds and had
stars enough to go round the right ear and begin on the left. In a week
more the thirteen runs were completed, six stars in the left ear and
seven in the right, and the newspapers had new material.

"Whoop!" How Mickey hoorayed! "An' it's a free Jack ye are, Warrhorrse!
Thirteen always wuz a lucky number. I never knowed it to fail."


IX

"Yes, I know I did," said the Steward. "But I want to give him one more
run. I have a bet on him against a new Dog here. It won't hurt him now;
he can do it. Oh, well. Here now, Mickey, don't you get sassy. One run
more this afternoon. The Dogs run two or three times a day; why not the
Jack?"

"They're not shtakin' thayre loives, sor."

"Oh, you get out."

Many more Rabbits had been added to the pen,--big and small, peaceful
and warlike,--and one big Buck of savage instincts, seeing Jack
Warhorse's hurried dash into the Haven that morning, took advantage of
the moment to attack him.

At another time Jack would have thumped his skull, as he once did the
Cat's, and settled the affair in a minute; but now it took several
minutes, during which he himself got roughly handled; so when the
afternoon came he was suffering from one or two bruises and stiffening
wounds; not serious, indeed, but enough to lower his speed.

The start was much like those of previous runs. The Warhorse steaming
away low and lightly, his ears up and the breezes whistling through his
thirteen stars.

Minkie with Fango, the new Dog, bounded in eager pursuit, but, to the
surprise of the starters, the gap grew smaller. The Warhorse was losing
ground, and right before the Grand Stand old Minkie turned him, and a
cheer went up from the dog-men, for all knew the runners. Within fifty
yards Fango scored a turn, and the race was right back to the start.
There stood Slyman and Mickey. The Rabbit dodged, the Greyhounds
plunged; Jack could not get away, and just as the final snap seemed
near, the Warhorse leaped straight for Mickey, and in an instant was
hidden in his arms, while the starter's feet flew out in energetic
kicks to repel the furious Dogs. It is not likely that the Jack knew
Mickey for a friend; he only yielded to the old instinct to fly from a
certain enemy to a neutral or a possible friend, and, as luck would
have it, he had wisely leaped and well. A cheer went up from the
benches as Mickey hurried back with his favorite. But the dog-men
protested "it wasn't a fair run--they wanted it finished." They
appealed to the Steward. He had backed the Jack against Fango. He was
sore now, and ordered a new race.

An hour's rest was the best Mickey could get for him. Then he went as
before, with Fango and Minkie in pursuit. He seemed less stiff now--he
ran more like himself; but a little past the Stand he was turned by
Fango and again by Minkie, and back and across, and here and there,
leaping frantically and barely eluding his foes. For several minutes it
lasted. Mickey could see that Jack's ears were sinking. The new Dog
leaped. Jack dodged almost under him to escape, and back only to meet
the second Dog; and now both ears were flat on his back. But the Hounds
were suffering too. Their tongues were lolling out; their jaws and
heaving sides were splashed with foam. The Warhorse's ears went up
again. His courage seemed to revive in their distress. He made a
straight dash for the Haven; but the straight dash was just what the
Hounds could do, and within a hundred yards he was turned again, to
begin another desperate game of zigzag. Then the dog-men saw danger for
