
"I dare say he ran off while we were thumpin' the bull," suggested
Eddie.

"I'm here, boys!  I'm here, Junkie," cried a strange sepulchral voice,
as if from the bowels of the earth.

"Where?" asked the boys gazing down at their feet with expressions of
awe.

"He's i' the drain!" cried Junkie with an expanding mouth.

"Ay--that's it!  I'm in the drain!  Lend a hand, boys; I can hardly
move."

They ran to him instantly, but it required the united powers of all
three to get him out, and when they succeeded he was found to be coated
all over one side with thick mud.

"What a muddle you've made of yourself, to be sure!" exclaimed Junkie.
"Let me scrape you."

But MacRummle refused to be scraped until they had placed the five-foot
wall between himself and the black bull.  Then he submitted with a
profound sigh.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

PECULIAR INCIDENTS OF A SABBATH AMONG THE WESTERN ISLES.

One beautiful Sunday morning while the party assembled in Kinlossie
House was at breakfast, a message was brought to the laird that he "wass
wantit to speak wi' the poy Tonal'."

"Well, Donald, my lad, what want ye with me this fine morning?" asked
the laird, on going out to the hall.

"I wass telt to tell ye the'll be no kirk the day, for the minister's
got to preach at Drumquaich."

"Very well, Donald.  Have you had breakfast?"

"Oo, ay."

"Go into the kitchen, then, and they will give you some more."

"Thenkee, sir."

"I find," said the laird on returning to his friends, "that we are to
have no service to-day in our little church, as our minister has to take
the duty at Drumquaich, on the other side of the loch.  So those of you
who are bent on going to church must make up your minds to cross the
loch in the boat."

"Is Drumquaich the little village close under the pine wood, that we see
on doubling Eagle Point?" asked Mabberly.

"The same.  The little church there, like our own, is not supplied
regularly.  Sometimes a Divinity student is sent down to them.
Occasionally they have a great gun from Edinburgh."

"I think some of the students are better than the great guns," remarked
Mrs Gordon quietly.

"True, my dear, and that is most natural, for it stands to reason that
some at least of the students must be the great guns of the future in
embryo; and they have the freshness of youth to set against the weight
of erudition."

"The student who preached to us here last Sunday," observed Barret,
"must surely be an embryo great gun, for he treated his subject in a
learned and masterly way that amazed me.  From the look of him I would
not have expected even an average discourse."

"That was partly owing to his modest air and reticence," returned the
laird.  "If you heard him converse on what he would call metapheesical
subjects, you would perhaps have been still more surprised."

"Well, I hope he will preach to-day," said Barret.

"From which I conclude that you will be one of the boat party.  My wife
and Milly make three, myself four; who else?"

"No--don't count me" interrupted the hostess; "I must stay with Flo;
besides, I must visit poor Mrs Donaldson, who is again laid up.  But
I'll be glad if you will take Aggy Anderson.  Ever since the poor girl
came here for a little change of air she has been longing to go out in
the boat.  I really believe it is a natural craving for the free, fresh
breezes of the sea.  May she go?"

"By all means; as many as the boat will hold," returned the laird.

It was finally arranged that, besides those already mentioned, Mabberly,
Jackman, MacRummle, Quin, the three boys, Roderick the groom, and Ian
Anderson, as boatman in charge, should cross over to the little church
at Drumquaich, about eight miles distant by water.

While they were getting ready, Mrs Gordon and Flo, with the beloved
black dolly, paid a visit to old Molly, the keeper's mother.  They found
her in her arm-chair, sitting by the large, open chimney, on the hearth
of which a very small fire was burning--not for the sake of warmth, but
for the boiling of an iron pot which hung over it.

The old woman was enveloped in a large, warm shawl--a gift from the
"Hoose."  She also wore a close-fitting white cap, or "mutch," which was
secured to her head by a broad, black ribbon.  The rims of her
spectacles were of tortoiseshell, and she had a huge family Bible on her
knee, while her feet rested upon a three-legged stool.  She looked up
inquiringly as her visitors entered.

"Why, Molly, I thought you were in bed.  They told me you were ill."

"Na, mem, I'm weel eneuch in body; it's the speerit that's ill.  And ye
ken why."

She spoke in a faint, quavering voice, for her old heart had been
crushed by her wayward, self-indulgent son, and a few tears rolled down
her wrinkled cheeks; but she was too old and feeble to give way to
demonstrative grief.  Little Flo, whose heart was easily touched, went
close to the poor old woman, and looked up anxiously in her face.

"My bonny doo!  It's a pleasure to look at ye," said the old woman,
laying her hand on the child's head.

Mrs Gordon drew in a chair and sat down by her side.

"Tell me about it," she said confidentially; "has he given way again,
after all his promises to Mr Jackman?"

"Oo, ay; Maister Jackman's a fine man, but he canna change the hert o'
my son--though it is kind o' him to try.  No, the only consolation I hev
is here."

She laid her hand on the open Bible.

"Where is he just now?" asked the lady.

As she spoke, a fierce yell was heard issuing from the keeper's cottage,
which, as we have said, stood close to his mother's abode.

"Ye hear till 'im," said the old woman with a sorrowful shake of the
head.  "He iss fery pad the day.  Whiles he thinks that horrible craters
are crawlin' ower him, an' whiles that fearful bogles are glowerin' at
him.  Sometimes he fancies that the foul fiend himsel' has gotten haud
o' him, an' then he screeches as ye hear."

"Would it do any good, Molly, if I were to go and speak to him, think
you?"

"Na, ye'd better let him lie.  He's no' hissel' the now, and there's no
sayin' what he might do.  Oh! drink! drink!" cried the old creature,
clasping her hands; "ye took my man awa', an' now ye're ruinin' my son!
But," she added with sudden animation, "we can pray for him; though it
iss not possible for you or Maister Jackman to change my bairn's hert,
the Lord can do it, for wi' Him `a' things are possible.'"

To this Mrs Gordon gave a hearty assent.  Sitting still as she was,
with hand resting on the old woman's arm, she shut her eyes and prayed
fervently for the salvation of the enslaved man.

She was still engaged in this act of worship when another shriek was
heard.  At the same time the door of the keeper's cottage was heard to
open, and Ivor's feet were heard staggering towards his mother's
cottage.  Poor Flo took refuge in great alarm behind Mrs Donaldson,
while her mother, rising quickly, drew back a few paces.

Next moment the small door was burst open, and the keeper plunged,
almost fell, into the room with something like a savage cheer.  He was a
terrible sight.  With wildly dishevelled hair, bloodshot eyes, and
distorted features, he stood for a few seconds glaring at his mother;
his tall figure swaying to and fro, while he held a quart bottle aloft
in his right hand.  He did not appear to observe the visitors, but
continued to stare at his mother with an expression that perplexed her,
accustomed though she was to his various moods.

"See, mother," he shouted fiercely, "I have done wi' the accursed thing
at last!"

He dashed the bottle on the hearth with tremendous violence as he spoke,
so that it vanished into minute fragments, while its contents spurted
about in all directions.  Happily very little of it went into the fire,
else the cottage would have been set ablaze.

With another wild laugh the man wheeled round, staggered out of the
cottage, and went his way.

"You are not hurt, I trust?" said the lady, anxiously bending down over
the poor old creature, who had remained calmly seated in her chair,
without the slightest appearance of alarm.

"No, I'm not hurt, thank the Lord," she answered.

"Don't you think that that was an answer to our prayer?" asked the lady
with some eagerness.

Old Molly shook her head dubiously.  "It may be so," she replied; "but I
hev often seen 'im i' that mind, and he has gone back to it again and
again, like the soo that was washed, to her wallowin' i' the mire.  Yet
there did seem somethin' different aboot 'im the day," she added
thoughtfully; "but it iss not the first time I hev prayed for him
without gettin' an answer."

"Answers do not always come as we expect them," returned her visitor;
"yet they may be granted even while we are asking.  I don't know how it
is, but I feel sure that Jesus will save your son."

Poor little Flo, who had been deeply affected by the terrible appearance
of her favourite Ivor, and who had never seen him in such a plight
before, quietly slipped out of old Molly's hut and went straight to that
of the keeper.  She found him seated on a chair with his elbows on his
knees, his forehead resting on his hands, and his strong fingers
grasping his hair as if about to tear it out by the roots.  Flo, who was
naturally fearless and trustful, ran straight to him and placed a hand
on his shoulder.  He started and looked round.

"Bairn! bairn!" he said grasping her little head, and kissing her
forehead, "what brings ye here?"

"Muzzer says she is _sure_ Jesus will save you; so I came to tell you,
for muzzer _never_ says what's not true."

Having delivered her consoling message, Flo ran back at once to Molly's
cottage with the cheerful remark that it was all right now, for she had
told Ivor that he was going to be saved!

While Mrs Gordon and Flo were thus engaged on shore, the boat party
were rowing swiftly down the loch to the little hamlet of Drumquaich.
The weather was magnificent.  Not a breath of air stirred the surface of
the sea, so that every little white cloud in the sky was perfectly
reproduced in the concave below.  The gulls that floated on the white
expanse seemed each to be resting on its own inverted image, and the
boat would have appeared in similar aspect but for the shivering of the
mirror by its oars.

"Most appropriate type of Sabbath rest," said Jackman.

"Ay, but like all things here pelow," remarked Ian Anderson, who
possessed in a high degree the faculty of disputation, "it's not likely
to last long."

"What makes you think so, Ian?" asked Milly, who sat in the stern of the
boat between John Barret and Aggy Anderson.

"Well, you see, muss," began Ian, in his slow, nasal tone, "the gless
has bin fallin' for some time past, an'--Tonal', poy, mind your helm;
see where you're steerin' to!"

Donald, who steered, was watching with profound interest the operations
of Junkie, who had slily and gravely fastened a piece of twine to a back
button of MacRummle's coat, and tied him to the thwart on which he sat.
Being thus sternly asked where he was steering to, Donald replied, "Oo,
ay," and quickly corrected the course.

"But surely," returned Milly, "there is no sign of a rapid change, at
least if we may judge from the aspect of Nature; and I am a fervent
believer in Nature, whatever the glass may predict."

"I am not sure o' that, muss," said Ian.  "You needn't pull quite so
hard, Muster Mabberly; we hev plenty o' time.  Tak it easy.  Well, as I
wass sayin', muss, I hev seen it as calm as this i' the mornin' mony a
time, an' plowin' a gale at nicht."

"Let us hope that that won't be our experience to-day," said the laird.
"Anyhow, we have a good sea-boat under us."

"Weel, the poat's no' a pad wan, laird, but I hev seen petter.  You see,
when the wund iss richt astern, she iss given to trinkin'."

"That's like Ivor," said Junkie with a laugh; "only _he_ is given to
drinkin', no matter how the wind blows."

"What do you mean?" asked Milly, much perplexed.

Barret here explained that a boat which takes in much water over the bow
is said to be given to drinking.

"I'm inclined that way myself," said Jackman, who had been pulling hard
at one of the oars up to that time.

"Has any one thought of bringing a bottle of water?"

"Here's a bottle," cried MacRummle, laughing.

"Ah, sure, an' there seems to be a bottle o' milk, or somethin' white
under the th'ort," remarked Quin, who pulled the bow oar.

"But that's Milly's bottle of milk," shouted Junkie.

"And Aggy's," chimed in Eddie.

"Yes--no one must touch that," said Junkie.

"Quite right, boys," said Jackman; "besides, milk is not good for
quenching thirst."

On search being made, it was found that water had not been brought with
them, so that the thirsty rowers had to rest content without it.

"Is that Eagle Cliff I see, just over the knoll there?" asked Barret.

"It is," answered the laird; "don't you see the eagle himself like a
black speck hovering above it?  My shepherd would gladly see the bird
killed, for he and his wife make sad havoc among the lambs sometimes;
but I can't say that I sympathise with the shepherd.  An eagle is a
noble bird, and there are none too many of them now in this country."

"I agree with you heartily," said Barret; "and I would regard the man
who should kill that eagle as little better than a murderer."

"_Quite_ as bad as a murderer!" said Milly with energy.  "I am glad you
speak out so clearly, Mr Barret; for I fear there are some among us who
would not hesitate to shoot if the poor bird were to come within range."

"Pray don't look so pointedly at me, Miss Moss," said Jackman; "I assure
you I have no intention of attempting murder--at least not in that
direction."

"Och! an' it's murder enough you've done already for wan man," said Quin
in an undertone.

"Oh!  I say, that reminds me.  Do tell us the rest of the story of the
elephant hunt, Mr Jackman," cried Junkie.

"Not just now, my boy.  It's a long story.  Besides, we are on our way
to church!  Some other time I will tell it you."

"It would take half the romance away from my mother's visit if the eagle
were killed," remarked Milly, who did not overhear the elephant
parenthesis.

"Has your mother, then, decided to come?" asked Barret.

"Yes.  In spite of the sea, which she dreads, and steamers, which she
hates, she has made up her mind to come and take me home."

"How charming that will be!" said Barret.

"Indeed!" returned Milly, with a significant look and smile.

"Of _course_ I did not mean that," returned Barret, laughing.  "I meant
that it would be charming for you to have your mother out here, and to
return home in her company.  Is she likely to stay long?"

"I cannot tell.  That depends on so many things.  But I am sure of one
thing, that she longs to see and thank you for the great service you
rendered me on the day of your arrival here."

Barret began to protest that the service was a comparatively small one,
and such as any man might gladly render to any one, when the arrival of
the boat at the landing-place cut him short.

About thirty or forty people had assembled from the surrounding
districts, some of whom had come four or even six miles to attend
church.  They formed a quiet, grave, orderly company of men and women in
homespun garments, with only a few children among them.  The arrival of
the laird's party made a very considerable addition to the congregation,
and, as the hour for meeting had already passed by a few minutes, they
made a general move towards the church.

The building was wonderfully small, and in the most severely simple
style of architecture, being merely an oblong structure of grey stone,
with small square windows, and a belfry at one end of the roof.  It
might have been mistaken for a cottage but for this, and the door being
protected by a small porch, and placed at one end of the structure,
instead of at the side.

A few of the younger men remained outside in conversation, awaiting the
advent of the minister.  After a time, however, these dropped in and
took their seats, and people began to wonder why the minister was so
late.  Presently a boy with bare legs and a kilt entered the church and
whispered to a very old man, who turned out to be an elder.  Having
heard the boy's message, the elder crossed over to the pew in which the
laird was seated and whispered to him, not so low, however, as to
prevent Giles Jackman from hearing all that passed.  The minister's
horse had fallen, he said, and bruised the minister's legs so that he
could not officiate.

"Very awkward," returned the laird, knitting his brows.  "What's to be
done?  It seems absurd that so many of us should assemble here just to
look solemn for a few minutes and then go home."

"Yes, sir, it iss akward," said the elder.  "Could you not gif us a
discoorse yoursel', sir, from the prezenter's dask?"

The latter part of the proposition was to guard himself from the
imputation of having asked the laird to mount the _pulpit_.

"Me preach!" exclaimed the laird; "I never did such a thing in my life."

"Maype you'll read a chapter, what-e-ver," persisted the elder.

"Impossible!  I never read a chapter since I was born--in public, I
mean, of course.  But why not do it yourself, man?"

"So I would, sir, but my throat'll not stand it."

"Is there no other elder who could do it?"

"Not wan, sir.  I'm afraid we will hev to dismiss the congregation."

At this point, to the laird's relief and no little surprise, Jackman
leaned forward, and said in a low voice, "If you have no objection, I
will undertake to conduct the service."

The elder gave the laird a look which, if it had been translated into
words, would probably have conveyed the idea--"Is he orthodox?"

"By all means, Mr Jackman," said the laird; "you will be doing us a
great favour."

Accordingly Jackman went quietly to the precentor's desk and mounted it,
much to the surprise of its proper occupant, a man with a voice like a
brass trumpet, who thereupon took his seat on a chair below the desk.

Profound was the interest of the congregation when they saw this
bronzed, broad-shouldered, big-bearded young man pull a small Bible out
of his pocket and begin to turn over the leaves.  And it was noted with
additional interest by several of the people that the Bible seemed to be
a well-worn one.  Looking up from it after a few minutes, during which
it was observed that his eyes had been closed, Jackman said, in an easy,
conversational tone, that quite took the people by surprise--

"Friends, it has been my lot in life to wander for some years in wild
and distant lands, where ministers of the Gospel were few and far
between, and where Christians were obliged to conduct the worship of God
as best they could.  Your minister being unable to attend, owing to an
accident, which I trust may not turn out to be serious, I shall attempt,
