"Everything in the pitching line," Dick answered.

"But what is his best point of all, Prescott?" broke in Old Dut.

Even that experienced school principal had tumbled into the trap that
Dick Prescott had so ingeniously laid for him.

"Well, sir," replied Dick, wheeling around to the principal, every trace
of resentment gone from his young face, "I should say that Pendleton's
most noticeable trick is the way he twists and handles the ball when
he's getting ready to drive in his curve. I watched Pendleton's work
that day, and I think I stole the principle on which he uses his right
wrist."

"Show me," unsuspiciously invited Old Dut.

Dick started to curve an imaginary ball in his right hand, then glanced
over the principal's desk. A small, but thick, heavy book lay there.

"Well, I should say," Prescott resumed, "that Pendleton handles the ball
about like this."

Picking up the book, Dick used both hands in trying to give it the right
preliminary curve.

"But his delivery is, of course, the great feature," the lad went on.
"When Pendleton has the ball curved just right, he raises his right and
lets it go like this!"

Dick was facing the bevy of girls. They were so certain he was going to
hurl the book in their direction that they scattered with little cries
of alarm.

So forcefully had young Prescott prepared for the throw that the book
did leave his hand, though the boy made a frantic effort--apparently--to
recover the missile.

Not toward the retreating girls, however, did the book fly. It spun
nearly at right angles, and----

Smack! it went, full into the face of Principal E. Dutton Jones.

"Oh, I beg your pardon, sir!" cried Dick in a voice ringing with
remorse. "That must hurt you very much, sir."

"It is nothing," replied Old Dut gamely, though the unexpected shock had
nearly taken his breath. Then he put one hand up to his injured face.
"Why, I believe my nose is bleeding," he added, making a quick dive for
his handkerchief.

In truth the nose was bleeding. Old Dut made a specialty of low-cut
vests and white, immaculate shirt-fronts. Before the handkerchief was in
place, three bright, crimson drops had fallen, rendering the shirt-front
a gruesome sight to look at.

"Oh, sir, I hope you will excuse me," followed up Dick.

"Oh, yes; certainly," dryly returned the principal, as he rose and made
for his private room. There was a handbowl in there, with hot and cold
water, and the principal of the Central Grammar School of Gridley was
soon busy repairing his personal appearance.

No sooner had he vanished behind the open door than Dave Darrin, Tom
Reade, Dan Dalzell, Greg Holmes, Harry Hazelton and several other boys
grinned broadly in their huge delight. Dick Prescott, however, admirable
actor that he was, still wore a look of concern on his rather fine young
face.

"One thing I've learned to-day, which I ought to have known before,"
grimly mused Old Dut, as he sopped a wet towel to his injured nose.
"Dick Prescott doesn't need any guardian. He can look out for himself!"

"Wasn't it awful?" repeated a girl's voice out in the schoolroom.

"No," replied her companion. "I don't think it was. After what he did it
served him just right!"

"I'm getting the usual sympathy that is awarded to the vanquished,"
smiled Old Dut to himself. "That's Laura Bentley's voice. She didn't
laugh when I was having my innings with Dick. She flushed up and looked
indignant."

Before Old Dut felt that he was in shape to present himself, all of the
eight grades had received seven minutes' additional recess.

At last studies were resumed. Old Dut, however, noted that whenever one
of the boys or girls looked up and caught sight of his expansive,
crimsoned shirt-front, a smile always followed.




CHAPTER II

A BRUSH ON THE STREET


By the time that the noon dismissal bell rang the rain had ceased, and
the sun was struggling out.

Out in the coatroom Dick snatched his hat from the nail as though he
were in haste to get away.

"I'll race you home, as far as we go together," proposed Dave Darrin.

"Go you!" hovered on the tip of Prescott's tongue, but just then another
thought popped into Dick's mind. It was a manly idea, and he had learned
to act promptly on such impulses.

"Wait a moment," he answered Darrin. "I've got something to do."

With that Dick marched back into the schoolroom. Old Dut, looking up
from the books that he was placing in a tidy pile on the platform desk,
smiled.

"I came back to ask, sir, if your nose pains?"

Old Dut shot a keen glance at young Prescott, for long experience had
taught the school-teacher that malice sometimes lurks behind the most
innocent question from a boy. Then he answered:

"I'm glad to be able to report, Master Prescott, that my nose is causing
me no trouble whatever."

"I'm very glad of that, sir. I've been a bit uncomfortable, since
recess, thinking that perhaps my--that my act had broken your nose, and
that you were just too game to let any one know. I'm glad no real harm
was done, sir."

Then Dick turned, anxious to get out into the open as quickly as
possible.

"One moment, Master Prescott!"

Dick wheeled about again.

"Are you sure that the book-throwing was an accident?"

"I--I am afraid it wasn't, sir," Dick confessed, reddening.

"Then, if you threw the book into my face on purpose, why did you do
it!"

"I was a good deal provoked, Mr. Jones."

"Oh! Provoked over the funny story that I told you this forenoon?"

"Not over the story, sir; but your manner of telling it."

Old Dut had hard work to keep back the smile that struggled for an
appearance on his face.

"Revenge, was it, Master Prescott?"

"Well, I felt that it was due me, Mr. Jones, to get even for the show
that you made of me before the class."

"Master Prescott, we won't go into the details of whether I was
justified in illustrating my story this morning in the manner that I
did, or whether you were right in coming back at me after the fashion
that you did. But I am going to offer one thought for your
consideration. It is this--that the man who devotes too much thought to
'getting even' with other folks is likely to let slip a lot of good,
solid chances for getting ahead in the world. I don't blame any fellow
for protecting his own rights and dignity, but just think over what I
said, won't you, about the chap who spends too much of his time thinking
up ways to get even with others?"

"There's a good idea in that, sir," Dick assented.

"Of course you've heard, Master Prescott, that 'revenge is sweet?'"

"Yes; I have."

"And I believe, Master Prescott, that the saying is often true. But did
it ever strike you, in this connection, that sweet things often make one
sick at his stomach? I believe this is just as true of revenge as it is
of other sweets. And now run along, or you won't have time to do justice
to the pudding that your mother has undoubtedly been baking for you this
morning."

As Dick hastened from the room he found Dave Darrin waiting for him. Out
in the corridor beyond these two encountered Holmes, Dalzell, Hazelton
and Reade, for these six boys of the "top grade" generally stuck
together in all things concerning school life.

"Was Old Dut blowing you up for showing him how to pitch a book?"
inquired Greg.

"No; Old Dut doesn't seem to hold that in for me very hard," smiled
Prescott. "But he was giving me something to think over."

"Huh!" muttered Greg, as the boys walked down the outer steps. "I'd like
to give him something to think about. Why did you get so crusty when I
sprang the idea of doing the wreck scene in his flower beds to-night?"

"Because the idea was too kiddish," returned Dick. "Besides, Old Dut was
talking to me a good deal along such lines."

"Did you go and tell him what I wanted to do?" flared Greg.

"I didn't. But Old Dut pinned me down and asked me whether that book
throwing were really an accident, and I had to admit that it wasn't.
Now, listen!"

Dick thereupon repeated his conversation with Principal Jones.

"He's a wise man, all right," nodded Harry Hazelton.

"I guess so," nodded Dave Darrin. "After all, it would look rather
kiddish in us to go slipping up to his front yard in the dark night,
lifting off his front gate and carrying it down to the river."

"It would be stealing, or wasting, property, also," agreed Tom Reade.

"So, fellows," resumed Dick, "I guess----"

"Hullo! What's going on down there?" broke in Darrin hastily, as all six
of the Grammar School boys looked ahead.

A woman's scream had caught their ear.

"It's Mrs. Dexter," muttered Hazelton.

"And that rascally husband of hers," added Greg Holmes.

"Some new row, of course," broke in Dan Dalzell.

"It's a shame!" burst from Dick.

"That Dexter fellow ought to be hung," growled Tom Reade. "He's always
bothering that woman, and she's one of the nicest ever. But now he won't
let her alone, just because her grandfather had to die and leave Mrs.
Dexter a lot of money."

The little city of Gridley was quite familiar with the domestic troubles
of the Dexters. The woman was young and pretty, and good-hearted. Abner
Dexter, on the other hand, was good-looking and shiftless. He had
married Jennie Bolton because he believed her family to be wealthy, and
Dexter considered himself too choice for work. But the Bolton money had
all belonged to the grandfather, who, a keen judge of human nature, had
guessed rightly the nature of Abner Dexter and had refused to let him
have any money.

Dexter had left his wife and little daughter some two years before the
opening of this story. Three months before old man Bolton had died,
leaving several hundred thousand dollars to Mrs. Dexter. Then Dexter had
promptly reappeared. But Mrs. Dexter no longer wanted this shiftless,
extravagant man about, and had told him so plainly. Dexter had
threatened to make trouble, and the wife had thereupon gone to court and
had herself appointed sole guardian of her little daughter. At the same
time she had turned some money over to her husband--common report said
ten thousand dollars--on his promise to go away and not bother her
again.

Plainly he had not kept his word. As Dick and his chums glanced down the
quiet side street they saw husband and wife standing facing each other.
The man was scowling, the woman half-tearful, half-defiant. Behind her,
in her left hand, Mrs. Dexter held a small handbag.

"I'd like to be big enough to be able to enjoy the pleasure of thrashing
a fellow like that Dexter!" growled Dave Darrin, his eyes flashing.

"There's a man standing a little way below the pair," announced Dick. "I
wonder what he's doing, for he seems to be watching the couple intently.
I hope he's on Mrs. Dexter's side."

Unconsciously Dick and his friends had halted to watch the proceedings
ahead of them.

"No, I won't," replied Mrs. Dexter sharply, to something that her husband
had said.

Abner Dexter talked rapidly, a black scowl on his face meanwhile.

"No, you won't! You don't dare!" replied the woman, her voice sounding
as though she had summoned all her courage by an effort.

Dexter suddenly sprang closer to the woman. The next instant both were
struggling for possession of the little black bag that she carried.

"Stop!" cried Mrs. Dexter desperately. "Help! He-lp!"

"Fellows, I don't know that we're bound to stand for that," muttered
Dick Prescott quickly. "She's calling for help. Come along."

Dick was off down the street like a streak, the others following, though
Dave was closest to his chum.

"Here, what are you doing, mister?" demanded Dick, as he darted up to
where the pair were struggling.

Dexter would have had the bag in his own possession by this time, had he
not turned to see what the onrush of boys meant.

"None of your business what I'm doing," he replied savagely. "You
schoolboys run along out of this."

"Don't go! Help me," pleaded the woman. "He's trying to rob me!"

"You boys clear out, or it will be worse for you!" growled Dexter.

"The lady wins!" Dick announced coolly, though he was shaking somewhat
from excitement. "You let go of her and her property."

But Dexter, his face black with scowls, still clutched tightly with his
right hand at the little handbag, to which Mrs. Dexter was clinging with
both her hands.

"You let go of that bag," challenged Dick, "or six of us will sail into
you. I think we can handle you. We'll try, anyway."

"Yes; make him let go," begged Mrs. Dexter. "I have money and jewels
here, and he is trying to take them away from me."

"Going to do as the lady wishes?" inquired Dick, stepping closer.

Abner Dexter shot another angry glare at the sextette of Grammar School
boys. They were closing in around him, and it looked as though they
meant business.

"Gus!" called Dexter sharply.

The man who had been standing a short distance away now ran up to the
spot.

"Hullo, what do you want!" asked Dick coolly. "Are you the understudy in
this game of robbery?"

"I'm an officer," retorted the fellow sharply.

"Secretary to some Chinese laundry company, eh?" jeered Dick.

"I'm a police officer," retorted the man sharply, at the same time
displaying a shield.

That put a different look on matters with some of young Prescott's
friends. Dick, however, was a boy not easily daunted.

"If you're an officer," he inquired, "why don't you get busy and do your
duty? Here's a man trying to rob his wife, just because she happens to
have more money than he has."

"A man can't legally steal from his wife, nor a woman from her husband,"
retorted the policeman bullyingly. "There is no crime being committed
here. But if you boys try to interfere you'll be disturbing the peace,
and I'll run you all in."

Mrs. Dexter looked bewildered and frightened. She even let go of the
handbag with one hand. Dick saw this, and quickly broke in:

"Mrs. Dexter, don't you let Mr. Dexter have that handbag unless you want
to do it. We'll stand by you."

"Oh, will you?" glared the policeman. "You boys run along, or I'll
gather you all in."

"Where are you a policeman?" inquired Dick Prescott, eyeing the fellow
with interest. "You're not a Gridley officer, for I know every one of
them."

"Never you mind where I'm from," jeered the man harshly. "I'm a
policeman. That'll have to be enough for you youngsters. If you don't
trot fast down the street I'll gather you in."

Some of Dick's chums were now inclined to feel that they had broken in
at the wrong place, but not so their young leader.

"You haven't any right to make arrests in Gridley," retorted Dick
defiantly. "And, even if you had, you couldn't stop us from defending a
woman. Tom, you and Greg stand by me. Dave, you lead the rest. We'll
make Dexter let go of his wife's property and let her alone. If this man
who says he's an officer interferes, Greg, Tom and I will devote our
attention to him!"

"Great!" snarled Dexter jeeringly. "You're all young jailbirds!"

"Are you going to let go of Mrs. Dexter's property?" challenged Dick.

"I'm not."

"Come on, fellows--let's sail into him."

Dick was an able general, having his small force under good discipline.
There was a sudden rush of boys. True, they averaged only thirteen years
of age, but there were six of them, and they were determined.

Dexter let go of the handbag in a hurry. He had to do so, in order to
defend himself.

At the same moment the man named as "Gus" jumped into the fray.

"Three to each man!" yelled Dick, and thus the force was divided.

The self-styled policeman reached out with the flat of his hand,
knocking Greg Holmes off his feet. But, as he did so, Dick dropped down
in front of the man, wrapping both arms around the fellow's knees. Then
Dick rose. It required the exertion of all his strength, but he
succeeded in toppling Gus over onto his back.

At the same time Abner Dexter was having all he could do, for three very
determined schoolboys were assailing him. At last Dexter turned to
retreat, but Dan Dalzell thrust a foot before him and tripped him.

