"Das de most 'straord'nary craze I eber know'd men inflicted wid!" said
Moses that night, as he sat smoking his pipe beside the Dyak boy.  "It
passes my compr'ension what fun dey find runnin' like child'n arter
butterflies, an' beetles, an' sitch like varmint.  My massa am de wisest
man on eart', yet _he_ go a little wild dat way too--sometimes!"

Moses looked at the Dyak boy with a puzzled expression, but as the Dyak
boy did not understand English, he looked intently at the fire, and said
nothing.

Next morning Nigel entered the forest under the guidance of Verkimier
and the Dyak youth, and the orang-utan, which followed like a dog, and
sometimes even took hold of its master's arm and walked with him as if
it had been a very small human being.  It was a new experience to Nigel
to walk in the sombre shade beneath the tangled arches of the
wilderness.  In some respects it differed entirely from his
expectations, and in others it surpassed them.  The gloom was deeper
than he had pictured it, but the shade was not displeasing in a land so
close to the equator.  Then the trees were much taller than he had been
led to suppose, and the creeping plants more numerous, while, to his
surprise, the wild-flowers were comparatively few and small.  But the
scarcity of these was somewhat compensated by the rich and brilliant
colouring of the foliage.

The abundance and variety of the ferns also struck the youth
particularly.

"Ah! zey are magnificent!" exclaimed Verkimier with enthusiasm.  "Look
at zat tree-fern.  You have not'ing like zat in England--eh!  I have
found nearly von hoondred specimens of ferns.  Zen, look at zee
fruit-trees.  Ve have here, you see, zee Lansat, Mangosteen, Rambutan,
Jack, Jambon, Blimbing ant many ozers--but zee queen of fruits is zee
Durian.  Have you tasted zee Durian?"

"No, not yet."

"Ha! a new sensation is before you!  Stay, you vill eat von by ant by.
Look, zat is a Durian tree before you."

He pointed as he spoke to a large and lofty tree, which Mr A.R.
Wallace, the celebrated naturalist and traveller, describes as
resembling an elm in general character but with a more smooth and scaly
bark.  The fruit is round, or slightly oval, about the size of a man's
head, of a green colour, and covered all over with short spines which
are very strong and so sharp that it is difficult to lift the fruit from
the ground.  Only the experienced and expert can cut the tough outer
rind.  There are five faint lines extending from the base to the apex of
the fruit, through which it may be divided with a heavy knife and a
strong hand, so as to get to the delicious creamy pulp inside.

There is something paradoxical in the descriptions of this fruit by
various writers, but all agree that it is inexpressibly good!  Says
one--writing of the sixteenth century--"It is of such an excellent taste
that it surpasses in flavour all the other fruits of the world."
Another writes: "This fruit is of a hot and humid nature.  To those not
used to it, it seems at first to smell like rotten onions! but
immediately they have tasted it they prefer it to all other food."
Wallace himself says of it: "When brought into the house, the smell is
so offensive that some persons can never bear to taste it.  This was my
own case in Malacca, but in Borneo I found a ripe fruit on the ground,
and, eating it out of doors, I at once became a confirmed Durian-eater!"

This was exactly the experience of Nigel Roy that day, and the way in
which the fruit came to him was also an experience, but of a very
different sort.  It happened just as they were looking about for a
suitable spot on which to rest and eat their mid-day meal.  Verkimier
was in front with the orang-utan reaching up to his arm and hobbling
affectionately by his side--for there was a strong mutual affection
between them.  The Dyak youth brought up the rear, with a sort of
game-bag on his shoulders.

Suddenly Nigel felt something graze his arm, and heard a heavy thud at
his side.  It was a ripe Durian which had fallen from an immense height
and missed him by a hairbreadth.

"Zank Got, you have escaped!" exclaimed the professor, looking back with
a solemn countenance.

"I have indeed escaped what might have been a severe blow," said Nigel,
stooping to examine the fruit, apparently forgetful that more might
follow.

"Come--come avay.  My boy vill bring it.  Men are sometimes killed by
zis fruit.  Here now ve vill dine."

They sat down on a bank which was canopied by ferns.  While the boy was
arranging their meal, Verkimier drew a heavy hunting-knife from his belt
and, applying it with an unusually strong hand to the Durian, laid it
open.  Nigel did not at all relish the smell, but he was not fastidious
or apt to be prejudiced.  He tasted--and, like Mr Wallace, "became a
confirmed Durian-eater" from that day.

"Ve draw near to zee region vere ve shall find zee bootterflies," said
the naturalist, during a pause in their luncheon.

"I hope we shall be successful," said Nigel, helping himself to some
more of what may be styled Durian cream.  "To judge from the weight and
hardness of this fruit, I should think a blow on one's head from it
would be fatal."

"Sometimes, not always.  I suppose zat Dyak skulls are strong.  But zee
wound is terrible, for zee spikes tear zee flesh dreadfully.  Zee Dyak
chief, Rajah, with whom I dwell joost now, was floored once by one, and
he expected to die--but he did not.  He is alife ant vell, as you shall
see."

As he spoke a large butterfly fluttered across the scene of their
festivities.  With all the energy of his enthusiastic spirit and strong
muscular frame the naturalist leaped up, overturned his dinner, rushed
after the coveted specimen, tripped over a root, and measured his length
on the ground.

"Zat comes of too much horry!" he remarked, as he picked up his glasses
and returned, humbly, to continue his dinner.  "Mine frond, learn a
lesson from a foolish man!"

"I shall learn two lessons," said Nigel, laughing--"first, to avoid your
too eager haste, and, second, to copy, if I can, your admirable
enthusiasm."

"You are very goot.  Some more cheekin' if you please.  Zanks.  Ve most
make haste viz our meal ant go to vork."

The grandeur and novelty of the scenery through which they passed when
they did go to work was a source of constant delight and surprise to our
hero, whose inherent tendency to take note of and admire the wonderful
works of God was increased by the unflagging enthusiasm and interesting
running commentary of his companion, whose flow of language and eager
sympathy formed a striking contrast to the profound silence and gravity
of the Dyak youth, as well as to the pathetic and affectionate
selfishness of the man-monkey.

It must not, however, be supposed that the young orang-utan was unworthy
of his victuals, for, besides being an amusing and harmless companion,
he had been trained to use his natural capacity for climbing trees in
the service of his master.  Thus he ascended the tall Durian trees, when
ordered, and sent down some of the fruit in a few minutes--an operation
which his human companions could not have accomplished without tedious
delay and the construction of an ingenious ladder having slender bamboos
for one of its sides, and the tree to be ascended for its other side,
with splinters of bamboo driven into it by way of rounds.

"Zat is zee pitcher-plant," said Verkimier, as Nigel stopped suddenly
before a plant which he had often read of but never seen.  He was told
by his friend that pitcher-plants were very numerous in that region;
that every mountain-top abounded with them; that they would be found
trailing along the ground and climbing over shrubs and stunted trees,
with their elegant pitchers hanging in every direction.  Some of these,
he said, were long and slender, others broad and short.  The plant at
which they were looking was a broad green one, variously tinted and
mottled with red, and was large enough to hold two quarts of water.

Resuming the march Nigel observed that the group of orchids was
abundant, but a large proportion of the species had small inconspicuous
flowers.  Some, however, had large clusters of yellow flowers which had
a very ornamental effect on the sombre forest.  But, although the
exceptions were striking, he found that in Borneo, as elsewhere, flowers
were scarcer than he had expected in an equatorial forest.  There were,
however, more than enough of striking and surprising things to engage
the attention of our hero, and arouse his interest.

One tree they came to which rendered him for some moments absolutely
speechless! to the intense delight of the professor, who marched his
new-found sympathiser from one object of interest to another with the
secret intention of surprising him, and when he had got him to the point
of open-mouthed amazement he was wont to turn his spectacles full on his
face, like the mouths of a blue binocular, in order to witness and enjoy
his emotions!

Nigel found this out at last and was rather embarrassed in consequence.

"Zat," exclaimed the naturalist, after gazing at his friend for some
time in silence, "zat is a tree vitch planted itself in mid-air and zen
sent its roots down to zee ground and its branches up to zee sky!"

"It looks as if it had," returned Nigel; "I have seen a tree of the same
kind near the coast.  How came it to grow in this way?"

"I know not.  It is zought zat zey spring from a seed dropped by a bird
into zee fork of anozer tree.  Zee seed grows, sends his roots down ant
his branches up.  Ven his roots reach zee ground he lays hold, ant, ven
strong enough, kills his support--zus returning efil for good, like a
zankless dependent.  Ah! zere is much resemblance between plants and
animals!  Com', ve must feed here," said the professor, resting his gun
against one of the roots, "I had expected to find zee bootterflies
sooner.  It cannot be helped.  Let us make zis our banqueting-hall.  Ve
vill have a Durian to refresh us, ant here is a handy tree which seems
to have ripe vones on it.--Go," he added, turning to the orang-utan,
"and send down von or two."

The creature looked helplessly incapable, pitifully unwilling,
scratching its side the while.  Evidently it was a lazy monkey.

"Do you hear?" said Verkimier, sternly.

The orang moved uneasily, but still declined to go.

Turning sharply on it, the professor bent down, placed a hand on each of
his knees and stared through the blue goggles into the animal's face.

This was more than it could stand.  With a very bad grace it hobbled off
to the Durian tree, ascended it with a sort of lazy, lumbering facility,
and hurled down some of the fruit without warning those below to look
out.

"My little frond is obstinate sometimes," remarked the naturalist,
picking up the fruit, "but ven I bring my glasses to bear on him he
always gives in, I never found zem fail.  Come now; eat, an' ve vill go
to vork again.  Ve must certainly find zee bootterflies somevere before
night."

But Verkimier was wrong.  It was his destiny not to find the butterflies
that night, or in that region at all, for he and his companion had not
quite finished their meal when a Dyak youth came running up to them
saying that he had been sent by the Rajah to order their immediate
return to the village.

"Alas! ve most go.  It is dancherous to disobey zee Rajah--ant I am
sorry--very sorry--zat I cannot show you zee bootterflies to-day.  No
matter.--Go," (to the Dyak youth), "tell your chief ve vill come.
Better lock zee next time!"



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

HUNTING THE GREAT MAN-MONKEY.

Although Professor Verkimier had promised to return at once, he was
compelled to encamp in the forest, being overtaken by night before he
could reach the river and procure a boat.

Next morning they started at daybreak.  The country over which they
passed had again changed its character and become more hilly.  On the
summits of many of the hills Dyak villages could be seen, and rice
fields were met with as they went along.  Several gullies and rivulets
were crossed by means of native bamboo bridges, and the professor
explained, as he went along, the immense value of the bamboo to the
natives.  With it they make their suspension bridges, build their
houses, and procure narrow planking for their floors.  If they want
broader planks they split a large bamboo on one side and flatten it out
to a plank of about eighteen inches wide.  Portions of hollow bamboo
serve as receptacles for milk or water.  If a precipice stops a path,
the Dyaks will not hesitate to construct a bamboo path along the face of
it, using branches of trees wherever convenient from which to hang the
path, and every crevice or notch in the rocks to receive the ends of the
bamboos by which it is supported.

Honey-bees in Borneo hang their combs, to be out of danger no doubt,
under the branches of the Tappan, which towers above all the other trees
of the forest.  But the Dyaks love honey and value wax as an article of
trade; they therefore erect their ingenious bamboo ladder--which can be
prolonged to any height on the smooth branchless stem of the Tappan--and
storm the stronghold of the bees with much profit to themselves, for
bees'-wax will purchase from the traders the brass wire, rings,
gold-edged kerchiefs and various ornaments with which they decorate
themselves.  When travelling, the Dyaks use bamboos as cooking vessels
in which to boil rice and other vegetables; as jars in which to preserve
honey, sugar, etcetera, or salted fish and fruit.  Split bamboos form
aqueducts by which water is conveyed to the houses.  A small neatly
carved piece of bamboo serves as a case in which are carried the
materials used in the disgusting practice of betel-nut chewing--which
seems to be equivalent to the western tobacco-chewing.  If a pipe is
wanted the Dyak will in a wonderfully short space of time make a huge
hubble-bubble out of bamboos of different sizes, and if his long-bladed
knife requires a sheath the same gigantic grass supplies one almost
ready-made.  But the uses to which this reed may be applied are almost
endless, and the great outstanding advantage of it is that it needs no
other tools than an axe and a knife to work it.

At about mid-day the river was reached, and they found a native boat, or
prahu, which had been sent down to convey them to the Rajah's village.
Here Nigel was received with the hospitality due to a friend of Van der
Kemp, who, somehow--probably by unselfish readiness, as well as ability,
to oblige--had contrived to make devoted friends in whatever part of the
Malay Archipelago he travelled.

Afterwards, in a conversation with Nigel, the professor, referring to
those qualities of the hermit which endeared him to men everywhere,
said, with a burst of enthusiasm, which almost outdid himself--

"You cannot oonderstant Van der Kemp.  No man can oonderstant him.  He
is goot, right down to zee marrow--kind, amiable, oonselfish, obliging,
nevair seems to zink of himself at all, ant, abof all zings, is capable.
Vat he vill do, he can do--vat he can do he vill do.  But he is sad--
very sad."

"I have observed that, of course," said Nigel.  "Do you know what makes
him so sad?"

The professor shook his head.

"No, I do not know.  Nobody knows.  I have tried to find out, but he
vill not speak."

The Orang-Kaya, or rich man, as this hill chief was styled, had provided
lodgings for his visitors in the "head-house."  This was a large
circular building erected on poles.  There is such a house in nearly all
Dyak villages.  It serves as a trading-place, a strangers' room, a
sleeping-room for unmarried youths, and a general council-chamber.  Here
Nigel found the hermit and Moses enjoying a good meal when he arrived,
to which he and the professor sat down after paying their respects to
the chief.

"The Orang-Kaya hopes that we will stay with him some time and help to
defend the village," said Van der Kemp, when they were all seated.

"Of course you have agreed?" said Nigel.

"Yes; I came for that purpose."

"We's allers ready to fight in a good cause," remarked Moses, just
before filling his mouth with rice.

"Or to die in it!" added Verkimier, engulfing the breast of a chicken at
a bite.  "But as zee pirates are not expected for some days, ve may as
vell go after zee mias--zat is what zee natifs call zee orang-utan.  It
is a better word, being short."

Moses glanced at the professor out of the corners of his black eyes and
seemed greatly tickled by his enthusiastic devotion to business.

"I am also," continued the professor, "extremely anxious to go at zee
bootterflies before--"

"You die," suggested Nigel, venturing on a pleasantry, whereat Moses
opened his mouth in a soundless laugh, but, observing the professor's
goggles levelled at him, he transformed the laugh into an astounding
sneeze, and immediately gazed with pouting innocence and interest at his
plate.

"Do you always sneeze like zat?" asked Verkimier.

"Not allers," answered the negro simply, "sometimes I gibs way a good
deal wuss.  Depends on de inside ob my nose an' de state ob de wedder."

What the professor would have replied we cannot say, for just then a
Dyak youth rushed in to say that an unusually large and gorgeous
butterfly had been seen just outside the village!

No application of fire to gunpowder could have produced a more immediate
effect.  The professor's rice was scattered on the floor, and himself
was outside the head-house before his comrades knew exactly what was the
matter.

"He's always like that," said the hermit, with a slight twinkle in his
eyes.  "Nothing discourages--nothing subdues him.  Twice I pulled him
out of deadly danger into which he had run in his eager pursuit of
specimens.  And he has returned the favour to me, for he rescued me once
when a mias had got me down and would certainly have killed me, for my
gun was empty at the moment, and I had dropped my knife."

"Is, then, the orang-utan so powerful and savage?"

"Truly, yes, when wounded and driven to bay," returned the hermit.  "You
must not judge of the creature by the baby that Verkimier has tamed.  A
full-grown male is quite as large as a man, though very small in the
legs in proportion, so that it does not stand high.  It is also very
much stronger than the most powerful man.  You would be quite helpless
in its grip, I assure you."

"I hope, with the professor," returned Nigel, "that we may have a hunt
after them, either before or after the arrival of the pirates.  I know
he is very anxious to secure a good specimen for some museum in which he
is interested--I forget which."

As he spoke, the youth who had brought information about the butterfly
returned and said a few words to Moses in his native tongue.

"What does he say?" asked Niger.

"Dat Massa Verkimier is in full chase, an' it's my opinion dat when he
comes back he'll be wet all ober, and hab his shins and elbows barked."

"Why d'you think so?"

