its power.  Feeling his dependence on it, Radama adopted the unwise
policy of increasing the military influence, and weakening that of the
civil officials, the heads of the people, and other functionaries whose
position was derived from ancient political arrangements.  Public
offices of honour and importance were given to military officers rather
than to civilians, and this unfair exaltation of the military over the
civilian class led, as it always does, to tyranny and injustice.

The system of service was in itself a gross form of injustice to the
people, for, although the theory of service does not at first sight
appear unjust, the practice of it was very much so.  More than the
half--perhaps nearly two-thirds--of the whole effective male population
of the central province were enrolled either as officers or privates.
These received no pay, except an occasional gift of a lamba, and about a
week's rice during the year!  The soldiers were indeed freed from money
taxes in consideration of their service, but this was small compensation
for the hardships that it entailed.  Although the drills at ordinary
times did not occur more frequently than for a day or two every
fortnight, much time was taken up in passing to and from the exercises,
especially in the case of those who lived at a distance, and thus found
it almost impossible to cultivate their own rice-fields.  Frequently,
also, the officers would not allow the men to return home without a
money bribe.  In short, the private soldier was little better than a
slave--in some cases worse--while the officers of the highest rank
possessed unreasonable power.

Military rank was founded on a system which led to some absurdities.  It
was reckoned by numbers, commencing with _one honour_ for the private,
_two honours_ for the corporal, three for the sergeant, and so on up to
thirteen for a field-marshal of the higher rank--a few having sixteen
honours!  Those thus highly _honoured_ were not numerous; but the number
of officers of lower grade was much greater in proportion to privates,
than in the British army.  Indeed from a third to a fourth of the army
was composed of officers, so that "ta Phairshon," with his excess of
pipers over fighting men, would not have appeared very outrageous in the
eyes of the Malagasy troops!

These officers had an eye to profitable business when not on service.
It is stated by the missionaries that when engaged in building their
churches and schools they sometimes found they had a field-marshal for a
foreman, a colonel for mason or carpenter, a major for bricklayer, and
so on!  Above the thirteenth rank the numbers were very few, and of the
sixteenth there were not above half-a-dozen.

Good, stout, courageous fellows were the men whom John Hockins and his
comrades saw that day manoeuvring below them on the plain of
Imahamasina; men who, although by no means comparable to European troops
in precision of movement, understood their work nevertheless, and would
have proved themselves formidable opponents to deal with in war.
Laihova further informed them that the first man who organised the force
was a Sergeant Brady, who began his work in the year 1816, carried it on
for many years, and rose to the rank of major-general in the service of
King Radama.  After General Brady's death, the native officers continued
the work on the same lines.

But in costume and appearance these soldiers were what is familiarly
known as "a queer lot!"  The uniform of the rank and file consisted of a
tunic and trousers of white material, with a narrow-brimmed straw hat
painted white, cross-belts and cartouche-box--by no means an unbecoming
dress.  But it was worn only at drills and reviews and state ceremonies.
At other times, when on duty, soldiers went about almost naked, and the
contrast of their dirty-white cross-belts with their brown breasts was
curious, to say the least, while their straw hats and slovenly gait
suggested anything but soldierly bearing.

The variety of dress indulged in, however, by the crowd of officers was
outrageous as well as mirth-provoking.

"Why it seems to me," said Mark, "that every officer may put on what
seemeth right in his own eyes!  I see old regimental red coats and
pantaloons; hats and shakos that must have been worn a hundred years
ago.  I even see what looks at this distance like naval uniforms and
cocked hats, and no two of them seem to be dressed alike."

Mark looked inquiringly at Laihova as he spoke, but that dignified
native merely smiled, and made a slight inclination of his head, as if
to say, "Just so, that's the way we do it here!"

"Why do they let civilians mix wi' them?" asked Hockins, pointing to a
particular part of the field.

"To keep 'em cibil, I s'pose," suggested Ebony.

"Where?" asked Laihova, with a puzzled look.

"There--don't you see 'em?  Fellers all in black--with bell-toppers--
beavers--chimney-pots on--I don't know what you call 'em here."

"Them be officers too," said Laihova.

And this was true, for the higher grades of officers usually appeared at
drill in a full suit of black cloth, with the common black silk hat
doing duty as a helmet, and contrasting oddly enough with the rough
home-made scabbardless sword, which was carried naked in the hand.

On some occasions, as our travellers afterwards learned, these regiments
turned out in every variety of costume, with coats, hats, vests, and
trousers, of all colours and patterns--as if they had been got up by an
extensive dealer in old clothes.  This passion for variety even extended
to the officers of the palace, with whom, however, the material was of
the best as well as gayest--for they were all gorgeously clad in blue
and scarlet cloth; and velvet, with gold and silver lace, embroidery,
feathers, etcetera,--but what nation, even in the so-called civilised
world, is free from barbarism in this respect?

One pair of eyes beheld this review on that Friday with something of
fiendish satisfaction.  These belonged to no less a personage than Queen
Ranavalona herself.  High up on the balcony of her palace she sat under
the shade of a scarlet umbrella.

That very day she had had an angry interview with her Prime Minister,
Rainiharo, in reference to her only child Prince Rakota, who was a young
man of mild gentle disposition, as kind to the Christians as his mother
was cruel and unjust.  Indeed it was believed that he himself was among
the Christians, for he dared openly to defend them before his mother,
and often protected them secretly from her violence.  Rainiharo, the
Prime Minister, on the contrary, was their bitter foe, and in his
interview with the Queen above mentioned, had ventured to accuse the
prince of aiding in the protection of those who practised the proscribed
religion.

The one redeeming point in the character of Ranavalona was her love for
this son.  When asked to punish the prince for his conduct, she would
say in tones of tenderness that seldom issued from her lips, "Is he not
my son--my only son?"  Alas! she had little pity for the son or daughter
of any one else, whether "only" or otherwise!

The dress of Ranavalona, as she sat in her balcony under her scarlet
umbrella observing the troops, was gorgeous, but the greater part of it
was hidden under the voluminous folds of the scarlet lamba of finest
English broad-cloth, with which her person was enveloped.  Here and
there, however, portions of a rich silk dress of European manufacture
could be seen, as well as various gold and silver rings, bracelets,
chains, charms, and ornaments of ivory.  Scarlet being the royal colour,
only the Sovereign is entitled to wear the scarlet lamba or use the
scarlet umbrella.  The Queen's lamba was ornamented heavily with
gold-lace.  Her head was not much decorated, but her hair was anointed
with that hideous horror of the sick-room, castor-oil! the odour of
which, however, was disguised, or rather mixed, with a leaf which smelt
like nutmeg.

"I will submit to this no longer," said the Queen, with a stern frown.
"Have I not said it?  Is the will of Ranavalona to be thwarted?"

This remark was, in the conversation above mentioned, made to the Prime
Minister, a stern old man, dressed in a scarlet coat with huge gold
epaulettes, and profusely braided with gold-lace, blue pantaloons, also
gold-laced, and a magnificent brazen-sheathed sword.  He stood at the
Queen's elbow with a perplexed expression of countenance, being the
bearer of news about the effect of which he felt uncertain.  But
Rainiharo was a bold man as well as a bad one.

"Your will, madam, is sure to be thwarted," he replied, "as long as you
suffer Prince Rakota to act as he pleases.  Your son is a Christian.  He
prays with the Christians and encourages them in this new doctrine.  We
are lost if your Majesty does not stop the prince in his strange
self-willed ways."

"But," repeated the Queen, "he is my son--my only, my beloved son!  Let
him do what he pleases.  If he wishes to be a Christian, let him--he is
my beloved son!"

"But, madam," urged Rainiharo, who hated Rakota, "if your son resists
your will what becomes of the Government?  I know that Rakota--"

"Cease to speak to me of Rakota," interrupted the Queen, impatiently.
"He is my son, I tell you.  I love him.  Let him alone--he will not
disobey me."

"Prince Ramonja, it is said, has also joined the Christians," continued
the minister, with a slightly cynical expression.

"Is this true?" demanded Ranavalona, fiercely, while she seemed to grind
her teeth in wrath.

"I have reason to believe it."

"Let inquiry be made, and if it proves to be true," said the Queen,
sternly, "let Ramonja be deprived of all his military honours, reduce
him to the ranks, and fine him heavily."

"But he is your own nephew, madam," returned the Minister, simply, yet
with a touch of sarcasm in his tone.

"It matters not.  It is of our mercy that he does not die, as many
others have died before him.  Let my orders be obeyed if Ramonja is
guilty.  Let him be a warning to others in the palace, for it has come
to my ears that some of our courtiers are hankering after this religion
that seems to have turned my people mad.  Indeed it is said that some
related to yourself are among them."

She looked pointedly at Rainiharo as she spoke, and the prime minister
winced, for he had lately discovered that his own son was among the
number of the "praying people."  Recovering himself in a moment,
however, he merely said that he was not aware of any of his kindred
having fallen away from the customs of their ancestors.

"I hope not," returned the Queen, darkly, "for degradation and slavery,
if not death, await them if they do.  Go.  Let a proclamation be made
to-day in the market-place.  Let my people and the army know that I have
resolved to extinguish Christianity.  Tell those officers who have
become Christians, or have taken any part in religious teaching, that
they shall lose their honours.  They have transgressed my laws and
deserve death, but through the supplications of the people of Imerina
their lives are spared.  But their honours, I say, shall be thrown into
the river and carried over the cataract of Ifarahantsana, for they are
trying to change the customs of our ancestors.  Of some, half the
honours shall be thrown into the river.  Of others, one-third of their
honours shall be thrown in, and some shall lose all their honours; the
precise number shall be in proportion to their offences.  Moreover,"
continued the angry woman, as she worked herself into a state of great
wrath, "there must be no more praying; no more psalm-singing among my
people; no more--"

She stopped suddenly and listened, while the veins in her neck and
forehead seemed to swell almost to bursting, for at that moment the
clear notes of a sweet female voice came from some distant part of the
palace and broke softly on her ear.  There was no mistaking the nature
of the music, for the Queen had long been familiar with the music of the
psalms, in which the "praying people" were wont to sing praise to the
name of Jesus.

"Who sings?" she asked, with a fierce look at Rainiharo.

The prime minister again gave vent to a very slight touch of sarcasm as
he replied, "I think it is Rafaravavy."

This time the queen noted the tone, and sharply ordered her minister to
be gone and do her bidding.

Now, Rafaravavy was a lady of the palace, as we have said, and a great
favourite with her royal mistress, but the queen's affection for the
girl had been severely tested since the latter showed symptoms of a
leaning towards the Christian religion.  It is probable that Ranavalona
would have cared little as to what her favourite thought about
Christianity if she had only kept quiet, but Rafaravavy was one of those
earnest straightforward souls who are prone to act in accordance with
their conscientious beliefs without regard to consequences.  She did not
indeed go about endeavouring to proselytise the household, for she was
naturally timid, soft-hearted, and meek, but she made no attempt to
conceal her opinions and her sympathy with the persecuted Christians.
She had even gone the length of interceding for them once or twice when
she found her mistress in an amiable mood, but the explosion of wrath
which resulted warned her not to presume again in that way.

For some time Ranavalona sat brooding over the mystery of that religion,
which, notwithstanding all her power and cruelty, she had, after so many
years of tyranny, been unable to suppress.  Then she sent for
Rafaravavy.

The girl, who in a few minutes entered her presence, was possessed of no
ordinary beauty.  Her delicate features and oval face were much lighter
in complexion than those of the other ladies of the court, resembling
rather those of a Spanish brunette than a Hova beauty.  Her eyes were
large, soft, and lustrous; her nose was straight and thin, and her mouth
small, with an expression of habitual gravity which made her smile, when
it came, all the more attractive.  Little wonder that poor Ravonino had
lost his heart to her, for, besides beauty of countenance, the girl was
endowed with a sylph-like form, a sprightly disposition, and the sweet
grace of humility.

"You have disobeyed me, Rafaravavy," said the Queen as she entered.

"Forgive me!" answered the girl in a low musical voice.  "I did not
think my song of praise would reach your ear.  It was meant only for my
God and Saviour."

"Is your God then deaf, that you must sing so loud?" asked the Queen,
sharply.

"He is not deaf, blessed be His name!" exclaimed the maiden, with
enthusiasm, "neither is His arm shortened that it cannot save.  Oh! if
you--"

"Stop!" cried the angry Queen, "you have presumed to talk to me thus too
often.  You deserve to die for singing psalms.  Have you given up
praying since I forbade it?"

There was that in the voice of Ranavalona which alarmed the girl, and
caused her to tremble as she replied, with some hesitation, that she
still prayed.

Instead of giving way to another burst of passion the Queen adopted a
bantering tone, and said--

"Come, Rafaravavy, tell me what you pray for."

"I pray for the pardon of my sins."

"Is that all?  Surely you pray for something more than that.  Something
nice that you want very much."

"Yes," continued the girl, becoming somewhat pale, yet praying silently
for courage even while she spoke.  "Yes, I pray for the pardon of--of
_your_ sins, and--"

"Go on!  Why do you stop?"

"And that your eyes may be opened that you may `see the King in His
beauty,' and be drawn to Him by the cords of love, so that you may cease
to persecute the Christians and learn to join with them in praising the
name of Jesus who redeemed us from destruction, and is ready and willing
to save us from our sins."

While Rafaravavy was speaking Ranavalona put her hand over her eyes.
When the former ceased, she did not remove the hand, but said, in a tone
which the poor girl could not quite understand--

"Go!  Enough.  Leave me!"

As Rafaravavy left the balcony, a prepossessing youth of delicate form
and gentle mien emerged upon it by another door.

"Mother," he said, earnestly, "do, _do_ give me leave to recall your
proclamation.  I have just heard of it from Rainiharo.  Believe me, many
of the nobles are not so good--I mean so guilty!--as you think.  And the
poor Christians--why should they not pray and sing?  It is all that you
have left to them, for they no longer dare to worship together in the
churches."

"No, Rakota, I will not recall it.  Your constant pleading worries me.
It is enough to say that the people shall be examined--by the tangena
ordeal if necessary--and they shall be punished according to their
deserts.  Is that all that you come here for, my son?"

It was evident from her tone that Ranavalona relented a little, though
her words were firmly spoken.

"I came also to tell you," said the prince, "that the Europeans whom
your spies brought news of some time ago have arrived.  They are even
now in the market-place.  By my orders the guards have let them pass
without question."

"Always interfering, Rakota!" said the Queen, angrily.  "Why were they
not seized and guarded till I should find time to speak with them?"

"Because, mother, that would scarcely be a civil way of receiving
strangers."

"Strangers!  Spies you should have said.  Have you forgotten the
ungrateful Frenchmen who so lately tried to overturn my government?"

"But these are not Frenchmen.  They are English," said the prince, "and
I will answer for them being good and true men."

"No doubt English are better than French--at least I hate them less; but
they are all pale-faced liars and Christians, and none of them shall
remain in my land.  But how can _you_ tell, boy, that they are good and
true men?  Have you had speech with them?"

"Not I," returned the prince.  "I have only seen them as they entered
the town, but that was enough.  One glance satisfied me of their being
true men.  When the sun rises it needs not much wisdom to know that
there is heat and light.  An honest face is like the sun.  You cannot
fail to know it."

"Go, foolish boy.  You are too confident.  I will not tolerate
Europeans.  These men shall be arrested.  Hence, and send hither an
officer."

Finding that the Queen was not in a temper to be trifled with, Rakota
wisely made no reply, but bowed and went his way.  In delivering the
message to the officer, however, he whispered such words to him as
secured a little delay in the execution of the royal commands.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE PRIME MINISTER LAYS DEEP PLANS--SO DOES HIS NEPHEW--THE GREAT
MARKET-PLACE--A FRIEND IN DEADLY PERIL, AND OUR THREE HEROES COME TO
GRIEF.

Returning to his own quarters in the palace, and chafing to find that
