
"Come here, Sim!" I called.

My blundering deck hand came promptly at my call, and I gave him the
steering oar, bidding him keep the raft steady before the current. I
took the long lines, which I used as mooring ropes, and tied them
together, making a cord at least a hundred feet in length. I took off
all my clothes but my pants and shirt, and secured the cord around my
body, making fast the other end to the raft.

"Sim!" said I, startling him with the sharpness of my tones.

"Yes; I'm here, Buck! Hookie!" stammered he.

"Mind what you're about!"

"O, yes! I will!"

"When I tell you, let go the oar, and pull in on this rope."

"I'll help him," said Flora.

"Don't you touch the rope, Flora. You may get dragged overboard."

"What shall I do?"

"You may make a fire in the stove, if you can," I answered, wishing to
get her out of the reach of danger if I could.

"I will, Buckland;" and she went into the house.

I was a powerful swimmer, and nerved by the peril of the stranger in the
water, I felt able to do anything. I let myself down into the river, and
struck out with all my strength towards the sufferer. The current of the
Mississippi is swift and treacherous. It was the hardest swimming I had
ever known; and, dragging the rope after me, I had a fierce struggle to
make any progress. In going those fifty feet, it seemed to me that I
worked hard enough to accomplish a mile.

I reached the sufferer, and grasped the stick to which she clung. I was
nearly exhausted myself by the violence of my efforts. I waited a moment
to regain my breath, before I attempted to deal with the difficulties of
the situation. I glanced at the person for whom I was to struggle. She
was not a woman, but a girl of fourteen. She was in a sinking condition,
apparently more from the effects of fear than actual suffering, for the
stick to which she clung afforded her ample support.

Afraid that the act of hauling us in would detach her from the stick, I
grasped it firmly with one hand, and clasped her around the waist with
the other. Her frame quivered with the cold and the terror of her
situation. As all persons in peril of drowning are apt to do, she was
disposed to cling to me.

"Don't be afraid," said I to her. "You are safe now."

"Save me!" gasped she, hardly loud enough to be heard.

"Haul in!" I shouted to Sim.

I felt the rope cutting my waist as Sim jerked and tugged at it with
all his strength. There was no lack of zeal on his part, but if anything
had depended upon coolness and skill, we might both have been drowned. I
kept a firm hold upon my helpless charge, and managed to keep her head
above the water, though my own was dragged under several times by the
clumsiness of my willing friend.

Sim pulled and hauled with energy, if not with skill. When he abandoned
the steering oar, the raft began to whirl, and thus to complicate his
labor. I caught a glance of the simple-minded fellow, as the craft
turned, and I heard him yell, "Hookie!" He was nonplussed by the change
of the raft; but he did not know enough to follow it round upon the
outside. I am not sure this freak of the current did not save us from a
calamity, for as it revolved, and the rope became tangled in the
platform, we were thrown against the raft, thus saving my helpmate half
his toil. Fortunately the end of the stick on which I floated struck the
logs first, and broke the force of what might otherwise have been a
stunning blow.

"Tie the rope, Sim!" I called to my assistant, who was now on the other
side of the raft.

"O, Buckland!" cried Flora, as she came out of the house and gazed at me
with an expression of intense pain.

"Hookie!" ejaculated Sim, rushing to the point where I had seized hold
of the raft.

[Illustration: AFTER THE EXPLOSION.--Page 221.]

He stood there, jumping up and down on both feet, bewildered and
helpless.




CHAPTER XX.

EMILY GOODRIDGE.


In the water, struggling for his own or another's life, a man's stock in
trade consists mainly of breath. Without that he can't do much, and
generally he fails for the want of it; not when life deserts him, but
when he might, by an economical use of it, have been able to save
himself. I had been in the water enough to learn this lesson, and to be
competent to advise all my young friends, in the moment of peril, to
refrain from useless and unreasonable struggling, for that wastes the
breath, and fritters away the strength.

I held on at the raft till I had recovered my breath, and felt strong
enough to make another effort; for I found that my own life and that of
my charge were to depend principally on my own exertions. Sim was
willing, but he was stupid; and I was afraid that some blunder of his
would yet lose me the battle.

I brought the helpless girl on my arm so that she could take hold of the
raft, but she seemed not to have the power to do so.

"Sim, mind what you are about now!" I called to my help.

"I will, Buck! What shall I do?" stuttered he.

"Lie down on the platform so that you can reach the girl."

He obeyed, and held out his great paws towards my helpless burden. I
raised her up a little, and he grasped her under the arms. He was as
strong as an ox; and raising her a little way, he turned over, and then
lifted her clear from the water, but dragging her up as roughly as
though she had been a log of wood. I needed no help myself, and was on
the raft almost as soon as the girl. She was utterly exhausted, and
unable to hold up her head. Sim and I carried her into the house. We
laid her in Sim's bunk, and Flora was as tender with her as though she
had been a baby.

"Hookie!" exclaimed Sim, staring at the sufferer, with his mouth open
wide enough to take in a canal boat. "Is she dead?"

"No--not dead!" replied Flora, as she lifted the wet locks from her
face, and gently rubbed her temples. "What shall we do for her,
Buckland?"

"She is chilled with the cold, and worn out with fear and exertion."

"I shall be better soon," said the girl, faintly. "I feel better now.
Let me rest a moment."

"Give her some hot tea," suggested Flora.

The tea-pot was on the stove, and I prepared a cup of tea for her. She
drank it, and the effect was good.

"I feel better; but I am so cold!" said she.

Flora and I consulted what it was best to do, and we finally decided
that her wet clothing must be removed. I carried her into my sister's
room, and laid her on a blanket. I then closed up the shutters of the
outer room, replenished the fire, and left Flora to do the rest. The
stove would heat the house as hot as an oven when the windows and doors
were closed.

Sim was now at the steering oar, where I joined him. Except the
fragments of the wreck which floated on the river, there was no vestige
of the terrible calamity in sight.

"Do you think she will die?" asked Sim, looking as anxious as though the
girl had been one of our own party.

"No; she is better now. She will be all right in a day or two."

"Who is she?" asked he, opening his mouth and his eyes to express his
wonder.

"I don't know--how should I?"

"Didn't she tell you?"

"No--she isn't able to talk much yet. She hasn't said ten words."

"Didn't she tell you who she was?"

Sim asked silly questions, and I had not always the patience to answer
him, especially when he had asked the same ones half a dozen times. I
had as much curiosity as he had to know who and what the young lady was,
and I was impatient to hear from Flora. As she did not call me, I was
satisfied her patient was doing well. It was quite dark now, and I was
walking rapidly up and down the raft, to keep myself warm, for I had
had no opportunity to change my wet clothes for dry ones.

"Buckland!" called the soft voice of Flora, "You may come in now."

"How is the girl?" I asked.

"She is nicely now. I have rubbed her, put dry clothes upon her, and
covered her up with blankets in my bed. She wants to see you."

I followed Flora into her room. The stranger, with the exception of her
head, was buried in the blankets, and by the dim light of the lantern I
saw as pretty a face as it ever had been my good fortune to behold
before. I had hardly seen her until now; certainly my first impressions
of her features and expression were derived from this observation,
rather than from any former one. She had a very mild, soft blue eye; but
she looked quite sad and troubled.

"I wish to tell you how grateful I am to you for saving my life," said
she. "I shall never forget your kindness, and I hope I may be able to do
something more for you."

"O, never mind that," I replied. "That's all right. I'm glad I had a
chance to do as I did."

"You are a brave and noble young man, and you saved my life. It may do
for you to forget it, but it will not do for me to do so."

"I won't complain if you do;" and as all heroes say under similar
circumstances, I told her I had only done my duty.

"Yet I almost wish you had not saved me," she added, with a shudder, as
her eyes suddenly filled with tears.

"Why so?" I asked, though I had not much difficulty in reading the cause
of her sadness.

"My mother! O, my mother!" cried she, in agony.

Poor girl! I wanted to cry with her. Flora threw her arms around her
neck, and wept with her.

"Your mother was in the steamer--was she?" I added.

"She was--and lost."

"Perhaps not," I suggested.

"O, I know she was."

"Probably some were saved."

"I dare not hope so," sobbed she, uncovering her eyes, and glancing at
me. "I was sitting clear back, as far as I could get, looking into the
water, when this terrible thing happened. I was thrown into the river by
the shock, or I jumped in--I don't know which. I caught hold of that
stick, but I did not know what I was doing."

"But where was your mother?" I asked. "She may have been equally
fortunate."

"The boat was racing with another, and Mr. Spear asked my mother to go
forward, and see the furnaces under the boilers, which, he said, were
red hot. I was reading a book, and did not want to go. In two or three
minutes after they went, the boiler burst. My mother must have been very
near the furnaces when the explosion took place."

"Who was Mr. Spear?"

"He was the gentleman who was taking charge of us."

"But it is possible that your mother was saved."

"I wish I knew!" she exclaimed, with tremulous emotion. "Can't you
ascertain? I shall be so grateful to you!"

"I will try," I replied. "We are not more than ten miles from the place
where the accident happened, and I can return."

"O, I wish you would!"

"Do you wish to return?" I asked.

"She cannot go to-night," interposed Flora. "She is all worn out."

"I do not feel able to go," added the poor girl; "and I do not wish to
go unless my mother is saved."

"What is your mother's name?"

"Mrs. Goodridge."

"And yours?"

"Emily Goodridge."

"Where do you live?"

"In New Orleans. My father is a merchant there. I have been sick, and
the doctor said I must go to the North; but my mother--"

She could say no more, for her sobs choked her utterance. I assured her
I would do all I could to ascertain the fate of her mother. I went into
the other room, and changed my clothes, and wrote down the names which
Emily gave me, so that I need not forget them. After assuring myself
that everything was right in the house, I went out and hoisted the
sail. Taking the steering oar, I ran the raft up to the shore on the
Missouri side, as the wind was favorable in that direction. I secured
the craft in the strongest manner, in order to make sure that she did
not go adrift during the night.

I knew there was a village not far above, for I had seen the lights of
it through the window as I was talking to Emily. I went on shore, and
walked about a mile, which brought me to the place. I went into a store
that I found open on the levee, and inquired of the keeper in what
manner I could get to Cairo. He told me I could only go by a steamboat,
and that I might have to wait an hour, or a couple of days, for one.
But, while I was talking with him, a man came in and said there was a
boat coming up the river. The person who brought this pleasing
intelligence was rough looking, and I offered him a dollar if he would
put me on board of her. He accepted my proposition so good-naturedly
that I concluded the boat was coming up to the town; but she did not,
and he put me into a bateau, and pulled off to her. At first she would
not stop.

"Great news!" I shouted, at the top of my lungs.

Curiosity did what good-nature would not, and the boat stopped her
wheels long enough for me to jump on her deck.

"What do you mean by great news?" demanded a gentleman, who, I soon
found, was the captain. "Did you say that to make me stop the boat? If
you did, I'll heave you overboard."

"No, sir; I did not," I replied, with becoming promptness after the
threat he had used.

"What's your great news, then?" demanded he.

"Do you know what two steamers went up the river about two or three
hours ago?" I asked.

"Certainly I do--the River Queen No. 4 and the Centurion. They passed me
this morning. But what's your news, boy?"

"The Centurion blew up about seven o'clock, as she was going into the
Ohio River."

"The Centurion!" exclaimed he.

"Yes, sir."

"Is that so, or are you making up this story?"

"It is true, sir. I saved a young lady who was a passenger. I left her
below this village, and I want to go up and find out whether her mother
was lost, or not."

"What is her name?"

"Emily Goodridge."

"Goodridge? Do you know her father's name?"

I looked at my paper, and found the name was Edward F. Goodridge.

"He is one of the heaviest merchants in New Orleans," added the captain,
thoughtfully.

My news proved to be all I had represented it, and I was plied with
questions which I could not answer, by the passengers interested in the
fate of those on board of the unfortunate steamer. I could only tell
them that the boat had been blown all to pieces, and that there was
plenty of assistance at hand to save those who were thrown into the
water.

In less than an hour my news was fully confirmed on the arrival of the
steamer at Cairo. We were informed that the River Queen No. 4 was still
there, with the survivors of the disaster on board, and I hastened to
find her.




CHAPTER XXI.

FLORA AND HER PATIENT.


There was no difficulty, in finding the River Queen No. 4, for she was
the centre of a circle of melancholy interest, and a crowd of people had
gathered on the levee to hear the latest tidings of woe from her cabin,
now changed into a hospital. I care not to dwell upon the sad scene
which greeted my vision as I went on board of her, nor to describe the
horror with which I glanced at the long row of ghastly corpses which had
been taken from the water.

It was a sickening sight, and terrible were the groans and the wailings
of the sufferers which resounded through the boat. I learned that the
captain of the ill-fated steamer was among the dead. If it had not been
so, an hour in the midst of this horrible din of sighs, and wails, and
groans would have been an all-sufficient punishment, if he had a human
heart in his bosom, for the base crime of sacrificing those precious
lives to the stupid rivalry of the hour.

The officers and passengers had been engaged in making up lists of the
wounded and the dead. Among the latter I found the name of Mrs.
Goodridge and Mr. Spear. I shuddered as I realized that the worst fears
of Emily were confirmed. I informed the clerk of the boat that I had
