connection with this eclipse. Not only did the Egyptian Government grant
special facilities, but strong parties went out representing England,
France, and Italy, although not perhaps in set terms at the direct
instigation of their respective Governments.

The next eclipse, that of May 6, 1883, had some dramatic features about
it. To begin with its duration was unusually long--nearly 51/2 minutes, and
Mrs. Todd in her genial American style remarks:--"After the frequent
manner of its kind, the path lay where it would be least useful--across
the wind-swept wastes of the Pacific. But fortunately one of a small
group of coral islands lay quite in its line, and, nothing daunted, the
brave scientific men set their faces toward this friendly cluster, in
cheerful faith that they could locate there. Directed to take up their
abode somewhere on a diminutive island about which nothing could be
ascertained beforehand, save the bare fact of its existence at a known
spot in mid-ocean, the American observers were absent from the United
States more than three months, most of which time was spent in
travelling, 15,000 miles in all, with ten full weeks at sea. Their tiny
foothold in the Pacific was Caroline Island, a coral atoll on the
outskirts of the Marquesas group."

In spite of the unattractive, not to say forbidding, character of the
place to which they would have to go, parties of astronomers went out
from England, France, Austria, and Italy, and although rain fell on the
morning of the day the sky became quite clear by the time of totality
and the observations were completely successful. One of the pictures of
the Corona obtained by Trouvelot, an observer of French descent, but
belonging to the American party, has been often reproduced in books and
exhibited the Corona in a striking form. How few were the attractions of
Caroline Island as an eclipse station may be judged from the fact that
the inhabitants consisted of only four native men, one woman, and two
children who lived in three houses and two sheds.

On September 8, 1885, there occurred a total eclipse, which was seen as
such in New Zealand, but the observations were few, and with one
exception, unimportant and uninteresting. A certain Mr. Graydon,
however, made a sketch which showed at one point a complete break in the
Corona so that from the very edge of the Moon outwards into space, there
was a long and narrow black space showing nothing but a vacuity. If this
was really the condition of things, such a break in the Corona is
apparently quite unprecedented.

In 1886, on August 29, there occurred a total eclipse, visible in the
West Indies, which yielded various important results. It was unfortunate
that for the greater part of its length, the zone of totality covered
ocean and not land, the only land being the Island of Grenada and some
adjacent parts of South America. The resulting restriction as regards
choice of observing stations was the more to be regretted because the
duration of the totality was so unusually long, and therefore
favourable, being more than 61/2 minutes in the middle of the Atlantic
Ocean. Parties of English, American, and Italian astronomers assembled,
however, at Grenada, and though the weather was not the best possible,
some interesting photographs were obtained which exhibited an unusual
development of hydrogen protuberances. The central line in this eclipse
not only stretched right across the Atlantic, but entered Africa on the
West Coast where a missionary saw the eclipse as a mere spectator, and
afterwards expressed his regret that no astronomers were within reach
with instruments to record the remarkable Corona which was displayed to
his gaze.

Though the unusual opportunities which, so far as the Sun and the Moon
were concerned, were afforded by the eclipse of 1886 were lost,
astronomers looked out hopefully for August 19, 1887, when another
eclipse was due to happen which, weather permitting, would be observable
over a very long stretch of land, from Berlin through Russia and Siberia
to Japan. Unusually extensive preparations were made in Russia at one
end and in Japan at the other, but clouds prevailed very generally, and
the pictures of the Corona which were obtained fell far short in number
and quality from what had been hoped for, having regard to the number
and importance of the stations chosen, and of the astronomers who made
their preparations thereat. An enthusiastic Russian, in the hopes of
emancipating himself from the risks of terrestrial weather at the
Earth's surface, went up in a balloon to an elevation of more than two
miles. His enthusiasm was so far rewarded that he had a very clear view
of a magnificent Corona; but as, owing to some mischance, the balloon
rose, conveying only the astronomer and leaving behind his assistant who
was to have managed the balloon, all his time was engrossed by the
management of the balloon, and he could do very little in the way of
purely astronomical work.

The year 1889 afforded two total eclipses of the Sun for which the usual
preparations were made. The first occurred on New Year's Day, and the
path of the shadow crossed the North American Continent from California
to Manitoba. The weather was nearly everywhere very favourable, and an
enormous number of observers and instruments were assembled along the
central line. The consequence was that a very large number of
photographs were obtained. It may be said generally of this eclipse,
that as it coincided with a Sun-spot minimum, it left us in a position
to learn very distinctly what are the characteristic features of a solar
Corona at a period which is one of rest and repose on the Sun, at least,
so far as regards visible Sun-spots.

The second eclipse of 1889 occurred on December 22, and should have been
visible off the northern coast of South America and on the West Coast of
Africa. Attempts were made to utilise the South American chances by
English and American parties, whilst a small expedition comprising
astronomers of both nations went to Cape Ledo in West Africa. The
African efforts failed entirely owing to clouds, but the South American
parties at Cayenne were successful. One very deplorable result, however,
arising out of the expedition to Cayenne was the illness and subsequent
death of the Rev. S. J. Perry, S.J., who was struck down by malaria and
died at sea on the return journey. None who knew Mr. Perry personally
could fail to realise what a loss he was both to astronomy generally and
to his own circle of friends particularly.

On April 16, 1893, there happened a total eclipse of the Sun, which was
successfully watched by a large number of skilled observers throughout
its entire length. Indeed it is believed that only one party was
unsuccessful. The line of totality started on the coast of Chili, passed
over the highlands of that country, across the borders of Argentina and
Paraguay, and over the vast plains and forests of Central Brazil,
emerging at about noon of local time at a short distance to the N.-W. of
Ceara on the North Atlantic seaboard. Crossing the Atlantic nearly at
its narrowest part, it struck the coast of Africa N. of the river
Gambia, and finally disappeared somewhere in the Sahara. The South
American observations were the most extensive and successful, the latter
fact being due to the circumstance that the sky at many of the principal
stations was pre-eminently favourable, owing to the clearness and
dryness of the atmosphere.

On Sept. 29, 1894, there was a total eclipse of the Sun, but as its
duration was brief and the zone of totality lay chiefly over the Indian
Ocean, practically nothing came of it.

Things seemed, however, much more promising for the total eclipse of
Aug. 9, 1896, and a very large number of observers went out to the North
of Norway hoping to catch the shadow at its European end, whilst a
yacht party went to Nova Zembla in the Arctic Ocean, and a few observers
travelled as far as Japan. So far as the very large number of would-be
observers who went from England to Norway were concerned, the eclipse
was a profound disappointment, for owing to bad weather practically
nothing was seen in Norway except on the West coast near Bodoe, where the
weather was beautifully fine, but where no adequate preparations had
been made, because nobody believed that the coast would be free from
fog. Exceptionally fine weather prevailed at Nova Zembla, and the small
but select party who were kindly taken there by the late Sir G. B.
Powell, M.P., in his yacht, were very fortunate, and an excellent series
of photographs was secured. One important result obtained at Nova Zembla
was a full confirmation by Mr. Shackleton of Prof. Young's discovery in
1870 of the "Reversing Layer," a discovery which was long and vehemently
disputed by Sir Norman Lockyer. Fairly successful observations were made
of this eclipse in Siberia and Japan.

The last total eclipse of the Sun which has to be noticed as an
accomplished fact was the "Indian Eclipse" of Jan. 22, 1898, which was
very successfully seen by large numbers of people who went to India from
all parts of the world. As usual in all total eclipses of the Sun
nowadays, the photographers were very much to the front, and the
photographs of the inner Corona, taken by the Astronomer Royal, are
thought to have been probably the best that have yet been done. Amongst
the miscellaneous observations made, it may be mentioned that more stars
were seen during the second partial phases than during totality (a
circumstance which had been noticed by Don A. Ulloa as far back as
1778). It is stated also that a mysterious object was seen between Mars
and Venus by two officers of H.M.S. _Melpomene_, which was not put down
on the published chart as a star to be looked for. The identity of this
object has not been ascertained.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 108: _Memoirs_, R.A.S., vol. x. p. 5.]

    [Footnote 109: _L'Annuaire_, 1846, p. 303.]

    [Footnote 110: _Month. Not._, R.A.S., vol. xx. p. 301; May 1860.]




                             CHAPTER XIV.

       THE ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH AS APPLIED TO ECLIPSES OF THE SUN.


Amongst the auxiliary agencies which have been brought into use in
recent years, to enable astronomers the better to carry out systematic
observations of eclipses of the Sun, the electric telegraph occupies a
place which may hereafter become prominent. As it is not likely that
this little book will fall into the hands of any persons who would be
able to make much use of telegraphy in connection with eclipse
observations, it will not be necessary to give much space to the matter,
but a few outlines will certainly be interesting. When the idea of
utilising the telegraph wire first came into men's minds, it was with
the object of enabling observers who saw the commencement of an eclipse
at one end of the line of totality, to give cautionary notices to
observers farther on, or towards the far end, of special points which
had been seen at the beginning of the totality, and as to which
confirmatory observations, at a later hour, were evidently very
desirable. It is obvious that a scheme of this kind depends for its
success upon each end (or something like it) of the line of totality
being in telegraphic communication with the other end, and this involves
a combination of favourable circumstances not likely to exist at every
occurrence of a total eclipse, and in general only likely to prevail in
the case of eclipses visible over inhabited territory, such as the two
Americas, Europe, and parts of Asia. This use of the telegraph was, I
think, first proposed as far back as 1878, by an American astronomer, in
connection with the total eclipse of that year. His proposal fell upon
sympathetic ears, with the result that arrangements were concluded with
the Western Union Telegraph Company of North America for the expeditious
forwarding of messages from northern stations on the eclipse line to
southern stations. Some attention was being given at that time to the
question of Intra-Mercurial planets, and it was thought that if by good
fortune any such objects were unexpectedly found at the northern
station, and observers at a southern station could be advised of the
fact, there might be a better chance of procuring an accurate and
precise record of the discovery. As it happened, nothing came of it on
that occasion, but the idea of utilising the telegraph having once taken
possession of men's minds, it was soon seen what important possibilities
were opened up.

The want of telegraph organisation curiously made itself felt in the
Egyptian eclipse of 1882. It is stated in another chapter of this work
that during the total phase a comet was unexpectedly discovered. Now
comets sometimes move very rapidly (especially when they are near the
Sun), and had it been possible to have warned some observer to the E. of
Egypt to look out for this comet, and had he seen it even only a couple
of hours after it had been found in Egypt, some data respecting its
position might have been obtained which would have permitted a rough
estimate being formed of its movement through the heavens. Such an
estimate might have enabled astronomers to have hunted up the comet at
sunset or sunrise on the days immediately following the eclipse. As it
happened, however, the comet was not seen again in 1882, and, so far as
we know, may never be seen again.

It was not till 1889 that a complete organisation of a telegraph service
in connection with an eclipse was accomplished. The eclipse of January 1
of that year began in the Pacific and the line of totality touched land
in California, passing across North America to Manitoba. The first
Californian station was at Willows, and was occupied by a party from
Harvard College Observatory, who were supplied with an unusually
complete equipment of photographic apparatus, together with a large
camera for charting all the stars in the neighbourhood of the Sun, so as
to detect an Intra-Mercurial planet if one existed. The telegraph scheme
which had to be worked out was somewhat complicated, and one of the
chief actors in the scene has furnished a fairly full account of what
was done. First of all, a complete list of the instruments and of the
work proposed to be done by them had to be prepared. The weather
probabilities being everywhere very unsatisfactory, there was a
possibility of all degrees of success or failure, and one thing which
had to be prearranged for each station was a cypher code which should be
available for all the likely combinations of instruments, weather and
results. It was found that about one hundred words would suffice for the
necessary code, including words which would indicate in a sufficiently
precise manner the position of any new planet which a photograph might
disclose.

The following, being a part of the code prescribed for use at Willows,
will serve to indicate the nature of the whole scheme:--

_Africa_,  Perfectly clear throughout the whole eclipse.
_Alaska_,  Perfectly clear during totality.
_Belgium_, Clear sky for the partial phases, but cloudy for totality.
_Bolivia_, Entirely cloudy throughout the whole eclipse.
_Brazil_,  Observed all the contacts.
_Bremen_,  Observed three of the contacts.
_Ceylon_,  Made observations on the shadow-bands.
_Chili_,   Observed lines of the reversing layer visually.
_China_,   The Corona showed great detail.
_Cork_,    Obtained 40-50 negatives during totality.
_Corsica_, Obtained 50-60 negatives during totality.
_Crimea_,  Obtained 60-70 negatives during totality.
_Cuba_,    Observed a comet.

Upwards of twenty codes were prepared for the like number of stations,
and the observers were to report their results at the earliest possible
moment. On a rehearsal of the programme the thought occurred that the
sending and reception of so many cypher messages in the ordinary course
of business might lead to delays which would be productive of serious
inconvenience, and that the success of the whole scheme could be only
well assured if a special wire, in direct circuit from New York to the
eclipse stations in turn, could be dedicated to the work. Thanks to the
liberality of the Western Union Telegraph Company this privilege was
secured, and a branch wire was led across from the Company's New York
office to the office of the _New York Herald_, which journal had
undertaken to be responsible for the non-astronomical part of the
business.

Mrs. Todd gives the following account of the final arrangements, and of
how they began to work when the moment for action arrived:--"From San
Francisco every California observer was within easy telegraphic reach,
and the wire thus extended by direct circuit to each eclipse station in
turn. From the editorial rooms of the _Herald_ Professor Todd was in
immediate communication with any observers whom he chose to call. As
previously intimated, arrangements had been made with the Harvard
astronomers at Willows to receive their message first and with the
utmost despatch, in order to test the feasibility of outstripping the
Moon. Shortly before 5 o'clock in the afternoon despatches began to come
in. Of course a slight delay was unavoidable, as the observers at the
various stations were some rods distant from the local telegraph
offices, and it would take a few minutes after the eclipse was over to
prepare the suitable message from the cypher code. On the astronomer's
table in the _Herald_ office were a large map and a chronometer. The
latter indicated exact Greenwich time, and the former showed the correct
position of the Moon's shadow at the beginning of every minute by the
chronometer. In this way it was possible to follow readily the precise
phase of the eclipse at every station. About the rooms and accessible
for immediate use were arranged the cypher codes pertaining to the
several stations and other papers necessary in preparing the reports for
the press. Everything being, as was supposed, in working order, New York
about a quarter of an hour before totality commenced inquired of Willows
the state of the weather. The answer was that the sky was getting dark,
and that there were no clouds anywhere near the Sun. At that time the
Moon's shadow was travelling across the open waters of the Pacific. It
rapidly rushed along; totality came and went at Willows; a two minutes'
glimpse of the Corona was had, and the Corona swept rapidly eastwards.
After a brief interval Professor Pickering sent off from Willows a
telegram which began--"_Alaska_, _China_, _Corsica_," and then the
connection failed. The break was located somewhere between California
and Utah, and more than half an hour elapsed ere the circuit was
re-established, and the rest of the message received. The remainder of
the thrilling incidents of that eventful day cannot possibly be better
told than in Mrs. Todd's crisp and striking language[111]:--

"During this interval the lunar shadow, advancing over Montana and
Dakota, had left the Earth entirely, sweeping off again into space.
Still, however, the prospect that the telegraph might win the race was
hopeful. Had New York been located in the eclipse path as well as
Willows, with both stations symmetrically placed, the total eclipse
would have become visible at New York about an hour and a quarter after
the shadow had left California. Thus there was time to spare. Having
recovered the wire, Professor Pickering's message was completed at
10h. 36m. [G.M.T.], the cypher translated, and the stenographer's notes
were written out and despatched to the composing-room six minutes later.
The "copy" was quickly put in type, and the hurried proof handed to
Professor Todd at 10h. 50m., exactly an hour of absolute time after the
observations were concluded. Had the Moon's shadow been advancing from
California toward New York, there was still a margin of several minutes
before the eclipse could become total at the latter place. In point of
fact, while the proof sheet of the first message was being read, the
lunar shadow would have been loitering among the Alleghanies. Man's
messenger had thus outrun the Moon. The telegraphic reports of the other
astronomers were gradually gathered and put in type, and the forms of
the _Herald_ were ready for the stereotyper at the proper time, some
two hours after midnight. At 3 o'clock a.m. the European mails closed,
and the pouches put on board the steamship _Aller_ carried the usual
copies for the foreign circulation. Within twenty-four hours after the
observations of the eclipse were made near the Pacific coast, the
results had been telegraphed to the Atlantic seaboard, collected and
printed, and the papers were well out on their journey to European
readers."

The foregoing narrative will make amply clear the future possibilities
of telegraphy as a coadjutor of Astronomy in the observation of total
eclipses of the Sun. And if the will and the funds are forthcoming, the
eclipse of May 28, 1900, will afford an excellent opportunity of again
putting to the test the excellent ideas of which our American friends
worked out so successfully ten years ago. The zone of totality in that
eclipse passing as it will through so many of the densely populated
Southern States of North America, and then through Portugal, Spain, and
Algiers, great facilities will present themselves for telegraphic
combinations, if political and financial difficulties do not interfere.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 111: There is a want of uniformity in Mrs. Todd's
    references to times which I have not thought it necessary to put
    straight. "Greenwich Mean Time," "Eastern U.S. Standard Time," and
    "Pacific Time," are all severally quoted in happy-go-lucky
    confusion.]




                              CHAPTER XV.

               ECLIPSES OF THE MOON--GENERAL PRINCIPLES.


In dealing with eclipses generally, but with more especial reference to
eclipses of the Sun, in a previous chapter, it was unavoidable to mix
up in some degree eclipses of the Moon with those of the Sun. There
are, however, distinctions between the two phenomena which make it
convenient to separate them as much as possible. Eclipses of the Moon
are, like those of the Sun, divisible into "partial" and "total"
eclipses, but those words have a different application in regard to
eclipses of the Moon from what they have when eclipses of the Sun are in
