time how dey gwine ter nab 'im. Dey ain't had no holiday yit, 'kaze w'en
de holiday come, dey'd go ter wuk, dey would, en juggle wid one er n'er
fer ter see how dey gwine ter ketch up wid Brer Rabbit. Bimeby, w'en all
der plans, en der traps, en der jugglements ain't do no good, dey all
'gree, dey did, dat Brer Rabbit got some cunjerment w'at he trick um
wid. Brer B'ar, he up'n 'low, he did, dat he boun' Brer Rabbit is a
nat'al bawn witch; Brer Wolf say, sezee, dat he 'speck Brer Rabbit des
in cahoots wid a witch; en Brer Fox, he vow dat Brer Rabbit got mo' luck
dan smartness. Den Jedge B'ar, he drap he head one side, he did, en he
ax how come Brer Rabbit got all de luck on he own side. De mo' dey ax,
de mo' dey git pestered, en de mo' dey git pestered, de wuss dey worry.
Day in en day out dey wuk wid dis puzzlement; let 'lone dat, dey sot up
nights; en bimeby dey 'gree 'mungs deyse'f dat dey better make up wid
Brer Rabbit, en see ef dey can't fine out how come he so lucky.

"Wiles all dis gwine on, ole Brer Rabbit wuz a-gallopin' 'roun' fum
Funtown ter Frolicville, a-kickin' up de devilment en terrifyin' de
neighborhoods. Hit keep on dis a-way, twel one time, endurin' de
odd-come-shorts,[30] ole Jedge B'ar sont wud dat one er his chilluns done
bin tooken wid a sickness, en he ax won't ole Miss Rabbit drap 'roun' en
set up wid 'im. Ole Miss Rabbit, she say, co'se she go, en atter she
fill 'er satchy full er yerbs en truck, off she put.

"I done fergit," said Uncle Remus, scratching his head gravely, "w'ich
one er dem chilluns wuz ailin'. Hit mout er bin Kubs, en hit mout er bin
Klibs; but no marter fer dat. W'en ole Miss Rabbit git dar, ole Miss
B'ar wuz a-settin' up in de chimbly-cornder des a-dosin' en a-nussin' de
young un; en all de wimmin er de neighborhoods wuz dar, a-whispun en
a-talkin', des fer all de worl' lak wimmin does deze days. It 'uz:--

"'Come right in, Sis Rabbit! I mighty proud to see you. I mighty glad
you fotch yo' knittin', 'kaze I'm pow'ful po' comp'ny w'en my chillun
sick. Des fling yo' bonnet on de bed dar. I'm dat flustrated twel I
dunner w'ich een's up, skacely. Sis Wolf, han' Sis Rabbit dat
rickin'-cheer dar, 'kaze 't ain't no one step fum her house ter mine.'

"Dat de way ole Miss B'ar run on," continued Uncle Remus, "en dey set
dar en dey chatter en dey clatter. Ole Brer Wolf, he 'uz settin' out on
de back peazzer smokin' en noddin'. He 'ud take en draw a long whiff, he
would, en den he 'ud drap off ter noddin' en let de smoke oozle out thoo
he nose. Bimeby ole Sis Rabbit drap 'er knittin' in 'er lap, en sing
out, sez she:--

"'Law, Sis B'ar! I smells 'barker smoke,' sez she.

"Ole Sis B'ar, she jolt up de sick baby, en swap it fum one knee ter de
yuther, en 'low:--

"'My ole man bin smokin' 'roun' yer de whole blessid day, but soon'z
dish yer chile tuck sick, I des tuck'n tole 'im, sez I, fer ter take
hisse'f off in de woods whar he b'long at, sez I. Yessum! I did dat! I
pities any 'oman w'at 'er ole man is fer'verlastin' stuck 'roun' de
house w'en dey's any sickness gwine on,' sez she.

"Ole Brer Wolf sot out dar on de back peazzer, en he shot one eye, he
did, en open um 'g'in, en let de smoke oozle out'n he nose. Sis B'ar,
she jolt de sick baby en swap it fum one knee ter de yuther. Dey sot dar
en talk twel bimeby der confab sorter slack up. Fus' news dey know Sis
Rabbit drap 'er knittin' en fling up 'er han's en squall out:--

"'De gracious en de goodness! Ef I ain't done come traipsin' off en lef'
my ole man money-pus, en he got sump'n' in dar w'at he won't take a
purty fer, needer! I'm dat fergitful,' sez she, 'twel hit keep me
mizerbul mighty nigh de whole time,' sez she.

"Brer Wolf, he lif' up he year en open he eye, en let de smoke oozle
out'n he nose. Sis B'ar, she jolt de sick baby wuss en wuss, en bimeby,
she up'n say, sez she:--

"'I mighty glad 't ain't me, dat I is,' sez she, 'bekaze ef I wuz ter
lef' my ole man money-pus layin' 'roun' dat a-way, he'd des nat'ally rip
up de planks in de flo', en t'ar all de bark off'n de trees,' sez she.

"Ole Miss Rabbit, she sot dar, she did, en she rock en study, en study
en rock, en she dunner w'at ter do. Ole Sis B'ar, she jolt en jolt de
baby. Ole Brer Wolf, he let de 'barker smoke oozle thoo he nose, he did,
en den he open bofe eyes en lay he pipe down. Wid dat, he crope down de
back steps en lit out fer Brer Rabbit house. Brer Wolf got gait same lak
race-hoss, en it ain't take 'im long fer ter git whar he gwine. W'en he
git ter Brer Rabbit house, he pull de latch-string en open de do', en
w'en he do dis, one er de little Rabs wake up, en he holler out:--

"'Dat you, mammy?'

"Den Brer Wolf wish he kin sing 'Bye-O-Baby,' but 'fo' he kin make
answer, de little Rab holler out 'g'in:--

"'Dat you, mammy?'

"Ole Brer Wolf know he got ter do sump'n', so he tuck'n w'isper, he
did:--

"'Sh-sh-sh! Go ter sleep, honey. De boogers'll git you!' en wid dat de
little Rab 'gun ter whimple, en he whimple hisse'f off ter sleep.

"Den w'en it seem lak de little Rabs, w'ich dey wuz mighty nigh
forty-eleven un um, is all gone ter sleep, Brer Wolf, he crope 'roun',
he did, en feel on de mantel-shelf, en feel, en feel, twel he come ter
ole Brer Rabbit money-pus. Ef he want so light wid he han'," Uncle Remus
went on, glancing quizzically at the child, "he'd a knock off de
pollygollic vial w'at ole Miss Rabbit put up dar. But nummine! Brer
Wolf, he feel, en feel, twel he come ter de money-pus, en he grab dat,
he did, en he des flew'd away fum dar.

"W'en he git out er sight en year'n', Brer Wolf look at de money-pus,
en see w'at in it. Hit 'uz one er deze yer kinder money-pus wid tossle
on de een' en shiny rings in de middle. Brer Wolf look in dar fer ter
see w'at he kin see. In one een' dey wuz a piece er calamus-root en some
collard-seeds, en in de t'er een' dey wuz a great big rabbit foot. Dis
make Brer Wolf feel mighty good, en he gallop off home wid de
shorance[31] un a man w'at done foun' a gol' mine."

Here Uncle Remus paused and betrayed a disposition to drop off to sleep.
The little boy, however, touched him upon the knee, and asked him what
Brother Rabbit did when he found his foot was gone. Uncle Remus laughed
and rubbed his eyes.

"Hit's mighty kuse 'bout Brer Rabbit, honey. He ain't miss dat money-pus
fer mighty long time, yit w'en he do miss it, he miss it mighty bad. He
miss it so bad dat he git right-down sick, 'kaze he know he bleedz ter
fine dat ar foot let go w'at may, let come w'at will. He study en he
study, yit 't ain't do no good, en he go all 'roun' 'lowin' ter
hisse'f:--

"'I know whar I put dat foot, yit I dunner whar I lef' um; I know whar I
put dat foot, yit I dunner whar I lef' um.'

"He mope en he mope 'roun'. Look lak Brer Wolf got all de luck en Brer
Rabbit ain't got none. Brer Wolf git fat, Brer Rabbit git lean; Brer
Wolf run fas', Brer Rabbit lope heavy lak ole Sis Cow; Brer Wolf feel
funny, Brer Rabbit feel po'ly. Hit keep on dis a-way, twel bimeby Brer
Rabbit know sump'n' n'er bleedz ter be done. Las' he make up he min' fer
ter take a journey, en he fix up he tricks, he do, en he go en see ole
Aunt Mammy-Bammy Big-Money."

"And who was old Aunt Mammy-Bammy Big-Money, Uncle Remus?" the little
boy inquired.

"Ah-yi!" exclaimed Uncle Remus, in a tone of triumph, "I know'd w'en I
fotch dat ole creetur name up, dey wa'n't gwine ter be no noddin' 'roun'
dish yer h'a'th. In dem days," he continued, "dey wuz a Witch-Rabbit,
en dat wuz her entitlements--ole Aunt Mammy-Bammy Big-Money. She live
way off in a deep, dark swamp, en ef you go dar you hatter ride some,
slide some; jump some, hump some; hop some, flop some; walk some, balk
some; creep some, sleep some; fly some, cry some; foller some, holler
some; wade some, spade some; en ef you ain't monst'us keerful you ain't
git dar den. Yit Brer Rabbit he git dar atter so long a time, en he
mighty nigh wo' out.

"He sot down, he did, fer ter res' hisse'f, en bimeby he see black smoke
comin' outer de hole in de groun' whar de ole Witch-Rabbit stay. Smoke
git blacker en blacker, en atter w'ile Brer Rabbit know de time done
come fer 'im ter open up en tell w'at he want."

As Uncle Remus interpreted the dialogue, Brother Rabbit spoke in a
shrill, frightened tone, while the voice of the Rabbit-Witch was hoarse
and oracular:--

"'Mammy-Bammy Big-Money, I needs yo' he'p.'

"'Son Riley Rabbit, why so? Son Riley Rabbit, why so?'

"'Mammy-Bammy Big-Money, I los' de foot you gim me.'

"'O Riley Rabbit, why so? Son Riley Rabbit, why so?'

"'Mammy-Bammy Big-Money, my luck done gone. I put dat foot down 'pon de
groun'. I lef um dar I know not whar.'

"'De Wolf done tuck en stole yo' luck, Son Riley Rabbit, Riley. Go fine
de track, go git hit back, Son Riley Rabbit, Riley.'

"Wid dat," continued Uncle Remus, "ole Aunt Mammy-Bammy Big-Money sucked
all de black smoke back in de hole in de groun', and Brer Rabbit des put
out fer home. W'en he git dar, w'at do he do? Do he go off in a cornder
by hisse'f, en wipe he weepin' eye? Dat he don't--dat he don't. He des
tuck'n wait he chance. He wait en he wait; he wait all day, he wait all
night; he wait mighty nigh a mont'. He hang 'roun' Brer Wolf house; he
watch en he wait.

"Bimeby, one day, Brer Rabbit git de news dat Brer Wolf des come back
fum a big frolic. Brer Rabbit know he time comin', en he keep bofe eye
open en bofe years h'ist up. Nex' mawnin' atter Brer Wolf git back fum
de big frolic, Brer Rabbit see 'im come outer de house en go down de
spring atter bucket water. Brer Rabbit, he slip up, he did, en he look
in. Ole Miss Wolf, she 'uz sailin' 'roun' fryin' meat en gittin'
brekkus, en dar hangin' 'cross er cheer wuz Brer Wolf wes'cut where he
keep he money-pus. Brer Rabbit rush up ter do' en pant lak he mighty
nigh fag out. He rush up, he did, en he sing out:--

"'Mawnin', Sis Wolf, mawnin'! Brer Wolf sont me atter de shavin'-brush,
w'ich he keep it in dat ar money-pus w'at I 'loant 'im.'

"Sis Wolf, she fling up 'er han's en let um drap, en she laugh en say,
sez she:--

"'I 'clar' ter gracious, Brer Rabbit! You gimme sech a tu'n, dat I ain't
got room ter be perlite skacely.'

"But mos' 'fo' she gits de wuds out'n 'er mouf, Brer Rabbit done grab de
money-pus en gone!"

"Which way did he go, Uncle Remus?" the little boy asked, after a while.

"Well, I tell you dis," Uncle Remus responded emphatically, "Brer Rabbit
road ain't lay by de spring; I boun' you dat!"

Presently 'Tildy put her head in the door to say that it was bedtime,
and shortly afterward the child was dreaming that Daddy Jack was
Mammy-Bammy Big-Money in disguise.


FOOTNOTES:

[27] Disease.

[28] If, as some ethnologists claim, the animal myths are relics of
zooetheism, there can scarcely be a doubt that the practice here
described by Uncle Remus is the survival of some sort of obeisance or
genuflexion by which the negroes recognized the presence of the Rabbit,
the great central figure and wonder-worker of African mythology.

[29] Never mind.

[30] Sometime, any time, no time. Thus: "Run fetch me de ax, en I'll
wait on you one er deze odd-come-shorts."

[31] Assurance.




XXXI

"IN SOME LADY'S GARDEN"


When the little boy next visited Uncle Remus the old man was engaged in
the somewhat tedious operation of making shoe-pegs. Daddy Jack was
assorting a bundle of sassafras roots, and Aunt Tempy was transforming
a meal-sack into shirts for some of the little negroes,--a piece of
economy of her own devising. Uncle Remus pretended not to see the child.

"Hit's des lak I tell you all," he remarked, as if renewing a
conversation; "I monst'us glad dey ain't no bad chilluns on dis place
fer ter be wadin' in de spring-branch, en flingin' mud on de yuther
little chilluns, w'ich de goodness knows dey er nasty nuff bidout dat. I
monst'us glad dey ain't none er dat kinder young uns 'roun' yer--I is
dat."

"Now, Uncle Remus," exclaimed the little boy, in an injured tone,
"somebody's been telling you something on me."

The old man appeared to be very much astonished.

"Heyo! whar you bin hidin', honey? Yer 't is mos' way atter supper en
you ain't in de bed yit. Well--well--well! Sit over ag'in in de chimbly
jam dar whar you kin dry dem shoes. En de ve'y nex' time w'at I see you
wadin' in dat branch, wid de sickly season comin' on, I'm a-gwine ter
take you 'cross my shoulder en kyar you ter Miss Sally, en ef dat ain't
do no good, den I'll kyar you ter Mars John, en ef dat ain't do no good,
den I'm done wid you, so dar now!"

The little boy sat silent a long time, listening to the casual talk of
Uncle Remus and his guests, and watching the vapor rise from his wet
shoes. Presently there was a pause in the talk, and the child said:--

"Uncle Remus, have I been too bad to hear a story?"

The old man straightened himself up and pushed his spectacles back on
his forehead.

"Now, den, folks, you year w'at he say. Shill we pursue on atter de
creeturs? Shill er shan't?"

"Bless yo' soul, Brer Remus, I mos' 'shame' myse'f, yit I tell you de
Lord's trufe, I'm des ez bad atter dem ar tales ez dat chile dar."

"Well, den," said Uncle Remus, "a tale hit is. One time dey wuz a man,
en dish yer man he had a gyardin. He had a gyardin, en he had a little
gal fer ter min' it. I don't 'speck dish yer gyardin wuz wide lak Miss
Sally gyardin, but hit 'uz lots longer. Hit 'uz so long dat it run down
side er de big road, 'cross by de plum thicket, en back up de lane. Dish
yer gyardin wuz so nice en long dat it tuck'n 'track de 'tention er Brer
Rabbit; but de fence wuz built so close en so high, dat he can't git in
nohow he kin fix it."

"Oh, I know about that!" exclaimed the little boy. "The man catches
Brother Rabbit and ties him, and the girl lets him loose to see him
dance."

Uncle Remus dropped his chin upon his bosom. He seemed to be humbled.

"Sis Tempy," he said, with a sigh, "you'll hatter come in some time w'en
we ain't so crowded, en I'll up en tell 'bout Billy Malone en Miss
Janey."

"_That_ wasn't the story I heard, Uncle Remus," said the little boy.
"_Please_ tell me about Billy Malone and Miss Janey."

"Ah-yi!" exclaimed Uncle Remus, with a triumphant smile; "I 'low'd maybe
I wa'n't losin' de use er my 'membunce, en sho' nuff I ain't. Now, den,
we'll des wuk our way back en start fa'r en squar'. One time dey wuz a
man, en dish yer man he had a gyardin en a little gal. De gyardin wuz
chock full er truck, en in de mawnin's, w'en de man hatter go off, he
call up de little gal, he did, en tell 'er dat she mus' be sho' en keep
ole Brer Rabbit outer de gyardin. He tell 'er dis eve'y mawnin'; but one
mawnin' he tuck en forgit it twel he git ter de front gate, en den he
stop en holler back:--

"'O Janey! You Janey! Min' w'at I tell you 'bout ole Brer Rabbit. Don't
you let 'im get my nice green peas.'

"Little gal, she holler back: 'Yes, daddy.'

"All dis time, Brer Rabbit he 'uz settin' out dar in de bushes dozin'.
Yit, w'en he year he name call out so loud, he cock up one year en
lissen, en he 'low ter hisse'f dat he bleedz ter outdo Mr. Man. Bimeby,
Brer Rabbit, he went 'roun' en come down de big road des ez natchul ez
ef he bin trafflin' some'rs. He see de little gal settin' by de gate, en
he up'n 'low:--

"'Ain't dish yer Miss Janey?'

"Little gal say: 'My daddy call me Janey.'" Uncle Remus mimicked the
voice and manner of a little girl. He hung his head, looked excessively
modest, and spoke in a shrill tone. The effect was so comical that even
Daddy Jack seemed to enjoy it.

"'My daddy call me Janey; w'at yo' daddy call you?'

"Brer Rabbit look on de groun', en sorter study lak folks does w'en dey
feels bad. Den he look up en 'low:--

"I bin lose my daddy dis many long year, but w'en he 'live he call me
Billy Malone.' Den he look at de little gal hard en 'low: 'Well, well,
well! I ain't seed you sence you 'uz a little bit er baby, en now yer
you is mighty nigh a grown 'oman. I pass yo' daddy in de road des now,
en he say I mus' come en tell you fer ter gimme a mess er
sparrer-grass.'

"Little gal, she fling de gate wide open, en let Mr. Billy Malone git de
sparrer-grass.

"Man come back en see whar somebody done bin tromplin' on de gyardin
truck, en den he call up de little gal, en up'n ax 'er who bin dar since
he bin gone; en de little gal, she 'low, she did, dat Mr. Billy Malone
bin dar. Man ax who in de name er goodness is Mr. Billy Malone. Little
gal 'low hit's des a man w'at say 'er daddy sont 'im fer ter git some
sparrer-grass on account er ole acquaintance. Man got his 'spicions, but
he ain't say nothin'.

"Nex' day, w'en he start off, he holler en tell de little gal fer ter
keep one eye on ole Brer Rabbit, en don't let nobody git no mo'
sparrer-grass. Brer Rabbit, he settin' off dar in de bushes, en he year
w'at de man say, en he see 'im w'en he go off. Bimeby, he sorter run
'roun', ole Brer Rabbit did, en he come hoppin' down de road, twel he
git close up by de little gal at de gyardin gate. Brer Rabbit drapt 'er
his biggest bow, en ax 'er how she come on. Den, atter dat, he 'low, he
did:--

"'I see yo' daddy gwine 'long down de road des now, en he gimme a rakin'
down 'kaze I make 'way wid de sparrer-grass, yit he say dat bein' 's how
I sech a good fr'en' er de fambly I kin come en ax you fer ter gimme a
mess er Inglish peas.'

"Little gal, she tuck'n fling de gate wide open, en ole Brer Rabbit, he
march in, he did, en he git de peas in a hurry. Man come back atter
w'ile, en he 'low:--

"'Who bin tromplin' down my pea-vines?'

"'Mr. Billy Malone, daddy.'

"Man slap he han' on he forrud;[32] he dunner w'at ter make er all dis.
Bimeby, he 'low:--

"'W'at kinder lookin' man dish yer Mr. Billy Malone?'

"'Split lip, pop eye, big year, en bob-tail, daddy.'

"Man say he be bless ef he ain't gwine ter make de acquaintance er Mr.
Billy Malone; en he went ter wuk, he did, en fix 'im up a box-trap, en
he put some goobers in dar, en he tell de little gal nex' time Mr. Billy
Malone come fer 'vite 'im in. Nex' mawnin', Man git little ways fum de
house en tuck'n holler back, he did:--

"'W'atsumever you does, don't you dast ter let nobody git no mo'
sparrer-grass, en don't you let um git no mo' Inglish peas.'

"Little gal holler back: 'No, daddy.'

"Den, atter dat, 't wa'n't long 'fo' yer come Mr. Billy Malone, hoppin'
'long down de big road. He drapt a bow, he did, en 'low:--

"'Mawnin', Miss Janey, mawnin'! Met yo' daddy down de big road, en he
say dat I can't git no mo' sparrer-grass en green peas but you kin gimme
some goobers.'

"Little gal, she lead de way, en tell Mr. Billy Malone dar dey is in de
box. Mr. Billy Malone, he lick he chops, he did, en 'low:--

"'You oughter be monst'us glad, honey, dat you got sech a good daddy
lak dat.'

"Wid dat, Mr. Billy Malone wunk he off eye, en jump in de box."

"W'at I done tell you!" exclaimed Aunt Tempy.

"He jump in de box," continued Uncle Remus, "en dar he wuz, en ef de
little gal hadder bin a minnit bigger, I lay she'd 'a' tuck'n done some
mighty tall winkin'.

"Man ain't gone fur, en 't wa'n't long 'fo' yer he come back. W'en Brer
Rabbit year 'im comin' he bounce 'roun' in dar same ez a flea in a
piller-case, but 't ain't do no good. Trap done fall, en Brer Rabbit in
dar. Man look thoo de slats, en 'low:--

"'Dar you is--same old hoppum-skippum run en jumpum. Youer de ve'y chap
I'm atter. I want yo' foot fer ter kyar in my pocket, I want yo' meat
fer ter put in de pot, en I want yo' hide fer ter w'ar on my head.'

"Dis make cole chill rush up en down Brer Rabbit backbone, en he git
more 'umble dan a town nigger w'at been kotch out atter nine erclock.[33]
He holler en cry, en cry en holler:--

"'Do pray, Mr. Man, tu'n me go! I done 'ceive you dis time, but I ain't
gwine ter 'ceive you no mo'. Do pray, Mr. Man, tu'n me go, des dis
little bit er time.'

"Man he ain't sayin' nothin'. He look lak he studyin' 'bout somep'n'
ne'r way off yan', en den he take de little gal by de han' en go off
todes de house."

"Sho'ly Brer Rabbit time done come now!" exclaimed Aunt Tempy, in a tone
of mingled awe and expectation.

Uncle Remus paid no attention to the interruption, but went right on:--

"Hit seem lak dat Brer Rabbit got mo' luck dan w'at you kin shake a
stick at, 'kaze de man en de little gal ain't good en gone skacely twel
yer come Brer Fox a-pirootin' 'roun'. Brer Fox year Brer Rabbit holl'in'
en he up'n ax w'at de 'casion er sech gwines on right dar in de broad
open daylight. Brer Rabbit squall out:--

"'Lordy, Brer Fox! you better make 'as'e 'way fum yer, 'kaze Mr. Man ull
ketch you en slap you in dish yer box en make you eat mutton twel you
