"Then you will all be discreet. The motto contains a very valuable
moral lesson, which bears on your case, and I hope you will take it to
heart," said Paul.

"I should like to take it to head first," replied Lindsley.

"I hope you are satisfied now, Mr. Raymond," continued Grace.

"Not at all. I am willing to do my duty, rather than be starved on salt
junk, and choked to death for the want of water; but I am not
satisfied."

"Not satisfied!" exclaimed Grace. "Not after you have been initiated
into the noble and magnanimous Circle of the Order of the Faithful!"

"Not much!"

"You should say, '_Nicht viel_,' when you want to use that expression,"
laughed Grace, who did not like American slang, and had already
partially cured Paul, who had a slight tendency in that direction.

"Well, _nicht viel_, then. It was not fair, when we had been promised a
trip into Germany, to send us off to sea, just to please Shuffles."

"Captain Shuffles is a good young man. If you say anything against him,
you shall be expelled from the Order of the Faithful!"

"Well, I won't say anything against him, then, Miss Arbuckle; but they
say the ship is bound for Belfast."

"Do you see that land, Mr. Raymond?" she added, pointing to the light
on the headland.

"I do."

"What land is it?"

"I don't know."

"It is the Bill of Portland. Now, which way is the ship headed?"

"About south-west," replied Raymond, after looking through the skylight
at the tell-tale in the steerage.

"South-west by west, half west," she added.

"Bully for you!"

"Instead of that, you should say, "_Bulle fuer ihnen_." In other words,
you should utter all your slang in German: it sounds better."

"I only meant to say that you reeled off the course like a regular old
salt," laughed Raymond.

"If the ship were bound to Belfast, its course would be nearer west. We
are not going to Belfast. We are going to Brest. Mr. Lowington said the
ship's company needed a little exercise to perfect the discipline, and
to save the trouble and expense of going into the dock at Havre, the
vessels will be left in the harbor of Brest. He never had a thought of
giving up the trip down the Rhine."

"Is that so?" asked the leader of the mild rebels.

Paul repeated the explanation to the penitents which the principal had
given the day before.

"We understood that we were going to sea just to please Shuffles," said
Lindsley.

"The captain certainly wanted better discipline, and he did propose a
day or two at sea for its improvement," added Paul.

"I don't care for two or three days at sea, if we are to go to the
Rhine," continued Raymond. "I'm satisfied now."

The conversation was continued till the starboard watch was piped to
supper. Raymond was fully satisfied now that he had made a fool of
himself, and, what was even worse, that he and his companions had been
the dupes of the runaways. Those who belonged in the starboard watch
were permitted to go to the table, and they did ample justice to the
cold roast beef, butter toast, and tea which covered the mess tables.
Peaks and the head steward paced the steerage, as before, and no one
without a ribbon was allowed to partake. At six o'clock, after the port
watch had been relieved, the second supper was served, and the rest of
the hungry and thirsty delinquents enjoyed the change in their bill of
fare.

Then the runaways sat down to their supper of salt beef and hard bread,
without tea or water. The food did not suit them, and they turned up
their noses at it. The thirst created by their salt breakfast in the
morning had required large draughts upon their water bottles, and
before dinner they had exhausted the supply. They were very thirsty,
though none of them were actually suffering. The fact that they could
not get any water made them want it all the more. They ate none of the
salt meat, which by this time was loathsome to them. Ship bread was dry
feed, and they could eat very little of it. Doubtless it was a hard
case for them, the sons of rich men; but they had only to obey the
boatswain's pipe, and "eat, drink, and be filled."

"I can't stand this," said Monroe, when a group of them had gathered in
their mess-room after the unpalatable supper.

"Can't you? What's the reason you can't?" growled Howe.

"I'm almost choked."

"So am I," added several others.

"Are you going to back out?" demanded the leader.

"Rather than perish with thirst, I am," answered Herman.

"What's the use? All the rest of the fellows have deserted us," added
Ibbotson. "Even Raymond is sporting a yellow ribbon, and is as jolly as
a lord now."

"We can't make anything by it," said Monroe. "I move you we back out,
and get a drink of water. All hands will be called at eight bells, I
think, to put on more sail."

"No, no! Don't back out," interposed Howe. "We haven't made ourselves
felt yet."

"That's so," groaned Herman. "No one takes any notice of us. Even
those fellows that went up last won't speak to us, not even to answer a
civil question. The principal evidently regards us with perfect
contempt. I go in for doing something, or backing out. As it is, we are
making a milk-and-water affair of it. We are starved and choked. That's
all we have to show for what we have done."

"Why don't you preach, and say, 'The way of the transgressor is hard,'
or something of that sort, which is original," snarled Howe.

"I should judge from your talk that you did not feel very good," added
Herman.

"I don't; I'm as dry as any of you, but I have no idea of backing out."

"What are you going to do? What's to be the end of this?" demanded
Ibbotson. "I've got enough of it."

"That seems to be the general opinion," continued Herman.

"Where's Little?" demanded Howe, who could not help realizing that the
fortunes of the last of the mutineers were becoming desperate, and that
it was not an easy thing to contend against such enemies as hunger and
thirst. "I shall not give it up so. Let us do something. Let us make
ourselves felt, even if we are hanged for it."

"What can we do?" inquired Herman, earnestly. "We are caged here like a
lot of donkeys, and I have had enough of it."

"Will you hold on for a couple of hours longer, fellows?" persisted
Howe.

"I will hold on till the boatswain calls all hands, and not an instant
longer," replied Herman. "My tongue feels as though it were cracking
with thirst."

Howe rushed out of the room to find Little, who was the man of
expedients for the runaways. He found him in an adjoining room, and
stated the case to him. The little villain was as uncomfortable and
unhappy as the rest of the mutineers, and, to the surprise of Howe,
counselled yielding rather than suffering any longer.

"I didn't think that of you, Little," sneered Howe.

"Didn't you? Well, it's only a question as to who can stand it the
longest on a diet of salt horse without water," replied Little. "I can
hold out as long as any fellow; but we shall not make anything by it.
If we could, I would stick."

"Let us do something, at least, to make a sensation before we give in.
I don't like the idea of being conquered just in this way."

"What can we do?"

"Let us set the ship afire, or bore holes in the bottom," whispered
Howe.

"Of course, you don't mean anything of that sort," added Little, with a
grim smile.

"I would rather do it than be whipped out in this manner. I never felt
so cheap and mean in my life," continued Howe, kicking the front of the
berth, and pounding with his fist to indicate the intensity of his
wrath.

"Nor I either; but what are you going to do about it."

"Well, you furnish gumption for the crowd, and I came to ask you what
to do. Our fellows' backs are broken, and they will go on deck when the
boatswain's pipe sounds again."

"I shall go with them," replied Little, quietly.

"Can't we get into the hold, and find some water?"

"No; Bitts put a lock on that scuttle this morning, and the forward
officers are watching all the time. You can set the ship afire if you
like. I don't think of anything else you can do to make yourself felt."

"I'll do it!" exclaimed Howe.

"No, you won't," added Little, mildly.

"What's the reason I won't?"

"You dare not."

"You see!" said the discomfited leader, bolting out of the room.

Some men, and some boys, are the most easily overwhelmed by letting
them severely alone. If Howe could have made a sensation, he would have
been better satisfied, even if he had been committed to the brig. He
was vain and proud, and it hurt him more to be ignored than to be
beaten. It was questionable whether he was desperate enough to put his
savage threat into execution; but he collected a pile of books and
papers in his mess-room, and declared his intention to Herman, Monroe,
and others, who were his messmates. No student was allowed to have
matches, and he lacked the torch to fire the incendiary pile.

"Don't be an idiot, Howe!" said Herman, disgusted with the conduct of
his leader.

"I'm going to do something," persisted he.

"You are not going to do that."

"Yes, I am! As soon as the steward leaves the steerage, I shall borrow
one of the lanterns, and there will be a blaze down here."

"No, there won't!"

"What's the reason there won't?"

"The fellows won't let you do any such thing. A fellow is a fool to
burn his own ship at sea."

"Of course it won't burn up; but it will bring Lowington down here, and
he will find out we are somebody."

"Nonsense!"

"But I mean it."

"No, you don't! It is all buncombe."

"You wait and see if it is. If I can only bring Lowington down here,
and see him scared out of his wits, I shall be satisfied. I shall be
willing to go into the brig, then, and stay there for the rest of the
cruise."

"You are a fool, Howe."

"I'm desperate."

"You shall not kindle any fire here. If you say you mean to do it, I
will call Peaks at once."

"I said it, and I'll do it," said Howe, leaving the room.

His messmates followed him. The steward had left the steerage, and
Howe, in order to take down the lantern, leaped upon a stool. Herman
kicked it from beneath him, and he fell upon the floor.

"What do you mean by that?" demanded Howe, with clinched fists.

"Don't you touch that lantern--that's all!"

"Yes, I will;" and he tried to mount the stool again.

Herman, Ibbotson, and Monroe seized him, and dragged him back into the
room. The noise attracted the attention of the rest of the mutineers,
and some others, who were below.

"Go, and call Peaks, Monroe," said Herman. "I will hold him till you
come back."

"Don't do that," interposed the desperate leader, becoming suddenly
calm, and apparently reasonable. "You are all cowards. Let me alone. I
might as well yield, with such milk-and-water fellows around me. Don't
say anything to Peaks."

"You are a bigger fool than I thought you were," added Herman, taking
no pains to conceal his disgust at the conduct of his leader.

"All hands, on deck, ahoy!" piped the boatswain.

All hands, Howe included, answered the call. The mutiny was ended.




CHAPTER X.

WHAT THE RUNAWAYS WERE GOING TO DO.


It was an astonishingly stupid mutiny, not relieved, even a shade, by
the sensational conduct of Howe, the leader, in its last moments, that
terminated twenty-four hours after its commencement, on board of the
Young America. However, it was hardly more stupid than any other wilful
evil-doing. Captain Shuffles, like the potentates of the old world,
wishing to have his accession to power signalized by an act of
clemency, had pleaded earnestly that the runaways might be forgiven,
and permitted to visit Germany with the rest of the ship's company. Mr.
Lowington had endeavored to reconcile the granting of the request with
his views of discipline. It is not necessary to ask with what success
he considered the matter, for the delinquents had now effectually put
it out of his power to grant them any favor.

The fog had lifted, and from the north-west came up the clearing of the
blue sky, as the sun went down. The wind had moderated, though the sea
still rolled uneasily in the channel. The principal had directed the
head steward to estimate the supply of water on board, and on his
report had decided that the ship should proceed directly to Brest. She
had been under easy sail, but as soon as the course was given to the
captain, he called all hands. For the first time since the departure
from Havre, all hands answered the call. Though it was quite dark, the
presence of the runaways was promptly recognized. The volunteer
officers, who were serving as seamen, were directed to take their
regular stations in working ship.

The water breaker in the waist was in demand, as soon as the last of
the mutineers came on deck; and without a word in regard to the past,
the steward served them out a pint of water apiece. Their prompt
attention to the water ration caused a smile among the Faithful, and
the officers considerately deferred further orders until their pressing
want was supplied.

"Shall we admit them to the Order of the Faithful?" said Grace to the
commodore, when it was announced that the bottom had dropped out of the
mutiny.

"I think not," replied Paul. "They have been the cause of all the
trouble on board, and Mr. Lowington does not wish that anything should
be said to them. They are the ones who emptied the water tanks."

"Really, I don't think they deserve to be admitted to the Order of the
Faithful--at least, not till they have proved their fidelity to duty."

"Raymond, and those who came on deck before, are generally very good
fellows; and we all believe now that they were led away by the
runaways," added Paul. "We shall soon see whether all hands intend to
do their duty."

When the thirsty ones had been supplied with water, the order to set
the courses was given, and the runaways severally took their stations,
and performed their duty without making any confusion. The
top-gallant-sails and royals were then shaken out. The discipline now
seemed to be perfect, and the principal's method of dealing with the
mutiny was fully justified, though he took pains to explain to some of
the professors that he did not consider this treatment practicable in
all cases. The conduct of the rebels, and the facts developed,
indicated that they wished to be noticed; that they believed the ship
could not sail without their permission and assistance. This blunder
was fatal to all their calculations, and they were unable to "make
themselves felt."

But the runaways were no better satisfied than Raymond had been; and
though they performed their duty in setting sail with entire precision,
they were sour and morose. The sting of an overwhelming defeat thorned
them. They were mortified, humiliated, and crest-fallen. They were
enraged at the conduct of their rebellious companions of the milder
stripe, who had deserted them, and they were reaping the general
consequences of evil-doing. They did their work, but when it was done
they avoided their shipmates, and even avoided each other. Howe had
ruined himself as a leader by his silly conduct, and there was not
likely to be any further concerted action among them.

Mr. Lowington had faithfully followed out his plan, and had directed
Mr. Fluxion to adopt the same treatment for those who refused to do
duty in the Josephine--to keep them in the steerage, and feed them on
sailors' fare. The result of the treatment in the consort was yet to be
learned, for she had not been seen since the supply of water had been
procured from her.

At midnight the wind blew fresh from the north-west, and with all sails
set, the ship logged twelve knots. The three lights on the Casquets, at
the western extremity of the Channel Islands were in sight, and the
prospect of seeing Ushant early in the forenoon was good. As all hands
were now on duty, the system of quarter watches was restored, so that
each part could have six hours of uninterrupted sleep. There was
nothing for the watch on deck to do, except to steer, and keep a
