dinner, finding plenty of food and drink in the boat's lockers. In the
evening the stars came out in the sky and tipped the waves around their
boat with silver. All around them was delightfully still save for the
occasional snarl of a beast on the neighboring shore.

They talked together quietly of their adventures and their future plans
and Zella told them her simple history and how hard her poor father was
obliged to work, burning charcoal to sell for enough money to support
his wife and child. Nikobob might be the humblest man in all Regos, but
Zella declared he was a good man, and honest, and it was not his fault
that his country was ruled by so wicked a King.

Then Rinkitink, to amuse them, offered to sing a song, and although
Bilbil protested in his gruff way, claiming that his master's voice was
cracked and disagreeable, the little King was encouraged by the others
to sing his song, which he did.

  "A red-headed man named Ned was dead;
      Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!
  In battle he had lost his head;
      Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!
  'Alas, poor Ned,' to him I said,
  'How did you lose your head so red?'
      Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!

  "Said Ned: 'I for my country bled,'
      Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!
  'Instead of dying safe in bed;'
      Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!
  'If I had only fled, instead,
  I then had been a head ahead.'
      Sing fiddle-cum-faddle-cum-fi-do!

  "I said to Ned----"

"Do stop, Your Majesty!" pleaded Bilbil. "You're making my head ache."

"But the song isn't finished," replied Rinkitink, "and as for your head
aching, think of poor Ned, who hadn't any head at all!"

"I can think of nothing but your dismal singing," retorted Bilbil. "Why
didn't you choose a cheerful subject, instead of telling how a man who
was dead lost his red head? Really, Rinkitink, I'm surprised at you."

"I know a splendid song about a live man," said the King.

"Then don't sing it," begged Bilbil.

Zella was both astonished and grieved by the disrespectful words of the
goat, for she had quite enjoyed Rinkitink's singing and had been taught
a proper respect for Kings and those high in authority. But as it was
now getting late they decided to go to sleep, that they might rise early
the following morning, so they all reclined upon the bottom of the big
boat and covered themselves with blankets which they found stored
underneath the seats for just such occasions. They were not long in
falling asleep and did not waken until daybreak.

[Illustration]

After a hurried breakfast, for Inga was eager to liberate his father,
the boy rowed the boat ashore and they all landed and began searching
for the path. Zella found it within the next half hour and declared they
must be very close to the entrance to the mines; so they followed the
path toward the north, Inga going first, and then Zella following him,
while Rinkitink brought up the rear riding upon Bilbil's back.

Before long they saw a great wall of rock towering before them, in which
was a low arched entrance, and on either side of this entrance stood a
guard, armed with a sword and a spear. The guards of the mines were not
so fierce as the warriors of King Gos, their duty being to make the
slaves work at their tasks and guard them from escaping; but they were
as cruel as their cruel master wished them to be, and as cowardly as
they were cruel.

Inga walked up to the two men at the entrance and said:

"Does this opening lead to the mines of King Gos?"

"It does," replied one of the guards, "but no one is allowed to pass out
who once goes in."

"Nevertheless," said the boy, "we intend to go in and we shall come out
whenever it pleases us to do so. I am the Prince of Pingaree, and I
have come to liberate my people, whom King Gos has enslaved."

Now when the two guards heard this speech they looked at one another and
laughed, and one of them said: "The King was right, for he said the boy
was likely to come here and that he would try to set his people free.
Also the King commanded that we must keep the little Prince in the
mines, and set him to work, together with his companions."

"Then let us obey the King," replied the other man.

Inga was surprised at hearing this, and asked:

"When did King Gos give you this order?"

"His Majesty was here in person last night," replied the man, "and went
away again but an hour ago. He suspected you were coming here and told
us to capture you if we could."

This report made the boy very anxious, not for himself but for his
father, for he feared the King was up to some mischief. So he hastened
to enter the mines and the guards did nothing to oppose him or his
companions, their orders being to allow him to go in but not to come
out.

The little group of adventurers passed through a long rocky corridor and
reached a low, wide cavern where they found a dozen guards and a
hundred slaves, the latter being hard at work with picks and shovels
digging for gold, while the guards stood over them with long whips.

Inga found many of the men from Pingaree among these slaves, but King
Kitticut was not in this cavern; so they passed through it and entered
another corridor that led to a second cavern. Here also hundreds of men
were working, but the boy did not find his father amongst them, and so
went on to a third cavern.

The corridors all slanted downward, so that the farther they went the
lower into the earth they descended, and now they found the air hot and
close and difficult to breathe. Flaming torches were stuck into the
walls to give light to the workers, and these added to the oppressive
heat.

The third and lowest cavern was the last in the mines, and here were
many scores of slaves and many guards to keep them at work. So far, none
of the guards had paid any attention to Inga's party, but allowed them
to proceed as they would, and while the slaves cast curious glances at
the boy and girl and man and goat, they dared say nothing. But now the
boy walked up to some of the men of Pingaree and asked news of his
father, telling them not to fear the guards as he would protect them
from the whips.

[Illustration]

Then he learned that King Kitticut had indeed been working in this very
cavern until the evening before, when King Gos had come and taken him
away--still loaded with chains.

"Seems to me," said King Rinkitink, when he heard this report, "that Gos
has carried your father away to Regos, to prevent us from rescuing him.
He may hide poor Kitticut in a dungeon, where we cannot find him."

"Perhaps you are right," answered the boy, "but I am determined to find
him, wherever he may be."

Ingo spoke firmly and with courage, but he was greatly disappointed to
find that King Gos had been before him at the mines and had taken his
father away. However, he tried not to feel disheartened, believing he
would succeed in the end, in spite of all opposition. Turning to the
guards, he said:

"Remove the chains from these slaves and set them free."

The guards laughed at this order, and one of them brought forward a
handful of chains, saying: "His Majesty has commanded us to make you,
also, a slave, for you are never to leave these caverns again."

[Illustration]

Then he attempted to place the chains on Inga, but the boy indignantly
seized them and broke them apart as easily as if they had been cotton
cords. When a dozen or more of the guards made a dash to capture him,
the Prince swung the end of the chain like a whip and drove them into a
corner, where they cowered and begged for mercy.

Stories of the marvelous strength of the boy Prince had already spread
to the mines of Regos, and although King Gos had told them that Inga had
been deprived of all his magic power, the guards now saw this was not
true, so they deemed it wise not to attempt to oppose him.

The chains of the slaves had all been riveted fast to their ankles and
wrists, but Inga broke the bonds of steel with his hands and set the
poor men free--not only those from Pingaree but all who had been
captured in the many wars and raids of King Gos. They were very
grateful, as you may suppose, and agreed to support Prince Inga in
whatever action he commanded.

He led them to the middle cavern, where all the guards and overseers
fled in terror at his approach, and soon he had broken apart the chains
of the slaves who had been working in that part of the mines. Then they
approached the first cavern and liberated all there.

The slaves had been treated so cruelly by the servants of King Gos that
they were eager to pursue and slay them, in revenge; but Inga held them
back and formed them into companies, each company having its own leader.
Then he called the leaders together and instructed them to march in good
order along the path to the City of Regos, where he would meet them and
tell them what to do next.

They readily agreed to obey him, and, arming themselves with iron bars
and pick-axes which they brought from the mines, the slaves began their
march to the city.

Zella at first wished to be left behind, that she might make her way to
her own home, but neither Rinkitink nor Inga thought it was safe for her
to wander alone through the forest, so they induced her to return with
them to the city.

The boy beached his boat this time at the same place as when he first
landed at Regos, and while many of the warriors stood on the shore and
before the walls of the city, not one of them attempted to interfere
with the boy in any way. Indeed, they seemed uneasy and anxious, and
when Inga met Captain Buzzub the boy asked if anything had happened in
his absence.

"A great deal has happened," replied Buzzub. "Our King and Queen have
run away and left us, and we don't know what to do."

"Run away!" exclaimed Inga. "Where did they go to?"

"Who knows?" said the man, shaking his head despondently. "They departed
together a few hours ago, in a boat with forty rowers, and they took
with them the King and Queen of Pingaree!"

[Illustration]




The Flight of the Rulers

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 15


Now it seems that when Queen Cor fled from her island to Regos, she had
wit enough, although greatly frightened, to make a stop at the royal
dairy, which was near to the bridge, and to drag poor Queen Garee from
the butter-house and across to Regos with her. The warriors of King Gos
had never before seen the terrible Queen Cor frightened, and therefore
when she came running across the bridge of boats, dragging the Queen of
Pingaree after her by one arm, the woman's great fright had the effect
of terrifying the waiting warriors.

"Quick!" cried Cor. "Destroy the bridge, or we are lost."

While the men were tearing away the bridge of boats the Queen ran up to
the palace of Gos, where she met her husband.

"That boy is a wizard!" she gasped. "There is no standing against him."

"Oh, have you discovered his magic at last?" replied Gos, laughing in
her face. "Who, now, is the coward?"

"Don't laugh!" cried Queen Cor. "It is no laughing matter. Both our
islands are as good as conquered, this very minute. What shall we do,
Gos?"

"Come in," he said, growing serious, "and let us talk it over."

So they went into a room of the palace and talked long and earnestly.

"The boy intends to liberate his father and mother, and all the people
of Pingaree, and to take them back to their island," said Cor. "He may
also destroy our palaces and make us his slaves. I can see but one way,
Gos, to prevent him from doing all this, and whatever else he pleases to
do."

"What way is that?" asked King Gos.

"We must take the boy's parents away from here as quickly as possible. I
have with me the Queen of Pingaree, and you can run up to the mines and
get the King. Then we will carry them away in a boat and hide them where
the boy cannot find them, with all his magic. We will use the King and
Queen of Pingaree as hostages, and send word to the boy wizard that if
he does not go away from our islands and allow us to rule them
undisturbed, in our own way, we will put his father and mother to death.
Also we will say that as long as we are let alone his parents will be
safe, although still safely hidden. I believe, Gos, that in this way we
can compel Prince Inga to obey us, for he seems very fond of his
parents."

"It isn't a bad idea," said Gos, reflectively; "but where can we hide
the King and Queen, so that the boy cannot find them?"

"In the country of the Nome King, on the mainland away at the south,"
she replied. "The nomes are our friends, and they possess magic powers
that will enable them to protect the prisoners from discovery. If we can
manage to get the King and Queen of Pingaree to the Nome Kingdom before
the boy knows what we are doing, I am sure our plot will succeed."

[Illustration]

Gos gave the plan considerable thought in the next five minutes, and the
more he thought about it the more clever and reasonable it seemed. So he
agreed to do as Queen Cor suggested and at once hurried away to the
mines, where he arrived before Prince Inga did. The next morning he
carried King Kitticut back to Regos.

While Gos was gone, Queen Cor busied herself in preparing a large and
swift boat for the journey. She placed in it several bags of gold and
jewels with which to bribe the nomes, and selected forty of the
strongest oarsmen in Regos to row the boat. The instant King Gos
returned with his royal prisoner all was ready for departure. They
quickly entered the boat with their two important captives and without a
word of explanation to any of their people they commanded the oarsmen to
start, and were soon out of sight upon the broad expanse of the Nonestic
Ocean.

Inga arrived at the city some hours later and was much distressed when
he learned that his father and mother had been spirited away from the
islands.

"I shall follow them, of course," said the boy to Rinkitink, "and if I
cannot overtake them on the ocean I will search the world over until I
find them. But before I leave here I must arrange to send our people
back to Pingaree."

[Illustration]




