emotions--all while the mechanical act of reading is going on. To
illustrate, let us take a line from _The Island of the Scots_:

  High flew the spray above their heads, yet onward still they bore.

If we wish to read this line well, what must we do besides pronouncing
the words correctly and articulating them distinctly? We must think
about the meaning of what we read. This includes two kinds of
thinking. In the example we first think the picture presented by the
words; that is, we make a mental image of the little band of Scots,
hand in hand, trying to ford the swiftly flowing waters of the swollen
river. This is called concrete thinking. At the same time we form some
judgment based on the picture. We think of the great determination and
courage these men showed in struggling forward in spite of the danger.
This is called =abstract thinking=. But, as we have said, a reader
does more than think in these two ways--he feels; and feeling, or
=emotion=, comes of itself, if the reader thinks in the two ways
described, for emotion is the result of thinking. Especially is it the
result of concrete thinking; for what we see, even if only with the
mind's eye, stirs our emotions more than that of which we think in the
abstract.

While reading the line just quoted, there are three emotions which
spring from the thinking. As we see these men struggling against the
strong current we have an emotion of fear for them; then as we think
of their determination and courage in the face of such great danger,
an emotion of determination comes to us, for we identify ourselves
with their fortunes; and lastly we are filled with admiration for
their heroism. Thus we experience the three emotions of fear,
determination, and admiration, while performing the mechanical act of
reading the words. These emotions, together with the two kinds of
thinking mentioned, affect the voice and the manner of reading, and
determine what we call =expression=. If the words were simply repeated
mechanically there would be no expression. Since expression involves
the employment of so many different powers at one time, a mastery of
the art of expression is much harder to acquire, than a mastery of
merely the mechanical side of reading.

Accordingly, good vocal expression springs primarily from something
within ourselves--that is, from our mental and emotional state. It
cannot be acquired by mechanical imitation, whether of the reading of
another, or of the movements, sounds, and gestures indicated in the
subject matter of what we read. Nevertheless it is very stimulating
to hear a selection well read, not because a model is thus supplied
for our imitation, but because we get a grasp of the selection as a
whole, and because the voice, which possesses great power in stirring
the imagination and the feelings, thus prepares within us the mental
and emotional state necessary for the correct expression.

In the same way, imitation of the movements, sounds, and gestures,
suggested by the subject matter may be a stimulus to thought and
feeling when preparing a selection, since what we have actually
reproduced is more real to us than what we have only imagined. After
such preparation, imitation, if it enters into the reading at all,
will be spontaneous, and not intentional and forced. In reading _The
Charge of the Light Brigade_ or _The Ride from Ghent to Aix_, we do
not designedly hurry along to imitate rapidity of movement; but,
rather, the imagination having been kindled by the picture, our pulse
is quickened, and the voice moves rapidly in sympathy with the
feelings aroused.

In the following extract (p. 216) the atmosphere is one of joy. The
reader is moved through sympathy with Horatius, and his voice
indicates the joy of the Romans, but he does not attempt to imitate
vocally, or by gesture, the "shouts," "clapping," and "weeping":

  Now round him throng the Fathers
  To press his gory hands;
  And now, with shouts and clapping,
  And noise of weeping loud,
  He enters through the River-Gate,
  Borne by the joyous crowd.

Sometimes, as already stated, we imitate spontaneously:

  Back darted Spurius Lartius;
  Herminius darted back:
  And, as they passed, beneath their feet
  They felt the timbers crack.

Here we imitate spontaneously the movement expressive of sudden fear.
Our action is prompted by our own fears for their safety.

Sometimes the feeling is still more complex. In reading the following
we spontaneously reproduce Sextus' alternate hate and fear which,
moreover, we tinge with our own contempt:

  Thrice looked he at the city;
  Thrice looked he at the dead;
  And thrice came on in fury,
  And thrice turned back in dread:
  And, white with fear and hatred,
  Scowled at the narrow way
  Where, wallowing in a pool of blood,
  The bravest Tuscans lay.

In reading the little poem from _The Princess_, (page 107) note how we
are influenced by the tense emotion of the attendants who speak. We do
not try to imitate them; but having made the scene stand out before
us, we speak as we in imagination hear them, in an aspirated tone of
voice:

  She must weep or she will die.

In the last line it would savour of melodrama to try to impersonate
the lady as she says:

  Sweet my child, I live for thee.

The important point is to show intelligent sympathy with her speech,
not to imitate her manner of uttering it.

On the other hand we must not make the mistake of supposing that if we
get the thought and the emotion, the true vocal expression will
follow. One who has a fine appreciation of a piece of literature may,
notwithstanding, read it very indifferently. Even in conversation
where we are interpreting vocally our own thoughts and feelings, we
sometimes misplace emphasis or employ the wrong inflection. How much
more likely we are to fall into such errors when we attempt to
interpret vocally from a book the thoughts of another.


=Elements Of Vocal Expression=

In order to criticise ourselves or understand intelligent criticism,
we must have a knowledge of the laws that govern speech--that is, we
must know what properties of tone or what acts of the voice correspond
to certain mental and emotional states. For example, the amount and
character of thinking done while we read determines the rate of
utterance; the purpose or motive of the thought and its completeness
or incompleteness are indicated by an upward or downward slide of the
voice; the nervous tension expresses itself in a certain key; the
physical and mental energy, in a certain power or volume of the voice;
and the character of the emotion is reflected in the quality. These
principles of vocal expression are known technically as the =elements=
of =time=, =inflection=, =pitch=, =force=, and =quality=. Closely
connected with these elements are =pause=, =grouping=, =stress=,
=emphasis=, =shading=, and =perspective=.

=Pause.= It must be quite clear that when we are reading silently, for
the purpose of getting the thought for ourselves, our minds are at
work as has been described. We shall now examine how this work done by
the mind affects the voice and produces what we call good expression
when we are reading aloud for the purpose of conveying thought to
others. As an illustration we shall take an example from _The Glove
and the Lions_:

  The nobles fill'd the benches round, the ladies by their side,
  And 'mongst them Count de Lorge, with one he hoped to make his bride.

In these lines there are certain words or phrases which stand out
prominently, since they call up mental pictures, namely: "nobles,"
"benches round," "Count de Lorge," and "one." In order to give time
to make these mental pictures, we naturally pause after each one. At
the end of the first line we combine the details, making a larger
mental image, with the result that we make a long pause after "side."
In reading the second line, the eye and the mind run ahead of the
voice, and the reader, wishing to impress the listener with the new
and important idea "Count de Lorge," pauses before it as well as after
it. In the same way he pauses before the phrase, "he hoped to make his
bride," to prepare the mind of the listener to receive the impression.
Thus we see that, if the mind is working, a pause occurs after a word
while we are making a mental image or trying to realize the idea more
fully, and also often before we express an important idea, in order to
prepare the mind of the listener for what is to come.

A very useful exercise in the study of pause is to image the pictures
in selections such as the following:

  Come from deep glen (picture) and
    From mountain so rocky; (picture)
  The war pipe and pennon (picture)
    Are at Inverlocky.
  Come every hill-plaid, and
    True heart that wears one; (picture)
  Come every steel blade, (picture) and
    Strong hand that bears one. (picture)

  Leave untended the herd, (picture)
    The flock without shelter; (picture)
  Leave the corpse uninterred, (picture)
    The bride at the altar; (picture)
  Leave the deer, (picture) leave the steer, (picture)
    Leave nets and barges: (picture)
  Come with your fighting gear,
    Broadswords and targes, (picture)

Then, too, in passing from one idea or thought to another, the mind
requires time to make the transition:

  Stout Lartius hurled down Aunus
    Into the stream beneath:
  Herminius struck at Seius,
    And clove him to the teeth:
  At Picus brave Horatius
    Darted one fiery thrust;
  And the proud Umbrian's gilded arms
    Clashed in the bloody dust.

Here the mind passes in succession from the action of Lartius to that
of Herminius and that of Horatius. A long pause is required after
"beneath," "teeth," and "dust," with a shorter pause after "Seius" and
after "thrust." Further, if the thoughts concern actions far apart,
more time is required to make the transition, and hence a longer
pause:

  All day long that free flag toss'd
  Over the heads of the rebel host.

  Ever its torn folds rose and fell
  On the loyal winds that loved it well;

  And through the hill-gaps, sunset light
  Shone over it with a warm good-night.

  Barbara Frietchie's work is o'er,
  And the Rebel rides on his raids no more.

Note the transition in thought from the day on which these stirring
events are supposed to have taken place to the present time. This is
indicated by a long pause after "warm good-night."

Sometimes the mind requires time to fill in ideas suggested but not
expressed:

  Forty flags with their crimson bars,
  Flapped in the morning wind: the sun
  Of noon look'd down and saw not one.

Here, the tearing down of the flags between the morning and noon, is
suggested to the mind; hence a long pause after "wind."

Where an ellipsis occurs and the meaning is not obvious, there is a
pause to give time to realize the logical connection:

  I'd rather rove with Edmund there
  Than reign our English queen.

  Here's the English can and will!

Note the pauses after "reign," and "English" (second example).

In such examples as the following where the meaning is obvious, the
pauses after "them," "one," "weary," and "wounded," make prominent the
important idea following:

  And 'mongst them Count de Lorge, with one he hoped to make
    his bride.

  The weary to sleep and the wounded to die.

When preparing to read a selection, it is of great importance to make
the leading thoughts stand out clearly in the mind so that we may be
able to present them one by one. The poem _Barbara Frietchie_ (p. 113)
could be divided into paragraphs with some such titles as the
following: (1) the town of Frederick and its surroundings, (2) the
approach of the army, (3) the tearing down of the flags, (4) the
raising of Barbara Frietchie's flag, (5) Stonewall Jackson and his
men, and so on. Each of the paragraphs is a complete section of the
poem, and requires a well-marked pause before passing on to the next
one.

=Grouping.= In the extract from _The Glove and the Lions_, used above
to illustrate pause, the mental pictures and important ideas are
suggested in nearly every ease by a single word. Ideas are, however,
suggested as often by groups of words as by single words. These groups
are treated as single words, and may take pauses before or after them
as the case may be. The reader, who is thinking as he reads, will
group together words that express one idea, or symbolize one picture,
presenting these ideas and pictures to himself and to the listener one
by one, and separating by a pause, of greater or less length, those
not closely connected.

  A slouched leather cap|| half hid his face| bronzed
  by the sun and wind| and dripping with sweat.|| He
  wore a cravat twisted like a rope|| coarse blue
  trousers| worn and shabby| white on one knee| and
  with holes in the other;|| an old ragged gray blouse|
  patched on one side with a piece of green cloth|
  sewed with twine;|| upon his back| was a well-filled
  knapsack,|| in his hand| he carried an enormous
  knotted stick;|| his stockingless feet| were in hobnailed
  shoes;|| his hair was cropped|| and his beard
  long.

Here the double vertical lines mark off groups of words which express
one idea or symbolize one picture, and which are therefore each
separated from the other by a well-marked pause. The single vertical
lines indicate a shorter pause between the subdivisions of each group.
The phrase "an old ragged gray blouse patched on one side with a piece
of green cloth sewed with twine" presents one picture by itself, and
is separated from the context by a long pause, but each detail in this
picture is presented in turn to the mind's eye, hence the shorter
pauses after "blouse," "cloth," and "twine."

The reader should be careful not to allow pause and grouping to
produce a jerky effect, thus interfering with the rhythm. This applies
especially to poetry, which demands, in order to preserve the rhythm,
that the caesural pause should not be slighted, and that there should
be a more or less marked pause at the end of each line:

  And they had trod the Pass once more, and stoop'd on either side
  To pluck the heather from the spot where he had dropped and died.

In the second line, the caesural pause occurs after "spot," but the
phrase "from the spot where he had dropped and died" expresses one
idea and must be given as a whole. The rhythm and the grouping appear
to be at variance; but the difficulty is easily overcome by making the
caesural pause shorter than the pause after "heather" which introduces
the group, and at the same time, by not allowing the voice to fall on
the word "spot."

The following affords another instance where the grouping appears to
interfere with the rhythm:

  If the husband of this gifted well
  Shall drink before his wife,
  A happy man thenceforth is he,
  For he shall be master for life.

"Of this gifted well" is evidently not connected in thought with
"husband." It must be separated from "husband" by a pause and attached
to "shall drink" at the beginning of the next line. To do this, it is
not, however, necessary to omit the pause at the end of the line; for
this would mar the effect of the rhythm. The difficulty is again
overcome by making the pause at the end of the line shorter than the
pauses which mark the grouping, and by not allowing the voice to fall
on "well."

=Time= is the rate at which we read. It is fast or slow according to
the number and the length of the pauses between words and phrases, and
also according to the length of time the reader dwells on the words
themselves. There is perhaps no more frequent criticism made on
reading than that it is too fast. What does this mean? It means that
the reader is not doing enough thinking as he repeats the words.
Consequently, he does not dwell on words that are full of meaning, nor
pause before and after words and phrases to make the mental picture
and to grasp the thought more fully. Moreover, for the benefit of the
listener, the reading should be slower than is required by the reader
for himself. The reader, with his eye on the page, can allow his eye
and mind to run ahead of his voice, and can thus realize the thought
in less time than the listener. The following line calls for a
comparatively small amount of thinking:

  High flew the spray above their heads, yet onward still they bore.

Here, there is little except what is on the surface, and the thoughts
suggested by the words are of the kind to make the mind think rapidly.
Hence the line is read in faster time than the average rate. Reading
may, accordingly, be fast from one or both of two causes. First, when
there is no background of thought for the mind to dwell upon, and
second when the nature of the thoughts themselves, such as the
narration of the rapid succession of events, impels to quick mental
action. The following lines from _Pibroch of Donuil Dhu_ (p. 61) will
serve as an illustration:

  Faster come, faster come,
    Faster and faster,
  Chief, vassal, page and groom,
    Tenant and master.
  Fast they come, fast they come;
    See how they gather! etc.

So, too, reading may be slow from the exact opposite of these two
reasons. First, when there is a great back-ground of thought suggested
by the words, and second, when the reflective and meditative nature of
the thought leads to slow action on the part of the mind. In some
selections both of these conditions are present; in others only one of
them. In _The Day is Done_ (p. 63) there is little thought below the
surface; but the reading is slow because the quiet, meditative nature
of the thought tends to slow mental action:

  And the night shall be filled with music,
    And the cares that infest the day,
  Shall fold their tents, like the Arabs,
    And as silently steal away.

Both conditions, however, exist in the lines from _Barbara Frietchie_
which describe the effect produced on Stonewall Jackson by Barbara
Frietchie's heroic action and daring speech:

  A shade of sadness, a blush of shame,
  Over the face of the leader came.

A great many thoughts are suggested by these two lines. The heart of
the gallant Southerner is touched at the sight of this weak, decrepit
old woman with the courage and boldness of youth, ready to die for her
principles. His stern features relax and a look of sadness passes over
his face. The taunting words "spare your country's flag" have struck
home. The tragic side of civil war is forced upon him--father fighting
against son, and brother against brother, the sons of freedom firing
at their own star-spangled banner. The sorrow and the shame of it all
rise before him, and the crimson flush mounts to his brow. With this
undercurrent of thought in the mind, it is impossible to read rapidly.
Besides, the reflective nature of the thoughts themselves tends to
make one repeat the words slowly.

Sometimes, again, reading is faster than the moderate rate because of
the unimportance of the events or facts:

  He spoke of the grass, the flowers and the trees,
  Of the singing birds and the humming bees;
  Then talked of the haying, and wondered whether
  The cloud in the west would bring foul weather.

