among the barrels and boxes of the yard behind the bird-man's cellar.

The old iron-yard never had been home, she had always felt like a
stranger there; but here she had a sense of ownership, and at once
resented the presence of another small Cat. She approached this
newcomer with threatening air. The two had got as far as snarling and
spitting when a bucket of water from an upper window drenched them both
and effectually cooled their wrath. They fled, the newcomer over the
wall, Slum Kitty under the very box where she had been born. This whole
back region appealed to her strongly, and here again she took up her
abode. The yard had no more garbage food than the other and no water at
all, but it was frequented by stray Rats and a few Mice of the finest
quality; these were occasionally secured, and afforded not only a
palatable meal, but were the cause of her winning a friend.


IV

Kitty was now fully grown. She was a striking-looking Cat of the tiger
type. Her marks were black on a very pale gray, and the four
beauty-spots of white on nose, ears, and tail-tip lent a certain
distinction. She was very expert at getting a living, and yet she had
some days of starvation and failed in her ambition of catching a
Sparrow. She was quite alone, but a new force was coming into her life.

She was lying in the sun one August day, when a large Black Cat came
walking along the top of a wall in her direction. She recognized him at
once by his torn ear. She slunk into her box and hid. He picked his way
gingerly, bounded lightly to a shed that was at the end of the yard,
and was crossing the roof when a Yellow Cat rose up. The Black Torn
glared and growled, so did the Yellow Tom. Their tails lashed from side
to side. Strong throats growled and yowled. They approached each other
with ears laid back, with muscles a-tense.

"Yow-yow-ow!" said the Black One.

"Wow-w-w!" was the slightly deeper answer.

"Ya-wow-wow-wow!" said the Black One, edging up half an inch nearer.

"Yow-w-w!" was the Yellow answer, as the blond Cat rose to full height
and stepped with vast dignity a whole inch forward. "Yow-w!" and he
went another inch, while his tail went swish, thump, from one side to
the other.

"Ya-wow-yow-w!" screamed the Black in a rising tone, and he backed the
eighth of an inch, as he marked the broad, unshrinking breast before
him.

Windows opened all around, human voices were heard, but the Cat scene
went on.

"Yow-yow-ow!" rumbled the Yellow Peril, his voice deepening as the
other's rose.

"Yow!" and he advanced another step.

Now their noses were but three inches apart; they stood sidewise, both
ready to clinch, but each waiting for the other. They glared for three
minutes in silence and like statues, except that each tail-tip was
twisting.

The Yellow began again. "Yow-ow-ow!" in deep tone.

"Ya-a-a--a-a!" screamed the Black, with intent to strike terror by his
yell; but he retreated one sixteenth of an inch. The Yellow walked up a
long half-inch; their whiskers were mixing now; another advance, and
their noses almost touched.

"Yo-w-w!" said Yellow, like a deep moan.

"Y-a-a-a-a-a-a!" screamed the Black, but he retreated a thirty-second
of an inch, and the Yellow Warrior closed and clinched like a demon.

Oh, how they rolled and bit and tore, especially the Yellow One!

How they pitched and gripped and hugged, but especially the Yellow One!

Over and over, sometimes one on top, sometimes another, but mostly the
Yellow One; and farther till they rolled off the roof, amid cheers from
all the windows. They lost not a second in that fall to the junk-yard;
they tore and clawed all the way down, but especially the Yellow One.
And when they struck the ground, still fighting, the one on top was
chiefly the Yellow One; and before they separated both had had as much
as they wanted, especially the Black One! He scaled a wall and,
bleeding and growling, disappeared, while the news was passed from
window to window that Cayley's Nig had been licked at last by Orange
Billy.

Either the Yellow Cat was a very clever seeker, or else Slum Kitty did
not hide very hard; but he discovered her among the boxes, and she made
no attempt to get away, probably because she had witnessed the fight.
There is nothing like success in warfare to win the female heart, and
thereafter the Yellow Tom and Kitty became very good friends, not
sharing each other's lives or food,--Cats do not do that way much,--but
recognizing each other as entitled to special friendly privileges.


V

September had gone. October's shortening days were on when an event
took place in the old cracker-box. If Orange Billy had come he would
have seen five little Kittens curled up in the embrace of their mother,
the little Slum Cat. It was a wonderful thing for her. She felt all the
elation an animal mother can feel, all the delight, and she loved them
and licked them with a tenderness that must have been a surprise to
herself, had she had the power to think of such things.

She had added a joy to her joyless life, but she had also added a care
and a heavy weight to her heavy load. All her strength was taken now to
find food. The burden increased as the offspring grew up big enough to
scramble about the boxes, which they did daily during her absence after
they were six weeks old. That troubles go in flocks and luck in
streaks, is well known in Slumland. Kitty had had three encounters with
Dogs, and had been stoned by Malee's negro during a two days' starve.
Then the tide turned. The very next morning she found a full milk-can
without a lid, successfully robbed a barrow pensioner, and found a big
fish-head, all within two hours. She had just returned with that
perfect peace which comes only of a full stomach, when she saw a little
brown creature in her junk-yard. Hunting memories came back in
strength; she didn't know what it was, but she had killed and eaten
several Mice, and this was evidently a big Mouse with bob-tail and
large ears. Kitty stalked it with elaborate but unnecessary caution;
the little Rabbit simply sat up and looked faintly amused. He did not
try to run, and Kitty sprang on him and bore him off. As she was not
hungry, she carried him to the cracker-box and dropped him among the
Kittens. He was not much hurt. He got over his fright, and since he
could not get out of the box, he snuggled among the Kittens, and when
they began to take their evening meal he very soon decided to join
them. The old Cat was puzzled. The hunter instinct had been dominant,
but absence of hunger had saved the Rabbit and given the maternal
instinct a chance to appear. The result was that the Rabbit became a
member of the family, and was thenceforth guarded and fed with the
Kittens.

Two weeks went by. The Kittens romped much among the boxes during their
mother's absence. The Rabbit could not get out of the box. Jap Malee,
seeing the Kittens about the back yard, told the negro to shoot them.
This he was doing one morning with a 22-calibre rifle. He had shot one
after another and seen them drop from sight into the crannies of the
lumber-pile, when the old Cat came running along the wall from the
dock, carrying a small Wharf Rat. He had been ready to shoot her, too,
but the sight of that Rat changed his plans: a rat-catching Cat was
worthy to live. It happened to be the very first one she had ever
caught, but it saved her life. She threaded the lumber-maze to the
cracker-box and was probably puzzled to find that there were no Kittens
to come at her call, and the Rabbit would not partake of the Rat. Pussy
curled up to nurse the Rabbit, but she called from time to time to
summon the Kittens. Guided by that call, the negro crawled quietly to
the place, and peering down into the cracker-box, saw, to his intense
surprise, that it contained the old Cat, a live Rabbit, and a dead Rat.

The mother Cat laid back her ears and snarled. The negro withdrew, but
a minute later a board was dropped on the opening of the cracker-box,
and the den with its tenants, dead and alive, was lifted into the
bird-cellar.

"Say, boss, look a-hyar--hyar's where de little Rabbit got to wot we
lost. Yo' sho t'ought Ah stoled him for de 'tater-bake."

Kitty and Bunny were carefully put in a large wire cage and exhibited
as a happy family till a few days later, when the Rabbit took sick and
died.

Pussy had never been happy in the cage. She had enough to eat and
drink, but she craved her freedom--would likely have gotten 'death or
liberty' now, but that during the four days' captivity she had so
cleaned and slicked her fur that her unusual coloring was seen, and Jap
decided to keep her.



LIFE II

VI

Jap Malee was as disreputable a little Cockney bantam as ever sold
cheap Canary-birds in a cellar. He was extremely poor, and the negro
lived with him because the 'Henglish-man' was willing to share bed and
board, and otherwise admit a perfect equality that few Americans
conceded. Jap was perfectly honest according to his lights, but he
hadn't  any lights; and it was well known that his chief revenue was
derived from storing and restoring stolen Dogs and Cats. The half-dozen
Canaries were mere blinds. Yet Jap believed in himself. "Hi tell you,
Sammy, me boy, you'll see me with 'orses of my own yet," he would say,
when some trifling success inflated his dirty little chest. He was not
without ambition, in a weak, flabby, once-in-a-while way, and he
sometimes wished to be known as a fancier. Indeed, he had once gone the
wild length of offering a Cat for exhibition at the Knickerbocker High
Society Cat and Pet Show, with three not over-clear objects: first, to
gratify his ambition; second, to secure the exhibitor's free pass; and,
third, "well, you kneow, one 'as to kneow the valuable Cats, you kneow,
when one goes a-catting." But this was a society show, the exhibitor
had to be introduced, and his miserable alleged half-Persian was
scornfully rejected. The 'Lost and Found' columns of the papers were
the only ones of interest to Jap, but he had noticed and saved a
clipping about 'breeding for fur.' This was stuck on the wall of his
den, and under its influence he set about what seemed a cruel
experiment with the Slum Cat. First, he soaked her dirty fur with stuff
to kill the two or three kinds of creepers she wore; and, when it had
done its work, he washed her thoroughly in soap and warm water, in
spite of her teeth, claws, and yowls. Kitty was savagely indignant, but
a warm and happy glow spread over her as she dried off in a cage near
the stove, and her fur began to fluff out with wonderful softness and
whiteness. Jap and his assistant were much pleased with the result, and
Kitty ought to have been. But this was preparatory: now for the
experiment. "Nothing is so good for growing fur as plenty of oily food
and continued exposure to cold weather," said the clipping. Winter was
at hand, and Jap Malee put Kitty's cage out in the yard, protected only
from the rain and the direct wind, and fed her with all the oil-cake
and fish-heads she could eat. In a week a change began to show. She was
rapidly getting fat and sleek--she had nothing to do but get fat and
dress her fur. Her cage was kept clean, and nature responded to the
chill weather and the oily food by making Kitty's coat thicker and
glossier every day, so that by midwinter she was an unusually beautiful
Cat in the fullest and finest of fur, with markings that were at least
a rarity. Jap was much pleased with the result of the experiment, and
as a very little success had a wonderful effect on him, he began to
dream of the paths of glory. Why not send the Slum Cat to the show now
coming on? The failure of the year before made him more careful as to
details. "'T won't do, ye kneow, Sammy, to henter 'er as a tramp Cat,
ye kneow," he observed to his help; "but it kin be arranged to suit the
Knickerbockers. Nothink like a good noime, ye kneow. Ye see now it had
orter be 'Royal' somethink or other--nothink goes with the
Knickerbockers like 'Royal' anythink. Now 'Royal Dick,' or 'Royal Sam,'
'ow's that? But 'owld on; them's Tom names. Oi say, Sammy, wot's the
noime of that island where ye wuz born?"

"Analostan Island, sah, was my native vicinity, sah."

"Oi say, now, that's good, ye kneow. 'Royal Analostan,' by Jove! The
onliest pedigreed 'Royal Analostan' in the 'ole sheow, ye kneow. Ain't
that foine?" and they mingled their cackles.

"But we'll 'ave to 'ave a pedigree, ye kneow." So a very long fake
pedigree on the recognized lines was prepared. One dark afternoon Sam,
in a borrowed silk hat, delivered the Cat and the pedigree at the show
door. The darkey did the honors. He had been a Sixth Avenue barber, and
he could put on more pomp and lofty hauteur in five minutes than Jap
Malee could have displayed in a lifetime, and this, doubtless, was one
reason for the respectful reception awarded the Royal Analostan at the
Cat Show.

Jap was very proud to be an exhibitor; but he had all a Cockney's
reverence for the upper class, and when on the opening day he went to
the door, he was overpowered to see the array of carriages and silk
hats. The gate-man looked at him sharply, but passed him on his ticket,
doubtless taking him for stable-boy to some exhibitor. The hall had
velvet carpets before the long rows of cages. Jap, in his small
cunning, was sneaking down the side rows, glancing at the Cats of all
kinds, noting the blue ribbons and the reds, peering about but not
daring to ask for his own exhibit, inly trembling to think what the
gorgeous gathering of fashion would say if they discovered the trick he
was playing on them. He had passed all around the outer aisles and seen
many prize-winners, but no sign of Slum Kitty. The inner aisles were
more crowded. He picked his way down them, but still no Kitty, and he
decided that it was a mistake; the judges had rejected the Cat later.
Never mind; he had his exhibitor's ticket, and now knew where several
valuable Persians and Angoras were to be found.

In the middle of the centre aisle were the high-class Cats. A great
throng was there. The passage was roped, and two policemen were in
place to keep the crowd moving. Jap wriggled in among them; he was too
short to see over, and though the richly gowned folks shrunk from his
shabby old clothes, he could not get near; but he gathered from the
remarks that the gem of the show was there.

"Oh, isn't  she a beauty!" said one tall woman.

"What distinction!" was the reply.

"One cannot mistake the air that comes only from ages of the most
refined surroundings."

"How I should like to own that superb creature!"

"Such dignity--such repose!"

"She has an authentic pedigree nearly back to the Pharaohs, I hear";
and poor, dirty little Jap marvelled at his own cheek in sending his
Slum Cat into such company.

"Excuse me, madame." The director of the show now appeared, edging his
way through the crowd. "The artist of the 'sporting Element' is here,
under orders to sketch the 'pearl of the show' for immediate use. May I
ask you to stand a little aside? That's it; thank you.

"Oh, Mr. Director, cannot you persuade him to sell that beautiful
creature?"

"Hm, I don't know," was the reply. "I understand he is a man of ample
means and not at all approachable; but I'll try, I'll try, madame. He
was quite unwilling to exhibit his treasure at all, so I understand
from his butler. Here, you, keep out of the way," growled the director,
as the shabby little man eagerly pushed between the artist and the
blue-blooded Cat. But the disreputable one wanted to know where
valuable Cats were to be found. He came near enough to get a glimpse of
the cage, and there read a placard which announced that "The blue
ribbon and gold medal of the Knickerbocker High Society Cat and Pet
Show" had been awarded to the "thoroughbred, pedigreed Royal Analostan,
imported and exhibited by J. Malee, Esq., the well-known fancier. (Not
for sale.)" Jap caught his breath and stared again. Yes, surely; there,
