How long have you been attending this school?

See how much you have noticed as you came here each day. Tell what you
can remember of the different parts of the building which can be seen
from the street or road. Describe each of these parts:

  Walls      Roof
  Windows    Chimneys
  Doors      Fire-escape


2

As you look at the school from the outside what materials do you see
that the builders have used? Where have they needed stone, slate, glass,
tin, iron, steel, wood?

Now let us think of the garden and playground. Tell about the different
parts and the materials that have been used in making them.

What great numbers of workmen were needed before a school like ours
could be built! Who procured the stone and the slate? Whose work was
needed to obtain the iron, the steel and the tin? Who made the glass?
Which workmen shall we thank for the wood?

Can you think how the bare lot looked before the school was built? Many
men with shovels and pick-axes dug out the foundation, and numbers of
horses and wagons were needed to carry out the earth. Then came the
builders. How were so many materials brought here?


3

1. We will go outdoors together and look at the school building.

2. We will stand north of the school, south, east and west of it. Notice
the position of the parts, their number, shape, size and color.

3. As we stand at each side, see whether there are any parts which you
never noticed before or any parts which we forgot to mention yesterday.


4

[Illustration]

Look at this drawing of a school building and grounds. It is called a
plan. Before any school or church or home is built a plan must be drawn.
This is to show the workmen what to do. See how much of the ground is
used for the building. Find the garden. What are in the garden? Which is
larger, the garden or the playground? What shape is the playground? How
many doors are there to the building? In how many ways can you get into
the playground?

Try to draw a plan of your school building and yard, showing the gates,
the flagpole, the drinking fountain or pump, and any other parts you
think of. Show which door you use most.

    _Note to the Teacher._--The pupils should draw the plan upon paper
    while the teacher draws it upon the blackboard. Infinite care should
    be exercised to invest every line with its full meaning. Upon the
    proper interpretation of this first plan will depend much of the
    pupil's future ability to correctly read a map as the representation
    of a reality.


5

THE INSIDE OF THE SCHOOL

As you walk from the school door to your room what do you see? Tell all
that you have noticed in the corridors, on the staircases, in the
cloak-rooms and the class-rooms.


6

We will go on a little excursion through the school today, walking along
all of the corridors and upon all of the staircases. Look especially to
see anything that you never saw before, and notice anything that you
forgot to mention in yesterday's description.


7

Answer the following questions:

1. How many stories high is our school?

2. How many class-rooms are on each floor?

3. How many other rooms are on each floor?

4. How many staircases does our school have?

5. What materials have been used in building the staircases?

6. What can be seen in the corridor nearest your room?

7. By how many doorways can the children leave the building?

8. How is your school heated and ventilated?


8

Describe everything that you can see in your class-room.


9

[Illustration: PLAN OF SCHOOL ROOM]

Look at this plan of a school-room. See if you can draw a plan of _your_
school-room.


10

Make a list of all the materials that have been used in building the
inside of your school. Remember all of the following parts:

  Floors      Windows       Corridor furnishings
  Ceilings    Doors         Class-room furnishings
  Walls       Staircases

Now write a list of the kinds of workmen who gathered together these
materials. Name as many of the kinds of workmen as you can think of who
were engaged on the inside work of the building.


11

Write a letter to anyone whom you know who has never seen our school.
Tell all about our building and the good workmen by whom it was planned
and built.




CHAPTER II

THE STREETS AND ROADS


1

On what street or road does your school stand?

On what street or road do you live?

What streets or roads do you pass on your way home?

What do you think is the finest street or road that you have ever seen
anywhere? What makes that so good a street or road?

Name a poor street or road. What could be done to improve it?


2

Why do cities and towns have streets and roads? Where are there no
streets?

Look at the country picture shown on page 19. How pretty it is! When
would it be pleasant to walk there? When would it not be so pleasant?
Why? What must be done to a road to make it into a good street? Tell
what you can of the different ways of paving, lighting and draining
streets and roads, and of the different kinds of name-signs you have
seen.

Now what can be done to make a street or road beautiful and pleasant in
warm weather?

How can boys and girls help to keep the streets and roads pleasant?

Here is a plan of some of the streets in a large city.

[Illustration: PLAN OF CITY STREETS.]


3

Draw the shape of the school lot. Now show the street or road that the
school stands upon. If you live in a town, draw the streets next to the
school. Then draw the next streets, and keep on until you have drawn the
street on which your home stands. Place a little cross to show your
home. With your pencil start from your house and make a dotted line to
show how you come to school.


4

On your plan of the neighborhood place a circle to show the grocery
store or bakery that you pass on your way to school. Make a large dot to
show the nearest store to school, and with a dotted line explain how you
would go there from school if your teacher sent you to buy ink. Make a
circle with a cross in it to show where there is a church, a bank, a
factory, or any other important building near your school. If there is a
railroad near, show it upon your plan.

[Illustration: A COUNTRY HOME.]


5

Many streets and lanes have names of trees. Some have been named after
great and good men. There are some streets with only numbers for names.
Do you know of any streets having names of these different kinds? Can
you think of any street or road that received its name for some other
reason?

Get as many pictures as you can of the streets of your town or any other
town and paste them in your note-book. Get some pictures of country
roads and paste them also in your note-book.

[Illustration: A CITY STREET.
  (Copyright, 1911, William H. Rau, Philadelphia.)]


6

In some towns the streets are nearly straight and cross each other like
the wires of a window-screen. In other towns the streets run off from
the centre of the town like the spokes of a wheel. Some streets and
roads are very crooked.

How are the streets in our town arranged? Name some of our best business
streets. Which streets have the finest homes in which people live? Name
some streets or roads with trolley lines upon them. Are our streets
paved?


7

Perhaps you live in the country where there are very few streets or none
at all. How different is your walk to school each day from that of the
city boy or girl! In town, children walk on paved streets and pass many
buildings. What kind of roads do the country children walk upon? What
buildings do they pass? A country school.

[Illustration: A MODERN COUNTRY SCHOOL.]

Do you take a pleasant road between broad fields? Do you walk through
the cool shady woods? Perhaps you run over a bridge with the clear brook
sparkling and babbling beneath. What else do you see or hear in the
country which city folks do not know in their built up towns?




CHAPTER III

THE BUILDINGS


1

What kinds of buildings do you pass on your way to school? Write a list
of all the kinds that you have ever seen.

Look at the pictures of buildings in this book and see if you know for
what each is used. How can you tell?


2

Of all the many kinds of buildings in town or country, the _houses_ are
the most important. It is more necessary to have good homes to live in
than to have the other buildings large or beautiful. What makes a good
residence? There must be enough room for the whole family. It needs
plenty of light, air, sunshine and water. It must have a good roof to
keep it dry in stormy weather. It should be well heated in the cold
winter. Tell of other things that are needed in our homes to keep the
family healthy and happy. How can you help to make your home pleasant?


3

Good _schools_, too, are very necessary. The school-house must be built
to keep the boys and girls comfortable and healthy while at work. Name
some of the things needed for a good school building.

[Illustration: A STREET SCENE IN NEW YORK.]


4

The libraries and museums also teach people. A _library_ is like a home
where many friendly teachers live. These friends will talk to you and
tell you many useful and wonderful things. Have you ever visited them at
the library? Have you ever taken any of them home with you? Is there a
