yourself favoured because you have as a bride the daughter of a mighty
earl; but do you know what bride the wife of Iarlaid sought for her own
son?  It was no worldly wife she found for him, but the swift March
wind, and never can you prevail against her.'

'Is it thus?' answered Manu.  And at the first streak of dawn he went
to the chamber where the queen lay in the midst of her maidens.

'I have come,' he said, 'for the third part of the kingdom, and for the
treasure which you promised me.'  But the wife of Iarlaid laughed as
she heard him.

'Not a clod shall you have here,' spake she.  'You must go to the Old
Bergen for that.  Mayhap under its stones and rough mountains you may
find a treasure!'

'Then give me your son's six foster brothers as well as my own,'
answered he.  And the queen gave them to him, and they set out for Old
Bergen.

A year passed by, and found them still in that wild land, hunting the
reindeer, and digging pits for the mountain sheep to fall into.  For a
time Manus and his companions lived merrily, but at length Manus grew
weary of the strange country, and they all took ship for the land of
Lochlann.  The wind was fierce and cold, and long was the voyage; but,
one spring day, they sailed into the harbour that lay beneath the
castle of Iarlaid.  The queen looked from her window and beheld him
mounting the hill, with the twelve foster brothers behind him.  Then
she said to her husband: 'Manus has returned with his twelve foster
brothers.  Would that I could put an end to him and his murdering and
his slaying.'

'That were a great pity,' answered Iarlaid.  'And it is not I that will
do it.'

'If you will not do it I will,' said she.  And she called the twelve
foster brothers and made them vow fealty to herself.  So Manus was left
with no man, and sorrowful was he when he returned alone to Old Bergen.
 It was late when his foot touched the shore, and took the path towards
the forest.  On his way there met him a man in a red tunic.

'Is it you, Manus, come back again?' asked he.

'It is I,' answered Manus; 'alone have I returned from the land of
Lochlann.'

The man eyed him silently for a moment, and then he said:

'I dreamed that you were girt with a sword and became king of
Lochlann.'  But Manus answered:

'I have no sword and my bow is broken.'

'I will give you a new sword if you will make me a promise,' said the
man once more.

'To be sure I will make it, if ever I am king,' answered Manus.  'But
speak, and tell me what promise I am to make.'

'I was your grandfather's armourer,' replied the man, 'and I wish to be
your armourer also.'

'That I will promise readily,' said Manus; and followed the man into
his house, which was at a little distance.  But the house was not like
other houses, for the walls of every room were hung so thick with arms
that you could not see the boards.

'Choose what you will,' said the man; and Manus unhooked a sword and
tried it across his knee, and it broke, and so did the next, and the
next.

'Leave off breaking the swords,' cried the man, 'and look at this old
sword and helmet and tunic that I wore in the wars of your grandfather.
 Perhaps you may find them of stouter steel.'  And Manus bent the sword
thrice across his knee but he could not break it.  So he girded it to
his side, and put on the old helmet.  As he fastened the strap his eye
fell on a cloth flapping outside the window.

'What cloth is that?' asked he.

'It is a cloth that was woven by the Little People of the forest,' said
the man; 'and when you are hungry it will give you food and drink, and
if you meet a foe, he will not hurt you, but will stoop and kiss the
back of your hand in token of submission.  Take it, and use it well.'
Manus gladly wrapped the shawl round his arm, and was leaving the
house, when he heard the rattling of a chain blown by the wind.

'What chain is that?' asked he.

'The creature who has that chain round his neck, need not fear a
hundred enemies,' answered the armourer.  And Manus wound it round him
and passed on into the forest.

Suddenly there sprang out from the bushes two lions, and a lion cub
with them.  The fierce beasts bounded towards him, roaring loudly, and
would fain have eaten him, but quickly Manus stooped and spread the
cloth upon the ground.  At that the lions stopped, and bowing their
great heads, kissed the back of his wrist and went their ways.  But the
cub rolled itself up in the cloth; so Manus picked them both up, and
carried them with him to Old Bergen.

Another year went by, and then he took the lion cub and set forth to
the land of Lochlann.  And the wife of Iarlaid came to meet him, and a
brown dog, small but full of courage, came with her.  When the dog
beheld the lion cub he rushed towards him, thinking to eat him; but the
cub caught the dog by the neck, and shook him, and he was dead.  And
the wife of Iarlaid mourned him sore, and her wrath was kindled, and
many times she tried to slay Manus and his cub, but she could not.  And
at last they two went back to Old Bergen, and the twelve foster
brothers went also.

'Let them go,' said the wife of Iarlaid, when she heard of it.  'My
brother the Red Gruagach will take the head off Manus as well in Old
Bergen as elsewhere.'

Now these words were carried by a messenger to the wife of Oireal, and
she made haste and sent a ship to Old Bergen to bear away her son
before the Red Gruagach should take the head off him.  And in the ship
was a pilot.  But the wife of Iarlaid made a thick fog to cover the
face of the sea, and the rowers could not row, lest they should drive
the ship on to a rock.  And when night came, the lion cub, whose eyes
were bright and keen, stole up to Manus, and Manus got on his back, and
the lion cub sprang ashore and bade Manus rest on the rock and wait for
him.  So Manus slept, and by-and-by a voice sounded in his ears,
saying: 'Arise!' And he saw a ship in the water beneath him, and in the
ship sat the lion cup in the shape of the pilot.

Then they sailed away through the fog, and none saw them; and they
reached the land of Lochlann, and the lion cub with the chain round his
neck sprang from the ship and Manus followed after.  And the lion cub
killed all the men that guarded the castle, and Iarlaid and his wife
also, so that, in the end, Manus son of Oireal was crowned king of
Lochlann.

[Shortened from West Highland Tales.]



               Pinkel the Thief



Long, long ago there lived a widow who had three sons.  The two eldest
were grown up, and though they were known to be idle fellows, some of
the neighbours had given them work to do on account of the respect in
which their mother was held.  But at the time this story begins they
had both been so careless and idle that their masters declared they
would keep them no longer.

So home they went to their mother and youngest brother, of whom they
thought little, because he made himself useful about the house, and
looked after the hens, and milked the cow.  'Pinkel,' they called him
in scorn, and by-and-by 'Pinkel' became his name throughout the village.

The two young men thought it was much nicer to live at home and be idle
than to be obliged to do a quantity of disagreeable things they did not
like, and they would have stayed by the fire till the end of their
lives had not the widow lost patience with them and said that since
they would not look for work at home they must seek it elsewhere, for
she would not have them under her roof any longer.  But she repented
bitterly of her words when Pinkel told her that he too was old enough
to go out into the world, and that when he had made a fortune he would
send for his mother to keep house for him.

The widow wept many tears at parting from her youngest son, but as she
saw that his heart was set upon going with his brothers, she did not
try to keep him.  So the young men started off one morning in high
spirits, never doubting that work such as they might be willing to do
would be had for the asking, as soon as their little store of money was
spent.

But a very few days of wandering opened their eyes.  Nobody seemed to
want them, or, if they did, the young men declared that they were not
able to undertake all that the farmers or millers or woodcutters
required of them.  The youngest brother, who was wiser, would gladly
have done some of the work that the others refused, but he was small
and slight, and no one thought of offering him any.  Therefore they
went from one place to another, living only on the fruit and nuts they
could find in the woods, and getting hungrier every day.

One night, after they had been walking for many hours and were very
tired, they came to a large lake with an island in the middle of it.
From the island streamed a strong light, by which they could see
everything almost as clearly as if the sun had been shining, and they
perceived that, lying half hidden in the rushes, was a boat.

'Let us take it and row over to the island, where there must be a
house,' said the eldest brother; 'and perhaps they will give us food
and shelter.'  And they all got in and rowed across in the direction of
the light.  As they drew near the island they saw that it came from a
golden lantern hanging over the door of a hut, while sweet tinkling
music proceeded from some bells attached to the golden horns of a goat
which was feeding near the cottage.  The young men's hearts rejoiced as
they thought that at last they would be able to rest their weary limbs,
and they entered the hut, but were amazed to see an ugly old woman
inside, wrapped in a cloak of gold which lighted up the whole house.
They looked at each other uneasily as she came forward with her
daughter, as they knew by the cloak that this was a famous witch.

'What do you want?' asked she, at the same time signing to her daughter
to stir the large pot on the fire.

'We are tired and hungry, and would fain have shelter for the night,'
answered the eldest brother.

'You cannot get it here,' said the witch, 'but you will find both food
and shelter in the palace on the other side of the lake.  Take your
boat and go; but leave this boy with me--I can find work for him,
though something tells me he is quick and cunning, and will do me ill.'

'What harm can a poor boy like me do a great Troll like you?' answered
Pinkel.  'Let me go, I pray you, with my brothers.  I will promise
never to hurt you.'  And at last the witch let him go, and he followed
his brothers to the boat.

The way was further than they thought, and it was morning before they
reached the palace.

Now, at last, their luck seemed to have turned, for while the two
eldest were given places in the king's stables, Pinkel was taken as
page to the little prince.  He was a clever and amusing boy, who saw
everything that passed under his eyes, and the king noticed this, and
often employed him in his own service, which made his brothers very
jealous.

Things went on this way for some time, and Pinkel every day rose in the
royal favour.  At length the envy of his brothers became so great that
they could bear it no longer, and consulted together how best they
might ruin his credit with the king.  They did not wish to kill
him--though, perhaps, they would not have been sorry if they had heard
he was dead--but merely wished to remind him that he was after all only
a child, not half so old and wise as they.

Their opportunity soon came.  It happened to be the king's custom to
visit his stables once a week, so that he might see that his horses
were being properly cared for.  The next time he entered the stables
the two brothers managed to be in the way, and when the king praised
the beautiful satin skins of the horses under their charge, and
remarked how different was their condition when his grooms had first
come across the lake, the young men at once began to speak of the
wonderful light which sprang from the lantern over the hut.  The king,
who had a passion for collection all the rarest things he could find,
fell into the trap directly, and inquired where he could get this
marvellous lantern.

'Send Pinkel for it, Sire,' said they.  'It belongs to an old witch,
who no doubt came by it in some evil way.  But Pinkel has a smooth
tongue, and he can get the better of any woman, old or young.'

'Then bid him go this very night,' cried the king; 'and if he brings me
the lantern I will make him one of the chief men about my person.'

Pinkel was much pleased at the thought of his adventure, and without
more ado he borrowed a little boat which lay moored to the shore, and
rowed over to the island at once.  It was late by the time he arrived,
and almost dark, but he knew by the savoury smell that reached him that
the witch was cooking her supper.  So he climbed softly on to the roof,
and, peering, watched till the old woman's back was turned, when he
quickly drew a handful of salt from his pocket and threw it into the
pot.  Scarcely had he done this when the witch called her daughter and
bade her lift the pot off the fire and put the stew into a dish, as it
had been cooking quite long enough and she was hungry.  But no sooner
had she tasted it than she put her spoon down, and declared that her
daughter must have been meddling with it, for it was impossible to eat
anything that was all made of salt.

'Go down to the spring in the valley, and get some fresh water, that I
may prepare a fresh supper,' cried she, 'for I feel half- starved.'

'But, mother,' answered the girl, 'how can I find the well in this
darkness?  For you know that the lantern's rays shed no light down
there.'

'Well, then, take the lantern with you,' answered the witch, 'for
supper I must have, and there is no water that is nearer.'

So the girl took her pail in one hand and the golden lantern in the
other, and hastened away to the well, followed by Pinkel, who took care
to keep out of the way of the rays.  When at last she stooped to fill
her pail at the well Pinkel pushed her into it, and snatching up the
lantern hurried back to his boat and rowed off from the shore.

He was already a long distance from the island when the witch, who
wondered what had become of her daughter, went to the door to look for
her.  Close around the hut was thick darkness, but what was that
bobbing light that streamed across the water?  The witch's heart sank
as all at once it flashed upon her what had happened.

'Is that you, Pinkel?' cried she; and the youth answered:

'Yes, dear mother, it is I!'

'And are you not a knave for robbing me?' said she.

'Truly, dear mother, I am,' replied Pinkel, rowing faster than ever,
for he was half afraid that the witch might come after him.  But she
had no power on the water, and turned angrily into the hut, muttering
to herself all the while:

'Take care! take care!  A second time you will not escape so easily!'

The sun had not yet risen when Pinkel returned to the palace, and,
entering the king's chamber, he held up the lantern so that its rays
might fall upon the bed.  In an instant the king awoke, and seeing the
golden lantern shedding its light upon him, he sprang up, and embraced
Pinkel with joy.

'O cunning one,' cried he, 'what treasure hast thou brought me!' And
calling for his attendants he ordered that rooms next his own should be
prepared for Pinkel, and that the youth might enter his presence at any
hour.  And besides this, he was to have a seat on the council.

It may easily be guessed that all this made the brothers more envious
than they were before; and they cast about in their minds afresh how
best they might destroy him.  At length they remembered the goat with
golden horns and the bells, and they rejoiced; 'For,' said they, 'THIS
time the old woman will be on the watch, and let him be as clever as he
likes, the bells on the horns are sure to warn her.'  So when, as
before, the king came down to the stables and praised the cleverness of
their brother, the young men told him of that other marvel possessed by
the witch, the goat with the golden horns.

From this moment the king never closed his eyes at night for longing
after this wonderful creature.  He understood something of the danger
that there might be in trying to steal it, now that the witch's
suspicions were aroused, and he spent hours in making plans for
outwitting her.  But somehow he never could think of anything that
would do, and at last, as the brothers had foreseen, he sent for Pinkel.

'I hear,' he said, 'that the old witch on the island has a goat with
golden horns from which hang bells that tinkle the sweetest music.
That goat I must have!  But, tell me, how am I to get it?  I would give
the third part of my kingdom to anyone who would bring it to me.'

'I will fetch it myself,' answered Pinkel.

This time it was easier for Pinkel to approach the island unseen, as
there was no golden lantern to thrown its beams over the water.  But,
on the other hand, the goat slept inside the hut, and would therefore
have to be taken from under the very eyes of the old woman.  How was he
to do it?  All the way across the lake he thought and thought, till at
length a plan came into his head which seemed as if it might do, though
he knew it would be very difficult to carry out.

The first thing he did when he reached the shore was to look about for
a piece of wood, and when he had found it he hid himself close to the
hut, till it grew quite dark and near the hour when the witch and her
daughter went to bed.  Then he crept up and fixed the wood under the
door, which opened outwards, in such a manner that the more you tried
to shut it the more firmly it stuck.  And this was what happened when
the girl went as usual to bolt the door and make all fast for the night.

'What are you doing?' asked the witch, as her daughter kept tugging at
the handle.

'There is something the matter with the door; it won't shut,' answered
she.

'Well, leave it alone; there is nobody to hurt us,' said the witch, who
was very sleepy; and the girl did as she was bid, and went to bed.
Very soon they both might have been heard snoring, and Pinkel knew that
his time was come.  Slipping off his shoes he stole into the hut on
tiptoe, and taking from his pocket some food of which the goat was
particularly fond, he laid it under his nose.  Then, while the animal
was eating it, he stuffed each golden bell with wool which he had also
brought with him, stopping every minute to listen, lest the witch
should awaken, and he should find himself changed into some dreadful
