"It's easy to keep just one," retorted Cecily, rather resentfully.

"It's not so easy to think beautiful thoughts," answered Felicity.

"It's the easiest thing in the world," said the Story Girl, tiptoeing to
the edge of the pool to peep at her own arch reflection, as some nymph
left over from the golden age might do. "Beautiful thoughts just crowd
into your mind at times."

"Oh, yes, AT TIMES. But that's different from thinking one REGULARLY at
a given hour. And mother is always calling up the stairs for me to hurry
up and get dressed, and it's VERY hard sometimes."

"That's so," conceded the Story Girl. "There ARE times when I can't
think anything but gray thoughts. Then, other days, I think pink and
blue and gold and purple and rainbow thoughts all the time."

"The idea! As if thoughts were coloured," giggled Felicity.

"Oh, they are!" cried the Story Girl. "Why, I can always SEE the colour
of any thought I think. Can't you?"

"I never heard of such a thing," declared Felicity, "and I don't believe
it. I believe you are just making that up."

"Indeed I'm not. Why, I always supposed everyone thought in colours. It
must be very tiresome if you don't."

"When you think of me what colour is it?" asked Peter curiously.

"Yellow," answered the Story Girl promptly. "And Cecily is a sweet pink,
like those mayflowers, and Sara Ray is very pale blue, and Dan is red
and Felix is yellow, like Peter, and Bev is striped."

"What colour am I?" asked Felicity, amid the laughter at my expense.

"You're--you're like a rainbow," answered the Story Girl rather
reluctantly. She had to be honest, but she would rather not have
complimented Felicity. "And you needn't laugh at Bev. His stripes are
beautiful. It isn't HE that is striped. It's just the THOUGHT of him.
Peg Bowen is a queer sort of yellowish green and the Awkward Man is
lilac. Aunt Olivia is pansy-purple mixed with gold, and Uncle Roger is
navy blue."

"I never heard such nonsense," declared Felicity. The rest of us were
rather inclined to agree with her for once. We thought the Story Girl
was making fun of us. But I believe she really had a strange gift of
thinking in colours. In later years, when we were grown up, she told
me of it again. She said that everything had colour in her thought; the
months of the year ran through all the tints of the spectrum, the days
of the week were arrayed as Solomon in his glory, morning was golden,
noon orange, evening crystal blue, and night violet. Every idea came to
her mind robed in its own especial hue. Perhaps that was why her voice
and words had such a charm, conveying to the listeners' perception such
fine shadings of meaning and tint and music.

"Well, let's go and have something to eat," suggested Dan. "What colour
is eating, Sara?"

"Golden brown, just the colour of a molasses cooky," laughed the Story
Girl.

We sat on the ferny bank of the pool and ate of the generous basket Aunt
Janet had provided, with appetites sharpened by the keen spring air and
our wilderness rovings. Felicity had made some very nice sandwiches of
ham which we all appreciated except Dan, who declared he didn't like
things minced up and dug out of the basket a chunk of boiled pork which
he proceeded to saw up with a jack-knife and devour with gusto.

"I told ma to put this in for me. There's some CHEW to it," he said.

"You are not a bit refined," commented Felicity.

"Not a morsel, my love," grinned Dan.

"You make me think of a story I heard Uncle Roger telling about Cousin
Annetta King," said the Story Girl. "Great-uncle Jeremiah King used to
live where Uncle Roger lives now, when Grandfather King was alive and
Uncle Roger was a boy. In those days it was thought rather coarse for a
young lady to have too hearty an appetite, and she was more admired if
she was delicate about what she ate. Cousin Annetta set out to be very
refined indeed. She pretended to have no appetite at all. One afternoon
she was invited to tea at Grandfather King's when they had some special
company--people from Charlottetown. Cousin Annetta said she could hardly
eat anything. 'You know, Uncle Abraham,' she said, in a very affected,
fine-young-lady voice, 'I really hardly eat enough to keep a bird alive.
Mother says she wonders how I continue to exist.' And she picked and
pecked until Grandfather King declared he would like to throw something
at her. After tea Cousin Annetta went home, and just about dark
Grandfather King went over to Uncle Jeremiah's on an errand. As he
passed the open, lighted pantry window he happened to glance in, and
what do you think he saw? Delicate Cousin Annetta standing at the
dresser, with a big loaf of bread beside her and a big platterful of
cold, boiled pork in front of her; and Annetta was hacking off great
chunks, like Dan there, and gobbling them down as if she was starving.
Grandfather King couldn't resist the temptation. He stepped up to the
window and said, 'I'm glad your appetite has come back to you, Annetta.
Your mother needn't worry about your continuing to exist as long as you
can tuck away fat, salt pork in that fashion.'

"Cousin Annetta never forgave him, but she never pretended to be
delicate again."

"The Jews don't believe in eating pork," said Peter.

"I'm glad I'm not a Jew and I guess Cousin Annetta was too," said Dan.

"I like bacon, but I can never look at a pig without wondering if they
were ever intended to be eaten," remarked Cecily naively.

When we finished our lunch the barrens were already wrapping themselves
in a dim, blue dusk and falling upon rest in dell and dingle. But out
in the open there was still much light of a fine emerald-golden sort and
the robins whistled us home in it. "Horns of Elfland" never sounded more
sweetly around hoary castle and ruined fane than those vesper calls
of the robins from the twilight spruce woods and across green pastures
lying under the pale radiance of a young moon.

When we reached home we found that Miss Reade had been up to the hill
farm on an errand and was just leaving. The Story Girl went for a walk
with her and came back with an important expression on her face.

"You look as if you had a story to tell," said Felix.

"One is growing. It isn't a whole story yet," answered the Story Girl
mysteriously.

"What is it?" asked Cecily.

"I can't tell you till it's fully grown," said the Story Girl. "But
I'll tell you a pretty little story the Awkward Man told us--told
me--tonight. He was walking in his garden as we went by, looking at his
tulip beds. His tulips are up ever so much higher than ours, and I asked
him how he managed to coax them along so early. And he said HE didn't do
it--it was all the work of the pixies who lived in the woods across
the brook. There were more pixy babies than usual this spring, and the
mothers were in a hurry for the cradles. The tulips are the pixy babies'
cradles, it seems. The mother pixies come out of the woods at twilight
and rock their tiny little brown babies to sleep in the tulip cups. That
is the reason why tulip blooms last so much longer than other blossoms.
The pixy babies must have a cradle until they are grown up. They grow
very fast, you see, and the Awkward Man says on a spring evening, when
the tulips are out, you can hear the sweetest, softest, clearest, fairy
music in his garden, and it is the pixy folk singing as they rock the
pixy babies to sleep."

"Then the Awkward Man says what isn't true," said Felicity severely.




CHAPTER XIII. A SURPRISING ANNOUNCEMENT


"Nothing exciting has happened for ever so long," said the Story Girl
discontentedly, one late May evening, as we lingered under the wonderful
white bloom of the cherry trees. There was a long row of them in the
orchard, with a Lombardy poplar at either end, and a hedge of lilacs
behind. When the wind blew over them all the spicy breezes of Ceylon's
isle were never sweeter.

It was a time of wonder and marvel, of the soft touch of silver rain on
greening fields, of the incredible delicacy of young leaves, of blossom
in field and garden and wood. The whole world bloomed in a flush and
tremor of maiden loveliness, instinct with all the evasive, fleeting
charm of spring and girlhood and young morning. We felt and enjoyed it
all without understanding or analyzing it. It was enough to be glad and
young with spring on the golden road.

"I don't like excitement very much," said Cecily. "It makes one so
tired. I'm sure it was exciting enough when Paddy was missing, but we
didn't find that very pleasant."

"No, but it was interesting," returned the Story Girl thoughtfully.
"After all, I believe I'd rather be miserable than dull."

"I wouldn't then," said Felicity decidedly. "And you need never be dull
when you have work to do. 'Satan finds some mischief still for idle
hands to do!'"

"Well, mischief is interesting," laughed the Story Girl. "And I thought
you didn't think it lady-like to speak of that person, Felicity?"

"It's all right if you call him by his polite name," said Felicity
stiffly.

"Why does the Lombardy poplar hold its branches straight up in the
air like that, when all the other poplars hold theirs out or hang them
down?" interjected Peter, who had been gazing intently at the slender
spire showing darkly against the fine blue eastern sky.

"Because it grows that way," said Felicity.

"Oh I know a story about that," cried the Story Girl. "Once upon a time
an old man found the pot of gold at the rainbow's end. There IS a pot
there, it is said, but it is very hard to find because you can never get
to the rainbow's end before it vanishes from your sight. But this old
man found it, just at sunset, when Iris, the guardian of the rainbow
gold, happened to be absent. As he was a long way from home, and the pot
was very big and heavy, he decided to hide it until morning and then get
one of his sons to go with him and help him carry it. So he hid it under
the boughs of the sleeping poplar tree.

"When Iris came back she missed the pot of gold and of course she was in
a sad way about it. She sent Mercury, the messenger of the gods, to
look for it, for she didn't dare leave the rainbow again, lest somebody
should run off with that too. Mercury asked all the trees if they had
seen the pot of gold, and the elm, oak and pine pointed to the poplar
and said,

"'The poplar can tell you where it is.'

"'How can I tell you where it is?' cried the poplar, and she held up all
her branches in surprise, just as we hold up our hands--and down tumbled
the pot of gold. The poplar was amazed and indignant, for she was a very
honest tree. She stretched her boughs high above her head and declared
that she would always hold them like that, so that nobody could hide
stolen gold under them again. And she taught all the little poplars she
knew to stand the same way, and that is why Lombardy poplars always do.
But the aspen poplar leaves are always shaking, even on the very calmest
day. And do you know why?"

And then she told us the old legend that the cross on which the Saviour
of the world suffered was made of aspen poplar wood and so never again
could its poor, shaken, shivering leaves know rest or peace. There was
an aspen in the orchard, the very embodiment of youth and spring in its
litheness and symmetry. Its little leaves were hanging tremulously, not
yet so fully blown as to hide its development of bough and twig, making
poetry against the spiritual tints of a spring sunset.

"It does look sad," said Peter, "but it is a pretty tree, and it wasn't
its fault."

"There's a heavy dew and it's time we stopped talking nonsense and went
in," decreed Felicity. "If we don't we'll all have a cold, and then
we'll be miserable enough, but it won't be very exciting."

"All the same, I wish something exciting would happen," finished the
Story Girl, as we walked up through the orchard, peopled with its
nun-like shadows.

"There's a new moon tonight, so may be you'll get your wish," said
Peter. "My Aunt Jane didn't believe there was anything in the moon
business, but you never can tell."

The Story Girl did get her wish. Something happened the very next day.
She joined us in the afternoon with a quite indescribable expression
on her face, compounded of triumph, anticipation, and regret. Her
eyes betrayed that she had been crying, but in them shone a chastened
exultation. Whatever the Story Girl mourned over it was evident she was
not without hope.

"I have some news to tell you," she said importantly. "Can you guess
what it is?"

We couldn't and wouldn't try.

"Tell us right off," implored Felix. "You look as if it was something
tremendous."

"So it is. Listen--Aunt Olivia is going to be married."

We stared in blank amazement. Peg Bowen's hint had faded from our minds
and we had never put much faith in it.

"Aunt Olivia! I don't believe it," cried Felicity flatly. "Who told
you?"

"Aunt Olivia herself. So it is perfectly true. I'm awfully sorry in one
way--but oh, won't it be splendid to have a real wedding in the family?
She's going to have a big wedding--and I am to be bridesmaid."

"I shouldn't think you were old enough to be a bridesmaid," said
Felicity sharply.

"I'm nearly fifteen. Anyway, Aunt Olivia says I have to be."

"Who's she going to marry?" asked Cecily, gathering herself together
after the shock, and finding that the world was going on just the same.

"His name is Dr. Seton and he is a Halifax man. She met him when she
was at Uncle Edward's last summer. They've been engaged ever since. The
wedding is to be the third week in June."

"And our school concert comes off the next week," complained Felicity.
"Why do things always come together like that? And what are you going to
do if Aunt Olivia is going away?"

"I'm coming to live at your house," answered the Story Girl rather
timidly. She did not know how Felicity might like that. But Felicity
took it rather well.

"You've been here most of the time anyhow, so it'll just be that you'll
sleep and eat here, too. But what's to become of Uncle Roger?"

"Aunt Olivia says he'll have to get married, too. But Uncle Roger says
he'd rather hire a housekeeper than marry one, because in the first case
he could turn her off if he didn't like her, but in the second case he
couldn't."

"There'll be a lot of cooking to do for the wedding," reflected Felicity
in a tone of satisfaction.

"I s'pose Aunt Olivia will want some rusks made. I hope she has plenty
of tooth-powder laid in," said Dan.

"It's a pity you don't use some of that tooth-powder you're so fond of
talking about yourself," retorted Felicity. "When anyone has a mouth the
size of yours the teeth show so plain."

"I brush my teeth every Sunday," asseverated Dan.

