"You couldn't face it, Martha," said John.  "I thowt ye had bin asleep."

"No: I've bin thinkin' of our dear boy.  I can face it well enough."

"Come, then: but wrap well up.  Let Tommy come too: I see he's gettin'
ready."

Presently the three went out.  The door almost burst off its hinges when
it was opened, and it required John's utmost strength to reclose it.

Numbers of people, chiefly men, were already hurrying to the beach.
Clouds of foam and salt spray were whirled madly in the air, and,
carried far inland, and slates and cans were dashing on the pavements.
Men tried to say to each other that they had never seen such a storm,
but the gale caught their voices; away, and seemed to mingle them all up
in one prolonged roar.  On gaining the beach they could see nothing at
first but the heavings of the maddened sea, whose billows mingled their
thunders with the wind.  Sand, gravel, and spray almost blinded them,
but as daylight increased they caught glimpses of the foam above the
rock.

"God help us!" said John, solemnly, as he and his wife and child sought
shelter under the lee of a wall: "_the light'ouse is gone_!"

It was too true.  The Eddystone lighthouse had been swept completely
away, with the unfortunate Winstanley and all his men: not a vestige,
save a fragment of chain-cable, remained on the fatal rock to tell that
such a building had ever been.



CHAPTER TWO.

BEGINNING OF RUDYERD'S LIGHTHOUSE.

The terrible gale which swept away the first lighthouse that was built
on the Eddystone Rock, gave ample proof of the evils resulting from the
want of such a building.  Just after the structure fell, a vessel, named
the "Winchelsea," homeward bound, approached the dreaded rock.
Trusting, doubtless, to the light which had been destroyed so recently,
she held on her course, struck, split in two, and went down with every
soul on board.

The necessity for building another tower was thus made; as it were,
urgently obvious; nevertheless, nearly four years elapsed before any one
was found with sufficient courage and capacity to attempt the dangerous
and difficult enterprise.

During this period, our friend John Potter, being a steady, able man,
found plenty of work at the docks of Plymouth; but he often cast a
wistful glance in the direction of "the Rock" and sighed to think of the
tower that had perished, and the numerous wrecks that had occurred in
consequence; for, not only had some vessels struck on the Rock itself,
but others, keeping too far off its dreaded locality, were wrecked on
the coast of France.  John Potter's sigh, it must be confessed, was also
prompted, in part, by the thought that his dreams of a retired and
peaceful life as a light-keeper were now destined never to be realised.

Returning home one evening, somewhat wearied, he flung his huge frame
into a stout arm chair by the fireside, and exclaimed, "Heigho!"

"Deary me, John, what ails you to-night?" asked the faithful Martha, who
was, as of yore, busy with the supper.

"Nothin' partikler, Martha; only I've had a hard day of it, an I'm glad
to sit down.  Was Isaac Dorkin here to-day?"

"No, 'e wasn't.  I wonder you keep company with that man," replied Mrs
Potter, testily; "he's for ever quarrelling with 'ee, John."

"No doubt he is, Martha; but we always make it up again; an' it don't do
for a man to give up his comrades just because they have sharp words now
and then.  Why, old girl, you and I are always havin' a spurt o' that
sort off and on; yet I don't ever talk of leavin' ye on that account."

To this Martha replied, "Fiddlesticks;" and said that she didn't believe
in the friendship of people who were always fighting and making it up
again; that for her part she would rather have no friends at all, she
wouldn't; and that she had a settled conviction, she had, that Isaac
Dorkin would come to a bad end at last.

"I hope not, Martha; but in the meantime he has bin the means of gettin'
me some work to do that is quite to my liking."

"What may that be, John?" asked Mrs Potter in surprise.

"I'll tell you when we're at supper," said John with a smile; for he
knew from experience that his better half was in a fitter state to
swallow unpleasant news when engaged in swallowing her meals than at any
other time.

"Where is Tommy?" he added, looking round at the quantity of chips which
littered the floor.

"Where is 'e?" repeated Mrs Potter, in a tone of indignation.  "Where
would you expect 'im to be but after mischief?  'E's at the mod'l, of
course; always at it; never at hanythingk else a'most."

"No!" exclaimed John, in affected surprise.  "Wasn't he at school
to-day?"

"O yes, of course 'e was at school."

"An' did he git his lessons for to-morrow after comin' 'ome?"

"I suppose 'e did."

"Ah then, he does something else _sometimes_, eh?"

Mrs Potter's reply was interrupted by Tommy himself emerging from a
closet, which formed his workshop and in which he was at that time busy
with a model of Winstanley's lighthouse, executed from the drawings and
descriptions by his father, improved by his own brilliant fancy.

Four years make a marked difference on a boy in the early stage of life.
He was now nearly ten, and well grown, both intellectually and
physically, for his age.

"Well, Tommy, how d'ee git on wi' the light-'ouse?" asked his father.

"Pretty well, faither: but it seems to me that Mr Winstanley had too
many stickin'-out poles, an' curlywurleys, an' things o' that sort about
it."

"Listen to that now," said Mrs Potter, with a look of contempt, as they
all sat down to supper: "what ever does the boy mean by curlywurleys?"

"You've seed Isaac Dorkin's nose, mother?"

"Of course I 'ave: what then?"

"Well, it goes in at the top and out at the middle and curls up at the
end: that's curlywurley," said Tommy, with a grin, as he helped himself
to a large potato.

"The boy is right, Martha," said John, laughing, "for a lighthouse
should be as round an' as smooth as a ship's bow, with nothin' for wind
or water to lay hold on.  But now I'll tell 'ee of this noo situation."

Both mother and son looked inquiringly up, but did not speak, being too
busy and hungry.

"Well, this is how it came about.  I met Isaac Dorkin on my way to the
docks this mornin', an' he says to me, says he, `John, I met a gentleman
who is makin' very partikler inquiries about the Eddystone Rock: his
name he says is Rudyerd, and he wants to hire a lot o' first-rate men to
begin a new--'"

"A noo light'ouse!" exclaimed Mrs Potter, with sudden energy, bringing
her fist down on the table with such force that the dishes rattled
again.  "I know'd it: I did.  I've 'ad a settled conviction that if ever
they begun to put up another 'ouse on that there rock, you would 'ave
your finger in it!  And now it'll be the old story over again: out in
all weathers, gettin' yer limbs bruised, if yer neck ain't broke; comin'
'ome like a drownded rat, no regular hours or meals!  Oh John, John!"

Mrs Potter stopped at this point to recover breath and make up her mind
whether to storm or weep.  Heaving a deep sigh she did neither, but went
on with her supper in sad silence.

"Don't take on like that, duckey," said John, stretching his long arm
across the table and patting his wife's shoulder.  "It won't be so bad
as that comes to, and it will bring steady work, besides lots o' money."

"Go on with the story, faither," said Tommy, through a potato, while his
eyes glittered with excitement.

"It ain't a story, lad.  However, to make it short I may come to the
pint at once.  Isaac got engaged himself and mentioned my name to Mr
Rudyerd, who took the trouble to ferret me out in the docks and--and in
fact engaged me for the work, which is to begin next week."

"Capital!" exclaimed Tommy.  "Oh, how I wish I was old enough to go
too!"

"Time enough, lad: every dog shall have his day, as the proverb says."

Mrs Potter said nothing, but sighed, and sought comfort in another cup
of tea.

Meanwhile John continued his talk in an easy, off hand sort of way,
between bite.

"This Mr Rudyerd, you must know (pass the loaf, Tommy: thank 'ee), is a
Cornish man--and fine, straightforward, go-ahead fellows them Cornish
men are, though I'm not one myself.  Ah, you needn't turn up your pretty
nose, Mrs Potter; I would rather have bin born in Cornwall than any
other county in England, if I'd had my choice.  Howsever, that ain't
possible now.  Well, it seems that Mr Rudyerd is a remarkable sort of
man.  He came of poor an' dishonest parents, from whom he runned away in
his young days, an' got employed by a Plymouth gentleman, who became a
true father to him, and got him a good edication in readin', writin',
an' mathematics.  Ah, Tommy, my son, many a time have I had cause for to
regret that nobody gave me a good edication!"

"Fiddlesticks!" exclaimed Mrs Potter, rousing up at this.  "You've got
edication enough for your station in life, and a deal more than most men
in the same trade.  You oughtn't for to undervally yourself, John.  I'd
back you against all your acquaintance in the matter of edication, I
would, so don't talk any more nonsense like that."

Mrs Potter concluded by emphatically stabbing a potato with her fork,
and beginning to peel it.

John smiled sadly and shook his head, but he was too wise a man to
oppose his wife on such a point.

"However, Tommy," he continued, "I'll not let _you_ have the same
regrets in after life, my son: God helping me, you shall have a good;
edication.  Well, as I was sayin', John Rudyerd the runaway boy became
Mister Rudyerd the silk-mercer on Ludgate Hill, London, and now he's
goin' to build a noo light'ouse on the Eddystun."

"He'd do better to mind his shop," said Mrs Potter.

"He must be a strange man," observed Tommy, "to be both a silk-mercer
and an engineer."

Tommy was right: Mr Rudyerd was indeed a strange man, for the
lighthouse which he ultimately erected on the Eddystone Rock proved
that, although not a professional engineer, and although he never
attempted any other great work of the kind, he nevertheless possessed
engineering talent of the highest order: a fact which must of course
have been known to Captain Lovet, the gentleman who selected him for the
arduous undertaking.

The corporation of the Trinity House, who managed the lighthouses on the
English coast, had let the right to build on the Eddystone, for a period
of 99 years, to this Captain Lovet, who appointed Mr Rudyerd to do the
work.

It was a clear calm morning in July 1706 when the boat put off for the
first time to "the Rock," with the men and materials for commencing the
lighthouse.  Our friend John Potter sat at the helm.  Opposite to him
sat his testy friend, Isaac Dorkin, pulling the stroke oar.  Mr Rudyerd
and his two assistant engineers sat on either hand, conversing on the
subject that filled the thoughts of all.  It was a long hard pull, even
on a calm day, but stout oars and strong arms soon carried them out to
the rock.  Being low water at the time, a good deal of it was visible,
besides several jagged peaks of the black forbidding ridge of which the
Eddystone forms a part.

But calm though it was, the party could plainly see that the work before
them would be both difficult and dangerous.  A slight swell from the
open sea caused a long smooth glassy wave to roll solemnly forward every
minute or two, and launch itself in thunder on the weather side, sending
its spray right over the rock at times, so that a landing on that side
would have been impossible.  On the lee side, however, the boat found a
sort of temporary harbour.  Here they landed, but not altogether without
mishap.  Isaac Dorkin, who had made himself conspicuous, during the row
out, for caustic remarks, and a tendency to contradict, slipped his foot
on a piece of seaweed and fell into the water, to the great glee of most
of his comrades.

"Ah, then, sarves you right," cried Teddy Maroon, a little Irishman, one
of the joiners.

The others laughed, and so did John Potter; but he also stretched out a
helping hand and pulled Dorkin out of the sea.

This little incident tended to increase the spirits of the party as they
commenced preliminary operations.

The form of the little mass of rock on which they had to build was very
unfavourable.  Not only was it small--so small that the largest circle
which it was possible to draw on it was only twenty-five feet six inches
in diameter, but its surface sloped so much as to afford a very insecure
foundation for any sort of building, even if the situation had been an
unexposed one.

The former builder, Winstanley, had overcome this difficulty by
fastening a circle of strong iron posts into the solid rock, but the
weight of his building, coupled with the force of the sea, had snapped
these, and thus left the structure literally to slide off its
foundation.  The ends of these iron posts, and a bit of chain firmly
imbedded in a cleft of the rock, were all that the new party of builders
found remaining of the old lighthouse.  Rudyerd determined to guard
against a similar catastrophe, by cutting the rock into a succession of
flat steps or terraces, so that the weight of his structure should rest
perpendicularly on its foundation.

Stormy weather interrupted and delayed him, but he returned with his men
again and again to the work, and succeeded in advancing it very
considerably during the first year--that is to say, during the few weeks
of the summer of that year, in which winds and waves permitted the work
to go on.

Many adventures, both ludicrous and thrilling, had these enterprising
men while they toiled, by snatches as it were, sometimes almost under
water, and always under difficulties; but we are constrained to pass
these by, in silence, in order to devote our space to the more important
and stirring incidents in the history of this the second lighthouse on
the Eddystone,--one of which incidents bade fair to check the progress
of the building for an indefinite period of time, and well-nigh brought
the career of our hero, John Potter, and his mates to an abrupt close.



CHAPTER THREE.

A VIOLENT INTERRUPTION.

The incident referred to in our last chapter occurred on the afternoon
of a calm summer day.  Early that morning, shortly after daybreak, Mr
Rudyerd, with his engineers and workmen, put off in the boat to resume
operations on the rock after a lapse of nearly a week, during which
period rough weather had stopped the work.  They landed without
difficulty, the calm being so complete that there was only a little sea
caused by the heavy swell on the south-west side of the Eddystone Rock,
the leeside being as quiet as a pond.

"It's not often we have weather like this sir," observed John Potter to
Mr Rudyerd, as the heavily-laden boat approached the landing place.

"True, John; a few weeks like this would enable us almost to complete
