the walls. The same day, he learned from some prisoners captured in the
sortie, of the undiminished spirit of the garrison, and that Hennebon
was amply supplied with provisions brought by sea. His own army was
becoming straitened by the scarcity of supplies in the country round,
he therefore determined at once to raise the siege, and to besiege some
place where he would encounter less serious resistance.

Accordingly, next morning he drew off his army and marched to Carhaix.

Shortly afterwards the news came that the Earl of Northampton and Robert
of Artois, with their force, had sailed, and Don Louis, with the Genoese
and other Italian mercenaries, started to intercept them with a
large fleet. The fleets met off the island of Guernsey, and a severe
engagement took place, which lasted till night. During the darkness
a tremendous storm burst upon them and the combatants separated. The
English succeeded in making their way to Brittany and landed near
Vannes. The Spaniards captured four small ships which had been separated
in the storm from their consorts, but did not succeed in regaining the
coast of Brittany, being driven south by the storm as far as Spain. The
Earl of Northampton at once laid siege to Vannes, and Sir Walter Manny
moved with every man that could be spared from Hennebon to assist him.

As it was certain that the French army would press forward with all
speed to relieve the town, it was decided to lose no time in battering
the walls, but to attempt to carry it at once by assault. The walls,
however, were so strong that there seemed little prospect of success
attending such an attempt, and a plan was therefore determined upon by
which the enemy might be thrown off their guard. The assault commenced
at three points in the early morning and was continued all day. No great
vigour, however, was shown in these attempts which were repulsed at all
points.

At nightfall the assailants drew off to their camp, and Oliver de
Clisson, who commanded the town, suffered his weary troops to quit the
walls and to seek for refreshment and repose. The assailants, however,
did not disarm, but after a sufficient time had elapsed to allow the
garrison to lay aside their armour two strong parties attacked the
principal gates of the town, while Sir Walter Manny and the Earl of
Oxford moved round to the opposite side with ladders for an escalade.
The plan was successful. The garrison, snatching up their arms, hurried
to repel their attack upon the gates, every man hastening in that
direction. Sir Walter Manny with his party were therefore enabled to
mount the walls unobserved and make their way into the town; here they
fell upon the defenders in the rear, and the sudden onslaught spread
confusion and terror among them. The parties at the gates forced their
way in and joined their friends, and the whole of the garrison were
killed or taken prisoners, save a few, including Oliver Clisson, who
made their escape by sally-ports. Robert of Artois, with the Earl
of Stafford, was left with a garrison to hold the town. The Earl of
Salisbury, with four thousand men, proceeded to lay siege to Rennes, and
Sir Walter Manny hastened back to Hennebon.

Some of Sir Walter's men formed part of the garrison of Vannes, and
among these was Sir John Powis with a hundred men-at-arms.

The knight had been so pleased with Walter's coolness and courage at the
siege at Hennebon that he requested Sir Walter to leave him with him at
Vannes. "It is possible," he said to Walter, "that we may have fighting
here. Methinks that Sir Walter would have done better to leave
a stronger force. The town is a large one, and the inhabitants
ill-disposed towards us. Oliver Clisson and the French nobles will feel
their honour wounded at the way in which we outwitted them, and will
likely enough make an effort to regain the town. However, Rennes and
Hennebon are not far away, and we may look for speedy aid from the Earl
of Salisbury and Sir Walter should occasion arise."

Sir John's previsions were speedily verified. Oliver Clisson and his
friends were determined to wipe out their defeat, and scattered through
the country raising volunteers from among the soldiery in all the
neighbouring towns and castles, and a month after Vannes was taken they
suddenly appeared before the town with an army of 12,000 men, commanded
by Beaumanoir, marshal of Bretagne for Charles of Blois. The same
reasons which had induced the Earl of Northampton to decide upon a
speedy assault instead of the slow process of breaching the walls,
actuated the French in pursuing the same course, and, divided into a
number of storming parties, the army advanced at once to the assault on
the walls. The little garrison prepared for the defence.

"The outlook is bad, Walter," Sir John Powis said. "These men approach
with an air of resolution which shows that they are bent upon success.
They outnumber us by twelve to one, and it is likely enough that the
citizens may rise and attack us in the rear. They have been ordered to
bring the stones for the machines to the walls, but no one has laid his
hand to the work. We must do our duty as brave men, my lad, but I doubt
me if yonder is not the last sun which we shall see. Furious as the
French are at our recent success here you may be sure that little
quarter will given."



CHAPTER X: A PLACE OF REFUGE



The French, excited to the utmost by the exhortations of their
commanders, and by their desire to wipe out the disgrace of the easy
capture of Vannes by the English, advanced with ardour to the assault,
and officers and men vied with each other in the valour which they
displayed. In vain did the garrison shower arrows and cross-bow bolts
among them, and pour down burning oil and quicklime upon them as they
thronged at the foot of the wall. In vain were the ladders, time after
time, hurled back loaded with men upon the mass below. The efforts of
the men-at-arms to scale the defences were seconded by their archers and
crossbow-men, who shot such a storm of bolts that great numbers of the
defenders were killed. The assault was made at a score of different
points, and the garrison was too weak to defend all with success. Sir
John Powis and his party repulsed over and over again the efforts of the
assailants against that part of the wall entrusted to them, but at other
points the French gained a footing, and swarming up rushed along the
walls, slaying all whom they encountered.

"All is lost," Sir John exclaimed; "let us fall back to the castle and
die fighting there."

Descending from the wall the party made their way through the streets.
The French were already in the town; every house was closed and barred,
and from the upper windows the burghers hurled down stones and bricks
upon the fugitives, while parties of the French soldiers fell upon them
fiercely. Many threw down their arms and cried for quarter, but were
instantly slain.



For a while the streets were a scene of wild confusion; here and there
little knots of Englishmen stood together and defended themselves until
the last, others ran through the streets chased by their exulting foes,
some tried in vain to gain shelter in the houses. Sir John Powis's band
was soon broken and scattered, and their leader slain by a heavy stone
from a housetop. Walter fought his way blindly forward towards the
castle although he well knew that no refuge would be found there. Ralph
Smith kept close beside him, levelling many of his assailants with the
tremendous blows of a huge mace. Somehow, Walter hardly knew how, they
made their way through their assailants and dashed in at the castle
gate. A crowd of their assailants were close upon their heels. Walter
glanced round; dashing across the courtyard he ran through some passages
into an inner yard, in which, as he knew, was the well. The bucket hung
at the windlass.

"Catch hold, Ralph!" he exclaimed; "there is just a chance, and we may
as well be drowned as killed." They grasped the rope and jumped off. The
bucket began to descend with frightful velocity. Faster and faster it
went and yet it seemed a long time before they plunged into the water,
which was nigh a hundred feet below the surface. Fortunately the rope
was considerably longer than was necessary, and they sank many feet into
the water, still retaining their hold. Then clinging to the rope they
hauled themselves to the surface.

"We cannot hold on here five minutes," Ralph exclaimed, "my armour is
dragging me down."

"We will soon get rid of that," Walter said.

"There go our helmets; now I will hold on with one hand and help you to
unbuckle your breast and back pieces; you do the same for me."

With great efforts they managed to rid themselves of their armour,
and then held on with ease to the rope. They hauled the bucket to the
surface and tied a knot in the slack of the rope, so that the bucket
hung four feet below the level of the water. Putting their feet in
this, they were able to stand with their heads above the surface without
difficulty.

"This is a nice fix," Ralph exclaimed. "I think it would have been just
as well to have been killed at once. They are sure to find us here, and
if they don't we shall die of cold before tomorrow morning."

"I don't think they will find us," Walter said cheerfully. "When they
have searched the castle thoroughly it may occur to some of them that
we have jumped down the well, but it will be no particular business of
anyone to look for us, and they will all be too anxious to get at the
wine butts to trouble their heads about the matter; besides, it must be
a heavy job to wind up this bucket, and it is not likely there will be
such urgent need of water that anyone will undertake the task."

"But we are no better off if they don't," Ralph remarked, "for we must
die here if we are not hauled out. I suppose you don't intend to try and
climb that rope. I might do twenty feet or so on a pinch, but I could no
more get up to the top there than I could fly."

"We must think it over," Walter rejoined; "where there is a will there
is a way, you know. We will take it by turns to watch that little patch
of light overhead; if we see anyone looking down we must leave the
bucket and swim to the side without making the least noise. They may
give a few turns of the windlass to see if anyone has hold of the rope
below; be sure you do not make the slightest splashing or noise, for the
sound would be heard above to a certainty."

Ten minutes later they saw two heads appear above, and instantly
withdrew their feet from the bucket and made a stroke to the side, which
was but four feet distant, being careful as they did that no motion was
imparted to the rope. Then though it was too dark to see anything, they
heard the bucket lifted from the water. A minute later it fell back
again with a splash, then all was quiet.

"We are safe now, and can take our place in the bucket. They are
satisfied that if we did jump down here we are drowned. And now we must
think about climbing up."

"Aye, that will require a good deal of thinking," Ralph grumbled.

For some time there was silence; then Walter said, "The first thing to
do is to cut off the slack of the rope, there are some twelve feet of
it. Then we will unwind the strands of that. There are five or six large
strands as far as I can feel; we will cut them up into lengths of about
a couple of feet and we ought to be able to tie these to the rope in
such a way as not to slip down with our weight. If we tie them four
feet apart we can go up step by step; I don't see much difficulty about
that."

"No," Ralph said much more cheerfully, "I should think that we could
manage that."

They at once set to work. The rope was cut up and unravelled, and the
strands cut into pieces about two feet long. They then both set to work
trying to discover some way of fastening it by which it would not slip
down the rope. They made many fruitless attempts; each time that a
strand was fastened with a loop large enough for them to pass a leg
through, it slid down the rope when their weight was applied to it. At
last they succeeded in finding out a knot which would hold. This was
done by tying a knot close to one end of a piece of the strand, then
sufficient was left to form the loop, and the remainder was wound round
the rope in such a way that the weight only served to tighten its hold.

"Shall we begin at once?" Ralph said, when success was achieved.

"No, we had better wait until nightfall. The vibration of the rope
when our weight once gets on it might be noticed by anyone crossing the
courtyard."

"Do you think we have sufficient bits of rope," Ralph asked.

"Just enough, I think," Walter replied; "there were six strands, and
each has made six pieces, so we have thirty-six. I know the well
is about a hundred feet deep, for the other day I heard some of the
soldiers who were drawing water grumbling over the labour required. So
if we put them three feet apart it will take thirty-three of them, which
will leave three over; but we had better place them a little over a yard
so as to make sure."

In a short time the fading brightness of the circle of light far
overhead told them that twilight had commenced, and shortly afterwards
they attached the first strand to the rope some three feet above the
water.

"Now," Walter said, "I will go first, at any rate for a time. I must put
one leg through the loop, and sit, as it were, while I fasten the one
above, as I shall want both hands for the work. You will find it a good
deal easier to stand with your foot in the loop. If I get tired I will
fasten another loop by the side of that on which I am resting, so you
can come up and pass me. There is no hurry. It ought not to take up
above an hour, and it will not do for us to get to the top until the
place becomes a little quiet. Tonight they are sure to be drinking and
feasting over their victory until late."

They now set to work, and step by step mounted the rope. They found
the work less arduous than they had expected. The rope was dry, and
the strands held tightly to it. Two or three times they changed places,
resting in turn from the work; but in less than two hours from the time
they made the first loop Walter's head and shoulders appeared above the
level of the courtyard. He could hear sounds of shouting and singing
within the castle, and knew that a great feast was going on. Descending
a step or two he held parley with Ralph.

"I think, perhaps, it will be better to sally out at once. Everyone is
intent on his own pleasure, and we shall have no difficulty in slipping
out of the castle unnoticed. All will be feasting and riot in the town,
and so long as we do not brush against any one so that they may feel our
wet garments we are little likely to be noticed; besides, the gates of
the town will stand open late, for people from the villages round will
have come in to join in the revels."

"I am ready to try it, Master Walter," Ralph replied, "for I ache from
head to foot with holding on to this rope. The sooner the better, say
I."

In another minute both stood in the courtyard. It was a retired spot,
and none were passing. Going along the passage they issued into the main
yard. Here great fires were blazing, and groups of men sat round them
drinking and shouting. Many lay about in drunken sleep.

"Stay where you are in the shade, Ralph. You had best lie down by the
foot of the wall. Anyone who passes will think that you are in a drunken
sleep. I will creep forward and possess myself of the steel caps of
two of these drunkards, and if I can get a couple of cloaks so much the
better."

There was no difficulty about the caps, and by dint of unbuckling the
cloaks and rolling their wearers gently over, Walter succeeded at last
in obtaining two of them. He also picked up a sword for Ralph--his own
still hung in its sheath--and then he joined his companion, and the two
putting on the steel caps and cloaks walked quietly to the gate. There
were none on guard, and they issued unmolested into the town. Here all
was revelry. Bonfires blazed in the streets. Hogsheads of wine, with
the heads knocked out, stood before many of the houses for all to help
themselves who wished. Drunken soldiers reeled along shouting snatches
of songs, and the burghers in the highest state of hilarity thronged the
ways.

"First of all, Ralph, we will have a drink of wine, for I am chilled to
the bone."

"Aye, and so am I," Ralph replied. "I got hot enough climbing that rope,
but now the cold has got hold of me again, and my teeth are chattering
in my head."

Picking up one of the fallen vessels by a cask they dipped it in and
took a long draught of wine; then, turning off from the principal
streets, they made their way by quiet lanes down to one of the gates. To
their dismay they found that this was closed. The French commanders knew
that Sir Walter Manny or Salisbury might ere this be pressing forward
to relieve the town, and that, finding that it had fallen, they might
attempt to recapture it by a sudden attack. While permitting therefore
the usual licence, after a successful assault, to the main body of their
forces, they had placed a certain number of their best troops on the
walls, giving them a handsome largess to make up for their loss of the
festivities.

At first Walter and his friend feared that their retreat was cut off for
the night, but several other people presently arrived, and the officer
on guard said, coming out, "You must wait a while; the last batch have
only just gone, and I cannot keep opening and closing the gate; in half
an hour I will let you out."

Before that time elapsed some fifty or sixty people, anxious to return
to their villages, gathered round the gate.

"Best lay aside your steel cap, Ralph, before we join them," Walter
said. "In the dim light of that lamp none will notice that we have
head-gear, but if it were to glint upon the steel cap the officer might
take us for deserters and question us as to who we are."

Presently the officer came out from the guard-room again. There was a
forward movement of the little crowd, and Walter and Ralph closed in
