earnestly, and seem to pierce--"

"Ay, just so," interrupted the diver; "pierce into you like a gimblet,
goin' slap agin the retina, turnin' short down the jugular, right into
the heart, where they create an agreeable sort o' fermentation.  Oh!
Don't I know?--my Susan all over!"

Edgar's amusement was tinged slightly with disgust at the diver's
persistent comparisons.  However, mastering his feelings, he again
demanded advice as to what he should do in the circumstances.

"You han't told me the circumstances yet," said the diver quietly.

"Well, here they are.  Old Mr Hazlit--"

"What!  Hazlit?  Miss Hazlit, is _that_ her name?" cried Baldwin, with a
look of pleased surprise.

"Yes, do you know her?"

"Know her?  Of course I do.  Why, she visits the poor in my district o'
the old town--you know I'm a local preacher among the Wesleyans--an'
she's one o' the best an' sweetest--ha!  Angel indeed!  I'm glad she
wasn't made an angel of, for it would have bin the spoilin' of a
splendid woman.  Bless her!"

The diver spoke with much enthusiasm, and the young man smiled as he
said, "Of course I add Amen to your last words.--Well then," he
continued, "Aileen's father has refused to allow me to pay my addresses
to his daughter.  He has even forbidden me to enter his house, or to
hold any intercourse whatever with her.  This unhappy state of things
has induced me to hasten my departure from England.  My intention is to
go abroad, make a fortune, and then return to claim my bride, for the
want of money is all that the old gentleman objects to.  I cannot bear
the thought of going away without saying good-bye, but that seems now
unavoidable, for he has, as I have said, forbidden me the house."

Edgar looked anxiously at his companion's face, but received no
encouragement there, for Baldwin kept his eyes on the ground, and shook
his head slowly.

"If the old gentleman has forbid you his house, of course you mustn't go
into it.  However, it seems to me that you might cruise about the house
and watch till Sus--Aileen, I mean--comes out; but I don't myself quite
like the notion of that either, it don't seem fair an' above-board
like."

"You are right," returned Edgar.  "I cannot consent to hang about a
man's door, like a thief waiting to pounce on his treasure when it
opens.  Besides, he has forbidden Aileen to hold any intercourse with
me, and I know her dear nature too well to subject it to a useless
struggle between duty and inclination.  She is certain to obey her
father's orders at any cost."

"Then, sir," said Baldwin decidedly, "you'll just have to go afloat
without sayin' good-bye.  There's no help for it, but there's this
comfort, that, bein' what she is, she'll like you all the better for
it.--Now, here we are at the pier.  Boat a-hoy-oy!"

In reply to the diver's hail a man in a punt waved his hand, and pulled
for the landing-place.

A few strokes of the oar soon placed them on the deck of a large clumsy
vessel which lay anchored off the entrance to the harbour.  This was the
diver's barge, which exhibited a ponderous crane with a pendulous hook
and chain in the place where its fore-mast should have been.  Several
men were busied about the deck, one of whom sat clothed in the full
dress of a diver, with the exception of the helmet, which was unscrewed
and lay on the deck near his heavily-weighted feet.  The dress was wet,
and the man was enjoying a quiet pipe, from all which Edgar judged that
he was resting after a dive.  Near to the plank on which the diver was
seated there stood the chest containing the air-pumps.  It was open, the
pumps were in working order, with two men standing by to work them.
Coils of india-rubber tubing lay beside it.  Elsewhere were strewn about
stones for repairing the pier, and various building tools.

"Has Machowl come on board yet?" asked Baldwin, as he stepped on the
deck.  "Ah, I see he has.--Well, Rooney lad, are you prepared to go
down?"

"Yis, sur, I am."

Rooney Machowl, who stepped forward as he spoke, was a fine specimen of
a man, and would have done credit to any nationality.  He was about the
middle height, very broad and muscular, and apparently twenty-three
years of age.  His countenance was open, good-humoured, and
good-looking, though by no means classic--the nose being turned-up, the
eyes small and twinkling, and the mouth large.

"Have you ever seen anything of this sort before?" asked Baldwin, with a
motion of his hand towards the diving apparatus scattered on the deck.

"No sur, nothin'."

"Was you bred to any trade?"

"Yis, sur, I'm a ship-carpenter."

"An' why don't you stick to that?"

"Bekase, sur, it won't stick to me.  There's nothin' doin' apparently in
this poort.  Annyhow I can't git work, an' I've a wife an' chick at
home, who've bin so long used to praties and bacon that their stummicks
don't take kindly to fresh air fried in nothin'.  So ye see, sur,
findin' it difficult to make a livin' above ground, I'm disposed to try
to make it under water."

While Rooney Machowl was speaking Baldwin regarded him with a fixed and
critical gaze.  What his opinion of the recruit was did not, however,
appear on his countenance or in his reply, for he merely said, "Humph!
Well, we'll see.  You'll begin your education in your noo profession by
payin' partikler attention to all that is said an' done around you."

"Yis, sur," returned Machowl, respectfully touching the peak of his cap
and wrinkling his forehead very much, while he looked on at the further
proceedings of the divers with that expression of deep earnest sincerity
of attention which--whether assumed or genuine--is only possible to the
countenance of an Irishman.

During this colloquy the two men standing by the pump-case, and two
other men who appeared to be supernumeraries, listened with much
interest, but the diver seated on the plank, resting and calmly smoking
his pipe, gazed with apparent indifference at the sea, from which he had
recently emerged.

This man was a very large fellow, with a dark surly countenance--not
exactly bad in expression, but rather ill-tempered-looking.  His
diving-dress being necessarily very wide and baggy, made him seem larger
than he really was--indeed, quite gigantic.  The dress was made of very
thick india-rubber cloth, and all--feet, legs, body, and arms--was of
one piece, so perfectly secured at the seams as to be thoroughly
impervious to air or water.  To get into it was a matter of some
difficulty, the entrance being effected at the neck.  When this neck is
properly attached to the helmet, the diver is thoroughly cut off from
the external world, except through the air-tube communicating with his
helmet and the pump afore mentioned.

"Have ye got the hole finished, Maxwell?" said Baldwin, turning to the
surly diver.

"Yes," he replied shortly.

"Well, then, go down and fix the charge.  Here it is," said Baldwin,
taking from a wooden case an object about eighteen inches long, which
resembled a large office-ruler that had been coated thickly with pitch.
It was an elongated shell filled to the muzzle with gunpowder.  To one
end of it was fastened the end of a coil of wire which was also coated
with some protecting substance.

As Baldwin spoke Maxwell slowly puffed the last "draw" from his lips and
knocked the ashes out of his pipe on the plank, on which he still
remained seated while the two supernumeraries busied themselves in
completing his toilet for him; one screwing on his helmet, which
appeared ridiculously large, the other loading his breast and back with
two heavy leaden weights.  When fully equipped, the diver carried on his
person a weight fully equal to that of his own bulky person.

"Now look here, Mister Edgar, an' pay partikler attention, Rooney
Machowl.  This here toobe, made of indyrubber, d'ee see?  (`Yis, sur,'
from Rooney) I fix on, as you perceive, to the back of Maxwell's helmet.
It communicates with that there pump, and when these two men work the
pump, air will be forced into the helmet and into the dress down to his
very toes.  We could bu'st him, if we were so disposed, if it wasn't for
an escape-valve, here close beside the air-toobe, at the back of the
helmet, which keeps lettin' off the surplus air.  Moreover, there is
another valve, here in front of the breast-plate, which is under the
control of the diver, so that he can let air escape by givin' it a
half-turn when the men at the pumps are givin' him too much, or he can
keep it in when they're givin' him enough."

"An' what does he do," asked Rooney, with an anxious expression, "whin
they give him too little?"

"He pulls on the air-pipe,--as I'll explain to you in good time--the
proper signal for `more air.'"

"But what if he forgits, or misremimbers the signal?" asked the
inquisitive recruit.

"Why then," replied Baldwin, "he suffocates, and we pull him up dead,
an' give him decent burial.  Keep yourself easy, my lad, an' you'll know
all about it in good time.  I'll soon give 'ee the chance to suffocate
or bu'st yourself accordin' to taste."

"Come, cut it short and look alive," said Maxwell gruffly, as he stood
up to permit of a stout rope being fastened to his waist.

"You shut up!" retorted Baldwin.

Having exchanged these little civilities the two divers moved to the
side of the barge--Maxwell with a slow ponderous tread.

A short iron ladder dipped from the gunwale of the barge a few feet down
into the sea.  The diver stepped upon this, turning with his face
inwards, descended knee-deep into the water, and then stopped.  Baldwin
handed him the blasting-charge.  At the same moment one of the
supernumeraries advanced with the front-glass or bull's-eye in his hand,
and the men at the pumps gave a turn or two to see that all was working
well.

"All right?" demanded the supernumerary.

"Right," responded Maxwell, in a voice which issued sepulchrally from
the iron globe.

There are three round windows fitted with thick plate-glass in the
helmets to which we refer.  The front one is made to screw off and on,
and the fixing of this is always the last operation in completing a
diver's toilet.

"Pump away," said the man, holding the round glass in front of Maxwell's
nose, and looking over his shoulder to see that the order was obeyed.
The glass was screwed on, and the man finished off by gravely patting
Maxwell in an affectionate manner on the head.

"Why does he pat him so?" asked Edgar, with a laugh at the apparent
tenderness of the act.

"It's a tinder farewell, I suppose," murmured Rooney, "in case he niver
comes up again."

"It is to let him know that he may now descend in safety," answered
Baldwin.  "The pump there is kep' goin' from a few moments before the
front-glass is screwed on till the diver shows his head above water
again--which he'll do in quarter of an hour or so, for it don't take
long to lay a charge; but our ordinary spell under water, when work is
steady, is about four hours--more or less--with perhaps a breath of ten
minutes once or twice at the surface when they're working deep."

"But why a breath at the surface?" asked Edgar.  "Isn't the air sent
down fresh enough?"

"Quite fresh enough, Mister Edgar, but the pressure when we go deep--say
ten or fifteen fathoms--is severe on a man if long continued, so that he
needs a little relief now and then.  Some need more and some less
relief, accordin' to their strength.  Maxwell has only gone down fifteen
feet, so that he wouldn't need to come up at all durin' a spell of work.
We're goin' to blast a big rock that has bin' troublesome to us at low
water.  The hole was driven in it last week.  We moored a raft over it
and kep' men at work with a long iron jumper that reached from the rock
to the surface of the sea.  It was finished last night, and now he's
gone to fix the charge."

"But I don't understand about the pressure, sur, at all at all," said
Machowl, with a complicated look of puzzlement; "sure whin I putt my
hand in wather I don't feel no pressure whatsomediver."

"Of course not," responded Baldwin, "because you don't put it deep
enough.  You must know that our atmosphere presses on our bodies with a
weight of about 20,000 pounds.  Well, if you go thirty-two feet deep in
the sea you get the pressure of exactly another atmosphere, which means
that you've got to stand a pressure all over your body of 40,000 when
you've got down as deep as thirty-two feet."

"But," objected Rooney, "I don't fed no pressure of the atmosphere on me
body at all."

"That's because you're squeezed by the air inside of you, man, as well
as by the atmosphere outside, which takes off the _feelin'_ of it, an',
moreover, you're used to it.  If the weight of our atmosphere was took
off your outside and not took off your inside--your lungs an' the
like,--you'd come to feel it pretty strong, for you'd swell like a
balloon an' bu'st a'most, if not altogether."

Baldwin paused a moment and regarded the puzzled countenance of his
pupil with an air of pity.

"Contrairywise," he continued, "if the air was all took out of your
inside an' allowed to remain on your outside, you'd go squash together
like a collapsed indyrubber ball.  Well then, if that be so with one
atmosphere, what must it be with a pressure equal to two, which you have
when you go down to thirty-two feet deep in the sea?  An' if you go down
to twenty-five fathoms, or 150 feet, which is often done, what must the
pressure be there?"

"Tightish, no doubt," said Rooney.

"True, lad," continued Joe.  "Of course, to counteract this we must
force more air down to you the deeper you go, so that the pressure
inside of you may be a little more than the pressure outside, in order
to force the foul air out of the dress through the escape-valve; and
what between the one an' the other your sensations are peculiar, you may
be sure.--But come, young man, don't be alarmed.  We'll not send you
down very deep at first.  If some divers go down as deep as twenty-five
fathoms, surely you'll not be frightened to try two and a half."

Whatever Rooney's feelings might have been, the judicious allusion to
the possibility of his being frightened was sufficient to call forth the
emphatic assertion that he was ready to go down two thousand fathoms if
they had ropes long enough and weights heavy enough to sink him!

While the recruit is preparing for his subaqueous experiments, you and
I, reader, will go see what Maxwell is about at the bottom of the sea.



CHAPTER TWO.

DESCRIBES A FIRST VISIT TO THE BOTTOM OF THE SEA.

When the diver received the encouraging pat on the head, as already
related, he descended the ladder to its lowest round.  Here, being a few
feet below the surface, the buoyancy of the water relieved him of much
of the oppression caused by the great weights with which he was loaded.
He was in a semi-floating condition, hence the ladder, being no longer
necessary, was made to terminate at that point.  He let go his hold of
it and sank gently to the bottom, regulating his pace by a rope which
descended from the foot of the ladder to the mud, on which in a few
seconds his leaden soles softly rested.  A continuous stream of
air-bubbles from the safety-valve behind the helmet indicated to those
above that the pumps were doing their duty, and at the same time hid the
diver entirely from their sight.

Meanwhile the two men who acted as signalman and assistant stood near
the head of the ladder, the first holding the life-line, the assistant
the coil of air-tubing.  Their duty was to stand by and pay out or haul
in tubing and line according as the diver's movements and necessities
should require.  They were to attend also to his signals--some of which
were transmitted by the line and some by the air-tube.  These signals
vary among divers.  With Baldwin and his party one pull on the
_life-line_ meant "All right;" four pulls, "I'm coming up."  One pull on
the air-pipe signified "Sufficient air;" two pulls, "More air."  (pump
faster.)  Four pulls was an alarm, and signified "Haul me up."  The
aspect of Rooney Machowl's face when endeavouring to understand
Baldwin's explanation of these signals was a sight worth seeing!

But to return to our diver.  On reaching the bottom, Maxwell took a coil
of small line which hung on his left arm, and attached one end of it to
a stone or sinker which kept taut the ladder-line by which he had
descended.  This was his clew to guide him back to the ladder.  Not only
is the light under water very dim--varying of course, according to
depth, until total darkness ensues--but a diver's vision is much
weakened by the muddy state of the water at river-mouths and in
harbours, so that he is usually obliged to depend more on feeling than
on sight.  If he were to leave the foot of his ladder without the
guiding-coil, it would be difficult if not impossible to find it again,
and his only resource would be to signal "Haul me up," which would be
undignified, to say the least of it!  By means of this coil he can
wander about at will--within the limits of his air-tube tether of
course,--and be certain to find his way back to the ladder-foot in the
darkest or muddiest water.

Having fastened the line, the diver walked in the direction of the rock
on which he had to operate, dropping gradually the coils of the
guiding-line as he proceeded.  His progress was very slow, for water is
a dense medium, and man's form is not well adapted for walking in it--as
every bather knows who has attempted to walk when up to his neck in it.
He soon found the object of his search, and went down on his knees
beside the hole already driven into the rock.  Even this process of
going on his knees was not so simple as it sounds, for the men above
were sending down more air than could escape by the valve behind the
helmet, and thus were filling his dress to such an extent that he had a
tendency to rise off the ground despite his weights.  To counteract this
he opened the valve in front, let out the superabundant air, got on his
knees, and was soon busy at work inserting the charge-tube into the hole
and tamping it well home, taking care that the fine wire with which it
communicated with the party in the barge should not be injured.
