Polar bears are found along the shores of the Arctic Ocean, both in Asia
and America.  They do not go to sleep in winter--that is, the males do
not.  The females with young, however, bury themselves in the snow--
having formed a lair--and there remain until they bring forth their
young.  The cubs are often captured in these snow caves, which the
Esquimaux discover by means of dogs trained for this peculiar purpose.

The _Grizzly bear_ next merits attention.  This formidable animal was,
for a long time, supposed to be a variety either of the brown bear of
Europe or the black bear of America; but his greater ferocity, so often
and fatally experienced by travellers, drew the attention of naturalists
upon him, when it was discovered that he was altogether distinct from
either of the two.  His name is usually coupled with that of the Rocky
Mountains of America--for it is chiefly in the defiles and valleys of
this stupendous chain that he makes his home.  He wanders, however, far
eastward over the prairies, and also to the Californian Mountains on the
west; and in a latitudinal direction from the borders of Texas on the
south, northward as far, it is supposed, as the shores of the Arctic
Sea.  At all events, a bear somewhat like him, if not identically the
same, has been seen on the banks of the great Mackenzie River, near its
mouth.  Perhaps it may be the brown bear of the Barren Grounds, already
noticed; and which last is, in many respects--in size and colour
especially--very similar to the grizzly.

The grizzly bear is certainly the most ferocious of his tribe--even
exceeding, in this unamiable quality, his white cousin of the icy north;
and many a melancholy tale of trapper and Indian hunter attests his
dangerous prowess.  He is both carnivorous and frugivorous--will dig for
roots and eat fruits when within his reach; but not being a
tree-climber, he has to content himself with such berries as grow upon
the humbler bushes.  Indeed, it is a fortunate circumstance that the
fierce animal is unable to ascend a tree.  Many a traveller and hunter
have found a neighbouring tree the readiest means of saving their lives,
when pursued by this ferocious assailant.  Another circumstance is also
in favour of those pursued by the grizzly bear.  In the region where he
dwells, but few persons ever go afoot; and although the bear can
overtake a pedestrian, his speed is no match for that of the friendly
horse.

It is almost hopeless to think of killing a grizzly bear by a single
bullet.  There the deadly rifle is no longer deadly--unless when the
shot is given in a mortal part; and to take sure aim from the saddle,
with a horse dancing in affright, is a feat which even the most skilful
marksman cannot always accomplish.  As many as a dozen bullets have been
fired into the body of a grizzly bear, without killing him outright.

The strength of this animal equals his ferocity.  He pulls the huge
buffalo, a thousand pounds in weight, to the ground; and then drags its
carcass to some cave or crevice among the rocks, or to a hole which he
has dug to receive it.  To this place he repairs from time to time, till
the exhausted store compels him to go in search of a new victim.  Many
an incident can be related--and on the best authority too--where man has
been the victim of the grizzly bear; and the Indians esteem the killing
of one of these animals a feat equal to that of taking the scalp of a
human enemy.  One of the proudest ornaments of a savage chief is a
necklace of bears' claws: only to be worn by those who have themselves
killed the animals from which they have been taken.

The _Black_, or _American bear_, is one of the best known of the family;
and on account of his clean smooth head, tapering muzzle, and rich black
fur, he is also one of the best looking of bears.  He is found
throughout the whole of the United States territory--from the Canadas to
the Gulf of Mexico--and westward to the shores of the Pacific.  He is
sometimes met with in the same neighbourhood with the grizzly, but not
often: since their haunts are essentially unlike--the black bear being a
denizen of the heavy-timbered forest, while the other frequents the
grassy hills or coppice-openings of the prairies and mountain valleys.

The black bear is a tree-climber; and ascends the loftiest trees in
search of the honey of the wild bees, or to make his lair in some
cavernous hollow of the trunks.  His food is usually fruits and roots,
but he is also fond of young corn, and often commits serious
depredations on the maize plantation.  In the backwood settlements,
where clearings are apart from each other, the black bear is still
occasionally met with; and the chase of this animal is one of the most
favourite pastimes of the backwoods' hunter, whether amateur or
professional.  Generally there is little peril in the pursuit--unless
when the bear is wounded and enraged, and the hunter chooses to risk
himself at close quarters.

There are varieties in colour.  Some with white throats, and some of a
cinnamon brown, have been observed; but the colour of the species is
usually jet black; and on this account the skins are much prized for
military and other purposes.

The _Spectacled bear_ is a native of South America, and frequents the
forests upon the declivities of the Andes.  This was long supposed to be
a variety of the black bear, but later observations prove it to be a
different species.  Its habits are very similar to the last, to which it
is also similar in shape.  In colour it differs essentially.  It is
black, but with a buff snout, and buff rings round the eyes, which give
it that appearance whence it derives its trivial name.  Its throat and
breast are whitish.

There is at least one other species of black bear indigenous to South
America, inhabiting the tropical forests; but very little is known of
it--further than that it is one of the smallest of the tribe.

We now reach the Asiatic bears, properly so called; and we have only
space to say a word about each.

The _Siberian bear_ is thought to be only a variety of the brown bear of
Europe, differing slightly in colour.  In the former there is a broad
band, or collar, of white passing over the neck and meeting upon the
breast.  It is, as its name implies, an inhabitant of Siberia.

The _Thibet bear_ is a dweller among the Himalayas--in Sylhet and
Nepaul.  Its general colour is black, with a white mark, shaped like the
letter Y; so placed that the shank of the letter is upon its breast, and
the forks running up the front of its shoulders.  It is not carnivorous,
and, generally, its disposition is harmless and playful.  It is easily
tamed.

The _Sloth bear_ is another Indian species having this peculiar marking
on the breast and shoulders.  This animal is one of the oddest of
creatures.  Its short limbs and depressed head, with the long shaggy
hair surmounting its back like a bullock, give it the appearance of
being deformed.  On this account it was the favourite of the Indian
jugglers, who, depending on its ugliness as a source of attraction,
trained it to a variety of tricks.  It is therefore sometimes known as
the jugglers' bear (_Ours jongleur_).  It has also a peculiar prehensile
power in its lips; and this, with its general shaggy mien, led to the
belief of its being a species of sloth--hence its common name.

The _Malayan bear_ is another black species, with a marking on the
breast.  This mark is of a semi-lunar shape, and whitish; but the colour
of the muzzle is buff-yellow.  This is a very handsome species,
subsisting on vegetable diet; and very injurious to the plantations of
young cocoa trees, of the shoots of which it is very fond.  It is also a
honey eater; and roams about in quest of the hives of the indigenous
bees.  It is a native of Malacca, Sumatra, and others of the East Indian
islands.

The _Isabella bear_ is so called from its colour--being of that fulvous
white known as Isabella colour.  It is another of the species belonging
to the great range of the Himalayas, and is found in the mountains of
Nepaul.  Sometimes it is observed of nearly a white colour; which led to
the mistaken belief that Polar bears existed in the Himalayas.

The _Syrian bear_ is a species found in the mountainous parts of Asia
Minor.  It is of a fulvous-brown colour, sometimes approaching to
yellowish white.  It is partly carnivorous, but feeds also on fruits;
and is most remarkable as being the species first mentioned in books--
that is, it is the bear of the Bible.

The _Bornean bear_ is the last to be mentioned, though it is certainly
one of the most beautiful, if not the most beautiful, of the genus.
This beauty arises from its peculiar markings, especially from the large
patch of rich orange colour upon the breast.  It is a native of the
great Island of Borneo, and little is known of its habits; but it is
supposed to resemble the Malayan bear in these, as it does in many other
respects.

In Africa there are no bears.



CHAPTER FOUR.

BADGERS.

The Badger is a silent, solitary, carnivorous creature, having his
representative, in some form or other, in almost every part of the
world; though nowhere either numerous in species or plentiful in
individuals.  In Europe he appears in two forms, the _Glutton and common
Badger_; in North America in three, viz., _Wolverene, American_, and
_Mexican Badgers_; and, indeed, we might say a fourth belongs to that
continent, for the _Racoon_ is as near being a badger, both in
appearance and habits, as he is to being anything else.  For
convenience, therefore, let us class him in this group: he will
certainly be more at home in it than among the _bears_--where most of
the naturalists have placed him.

In South America we find another form of badger in the _Coati mondi_, of
which there are several varieties; and there, too, the racoon appears of
a species distinct from those of the north.  Some writers class the
coati with the civets, but the creature has far more of the habits and
appearance of a badger than of a civet cat; and therefore, whatever the
anatomists may say, we shall consider the coati a badger.

But a truer form of the badger than either of the above, exists in South
America--extending over nearly the whole of that continent.  This is the
_Grison_, which, in appearance and habits, somewhat resembles the
wolverene.  It also is found in two or three varieties--according to the
part of the country it inhabits.  The _Taira_ is another South American
species of badger-like animal, though usually referred to the weasels.

In Africa, the badger appears in the _Ratel_, or honey badger, common
from Senegal to the Cape.  In Asia, in its northern zone, we have the
_European badger and Glutton_; and in the south, the _Indian badger_;
while in the Himalaya chain dwells another animal, closely allied to the
badgers, called the _Wha_ or _Panda_.  In Java, we find still another
species, the _Nientek_; and in the other large Asiatic islands there are
several kinds of animals that approach very near to badgers in their
forms and habits, but which are usually classed either with the weasels
or civets.

We shall now give some details respecting the different animals of this
family; among which the Glutton, in point of size, as well as for other
reasons, deserves precedence.

The _Glutton_ is the Rosomak of the Russians, in whose country he is
chiefly found--along high northern latitudes, both in Europe and Asia.
He is supposed to be identical with the wolverene of North America; and
if this be so, his range extends all round the Arctic zone of the globe:
since the wolverene is found throughout the whole extent of the Hudson's
Bay territory.  There are good reasons to believe, however, that the two
species differ considerably from each other--just as the European badger
does from his American cousins.  It was the writer Olaus Magnus who gave
such celebrity to this animal, by telling a very great "story" about the
creature--which, at a time when people were little studied in natural
history, was readily believed.  Olaus's report was, that whenever the
glutton killed an animal, he was in the habit of feeding on the carcass
till his belly became swelled out and tight as a drum; that then he
would pass between two trees growing close together--to press the
swelling inwards and ease himself--after which he would return to the
carcass, again fill himself, and then back again to the trees, and so
on, till he had eaten every morsel of the dead animal, whatever might
have been its size!  All this, of course, was mere fable; but it is not
without some foundation in fact: for the Rosomak is, in reality, one of
the greatest _gluttons_ among carnivorous animals.  So, too, is his
cousin, the wolverene of America; as the fur trappers have had sad
reasons to know--whenever the creature has come upon a store of their
provisions.  The name of Glutton, therefore, though based upon Olaus
Magnus's exaggeration, is not so inappropriate.

The glutton and wolverene are, in fact, very like the common badger in
their habits; except that being much larger and stronger animals, they
prey upon larger game.  The reindeer, and other large quadrupeds, are
often the victims of both; and it is even said that they can overcome
the great elk; but this is not confirmed by the observations of any
trustworthy traveller.  The young of the elk, or a disabled old one, may
occasionally succumb to them, but not an elk in full vigour, nor yet a
reindeer, except when they can surprise the latter asleep.  Their game
is usually the smaller quadrupeds; and in the fur countries no animal is
a greater pest to the trapper than the wolverene or glutton.  A single
individual will in one night visit a whole line of traps, and rob them
of the captured animals--whether they be polar hares, white or blue
foxes, martens, or ermine weasels.

It is this creature that is usually represented lying in wait upon the
limb of a tree, and springing upon deer as they pass underneath: but
this story of its habits wants confirmation.

The fur of the wolverene is one of the _staple_ articles of trade of the
Hudson's Bay Company; though it is more prized among the Russians than
with us--who esteem it in value as next to the ermine.

The _Common_, or _European badger_, need not be here described, since it
is familiar to all.  The same may be said of the two American badgers,
and also that of India, all three of which are very similar in habits
and appearance to the common kind.

But the _African badger_, or _Ratel_, merits a word or two.  It is about
the size of the true badger, and ordinarily lives on small game, as
badgers do; but, in addition to this, it is fond of varying its diet
with a little honey.  This it procures from the nests of wild bees,
common throughout the whole of Africa.  The account given of the mode in
which it finds these nests would be incredible, were it not that we have
the testimony of reverend missionaries to confirm it.  It is as
follows:--In Africa there is a bird--a species of cuckoo--known as the
Indicator bird, or honey guide.  This little creature hops from tree to
tree, itself apparently in search of the bees' nests.  While doing so,
it utters a shrill cry; and these cries are repeated until the honey
hive is found.  The ratel lies in wait for this bird; and, on hearing
the cry, makes towards it, and keeps following its flights till the
bees' nest is found.  Should this prove to be in a tree and out of
reach--for the ratel is not a climber--the animal vents his chagrin by
tearing at the trunk with his teeth, as if he had hopes of felling the
tree.  The scratches thus made on the bark serve as a guide to certain
other creatures, who are also fond of honey, viz., the Kaffir hunters
and Bushmen.

Should the bees' nest prove to be on the ground, or under it, the ratel
soon unearths the treasure with his strong claws, and takes possession
of it, regardless of the stings of the bees, against which his thick
skin defends him.

The _Orison_ inhabits the forests of South America, from Guiana to
Paraguay.  It is quite as ferocious as any of the tribe; but its smaller
size hinders it from attacking large animals, and its victims are birds,
agoutis, and other small rodents--against all of which it wages a war of
extermination.  When surprised by the hunters and their dogs, it will
battle furiously till life is extinct: all the while emitting a strong
disagreeable smell, after the manner of the weasels and polecats.  The
_Racoon_, which we have grouped with the badgers, is both a North and
South American animal; dwelling in dense forests, and making its lair in
the hollow of a tree.  This animal is a good tree-climber, and usually
takes refuge among the higher branches when pursued.  It is nocturnal in
its habits, but in deep shady woods it may be seen prowling about in the
daylight, in search of birds and their eggs, small rodents, fish, or
frogs, all of which it eats indifferently.  There are several distinct
species.

The _Coati_ is exclusively South American.  This, unlike the racoon,
sleeps at night, and prowls during the day.  It is also an expert
tree-climber, and has a peculiarity in this respect; viz., it descends a
tree _head foremost_, which no other animal of its order can do.  It is
equally as fierce and carnivorous as any of the badgers; and its prey,
as with the _racoon_, consists of birds, their eggs, and small
quadrupeds.  It feeds also upon insects; and will turn over the earth
with its long proboscis-like snout.  When drinking it laps like the dog.
In eating, it uses its fore-paws to carry the food to its mouth, though
not as squirrels and monkeys do.  On the contrary, it first divides the
flesh, or whatever it may be, into small morsels, and then raises these
to its mouth by impaling them on its claws as on a fork!

It is not a solitary animal, but prefers the society of its companions,
and usually goes about in troops or gangs.  Its lair, like the racoon,
is the hollow of a tree.

The _Panda_ of the East Indies is an animal of very similar habits.  It
is found chiefly along the banks of streams that descend from the
mountains; and subsists upon small quadrupeds and birds--which it is
able to follow to the tops of the tallest trees.  Its name of Qua, or
Oua, or Wha, is derived from the cry which it utters, and repeats very
often; and which is well represented by any of the syllables above
written.



CHAPTER FIVE.

WEASELS, OTTERS AND CIVETS.

Fortunate it is that the quadrupeds composing this group are all animals
of small dimensions.  Were they equal in size to lions and tigers, the
human race would be in danger of total extirpation: for it is well-known
that weasels are the most ferocious and bloodthirsty creatures upon the
earth.  None of them, however, much exceed the size of the ordinary cat:
unless we include the gluttons and wolverenes among the weasels, as
naturalists sometimes do, notwithstanding that these animals differ
altogether from them.

The _civets_, it is true, are not usually classed with the weasels, but
form a group of themselves; however, they are much more nearly related
to weasels than the gluttons; and where, as in the present case, it is
desirable to divide the mammalia into large groups, they will stand very
well together.  In truth, the civets are much nearer in resemblance to
weasels than the otters are; and these two last are generally classed
together--the otters being neither more nor less than water weasels.

We shall first consider the true _Weasels_: that is, the Weasels,
Stoats, Ferrets, Polecats, and Martens.

The habits of most of the species are well-known; and all resemble each
other in the exceeding ferocity of their disposition.  It will only be
necessary to say a word about their geographical distribution, and to
speak of a few of the more noted kinds.

In Great Britain, five species are natives: the Pine and Beech Martens,
the Stoat, the Common Weasel (which is the type of the family), and the
Polecat.  The Ferret is not indigenous to the country, but has been
introduced from Africa, and is trained, as is well-known, for the
pursuit of the rabbit--which it can follow into the very innermost
recesses of its burrow.  The English species of weasels are also common
to other countries of Europe and Asia.

In the high northern latitudes of the Old World, we find a very
celebrated species--celebrated for a long time on account of its
valuable fur--the Sable.  The sable is a true marten: a tree-climber,
and one of the most sanguinary of weasels.  An account of its habits,
and of the mode of hunting it, forms one of the most interesting
chapters in natural history.

An allied species inhabits the Hudson's Bay territory, known as the
American sable, and another, belonging to the Japanese islands, is
called the Japan sable.

The Ermine is a species equally famous; and for a like reason--the value
of its beautiful white fur, so long an article of commerce.  The ermine
is neither more nor less than a stoat in winter dress; but there are
several varieties of it--some that turn to brown in summer, while
another kind retains its snow-white covering throughout all the year.
The ermine is common to Europe, Asia, and North America.

The Pekan is a larger species, belonging to North America, and
semi-aquatic in its habits; while the Vison, or Mink, is a large black
weasel that inhabits the borders of rivers in Canada and the United
States, where it preys upon fish and aquatic reptiles.

In North America there is also a very large Pine marten, so called from
its habit of dwelling in the pine forests--where it climbs the trees in
pursuit of birds and squirrels.  This is among the largest of the weasel
tribe.  In California, a new species has been described under the name
of the Yellow-cheeked weasel, and in Mexico another, the Black--faced;
so that North America has its full complement of these sanguinary
quadrupeds.  Nor is the southern division of that continent without its
weasels, as there is one species or more in New Granada, one in Guiana,
and two or three in Chili and Peru.

In India, there is the White-cheeked weasel, Hodgson's and Horsefield's
weasels; and in Nepaul, the Nepaul weasel, and the Cathia.  Further
north in Asia, there is, in Siberia, the Vomela, the Chorok, and the
Altai weasel of the Altai Mountains; and no doubt need exist that
animals of the weasel tribe are to be found everywhere.  Indeed, if we
regard as weasels the various carnivorous quadrupeds of the glutton and
badger family, which have been described elsewhere in these sketches--
including the strange Teledu or Stinkard of Java, the Helietis of India
and China, the Taira and Grison of Brazil, the Ratel or honey badger of
Africa, the Zorille of the Cape, the Zorilla or Maikel of Patagonia, the
Sand bear of India, and the numerous varieties of the celebrated
Polecat, or Skunk, of North and South America--we may well say that
there are weasels, or their representatives, in every hole and corner of
the earth.

With regard to the Polecats of America, they form a sort of link between
the weasels and civets; and although there was long supposed to be but
one kind--as in the case of the opossum--it is now ascertained that
there are several distinct species, with an endless list of varieties.

The _Water Weasels_, or _Otters_, are not so numerous either in species
or individuals--though there are at least a dozen of them in all, and
they are widely distributed over the world.

In Britain, there is but one--the Common or European otter; and in North
America, a very similar species was supposed, until recently, to be the
only one inhabiting that continent.  The rivers of California, however,
have presented us with a second, known as the Californian otter; and the
singular Sea otter, whose beautiful fur is so prized under the name of
Sea otter, is also an animal inhabiting the coasts of California--as it
does most part of the western seaboard of the American continent.

The Grey otter is a South African animal, and in India we have the
Wargul; while in the rivers of Nepaul--a country so rich in mammalia--
there is the Golden brown otter.  China, in common with other
Indo-Chinese countries, possesses the Chinese otter; and South America
has the Brazilian Contra, and in all probability several other species.

With regard to the _Civet-Weasels_--or Civet Cats, as they are commonly
called--there is a still greater variety, both in genera and species: so
many, indeed, that, as already stated, they have been arranged in a
family by themselves.  They may be regarded, however, as large weasels,
distinguished from the others by their having a sort of pouch or gland
under the tail, in which is secreted an unctuous and highly odorous
substance.  This, in some species, as in the true civets, is relished as
a perfume or scent, while in others it is an extremely disagreeable
odour.  The true civet is a native of North Africa; where it is kept in
a tame state, for the purpose of obtaining from it the well-known
perfume of commerce.  An allied species, the Rasse, belongs to Java--and
is there also kept in cages for the same purpose--while in Asia--from
Arabia to Malabar, and among the Malays and Arabs of Borneo, Macassar,
and other islands of the Indian Archipelago--still another species of
civet affords a similar perfumed substance.

The Aard Wolf (earth wolf) of South Africa is usually classed among the
civets, but with very slight reason.  It is far more like the hyena; and
is certainly nothing else than a hyena.

The Delundung of Java is a creature that bears a resemblance to the
civets; and may be regarded as forming a link between these and the true
cats.

The Genets constitute a division of the civet-weasel tribe; and one of
which there are numerous species.  They are usually pretty spotted
creatures, with immensely long tails; and but for their cruel and
sanguinary habits would, no doubt, be favourites.  They exist in South
Europe; and, under different forms and appellations, extend over all
Africa to Madagascar and the Cape--as well as through the countries of
Southern Asia and the Asiatic islands.

The Ichneumons claim our attention next.  These are celebrated animals,
on account of the strange and fabulous tales related of the species
known as the Egyptian ichneumon, which, among the people of Egypt, is
domesticated, and was once held as a sacred animal.  Besides the
Egyptian ichneumon, there are several other species in Africa--one
belonging to Abyssinia, and no less than six to the countries near the
Cape.  The Garangan of Java is an ichneumon; and so also are the Mongoos
and Nyula of Nepaul; while in the Malay peninsula is a species known as
the Malacca ichneumon.  The Paradoxure is usually classed with the
civets, though it wants the perfumed pouch; and the Suricate or
Meer-cat, of the Cape colonists, takes its station in this group.  A
badger-like animal of Madagascar, the Mangu, is also regarded as a
civet: so, too, are the Coatis of the New World, though these last are
evidently of much nearer kin to the badgers.

Perhaps the curious creature known as the Potto, or Kinkajou, has more
pretensions to a place among the civets: at all events, it deserves one
in the general group of the weasels.



CHAPTER SIX.

TAME DOGS.

Perhaps of all other animals the dog has been the earliest and most
constant companion of man.  His swiftness and strength, but more
especially his highly-developed power of smelling, have made him a
powerful ally against the other animals; and these qualities must have
attracted the attention of man at an early period--particularly in those
times when the chase was, perhaps, the only pursuit of mankind.

No animal is more widely distributed over the earth.  He has followed
man everywhere; and wherever human society exists, there this constant
and faithful attendant may be found--devoted to his master, adopting his
manners, distinguishing and defending his property, and remaining
attached to him even after death.

It is a question among naturalists as to what was the parent stock of
the dog.  Some allege that he has sprung from the wolf; others that he
is a descendant of the jackal; while not a few believe that there were
true wild dogs, from which the present domesticated race had their
origin.  These ideas are mere speculations, and not very reasonable ones
