   68. Why the Dog Turns Around Three Times Before Lying Down      164

   69. The Deathcup of Diablo                                      165

   70. The Poison Ivy, or the Three-fingered Demon of the Woods    169

   71. The Medicine in the Sky                                     170

   72. The Angel of the Night                                      172


  Things to Do

  _The Thinking Hand_

   73. Bird-nesting in Winter                                      177

   74. The Ox-eye Daisy or Marguerite                              179

   75. The Monkey-hunt                                             181

   76. The Horsetail and the Jungle                                185

   77. The Woods in Winter                                         186

   78. The Fish and the Pond                                       187

   79. Smoke Prints of Leaves                                      189

   80. Bird-boxes                                                  189

   81. A Hunter's Lamp                                             193

   82. The Coon Hunt                                               194

   83. The Indian Pot                                              195

   84. Snowflakes                                                  197

   85. Are you Alive? Farsight                                     199

   86. Are you Alive? Quicksight                                   200

   87. Are you Alive? Hearing                                      200

   88. Are you Alive? Feeling                                      201

   89. Are you Alive? Quickness                                    202

   90. Are you Alive? Guessing Length                              203

   91. Are you Alive? Aim or Limb-control                          204

   92. A Treasure Hunt                                             205

   93. Moving Pictures                                             205

   94. The Natural Autograph Album                                 207

   95. The Crooked Stick                                           208

   96. The Animal Dance of Nana-bo-jou                             209

   97. The Caribou Dance                                           212

   98. The Council Robe                                            216


  Things to Remember

  _The Winged Soul that Stores up Precious Memories._

   99. How the Wren Became King of the Birds                       221

  100. The Snowstorm                                               222

  101. The Fairy Lamps                                             223

  102. The Sweetest Sad Song in the Woods                          225

  103. Springtime, or the Wedding of Maka Ina and El Sol           227

  104. Running the Council                                         228

  105. The Sandpainting of the Fire                                229

  106. The Woodcraft Kalendar                                      231

  107. Climbing the Mountain                                       233

  108. The Omaha Prayer                                            235


  A List of Books by the Author                                    236




INTRODUCTION

_Mother Carey_


All-mother! Mater Cara! I have never seen you, but I hungered so to know
you that I understood it when you came, unseen, and silently whispered
to me that first time in the long ago.

I cannot tell the children what you look like, Mother Carey, for mortal
eye hath never rested on your face; and yet I can offer them a portrait,
O strong Angel of the Wild Things, neither young nor old--Oh! loving One
that neither trembles nor relents!

       *       *       *       *       *

A mink he was, a young mink and foolish. One of a happy brood, who were
seeing the world with their mother--a first glimpse of it. She was
anxious and leading, happy and proud, warning, sniffing, inviting,
loving, yet angersome at trivial disobedience, doling out her wisdom in
nips and examples and shrill warnings that all heeded; except this one,
the clever fool of the family, the self-satisfied smart one. He would
not be warned, the thing smelt so good. He plunged ahead. Mother was a
fool; he was wiser than Mother. Here was a merry feasting for him. Then
_clank_! The iron jaws of a trap sprang from the hiding grass, and
clutched on his soft young paws. Screams of pain, futile strainings,
writhings, ragings and moanings; bloody jaws on the trap; the mother
distraught with grief, eager to take all the punishment herself, but
helpless and stunned, unable to leave; the little brothers, aghast at
this first touch of passion, this glimpse of reality, skurrying, scared,
going and coming, mesmerized, with glowing eyes and bristling
shoulder-fur. And the mother, mad with sorrow, goaded by the screaming,
green-eyed, vacant-minded, despairing--till a new spirit entered into
her, the spirit of Cara the All-mother, Mother Carey the Beneficent,
Mother Carey the wise Straightwalker. Then the mother mink, inspired,
sprang on her suffering baby. With all the power of her limbs she sprang
and clutched; with all the power of her love she craunched. His screams
were ended; his days in the land were ended. He had not heeded her
wisdom; the family fool was finished. The race was better, better for
the suffering fool mink; better for the suffering mother mink.

The spirit left her; left her limp and broken-hearted. And away on the
wind went riding, grimly riding her empire.

Four swift steeds for riding, has she, the White Wind, the West Wind,
the Wet Wind and the Waking Wind. But mostly she rides the swift West
Wind.

She is strong, is Mother Carey, strong, wise, inexorable, calm and
direct as an iceberg. And beneficent; but she loves the strong ones
best. She ever favours the wise ones. She is building, ceaselessly
building. The good brick she sets in a place of honour, and the poor one
she grinds into gravel for the workmen to walk on.

She loves you, but far less than she does your race. It may be that you
are not wise, and if it seem best, she will drop a tear and crush you
into the dust.

Three others there be of power, like Mother Carey: Maka Ina who is
Mother Earth; El Sol, the Sun in the Sky, and Diablo the Evil Spirit of
Disease and Dread. But over all is the One Great Spirit, the Beginning
and the Ruler with these and many messengers, who do His bidding. But
mostly you shall hear of Mother Carey.

It is long ago since first I heard her whisper, and though I hear better
now than then, I have no happier memory than that earliest message.

"Ho Wayseeker," she called, "I have watched your struggle to find the
pathway, and I know that you will love the things that belong to it.
Therefore, I will show you the trail, and this is what it will lead you
to: a thousand pleasant friendships that will offer honey in little
thorny cups, the twelve secrets of the underbrush, the health of
sunlight, suppleness of body, the unafraidness of the night, the delight
of deep water, the goodness of rain, the story of the trail, the
knowledge of the swamp, the aloofness of knowing,--yea, more, a crown
and a little kingdom measured to your power and all your own.

"But there is a condition attached. When you have found a trail you are
thereby ordained a guide. When you have won a kingdom you must give it
to the world or lose it. For those who have got power must with it bear
responsibility; evade the one, the other fades away."

This is the pledge I am trying to keep; I want to be your Guide. I am
offering you my little kingdom.




THINGS TO SEE IN SPRINGTIME

[Illustration: Blue-eyes the Snow Child]




Things to See in Springtime


TALE 1

Blue-eyes, the Snow Child, or The Story of Hepatica

Have you ever seen El Sol, the Chief of the Wonder-workers, brother to
Mother Carey? Yes, you have, though probably you did not know it; at
least you could not look him in the face. Well, I am going to tell you
about him, and tell of a sad thing that happened to him, and to some one
whom he loved more than words can tell.

Tall and of blazing beauty was El Sol, the King of the Wonder-workers;
his hair was like shining gold, and stood straight out a yard from his
head, as he marched over the hilltops.

Everyone loved him, except a very few, who once had dared to fight him,
and had been worsted. Everyone else loved him, and he liked everybody,
without really loving them. Until one day, as he walked in his garden,
he suddenly came on a beautiful white maiden, whom he had never seen
before. Her eyes were of the loveliest blue, her hair was so soft that
it floated on the air, and her robe was white, covered with ferns done
in white lace.

He fell deeply in love with her at once, but she waved a warning hand,
when he tried to come near.

"Who are you, oh radiant princess? I love you even before I hear you
speak."

"I am Snowroba, the daughter of the great King Jackfrost," she said.

"I love you as I never loved any one. Will you marry me? I am the King
of the Wonder-workers. I will make you the Queen."

"No," said she, "I cannot marry you, for it is written that if one of my
people marry one of your people, she will sink down and die in a day."

Then El Sol was very sad. But he said, "May I not see you again?"

"Yes," she answered, "I will meet you here in the morning, for it is
pleasant to look on your beauty," and her voice tinkled sweetly.

So she met him in the morning, and again on the third morning. He loved
her madly now, and though she held back, he seized her in his arms and
kissed her tenderly.

Then her arms fell weakly to her sides, and her eyes half closed as she
said: "I know now that the old writing spake truth. I love you, I love
you, my love; but you have killed me."

And she sank down, a limp white form, on the leafy ground.

El Sol was wild with grief. He tried to revive her, to bring her back.

She only whispered, "Good-bye, my love. I am going fast. You will see me
no more, but come to this place a year from now. It may be Maka Ina will
be kind, and will send you a little one that is yours and mine."

Her white body melted away, as he bent over it and wept.

He came back every morning, but saw Snowroba no more. One year from that
day, as he lingered sadly over the sacred spot, he saw a new and
wonderful flower come forth. Its bloom was of the tenderest violet blue,
and it was full of expression. As he gazed, he saw those eyes again; the
scalding tears dropped from his eyes, and burned its leaves into a
blotched and brownish colour. He remembered, and understood her promise
now. He knew that this was their blue-eyed little one.

In the early springtime we can see it. Three sunny days on the edge of
the snowdrift will bring it forth. The hunterfolk who find it, say that
it is just one of the spring flowers, out earlier than any other, and is
called Liverleaf, but we Woodcrafters know better. We know it is
Hepatica, the child of El Sol and Snowroba.


TALE 2

The Story of the White Dawnsinger

or

How the Bloodroot Came

Have you noticed that there are no snow-white birds in our woods during
summer? Mother Carey long ago made it a rule that all snow-white
landbirds should go north, when the snow was gone in the springtime. And
they were quite obedient; they flew, keeping just on the south edge of
the melting snow.

But it so happened that one of the sweetest singers of all--the
snow-white Dawnsinger with the golden bill and the ruby legs--was flying
northward with his bride, when she sprained her wing so she could not
fly at all.

There was no other help for it; they must stay in that thicket till her
wing grew strong again.

The other white birds flew on, but the Dawnsinger waited. He sang his
merriest songs to cheer her. He brought her food: and he warned her when
enemies were near.

A moon had come and gone. Now she was well again, and strong on the
wing. He was anxious to go on to their northern home. A second warning
came from Mother Carey, "White birds go north."

But the sunny woodside had become very pleasant, food was abundant, and
the little white lady said, "Why should we go north when it is so much
nicer right here?"

The Dawnsinger felt the same way, and the next time the warning came,
"White birds go north," he would not listen at all, and they settled
down to a joyful life in the woods.

They did not know anything about the Yellow-eyed Whizz. They never would
have known, had they gone north at their right time. But the Yellow-eyed
Whizz was coming. It came, and It always goes straight after white
things in the woods, for brown things It cannot see.

Dawnsinger was high on a tree, praising the light in a glorious song,
that he had just made up, when It singled him out by his whiteness, and
pierced him through.

He fell fluttering and dying; and as she flew to him, with a cry of
distress, the Yellow-eyed wicked Whizz struck her down by his side.
