"Sorry to say I can't," replied the other, calmly now, and with an air
of business about him that inspired Bristles to conquer his own
weakness. "My eyes have been so used to the sun that it looks as black
as a pocket down in this well. But perhaps he might answer a call."

"Give the poor fellow a hail, then, Fred, please. Just think how he
must have suffered, hollering all this time, with nobody to help him
out," and Bristles, who really had a very tender heart himself, leaned
over the curbing of the well.

"Be careful not to push one of these big stones in, or you'll finish the
poor fellow," warned Fred; and then bending low he called out very
loudly: "Hello! down there! We want to help you get out. Are you badly
hurt?"

"Oh! I don't know, but I'm so cold. Please hurry, or I'll die!" came in
a faint voice from far below.

"Good gracious!" gasped Bristles; "did you hear that, Fred?"

"I certainly did," replied the other.

"But--the voice; it was a woman's or a girl's!" continued the amazed
Bristles.

"Just what I thought; and that makes it all the more necessary that
something be done in a hurry to get her out. That rope looks pretty
sound; doesn't it, Bristles?"

"What do you mean to do now, Fred; go down there?" and the boy shuddered
as he looked at the gaping hole.

"Somebody's got to, and what's the matter with my doing it?" Fred
demanded. "I'll tell you what to do while I'm sliding down the rope;
just carefully take away all these loose stones, so none of 'em can drop
on top of me. And, Bristles, when I give the word, buckle down to turn
that windlass for all you're worth!"

"I'll do it, Fred. Gosh! if it don't take you to think of things that
wouldn't come to me in a thousand years. Say, he's gone, as quick as
that! I guess I'll get busy with these stones."

Fred was indeed already slipping carefully down the rope. He believed it
was fairly new, and could easily sustain the weight of himself, and
another as well, if only the stout Bristles could turn the handle of the
windlass long enough to bring them to the top.

Once below the region of sunlight his eyes began to grow more accustomed
to the surrounding gloom. He could make out the rough stones all about
him that went to form the well itself.

Then he stopped, wondering if he must not be pretty nearly down to the
water. The rope still went on, and he could hear what seemed like heavy
breathing not far away.

Bristles was working like a beaver above, taking away the loose stones,
but exercising great care so that not even a bit of loose earth, or
mortar, should fall down the shaft to alarm his chum.

"Hello! where are you, below?"

"Close by you now. Oh! do you think you can get me up again, mister?"
came in a quavering voice.

Fred let himself slip down a little further, inch by inch as it were. He
was afraid of striking the one who must be clinging to the rope below,
undoubtedly chilled to the bone, and sick with fear.

Even at that moment the boy was filled with amazement, and could not
imagine how a girl could have gotten into such a strange situation. But
his first duty was to get her out.

Ten seconds later and he could feel her beside him.

"Don't be afraid, we'll get you on dry land in a jiffy," he said, as
cheerfully as possible. "Can you hold on to the rope if my friend turns
the windlass? I'll do all I can to help you. If only the bucket could be
used for you to stand on! It's the only way to work it, I guess."

"Yes, yes, anything you say, I'll do, mister. Oh! what if they have hurt
him, and me such a coward as to run away like I did and hide. But pop
made me, he just said I must. He'll tell you that same, mister, if so be
he's alive yet."

The girl said this in broken sentences. She was almost in a state of
complete collapse, and Fred knew that unless he hurried to get her up
where she could obtain warmth, she would be a dead weight on his hands.

"Hello! Bristles!" he called out.

"Yes; what d'ye want, Fred? Shall I begin to wind up?" came from above,
accompanied by the musical clank of the iron brake falling over the cogs
that were intended to hold it firmly, and prevent a slip, should the one
at the handle let go suddenly.

"Go slow, Bristles, and stop when you hear me shout!"

"O. K. Fred; slow she is! Are you coming now?"

Fred had felt the rope slip through his hands inch by inch. He was
feeling with his dangling feet for the bucket, and presently discovered
it.

"Hold on till I tilt the bucket, and empty out the water; we have to use
it to stand on as you pull us up!" he shouted.

With more or less difficulty he managed to accomplish this task. It
would relieve Bristles considerably; and even as it was, the straining
boy up there would have a tremendous task ahead of him, raising two
persons at a time.

Fred threw his arm around the girl, whom he could just dimly make out.
She clung wildly to him, as though realizing that all her hopes of
getting out of this strange prison rested in the boy who had come down
the rope so daringly.

"Now once again, old fellow, and do your level best!" Fred sang out.

So they went up, foot by foot. He held the girl in a tight clasp, and
kept hoping the rope would not break, or any other accident happen.
Bristles was tugging wildly away at the handle of the windlass,
doubtless with his teeth set hard together, and every muscle of his body
in play.

Now they were close to the top, and Fred called out, to caution his chum
to slacken his violent efforts.

So once again Fred's eyes came above the curbing of the old well, and he
found Bristles, panting for breath, but eager to assist still further in
the work of rescue.

"Reach down," Fred said, quietly, wishing to calm the other; "and get
your arms around her, if you can; then lift for all you're worth! She
isn't heavy, only her clothes are soaked with water. There you are, and
well done, old chap!"

Bristles had actually plucked the girl from the grasp of the boy who had
to cling to the rope with one hand; she was already placed upon the
ground, while he turned to assist Fred, starting to climb out unaided.

But the girl had not fainted, as Fred suspected. She was now on her
knees, and trying to get upon her feet.

"Oh! what can have happened to him?" she muttered.

"Who is it you are talking about?" asked Bristles.

"My poor sick father," she replied. "They came in on us, and made me get
a meal. Then they began to hunt all over the house for money, just as if
we ever had any such thing hidden. Oh! the terrible threats they made;
father was afraid for me, and ordered me to watch out for the first
chance to run away, to go to the nearest neighbor for help; but he lives
two miles away. I was afraid to leave the place, because I thought they
might set the house on fire. So I tried to hide just below the curbing
of the well; but the brake wasn't set, and I went down with the bucket.
I might have drowned, only I held on all these hours, hoping and
fearing. Oh! I wonder if he is still alive!"

"Who was it came and did these things?" asked Fred, indignantly.

"Three tramps; and they were bad men, too," she replied, starting toward
the old farmhouse, where the door stood open. A few whiffs of smoke
curled up from the chimney, yet there was no sign of life.

And, wondering what they would find there, the two boys strode along
beside her, ready to catch her should she show signs of falling. But a
great hope seemed to sustain the girl they had rescued from the well.




CHAPTER IV

FRED GETS A SHOCK


"Shall we follow, Fred?" asked Bristles, a little dubiously it must be
confessed.

The girl had darted eagerly through the open doorway.

"That's the program," replied the leading boy; and with these words he
immediately crossed the doorsill.

The interior of the cottage was not any too well lighted, for the shades
of the windows were partly down. Fred saw at a glance, however, that a
hurried and thorough search had been made by the three tramps, when they
thought to find something of value in the lonely farmhouse.

All manner of articles had been thrown recklessly about, drawers
emptied, and even chairs overturned as they sought to turn up the edges
of the scanty carpet, under the old belief that family treasures are
generally secreted either there or between the mattresses of the bed.

Voices in an adjoining room gave Fred a reassuring sensation. Then the
sick man had not passed away, as his daughter seemed to have feared;
for while one of the voices was undoubtedly that of the girl, the other
belonged to a man. It was weak and complaining, however, as might be
expected, under the circumstances.

So Fred, again followed by Bristles, lost no time in passing through the
first room, and entering the adjoining one. A glance showed him a bed
upon which a thin-faced man was lying. The girl was gently stroking his
forehead with considerable affection, murmuring endearing terms.

At the entrance of the two boys, however, the sick man started half up
in bed. He stared at them in utter amazement, nor could Fred blame him.
After the experience through which he had recently passed, the sick man
must almost believe he was losing his senses, to see two lads in running
costume burst in upon him.

"What! who are these, daughter?" he exclaimed. "I sent you for help, to
get our German neighbor, Johann Swain, and you come back after all these
hours bringing freaks from a circus. But at least they do not look as
bad as those terrible tramps."

Bristles laughed outright at this.

"I hope not, sir," he could not help saying, before Fred could utter a
word; "you see, we're only a couple of boys from Riverport, engaged in a
cross-country run; and we're mightily glad to be on hand in time to
help you and--your girl."

"But what makes your dress so wet, child; and you are shivering like a
leaf? Don't tell me that you fell into the river?" the sick man asked,
turning his attention upon his daughter once more, now that he realized
there was nothing to be feared from the two strangers.

"No," she replied, soothingly; "when you sent me away I could not leave
you alone with those dreadful men; so, meaning to hide just below the
curbing of the well, I took hold of the rope; but the windlass was free,
and I fell in."

"And you have been there all this time!" cried the man, reproachfully;
"while I lay here, recovering my strength, and expecting you to come
every minute with help. Oh! if I had but heard you call, nothing could
have prevented me from crawling out to rescue you, child. And did these
boys get you out?"

"Yes, and we owe them more than we can ever pay, father," she replied,
warmly; "for I could not have held on much longer; and the water was
deep enough to drown a helpless girl."

"Oh! Sarah, child! what a blessing that they came!" exclaimed the man,
thrusting a weak and trembling hand out, first toward Fred, whom he saw
was wet, and somehow guessed must have borne the brunt of the rescue;
and then repeating the act with regard to Bristles.

The sick man asked Fred a number of questions. As a rule these concerned
his daughter, and in what condition they had found the poor girl at the
bottom of the well; but he also seemed anxious as to whether they had
seen anything of the three tramps.

"One of them was terribly enraged when they failed to find even a dollar
for their pains, and I assured him I did not have such a thing to my
name," the aged man said, almost pathetically, Fred thought. "He would
have struck me with the poker, as he threatened to do, only his
companions held his arm. I have been in mortal fear that he might
return."

"No danger of that sir," Fred went on to say; and already in his mind he
was determined that some of the good people of Riverport should quickly
know about the sick man and his devoted daughter, who lived in such a
lonely place, and were almost at the point of starvation.

"I used to have a man who worked on shares with me," the other
continued, as though he thought some explanation was due to account for
the situation; "but he changed his mind suddenly this summer past, and
left me alone. I might have managed, only for this sickness. Sarah has
tried to do everything, but, poor child, she was unable to take care of
me and the farm too. So it has come to this, and my heart is nearly
broken worrying about her."

"Never mind, it will be all right, sir," Fred continued to assure him.
"We are from Riverport, and we know a lot of good people there who will
be only too glad to do everything they can for you. It is not charity,
you see, but just what one neighbor ought to be ready to do for
another."

For his years, Fred was wise; he realized that this man undoubtedly had
more or less pride, and might hesitate to accept assistance when he had
no means of returning favors.

To his surprise the other started, and looked keenly at him.

"Riverport, you say, young man?" he muttered. "I don't seem to know you.
Might I ask your name, please?"

"Fred Fenton, sir. But as we only came to the place a year ago last
spring, of course you wouldn't be apt to know me."

"No, I haven't been in Riverport for quite a number of years. We do what
little trading we have in Grafton, which is just as near, though not so
large a town. But you spoke of interesting some people in our condition.
For her sake I would even sink my pride and accept their help. But you
must make me one promise, boy!"

"As many as you like, sir; what might this particular one be?" asked
Fred, cheerfully.

"Don't, under any circumstances, let Sparks Lemington have anything to
do with the assistance you bring me; or I would utterly refuse to touch
the slightest thing, even if we both starved for it!" was the
astonishing reply of the sick man, as a look of anger showed in his
face, and he shut his jaws hard.

Evidently, then, he had some good cause for detesting the rich and
unscrupulous Squire Lemington. Well, Fred found reason to believe there
were a good many others besides this farmer who felt the same.

"Oh! Fred, come out here!" called Bristles, just then, before Fred could
ask any further questions.

Believing that his chum might be having some difficulty in finding
things, and wanted help, Fred hurried into the adjoining room, which was
the kitchen. There was also a dining room next, which they had entered
first, and apparently a couple of sleeping rooms up stairs, for the girl
had gone above.

Bristles was busily engaged. He had succeeded in getting a fire started,
and was rummaging through a cupboard, looking for eatables. Accustomed
to seeing a well stocked larder in his own home, Bristles was shocked at
the lack of everything a hungry boy would think ought to be found in a
kitchen pantry.

"Shucks, Fred," he remarked, in a low voice, for the door between the
rooms was open a trifle. "There isn't enough stuff here to feed a canary
bird, let alone two human beings. Why, whatever do they live on? They
must be as poor as Job's turkey. I can't just place that man, somehow;
seems as if I must have known him once; but he's changed a heap. Help me
skirmish around for some grub; won't you?"

Fred was perfectly willing, and proceeded to search until he had
discovered part of a loaf of home-made bread, and the coffee that was so
necessary to warm the poor girl. There was a strip of bacon a few inches
thick, some flour, grits--and these were about all.

Just then Bristles came over to where he was putting the coffee in the
pot.

"I've just remembered who that sick man is, Fred!" he said, in a low
tone, but with a vein of satisfaction in it, for he had been racking his
memory all the while.

"Who is he, then?" Fred asked, a bit eagerly.

"Why," Bristles went on, "you see, his name is Masterson!"




CHAPTER V

HOW GOOD SPRANG FROM EVIL


"Masterson, did you say, Bristles?" Fred asked, hurriedly, as he closed
the communicating door between the two rooms, and came back to the side
of his chum.

"Yep, that's it," replied the other, briskly, proud of having solved
what promised to be a puzzle. "He used to live in Riverport years ago,
when I was a kid; he and his girl Sarah."

"Is he any relation to Squire Lemington, do you know?" asked Fred.

"Sure, that's a fact, he is; a nephew, I reckon," answered Bristles,
thoughtfully. "I remember there was some sort of talk about this Arnold
Masterson; I kind of think he got in a fuss with the Squire, and there
was a lawsuit. But shucks, that don't matter to us, Fred, not a whit.
These people are up against it, hard as nails, and we've just _got_ to
do something for 'em when we get back."

"That's right, we will," asserted Fred.

He was thinking hard as he said this. Was it not a strange thing that
he should in this way place another Masterson under heavy obligations?
He had done Hiram a good turn that won the gratitude of the man from
Alaska; and now here it was a brother and a niece who had cause for
thanking him.

Perhaps there was something more than accident in this. If Hiram ever
did return, which Fred was almost ready to doubt, he would be apt to
hear about what had happened at the lonely farmhouse; and if he cared at
all for his folks, his debt must be doubled by the kind deed of the
Fenton boy.

"And believe me," Bristles went on, not noticing the way Fred was
pondering over the intelligence he had just communicated; "we just can't
get busy collecting some grub for this poor family any too soon. Why,
they're cleaned out, that's what! Never knew anybody could live from
hand to mouth like this. Why couldn't they get that German farmer, who
lives a mile or two away, to haul some stuff from Grafton, if the girl
couldn't walk there?"

"You forget that the man said he didn't have even a dollar, when those
tramps threatened to torture him, to make him tell where he had his
treasure; and Bristles, it takes cold cash to buy things these days. Old
Dog Trust is dead, the merchants say. But hurry that coffee along.
Hello! here's a part of a can of condensed milk, and some sugar. That's
good!"

Fred went into the other room about that time; for hearing voices, he
imagined the girl must have put on some dry clothes hurriedly, and once
more descended to be with her sick father.

She looked better, Fred thought, and there was even a slight color in
her cheeks. He was afraid, however, of what the long exposure might
bring, and determined that Doctor Temple must hear of the case. A little
care right then might be the means of warding off a severe illness.

"Please go in the kitchen, and stand near the stove all you can, miss,"
he said.

"But I am not cold any longer," she replied, giving him a smile that
told of the gratitude in her heart.

"You need all the warmth you can get," he insisted. "As soon as the
coffee is ready, you must swallow a cup or two of it, piping hot. And I
think it would do your father good, too."

Accordingly, as there seemed to be a vein of authority in his voice, the
girl complied. She found that the coffee was already beginning to
simmer, and send out a fragrant smell; for Bristles had made a furious
fire, regardless of consequences.

"Hope I don't burn your house down, Sarah," he said. "Excuse me, but I
used to know you a long time ago, when you lived in Riverport. My name
is Bris--that is, at home they call me Andy Carpenter."

"Oh! I do remember you now," she replied, quickly; "but it is so long
ago. Father never mentions Riverport any more; he seems to hate the
name. I think some one wronged him there, and it must have been my
uncle, because every time I happened to speak of him, he would grow
angry, and finally told me never to mention that name again. But you
have made this coffee very strong, Andy."

"Fred told me to; he said you both needed it," answered the boy. "And I
wouldn't worry if I was you, because I used up all there is. We're going
to see that more comes along this way, and that before night."

"Oh! it makes me feel ashamed to think that we are going to be objects
of charity," the girl commenced to say, when Bristles stopped her.

"Now, that isn't it at all, Sarah!" he declared, with vehemence; "your
pa is a sick man, and unless he gets a doctor soon you may lose him. So
I'd just pocket that pride of yours, and let the neighbors do what they
want. And if you've been fleeced by that shark of a Squire Lemington,
why, there are a lot of others in the same fix. I'd like to see them run
him out of town; but he owns a heap of property around Riverport, and
that would be hard to do, I suppose. Say, don't that coffee smell good
though; you know the kind to get, seems like."

"Johann Swain brought that over the last time he came," she replied,
somewhat confused on account of having to make the confession that they
were already indebted to another for favors.

When the coffee was done Fred came out and secured a cup of it for the
sick man; while Sarah sat down at the kitchen table to drink her
portion. Bristles was almost famishing for a taste, but he would not
have accepted the first drop, had it smelled twice as good.

After making the two as comfortable as possible, the two boys once more
prepared to start on their run toward home. Of course they must expect
to come in the very last of all, owing to all these delays; but it was
little they cared.

"Expect company before long," sang out Bristles, as, having shaken hands
with the sick man and Sarah, they turned to wave farewell to the girl,
standing in the open door, and with something approaching a smile on her
wan face.

Fred made a proposition before they had gone more than fifty yards.

"What's the use of our finishing, Bristles?" he remarked. "We're
hopelessly beaten right now. Suppose we head for home, and get busy
going around to speak to a few of our friends about these people here.
I want Doc. Temple to come out; and I know Flo will insist on it when
she hears about that poor girl."

"Three to one she comes with him; and that the buggy is crammed full of
all the good things they've got at home," asserted Bristles; "because
there never was a girl with a bigger heart than Flo."

Fred was of the same opinion himself, though he only nodded, and smiled.

"You see your father, and then drop in to talk it over with several
others," he went on to say. "Leave Judge Colon for me. I want to ask him
a few questions about what happened between Arnold Masterson and his
rich uncle, to make Sarah's father hate him so, and avoid Riverport in
the bargain."

When they arrived home the boys quickly changed their clothes, and then
started in to tell the story of their recent remarkable experience.
Fred, first of all, enlisted the good will of his own mother, who
hurried over to another neighbor to start the ball rolling, with the
idea of having a wagon with supplies sent out to the Masterson farm that
very afternoon.

His visit to the Temple home was a pleasant affair with Fred. Just as he
had expected, Flo was immediately concerned about the family, and asked
numerous questions while they were waiting for the genial old doctor to
come in at noon from his morning round of sick calls.

Then the doctor drove up, and as soon as he entered the house heard
Fred's amazing story. He was quite concerned about it.

"Of course I'll go out there the first thing after lunch, and bring them
both through, if I can," he declared, just as Fred had expected would be
the case. "Those tramps ought to be followed up, and caged; they're
getting bolder every day. I expect that some fine morning we'll find our
bank broken open, or else somebody kidnapped, and held for a ransom."

"And I'm going along with you, daddy," said Miss Temple, with an air
that announced the fact that she usually had her own way with her
parent.

"Did you know this Arnold Masterson, sir; and is he a nephew of the
Squire?" asked the boy.

"Yes, to both of your questions, Fred," replied the doctor. "Years back
there was a quarrel between them, and a lawsuit that went against
Arnold, who disappeared soon afterward. I did not know he still lived
within five miles of Riverport, because he is never seen on the streets
here. But he was an honest man, which is more than some people think can
be said of his rich uncle."

That was all Fred wanted to know, and he took his departure, well
satisfied with the way fortune had treated him that morning.

Later on he heard that the people of Riverport had carried enough
supplies out to the Masterson farm to last until Christmas. And Doctor
Temple reported that not only would Sarah escape any ill results from
her experience in the cold waters of the well, but the sick man was
going to come around, in time, all right.




CHAPTER VI

THE NEWS CORNEY BROUGHT


The big roller-skating rink had been turned into a splendid gymnasium
for the boys and girls of Riverport school; for certain days were to be
set aside when the latter should have their turn at basketball and
kindred athletic exercises, calculated to make them healthier, and
better fitted for their studies.

The headmaster of the school, Professor Brierley, was very much
delighted with the way things had gone. He was an advocate of all
healthful sports, when not carried to excess. And this spirit which had
been awakened in Riverport, was bound, he believed, to make for the
betterment of the town in every way.

"Perhaps there'll be less work for Dr. Temple," he remarked, at a
meeting of the best citizens, when the gymnasium was handed over to the
school trustees; "because there'll be far less sickness among our young
people. Though possibly a few accidents, as the result of indiscretion
in exercising too violently, may make amends to our physicians."

Meanwhile the young athletes belonging to Riverport school had been as
busy as the proverbial bee. Saturdays were devoted to all sorts of work,
each class being represented by aspiring claimants for honors.

And when the really deserving ones had finally been selected to do their
best for the honor of the school, everyone watched their work with
pride, and the hope that they might make the highest pole vault, the
longest running jump, the quickest time in the hundred yards,
quarter-mile, half mile and five mile races known to amateur athletic
meets in that part of the country at least.

Merchants talked with their customers about the coming tournament; and
the mildest looking women, whom no one would suspect of knowing the
least thing about such affairs, surprised others with their store of
knowledge.

The bookstore in town where sporting goods were kept did a land-office
business during those days, and had to duplicate their orders to
wholesalers frequently.

Stout business men were buying exercisers to fasten to the bathroom
doors; or perhaps dumb-bells and Indian clubs, calculated to take off a
certain number of pounds of fat. Others boasted of how deftly they were
beginning to hit the punching bag; and how much enjoyment the exercise,
followed by a cold shower bath, gave them.

Representatives from Mechanicsburg, who wandered down to get a few
