"Did you speak, sir?" said Maryann, bridling.

"No, oh! no, not by no means," replied Richards, "only the crust o' this
'ere toast is rayther 'ard, and I'm apt to growl w'en that's so."

"If the crust is 'ard, Mr Richards, your teeth is 'arder, so you ought
to scrunch 'em without growling."

"Brayvo, my dear," exclaimed Larry, coming to the rescue; "you're more
nor match for him, so be marciful, like a good sowl, an' let's hear
about this estate, for it seems to me, from what I've heard, it must be
somewhere in the neighbourhood of Bunco's native place."

Maryann, darting a look of mingled defiance and triumph at Richards, who
became more than ever devoted to the toast and bacon, proceeded--

"Well, as I was a-sayin', I 'eard Mrs Osten say to Master Will that his
uncle Edward--as was a scape somethin' or other--had died an' left a
small estate behind the Rocky Mountains in Ameriky or Afriky, I aint
sure which."

"Ameriky, my dear," observed Larry.

"An' she said as 'ow they 'ad discovered gold on it, which could be
picked up in 'andfuls, an' it was somewhere near a place called Kally
somethin'--"

"Calliforny?" cried Larry.

"Yes, that was it."

"I towld ye that, Bunco!" exclaimed the Irishman, becoming excited; "go
on, dear."

"Well, it seems there's some difficulties in the matter, wich I'm sure
don't surprise _me_, for I never 'eard of things as 'ad to do with
estates and law as didn't create difficulties, and I'm thankful as I've
got nothin' to do with none of such things.  Well, the end of it all is
that, w'en master was dyin', he made missis swear as she'd urge Master
Will to go to see after things hisself, an' missis, poor dear, she would
rather let the estate and all the gold go, if she could only keep the
dear boy at 'ome, but she's faithful to her promise, an' advises him to
go--the sooner the better--because that would let him come back to her
all the quicker.  Master Will, he vowed at first that he would never
more leave her, and I b'lieve he was in earnest, but when she spoke of
his father's wish, he gave in an' said he would go, if she thought it
his dooty so for to do."

"Hooray!" shouted Larry, jumping up at this point, and performing a
species of war-dance for a few moments, and then sitting down and
demanding another supply of tea.  "Didn't I tell ye, Bunco, that the
order would soon be up anchor an' away again!  It's Wanderin' Will he's
been named, an' Wanderin' Will he'll remain, that's as plain as the nose
on me face."

"No doubt the nose on your face is very plain--the plainest I ever did
see," said Maryann sharply,--"but you're quite wrong about Master Will,
for he's very anxious to get married, I can tell you, an' wants to
settle down at 'ome, like a sensible man, though it does grieve my 'eart
to think of the creetur as has took him in in furrin parts."

"Get married!" exclaimed Larry, Jemima, and Richards in the same breath.

"Yes, get married," replied Maryann, very full of the importance of her
keyhole discoveries, and not willing to make them known too readily.

"How did you come to know that, Maryhann?" asked Jemima; "are you sure
of it?"

"How I came for to know it," replied the other, "is nobody's business
(she paused a moment and looked sternly at Richards, but that sensible
man continued to gaze steadfastly at his plate and to `scrunch' crusts
with grave abstraction), and, as to its bein' true, all I can say is I
had it from his own lips.  Master Will has no objection to my knowing
what he tells his mother--as no more he shouldn't, for Jemimar, you can
bear me witness that I've been a second mother to him, an' used to love
him as if he were my own--though he _was_ a aggrawatin' hinfant, an'
used to bump his 'ead, an' skin his knees, an' tear his clothes, an' wet
his feet, in a way that often distracted me, though I did my very best
to prevent it; but nothink's of any use tryin' of w'en you can't do it;
as my 'usband, as was in the mutton-pie line, said to the doctor the
night afore he died--my 'eart used to be quite broke about him, so it
did; but that's all past an' gone--well, as I was a-sayin', Master Will
he told his mother as 'ow there was a young lady (so he called her) as
'ad won his 'art, an' she was a cannibal as lived on a coal island in
the Paphysic Ocean.  Then he told her some stories about the coal island
as made my blood run cold, and said his Flora behaved like a heroine in
the midst of it all."

At this point Larry and Bunco exchanged meaning glances, and the former
gave vent to a soft whistle, which he accompanied with a wink.

"I'm sure," continued Maryann, "it's past my comprehension; for instead
of being dreadfully shocked, as I had expected, Mrs Osten threw her
arms round Master Will's neck and blessed him and the cannibal, too, and
said she hoped to be spared to see 'em united, though she wouldn't like
them to remain on the coal island in the Paphysic.  I do assure you,
Jemimar," continued Maryann, putting the corner of her apron to her
eyes, "it quite gave me a turn, and I was nearly took bad w'en I 'eard
it.  Master Will, he made his mother promise to keep it to herself, as,
he said, not a soul in the world knew of it but him and her--"

Mr Richards coughed at this point, and appeared to be engaged in a
severe conflict with an untractable crust, which caused Maryann to stop
suddenly and look at him.  But Larry again came to the rescue by
saying--

"Why, Maryann, my dear, ye've bin an' mistook a good deal of what you've
heard, intirely.  This Flora Westwood is no cannibal, but wan o' the
purtiest bit craturs I iver had the good luck to set eyes on; as white
as a lily, wid cheeks like the rose, not to spake of a smile an' a
timper of an angel.  She's a parson's daughter, too, an' lives on a
coral island in the Pacific Ocean, where the people is cannibals, no
doubt, as I've good raison to know, for they ait up a lot o' me
shipmates, and it was by good luck they didn't ait up myself and Master
Will too--though I do belaive they'd have found me so tough that I'd
have blunted their teeth an' soured on their stummicks, bad luck to
them.  But it's surprised that I am to hear about this.  Ah, then,
Master Will, but ye're a sly dog--more cunnin' than I took ye for.  Ye
threw dust in the eyes of Larry O'Hale, anyhow."

Poor Maryann appeared much relieved by this explanation, although she
felt it to be consistent with her dignity that she should throw
considerable doubt on Larry's statement, cross-question him pretty
severely, and allow herself to be convinced only after the accumulation
of an amount of evidence that could not be resisted.

"Well, now, that accounts for the way in which his mother received the
news," said Maryann.

"It is a strange story," remarked Jemima.

"Uncommon," observed Richards.

Bunco said nothing, but he grinned from ear to ear.

At that moment, as if it were aware of the climax at which the party had
arrived, the baby, without a single note of warning, set up a hideous
howl, in the midst of which the bell rang, and Maryann rose to answer
it.

"Master Will wants to speak to you, Mr Hale, and to Mr Bunco, too,"
she said on returning.

"Come along, _Mister_ Bunco," said Larry, "that'll be the order to trip
our anchors."

"My friends," said Will Osten, when the two were seated on the corners
of their respective chairs in the drawing-room, "I sent for you to say
that circumstances have occurred which render it necessary that I should
visit California.  Do you feel inclined to join me in this trip, or do
you prefer to remain in England?"

"I'm yer man," said Larry.

"So's me," added Bunco.

"I thought so," said Will, smiling; "we have been comrades together too
long to part yet.  But I must start without delay, and mean to go by the
plains and across the Rocky Mountains.  Are you ready to set off on
short notice?"

"In half an hour av ye plaze, sur," said Larry.

Bunco grinned and nodded his head.

"The end of the week will do," said Will, laughing; "so be off and make
your preparations for a long and rough trip."

In pursuance of this plan, Will Osten and his two staunch followers,
soon after the date of the above conversation, crossed the Atlantic,
traversed the great Lakes of Canada to the centre of North America,
purchased, at the town of Saint Pauls, horses, guns, provisions, powder,
shot, etcetera, for a long journey, and found themselves, one beautiful
summer evening, galloping gaily over those wide prairies that roll
beyond the last of the backwood settlements, away into the wild recesses
of the Western Wilderness.



CHAPTER TWO.

DESCRIBES A BURST OVER THE WESTERN PRAIRIE, AND INTRODUCES A NEW
CHARACTER, ALSO A HUNT, AND A GREAT FEAST.

Wandering Will and his companions laid the reins on the necks of their
half-tamed horses and galloped wildly away over the western prairie.
Perhaps it was the feeling of absolute freedom from human restraints
that excited them to the galloping and shouting condition of maniacs;
perhaps it was the idea of sweeping over unbounded space in these
interminable plains, or the influence of the fresh air around, the sunny
blue sky overhead, and the flower-speckled sward underfoot--perhaps it
was all these put together, but, whatever the cause, our three
travellers commenced their journey at a pace that would have rendered
them incapable of further progress in a few hours had they kept it up.
Their state of mind was aptly expressed, at the end of one of these wild
flights, by Larry, who exclaimed, as he reined in--

"Ah, then, it's flyin' I'll be in a minit.  Sure av I only had a pair o'
wings no bigger than a sparrow's, I cud do it aisy."

"Yoo's a goose, Larry," observed Bunco.

"Faix if I was it's mesilf as would fly away an' lave you to waller on
the dirty earth ye belongs to," retorted the other.

"Dirty earth!" echoed Will Osten, gazing round on the plains of bright
green grass that waved in the soft air with something like the gentle
heavings of the sea.  "Come, let's have another!"

They stretched out again at full gallop and swept away like the wind
itself.

"Hooroo!" shouted Larry O'Hale, wildly throwing out both arms and rising
in his stirrups; "look here, Bunco, I'm goin' to fly, boy!"

Larry didn't mean to do so, but he _did_ fly!  His horse put its foot in
a badger-hole at that moment and fell.  The rider, flying over its head,
alighted on his back, and remained in that position quite motionless,
while his alarmed comrades reined up hastily and dismounted.

"Not hurt, I hope," said Will, anxiously.

"Och! ha! gintly, doctor, take me up tinderly," gasped the poor man as
they raised him to the perpendicular position, in which he stood for
nearly a minute making very wry faces and slowly moving his shoulders
and limbs to ascertain whether any bones were fractured.

"I do belave I'm all right," he said at length with a sigh of relief;
"have a care, Bunco, kape yer paws off, but take a squint at the nape o'
me neck an' see if me back-bone is stickin' up through me shirt-collar."

"Me no can see him," said the sympathetic Bunco.

"That's a blissin' anyhow.  I only wish ye cud _feel_ him, Bunco.
Doctor, dear, did ye iver see stars in the day-time?"

"No, never."

"Then ye'd better make a scientific note of it in yer book, for I see
'em at this good minit dancin' about like will-o'-the-wisps in a bog of
Ould Ireland.  There, help me on to the back o' the baste--bad luck to
the badgers, say I."

Thus muttering to himself and his comrades, half exasperated by the
stunning effects of his fall, yet rather thankful to find that no real
damage was done, Larry remounted, and all three continued their journey
with not much less enjoyment, but with abated energy.

Thus much for the beginning.  Availing ourselves of an author's
privilege to annihilate time and space at pleasure, we change the scene.
The three travellers are still riding over the same prairie, but at the
distance of a hundred miles or so from the spot where the accident above
described took place.

It was evening.  The sun was gradually sinking in the west--far beyond
that "far west" to which they had penetrated.  The wanderers looked
travel-stained, and appeared somewhat fatigued, while their horses
advanced with slow steps and drooping heads.  Two pack-horses, which had
been procured by them with an additional supply of necessaries at a
solitary fort belonging to the fur-traders of that region, were driven
by Larry, whose voice and action seemed to indicate that he and they
were actuated by different sentiments and desires.

"Of all the lazy bastes," he exclaimed, giving one of the horses a
tremendous cut over the flank that startled it into temporary life, "I
iver did see--but, och! what's the use--there's niver a dhrop o' wather
in this wilderness.  We may as well lie down an' die at wance."

"Hush, Larry," said Will Osten, "don't talk lightly of dying."

"Lightly is it?  Well, now, there's nothin' light about me from the sole
o' me fut to the top o' the tallest hair on me head, an' the heaviest
part about me is the heart, which feels like lead intirely.  But cheer
up, Larry, yer owld grandmother always said ye was born to be hanged, so
of coorse ye can't be starved--that's a comfort, anyhow!"

"What think you, Bunco," said Will Osten, turning to his dark-skinned
companion, "shall we encamp on this arid part of the plain and go
waterless as well as supperless to rest, or shall we push on?  I fear
the horses will break down if we try to force them much further."

"Water not be far-off," said Bunco curtly.

"Very well, we shall hold on."

In silence they continued to advance until the sun was descending
towards the horizon, when there suddenly appeared, on the brow of an
eminence, the figure of a solitary horseman.  Sharply defined as he was
against the bright sky, this horseman appeared to be of supernaturally
huge proportions--insomuch that the three travellers pulled up by tacit
consent, and glanced inquiringly at each other.

"It's a ghost _at last_!" muttered the superstitious Irishman, whose
expression of countenance showed that he was not by any means in a
jesting humour.

"Ghost or not, we must be prepared to meet him," said Will, loosening a
large hunting-knife in its sheath and examining the priming of his
rifle.

The strange horseman had evidently observed the party, for he presently
descended the rising ground and rode slowly towards them.  In doing so
he passed out of the strong light, and consequently assumed more
ordinary proportions, but still when he drew near, it was evident that
he was a man of immense size.  He rode a black steed of the largest and
most powerful description; was clad in the leathern hunting-shirt, belt,
leggings, moccasins, etcetera, peculiar to the western hunter, and
carried a short rifle in the hollow of his right arm.

"Good-evening, strangers," he said, in a tone that savoured of the
Yankee, but with an easy manner and good-humoured gravity that seemed to
indicate English extraction.  "Goin' far?"

"To California," said Will, smiling at the abrupt commencement of the
conversation.

"H'm, a longish bit.  Come far?"

"From England."

"H'm, a longish bit, too.  Lost and starvin', I see."

"Not exactly, but pretty nearly so," said Will.  "I had entertained the
belief, presumptuous if you will, that I could find my way in any part
of the wilderness by means of a sextant and pocket compass, and, to say
truth, I don't feel quite sure that I should have failed, but before I
had a sufficient opportunity of testing my powers, one of our baggage
horses rolled down the bank of a creek and broke my sextant.  In trying
to save him I rolled down along with him and smashed my compass, so I
