that they could not be hoisted. There was a kink in the halyards of the
main-top gallant-sail, so that it would not run through the block.
Clewlines, clew-garnets, leachlines, and buntlines were in a snarl. The
zeal of those who were striving to do their duty faithfully seemed to
make the matter worse, and the officers found it difficult to determine
who really made the mischief; for the malcontents pretended to be as
enthusiastic as their shipmates. Strong expressions and hard words were
freely used by the vexed seamen, and certainly such a scene of
confusion had never before been observed on board of the ship, even
when a large proportion of the crew were green hands.

Captain Shuffles was deeply grieved by the misconduct of the crew; for,
standing on the quarter-deck, he could not distinguish between the
intentional and the unintentional blunders of the crew, and therefore
believed that the disaffection was much more extensive than was really
the case. The zealous efforts of one portion of the crew to rectify the
mistakes of another portion only increased the confusion, and some of
those who were actually doing their best appeared to be the real
authors of the difficulty. The captain was drilling his crew in
simultaneous movements, and it was difficult, if not impossible, to
ascertain exactly the source of the unwonted confusion.

While the routine of evolutions was thus bunglingly performed, the
principal and the professors, who had been discussing an interesting
question of discipline in the main cabin, came on deck. Perhaps the
fact that Mr. Lowington was not on deck had encouraged the conspirators
in creating the confusion which pervaded the decks and rigging. As he
was the last to ascend the companion-way, he paused on the steps, with
his head on a level with the deck, to note the precision of the drill.
He was not noticed by the conspirators, and, unfortunately for them,
they continued in their career of insubordination. The quick eye of the
principal readily detected the nature of the mischief, though it was as
impossible for him as for the officers immediately to indicate the
authors of the confusion which prevailed throughout the ship.

"This does not look much like going down the Rhine this week," said Mr.
Lowington to Commodore Kendall, as he stepped upon the quarter-deck.

"I don't think it does, sir," replied Paul, grieved and indignant at
the miserable exhibition of seamanship which the crew then presented.

"This is a strange sight on board of this ship," added the principal,
biting his lips with vexation, for, as usual, when the young tars
displayed their seamanship, there were plenty of spectators on shore,
and on board of other vessels in the roadstead.

"I certainly never saw anything like it since we first began to learn
ship's duty in Brockway harbor."

"The crew appear to be hazing the new officers," continued Mr.
Lowington, who could not fail to perceive that a large portion of the
apparent blundering was intentional.

"Of course there isn't a seaman on board who does not know his duty."

"They are not familiar yet with their new stations, and a little
confusion is unavoidable," said Mr. Lowington, willing to make all
reasonable allowances.

"But they have already been through the routine two or three times,"
suggested Paul.

"Are the crew dissatisfied with the election?" asked the principal.

"I have not heard any dissatisfaction expressed; but I suppose some of
them don't like Shuffles, especially those who went off in the
Josephine."

"There are not twenty of them left in the ship; and it seems as though
the whole crew were engaged in this frolic."

At this moment a gang of the waist men, who were walking away with the
main-topsail sheets, were suddenly piled up in a pyramid on deck. The
second fellow in the line had fallen down; the next had tripped over
him, and those that followed tumbled into the heap. It is more than
probable that some, whose estimate of the value of good order was not
very high, though they were tolerably good boys in the main, were
tempted by their love of fun to take part in what appeared to them only
a frolic. A scene of violent confusion ensued in this particular part
of the deck. Some, who were near the bottom of the pile, were hurt by
those who fell upon them, and the tempers of others were not improved
by the mishap. Hard words followed, those at the bottom blaming those
at the top, and those at the top growling at those at the bottom. Some
were rubbing their elbows, others their shins, and all appeared to be
anxious to ascertain who had produced the mischief.

"Pipe to muster, Captain Shuffles," said the principal, stepping up to
the bewildered commander. "We have had about enough of this."

Shuffles gave the order to the first lieutenant, and it was duly
transmitted to the boatswain, whose shrill pipe soon assembled the
whole ship's company in the waist.

"We shall catch it now," said Spencer, one of the runaways, to Howe, as
they met near the rail, a little outside of the crowd.

"No matter; he is only going to preach to us," replied Howe through the
corner of his mouth, while he tried to look as innocent as one of the
chaplain's lambs.

"We shall not have a chance to go down the Rhine if we do things in
this way."

"I don't want to go down the Rhine; at least, not till I have been
through Paris and Switzerland."

"But we want to go ashore with the other fellows, or we shall have no
chance to go anywhere."

"Shut up! Don't talk about that here. If we don't go, no one will go.
This is bully! We shall get things mixed so that the officers won't
know a lamb from a goat."

"Bob Shuffles hasn't made much yet as captain," laughed Spencer.

"We'll get even with him yet," added Howe, still talking through the
corner of his mouth, and looking all the time at the principal, who had
taken his place on the hatch.

Mr. Lowington, as the rogue had suggested, only intended to "preach."
He had observed the insubordination of the crew, and he regretted it
exceedingly, for he was as careful of the reputation of the ship as of
his own. There was an evident intention on the part of a large portion
of the ship's company to haze the new officers. Such a purpose was
unworthy of the character of young gentlemen, and he hoped that such
conduct as he had just witnessed would be discontinued. In a day or two
he purposed to start for Germany, but he could not leave the ship
unless he was satisfied that every one on board knew his duty; for on
their return they might be compelled, by some unforeseen event, to go
to sea at once, and the crew did not appear to know how to set and furl
a sail. The officers, from the captain to the lowest rank, appeared to
have performed their duty faithfully; and all the trouble was in the
execution of their orders. In conclusion, he announced that the drill
would be resumed in half an hour, and directed the commander to pipe
down.

"That didn't hurt anybody," said Howe, as he walked forward with
Spencer. "Let us keep it up."

"We may get caught at it."

"No need of that. Accidents will happen."

"Yes; but they don't happen all over the ship at the same time."

"Well, they may, you know," laughed Howe. "In fact, I don't see how
accidents are to be avoided while we have such a fellow as Shuffles for
captain. If there is any one in the ship that I despise, it is
Shuffles."

"So say we all of us!"

"The snivelling, canting, whining puppy! Have you any idea that his
merit-marks made him captain of the ship?" continued Howe.

"I suppose they did."

"Tell that to the marines! Wasn't he acknowledged to be the worst
fellow in the ship when we crossed the Atlantic? Wasn't he the
ringleader in all mischief and scrapes?"

"But he has reformed."

"Reformed!" sneered Howe. "He has turned hypocrite, if that is what you
mean by reformed. I don't believe in that sort of bosh."

"He's the pet of the principal and the instructors."

"Yes; and they have given him marks enough to make him captain, just to
show good fellows, like you and me, what a saint can do. It is all
humbug! Why, he got more marks than Kendall, Gordon, Haven, and the
rest of those cabin nobs, who are fit to enter the senior class in a
college. I am satisfied that his merit-roll was doctored so as to make
it come out as it did."

"I don't believe Lowington would do any such thing as that," suggested
Spencer, shaking his head.

"Don't you? Well, I do. What's the use of talking! Didn't Shuffles jump
from the steerage into the captain's state-room?"

"Any other fellow may do the same thing. Look at Tom Perth, who lost a
heap of marks for running off in the Josephine, as the rest of us did.
He is second master. If it hadn't been for our scrape, very likely he
would have been captain."

"Don't you believe it."

"If Lowington had not been fair, and let every fellow go just where his
marks carried him, Perth would not have had a place in the cabin."

"O, the principal only wanted to break us up by taking our best fellow
away from us. He couldn't drive Tom Perth, and now he's going to lead
him--bait him with sugar and offices."

"Some of the fellows say Shuffles can't handle the ship without the
help of the principal," said Spencer.

"Of course he can't!" exclaimed Howe. "Hasn't he proved that already?
If Paul Kendall had been captain, he would have spotted every fellow
that made any trouble. Let us keep it up, Spencer, and we shall soon
prove that Shuffles can't handle the ship. That will be enough to
satisfy me."

The approach of an officer interrupted the conversation; but Howe
passed from one to another of the malcontents, and instructed them what
to do in the next drill. They were to create all the confusion they
could in the discharge of their duty. They were to misunderstand the
orders, and to blunder in the execution of them, in such a manner as to
conceal their own agency in the mischief, and divide the responsibility
of it among their companions. The runaway crew of the Josephine,
mortified at their failure, were still fretting because they had not
visited Paris and Switzerland. They were ready to listen to evil
counsels, and regarding Howe as their leader since the promotion of
Perth, they promised to follow his instructions to the letter.

"What are we going to make by it?" demanded Sheffield, who doubted the
policy of the proceeding.

"We are going to prove, in the first place, that Shuffles can't handle
the ship," replied Howe.

"Perhaps you may prove it, even if you don't believe what you prove."

"But I do believe he can't handle the ship."

"I don't. I hate Shuffles as bad as any fellow, but I believe he is as
good a sailor as any person on board, man or boy."

"That's all in your eye!" retorted Howe, contemptuously. "He may be
able to get along while we are lying in port, but I should like to see
him work the ship in a gale of wind."

"He can do it," answered Sheffield, confidently. "But he is a flunky,
and spoiled all our fun in the Josephine. I am willing to throw him
over for being a hypocrite, and selling us out as he did. What else are
we to gain?"

"We shall help along our chances of going down the Rhine, and,"
whispered Howe, "of seeing Paris and Switzerland."

"I don't see it."

"Well, I do. If we cave in and pretend to be lambs when we are lions,
we shall have to do duty while the rest of the fellows are having a
good time on shore. If we show that we are still wide awake, Lowington
will take us with him, because he will not dare to leave us on board."

"He will leave Fluxion with us."

"Not much! I heard some of the fellows say that Fluxion was going to
Italy to see his mother, or his sister, or somebody that is sick
there."

"I heard that."

"If it is true, Lowington will not leave us behind, especially if he
finds we are not as gentle as lambs."

"Perhaps not; but as the matter stands, we are already condemned to
stay on board during the rest of the season."

"I know that; but Lowington will let us off."

"He will be more likely to do so if we behave well."

"Not he! Don't you believe it."

"They say Shuffles is teasing him to remit the rest of the penalty."

"Shuffles!"

"That's so; and Lowington promised to consider the matter. Tom Perth
told me this; and he heard Shuffles talking to the principal about it."

"Humph! I don't want to go on those terms," replied Howe, in disgust.
"That's some more of Shuffles's cant! One of his sensations! He
thinks he whipped us out on board of the Josephine, and now he wants to
be magnanimous with his victims. If we go with the crowd, it will be
because Lowington is afraid to leave us behind. We are not a set of
babies, Sheffield, to be whipped and sent to bed when we are naughty.
Neither are we sailors before the mast, to be kicked here and there, at
the pleasure of our masters. What do you suppose the fellows came to
Europe for, if it was not to see the country? Are we to be left on
board just because we went on a little lark? Not much!"

"That's all very good, but it won't go down," laughed Sheffield.

"I'm not going to eat humble pie for any one. Do you mean to tell me I
am not as good a fellow as Bob Shuffles?"

"I didn't say you were not."

"Am I not his equal?" demanded Howe.

"I suppose you are, if you behave as well."

"Behave as well!" sneered the orator. "I behave well enough, and I'm
not going to be put down, nor beg my rights of Bob Shuffles. If I am
left on board, for one, when the fellows go down the Rhine, I intend to
break things."

"Don't break your own head."

"Let me alone for that. If our fellows have any spirit at all, they
will not be left behind. In the next drill, things will be mixed, and
no one can tell who makes the mischief. Our fellows are not the only
ones that don't like Shuffles, and you will find that about half the
crew will help snarl things up. Now, keep your weather eye open,
Sheffield. Take my advice, and don't whimper. Our fellows have a little
business in Paris and Switzerland, and we shall attend to it in a week
or two. There goes the pipe. Mind your eye, Sheffield."

The boatswain's call sounded through the ship, and officers and crew
hastened to their stations.




CHAPTER II.

CLOSE QUARTERS.


The malcontents in the ship were, apparently, the most zealous seamen
on board. Certainly no one would have suspected them of organizing any
mischief, they looked so innocent and so determined to do their duty
promptly. Howe, Wilton, Little, and others had done their work
thoroughly and secretly. They had arranged at least a dozen different
tricks for making confusion among the crew. To each one of the
discontented a part had been assigned, which he was to perform in such
a way as to conceal his own agency.

Captain Shuffles was planking the quarter-deck with the commodore.
Everybody could see that he was not entirely at his ease. His position
was a novel one to him, and he was oppressed by its responsibilities,
especially since the crew had behaved so badly at the first drill. He
could not help knowing that a portion of the crew were opposed to him,
and would do anything they could to annoy him. The situation was a
difficult one; for, at the commencement of his term of office, he did
not wish to have any of the seamen punished for neglect or
disobedience, even if he could discover the guilty ones.

Mr. Lowington was not on deck. He had purposely gone below, for he
wished the new captain to act on his own responsibility, and overcome
the difficulty alone. This was in accordance with his previous course,
when, even in a gale of wind, he permitted the young officers to handle
the ship without any dictation. Though the action adopted by the boys
was not always in accordance with his own judgment, he never interfered
unless an obvious and dangerous blunder was made. His policy had worked
well thus far, and he was disposed to continue it. In the present
instance, he was no better informed than the captain in regard to the
real cause of the difficulty. He believed it was merely the effect of a
fun-loving spirit on the part of the crew; a mere disposition to haze
the new officers a little, and perhaps prove what they were made of. He
hoped the new officers would satisfy them, and, if necessary, send a
dozen or twenty of the mischief-makers to the mainmast for punishment.

"All hands, up anchor, ahoy!" piped the boatswain, after he had
received the order from the captain, through the proper officers.

Those whose stations were at the cable and capstan sprang to their
places with unwonted alacrity.

"Bring to, forward!" added the first lieutenant, giving the order to
attach the messenger. "Ship and swifter the capstan bars!"

As it was not intended to get the ship actually under way, only a
portion of the work indicated by the orders was really executed. The
form of hooking on the messenger was gone through with, as also were
the various preparations for catting and fishing the anchor. The
capstan bars were inserted in the pigeon-holes.

"Heave round!" shouted the first lieutenant; and the order was repeated
by the second lieutenant, whose station is on the forecastle.

Everything appeared to be progressing with proper order and regularity,
and Captain Shuffles hoped the warning words of the principal had
produced an impression upon the minds of the mischief-makers. But
appearances are very deceptive. While the hands were walking around the
capstan, four of the bars suddenly came out of the pigeon-holes at the
same instant, and a dozen of the seamen were thrown, apparently with
great violence, upon the deck. The bars, confined at one end by the
swifter, swung round and cracked the shins of others, and a scene of
confusion ensued, which set at nought all ideas of discipline.
