Church of Our Saviour, next door, were a little open.

Suddenly a sound of music poured out into the bright air and drifted
into the chamber. It was the boy choir singing Christmas anthems. Higher
and higher rose the clear, fresh voices, full of hope and cheer, as
children's voices always are. Fuller and fuller grew the burst of melody
as one glad strain fell upon another in joyful harmony:--

    "Carol, brothers, carol,
      Carol joyfully,
    Carol the good tidings,
      Carol merrily!
    And pray a gladsome Christmas
      For all your fellow-men:
    Carol, brothers, carol,
      Christmas Day again."

One verse followed another, always with the same sweet refrain:--

    "And pray a gladsome Christmas
      For all your fellow-men:
    Carol, brothers, carol,
      Christmas Day again."

Mrs. Bird thought, as the music floated in upon her gentle sleep, that
she had slipped into heaven with her new baby, and that the angels were
bidding them welcome. But the tiny bundle by her side stirred a little,
and though it was scarcely more than the ruffling of a feather, she
awoke; for the mother-ear is so close to the heart that it can hear the
faintest whisper of a child.

She opened her eyes and drew the baby closer. It looked like a rose
dipped in milk, she thought, this pink and white blossom of girlhood, or
like a pink cherub, with its halo of pale yellow hair, finer than floss
silk.

    "Carol, brothers, carol,
      Carol joyfully,
    Carol the good tidings,
      Carol merrily!"

The voices were brimming over with joy.

"Why, my baby," whispered Mrs. Bird in soft surprise, "I had forgotten
what day it was. You are a little Christmas child, and we will name you
'Carol'--mother's Christmas Carol!"

"What!" said Mr. Bird, coming in softly and closing the door behind him.

"Why, Donald, don't you think 'Carol' is a sweet name for a Christmas
baby? It came to me just a moment ago in the singing, as I was lying
here half asleep and half awake."

"I think it is a charming name, dear heart, and sounds just like you,
and I hope that, being a girl, this baby has some chance of being as
lovely as her mother;"--at which speech from the baby's papa Mrs. Bird,
though she was as weak and tired as she could be, blushed with
happiness.

And so Carol came by her name.

Of course, it was thought foolish by many people, though Uncle Jack
declared laughingly that it was very strange if a whole family of Birds
could not be indulged in a single Carol; and Grandma, who adored the
child, thought the name much more appropriate than Lucy, but was glad
that people would probably think it short for Caroline.

Perhaps because she was born in holiday time, Carol was a very happy
baby. Of course, she was too tiny to understand the joy of
Christmas-tide, but people say there is everything in a good beginning,
and she may have breathed in unconsciously the fragrance of evergreens
and holiday dinners; while the peals of sleigh-bells and the laughter of
happy children may have fallen upon her baby ears and wakened in them a
glad surprise at the merry world she had come to live in.

Her cheeks and lips were as red as holly-berries; her hair was for all
the world the color of a Christmas candle-flame; her eyes were bright as
stars; her laugh like a chime of Christmas-bells, and her tiny hands
forever outstretched in giving.

[Illustration: "SHE IS A LITTLE CHRISTMAS CHILD"]

Such a generous little creature you never saw! A spoonful of bread and
milk had always to be taken by Mamma or nurse before Carol could enjoy
her supper; whatever bit of cake or sweetmeat found its way into her
pretty fingers was straightway broken in half to be shared with Donald,
Paul, or Hugh; and when they made believe nibble the morsel with
affected enjoyment, she would clap her hands and crow with delight.

"Why does she do it?" asked Donald thoughtfully. "None of us boys ever
did."

"I hardly know," said Mamma, catching her darling to her heart, "except
that she is a little Christmas child, and so she has a tiny share of the
blessedest birthday the world ever knew!"




II

DROOPING WINGS


It was December, ten years later.

Carol had seen nine Christmas trees lighted on her birthdays, one after
another; nine times she had assisted in the holiday festivities of the
household, though in her babyhood her share of the gayeties was
somewhat limited.

For five years, certainly, she had hidden presents for Mamma and Papa in
their own bureau drawers, and harbored a number of secrets sufficiently
large to burst a baby brain, had it not been for the relief gained by
whispering them all to Mamma, at night, when she was in her crib, a
proceeding which did not in the least lessen the value of a secret in
her innocent mind.

For five years she had heard "'Twas the night before Christmas," and
hung up a scarlet stocking many sizes too large for her, and pinned a
sprig of holly on her little white nightgown, to show Santa Claus that
she was a "truly" Christmas child, and dreamed of fur-coated saints and
toy-packs and reindeer, and wished everybody a "Merry Christmas" before
it was light in the morning, and lent every one of her new toys to the
neighbors' children before noon, and eaten turkey and plum-pudding, and
gone to bed at night in a trance of happiness at the day's pleasures.

Donald was away at college now. Paul and Hugh were great manly fellows,
taller than their mother. Papa Bird had gray hairs in his whiskers; and
Grandma, God bless her, had been four Christmases in heaven.

But Christmas in the Birds' Nest was scarcely as merry now as it used to
be in the bygone years, for the little child, that once brought such an
added blessing to the day, lay month after month a patient, helpless
invalid, in the room where she was born. She had never been very strong
in body, and it was with a pang of terror her mother and father noticed,
soon after she was five years old, that she began to limp, ever so
slightly; to complain too often of weariness, and to nestle close to her
mother, saying she "would rather not go out to play, please." The
illness was slight at first, and hope was always stirring in Mrs. Bird's
heart. "Carol would feel stronger in the summer-time;" or, "She would
be better when she had spent a year in the country;" or, "She would
outgrow it;" or, "They would try a new physician;" but by and by it came
to be all too sure that no physician save One could make Carol strong
again, and that no "summer-time" nor "country air," unless it were the
everlasting summer-time in a heavenly country, could bring back the
little girl to health.

The cheeks and lips that were once as red as holly-berries faded to
faint pink; the star-like eyes grew softer, for they often gleamed
through tears; and the gay child-laugh, that had been like a chime of
Christmas bells, gave place to a smile so lovely, so touching, so tender
and patient, that it filled every corner of the house with a gentle
radiance that might have come from the face of the Christ-child himself.

Love could do nothing; and when we have said that we have said all, for
it is stronger than anything else in the whole wide world. Mr. and Mrs.
Bird were talking it over one evening, when all the children were
asleep. A famous physician had visited them that day, and told them that
some time, it might be in one year, it might be in more, Carol would
slip quietly off into heaven, whence she came.

"It is no use to close our eyes to it any longer," said Mr. Bird, as he
paced up and down the library floor; "Carol will never be well again. It
almost seems as if I could not bear it when I think of that loveliest
child doomed to lie there day after day, and, what is still more, to
suffer pain that we are helpless to keep away from her. Merry Christmas,
indeed; it gets to be the saddest day in the year to me!" and poor Mr.
Bird sank into a chair by the table, and buried his face in his hands to
keep his wife from seeing the tears that would come in spite of all his
efforts.

"But, Donald, dear," said sweet Mrs. Bird, with trembling voice,
"Christmas Day may not be so merry with us as it used, but it is very
happy, and that is better, and very blessed, and that is better yet. I
suffer chiefly for Carol's sake, but I have almost given up being
sorrowful for my own. I am too happy in the child, and I see too clearly
what she has done for us and the other children. Donald and Paul and
Hugh were three strong, willful, boisterous boys, but now you seldom see
such tenderness, devotion, thought for others, and self-denial in lads
of their years. A quarrel or a hot word is almost unknown in this house,
and why? Carol would hear it, and it would distress her, she is so full
of love and goodness. The boys study with all their might and main.
Why? Partly, at least, because they like to teach Carol, and amuse her
by telling her what they read. When the seamstress comes, she likes to
sew in Miss Carol's room, because there she forgets her own troubles,
which, Heaven knows, are sore enough! And as for me, Donald, I am a
better woman every day for Carol's sake; I have to be her eyes, ears,
feet, hands,--her strength, her hope; and she, my own little child, is
my example!"

"I was wrong, dear heart," said Mr. Bird more cheerfully; "we will try
not to repine, but to rejoice instead, that we have an 'angel of the
house.'"

"And as for her future," Mrs. Bird went on, "I think we need not be
over-anxious. I feel as if she did not belong altogether to us, but that
