
Confining our attention in the first instance to eclipses of the Sun,
the diagrams fig. 2 and fig. 3 will make clear, with very little verbal
description, the essential features of the two principal kinds of
eclipses of the Sun. In these figures S represents the Sun, M the Moon
and E the Earth. They are not, of course, even approximately drawn to
scale either as to the size of the bodies or their relative distances,
but this is a matter of no moment as regards the principles involved. M
being in sunshine receives light on, as it were, the left hand side,
which faces S the Sun. The shadow of the Moon cast into space is, in the
particular case, thrown as regards its tip on to the Earth and is
intercepted by the Earth. Persons at the moment situated on the Earth
within the limits of this shadow will not see any part of the Sun at
all; they will see, in fact, nothing but the Moon as a black disc with
only such light behind and around it as may be reflected back on to the
sky by the illuminated (but to the Earth invisible) hemisphere of the
Moon, or as may proceed from the Sun's Corona (to be described
presently). The condition of things therefore is that known as a "total"
eclipse of the Sun so far as regards the inhabitants of the narrow strip
of Earth primarily affected.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--THEORY OF AN ANNULAR ECLIPSE OF THE SUN.]

Fig. 3 represents nearly but not quite the same condition of things.
Here the Earth and the Moon are in those parts of their respective
orbits which put the two bodies at or near the maximum distance
possible from the Sun and from one another. The Moon casts its usual
shadow, but the tip does not actually reach any part of the Earth's
surface. Or, in other words, to an observer on the Earth the Moon is not
big enough to conceal the whole body of the Sun. The result is this; at
the instant of central coincidence the Moon covers up only the centre of
the Sun, leaving the outer edge all round uncovered.

This outer edge shows as a bright ring of light, and the eclipse is of
the sort known as an "annular" eclipse of the Sun.[3] As the greatest
breadth of the annulus can never exceed 11/2 minutes of arc, an annular
eclipse may sometimes, in some part of its track, become almost or quite
total, and _vice versa_.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--ANNULAR ECLIPSE OF THE SUN.]

The idea will naturally suggest itself, what exactly does happen to the
inhabitants living outside (on the one side or the other) of the strip
of the Earth where the central line of shadow falls? This depends in
every case on circumstances, but it may be stated generally that the
inhabitants outside the central line but within 1000 to 2000 miles on
either side, will see a larger or smaller part of the Sun concealed by
the Moon's solid body, simultaneously with the total concealment of the
Sun to the favoured individuals who live, or who for the moment are
located, within the limits of the central zone.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--PARTIAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN.]

Now we must advance one stage in our conceptions of the movements of the
Earth and the Moon, so far as regards the bearing of those movements on
the question of eclipses. The Earth moves in a plane which is called the
"Plane of the Ecliptic," and correspondingly, the Sun has an _apparent_
annual motion in the same plane. The Moon moving in a different plane,
inclined to the first mentioned one to the extent of rather more than
5 deg., the Moon's orbit will evidently intersect the ecliptic in two
places. These places of intersection are called "Nodes," and the line
which may be imagined to join these Nodes is called the "Line of Nodes."
When the Moon is crossing the ecliptic from the S. to the N. side
thereof, the Moon is said to be passing through its "Ascending Node"
([Symbol: Ascending node]); the converse of this will be the Moon
passing back again from the N. side of the ecliptic to the S. side,
which is the "Descending Node" ([Symbol: Descending node]). Such changes
of position, with the terms designating them, apply not only to the Moon
in its movement round the Earth, but to all the planets and comets
circulating round the Sun; and also to satellites circulating round
certain of the planets, but with these matters we have no concern now.

    FOOTNOTES:

    [Footnote 1: D. Lardner, _Handbook of Astronomy_, 3rd ed., p. 288.]

    [Footnote 2: But not one of them was visible at Greenwich.]

    [Footnote 3: Latin _Annulus_, a ring.]




                             CHAPTER III.

             THE "SAROS" AND THE PERIODICITY OF ECLIPSES.


To bring about an eclipse of the Sun, two things must combine: (1) the
Moon must be at or near one of its Nodes; and (2), this must be at a
time when the Moon is also in "Conjunction" with the Sun. Now the Moon
is in Conjunction with the Sun (= "New Moon") 12 or 13 times in a year,
but the Sun only passes through the Nodes of the Moon's orbit twice a
year. Hence an eclipse of the Sun does not and cannot occur at every New
Moon, but only occasionally. An _exact_ coincidence of Earth, Moon, and
Sun, in a straight line at a Node is not necessary to ensure an eclipse
of the Sun. So long as the Moon is within about 181/2 deg. of its Node, with a
latitude of not more than 1 deg. 34', an eclipse _may_ take place. If,
however, the distance is less than 151/4 deg. and the latitude less than
1 deg. 23' an eclipse _must_ take place, though between these limits[4] the
occurrence of an eclipse is uncertain and depends on what are called the
"horizontal parallaxes" and the "apparent semi-diameters" of the two
bodies at the moment of conjunction, in other words, on the nearness or
"far-offness" of the bodies in question. Another complication is
introduced into these matters by reason of the fact that the Nodes of
the Moon's orbit do not occupy a fixed position, but have an annual
retrograde motion of about 191/4 deg., in virtue of which a complete
revolution of the Nodes round the ecliptic is accomplished in 18 years
218-7/8 days (= 18.5997 years).

The backward movement of the Moon's Nodes combined with the apparent
motion of the Sun in the ecliptic causes the Moon in its monthly course
round the Earth to complete a revolution with respect to its Nodes in a
less time (27.2 days) than it takes to get back to Conjunction with the
Sun (29.5 days); and a curious consequence, as we shall see directly,
flows from these facts and from one other fact. The other fact is to the
Sun starting coincident with one of the Moon's Nodes, returns on the
Ecliptic to the same Node in 346.6 days. The first named period of 27.2
days is called the "_Nodical_ Revolution of the Moon" or "Draconic
Month," the other period of 29.5 days is called the "_Synodical_
Revolution of the Moon." Now the curious consequence of these figures
being what they are is that 242 Draconic Months, 223 Lunations, and 19
Returns of the Sun to one and the same Node of the Moon's orbit, are all
accomplished in the same time within 11 hours. Thus (ignoring
refinements of decimals):--

               Days     Days.  Years.  Days.  Hours.

    242 times  27.2 = 6585.36 = 18      10      81/2
    223 times  29.5 = 6585.32 = 18      10      73/4
     19 times 346.6 = 6585.78 = 18      10     183/4

The interpretation to be put upon these coincidences is this: that
supposing Sun and Moon to start together from a Node they would, after
the lapse of 6585 days and a fraction, be found again together very near
the same Node. During the interval there would have been 223 New and
Full Moons. The exact time required for 223 Lunations is such that in
the case supposed the 223rd conjunction of the two bodies would happen a
little before they reached the Node; their distance therefrom would be
28' of arc. And the final fact is that eclipses recur in almost, though
not quite, the same regular order every 6585-1/3 days, or more exactly, 18
years, 10 days, 7 hours, 42 minutes.[5] This is the celebrated Chaldean
"SAROS," and was used by the ancients (and can still be used by the
moderns in the way of a pastime) for the prediction of eclipses alike of
the Sun and of the Moon.

                   *       *       *       *       *

At the end of a Saros period, starting from any date that may have been
chosen, the Moon will be in the same position with respect to the Sun,
nearly in the same part of the heavens, nearly in the same part of its
orbit, and very nearly indeed at the same distance from its Node as at
the date chosen for the _terminus a quo_ of the Saros. But there are
trifling discrepancies in the case (the difference of about 11 hours
between 223 lunations and 19 returns of the Sun to the Moon's Node is
one) and these have an appreciable effect in disturbing not so much the
sequence of the eclipses in the next following Saros as their magnitude
and visibility at given places on the Earth's surface. Hence, a more
accurate succession will be obtained by combining 3 Saros periods,
making 54 years, 31 days; while, best of all, to secure an almost
perfect repetition of a series of eclipses will be a combination of 48
Saroses, making 865 years for the Moon; and of about 70 Saroses, or more
than 1200 years for the Sun.

These considerations are leading us rather too far afield. Let us return
to a more simple condition of things. The practical use of the Saros in
its most elementary conception is somewhat on this wise. Given 18 or 19
old Almanacs ranging, say, from 1880 to 1898, how can we turn to account
the information they afford us in order to obtain from them information
respecting the eclipses which will happen between 1899 and 1917?
Nothing easier. Add 18^y 10^d 7^h 42^m to the middle time of every
eclipse which took place between 1880 and 1898 beginning, say, with the
last of 1879 or the first of 1880, and we shall find what eclipses will
happen in 1898 and 17 following years, as witness by way of example the
following table:--

                                            Error of Saros by
                             d.  h. m.      Exact Calculation.
       MOON.     1879   Dec. 28  4  26 p.m.
(Mag. 0.17)        18        10  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Mag. 0.16)      1898   Jan.  8 12   8 a.m. (civil time) +3 m.

                             d.  h. m.
       SUN.      1880   Jan. 11 10  48 p.m.
(Total)            18        10  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Total)          1898   Jan. 22  6  30 a.m. (civil time) -1 h. 7 m.

                             d.  h. m.
       MOON.     1880   June 22  1  50 p.m.
(Mag. Total)       18        11  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Mag. 0.93)      1898   July  3  9  32 p.m. +35 m.

                             d.  h. m.
       SUN.      1880   July  7  1  35 p.m.
(Mag. Annular)     18        11  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Mag. Annular)   1898   July 18  9  17 p.m. +1 h. 10 m.

                             d.  h. m.
       SUN.      1880   Dec.  2  3  11 a.m. (civil time).
(Mag. 0.04)        18        11  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Mag. 0.02)      1898   Dec. 13 10  53 a.m. -1 h. 5 m.

                             d.  h. m.
       MOON.     1880   Dec. 16  3  39 p.m.
(Mag. Total)       18        11  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Mag. Total)     1898   Dec. 27 11  21 p.m. -13 m.

                             d.  h. m.
       SUN.      1880   Dec. 31  1  45 p.m.
(Mag. 0.71)        18        11  7  42
---------------------------------------------
(Mag. 0.72)      1899   Jan. 11  9  27 p.m. -1 h. 11 m.

There having been 5 recurrences of Feb. 29 between Dec. 1879 and Jan.
1899, 5 leap years having intervened, we have to add an extra day to the
Saros period in the later part of the above Table.[6]

Let us make another start and see what we can learn from the eclipses,
say, of 1883.

                                             Error of Saros by
                                             Exact Calculation.
                                  h. m.
    MOON         1883   April 22  11 39 a.m.
(Mag. 0.8)         18         11   7 42
--------------------------------------------
(Mag. Penumbral) 1901   May    3   7 21 p.m. +51 m.

                                  h. m.
    SUN          1883   May    6   9 45 p.m. Visible, Philippines.
(Mag. Total)       18         11   7 42
--------------------------------------------
(Mag. Total)     1901   May   18   5 27 a.m. (civil time). -2 m.

                                  h. m.
    MOON         1883   Oct.  16   6 54 a.m. Visible, California.
(Mag. 0.28)        18         11   7 42
--------------------------------------------
(Mag. 0.23)      1901   Oct.  27   2 36 p.m. -39 m.

                                  h. m.
    SUN          1883   Oct.  30  11 37 p.m. Visible, N. Japan.
(Mag. Annular)     18         11   7 42
--------------------------------------------
(Mag. Annular)   1901   Nov.  11   7 19 a.m. (civil time) +1 m.

The foregoing does not by any means exhaust all that can be said
respecting the Saros even on the popular side.

If the Saros comprised an exact number of days, each eclipse of a second
Saros series would be visible in the same regions of the Earth as the
corresponding eclipse in the previous series. But since there is a
surplus fraction of nearly one-third of a day, each subsequent eclipse
will be visible in another region of the Earth, which will be roughly a
third of the Earth's circumference in longitude backwards (_i.e._ about
120 deg. to the W.), because the Earth itself will be turned on its axis
one-third forwards.

After what has been said as to the Saros and its use it might be
supposed that a correct list of eclipses for 18.03 years would suffice
for all ordinary purposes of eclipse prediction, and that the sequence
of eclipses at any future time might be ascertained by adding to some
one eclipse which had already happened so many Saros periods as might
embrace the years future whose eclipses it was desired to study. This
would be true in a sense, but would not be literally and effectively
true, because corresponding eclipses do not recur exactly under the same
conditions, for there are small residual discrepancies in the times and
circumstances affecting the real movements of the Earth and Moon and the
apparent movement of the Sun which, in the lapse of years and centuries,
accumulate sufficiently to dislocate what otherwise would be exact
coincidences. Thus an eclipse of the Moon which in A.D. 565 was of 6
digits[7] was in 583 of 7 digits, and in 601 nearly 8. In 908 the
eclipse became total, and remained so for about twelve periods, or until
1088. This eclipse continued to diminish until the beginning of the 15th
century, when it disappeared in 1413. Let us take now the life of an
eclipse of the Sun. One appeared at the North Pole in June A.D. 1295,
and showed itself more and more towards the S. at each subsequent
period. On August 27, 1367, it made its first appearance in the North of
Europe; in 1439 it was visible all over Europe; in 1601, being its 19th
appearance, it was central and annular in England; on May 5, 1818, it
was visible in London, and again on May 15, 1836. Its three next
appearances were on May 26, 1854, June 6, 1872, and June 17, 1890. At
its 39th appearance, on August 10, 1980, the Moon's shadow will have
passed the equator, and as the eclipse will take place nearly at
midnight (Greenwich M.T.), the phenomenon will be invisible in Europe,
Africa, and Asia. At every succeeding period the central line of the
eclipse will lie more and more to the S., until finally, on September
30, 2665, which will be its 78th appearance, it will vanish at the South
Pole.[8]

The operation of the Saros effects which have been specified above, may
be noticed in some of the groups of eclipses which have been much in
evidence (as will appear from a subsequent chapter), during the second
half of the 19th century. The following are two noteworthy Saros groups
of Solar eclipses:--

    1842  July  8.    |    1850  Aug.   7.
    1860   "   18.    |    1868   "    17.
    1878   "   29.    |    1886   "    29.
    1896  Aug.  9.    |    1904  Sept.  9.

If the curious reader will trace, by means of the _Nautical Almanac_
(or some other Almanac which deals with eclipses in adequate detail),
the geographical distribution of the foregoing eclipses on the Earth's
surface, he will see that they fulfil the statement made on p. 24
(_ante_), that a Saros eclipse when it reappears, does so in regions of
the Earth averaging 120 deg. of longitude to the W. of those in which it
had, on the last preceding occasion, been seen; and also that it
gradually works northwards or southwards.

But a given Saros eclipse in its successive reappearances undergoes
other transformations besides that of Terrestrial longitude. These are
well set forth by Professor Newcomb[9]:--

"Since every successive recurrence of such an eclipse throws the
conjunction 28' further toward the W. of the node, the conjunction must,
in process of time, take place so far back from the node that no eclipse
will occur, and the series will end. For the same reason there must be a
commencement to the series, the first eclipse being E. of the node. A
new eclipse thus entering will at first be a very small one, but will be
larger at every recurrence in each Saros. If it is an eclipse of the
Moon, it will be total from its 13th until its 36th recurrence. There
will be then about 13 partial eclipses, each of which will be smaller
than the last, when they will fail entirely, the conjunction taking
place so far from the node that the Moon does not touch the Earth's
shadow. The whole interval of time over which a series of lunar eclipses
thus extend will be about 48 periods, or 865 years. When a series of
solar eclipses begins, the penumbra of the first will just graze the
earth not far from one of the poles. There will then be, on the average,
11 or 12 partial eclipses of the Sun, each larger than the preceding
one, occurring at regular intervals of one Saros. Then the central line,
whether it be that of a total or annular eclipse, will begin to touch
the Earth, and we shall have a series of 40 or 50 central eclipses. The
central line will strike near one pole in the first part of the series;
in the equatorial regions about the middle of the series, and will leave
the Earth by the other pole at the end. Ten or twelve partial eclipses
will follow, and this particular series will cease."

These facts deserve to be expanded a little.

We have seen that all eclipses may be grouped in a series, and that 18
years or thereabouts is the duration of each series, or Saros cycle. But
these cycles are themselves subject to cycles, so that the Saros itself
passes through a cycle of about 64 Saroses before the conditions under
which any given start was made, come quite round again. Sixty-four times
18 make 1152, so that the duration of a Solar eclipse Great Cycle may be
taken at about 1150 years. The progression of such a series across the
face of the Earth is thus described by Mrs. Todd, who gives a very clear
account of the matter:--

"The advent of a slight partial eclipse near either pole of the Earth
will herald the beginning of the new series. At each succeeding return
conformably to the Saros, the partial eclipse will move a little further
towards the opposite pole, its magnitude gradually increasing for about
200 years, but during all this time only the lunar penumbra will impinge
upon the Earth. But when the true shadow begins to touch, the
obscuration will have become annular or total near the pole where it
first appeared. The eclipse has now acquired a track, which will cross
the Earth slightly farther from that pole every time it returns, for
about 750 years. At the conclusion of this interval, the shadow path
will have reached the opposite pole; the eclipse will then become
partial again, and continue to grow smaller and smaller for about 200
years additional. The series then ceases to exist, its entire duration
having been about 1150 years. The series of "great eclipses" of which
two occurred in 1865 and 1883, while others will happen in 1901, 1919,
1937, 1955, and 1973, affords an excellent instance of the northward
progression of eclipse tracks; and another series, with totality nearly
as great (1850, 1868, 1886, 1904, and 1922), is progressing slowly
southwards."

