wear. Shall I assist you to put one on?"

"No," answered Trot, "I guess I can manage it alone."

When she withdrew to the little chamber, the Rainbow's Daughter began
conversing with the Witch, whom she urged to stay with the new queen
and protect her as long as she ruled the Pink Country. Rosalie, who
longed to please the powerful Polychrome, whose fairy powers as
Daughters of the Rainbow were far superior to her own witchcraft,
promised faithfully to devote herself to Queen Mayre as long as she
might need her services.

By the time Trot was dressed in pink and had returned to the room,
there was an excited and clamorous crowd assembled in the court, and
Polychrome took the little girl's hand and led her out to greet her new
subjects. The Pinkies were much impressed by the fact that the
Rainbow's Daughter was their new Queen's friend, and that Rosalie the
Witch stood on Trot's left hand and treated her with humble deference.
So they shouted their approval very enthusiastically and pressed
forward one by one to kneel before their new Ruler and kiss her hand.

The parrot was now on Cap'n Bill's shoulder, for Trot thought a Queen
ought not to carry a bird around, but the parrot did not mind the
change and was as much excited as anyone in the crowd. "Oh, what bliss
to kiss a miss!" he shouted as Trot held out her hand to be kissed by
her subjects, and then he would scream,

  "We're in the sky and flyin' high;
  We're goin' to live instead of die,
  It's time to laugh instead of cry;
  Oh, my! Ki-yi! Ain't this a pie?"

Cap'n Bill let the bird jabber as he pleased, for the occasion was a
joyful one, and it was no wonder the parrot was excited. And while the
throng shouted greetings to the Queen, suddenly the great Rainbow
appeared in the sky and dropped its end right on the Court of the
Statues. Polychrome stooped to kiss Trot and Button-Bright, gave Cap'n
Bill a charming smile and Rosalie the Witch a friendly nod of farewell.
Then she sprang lightly upon the arch of the Rainbow and was greeted by
the bevy of dancing, laughing maidens who were her sisters. "I shall
keep watch over you, Button-Bright," she called to the boy. "Don't
despair, whatever happens, for behind the clouds is always the Rainbow!"

"Thank you, Polly," he answered, and Trot also thanked the lovely
Polychrome, and so did Cap'n Bill. The parrot made quite a long speech,
flying high above the arch where Polychrome stood and then back to
Cap'n Bill's shoulder. Said he,

  "We Pollys know our business, and we're all right!
  We'll take good care of Cap'n Bill and Trot and Button-Bright.
  You watch 'em from the Rainbow, and I'll watch day and night,
  And we'll call a sky policeman if trouble comes in sight!"

Suddenly, the bow lifted and carried the dancing maidens into the sky.
The colors faded, the arch slowly dissolved and the heavens were clear.
Trot turned to the Pinkies. "Let's have a holiday today," she said.
"Have a good time and enjoy yourselves. I don't jus' know how I'm goin'
to rule this country yet, but I'll think it over an' let you know."
Then she went into the palace hut with Cap'n Bill and Button-Bright and
Rosalie the Witch, and the people went away to enjoy themselves and
talk over the surprising events of the day.

"Dear me," said Trot, throwing herself into a chair, "wasn't that a
sudden change of fortune, though? That Rainbow's Daughter is a pretty
good fairy. I'm glad you know her, Button-Bright."

"I was sure something would happen to save you," remarked Rosalie, "and
that was why I voted to have you thrown off the edge. I wanted to
discover who would come to your assistance, and I found out. Now I have
made a friend of Polychrome, and that will render me more powerful as a
Witch, for I can call upon her for assistance whenever I need her."

"But see here," said Cap'n Bill. "You can't afford to spend your time
a-rulin' this tucked-up country, Trot."

"Why not?" asked Trot, who was pleased with her new and important
position.

"It'd get pretty tiresome, mate, after you'd had a few quarrels with
the Pinkies, for they expec' their Queen to be as poor as poverty an'
never have any fun in life."

"You wouldn't like it for long, I'm sure," added Button-Bright
seriously.

Trot seemed thoughtful. "No, I don't know's I would," she admitted.
"But as long as we stay here, it seems a pretty good thing to be Queen.
I guess I'm a little proud of it. I wish mother could see me rulin' the
Pinkies, an' Papa Griffith, too. Wouldn't they open their eyes?"

"They would, mate, but they can't see you," said Cap'n Bill. "So the
question is, what's to be done?"

"We ought to get home," observed the boy. "Our folks will worry about
us, and Earth's the best place to live, after all. If we could only get
hold of my Magic Umbrella, we'd be all right."

  "The rose is red, the violet's blue,
  But the umbrel's stolen by the Boolooroo!"

screamed the parrot.

"That's it," said Cap'n Bill. "The Boolooroo's got the umbrel, an' that
settles the question."

"Tell me," said Rosalie, "If you had your Magic Umbrella, could you fly
home again in safety?"

"Of course we could," replied Button-Bright.

"And would you prefer to go home to remaining here?"

"We would indeed!"

"Then why do you not get the umbrella?"

"How?" asked Trot eagerly.

"You must go into the Blue Country and force the Boolooroo to give up
your property."

"Through the Fog Bank?" asked Cap'n Bill doubtfully.

"And let the Boolooroo capture us again?" demanded Button-Bright with a
shiver.

"An' have to wait on the Snubnoses instead of bein' a Queen?" said Trot.

"You must remember that conditions have changed, and you are now a
powerful Ruler," replied Rosalie. "The Pinkies are really a great
nation, and they are pledged to obey your commands. Why not assemble an
army, march through the Fog Bank, fight and conquer the Boolooroo and
recapture the Magic Umbrella?"

"Hooray!" shouted Cap'n Bill, pounding his wooden leg on the floor.
"That's the proper talk! Let's do it, Queen Trot."

"It doesn't seem like a bad idea," added Button-Bright.

"Do you think the Pinkies would fight the Blueskins?" asked Trot.

"Why not?" replied the sailorman. "They have sharp sticks an' know how
to use 'em, whereas the Blueskins have only them windin'-up cords with
weights on the ends."

"The Blueskins are the biggest people," said the girl.

"But they're cowards, I'm sure," declared the boy.

"Anyhow," the sailor remarked, "that's our only hope of ever gett'n'
home again. I'd like to try it, Trot."

"If you decide on this adventure," said Rosalie, "I believe I can be of
much assistance to you."

"That'll help," asserted Cap'n Bill.

"And we've one good friend among the Blueskins," said Button-Bright.
"I'm sure Ghip-Ghisizzle will side with us, and I've got the Royal
Record Book, which proves that the Boolooroo has already reigned his
lawful three hundred years."

"Does the book say that?" inquired Trot with interest.

"Yes, I've been reading it."

"Then Sizzle'll be the new Boolooroo," said the girl, "an' p'raps we
won't have to fight, after all."

"We'd better go prepared, though," advised Cap'n Bill, "fer that awful
ol' Boolooroo won't give up without a struggle. When shall we start?"

Trot hesitated, so they all looked to Rosalie for advice. "Just as soon
as we can get the army together and ready," decided the Witch. "That
will not take long. Perhaps two or three days."

"Good!" cried Cap'n Bill, and the parrot screamed,

  "Here's a lovely how-d'y'-do--
  We're going to fight the Boolooroo!
  We'll get the Six Snubnoses, too,
  And make 'em all feel mighty blue."

"Either that or the other thing," said Trot. "Anyhow, we're in for it."




THE WAR OF THE PINKS AND BLUES

CHAPTER 19


Much to the surprise of the Earth people, the Pinkies made no objection
whatever to undertaking the adventure. Their lives were so monotonous
and uninteresting that they welcomed anything in the way of excitement.
This march through the unknown Fog Bank to fight the unknown Blueskins
aroused them to enthusiasm, and although the result of the expedition
could not be foretold and some of them were almost certain to get hurt,
they did not hesitate to undertake the war.

It appeared that Coralie was Captain of the Sunset Tribe and a man
named Tintint the Captain of the Sunrise Tribe. Tintint had a very pink
skin and eyes so faded in their pink color that he squinted badly in
order to see anything around him. He was a fat and pompous little
fellow and loved to strut up and down his line of warriors twirling his
long, pointed stick so that all might admire him.

By Rosalie's advice the Army of Conquest consisted of one hundred
Sunsets and one hundred Sunrises. Many more were eager to go, but the
Witch thought that would be enough. The warriors consisted of both men
and women, equally divided, and there was no need to provide uniforms
for them because their regular pink clothing was a distinctive uniform
in itself. Each one bore a long, pointed stick as the main weapon and
had two short, pointed sticks stuck in his belt.

While the army was getting ready, Rosalie the Witch went to the central
edge of the Fog Bank and fearlessly entered it. There she called for
the King of the Giant Frogs, who came at her bidding, and the two held
an earnest and long talk together. Meantime, Cap'n Bill had the army
assembled in the Court of the Statues, where Queen Mayre appeared and
told the Pinkies that the sailorman was to be Commander in Chief of the
Expedition and all must obey his commands. Then Cap'n Bill addressed
the army and told them what the Fog Bank was like. He advised them all
to wear their raincoats over their pretty pink clothes so they would
not get wet, and he assured them that all the creatures to be met with
in the Fog were perfectly harmless.

"When we come to the Blue Country, though," he added, "you're liable to
be pretty busy. The Blueskins are tall an' lanky, an' ugly an' fierce,
an' if they happen to capture you, you'll all be patched, which is a
deep disgrace an' a uncomfortable mix-up."

"Will they throw us over the edge?" asked Captain Tintint.

"I don't think so," replied Cap'n Bill. "While I was there I never
heard the edge mentioned. They're cruel enough to do that--'specially
the Boolooroo--but I guess they've never thought o' throwin' folks over
the edge. They fight with long cords that have weights on the ends,
which coil 'round you an' make you helpless in a jiffy; so whenever
they throw them cords you mus' ward 'em off with your long sticks.
Don't let 'em wind around your bodies, or you're done for."

He told them other things about the Blueskins, so they would not be
frightened when they faced the enemy and found them so different in
appearance from themselves, and also he assured them that the Pinkies
were so much the braver and better armed that he had no doubt they
would easily conquer.

On the third day, just at sunrise, the army moved forward to the Fog
Bank, headed by Cap'n Bill, clad in an embroidered pink coat with wide,
flowing pink trousers, and accompanied by Trot and Button-Bright and
Rosalie the Witch, all bundled up in their pink raincoats. The parrot
was there, too, as the bird refused to be left behind.

They had not advanced far into the deep fog when they were halted by a
queer barrier consisting of a long line of gigantic frogs, crouching so
close together that no Pinkie could squeeze between them. As the heads
of the frogs were turned the other way, toward the Blue Country, the
army could not at first imagine what the barrier was. But Rosalie said
to them, "Our friends the frogs have agreed to help us through the Fog
Bank. Climb upon their backs, as many on each frog as are able to hold
on, and then we shall make the journey more quickly." Obeying this
injunction, the Pinkies began climbing upon the frogs, and by crowding
close together, all were able to find places. On the back of the King
Frog rode Trot and her parrot, besides Rosalie, Button-Bright, Cap'n
Bill and the captains of the two companies of the army.

When all were seated, clinging to one another so they would not slide
off, Cap'n Bill gave the word of command and away leaped the frogs, all
together. They bounded a long distance at this jump--some farther than
others--and as soon as they landed they jumped again, without giving
their passengers a chance to get their breaths. It was a bewildering
and exciting ride, but a dozen of the huge jumps accomplished the
journey, and at the edge of the Fog Bank each frog stopped so suddenly
that the Pinkies went flying over their heads to tumble into the blue
fields of the Blue Country, where they rolled in a confused mass until
they could recover and scramble to their feet. No one was hurt,
however, and the King Frog had been wise enough to treat his passengers
more gently by slowing down at the edge and allowing his riders to slip
to the ground very comfortably.

Cap'n Bill at once formed his army into line of battle and had them all
remove the cumbersome raincoats, which they piled in a heap at the edge
of the Fog Bank. It was a splendid array of warriors, and from where
they stood they could discover several Blueskins rushing in a panic
toward the Blue City as fast as their long, blue legs could carry them.

"Well, they know we're here, anyhow," said Cap'n Bill, "and instead of
waitin' to see what'll they do, I guess we'll jus' march on the City
an' ask 'em to please surrender."




GHIP-GHISIZZLE HAS A BAD TIME

CHAPTER 20


The Boolooroo was quite busy at the time the Pinkies invaded his
country. He had discovered the loss of the Book of Records, and after
being frightened 'most to death at the prospect of his fraud on the
people's being made public, he decided to act boldly and hold his
position as Boolooroo at any cost.

Since Ghip-Ghisizzle was to be the next Boolooroo, the king suspected
him first of all, so he had the Majordomo bound with cords and brought
before him, when he accused him of stealing the Book of Records. Of
course, Ghip-Ghisizzle denied taking the Book, but he became almost as
nervous at its loss as had the Boolooroo. He secretly believed that
Button-Bright had taken the Book from the Treasure Chamber, and if this
were true it might prove as great a misfortune as if the king had kept
it locked up. For Button-Bright had escaped into the Fog Bank, and
Ghip-Ghisizzle was afraid the boy would never again be seen in the Blue
Country.

He did not tell the Boolooroo of this suspicion, because in that case
the king would realize he was secure and that his deception could never
be proved against him. The Majordomo simply denied taking the Record
Book, and the Boolooroo did not believe he spoke truly. To prevent his
rival from ever becoming the Ruler of the Blue Country, the Boolooroo
determined to have him patched, but for some time he could find no
other Blueskin to patch him with. No one had disobeyed a command or
done anything wrong, so the king was in a quandary until he discovered
that a servant named Tiggle had mixed the royal nectar for Cap'n Bill,
who had been ordered to do it at the time of his capture. This was
sufficient excuse for the Boolooroo, who at once had Tiggle made a
prisoner and brought before him.

This servant was not so long-legged as Ghip-Ghisizzle, and his head was
thicker and his nose flatter. But that pleased the Boolooroo all the
more. He realized that when the great knife had sliced the prisoners in
two and their halves were patched together, they would present a
ridiculous sight and all the Blueskins would laugh at them and avoid
them. So on the very morning that the Pinkies arrived, the Boolooroo
had ordered his two prisoners brought into the room of the palace where
the Great Knife stood, and his soldiers were getting ready to perform
the operation of patching Ghip-Ghisizzle with Tingle when a messenger
came running to say that a great army of the Pinkies had broken through
the Fog Bank.

"Never mind," said the Boolooroo, "I'll attend to them in a minute. I'm
busy now."

"They are marching on the City," said the frightened messenger. "If you
delay, Most High and Mighty One, we shall all be captured. You'd better
save your City first and do your patching afterward."

"What!" roared the Boolooroo. "Dare you dictate to me?" But he was
impressed by the man's logic. After locking the prisoners, who were
still bound, in the Room of the Great Knife, the Ruler hurried away to
assemble his soldiers. By this time the Pinkies had advanced halfway to
the walls of the City, so the first thing the Boolooroo did was to
order all the gates closed and locked, and then he placed a line of
