up'n spoken' w'ite 'oman dan w'at Miss Sally is.

"But dat ain't needer yer ner dar. You done got so youk'n rush down yer
des like you useter, en we kin set yer en smoke, en tell tales, en
study up 'musements same like we wuz gwine on 'fo' you got dat splinter
in yo' foot.

"I mines me er one time"--with an infectious laugh--"w'en ole Brer
Rabbit got Brer Fox in de wuss trubble w'at a man wuz mos' ever got in
yit, en dat 'uz w'en he fool 'im 'bout de hoss. Ain't I never tell you
'bout dat? But no marter ef I is. Hoe-cake ain't cook done good twel
hit's turnt over a couple er times.

"Well, atter Brer Fox done git rested fum keepin' out er de way er Mr.
Dog, en sorter ketch up wid his rations, he say ter hisse'f dat he be
dog his cats ef he don't slorate ole Brer Rabbit ef it take 'im a mont';
en dat, too, on top er all de 'spe'unce w'at he done bin had wid um.
Brer Rabbit he sorter git win' er dis, en one day, w'iles he gwine 'long
de road studyin' how he gwineter hol' he hand wid Brer Fox, he see a
great big Hoss layin' stretch out flat on he side in de pastur'; en he
tuck'n crope up, he did, fer ter see ef dish yer Hoss done gone en die.
He crope up en he crope 'roun', en bimeby he see de Hoss switch he tail,
en den Brer Rabbit know he ain't dead. Wid dat, Brer Rabbit lope back
ter de big road, en mos' de fus' man w'at he see gwine on by wuz Brer
Fox, en Brer Rabbit he tuck atter 'im, en holler:--

"'Brer Fox! O Brer Fox! Come back! I got some good news fer you. Come
back, Brer Fox,' sezee.

"Brer Fox, he tu'n 'roun', he did, en w'en he see who callin' 'im, he
come gallopin' back, kaze it seem like dat des ez gooder time ez any fer
ter nab Brer Rabbit; but 'fo' he git in nabbin' distance, Brer Rabbit he
up'n say, sezee:--

"'Come on, Brer Fox! I done fine de place whar you kin lay in fresh meat
'nuff fer ter las' you plum twel de middle er nex' year,' sezee.

"Brer Fox, he ax wharbouts, en Brer Rabbit, he say, right over dar in de
pastur', en Brer Fox ax w'at is it, en Brer Rabbit, he say w'ich 'twuz a
whole Hoss layin' down on de groun' whar dey kin ketch 'im en tie 'im.
Wid dat, Brer Fox, he say come on, en off dey put.

"W'en dey got dar, sho' nuff, dar lay de Hoss all stretch out in de sun,
fas' 'sleep, en den Brer Fox en Brer Rabbit, dey had a 'spute 'bout how
dey gwine ter fix de Hoss so he can't git loose. One say one way en de
yuther say n'er way, en dar dey had it, twel atter w'ile Brer Rabbit, he
say, sezee:--

"'De onliest plan w'at I knows un, Brer Fox,' sezee, 'is fer you ter git
down dar en lemme tie you ter de Hoss tail, en den, w'en he try ter git
up, you kin hol' 'im down,' sezee. 'Ef I wuz big man like w'at you is,'
sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'you mought tie me ter dat Hoss' tail, en ef I
ain't hol' 'im down, den Joe's dead en Sal's a widder. I des knows you
kin hol' 'im down,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'but yit, ef you 'feared, we
des better drap dat idee en study out some yuther plan,' sezee.

"Brer Fox sorter jubus 'bout dis, but he bleedzd ter play biggity 'fo'
Brer Rabbit, en he tuck'n 'gree ter de progrance, en den Brer Rabbit, he
tuck'n tie Brer Fox ter de Hoss' tail, en atter he git 'im tie dar hard
en fas', he sorter step back, he did, en put he han's 'kimbo, en grin,
en den he say, sezee:--

"Ef ever dey wuz a Hoss kotch, den we done kotch dis un. Look sorter lak
we done put de bridle on de wrong een',' sezee, 'but I lay Brer Fox is
got de strenk fer ter hol' 'im,' sezee.

"Wid dat, Brer Rabbit cut 'im a long switch en trim it up, en w'en he
get it fix, up he step en hit de Hoss a rap--_pow!_ De Hoss 'uz dat
s'prise at dat kinder doin's dat he make one jump, en lan' on he foots.
W'en he do dat, dar wuz Brer Fox danglin' in de a'r, en Brer Rabbit, he
dart out de way en holler:--

"'Hol' 'im down, Brer Fox! Hol' 'im down! I'll stan' out yer en see fa'r
play. Hol' 'im down, Brer Fox! Hol' 'im down!'

"Co'se, w'en de Hoss feel Brer Fox hangin' dar onter he tail, he thunk
sump'n' kuse wuz de marter, en dis make 'im jump en r'ar wusser en
wusser, en he shake up Brer Fox same like he wuz a rag in de win', en
Brer Rabbit, he jump en holler:--

"'Hol' 'im down, Brer Fox! Hol' 'im down! You got 'im now, sho'! Hol'
yo' grip, en hol' 'im down,' sezee.

"De Hoss, he jump en he hump, en he rip en he r'ar, en he snort en he
t'ar. But yit Brer Fox hang on, en still Brer Rabbit skip 'roun' en
holler:--

"'Hol' 'im down, Brer Fox! You got 'im whar he can't needer back ner
squall. Hol' 'im down, Brer Fox!' sezee.

"Bimeby, w'en Brer Fox git chance, he holler back, he did:--

"'How in de name er goodness I gwine ter hol' de Hoss down 'less I git
my claw in de groun'?'

"Den Brer Rabbit, he stan' back little furder en holler little louder:--

"'Hol' 'im down, Brer Fox! Hol' 'im down! You got 'im now, sho'! Hol'
'im down!'

"Bimeby de Hoss 'gun ter kick wid he behime legs, en de fus' news you
know, he fetch Brer Fox a lick in de stomach dat fa'rly make 'im squall,
en den he kick 'im ag'in, en dis time he break Brer Fox loose, en sont
'im a-whirlin'; en Brer Rabbit, he keep on a-jumpin' 'roun' en
hollerin':--

"'Hol' 'im down, Brer Fox!'"

"Did the fox get killed, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy.

"He wa'n't 'zackly kilt, honey," replied the old man, "but he wuz de
nex' do' ter't. He 'uz all broke up, en w'iles he 'uz gittin' well, hit
sorter come 'cross he min' dat Brer Rabbit done play n'er game on 'im."




III

BRER RABBIT AND THE LITTLE GIRL


"What did Brother Rabbit do after that?" the little boy asked presently.

"Now, den, you don't wanter push ole Brer Rabbit too close," replied
Uncle Remus significantly. "He mighty tender-footed creetur, en de mo'
w'at you push 'im, de furder he lef' you."

There was prolonged silence in the old man's cabin, until, seeing that
the little boy was growing restless enough to cast several curious
glances in the direction of the tool chest in the corner, Uncle Remus
lifted one leg over the other, scratched his head reflectively, and
began:--

"One time, atter Brer Rabbit done bin trompin' 'roun' huntin' up some
sallid fer ter make out he dinner wid, he fine hisse'f in de
neighborhoods er Mr. Man house, en he pass 'long twel he come ter de
gyardin-gate, en nigh de gyardin-gate he see Little Gal playin' 'roun'
in de san'. Wen Brer Rabbit look 'twix' de gyardin-palin's en see de
colluds, en de sparrer-grass, en de yuther gyardin truck growin' dar,
hit make he mouf water. Den he take en walk up ter de Little Gal, Brer
Rabbit did, en pull he roach,[1] en bow, en scrape he foot, en talk
mighty nice en slick.

"'Howdy, Little Gal,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee; 'how you come on?' sezee.

"Den de Little Gal, she 'spon' howdy, she did, en she ax Brer Rabbit how
he come on, en Brer Rabbit, he 'low he mighty po'ly, en den he ax ef dis
de Little Gal w'at 'er pa live up dar in de big w'ite house, w'ich de
Little Gal, she up'n say 'twer'. Brer Rabbit, he say he mighty glad,
kaze he des bin up dar fer to see 'er pa, en he say dat 'er pa, he sont
'im out dar fer ter tell de Little Gal dat she mus' open de gyardin-gate
so Brer Rabbit kin go in en git some truck. Den de Little Gal, she jump
'roun', she did, en she open de gate, en wid dat, Brer Rabbit, he hop
in, he did, en got 'im a mess er greens, en hop out ag'in, en w'en he
gwine off he make a bow, he did, en tell de Little Gal dat he much
'blije', en den atter dat he put out fer home.

"Nex' day, Brer Rabbit, he hide out, he did, twel he see de Little Gal
come out ter play, en den he put up de same tale, en walk off wid a n'er
mess er truck, en hit keep on dis a-way, twel bimeby Mr. Man, he 'gun
ter miss his greens, en he keep on a-missin' un um, twel he got ter
excusin' eve'ybody on de place er 'stroyin' un um, en w'en dat come ter
pass, de Little Gal, she up'n say:--

"'My goodness, pa!' sez she, 'you done tole Mr. Rabbit fer ter come and
make me let 'im in de gyardin atter some greens, en ain't he done come
en ax me, en ain't I done gone en let 'im in?' sez she.

"Mr. Man ain't hatter study long 'fo' he see how de lan' lay, en den he
laff, en tell de Little Gal dat he done gone en disremember all 'bout
Mr. Rabbit, en den he up'n say, sezee:--

"'Nex' time Mr. Rabbit come, you tak'n tu'n 'im in, en den you run des
ez fas' ez you kin en come en tell me, kase I got some bizness wid dat
young chap dat's bleedze ter be 'ten' ter,' sezee.

"Sho' nuff, nex' mawnin' dar wuz de Little Gal playin' 'roun', en yer
come Brer Rabbit atter he 'lowance er greens. He wuz ready wid de same
tale, en den de Little Gal, she tu'n 'im in, she did, en den she run up
ter de house en holler:--

"'O pa! pa! O pa! Yer Brer Rabbit in de gyardin now! Yer he is, pa!'

"Den Mr. Man, he rush out, en grab up a fishin'-line w'at bin hangin' in
de back po'ch, en mak fer de gyardin, en w'en he git dar, dar wuz Brer
Rabbit tromplin' 'roun' on de strawbe'y-bed en mashin' down de
termartusses. W'en Brer Rabbit see Mr. Man, he squot behime a collud
leaf, but 't wa'n't no use. Mr. Man done seed him, en 'fo' you kin
count 'lev'm, he done got ole Brer Rabbit tie hard en fas' wid de
fishin'-line. Atter he got him tie good, Mr. Man step back, he did, en
say, sezee:--

"'You done bin fool me lots er time, but dis time you er mine. I'm gwine
ter take you en gin you a larrupin',' sezee, 'en den I'm gwine ter skin
you en nail yo' hide on de stable do',' sezee; 'en den ter make sho dat
you git de right kinder larrupin', I'll des step up ter de house,'
sezee, 'en fetch de little red cowhide, en den I'll take en gin you
brinjer,' sezee.

"Den Mr. Man call to der Little Gal ter watch Brer Rabbit w'iles he
gone.

"Brer Rabbit ain't sayin' nothin', but Mr. Man ain't mo'n out de gate
'fo' he 'gun ter sing; en in dem days Brer Rabbit wuz a singer, mon,"
continued Uncle Remus, with unusual emphasis, "en w'en he chuned up fer
ter sing he make dem yuther creeturs hol' der bref."

"What did he sing, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy.

"Ef I ain't fergit dat song off'n my min'," said Uncle Remus, looking
over his spectacles at the fire, with a curious air of attempting to
remember something, "hit run sorter dish yer way:--

    "'_De jay-bird hunt de sparrer-nes',
    De bee-martin sail all 'roun';
    De squer'l, he holler from de top er de tree,
    Mr. Mole, he stay in de groun';
    He hide en he stay twel de dark drop down--
    Mr. Mole, he hide in de groun'._'

"W'en de Little Gal year dat, she laugh, she did, and she up'n ax Brer
Babbit fer ter sing some mo', but Brer Rabbit, he sorter cough, he did,
en 'low dat he got a mighty bad ho'seness down inter he win'pipe
some'rs. De Little Gal, she swade,[2] en swade, en bimeby Brer Rabbit,
he up 'n 'low dat he kin dance mo' samer dan w'at he kin sing. Den de
Little Gal, she ax' im won't he dance, en Brer Rabbit, he 'spon' how in
de name er goodness kin a man dance w'iles he all tie up dis a-way, en
den de Little Gal, she say she kin ontie 'im, en Brer Rabbit, he say he
ain't keerin' ef she do. Wid dat de Little Gal, she retch down en
onloose de fish-line, en Brer Rabbit, he sorter stretch hisse'f en look
'roun'."

Here Uncle Remus paused and sighed, as though he had relieved his mind
of a great burden. The little boy waited a few minutes for the old man
to resume, and finally he asked:--

"Did the Rabbit dance, Uncle Remus?"

"Who? Him?" exclaimed the old man, with a queer affectation of elation.
"Bless yo' soul, honey! Brer Rabbit gedder up his foots und' 'im, en he
dance outer dat gyardin, en he dance home. He did dat! Sho'ly you don't
'speck' dat a ole-timer w'at done had 'spe'unce like Brer Rabbit gwine
ter stay dar en let dat ar Mr. Man sackyfice 'im? _Shoo!_ Brer Rabbit
dance, but he dance home. You year me!"


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Topknot, foretop.

[2] Persuaded.




IV

BRER FOX COPIES BRER RABBIT


Uncle Remus chuckled a moment over the escape of Brother Rabbit, and
then turned his gaze upward toward the cobwebbed gloom that seemed to
lie just beyond the rafters. He sat thus silent and serious a little
while, but finally squared himself around in his chair and looked the
little boy full in the face. The old man's countenance expressed a
curious mixture of sorrow and bewilderment. Catching the child by the
coat-sleeve, Uncle Remus pulled him gently to attract his attention.

"Hit look like ter me," he said presently, in the tone of one
approaching an unpleasant subject, "dat no longer'n yistiddy I see one
er dem ar Favers chillun clim'in' dat ar big red-oak out yan', en den it
seem like dat a little chap 'bout yo' size, he tuck'n start up ter see
ef he can't play smarty like de Favers's yearlin's. I dunner w'at in de
name er goodness you wanter be a-copyin' atter dem ar Faverses fer. Ef
you er gwine ter copy atter yuther folks, copy atter dem w'at's some
'count. Yo' pa, he got de idee dat some folks is good ez yuther folks;
but Miss Sally, she know better. She know dat dey ain't no Favers 'pon
de top side er de yeth w'at kin hol' der han' wid de Abercrombies in
p'int er breedin' en raisin'. Dat w'at Miss Sally know. I bin keepin'
track er dem Faverses sence way back yan' long 'fo' Miss Sally wuz
born'd. Ole Cajy Favers, he went ter de po'house, en ez ter dat Jim
Favers, I boun' you he know de inside er all de jails in dish yer State
er Jawjy. Dey allers did hate niggers kase dey ain't had none, en dey
hates um down ter dis day.

"Year 'fo' las'," Uncle Remus continued, "I year yo Unk' Jeems
Abercrombie tell dat same Jim Favers dat ef he lay de weight er he han'
on one er his niggers, he'd slap a load er buck shot in 'im; en, bless
yo' soul, honey, yo' Unk' Jeems wuz des de man ter do it. But dey er
monst'us perlite unter me, dem Faverses is," pursued the old man,
allowing his indignation, which had risen to a white heat, to cool off,
"en dey better be," he added spitefully, "kase I knows der pedigree fum
de fus' ter de las', en w'en I gits my Affikin up, dey ain't nobody,
'less it's Miss Sally 'erse'f, w'at kin keep me down.

"But dat ain't needer yer ner dar," said Uncle Remus, renewing his
attack upon the little boy. "W'at you wanter go copyin' atter dem Favers
chillun fer? Youer settin' back dar, right dis minnit, bettin' longer
yo'se'f dat I ain't gwine ter tell Miss Sally, en dar whar youer lettin'
yo' foot slip, kaze I'm gwine ter let it pass dis time, but de ve'y nex'
time w'at I ketches you in hollerin' distuns er dem Faverses, right den
en dar I'm gwine ter take my foot in my han' en go en tell Miss Sally,
en ef she don't natally skin you 'live, den she ain't de same 'oman w'at
she useter be.

"All dish yer copyin' atter deze yer Faverses put me in min' er de time
w'en Brer Fox got ter copyin' atter Brer Rabbit. I done tole you 'bout
de time w'en Brer Rabbit git de game fum Brer Fox by makin' like he
dead?"[3]

The little boy remembered it very distinctly, and said as much.

"Well, den, ole Brer Fox, w'en he see how slick de trick wuk wid Brer
Rabbit, he say ter hisse'f dat he b'leeve he'll up'n try de same kinder
game on some yuther man, en he keep on watchin' fer he chance, twel
bimeby, one day, he year Mr. Man comin' down de big road in a one-hoss
waggin, kyar'n some chickens, en some eggs, en some butter, ter town.
Brer Fox year 'im comin', he did, en w'at do he do but go en lay down in
de road front er de waggin. Mr. Man, he druv 'long, he did, cluckin' ter
de hoss en hummin' ter hisse'f, en w'en dey git mos' up ter Brer Fox, de
hoss, he shy, he did, en Mr. Man, he tuck'n holler Wo! en de hoss, he
tuck'n wo'd. Den Mr. Man, he look down, en he see Brer Fox layin' out
dar on de groun' des like he cole en stiff, en w'en Mr. Man see dis, he
holler out:--

"'Heyo! Dar de chap w'at been nabbin' up my chickens, en somebody done
gone en shot off a gun at 'im, w'ich I wish she'd er bin two guns--dat I
does!'

"Wid dat, Mr. Man he druv on en lef Brer Fox layin' dar. Den Brer Fox,
he git up en run 'roun' thoo de woods en lay down front er Mr. Man
ag'in, en Mr. Man come drivin' 'long, en he see Brer Fox, en he say,
sezee;--

"'Heyo! Yer de ve'y chap what been 'stroyin' my pigs. Somebody done gone
en kilt 'im, en I wish dey'd er kilt 'im long time ago.'

"Den Mr. Man, he druv on, en de waggin-w'eel come mighty nigh mashin'
Brer Fox nose; yit, all de same, Brer Fox lipt up en run 'roun' 'head er
Mr. Man, en lay down in de road, en w'en Mr. Man come 'long, dar he wuz
all stretch out like he big 'nuff fer ter fill a two-bushel baskit, en
he look like he dead 'nuff fer ter be skint. Mr. Man druv up, he did, en
stop. He look down pun Brer Fox, en den he look all 'roun' fer ter see
w'at de 'casion er all deze yer dead Fox is. Mr. Man look all 'roun', he
did, but he ain't see nothin', en needer do he year nothin'. Den he set
dar en study, en bimeby he 'low ter hisse'f, he did, dat he had better
'zamin' w'at kinder kuse zeeze[4] done bin got inter Brer Fox fambly, en
wid dat he lit down outer de waggin, en feel er Brer Fox year; Brer Fox
year feel right wom. Den he feel Brer Fox neck; Brer Fox neck right wom.
Den he feel er Brer Fox in de short ribs; Brer Fox all soun' in de short
ribs. Den he feel er Brer Fox lim's; Brer Fox all soun' in de lim's. Den
he tu'n Brer Fox over, en, lo en beholes, Brer Fox right limber. Wen Mr.
Man see dis, he say ter hisse'f, sezee:--

"'Heyo, yer! how come dis? Dish yer chicken-nabber look lak he dead, but
dey ain't no bones broked, en I ain't see no blood, en needer does I
feel no bruise; en mo'n dat he wom en he limber,' sezee. 'Sump'n' wrong
yer, sho'! Dish yer pig-grabber _mought_ be dead, en den ag'in he
moughtent,' sezee; 'but ter make sho' dat he is, I'll des gin 'im a
whack wid my w'ip-han'le,' sezee; en wid dat, Mr. Man draw back en fotch
Brer Fox a clip behime de years--_pow!_--en de lick come so hard en it
come so quick dat Brer Fox thunk sho' he's a goner; but 'fo' Mr. Man kin
draw back fer ter fetch 'im a n'er wipe, Brer Fox, he scramble ter his
feet, he did, en des make tracks 'way fum dar."

Uncle Remus paused and shook the cold ashes from his pipe, and then
applied the moral:--

"Dat w'at Brer Fox git fer playin' Mr. Smarty en copyin' atter yuther
foks, en dat des de way de whole Smarty fambly gwine ter come out."


FOOTNOTES:

[3] _Uncle Remus: His Songs and His Sayings_, p. 70 (New York: D.
Appleton & Co.).

[4] Disease.




V

BRER RABBIT'S ASTONISHING PRANK


"I 'speck dat 'uz de reas'n w'at make ole Brer Rabbit git 'long so well,
kaze he ain't copy atter none er de yuther creeturs," Uncle Remus
continued, after a while. "Wen he make his disappearance 'fo' um, hit
'uz allers in some bran new place. Dey ain't know wharbouts fer ter
watch out fer 'im. He wuz de funniest creetur er de whole gang. Some
folks moughter call him lucky, en yit, w'en he git in bad luck, hit look
lak he mos' allers come out on top. Hit look mighty kuse now, but 't
wa'n't kuse in dem days, kaze hit 'uz done gun up dat, strike 'im w'en
you might en whar you would, Brer Rabbit wuz de soopless creetur gwine.

"One time, he sorter tuck a notion, ole Brer Rabbit did, dat he'd pay
Brer B'ar a call, en no sooner do de notion strike 'im dan he pick
hisse'f up en put out fer Brer B'ar house."

"Why, I thought they were mad with each other," the little boy
exclaimed.

"Brer Rabbit make he call w'en Brer B'ar en his fambly wuz off fum
home," Uncle Remus explained, with a chuckle which was in the nature of
a hearty tribute to the crafty judgment of Brother Rabbit.

"He sot down by de road, en he see um go by,--ole Brer B'ar en ole Miss
B'ar, en der two twin-chilluns, w'ich one un um wuz name Kubs en de t'er
one wuz name Klibs."

The little boy laughed, but the severe seriousness of Uncle Remus would
have served for a study, as he continued:--

"Ole Brer B'ar en Miss B'ar, dey went 'long ahead, en Kubs en Klibs, dey
come shufflin' en scramblin' 'long behime. W'en Brer Rabbit see dis, he
say ter hisse'f dat he 'speck he better go see how Brer B'ar gittin' on;
en off he put. En 't wa'n't long n'er 'fo' he 'uz ransackin' de
premmuses same like he 'uz sho' 'nuff patter-roller. Wiles he wuz gwine
'roun' peepin' in yer en pokin' in dar, he got ter foolin' 'mong de
shelfs, en a bucket er honey w'at Brer B'ar got hid in de cubbud fall
down en spill on top er Brer Rabbit, en little mo'n he'd er bin drown.
Fum head ter heels dat creetur wuz kiver'd wid honey; he wa'n't des only
bedobble wid it, he wuz des kiver'd. He hatter set dar en let de natal
sweetness drip outen he eyeballs 'fo' he kin see he han' befo' 'im, en
den, atter he look' 'roun' little, he say to hisse'f, sezee:--

"'Heyo, yer! W'at I gwine do now? Ef I go out in de sunshine, de
bumly-bees en de flies dey'll swom up'n take me, en if I stay yer, Brer
B'ar'll come back en ketch me, en I dunner w'at in de name er gracious I
gwine do.'

"Ennyhow, bimeby a notion strike Brer Rabbit, en he tip 'long twel he
git in de woods, en w'en he git out dar, w'at do he do but roll in de
leafs en trash en try fer ter rub de honey off'n 'im dat a-way. He roll,
he did, en de leafs dey stick; Brer Rabbit roll, en de leafs dey stick,
en he keep on rollin' en de leafs keep on stickin', twel atter w'ile
Brer Rabbit wuz de mos' owdashus-lookin' creetur w'at you ever sot eyes
on. En ef Miss Meadows en de gals could er seed 'im den en dar, dey
would n't er bin no mo' Brer Rabbit call at der house; 'deed, en dat dey
would n't.

"Brer Rabbit, he jump 'roun', he did, en try ter shake de leafs off'a
'im, but de leafs, dey ain't gwine ter be shuck off. Brer Rabbit, he
shake en he shiver, but de leafs dey stick; en de capers dat creetur cut
