
The prosecution of such a policy, however, is rarely economical; in the
history of the past it has always resulted in weakness and
disintegration. China is to-day helpless because of a policy of
self-seclusion; and the marvellous growth of Japan began when her trade
was thrown open to the world.

For the greater part the environment of a people is deficient--that is,
the locality of a people does not yield all that is required for the
necessities of life. For instance, the New England plateau requires an
enormous amount of fuel for its manufacturing enterprises; but
practically no coal is found within its borders; hence the manufacturers
must either command the coal to be shipped from other regions or give up
their employment. The people of Canada require a certain amount of
cotton cloth; but the cotton plant will not grow in a cold climate, so
they must either exchange some of their own commodities for cotton, or
else go without it. The inhabitants of Great Britain produce only a
small part of the food-stuffs they consume; therefore they are
constantly exchanging their manufactured products for the food-stuffs
that of necessity must be produced in other parts of the world.

The dwellers of the New England plateau might grow the bread-stuffs they
require, and in times past they did so. At that time, however, a barrel
of flour was worth twelve dollars. But the wheat of the prairie regions
can be grown, manufactured into flour, transported a thousand miles, and
sold at a profit for less than five dollars a barrel. Therefore it is
evidently more economical to buy flour in Minnesota than to grow the
wheat and make it into flour in Massachusetts.

All these problems, and they exist without number, show that man may
overcome most of the obstacles that surround him. So we find civilized
man living in almost every part of the world. Tropical regions are not
too scorching, nor are arctic fastnesses too cold for him. In other
words, because of commerce and transportation, he can and usually does
master the conditions of his environment; his intelligence enables him
to do so, and his ability to do so is the result of the intelligent use
of experience and education.




CHAPTER II

HOW COMMERCE CIVILIZED MANKIND


The history of western civilization is so closely connected with the
development of the great routes of travel and the growth of commerce
that one cannot possibly separate them. Commerce cannot exist without
the intercourse of peoples, and peoples cannot be in mutual
communication unless each learns from the other.

=Feudalism.=--When the Roman Empire fell civilization in western Europe
was not on a high plane; indeed, the feudalism that followed was not
much above barbarism. The people were living in a manner that was not
very much unlike the communal system under which the serfs of Russia
lived only a few years ago. Each centre of population was a sort of
military camp governed by a feudal lord. The followers and retainers
were scarcely better off than slaves; indeed, many of them were slaves.
There was no ownership of the land except by the feudal lords, and the
latter were responsible for their acts to the king only.

But very few people cared to be absolutely free, because they had but
little chance to protect themselves; so it was the common custom to
attach one's self to a feudal lord in order to have his protection; even
a sort of peonage or slavery under him was better than no protection at
all. A few of the people were engaged in trade and manufacture of some
kind or other, and they were the only ones through whom the feudal lord
could supply himself with the commodities needed for his retainers and
the luxuries necessary to himself.

Each feudal estate, therefore, became a sort of industrial centre by
itself, producing its own food-stuffs and much of the coarser
manufactures. It was not a very high condition of enlightenment, but it
was much better than the one which preceded it, for at least it offered
protection. It encouraged a certain amount of trade and commerce,
because the feudal lord had many wants, and he was usually willing to
protect the merchant who supplied them.

=The Crusades and Commerce.=--The Crusades, or wars by which the
Christians sought to recover the Holy Land from the Turk, resulted in a
trade between Europe and India that grew to wonderful proportions. Silk
fabrics, cotton cloth, precious stones, ostrich plumes, ivory, spices,
and drugs--all of which were practically unknown in Europe--were eagerly
sought by the nobility and their dependencies. In return, linen and
woollen fabrics, leather goods, glassware, blacklead, and steel
implements were carried to the far East.

Milan, Florence, Venice and Genoa, Constantinople and a number of less
important towns along the Mediterranean basin became important trade
centres, but Venice and Genoa grew to be world powers in commerce. Not
only were they great receiving and distributing depots of trade, but
they were great manufacturing centres as well.

The routes over which this enormous commerce was carried were few in
number. For the greater part, the Venetian trade went to Alexandria, and
thence by the Red Sea to India. Genoese merchants sent their goods to
Constantinople and Trebizond, thence down the Tigris River to the
Persian Gulf and to India. There was also another route that had been
used by the Phoenicians. It extended from Tyre through Damascus and
Palmyra[2] to the head of the Persian Gulf; this gradually fell into
disuse after the founding of Alexandria.

The general effects of this trade were very far-reaching. To the greater
number of the people of Europe, the countries of India, China, and Japan
were mythical. According to tradition they were infested with dragons
and gryphons, and peopled by dog-headed folk or by one-eyed Arimaspians.
About the first real information of them to be spread over Europe was
brought by Marco Polo, whose father and uncle had travelled all through
these countries during the latter part of the thirteenth century.[3]
Marco Polo's writings were very widely read, and influenced a great many
people who could not be reached through the ordinary channels of
commerce. So between the wars of the Crusades on the one hand, and the
growth of commerce on the other, a new and a better civilization began
to spread over Europe.

=The Turkish Invasions.=--But the magnificent trade that had thus grown up
was checked for a time by an unforeseen factor. The half-savage
Turkomans living southeast of Russia had become converted to the
religion of Islam, and in their zeal for the new belief, determined to
destroy the commerce which seemed to be connected with Christianity. So
they moved in upon the borderland between Europe and Asia, and one after
another the trade routes were tightly closed. Then they captured
Constantinople, and the routes between Genoa and the Orient were
hermetically sealed. Moslem power also spread over Syria and Egypt, and
so, little by little, the trade of Venice was throttled.

[Illustration: ROUTES TO INDIA--THE TURK CHANGES THE COMMERCE OF THE
WORLD]

Now a commerce that involved not only many millions of dollars, but the
employment of thousands of people as well, is not likely to be given up
without a struggle. So the energy that had been devoted to this great
trade was turned in a new direction, and there began a search for a new
route to India--one that the Turks could not blockade.

=The Search for an All-Water Route to India.=--Overland routes were out of
the question; there were none that could be made available, and so the
search was made for a sea-route. Rather singularly the Venetians and
Genoese, who had hitherto controlled this trade, took no part in the
search; it was conducted by the Spanish and the Portuguese.

The Spanish monarchs, Ferdinand and Isabella of Castile, fitted out an
expedition under Christopher Columbus, a master-mariner and
cartographer, the funds being provided by Isabella, who pledged her
private property as security for the cost of the expedition. This
expedition resulted in the discovery, October 10-21, 1492, of the West
India Islands. In a subsequent voyage, Columbus discovered the mainland
of South America.

Even before the voyage of Columbus, the Portuguese had been trying to
find a way around Africa to India, and Pope Eugenius IV. had conferred
on Portugal "all heathen lands from Cape Bojador eastward even to the
Indies." Little by little, therefore, Portuguese navigators were pushing
southward until, in 1487, Bartholomew Dias sighted the Cape of Good
Hope, and got about as far as Algoa Bay. Then he unwillingly turned back
because of the threats of his crew. It was a most remarkable voyage, and
one of the shipmates of Dias was Bartholomew Columbus, a brother of the
discoverer of the New World.

Ten years later, or five years after the voyage of Columbus, Vasco da
Gama sailed from Lisbon for the Cape of Good Hope. As he passed the Cape
he was terribly storm-tossed, but the storms carried him in a fortunate
direction. And when at last he got his reckonings, he was off the coast
of India; he therefore kept along the coast until in sight of a port.
The port was the well-known city of Calicut. Two years later he returned
to Europe by the same route, his ships laden with spices, precious
stones, beautiful tapestries and brocades, ivory and bronzes. The
long-sought sea-route to India had been discovered.

[Illustration: A HANSE CITY--HAMBURG, ALONG THE WATER-FRONT]

=Commerce in Western Europe.=--After the discovery of the new route,
Venice and Genoa were scarcely heard of in relation to commerce; they
lost everything and gained nothing. The great commerce with the Orient
was to have a new western terminus, and the latter was to be on the
shores of the North and Baltic Seas.

The commerce between Europe and India stimulated trade in western Europe
as well. As early as the twelfth century the manufacture of linen and
woollen cloth had grown to be a very important industry that had
resulted in the rapid growth of population. The older cities grew
rapidly, and new ones sprang up wherever the commodities of trade were
gathered, manufactured, or distributed.

These centres of trade had two hostile elements against them. The feudal
lords used to pillage them legally by extorting heavy taxes and forced
loans whenever their treasuries were empty. The portionless brothers and
relatives of the feudal lords, to whom no employments save war,
adventure, and piracy were open, pillaged them illegally. Along the
coasts especially, piracy was considered not only a legitimate, but a
genteel, profession. So in order to protect themselves, the cities began
to join themselves into leagues.

=The Hanse League.=--About the beginning of the thirteenth century[4]
Hamburg and Luebeck formed an alliance afterward called a _hansa_; at the
beginning of the fourteenth century it embraced seventy cities, having
the capital at Luebeck. At the time of its greatest power the League
embraced all the principal cities of western Europe nearly as far south
as the Danube. Large agencies, called "factories," were established in
London, Bruges, Novgorod, Bergen, and Wisby. The influence of the League
practically controlled western Europe.

The Hanse League performed a wonderful work. It stopped piracy on the
seas and robbery on the land. Industrially, it encouraged
self-government and obedience to constitutional authority. Shipbuilding
and navigation so greatly improved that the ocean traffic resulting from
the discovery of the cape route to India quickly fell into the hands of
Hanse sailors and master-mariners. The League not only encouraged and
protected all sorts of manufactures, but its schools trained thousands
of operatives. The mines were worked and the idle land cultivated. It
was the greatest industrial movement that ever occurred.

[Illustration: HANSE ROUTES--THE HANSE LEAGUE REORGANIZES THE TRADE OF
THE WORLD]

Socially, the Hanse League brought the wealth that gave those comforts
and conveniences before unknown. The standards of social life,
education, art, and science were raised from a condition scarcely
better than barbarism to a high plane of civilization. Indeed, the
civilization of western Europe was the most important result of it.

It forced the rights of individual freedom, as well as municipal
independence, from more than one monarch, and punished severely the
kings who sought to betray it. It crushed the power of those who opposed
it,[5] and rewarded those who were faithful to it. Its most important
mission, however, was the overthrow of feudalism and the gradual
substitution of popular government in its place.

Having accomplished the regeneration of Europe, the Hanse League died
partly by its own hand, because of its arrogance, but mainly from the
fact that, having educated western Europe to self-government and
commercial independence, there was no longer need for its existence.
Independent cities grew rapidly into importance, and these got along
very well without the protection of the League. The great industrial
progress was at times temporarily checked by wars, but it never took a
backward step. Indeed the progress of commerce has always been a contest
between brains and brute force, and in such a struggle there is never
any doubt about the final outcome.


QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION

What were some of the effects of Caesar's invasion of Germanic Europe so
far as commerce is concerned?

What were some of the effects on commerce of the breaking up of the
Roman Empire?

How did the invasion of England by William of Normandy affect the
commerce of the English people?

Who was Henry the Navigator, and what did he accomplish?

How did the blockade of the routes between Europe and India bring about
the discovery of America?

What was the result of the great voyage of the Cabots?

Was the overthrow of feudalism in Europe a gain or a loss to commerce?

Why are not commercial leagues, such as the Hanse, necessary at the
present time?

Why did Spain's commerce decline as Portugal's thrived?


COLLATERAL READING[6]

Gibbins's History of Commerce--Chapters IV-V.

Fiske's Discovery of America, Vol. 1--Chapters IV-V.




CHAPTER III

TOPOGRAPHIC CONTROL OF COMMERCE


The great industry of commerce, which includes both the trade in the
commodities of life and the transportation of them, is governed very
largely by the character of the earth's surface. But very few
food-stuffs can be grown economically in mountain-regions. Steep
mountain-slopes are apt to be destitute of soil; moreover, even the
mountain-valleys are apt to be difficult of access, and in such cases
the cost of moving the crops may be greater than the market value of the
products. Mountainous countries, therefore, are apt to be sparsely
peopled regions.

But although the great mountain-systems are unhabitable, or at least
sparsely peopled, they have a very definite place in the economics of
life. Thus, the great western highland of the United States diverts the
flow of moisture from the Gulf of Mexico northward into the central
plain, and gives to the region most of its food-growing power. In a
similar manner, moisture intercepted by the Alps and the Himalayas has
not only created the plains of the Po and the Ganges from the rock-waste
carried from the slopes, but has also made them exceedingly fertile.

Mountain-ranges are also valuable for their contents. The broken
condition of the rock-folds and the rapid weathering to which they are
subjected have exposed the minerals and metals so useful in the arts of
commerce and civilization. Thus, the weathering of the Appalachian folds
has made accessible about the only available anthracite coal measures
yet worked; and the worn folds about Lake Superior have yielded the
ores that have made the United States the foremost copper and steel
manufacturing country of the world. Gold, silver, tin, lead, zinc,
platinum, granite, slate, and marble occur mainly in mountain-folds.

=Mountains and Valleys.=--Mountain-ranges are great obstacles to commerce
and intercommunication. The Greek peoples found it much easier to
scatter along the Mediterranean coast than to cross the Balkan
Mountains. For twenty years after the settlement of California, it was
easier and less expensive to send traffic by way of Cape Horn than to
carry it across the Rocky Mountains.

The deep canyons of mountainous regions are quite as difficult to
overcome as the high ranges. In modern methods of transportation a range
that cannot be surmounted may be tunnelled, and a tunnel five or six
miles in length is no uncommon feat of engineering. A canyon, however,
cannot be tunnelled, and if too wide for cantilever or suspension
bridges, a detour of many miles is necessary. In crossing a deep chasm
the route of transportation may aggregate ten or fifteen times the
distance spanned by a straight line.

Excepting the mining regions, the population of mountainous countries is
apt to be found mainly in the intermontane valleys. A reason for this is
not hard to find; the valleys are usually filled with rich soil brought
from the higher slopes and levelled by the water. The population,
therefore, is concentrated in the valley because of the food-producing
power of the land. For this reason the Sound, Willamette, and San
Joaquin-Sacramento Valleys contain the chief part of the Pacific coast
population. The Shenandoah and the Great Valley of Virginia are similar
instances.

What is true of the larger intermontane valleys is true also of the
narrow stream valleys of mountain and plateau regions. Thus, in the New
England plateau the chief growth during the past forty years has been in
the valley lands. In that time if the uplands have not suffered actual
loss, they certainly have made no material gains. Upland farming has not
proved a remunerative venture, and many of the farms have either been
abandoned or converted to other uses.

=Passes.=--Transverse valleys form very important topographic features of
mountain-regions. Inasmuch as the ranges themselves are obstacles to
communication, it follows that the latter must be concentrated at such
cross valleys or gaps as may be traversed. Khaibar Pass, a narrow defile
in the Hindu Kush Mountains, between Peshawur and Jelalabad, for many
years was the chief gateway between Europe and India. Even now the cost
of holding it is an enormous tax upon England.

Brenner, St. Gotthard, and the Mont Cenis Passes are about the only land
channels of commerce between Italy and transalpine Europe, and most of
the communication between northern Italy and the rest of Europe is
carried on by means of these passes. Every transcontinental railway of
the American continent crosses the various highlands by means of gaps
and passes, and some of them would never have been built were it not for
the existence of the passes. Fremont, South, and Marshall Passes have
been of historic importance for half a century.

The Hudson and Champlain Valley played an important part in the history
of the colonies a century before the existence of the United States, and
its importance as a gateway to eastern Canada is not likely to be
lessened. The Mohawk gap was the first practical route to be maintained
between the Atlantic seaboard and the food-producing region of the Great
Central Plain. It is to-day the most important one. It is so nearly
level that the total lift of freight going from Buffalo to tide-water is
less than five hundred feet.

[Illustration: A PASS--THE ROUTE OF A RAILWAY]

=Rivers.=--River-valleys are closely connected with the economic
development of a country. Navigable rivers are free and open highways of
communication. In newly settled countries the river is always the least
expensive means of carriage, and often it is the only one available for
the transportation of heavy goods.

In late years, since the railway has become the chief means for the
transportation of commodities, river transportation has greatly
declined. The river-valley, however, has lost none of its importance; in
most instances it is a naturally levelled and graded route, highly
suitable for the tracks of the railway. As a result, outside of the
level lands of the Great Central Plain, not far from eighty per cent. of
the railway mileage of the United States is constructed along
river-valleys.

=Plateaus.=--Plateaus are usually characterized by broken and more or less
rugged surface features. As a rule they are deficient in the amount of
rainfall necessary to produce an abundance of the grains and similar
food-stuffs, although this is by no means the case with all.

Most plateaus produce an abundance of grass, and cattle-growing is
therefore an important industry in such regions. Thus, the plateaus of
the Rocky Mountains are famous for cattle, and the same is true of the
Mexican and the South American plateaus. The Iberian plateau, including
Spain and Portugal, is noted for the merino sheep, which furnish the
finest wool known. The plateau of Iran is also noted for its wool, and
the rugs from this region cannot be imitated elsewhere in the world.

=Plains.=--Plains are of the highest importance to life and its
activities. Not only do they present fewer obstacles to
intercommunication than any other topographic features, but almost
always they are deeply covered with the fine rock-waste that forms the
chief components of soil. Plains, therefore, contain the elements of
nutrition, and are capable of supporting life to a greater extent than
either mountains or plateaus. About ninety per cent. of the world's
population dwell in the lowland plains.

The Great Central Plain of North America produces more than one-quarter
of the world's wheat, and about four-fifths of the corn. The southern
part of the great Arctic plain, and its extension, the plains of the
Baltic also yield immense quantities of grain and cattle products. The
coast-plains of the Atlantic Ocean, on both the American and the
European side, are highly productive.

River flood-plains are almost always densely peopled because of their
productivity. The bottom-lands of the Mississippi and the Yangtze Rivers
are among the chief food-producing regions of the world. Lacustrine
plains, the beds of former lakes, are also highly productive regions.
The valley of the Red River of the North is an example, and its wheat is
of a very high quality.

Fertile coast-plains and lowlands that are adjacent to good harbors, as
a rule are the most thickly peopled regions of the world. In many such
regions the density of population exceeds two hundred or more per square
mile. The reason is obvious. Life seeks that environment which yields
the greatest amount of nutrition with the least expenditure of energy.

