
Deacon Milliken, meantime, said to Miss Sawyer, "Mirandy, do you know
who Rebecky reminds me of?"

"I can guess pretty well," she replied.

"Then you've noticed it too! I thought at first, seein' she favored her
father so on the outside, that she was the same all through; but she
ain't, she's like your father, Israel Sawyer."

"I don't see how you make that out," said Miranda, thoroughly
astonished.

"It struck me this afternoon when she got up to give your invitation in
meetin'. It was kind o' cur'ous, but she set in the same seat he used
to when he was leader o' the Sabbath-school. You know his old way of
holdin' his chin up and throwin' his head back a leetle when he got up
to say anything? Well, she done the very same thing; there was more'n
one spoke of it."

The callers left before nine, and at that hour (an impossibly
dissipated one for the brick house) the family retired for the night.
As Rebecca carried Mrs. Burch's candle upstairs and found herself thus
alone with her for a minute, she said shyly, "Will you please tell Mr.
Burch that I'm not a member of the church? I didn't know what to do
when he asked me to pray this afternoon. I hadn't the courage to say I
had never done it out loud and didn't know how. I couldn't think; and I
was so frightened I wanted to sink into the floor. It seemed bold and
wicked for me to pray before all those old church members and make
believe I was better than I really was; but then again, wouldn't God
think I was wicked not to be willing to pray when a minister asked me
to?"

The candle light fell on Rebecca's flushed, sensitive face. Mrs. Burch
bent and kissed her good-night. "Don't be troubled," she said. "I'll
tell Mr. Burch, and I guess God will understand."

Rebecca waked before six the next morning, so full of household cares
that sleep was impossible. She went to the window and looked out; it
was still dark, and a blustering, boisterous day.

"Aunt Jane told me she should get up at half past six and have
breakfast at half past seven," she thought; "but I daresay they are
both sick with their colds, and aunt Miranda will be fidgety with so
many in the house. I believe I'll creep down and start things for a
surprise."

She put on a wadded wrapper and slippers and stole quietly down the
tabooed front stairs, carefully closed the kitchen door behind her so
that no noise should waken the rest of the household, busied herself
for a half hour with the early morning routine she knew so well, and
then went back to her room to dress before calling the children.

Contrary to expectation, Miss Jane, who the evening before felt better
than Miranda, grew worse in the night, and was wholly unable to leave
her bed in the morning. Miranda grumbled without ceasing during the
progress of her hasty toilet, blaming everybody in the universe for the
afflictions she had borne and was to bear during the day; she even
castigated the Missionary Board that had sent the Burches to Syria, and
gave it as her unbiased opinion that those who went to foreign lands
for the purpose of saving heathen should stay there and save 'em, and
not go gallivantin' all over the earth with a passel o' children,
visitin' folks that didn't want 'em and never asked 'em.

Jane lay anxiously and restlessly in bed with a feverish headache,
wondering how her sister could manage without her.

Miranda walked stiffly through the dining-room, tying a shawl over her
head to keep the draughts away, intending to start the breakfast fire
and then call Rebecca down, set her to work, and tell her, meanwhile, a
few plain facts concerning the proper way of representing the family at
a missionary meeting.

She opened the kitchen door and stared vaguely about her, wondering
whether she had strayed into the wrong house by mistake.

The shades were up, and there was a roaring fire in the stove; the
teakettle was singing and bubbling as it sent out a cloud of steam, and
pushed over its capacious nose was a half sheet of note paper with
"Compliments of Rebecca" scrawled on it. The coffee pot was scalding,
the coffee was measured out in a bowl, and broken eggshells for the
settling process were standing near. The cold potatoes and corned beef
were in the wooden tray, and "Regards of Rebecca" stuck on the chopping
knife. The brown loaf was out, the white loaf was out, the toast rack
was out, the doughnuts were out, the milk was skimmed, the butter had
been brought from the dairy.

Miranda removed the shawl from her head and sank into the kitchen
rocker, ejaculating under her breath, "She is the beatin'est child! I
declare she's all Sawyer!"

The day and the evening passed off with credit and honor to everybody
concerned, even to Jane, who had the discretion to recover instead of
growing worse and acting as a damper to the general enjoyment. The
Burches left with lively regrets, and the little missionaries, bathed
in tears, swore eternal friendship with Rebecca, who pressed into their
hands at parting a poem composed before breakfast.

TO MARY AND MARTHA BURCH

  Born under Syrian skies,
       'Neath hotter suns than ours;
  The children grew and bloomed,
       Like little tropic flowers.

  When they first saw the light,
       'T was in a heathen land.
  Not Greenland's icy mountains,
       Nor India's coral strand,

  But some mysterious country
       Where men are nearly black
  And where of true religion,
       There is a painful lack.

  Then let us haste in helping
       The Missionary Board,
  Seek dark-skinned unbelievers,
       And teach them of their Lord.
            Rebecca Rowena Randall.

It can readily be seen that this visit of the returned missionaries to
Riverboro was not without somewhat far-reaching results. Mr. and Mrs.
Burch themselves looked back upon it as one of the rarest pleasures of
their half year at home. The neighborhood extracted considerable eager
conversation from it; argument, rebuttal, suspicion, certainty,
retrospect, and prophecy. Deacon Milliken gave ten dollars towards the
conversion of Syria to Congregationalism, and Mrs. Milliken had a spell
of sickness over her husband's rash generosity.

It would be pleasant to state that Miranda Sawyer was an entirely
changed woman afterwards, but that is not the fact. The tree that has
been getting a twist for twenty years cannot be straightened in the
twinkling of an eye. It is certain, however, that although the
difference to the outward eye was very small, it nevertheless existed,
and she was less censorious in her treatment of Rebecca, less harsh in
her judgments, more hopeful of final salvation for her. This had come
about largely from her sudden vision that Rebecca, after all, inherited
something from the Sawyer side of the house instead of belonging, mind,
body, and soul, to the despised Randall stock. Everything that was
interesting in Rebecca, and every evidence of power, capability, or
talent afterwards displayed by her, Miranda ascribed to the brick house
training, and this gave her a feeling of honest pride, the pride of a
master workman who has built success out of the most unpromising
material; but never, to the very end, even when the waning of her
bodily strength relaxed her iron grip and weakened her power of
repression, never once did she show that pride or make a single
demonstration of affection.

Poor misplaced, belittled Lorenzo de Medici Randall, thought ridiculous
and good-for-naught by his associates, because he resembled them in
nothing! If Riverboro could have been suddenly emptied into a larger
community, with different and more flexible opinions, he was, perhaps,
the only personage in the entire population who would have attracted
the smallest attention. It was fortunate for his daughter that she had
been dowered with a little practical ability from her mother's family,
but if Lorenzo had never done anything else in the world, he might have
glorified himself that he had prevented Rebecca from being all Sawyer.
Failure as he was, complete and entire, he had generously handed down
to her all that was best in himself, and prudently retained all that
was unworthy. Few fathers are capable of such delicate discrimination.

The brick house did not speedily become a sort of wayside inn, a place
of innocent revelry and joyous welcome; but the missionary company was
an entering wedge, and Miranda allowed one spare bed to be made up "in
case anything should happen," while the crystal glasses were kept on
the second from the top, instead of the top shelf, in the china closet.
Rebecca had had to stand on a chair to reach them; now she could do it
by stretching; and this is symbolic of the way in which she
unconsciously scaled the walls of Miss Miranda's dogmatism and
prejudice.

Miranda went so far as to say that she wouldn't mind if the Burches
came every once in a while, but she was afraid he'd spread abroad the
fact of his visit, and missionaries' families would be underfoot the
whole continual time. As a case in point, she gracefully cited the fact
that if a tramp got a good meal at anybody's back door, 't was said
that he'd leave some kind of a sign so that all other tramps would know
where they were likely to receive the same treatment.

It is to be feared that there is some truth in this homely
illustration, and Miss Miranda's dread as to her future
responsibilities had some foundation, though not of the precise sort
she had in mind. The soul grows into lovely habits as easily as into
ugly ones, and the moment a life begins to blossom into beautiful words
and deeds, that moment a new standard of conduct is established, and
your eager neighbors look to you for a continuous manifestation of the
good cheer, the sympathy, the ready wit, the comradeship, or the
inspiration, you once showed yourself capable of. Bear figs for a
season or two, and the world outside the orchard is very unwilling you
should bear thistles.

The effect of the Burches' visit on Rebecca is not easily described.
Nevertheless, as she looked back upon it from the vantage ground of
after years, she felt that the moment when Mr. Burch asked her to "lead
in prayer" marked an epoch in her life.

If you have ever observed how courteous and gracious and mannerly you
feel when you don a beautiful new frock; if you have ever noticed the
feeling of reverence stealing over you when you close your eyes, clasp
your hands, and bow your head; if you have ever watched your sense of
repulsion toward a fellow creature melt a little under the exercise of
daily politeness, you may understand how the adoption of the outward
and visible sign has some strange influence in developing the inward
and spiritual state of which it is the expression.

It is only when one has grown old and dull that the soul is heavy and
refuses to rise. The young soul is ever winged; a breath stirs it to an
upward flight. Rebecca was asked to bear witness to a state of mind or
feeling of whose existence she had only the vaguest consciousness. She
obeyed, and as she uttered words they became true in the uttering; as
she voiced aspirations they settled into realities.

As "dove that to its window flies," her spirit soared towards a great
light, dimly discovered at first, but brighter as she came closer to
it. To become sensible of oneness with the Divine heart before any
sense of separation has been felt, this is surely the most beautiful
way for the child to find God.



XXI

THE SKY LINE WIDENS

The time so long and eagerly waited for had come, and Rebecca was a
student at Wareham. Persons who had enjoyed the social bewilderments
and advantages of foreign courts, or had mingled freely in the
intellectual circles of great universities, might not have looked upon
Wareham as an extraordinary experience; but it was as much of an
advance upon Riverboro as that village had been upon Sunnybrook Farm.
Rebecca's intention was to complete the four years' course in three, as
it was felt by all the parties concerned that when she had attained the
ripe age of seventeen she must be ready to earn her own living and help
in the education of the younger children. While she was wondering how
this could be successfully accomplished, some of the other girls were
cogitating as to how they could meander through the four years and come
out at the end knowing no more than at the beginning. This would seem a
difficult, well-nigh an impossible task, but it can be achieved, and
has been, at other seats of learning than modest little Wareham.

Rebecca was to go to and fro on the cars daily from September to
Christmas, and then board in Wareham during the three coldest months.
Emma Jane's parents had always thought that a year or two in the
Edgewood high school (three miles from Riverboro) would serve every
purpose for their daughter and send her into the world with as fine an
intellectual polish as she could well sustain. Emma Jane had hitherto
heartily concurred in this opinion, for if there was any one thing that
she detested it was the learning of lessons. One book was as bad as
another in her eyes, and she could have seen the libraries of the world
sinking into ocean depths and have eaten her dinner cheerfully the
while; but matters assumed a different complexion when she was sent to
Edgewood and Rebecca to Wareham. She bore it for a week--seven endless
days of absence from the beloved object, whom she could see only in the
evenings when both were busy with their lessons. Sunday offered an
opportunity to put the matter before her father, who proved obdurate.
He didn't believe in education and thought she had full enough already.
He never intended to keep up "blacksmithing" for good when he leased
his farm and came into Riverboro, but proposed to go back to it
presently, and by that time Emma Jane would have finished school and
would be ready to help her mother with the dairy work.

Another week passed. Emma Jane pined visibly and audibly. Her color
faded, and her appetite (at table) dwindled almost to nothing.

Her mother alluded plaintively to the fact that the Perkinses had a
habit of going into declines; that she'd always feared that Emma Jane's
complexion was too beautiful to be healthy; that some men would be
proud of having an ambitious daughter, and be glad to give her the best
advantages; that she feared the daily journeys to Edgewood were going
to be too much for her own health, and Mr. Perkins would have to hire a
boy to drive Emma Jane; and finally that when a girl had such a passion
for learning as Emma Jane, it seemed almost like wickedness to cross
her will.

Mr. Perkins bore this for several days until his temper, digestion, and
appetite were all sensibly affected; then he bowed his head to the
inevitable, and Emma Jane flew, like a captive set free, to the loved
one's bower. Neither did her courage flag, although it was put to
terrific tests when she entered the academic groves of Wareham. She
passed in only two subjects, but went cheerfully into the preparatory
department with her five "conditions," intending to let the stream of
education play gently over her mental surfaces and not get any wetter
than she could help. It is not possible to blink the truth that Emma
Jane was dull; but a dogged, unswerving loyalty, and the gift of
devoted, unselfish loving, these, after all, are talents of a sort, and
may possibly be of as much value in the world as a sense of numbers or
a faculty for languages.

Wareham was a pretty village with a broad main street shaded by great
maples and elms. It had an apothecary, a blacksmith, a plumber, several
shops of one sort and another, two churches, and many boarding-houses;
but all its interests gathered about its seminary and its academy.
These seats of learning were neither better nor worse than others of
their kind, but differed much in efficiency, according as the principal
who chanced to be at the head was a man of power and inspiration or the
reverse. There were boys and girls gathered from all parts of the
county and state, and they were of every kind and degree as to birth,
position in the world, wealth or poverty. There was an opportunity for
a deal of foolish and imprudent behavior, but on the whole surprisingly
little advantage was taken of it. Among the third and fourth year
students there was a certain amount of going to and from the trains in
couples; some carrying of heavy books up the hill by the sterner sex
for their feminine schoolmates, and occasional bursts of silliness on
the part of heedless and precocious girls, among whom was Huldah
Meserve. She was friendly enough with Emma Jane and Rebecca, but grew
less and less intimate as time went on. She was extremely pretty, with
a profusion of auburn hair, and a few very tiny freckles, to which she
constantly alluded, as no one could possibly detect them without noting
her porcelain skin and her curling lashes. She had merry eyes, a
somewhat too plump figure for her years, and was popularly supposed to
have a fascinating way with her. Riverboro being poorly furnished with
beaux, she intended to have as good a time during her four years at
Wareham as circumstances would permit. Her idea of pleasure was an
ever-changing circle of admirers to fetch and carry for her, the more
publicly the better; incessant chaff and laughter and vivacious
conversation, made eloquent and effective by arch looks and telling
glances. She had a habit of confiding her conquests to less fortunate
girls and bewailing the incessant havoc and damage she was doing; a
damage she avowed herself as innocent of, in intention, as any new-born
lamb. It does not take much of this sort of thing to wreck an ordinary
friendship, so before long Rebecca and Emma Jane sat in one end of the
railway train in going to and from Riverboro, and Huldah occupied the
other with her court. Sometimes this was brilliant beyond words,
including a certain youthful Monte Cristo, who on Fridays expended
thirty cents on a round trip ticket and traveled from Wareham to
Riverboro merely to be near Huldah; sometimes, too, the circle was
reduced to the popcorn-and-peanut boy of the train, who seemed to serve
every purpose in default of better game.

Rebecca was in the normally unconscious state that belonged to her
years; boys were good comrades, but no more; she liked reciting in the
same class with them, everything seemed to move better; but from vulgar
and precocious flirtations she was protected by her ideals. There was
little in the lads she had met thus far to awaken her fancy, for it
habitually fed on better meat. Huldah's school-girl romances, with
their wealth of commonplace detail, were not the stuff her dreams were
made of, when dreams did flutter across the sensitive plate of her mind.

Among the teachers at Wareham was one who influenced Rebecca
profoundly, Miss Emily Maxwell, with whom she studied English
literature and composition. Miss Maxwell, as the niece of one of
Maine's ex-governors and the daughter of one of Bowdoin's professors,
was the most remarkable personality in Wareham, and that her few years
of teaching happened to be in Rebecca's time was the happiest of all
chances. There was no indecision or delay in the establishment of their
relations; Rebecca's heart flew like an arrow to its mark, and her
mind, meeting its superior, settled at once into an abiding attitude of
respectful homage.

It was rumored that Miss Maxwell "wrote," which word, when uttered in a
certain tone, was understood to mean not that a person had command of
penmanship, Spencerian or otherwise, but that she had appeared in print.

"You'll like her; she writes," whispered Huldah to Rebecca the first
morning at prayers, where the faculty sat in an imposing row on the
front seats. "She writes; and I call her stuck up."

Nobody seemed possessed of exact information with which to satisfy the
hungry mind, but there was believed to be at least one person in
existence who had seen, with his own eyes, an essay by Miss Maxwell in
a magazine. This height of achievement made Rebecca somewhat shy of
her, but she looked her admiration; something that most of the class
could never do with the unsatisfactory organs of vision given them by
Mother Nature. Miss Maxwell's glance was always meeting a pair of eager
dark eyes; when she said anything particularly good, she looked for
approval to the corner of the second bench, where every shade of
feeling she wished to evoke was reflected on a certain sensitive young
face.

One day, when the first essay of the class was under discussion, she
asked each new pupil to bring her some composition written during the
year before, that she might judge the work, and know precisely with
what material she had to deal. Rebecca lingered after the others, and
approached the desk shyly.

"I haven't any compositions here, Miss Maxwell, but I can find one when
I go home on Friday. They are packed away in a box in the attic."

"Carefully tied with pink and blue ribbons?" asked Miss Maxwell, with a
whimsical smile.

"No," answered Rebecca, shaking her head decidedly; "I wanted to use
ribbons, because all the other girls did, and they looked so pretty,
but I used to tie my essays with twine strings on purpose; and the one
on solitude I fastened with an old shoelacing just to show it what I
thought of it!"

"Solitude!" laughed Miss Maxwell, raising her eyebrows. "Did you choose
your own subject?"

"No; Miss Dearborn thought we were not old enough to find good ones."

"What were some of the others?"

"Fireside Reveries, Grant as a Soldier, Reflections on the Life of P.
T. Barnum, Buried Cities; I can't remember any more now. They were all
bad, and I can't bear to show them; I can write poetry easier and
better, Miss Maxwell."

"Poetry!" she exclaimed. "Did Miss Dearborn require you to do it?"

"Oh, no; I always did it even at the farm. Shall I bring all I have? It
isn't much."

Rebecca took the blank-book in which she kept copies of her effusions
and left it at Miss Maxwell's door, hoping that she might be asked in
and thus obtain a private interview; but a servant answered her ring,
and she could only walk away, disappointed.

A few days afterward she saw the black-covered book on Miss Maxwell's
desk and knew that the dreaded moment of criticism had come, so she was
not surprised to be asked to remain after class.

The room was quiet; the red leaves rustled in the breeze and flew in at
the open window, bearing the first compliments of the season. Miss
Maxwell came and sat by Rebecca's side on the bench.

"Did you think these were good?" she asked, giving her the verses.

"Not so very," confessed Rebecca; "but it's hard to tell all by
