
The Arab was an old hunter, and he now asked Malchus to take his place
with the bow while he drove the bear out. He first took off his bernous,
cut off several strips from the bottom, knotted them together, and then
twisted the strip into a rope. Growing out from a crevice in the rock,
some three feet above the top of the cave, was a young tree; and round
this, close to the root, Nessus fastened one end of his rope, the other
he formed into a slip-knot and let the noose fall in front of the cave,
keeping it open with two twigs placed across it. Then he gathered some
brushwood and placed it at the entrance, put a bunch of dried twigs and
dead leaves among it, and, striking a light with his flint and steel on
some dried fungus, placed this in the middle of the sticks and blew upon
it. In a minute a flame leaped up. "Now, my lord," he said, "be ready
with your sword and spear. The beast will be out in a minute; she cannot
stand the smoke."

Malchus ran to the corner and looked round. The natives were at a
distance along the ledge, evidently with no intention of attacking a foe
of whom they felt sure. A taunting shout was raised and an arrow flew
towards him, but he instantly withdrew his head and ran back to the
platform.

A minute later there was a fierce growl and the bear rushed out. The
brushwood was scattered as, checked suddenly in its rush by the noose,
the animal rose on its hind legs. In an instant the spear of Nessus was
plunged deeply into it on one side, while Malchus buried his sword to
the hilt in its body under the fore shoulder of the other. Stabbed to
the heart, the beast fell prostrate. Nessus repeated his blow, but
the animal was dead. Five young bears rushed out after their mother,
growling and snapping; but as these were only about a quarter grown they
were easily despatched.

"There is a supply of food for a long time," Malchus said cheerfully;
"and as there is a drip of water coming down in this angle we shall be
able to quench our thirst. Ah! we are just in time."

As he spoke an arrow struck the rock close to them and dropped at their
feet. Others came in rapid succession; and, looking at the brow of the
opposite side of the ravine, they saw a number of natives.

"Pull the bear's body across the mouth of the cave," Malchus said, "it
will prevent the arrows which strike the rock in front from glancing in.
The little bears will do for food at present."

They were soon in the cave, which opened beyond the entrance and
extended some distance into the mountain; it was seven or eight feet
wide and lofty enough to stand upright in. Nessus lay down behind the
bear, with his bow and arrow so as to command the angle of the rock.
Malchus seated himself further in the cave, sheltered by the entrance
from the arrows which from time to time glanced in at the mouth. Only
once did Nessus have to shoot. The natives on the ledge, informed by
their comrades on the opposite side of the gorge that their foes had
sought refuge in the cave, ventured to advance; but the moment the first
turned the corner he fell over the precipice, transfixed by an arrow
from the bow of Nessus, and the rest hastily retreated.

"Hand me your flint and steel, Nessus, and a piece of fungus. I may as
well have a look round the cave."

A light was soon procured, and Malchus found that the cave extended some
fifty feet back, narrowing gradually to the end. It had evidently been
used for a long time by wild animals. The floor was completely covered
with dry bones of various sizes.

As soon as he saw that this was the case Malchus tore off a strip of his
linen shirt, and rolling it into a ball set it on fire. On this he
piled up small bones, which caught readily, and he soon had a bright
and almost smokeless fire. He now took the place of Nessus. The latter
skinned and cut up one of the small bears, and soon had some steaks
broiling over the fire. By this time it was getting dusk without.

When the meat was cooked Nessus satisfied his hunger and then sallied
out from the cave and took his post as sentry with his spear close to
the angle of the rock, as by this time the natives on the opposite side,
being no longer able to see in the gathering darkness, had ceased
to shoot. Malchus ate his food at his leisure, and then joined his
companion.

"We must get out of here somehow, Nessus. Our company will search for us
tomorrow; but they might search for a week without finding us here; and,
as the army is advancing, they could not spare more than a day; so, if
we are to get away, it must be by our own exertions."

"I am ready to fight my way along this ledge, my lord, if such is your
wish. They cannot see us to fire at, and as only one man can stand
abreast, their numbers would be of no avail to them."

"Not on the ledge, Nessus; but they would hardly defend that. No doubt
they are grouped at the further end, and we should have to fight against
overwhelming numbers. No, that is not to be thought of. The only way of
escape I can think of would be to let ourselves down the precipice; but
our bernouses would not make a rope long enough."

"They would not reach a third of the distance," Nessus replied, shaking
his head. "They have been worn some time, and the cloth is no longer
strong. It would need a broad strip to support us."

"That is so, Nessus, but we have materials for making the rope long
enough, nevertheless."

"I do not understand you, my lord. Our other garments would be of but
little use."

"Of no use at all, Nessus, and I was not thinking of them; but we have
the skins of the bears--the hide of the old bear at least is thick and
tough--and a narrow strip would bear our weight."

"Of course," Nessus said. "How stupid of me not to think of it, for in
the desert we make all our rope of twisted slips of hide. If you will
stand sentry here, my lord, I will set about it at once."

Malchus took the spear, and Nessus at once set to work to skin the bear,
and when that was done he cut long strips from the hide, and having
fastened them together, twisted them into a rope.

The bernouses--which when on the march were rolled up and worn over one
shoulder like a scarf, as the German and Italian soldiers carry their
blankets in modern times--were also cut up and twisted, and in three
hours Nessus had a rope which he assured Malchus was long enough to
reach to the bottom of the precipice and sufficiently strong to bear
their weight.

One end was fastened to the trunk of the young tree, and the rope was
then thrown over the edge of the platform. One of the young bear's skins
was fastened round and round it at the point where it crossed the edge
of the rocky platform, to prevent it from being cut when the weight was
put upon it, and they then prepared for their descent.

"Do you go first," Malchus said. "As soon as I feel that the rope is
loose, I will follow you."

The Arab swung himself off the edge, and in a very short time Malchus
felt the rope slacken. He followed at once. The first twenty feet the
descent was absolutely perpendicular, but after that the rock inclined
outward in a steep but pretty regular slope. Malchus was no longer
hanging by the rope; but throwing the principal portion of his weight
still upon it, and placing his feet on the inequalities of the rock, he
made his way down without difficulty. Presently he stood by Nessus at
the foot of the slope.

"We had better make up the ravine. There will be numbers of them at its
mouth. We can see the glow of their fires from here."

"But we may not be able to find a way up," Nessus said; "the sides seem
to get steeper and steeper, and we may find ourselves caught in a trap
at the end of this gorge. At any rate we will try that way first. I
wish the moon was up; it is as black as a wolf's mouth here, and the
bottom of the gorge is all covered with boulders. If we stumble, and
our arms strike a stone, it will be heard by the natives on the opposite
heights."

They now set forward, feeling their way with the greatest care; but in
the dense darkness the task of making their way among the boulders was
difficult in the extreme. They had proceeded but a short distance when
a loud yell rose from the height above them. It was repeated again and
again, and was answered by shouts from the opposite side and from the
mouth of the ravine.

"By Astarte!" Malchus exclaimed, "they have found out that we have
escaped already."

It was so. One of the natives had crept forward along the path, hoping
to find the sentry asleep, or to steal up noiselessly and stab him. When
he got to the angle of the rock he could see no form before him,
nor hear the slightest sound. Creeping forward he found the platform
deserted. He listened attentively at the entrance to the cave, and
the keen ear of the savage would have detected had any been slumbering
there; but all was still.

He rose to his feet with the intention of creeping into the cave, when
his head struck against something. He put up his hand and felt the rope,
and saw how the fugitives had escaped. He at once gave the alarm to his
comrades. In a minute or two a score of men with blazing brands came
running along the path. On seeing the rope, they entered the cave, and
found that their prey had really escaped.

Malchus and his companion had not moved after the alarm was given.

"We had better be going, my lord," the Arab said as he saw the men with
torches retracing their steps along the brow. "They will soon be after
us."

"I think not, Nessus. Their chance of finding us among these boulders
in the dark would be small, and they would offer such good marks to our
arrows that they would hardly enter upon it. No, I think they will wait
till daybreak, planting a strong force at the mouth of the ravine, and
along both sides of the end, wherever an ascent could be made. Hark, the
men on the heights there are calling to others along the brow."

"Very well, my lord," Nessus said, seating himself on a rock, "then we
will sell our lives as dearly as possible."

"I hope it has not come to that, Nessus. There is a chance of safety for
us yet. The only place they are not likely to look for us is the cave,
and as we have climbed down from above with the rope, there will be no
difficulty in ascending."

Nessus gave an exclamation, which expressed at once admiration of his
leader's idea and gratification at the thought of escape. They began
without delay to retrace their steps, and after some trouble again found
the rope.

Nessus mounted first; his bare feet enabled him to grip any inequality
of the surface of the rock. Whenever he came to a ledge which afforded
him standing room he shook the rope, and waited until Malchus joined
him.

At last they stood together at the foot of the perpendicular rock at the
top. The lightly armed Arab found no difficulty whatever in climbing the
rope; but it was harder work for Malchus, encumbered with the weight
of his armour. The numerous knots, however, helped him, and when he was
within a few feet of the top, Nessus seized the rope and hauled it up
by sheer strength until Malchus was level with the top. Then he gave him
his hand, and assisted him to gain his feet. They entered the cave and
made their way to the further end, and there threw themselves down. They
had not long been there when they saw a flash of light at the mouth of
the cave and heard voices.

Malchus seized his spear and would have leaped to his feet, but Nessus
pressed his hand on his shoulder.

"They are come for the she bear," he said. "It is not likely they will
enter."

Lying hidden in the darkness the fugitives watched the natives roll the
bear over, tie its legs together, and put a stout pole through them.
Then four men lifted the pole on their shoulders and started.

Another holding a brand entered the cave. The two fugitives held their
breath, and Nessus sat with an arrow in the string ready to shoot. The
brand, however, gave but a feeble light, and the native, picking up the
bodies of three of the young bears, which lay close to the entrance,
threw them over his shoulder, and crawled back out of the cave again. As
they heard his departing footsteps the fugitives drew a long breath of
relief.

Nessus rose and made his way cautiously out of the cave. He returned in
a minute.

"They have taken the rope with them," he said, "and it is well, for when
they have searched the valley tomorrow, were it hanging there, it might
occur to them that we have made our way up. Now that it is gone they can
never suspect that we have returned here."

"There is no chance of our being disturbed again tonight, Nessus. We can
sleep as securely as if were in our camp."

So saying, Malchus chose a comfortable place, and was soon asleep.

Nessus, however, did not lie down, but sat watching with unwearied eyes
the entrance to the cave. As soon as day had fairly broken, a chorus
of loud shouts and yells far down the ravine told that the search had
begun. For hours it continued. Every bush and boulder in the bottom was
searched by the natives.

Again and again they went up and down the gorge, convinced that the
fugitives must be hidden somewhere; for, as Nessus had anticipated, the
cliffs at the upper end were so precipitous that an escape there was
impossible, and the natives had kept so close a watch all night along
the slopes at the lower end, and at the mouth, that they felt sure that
their prey could not have escaped them unseen. And yet at last they were
forced to come to the conclusion that in some inexplicable way this must
have been the case, for how else could they have escaped? The thought
that they had reascended by the rope before it was removed, and that
they were hidden in the cave at the time the bodies of the bear and its
cubs were carried away, never occurred to them.

All day they wandered about in the bottom of the ravine, searching every
possible place, and sometimes removing boulders with great labour, where
these were piled together in such a manner that any one could be hidden
beneath them.

At nightfall they feasted upon the body of the bear first killed, which
had been found where it had fallen in the ravine. The body of one of the
young bears which lay far up the cave, had escaped their search, and
a portion of this furnished a meal to the two prisoners, who were,
however, obliged to eat it raw, being afraid to light a fire, lest the
smoke, however slight, should be observed coming out at the entrance.

The next morning, so far as they could see, the place was deserted by
the natives. Lying far back in the cave they could see that the men
on the opposite side of the ravine had retired; but as it was quite
possible that the natives, feeling still convinced that the fugitives
must be hidden somewhere, had set a watch at some spot commanding a
view of the whole ravine, they did not venture to show themselves at the
entrance.

After making another meal of the bear, they sallied out, when it again
became dark, and made their way along the path. When they neared the end
they saw a party of the enemy sitting round a great fire at the mouth
of the ravine below them. They retired a short distance, and sat down
patiently until at last the fire burned low, and the natives, leaving
two of the party on watch, lay down to sleep. Then Malchus and his
companion rose to their feet, and made their way along the path. When
they were nearly abreast of the fire, Malchus happened to tread upon a
loose stone, which went bouncing down the side of the hill.

The scouts gave a shout, which called their companions to their feet,
and started up the hillside towards the spot where the stone had fallen.

Nessus discharged an arrow, which struck full on the chest of the leader
of the party, and then followed Malchus along the hillside.

A shout of rage broke from the natives as their comrade fell; but
without pausing they pushed on. Malchus did not hurry. Silence now was
of more importance than speed. He strode along, then, with a rapid but
careful step, Nessus following closely behind him. The shouts of
the savages soon showed that they were at fault. Malchus listened
attentively as he went. Whenever the babel of tongues ceased for a
moment he stopped perfectly still, and only ventured on when they were
renewed.

At last they had placed a long gap between them and their pursuers, and
came out on a level shoulder of the hill. They continued their way until
they found themselves at the edge of the forest. It was so dark under
the trees that they could no longer advance, and Malchus therefore
determined to wait till the dawn should enable them to continue their
journey. Whether they were in a clump of trees or in the forest, which
covered a large portion of the mountain side, they were unable to tell;
nor, as not a single star could be seen, had they any indication of the
direction which they should take. Retiring then for some little distance
among the trees, they lay down and were soon asleep.

When the first dawn of day appeared they were on their way again, and
soon found that the trees under which they had slept formed part of the
forest. Through occasional openings, formed by trees which had fallen
from age or tempest, they obtained a view of the surrounding country,
and were enabled to form an idea where lay the camp which they had left
two days before.

They had not proceeded far when they heard in the distance behind them
the shouting of men and the barking of dogs, and knew that the
enemy were upon their track. They ran now at the top of their speed,
convinced, however, that the natives, who would have to follow the
track, could not travel as fast as they did. Suddenly Malchus stopped.

"Listen!" he said. They paused, and far down the hillside heard the
distant sound of a horn. "Those must be our men," Malchus exclaimed,
"they are searching for us still; Hannibal must have allowed them to
stay behind when the army proceeded on its way."

In another half hour the horn sounded close at hand and they were
speedily among a body of Malchus' own followers, who received them with
shouts of delight. The men were utterly worn out, for they had searched
continuously day and night from the time they had missed their leader,
sometimes high up among the hills, sometimes among the lower valleys.
The party which he met comprised but a fourth of the band, for they had
divided into four parties, the better to range the country.

They were now ascending the hills again at a distance of two miles
apart, and messengers were at once sent off to the other bodies to
inform them that Malchus had returned. Malchus quickly recounted to his
men the story of what had befallen them, and then bade them lie down to
rest while he and Nessus kept watch.

The natives who had been in pursuit did not make their appearance,
having doubtless heard the horn which told of the approach of a body of
the Carthaginians. In two hours the whole of the band were collected,
and after a few hours' halt, to enable the men to recover from their
long fatigue and sleeplessness, Malchus put himself at their head
and they marched away to join the main body of their army, which they
overtook two days later.

Malchus was received with great delight by his father and Hannibal, who
had given him up for lost. Nessus had over and over again recounted all
the details of their adventure to his comrades, and the quickness of
Malchus at hitting upon the stratagem of returning to the cave, and so
escaping from a position where escape seemed well nigh impossible,
won for him an even higher place than before in the admiration of his
followers.



CHAPTER XI: THE PASSAGE OF THE RHONE


The army was now moving through the passes of the Pyrenees. The labour
was great; no army had ever before crossed this mountain barrier; roads
had to be made, streams bridged, and rocks blasted away, to allow the
passage of the elephants and baggage wagons. Opinions have differed as
to the explosives used by the Carthaginian miners, but it is certain
that they possessed means of blasting rocks. The engineers of Hannibal's
force possessed an amount of knowledge and science vastly in excess of
that attained by the Romans at that time, and during the campaign the
latter frequently endeavoured, and sometimes with success, by promises
of high rewards, to induce Hannibal's engineers to desert and take
service with them. A people well acquainted with the uses of sulphur
and niter, skilled in the Oriental science of chemistry, capable of
manufacturing Greek fire--a compound which would burn under water--may
well have been acquainted with some mixture resembling gunpowder.

The art of making this explosive was certainly known to the Chinese in
very remote ages, and the Phoenicians, whose galleys traversed the most
distant seas to the east, may have acquired their knowledge from that
people.

The wild tribes of the mountains harassed the army during this difficult
march, and constant skirmishes went on between them and Hannibal's light
armed troops. However, at last all difficulties were overcome, and the
army descended the slopes into the plains of Southern Gaul.
