"Then I shall be," put in Felix Gussing. "And now that this affair is at
an end, Mr. Montgomery will you shake hands?" he added.

"With pleasure, Mr. Gussing!" was the reply. "I must say in all
frankness I am sorry we quarrelled in the first place. Perhaps I was
wrong about the sword."

"And perhaps I was wrong."

"Both of you were wrong," put in the major. "I hunted up the letter that
came with the blade. It is an old Spanish weapon. Let us all call the
affair off, and Mr. Montgomery shall come to Clara's wedding to Mr.
Gussing."

"With all my heart," cried Montgomery, and there the little plot came to
a finish.



CHAPTER XX.


ATTACKED IN THE DARK.


"Joe, the plot worked to perfection!" said Felix Gussing, on the day
following. "I have to thank you, and here are twenty dollars for your
trouble."

"I don't want a cent, Mr. Gussing," answered our hero. "I did it only
out of friendliness to you. I hope you have no further trouble in your
courtship."

"Oh, that was all settled last night. Clara and I are to be married next
week. We are going to send out the cards to-day. You see," went on the
young man in a lower tone. "I don't want to give the major a chance to
change his mind, or to suspect that that duel was not just what it ought
to have been."

"Does he suspect anything as yet?"

"Not a thing."

"Then you are wise to have the wedding as quickly as possible."

"When we are married I am going to let Clara into the secret. I know
she'll enjoy it as much as anybody."

"Well, you had better warn her to keep mum before her father. He looks
as if he could get pretty angry if he wanted to."

"As you won't take any money for this, Joe, wouldn't you like to come to
the wedding?"

"I'm afraid it will be too high-toned for me, Mr. Gussing."

"No, it is to be a plain, homelike affair--Clara wants it that way.
The major has some country cousins who will be there, and they are very
plain folks."

"Then I'll come--if Miss Sampson wishes it."

So it was arranged that Joe should attend the wedding, and as he was in
need of a new Sunday suit he purchased it at once, so that he could use
it at the wedding.

"You're in luck, Joe," remarked Frank, when he heard the news. "And that
suit looks very well on you."

In some manner it leaked out among the boys that Joe was going to the
wedding, and two days before the affair came off Jack Sagger learned
of it. He immediately consulted with some of his cronies, and it was
unanimously resolved to watch for Joe after the wedding was over and
chastise him severely for the manner in which he had treated "the gang."

"We'll fix him," said Sagger, suggestively.

At the proper time Joe took a car to the Sampson home and was there
introduced to a dozen or more people. The wedding proved an enjoyable
affair and the elegant supper that was served was one long to be
remembered.

It was nearly eleven o'clock when Joe started for the hotel again. He
had thought to take a car, but afterwards concluded to walk.

"A walk will do me good--after such a hearty supper," he told himself.
"If I ride home I won't be able to sleep."

At the corner the Sagger crowd was waiting for him. One gave a low
whistle, and all slunk out of sight until Joe had passed.

Several blocks had been covered when our hero came to a spot where
several new buildings were in the course of construction. It was rather
dark and the street lights cast long and uncertain shadows along the
walk.

Joe had just started to cross a wooden bridge over an excavation when
he heard a rush behind him. Before he could turn he was given a violent
shove.

"Push him into de cellar hole!" came, in Jack Sagger's voice.

"Stop!" cried Joe, and it must be admitted that he was greatly alarmed.
But no attention was paid to his words, and over the side of the bridge
he went, to fall a distance of a dozen feet and land in a pile of dirt,
with one lower limb in a puddle of dirty water.

"Down he goes!" he heard, in the voice of Nick Sammel. "Wonder how he
likes it?"

"You're a mean, low crowd!" cried Joe, as he stood up. He was covered
with dirt and the cold water felt anything but agreeable on such a
frosty night as it chanced to be.

"Don't you dare to crawl out of dat!" said Sagger. "If yer do we'll
pitch yer in ag'in, won't we, fellers?"

"Sure we will!" was the cry.

"De next time we'll dump him in on his head!"

Growing somewhat accustomed to the semi-darkness, Joe counted seven of
his tormentors, all standing on the edge of the cellar hole into which
he had so unceremoniously been thrown. Several of the youths had heavy
sticks.

"I suppose I'll have to retreat," he reasoned "I can't fight seven of
them."

He turned to the rear of the cellar hole and felt his way along into
the deepest shadows. Presently he reached a partly finished building and
crawled up some planks leading to one of the floors.

"He is running away!" he heard Jack Sagger cry.

"Come on after him!" said another of the crowd.

"Let's take his new coat and vest away from him!" added a third.

The entire party dropped down into the hole and ran to the rear, in a
hunt after our hero. In the meantime Joe was feeling his way along a
scaffolding where some masons had been at work.

As it happened the entire party under Jack Sagger walked toward the
unfinished building and came to a halt directly under the scaffolding.
Joe saw them and crouched back out of sight.

"Where is de country jay?" he heard one of the crowd ask.

"He's back here somewhere," answered Jack Sagger. "We must find him an'
thump him good."

"You'll not thump me if I can help it," said our hero to himself.

Joe put out his hand and felt a cask near by. It was half filled with
dirty water, being used for the purposes of making mortar. A tub of
water was beside the cask.

"Tit for tat!" he thought, and as quickly as it could be done he
overturned the cask and the tub followed.

Joe's aim was perfect, and down came the shower of dirty water, directly
on the heads of the boys below. Every one was saturated and each set up
a yell of dismay.

"Oh, say, I'm soaked!"

"He trun water all over me!"

"Ugh! but dat's a regular ice bath, dat is!"

"That's what you get for throwing me into the hole!" cried Joe. "After
this you had better leave me alone."

"I've got some mortar in me eye!" screamed Jack Sagger, dancing around
in pain. "Oh, me eye is burned out!"

"I'm wet to de skin!" said Nick Sammel, with a shiver. "Oh, say, but
it's dead cold, ain't it?"

Waiting to hear no more, Joe ran along the scaffolding and then leaped
through a window of the unfinished building. A street light now guided
him and he came out through the back of the structure and into an
alleyway. From this he made his way to the street.

"I'll have to hurry," he reasoned. "If they catch me now they will want
to half kill me!"

"Don't let him git away!" he heard Sagger roar. "Catch him! Catch him!"

"Hold on there, you young rascals!" came a voice out of the darkness.
"What are you doing around these buildings?"

A watchman had come on the scene, with a lantern in one hand and a heavy
club in the other.

"We ain't doin' nuthin," said one of the boys.

"Maybe you're the gang that stole that lumber a couple of nights ago,"
went on the watchman, coming closer.

"Ain't touched yer lumber," growled Jack Sagger.

"We're after anudder feller wot hid in here," said Sammel.

"That's a likely story. I believe you are nothing but a crowd of young
thieves," grumbled the watchman. "Every night somebody is trying to
steal lumber or bricks, or something. I've a good mind to make an
example of you and have you all locked up."

"We ain't touched a thing!" cried a small boy, and began to back away in
alarm. At once several followed him.

"Here's a barrel of water knocked over and everything in a mess. You've
been skylarking, too. I'm going to have you locked up!"

The watchman made a dash after the boys and the crowd scattered in all
directions. Sagger received a crack on the shoulder that lamed him for
a week, and Sammel tripped and went down, taking the skin off of the end
of his nose.

"Oh, me nose!" he moaned. "It's busted entirely!"

"Run!" cried Sagger. "If you don't you'll be nabbed sure!" And then the
crowd ran with all their speed, scrambling out of the hole as best they
could. They did not stop until they were half a dozen blocks away and on
their way home.

"We made a fizzle of it dat trip," said Sagger, dolefully.

"It's all your fault," growled one of the boys. "I ain't goin' out wid
you again. You promise big things but you never do 'em."

"Oh, Jack 's a gas-bag, dat's wot he is," was the comment of another,
and he walked off by himself. Presently one after another of the boys
followed suit, leaving Jack Sagger to sneak home, a sadder if not a
wiser lad.



CHAPTER XXI.


DAYS AT THE HOTEL.


"Perhaps those fellows have learned a lesson they won't forget in a
hurry," remarked Frank to Joe, after he learned the particulars of the
attack in the dark.

"I hope they don't molest me further," answered our hero. "If they'll
only let me alone I'll let them alone."

"That Sagger is certainly on the downward path," said Frank. "If he
doesn't look out he'll land in jail."

What Frank said was true, and less than a week later they heard through
another hotel boy that Jack Sagger had been arrested for stealing some
lead pipe out of a vacant residence. The pipe had been sold to a junkman
for thirty cents and the boy had spent the proceeds on a ticket for
a cheap theater and some cigarettes. He was sent to the House of
Correction, and that was the last Joe heard of him.

With the coming of winter the hotel filled up and Joe was kept busy from
morning to night, so that he had little time for studying. He performed
his duties faithfully and the hotel proprietor was much pleased in
consequence.

"Joe is all right," he said to his cashier, "I can trust him with
anything."

"That's so, and he is very gentlemanly, too," replied the cashier.

Ulmer Montgomery was still at the hotel. He was now selling antiquaries,
and our hero often watched the fellow with interest. He suspected that
Montgomery was a good deal of a humbug, but could not prove it.

At length Montgomery told Joe that he was going to the far West to try
his fortunes. The man seemed to like our hero, and the night before he
left the hotel he called Joe into his room.

"I want to make you a present of some books I own," said Ulmer
Montgomery. "Perhaps you'll like to read them. They are historical
works."

"Thank you, Mr. Montgomery, you are very kind."

"I used to be a book agent, but I gave that up as it didn't pay me as
well as some other things."

"And you had these books left over?"

"Yes. The firm I worked for wouldn't take them back so I had to keep
them."

"And now you are selling curiosities."

At this Ulmer Montgomery smiled blandly.

"Not exactly, Joe--I only sell curiosities, or antiquities, when I am
hard up. On other occasions I do like other folks, work for a living."

"I don't quite understand."

"I dropped into selling curiosities when I was in the South and hard up
for cash. I wanted money the worst way, and I--well, I set to work to
raise it. Maybe you'd like to hear my story."

"I would."

"Mind you, I don't pose as a model of goodness and I shouldn't advise
you to follow in my footsteps. But I wanted money and wanted in badly.
So I put on my thinking cap, and I soon learned of a very zealous
antiquary living about five miles from where I was stopping. He was
wealthy and a bachelor, and spent no inconsiderable portion of his
income on curiosities."

"And you went to him?" said Joe, becoming interested.

"I at once determined to take advantage of this gentleman's antiquarian
zeal. I will own that I had some qualms of conscience--about imposing
upon the old gentleman, but I didn't know of any other way to procure
the money I absolutely needed.

"Having made all of my preparations, I set off for Mr. Leland's house.
To disguise myself I put on a pair of big goggles and an old-fashioned
collar and tie.

"'I understand, Mr. Leland, that you are in the habit of collecting
curiosities,' I said.

"'Quite right, sir,' said he. 'I have got together some few,' and he
gazed with an air of pride at the nondescript medley which surrounded
him.

"'I have in my possession,' I proceeded, 'two or three of great value,
which I had hoped to retain, but, well, I need money, and so I must part
with them, much as I wish to call them mine. But I wish to see that they
get into the proper hands, and I have been told that you are a great
antiquarian, understanding the true value of such things, and so--'

"'Pray, show them to me at once!' cried the old man, eagerly.

"'I have traveled a good deal, and been a pilgrim in many climes,' I
went on. 'I have wandered along the banks of the Euphrates and dipped my
feet in the currents of the Nile. I have gazed upon ruined cities--'

"'Yes! yes! show me what you have!' he cried, eagerly.

"'Here is a curiosity of the highest order', I said, opening a paper
and showing a bit of salt about the size of a walnut. 'This is a portion
of the statue of salt into which Lot's wife was turned.'

"'Is it possible?' cried the antiquary, taking the salt and gazing at
it in deep veneration. 'Are you quite certain of this?'

"'I am,' I answered. 'It is a portion of the wrist. I broke it off
myself. The hand was already gone.'"

"And did he buy it?" questioned Joe, in astonishment.

"He did, and gave me fifty dollars in cash for it."

"But that wasn't fair, Mr. Montgomery."

The seller of bogus curiosities shrugged his shoulders.

"Perhaps not. But I was hard up and had to do something."

"Did you sell him anything else?"

"I did--a walking stick, which I had procured in Connecticut. It was
covered with strange carvings and he mistook them for hieroglyphics, and
gave me ten dollars for the thing."

