"There!" said he, "our treasure is much safer there than it would be
in our possession, for to-night, at least."

Ben carefully took the bearings of the tree, that he might not
forget it. There was little difficulty about this, as it was larger
than any of its neighbors, not so tall, perhaps, but of greater
circumference.

"I shall remember it now," he said to himself.

As Ben walked back to the humble cabin he became very drowsy. He was
quite fatigued with his day's march, and it was now nearly or quite
two hours since his companion had fallen asleep.

It was fortunate for him that Ben had been more wakeful.

"I shall be glad enough to sleep now," thought Ben. "I don't know
when I have felt more tired."

He reached the cabin door, and listened outside to learn whether any
one were stirring. He could still hear the sonorous snore of Jack,
and could distinguish the deep breathing of his hostess. All seemed
to be safe.

He softly opened the door, and closed it after him. Without arousing
any one, he made his way up the ladder to the loft, where Bradley
lay precisely as he had left him.

Ben threw himself down beside him with a deep sigh of satisfaction,
and in ten minutes he, too, was sound asleep.




CHAPTER XX.

A THIEF'S DISAPPOINTMENT.


Jack Garter, regardless of his plans respecting his guests, slept
through the night, and it was not till after the sun rose that he
opened his eyes. His wife was already up and moving about the room.

Jack stretched himself negligently, but all at once his purpose
flashed upon him.

"Bess, what time is it?" he demanded.

"Past six o'clock, as you can see by the sun."

"Curse it! what made me fall asleep?" ejaculated Jack, with an oath.
"Now it may be too late."

"How long have you been awake, Bess?" he asked.

"An hour or more."

"Why didn't you wake me up?" demanded Jack sharply.

"I didn't know you wanted me to," answered his wife. "Only yesterday
you swore at me for waking you up an hour later."

"Yesterday isn't to-day, and I had something to do," said Jack,
looking significantly upward.

"Didn't you attend to it last night?"

"No; curse my drowsiness! I fell asleep like a natural-born fool
that I was."

"How could I know that? I was asleep myself."

"You always have some excuse," said Jack, rather unreasonably. "Just
quit movin' round and makin' a noise. It may not be too late yet."

No sound was heard in the loft above. Happily, the two lodgers might
still be asleep, so Jack said to himself, and in that case he might
still be able to carry out his plan. At any rate, there was no time
to lose, and he began softly to ascend the ladder.

When his head reached the level of the flooring he looked eagerly at
the rude couch where his guests lay. Both were fast asleep. Bradley
was still held in the power of the powerful drug which had been
mingled with his wine, and Ben had yielded to the sound and
healthful slumber which at his age follows fatigue. His boyish face
lay on his hand, and he looked innocent and happy. There was a smile
about his lips, for he was dreaming of his far-away home.

The sight might have appealed to any one less hardened than Jack
Carter, calling up memories of his own dead boy, and powerfully
appealing to what heart he had left. But Jack felt simply relieved
to find that the boy, whose wakefulness he had feared, was sound
asleep.

"All the better," he muttered. "It isn't too late, after all. Now,
Jack Carter, is your time. I hope you'll make a good haul."

Treading softly, Jack stepped to the side of Bradley. He thought it
best to rid him first, for there was no danger of his waking up.

But he was destined to disappointment. The most thorough search
brought to light only five dollars in gold.

"What has he done with his money?" muttered the thief, with a frown.
"Of course, he must have more."

The idea came to him that the bulk of the money might have been
given to the boy, who was less likely to attract the notice of
plunderers. This was a point easily settled, and Jack turned his
attention to Ben.

Ben was asleep when the search commenced, but his sleep was not as
profound as Bradley's, and he woke up. But, luckily, recollection
came with consciousness, and summoning all his self-command, he
counterfeited sleep, not interfering with Jack or his designs. He
was willing to lose the little he had in his pocket, and, besides,
he was curious to hear what Jack would say when he found out how
inconsiderable was the booty which he secured.

It must be admitted that Ben found it difficult to restrain himself
from some movement which would have betrayed to the thief that he
was awake. Jack, however, being fully convinced that Ben was asleep,
did not fix his eyes upon the countenance of his young lodger, and
so remained ignorant of his wakefulness.

The second search proved no more satisfactory than the first. The
boy was no richer than the man.

In a low voice Jack indulged in an oath indicating his deep disgust.

"I didn't think they were such poor tramps," he said to himself, "or
I wouldn't have taken all this trouble. Only ten dollars between the
two of them! Why, they're little more than beggars?"

Stay! They might have concealed their money. There was no place in
the loft, for it was wholly bare of furniture, but their luggage was
thrown down carelessly. There were no lodes, and Jack was able to
extend his search to their knapsacks; but he found nothing that
repaid him. He was forced finally to the conclusion that they were
as poor as they seemed.

Had Jack Carter been one of those generous highwaymen, of whom we
sometimes read, he would have disdained to rob Ben and his friend of
their little all. But indeed that was not his style.

He coolly pocketed the two gold pieces, which were all he had been
able to find, and sullenly descended the ladder.

His wife looked at him inquiringly.

"Look at that!" he said grumblingly, as he displayed the two gold
pieces.

"Was it all you could find?"

"Yes."

"They must be poor."

"Poor! They are beggars."

The woman, who was not as hard as she looked, was struck with
compassion.

"Give it back to them, Jack," she entreated. "It is little enough,
and they will have need of it."

"So do I have need of it," growled her lord and master.

"No, you don't, Jack. It isn't worth your taking."

"I'm the best judge of that, woman."

"They will suffer. I can't bear to have that boy suffer. He reminds
me so of our dead son."

"You're a fool!" said her husband roughly.

"And you have no heart!" said his wife bitterly.

"I don't want one if it's going to make a fool of me. Come, hurry up
the breakfast, for I must be out of the way before they come down.
They'll miss their money, and I don't want to be asked any
questions."

"What shall I say if they ask me where it is, Jack?"

"Anything you like," he answered impatiently. "Say the cat did it,
or anything else. Do you think a woman needs teachin' what she is to
say?"

"They will think we did it," persisted his wife.

"Let them. They can't prove anything. Just hurry up that breakfast,
I tell you."

The wife did as she was ordered, and Jack sat down to his breakfast.
He ate heartily, having a conscience that did not trouble him about
such trifles as plundering the guests who had slept beneath his
roof, and rose to leave the house.

"Give 'em some breakfast," he said, as he opened the door; "and tell
'em you won't take no pay on account of their loss. That'll about
make things square, I reckon. I've taken my pay in advance."

He shouldered his gun and went out into the woods.




CHAPTER XXI.

BEN'S SAVINGS-BANK.


It was not till an hour afterward that Ben rose from his lowly
couch, and, by dint of violent shaking, succeeded in rousing
Bradley.

"Come, Bradley, wake up!" he cried. "The sun is high, and it is time
we were on our way."

Bradley stretched himself, took a long breath, and said:

"I must have had a long sleep."

"Yes, you dropped off as soon as you lay down, and have slept ever
since."

"And did you sleep as soundly?"

"No, I was awake twice during the night," answered Ben.

"I don't know how it is, but I am sleepy still. Seems to me I don't
stand fatigue as well as you. I am sleepy yet, and feel as if I
could sleep all the forenoon."

"The effects of the drug," thought Ben.

Ben considered whether he should tell Bradley what had happened
during the night. He decided briefly to say a few words about it in
a whisper, and postpone a full explanation till later, for their
hostess was below, and could hear any loud word that might be
uttered. Bradley was instructed that he must claim to have lost five
dollars.

"But I had a hundred," said Bradley, feeling in his pockets.

"It's all right," whispered Ben. "I'll explain by and by. Not a word
of the loss till after breakfast."

Bradley was quite bewildered, and utterly failed to understand the
situation. But he had considerable faith in his young companion, and
was willing to follow Ben's instructions. They descended the ladder,
Ben in advance.

The woman looked at them sharply, to see if they had yet discovered
the robbery, but each seemed unconcerned.

"They don't know it yet," she said to herself.

"Madam, can you give us some breakfast?" asked Ben politely.

"I'll give you such as I have," said Mrs. Carter, feeling a little
remorse for her husband's theft, and pity for what she supposed
their penniless condition.

"That will be perfectly satisfactory, and we shall be much obliged
to you."

The breakfast was nearly ready in anticipation of their needs, and
they partook of it heartily.

Now came the critical moment.

Ben thrust his hand into his pocket, appearing to search for his
money, and, after a brief space, withdrew it in apparent dismay.

"I can't find my money," he said.

Mrs. Carter's face flushed, but she said nothing. She anticipated
their suspicion, and was ashamed.

"Bradley," said Ben, "have you your money?"

Jake Bradley repeated the search, and he, too, expressed surprise.

"I had it when I went to bed," he added.

"What is it?" asked the woman slowly, turning to them a troubled
face. "Have you lost anything?"

"I don't seem to find my money, ma'am," answered Bradley.

"Nor I mine," said Ben. "It's curious."

Mrs. Carter could not tell by their manner whether they suspected
anything, but she had her story ready. It was an invention, but life
with Jack Carter had left her few compunctions about such a simple
matter as telling a lie.

"I missed something myself," she said. "We don't lock our door of
nights, and I reckon some tramp got in last night, when we were
asleep, and robbed us all. Have you lost much, you two?"

"Not much, ma'am. There wasn't much to take."

"It's a pity. I am sorry it happened under my roof. But we slept
very sound last night, Jack and me, and that's the way it must have
come."

She looked at them critically, to detect, if she could, whether they
suspected her husband or herself, but both the travelers were on
their guard.

"Did you have much taken, ma'am?" asked Bradley.

"No," she answered hurriedly, rather ashamed of the imposture. "We
ain't rich, Jack nor I."

"What I am most sorry for," said Ben, "is that we have nothing to
pay for our accommodations."

"You're welcome to your lodging and what you've ate," said the woman
sincerely. "And, if you like, I'll put up some luncheon for you to
eat by and by."

"Thank you, ma'am, it will be very acceptable," answered Bradley.

"She's better than her husband," thought Ben.

"After all, we haven't lost much, for we shall get nearly the worth
of our lost money."

The woman remarked, with some surprise, that they did not take their
loss much to heart.

"How do you expect to get along without money?" she could not help
asking.

"We're used to roughing it, ma'am," said Bradley. "I'm an old miner,
and I think I can find some of my old chums before long."

By this time luncheon was ready, and they soon left the cabin.

Bradley could no longer repress his curiosity.

"Now, Ben, tell me all about it," he said. "Where is our money?"

Ben looked back, to make sure that he would not be overheard, and
answered: "I put it in the bank for security, Jake."

"What do you mean?"

