low.

Walter colored, for it was evident that the tone was ironical. He bowed
coldly, but did not speak.

The music struck up, and the dancing began. Though Walter was plainly
dressed, he was a good dancer, and Miss Longwood had no occasion to be
ashamed of her partner.

Murdock approached Hugh Longwood, who was busy in forming sets and was
not dancing.

"Who is that dancing with your sister?" he asked abruptly.

"A college friend of mine--Walter Sherwood."

"He looks poor."

"I believe he has met with a reverse of fortune."

"His face looks familiar. I am quite sure I have seen him somewhere."

"He only arrived in town to-day."

"I have it! He was playing the violin for a faker on the town common
this afternoon."

"Yes; it was there I met him."

"Good heavens! and you invited him to your party?"

"Why not?" demanded Hugh coldly.

"The assistant and companion of a wandering faker!"

"No, Mr. Murdock, I did not invite him, for my sister saved me the
trouble."

"I don't see how you could sanction her doing it."

"It strikes me, Murdock, you are interfering beyond your province.
Walter Sherwood, you will be good enough to remember, is a gentleman by
birth and education, and a college classmate of mine."

"That may all be, but think of his position!"

"Suppose we drop this discussion," said Hugh frigidly. "I shall invite
whom I please, and shall ask advice of no one."

"Oh, if you take it that way, I will be silent."

"It will be as well."

The dance was over, and Murdock, approaching Miss Longwood once more,
asked her hand for the next dance. She accepted, and they took their
places on the floor.

"I can hardly expect to equal your last partner," said Murdock, in an
ill-tempered tone.

Laura Longwood looked at him for a moment without speaking. She was
ashamed of his ill breeding.

"Perhaps not," she answered composedly. "Mr. Sherwood is a very good
dancer."

"I did not refer to that. I referred rather to his social position."

"He is of good family, I believe, but you need not be too modest as
regards yourself."

"You overwhelm me," returned Murdock, with an exaggerated bow; "and you
really think me the equal of Mr. Sherwood?"

"Is it necessary to discuss this question?" asked Laura, becoming more
and more disgusted with her partner.

"I think I saw the gentleman this afternoon playing the violin on the
wagon of a traveling faker."

"Yes, I saw him also."

"It is an excellent position for a young man--of family!" continued
Murdock, with a scornful curl of the lip.

"Suppose we change the subject, Mr. Murdock," said Laura Longwood,
with dignity. "If you desire a similar position you can speak to Mr.
Sherwood."

"You are really very--very amusing, Miss Longwood," said Murdock, biting
his lip. "I really don't aspire to such prominence. Besides, I don't
play on the violin."

"That is a pity. It is a very fine instrument."

When the dance was concluded Murdock sought another, but was rather
curtly refused. His efforts to injure Walter had only led to his own
discomfiture. When, a little later, he saw Walter a second time dancing
with Miss Longwood, he began to hate him.

During the last hour Walter obligingly consented to play on his favorite
instrument, and his performance gave pleasure to the entire company,
Murdock alone excepted.

When the party broke up, it chanced that Murdock and Walter took
leave at the same time. Walter was slightly in advance when Murdock,
quickening his pace, came up with him.

"Mr. Sherwood, I believe," he said.

"Yes, sir," answered Walter. "I believe I am addressing Mr. Murdock."

"You are. I hope you will pardon my giving you a little kindly advice."

"I certainly will if it is friendly," answered Walter.

"Then, don't you think you were a little out of place this evening?"

"What do you mean?" asked Walter quickly. "Where was I out of place?"

"At Miss Longwood's party."

"Why should I be? She invited me."

"No doubt."

"As her brother's friend and classmate."

"That is all very well, but you don't seem to consider your present
position."

"Will you be good enough to tell me what is my present position?"

"You know better than I can tell you. You are the assistant of a low
faker."

"I accompany Professor Robinson as a musical assistant, if that is what
you mean."

"Professor Robinson!" repeated Murdock scornfully. "Where did he get his
title?"

"You will have to ask him," said Walter, smiling.

"That is not the point, however. You are in his employ?"

"Well?"

"And yet you attend an evening party given by a young lady of high
social position."

"Mr. Murdock, you may be surprised to learn that it is by no means the
first social party of the kind that I have attended."

"That was before you became a faker."

"You will oblige me by not calling me a faker. I am earning my living
honestly. I don't know your business."

"I am a lawyer," said Murdock haughtily.

"I wish you success in your chosen profession."

"You are truly kind!" said Murdock, in an unpleasant tone.

Walter looked at him gravely.

"Mr. Murdock," he said, "you have volunteered to give me advice."

"Which you are not inclined to take."

"Because I consider you officious in offering it. Now let me give you
some advice."

"I shall be grateful, I am sure."

"Then let me advise you hereafter to mind your own business!"

"You are impertinent!" said Murdock angrily.

"That is my opinion of you. One thing more; you are quite at liberty to
advise Miss Longwood not to take any notice of me."

"I shall do so."

"And you may be sure that I shall not call upon her without an
invitation. It is hardly necessary to say this, as I leave town
to-morrow, and it may be a long time before I visit Glenwood again."

Murdock heard this with satisfaction, for Walter's good looks and the
evident favor with which he was regarded by Laura Longwood had made him
jealous. He could not help, however, launching a final sarcasm.

"Don't think me unkind, my good fellow!" he said patronizingly. "I feel
kindly disposed and as a proof will ask you to send round a bottle of
your balm to my office. Shall I pay for it in advance?"

"No. I will mention your request to the professor, and he will probably
be glad to furnish you with his medicine. Goodnight!"

They had reached the hotel, and Walter entered.

"That fellow is a snob," he said to himself. "He wishes me to feel that
one in my position cannot be a gentleman. If he is one, I don't want
to be. All his sneers won't make me ashamed of earning my living by an
honest use of any gift that God has given me."




CHAPTER XXII

AN ADVENTURE


Three months passed without any incident worth recording. Professor
Robinson's success was variable, but upon the whole he had reason to
feel encouraged. He was an excellent salesman, and his balm, though it
could not perform all the wonderful cures claimed for it, really had
merit, and this helped materially.

So far as Walter was concerned, he found the professor an indulgent and
honorable employer, whose word was as good as his bond. Every Saturday
night there was a statement of sales for the week, and Walter was paid
his commission of ten per cent. Though he was obliged to make some
disbursements, the largest being for a suit of clothes, he found
himself, at the end of fourteen weeks, possessed of a balance of a
hundred dollars. This was a source of great satisfaction to Walter, who
had known in Chicago how inconvenient it was to be without money.

One day the professor found himself in a Minnesota village. He had
secured a vacant lot on the principal street for the display of his
merchandise. He met with rather unusual success, a local celebration
having drawn a considerable crowd to the town of Warwick. Walter, after
playing on the violin, passed among the crowd with a supply of bottles
of balm, while the professor was expatiating in an eloquent manner upon
its merits. Among the crowd his attention was drawn to a roughly dressed
man, in hunting costume, wearing a sombrero with a broad brim. His face
was dark and his expression sinister. His eyes were very black and keen.
He looked like a Spaniard, and the thought came to Waiter that he would
make an ideal highway-man. He was leaning carelessly against the fence
that separated the lot from the street. As Walter approached he moved
slightly and accosted him.

"Say, young feller, is it all true that he"--with a jerk of his hand
toward the professor--"says about this balm?"

"Yes, sir," answered Walter, in a business-like tone. "It is a very
valuable remedy in all cases of bruise, sprain, rheumatism, headache,
and other kindred troubles. Can I sell you a bottle?"

"Well, I don't mind," and the stranger drew out a silver quarter and
tendered it in payment.

"Do you sell much of this stuff?" he asked carelessly.

"Yes, we have large sales."

"You are making money fast, I reckon?"

"We are doing very well," answered Walter, cautiously.

"It's an easy life to lead."

"Not so very easy. We are on the road early and late."

"Do you stop here overnight?"

"No; I think we will push on to Fremont."

"You'll get there late."

"Perhaps so. We shall not commence our sales till to-morrow.

"Why is he so inquisitive?" thought Walter, and as he turned back to
scan once more the face of his recent customer he became more and more
distrustful of him.

"Does that man live in town?" he inquired of a boy.

"Who? That man leaning against the fence?"

"Yes."

The boy shook his head.

"I never saw him before," he said. "I guess he came to the celebration."

When the sale was over Walter and the professor went to the hotel for
supper. Walter caught sight of the mysterious stranger in the barroom,
and could not avoid seeing that he himself was an object of attention.
Why this should be he did not understand. If only he were a mind-reader
and could interpret the man's thoughts it would have relieved
his anxiety, for in spite of himself he was becoming anxious and
apprehensive, though he could not explain why.

At supper the stranger sat opposite him. He ate heartily and with
great rapidity, yet found time to glance repeatedly at Walter and his
employer, as if he felt an interest in them.

Walter sought the professor after supper and communicated to him his
fears.

Professor Robinson shrugged his shoulders.

"Your imagination is running away with you," he said. "I don't see
anything extraordinary about this stranger, except that he is far from
good-looking."

"Don't you think he has a sinister look?"

"He is as homely as the ace of spades, if that is what you mean. Suppose
he is. All homely men are not suspicious characters. If they were, how
would we be judged?" and the professor laughed in a jolly way.

"You have quite decided to go through to Fremont this evening?"

"Yes; I want to reach Stillman on Saturday--there is to be a county fair
there--and to make it in time we must be moving to-night."

Of course, there was no more to be said. Walter did not care to
interfere with the professor's plans, and he was ashamed to admit that
he was nervous and alarmed. Perhaps his fears were groundless. He
began to think so when at seven o'clock the stable-boy brought round a
powerful black horse to the front of the inn, and the stranger who had
given him so much anxiety vaulted into the saddle and rode away, without
even turning to look at him.

"Who is that fellow?" he asked of an old man who stood near, smoking a
clay pipe.

The old man looked thoughtfully at the stranger, who had now ridden out
of the yard.

"Seems to me I've seen that face before," he said slowly, "but I can't
rightly tell where."

"He doesn't look like a farmer."

"No. If he lived anywhere within twenty miles I'd know him. He's a
stranger."

"His looks don't recommend him."

"You're right there, boy."

"I shouldn't be surprised to hear that he was an outlaw."

"One of Jesse James' band, mayhap," suggested the old man, with a smile.

"Yes, he looks it."

"Well, he's gone, so he won't trouble us."

This was a consoling thought to Walter. He carried a hundred dollars in
his pocket, and he had worked too hard for it to feel reconciled to its
loss. The stranger, judging from his appearance, was quite capable of
relieving him of it; but now he had ridden away, doubtless on business
of his own, and the chances were that they would never meet again.

About eight o'clock Professor Robinson's team was brought round to the
door, and he and Walter clambered upon the seat and were under way.

"Were you ever robbed, professor?" asked Walter.

The professor smiled.

"Yes," he said.

"By a highwayman?"

"No, by my assistant, a young man who occupied your place. He had been
with me four weeks, and I reposed a good deal of confidence in him, as I
do in you."

"I hope you won't repent your confidence in me, professor."

"I am sure I shall not. But to come back to my story, Charles Wright was
a good-looking, smooth-faced fellow of twenty, and had a good turn for
business. The trouble with him was that he was extravagant and never had
a cent ahead."

"Did he earn as much as I do?"

"Yes, for business with me was unusually good at the time he was with
me. However, he never could save money. Usually we occupied different
rooms at the hotels we stopped at, but one night the hotel was crowded
and we were obliged to room together. Now, as you know, I am a sound
sleeper. I am asleep five minutes after my head touches the pillow, and
even a thunder-storm during the night would scarcely waken me. On some
accounts this is an advantage, but, as you will see, it turned out
unluckily for me on the night I am speaking of. I awoke at the usual
