
"Perhaps your husband may be persuaded himself to remove to the city,"
said Temple. "I really think he stands in his own light in staying in a
small place like this."

"Just so," said James, who would have liked nothing better than to live
in New York. "There is no society here. I have no boys to associate with
in my own position. Why won't you move to New York, father?"

"That requires consideration," said Squire Leech.

"I should like to talk with you on that subject after supper," said
Temple. "Mrs. Leech, may I ask for another cup of tea?"

When supper was over Squire Leech led the way into the sitting room,
and his guest followed. The vista of future wealth which his visitor
had opened to him had not been without its effect and he began to make
inquiries.

"I suppose," he said, "there are ways of investing money to good
advantage in New York?"

"Most certainly--many ways."

"Real estate?"

"That may do, but it is too slow for me. I owned a house uptown. I sold
for thirty thousand dollars. In six weeks I made twenty thousand more
out of it."

"Is it possible?" ejaculated the squire. "Twenty thousand, did you say?"

"To be sure. Of course that was extra good luck. You can't expect to do
as well often, but there are always ways of turning over capital."

"May I ask in what way you made this large sum?"

"To be sure. I speculated in Erie. It is all the time fluctuating.
I became convinced that it was on the rise. I went in and the event
justified my action."

Temple spoke quietly, as if it were no great matter, after all. His host
was very much impressed, and felt like a man who has discovered a gold
mine. He had succeeded in saving up about two thousand dollars a year
for some years; but what was that to twenty thousand dollars made in six
weeks? Still, prudence led him to suggest: "But isn't there danger of
losing heavily?"

"Not if you are acquainted with the stock market. It is the ignoramuses
that get bit."

"I know very little of the stock market myself," confessed Squire Leech.
"I own some bank stocks."

"No money to be made in bank stocks."

"They pay good dividends."

"No doubt; but there is little or no variation in value. It's
fluctuation that gives a man a chance."

"I should be as likely to lose as gain, knowing as little as I do of the
market."

"True; but I should be happy to place my knowledge at your disposal.
As an old friend and schoolmate I naturally feel interested in your
prosperity."

"You are very kind," said the squire; "but wouldn't it be too much
trouble?"

"Not at all. In fact, it's my business, and wouldn't inconvenience me
in the least. By the way, how is your property invested?" asked Temple,
carelessly.

"Mostly in real estate."

"It must pay you very little."

"That is true. After deducting taxes and repairs, there is very little
left."

"So I supposed. It would pay you to mortgage your property, or sell it,
and use the money in Wall Street."

"I have about twenty thousand dollars in bank stock."

"That could readily be sold."

"What investments would you suggest?"

"I couldn't tell you on the moment; but I think favorably of a mining
stock lately put on the market. I have private advices that it is likely
to develop extraordinary richness and the stock may even treble in three
months."

"Where is the mine?" asked the squire, eagerly.

"Out in Nevada. A friend of mine has just returned from there and he has
given me strictly confidential information in regard to it. He has so
much faith in it that he has bought fifteen thousand dollars' worth of
shares."

"Could I get any?" asked Squire Leech.

"I think you could if you go to work quietly. If you went into the
market openly, they would suspect something and raise the price on you."

"Yes, I see. Do you think that is better than Erie?"

"At present, nothing is to be made in Erie. It is likely to go down
before it goes up. The time may come when you can buy to advantage but
not now."

"I have a great mind to go up to the city with you, and investigate the
matter," said the squire.

"Do so, by all means. I shall be delighted, and will cheerfully render
you all the assistance in my power. But, my friend, let me give you one
piece of advice."

"What is that?"

"Say as little as possible to your wife on the subject. Women don't
understand business. They are frightened at risks and don't understand
speculation."

"I think you are correct," said his host. "Men must judge for
themselves. It is a weak man who would be guided by his wife."

"So I say. Why, my wife happened to learn that I had gone into Erie on
the occasion I mentioned. She remonstrated in great alarm; but when I
announced that I had cleared twenty thousand dollars, she had no more to
say."

The next day they went to New York together and within a week the squire
had bought largely in the Nevada mine. He subscribed to a financial
paper, and was fully embarked on the dangerous sea of speculation.




CHAPTER XXIV

JAMES IS SNUBBED


In accordance with the invitation, Cameron walked to supper with Squire
Leech. His social position as the son of a rich manufacturer insured him
a cordial welcome and great attention from the whole family.

"You must find our village very dull, Mr. Cameron," said his host.

"Oh, no, sir; I think I shall enjoy it very well."

"We have very little good society, I am sorry to say."

"That's so, father," broke in James. "I wish you would move to the
city."

"That may come some day," said his father, thinking of Mr. Temple and
his operations.

"How do you occupy your time, Mr. Cameron?" asked Mrs. Leech.

"I walk about in the forenoon. In the afternoon I am occupied with my
professor," answered the young man.

"Your professor!" repeated the lady, in surprise. "Is one of your
college professors staying here?"

"No; they are too busy to leave New Haven. I refer to my young reader,
Herbert Carter."

"Herbert Carter!" repeated James, scornfully.

"Yes," said Cameron, ignoring the scorn; "he reads my lessons to me and
then questions me upon them. That is why I call him my professor."

"I should hardly think you would find him competent," said the squire.

"He don't know much," said James, contemptuously.

"On the contrary, I find him very intelligent. He reads clearly and
distinctly, and I congratulate myself on obtaining so satisfactory an
assistant."

Squire Leech shrugged his shoulders and had too much wisdom to
continue detracting from Herbert's merits, seeing that his guest seemed
determined to think well of him. Not so James.

"He is from a low family," he said, spitefully.

"Low?" interrogated Cameron, significantly.

"His mother is very poor."

"That's a very different thing," observed Cameron.

"Mrs. Carter is a very respectable person," said the squire,
condescendingly. "Indeed, I have offered to relieve her by taking
her house at a high valuation; but, under a mistaken idea of her own
interest, she refuses to sell."

"But you'll get it finally, father," asked James.

"I shall probably have to take it in the end, as I have a mortgage on it
for nearly its value."

Cameron looked down upon his plate and said nothing.

"My son will be happy to accompany you about the neighborhood, Mr.
Cameron," said Squire Leech.

"I can go round with you 'most any time," said James.

"Thank you both. You are very kind," said Cameron, politely, but without
expressing any pleasure.

"I think I may send James to Yale," observed his host, "I have a high
idea of your college, Mr. Cameron."

"Thank you. I think your son could hardly fail of deriving benefit from
a residence at Yale."

"James is my only child and I intend him to enjoy the greatest
educational advantages. I should like to have him become a professional
man."

"I should like to be a lawyer; that's a very gentlemanly profession,"
said James.

"You might rise to be a judge," said Cameron, with a smile.

"Very likely," said James, in a matter-of-course way, that amused the
young man exceedingly.

"What an odious young cub!" he said to himself, as he wended his way
back to the hotel at ten o'clock. "I never met such a combination of
pride and self-conceit."

James thought Cameron had taken a fancy to him.

"He must get awfully tired of that low-bred Herbert Carter," he said to
himself. "I guess I'll go round tomorrow morning and take a walk with
him."

He met Cameron on the steps of the hotel.

"I thought I'd come and walk with you," he said.

"Very well," said Cameron. "Do you know the way to Mr. Crane's?"

"The carpenter's?"

"Yes."

"There's nothing to see there," said James.

"I beg your pardon. I want to see Herbert at his work."

"Oh, well, I'll show you the way," said James.

Herbert was hard at work when the two came up.

"How are you, professor?" asked Cameron.

"Very well, Mr. Cameron. How are you, James?"

"I'm well enough," answered James, who always found it hard to be
decently civil to our hero. "Don't you get tired working?"

"I haven't worked long enough this morning for that. I dare say I shall
be tired before noon."

"Then your other work will begin," said Cameron.

"That kind of work will be a rest to me, it's so different."

"If you had an extra hoe I would help you a little. It would be as good
as exercise in the gymnasium."

"Perhaps I could borrow two and so employ both of you," remarked
Herbert, with a glance at James, who was sprucely dressed and wore a
flower in his buttonhole.

"None for me, thank you," said James, with a look of disgust. "I don't
intend to become a laborer."

"You'll have to labor if you study law," said Cameron.

"That's genteel; besides I don't call it labor. Shall we go on, Mr.
Cameron?"

"Not just yet. I want to watch Herbert a little longer."

So he lingered, much to the dissatisfaction of James.

"Won't you go out rowing?" he asked, when they were walking away.

"I have no objection," said Cameron; and they spent an hour on the pond.

"Do you think I can get into the crew if I go to Yale?" asked James,
complacently.

"I should say not, unless you improve in rowing."

"Don't I row well?"

"There is considerable room for improvement. However, you have time
enough for that."

They were cruising near the shore when a boy of ten came down to the
bank and called out to them.

"James," he said, "will you let me go across in the boat with you?"

"Why should I?" demanded James, not very amicably, for the boy belonged
to what he termed the lower classes.

"Do let me," urged the boy. "I left mother very sick and went for the
doctor. She was all alone and I want to get back as soon as I can."

By the road the boy would have to walk about a mile and a quarter, while
he could be rowed across the pond in six or seven minutes.

"I can't take anybody and everybody in my boat," said James,
disagreeably. "Go ahead and walk."

"How can you refuse the boy, when he wants to get home to his sick
mother?" said Cameron, indignantly. "Jump in, my boy, and we'll take you
over."

"I don't know about that," said James, sullenly.

"Look here!" said Cameron, shortly. "Refuse this boy and I shall get
out of the boat immediately and refuse hereafter to be seen in your
company."

James was disagreeably surprised.

"Jump in, my boy," said Cameron, kindly.

"Thank you, sir," said the boy, gratefully. James was not a little
mortified at the snubbing he had received, but he did not venture to
expostulate.

Cameron was fond of boating, but did not care to be indebted to James
for the loan of his boat.

"I'll have a boat sent on to me," he secretly determined, "and when I
leave Wrayburn I'll give it to Herbert."




CHAPTER XXV

THE NEW BOAT


Herbert worked steadily every forenoon on his farm. Cameron then
proposed that they should take the forenoon for their studies and walk
out or exercise in some other way in the afternoon.

One afternoon Cameron said: "Let us take a walk to Prospect Pond; I
think I should enjoy a little rowing."

"I will accompany you with pleasure, Mr. Cameron," said Herbert, "but
don't ask me to go out in the boat with you."

"Why not? Are you afraid I will upset you?"

"No," answered Herbert; "I have confidence in your skill. Besides, I can
swim."

"What is your objection, then?"

"If the boat belonged to anyone but James Leech I would not mind."

"Why should you mind that?"

"I met him last evening and he told me not to get into his boat again.
He said he was perfectly willing you should use it, but he didn't choose
to have me."

"It appears that I am a greater favorite with James Leech than you are,"
said Cameron, smiling.

"He looks down upon me as a poor boy."

"Well, I suppose James is entitled to his prejudice; but if you can't
use the boat, I won't."

"Don't let that interfere with your pleasure, Mr. Cameron," said
Herbert, eagerly. "I don't trouble myself in the least about the way
James treats me."

"Let us go down to the pond, at any rate. We can sit down on the bank,
if nothing better."

