and began to belabour her as they sang:

          'Would you beat your husband true?

                Don't cry so!
                    Now we'll beat you black and blue!
                         Oh!  Oh!'

The woman screamed out: 'Old man, old man! Come here, quick! Here are
two ruffians pommelling me fit to break my bones.'

Her husband only strolled up and down and laughed, as he said: 'Yes,
they'll beat you well, old lady.'

And the two thumped away and sang again:

          'Blows will hurt, remember, crone,
                We mean you well, we mean you well;
                    In future leave the stick alone,

                          For how it hurts, you now can tell,
                                One--two--'

At last her husband took pity on her, and cried:

'Two into the sack.'

He had hardly said the words before they were back in the sack again.

From this time the man and his wife lived so happily together that it
was a pleasure to see them, and so the story has an end.

(From Russiche Marchen.)




THE ENVIOUS NEIGHBOUR

Long, long ago an old couple lived in a village, and, as they had no
children to love and care for, they gave all their affection to a little
dog. He was a pretty little creature, and instead of growing spoilt and
disagreeable at not getting everything he wanted, as even children will
do sometimes, the dog was grateful to them for their kindness, and never
left their side, whether they were in the house or out of it.

One day the old man was working in his garden, with his dog, as usual,
close by. The morning was hot, and at last he put down his spade and
wiped his wet forehead, noticing, as he did so, that the animal was
snuffling and scratching at a spot a little way off. There was nothing
very strange in this, as all dogs are fond of scratching, and he went
on quietly with his digging, when the dog ran up to his master, barking
loudly, and back again to the place where he had been scratching.
This he did several times, till the old man wondered what could be the
matter, and, picking up the spade, followed where the dog led him.
The dog was so delighted at his success that he jumped round, barking
loudly, till the noise brought the old woman out of the house.

Curious to know if the dog had really found anything, the husband began
to dig, and very soon the spade struck against something. He stooped
down and pulled out a large box, filled quite full with shining gold
pieces. The box was so heavy that the old woman had to help to carry it
home, and you may guess what a supper the dog had that night! Now that
he had made them rich, they gave him every day all that a dog likes best
to eat, and the cushions on which he lay were fit for a prince.

The story of the dog and his treasure soon became known, and a neighbour
whose garden was next the old people's grew so envious of their good
luck that he could neither eat nor sleep. As the dog had discovered a
treasure once, this foolish man thought he must be able to discover one
always, and begged the old couple to lend him their pet for a little
while, so that he might be made rich also.

'How can you ask such a thing?' answered the old man indignantly.

'You know how much we love him, and that he is never out of our sight
for five minutes.'

But the envious neighbour would not heed his words, and came daily with
the same request, till at last the old people, who could not bear to
say no to anyone, promised to lend the dog, just for a night or two.
No sooner did the man get hold of the dog than he turned him into the
garden, but the dog did nothing but race about, and the man was forced
to wait with what patience he could.

The next morning the man opened the house door, and the dog bounded
joyfully into the garden, and, running up to the foot of a tree, began
to scratch wildly. The man called loudly to his wife to bring a spade,
and followed the dog, as he longed to catch the first glimpse of the
expected treasure. But when he had dug up the ground, what did he find?
Why, nothing but a parcel of old bones, which smelt so badly that he
could not stay there a moment longer. And his heart was filled with rage
against the dog who had played him this trick, and he seized a pickaxe
and killed it on the spot, before he knew what he was doing. When he
remembered that he would have to go with his story to the old man and
his wife he was rather frightened, but there was nothing to be gained
by putting it off, so he pulled a very long face and went to his
neighbour's garden.

'Your dog,' said he, pretending to weep, 'has suddenly fallen down dead,
though I took every care of him, and gave him everything he could wish
for. And I thought I had better come straight and tell you.'

Weeping bitterly, the old man went to fetch the body of his favourite,
and brought it home and buried it under the fig-tree where he had found
the treasure. From morning till night he and his wife mourned over their
loss, and nothing could comfort them.

At length, one night when he was asleep, he dreamt that the dog appeared
to him and told him to cut down the fig-tree over his grave, and out of
its wood to make a mortar. But when the old man woke and thought of his
dream he did not feel at all inclined to cut down the tree, which bore
well every year, and consulted his wife about it. The woman did not
hesitate a moment, and said that after what had happened before, the
dog's advice must certainly be obeyed, so the tree was felled, and a
beautiful mortar made from it. And when the season came for the rice
crop to be gathered the mortar was taken down from its shelf, and the
grains placed in it for pounding, when, lo and behold! in a twinkling of
an eye, they all turned into gold pieces. At the sight of all this gold
the hearts of the old people were glad, and once more they blessed their
faithful dog.

But it was not long before this story also came to the ears of their
envious neighbour, and he lost no time in going to the old people and
asking if they happened to have a mortar which they could lend him. The
old man did not at all like parting with his precious treasure, but he
never could say no, so the neighbour went off with the mortar under his
arm.

The moment he got into his own house he took a great handful of rice,
and began to shell off the husks, with the help of his wife. But,
instead of the gold pieces for which they looked, the rice turned into
berries with such a horrible smell that they were obliged to run away,
after smashing the mortar in a rage and setting fire to the bits.

The old people next door were naturally very much put out when they
learned the fate of their mortar, and were not at all comforted by the
explanations and excuses made by their neighbour. But that night the dog
again appeared in a dream to his master, and told him that he must go
and collect the ashes of the burnt mortar and bring them home. Then,
when he heard that the Daimio, or great lord to whom this part of the
country belonged, was expected at the capital, he was to carry the ashes
to the high road, through which the procession would have to pass. And
as soon as it was in sight he was to climb up all the cherry-trees and
sprinkle the ashes on them, and they would soon blossom as they had
never blossomed before.

This time the old man did not wait to consult his wife as to whether he
was to do what his dog had told him, but directly he got up he went to
his neighbour's house and collected the ashes of the burnt mortar. He
put them carefully in a china vase, and carried it to the high road,
Sitting down on a seat till the Daimio should pass. The cherry-trees
were bare, for it was the season when small pots of them were sold to
rich people, who kept them in hot places, so that they might blossom
early and decorate their rooms. As to the trees in the open air, no one
would ever think of looking for the tiniest bud for more than a month
yet. The old man had not been waiting very long before he saw a cloud of
dust in the far distance, and knew that it must be the procession of the
Daimio. On they came, every man dressed in his finest clothes, and the
crowd that was lining the road bowed their faces to the ground as they
went by. Only the old man did not bow himself, and the great lord saw
this, and bade one of his courtiers, in anger, go and inquire why he had
disobeyed the ancient customs. But before the messenger could reach him
the old man had climbed the nearest tree and scattered his ashes far and
wide, and in an instant the white flowers had flashed into life, and the
heart of the Daimio rejoiced, and he gave rich presents to the old man,
whom he sent for to his castle.

We may be sure that in a very little while the envious neighbour had
heard this also, and his bosom was filled with hate. He hastened to the
place where he had burned the mortar, collected a few of the ashes which
the old man had left behind, and took them to the road, hoping that
his luck might be as good as the old man's, or perhaps even better.
His heart beat with pleasure when he caught the first glimpses of the
Daimio's train, and he held himself ready for the right moment. As the
Daimio drew near he flung a great handful of ashes over the trees, but
no buds or flowers followed the action: instead, the ashes were all
blown back into the eyes of the Daimio and his warriors, till they cried
out from pain. Then the prince ordered the evil-doer to be seized and
bound and thrown into prison, where he was kept for many months. By the
time he was set free everybody in his native village had found out his
wickedness, and they would not let him live there any longer; and as he
would not leave off his evil ways he soon went from bad to worse, and
came to a miserable end.

(Japanische Marchen.)




THE FAIRY OF THE DAWN

Once upon a time what should happen DID happen; and if it had not
happened this tale would never have been told.

There was once an emperor, very great and mighty, and he ruled over an
empire so large that no one knew where it began and where it ended. But
if nobody could tell the exact extent of his sovereignty everybody was
aware that the emperor's right eye laughed, while his left eye wept.
One or two men of valour had the courage to go and ask him the reason of
this strange fact, but he only laughed and said nothing; and the reason
of the deadly enmity between his two eyes was a secret only known to the
monarch himself.

And all the while the emperor's sons were growing up. And such sons! All
three like the morning stars in the sky!

Florea, the eldest, was so tall and broad-shouldered that no man in the
kingdom could approach him.

Costan, the second, was quite different. Small of stature, and slightly
built, he had a strong arm and stronger wrist.

Petru, the third and youngest, was tall and thin, more like a girl than
a boy. He spoke very little, but laughed and sang, sang and laughed,
from morning till night. He was very seldom serious, but then he had a
way when he was thinking of stroking his hair over his forehead, which
made him look old enough to sit in his father's council!

'You are grown up, Florea,' said Petru one day to his eldest brother;
'do go and ask father why one eye laughs and the other weeps.'

But Florea would not go. He had learnt by experience that this question
always put the emperor in a rage.

Petru next went to Costan, but did not succeed any better with him.

'Well, well, as everyone else is afraid, I suppose I must do it myself,'
observed Petru at length. No sooner said than done; the boy went
straight to his father and put his question.

'May you go blind!' exclaimed the emperor in wrath; 'what business is it
of yours?' and boxed Petru's ears soundly.

Petru returned to his brothers, and told them what had befallen him; but
not long after it struck him that his father's left eye seemed to weep
less, and the right to laugh more.

'I wonder if it has anything to do with my question,' thought he.

'I'll try again! After all, what do two boxes on the ear matter?'

So he put his question for the second time, and had the same answer;
but the left eye only wept now and then, while the right eye looked ten
years younger.

'It really MUST be true,' thought Petru. 'Now I know what I have to do.
I shall have to go on putting that question, and getting boxes on the
ear, till both eyes laugh together.'

No sooner said than done. Petru never, never forswore himself.

'Petru, my dear boy,' cried the emperor, both his eyes laughing
together, 'I see you have got this on the brain. Well, I will let you
into the secret. My right eye laughs when I look at my three sons, and
see how strong and handsome you all are, and the other eye weeps
because I fear that after I die you will not be able to keep the empire
together, and to protect it from its enemies. But if you can bring me
water from the spring of the Fairy of the Dawn, to bathe my eyes, then
they will laugh for evermore; for I shall know that my sons are brave
enough to overcome any foe.'

Thus spoke the emperor, and Petru picked up his hat and went to find his
brothers.

The three young men took counsel together, and talked the subject well
over, as brothers should do. And the end of it was that Florea, as the
eldest, went to the stables, chose the best and handsomest horse they
contained, saddled him, and took leave of the court.

'I am starting at once,' said he to his brothers, 'and if after a year,
a month, a week, and a day I have not returned with the water from the
spring of the Fairy of the Dawn, you, Costan, had better come after me.'
So saying he disappeared round a corner of the palace.

For three days and three nights he never drew rein. Like a spirit the
horse flew over mountains and valleys till he came to the borders of
the empire. Here was a deep, deep trench that girdled it the whole way
round, and there was only a single bridge by which the trench could be
crossed. Florea made instantly for the bridge, and there pulled up to
look around him once more, to take leave of his native land Then he
turned, but before him was standing a dragon--oh! SUCH a dragon!--a
dragon with three heads and three horrible faces, all with their mouths
wide open, one jaw reaching to heaven and the other to earth.

At this awful sight Florea did not wait to give battle. He put spurs to
his horse and dashed off, WHERE he neither knew nor cared.

The dragon heaved a sigh and vanished without leaving a trace behind
him.

A week went by. Florea did not return home. Two passed; and nothing was
heard of him. After a month Costan began to haunt the stables and to
look out a horse for himself. And the moment the year, the month, the
week, and the day were over Costan mounted his horse and took leave of
his youngest brother.

'If I fail, then you come,' said he, and followed the path that Florea
had taken.

The dragon on the bridge was more fearful and his three heads more
terrible than before, and the young hero rode away still faster than his
brother had done.

Nothing more was heard either of him or Florea; and Petru remained
alone.

'I must go after my brothers,' said Petru one day to his father.

'Go, then,' said his father, 'and may you have better luck than they';
and he bade farewell to Petru, who rode straight to the borders of the
kingdom.

The dragon on the bridge was yet more dreadful than the one Florea and
Costan had seen, for this one had seven heads instead of only three.

Petru stopped for a moment when he caught sight of this terrible
creature. Then he found his voice.

'Get out of the way!' cried he. 'Get out of the way!' he repeated again,
as the dragon did not move. 'Get out of the way!' and with this last
summons he drew his sword and rushed upon him. In an instant the heavens
seemed to darken round him and he was surrounded by fire--fire to right
of him, fire to left of him, fire to front of him, fire to rear of him;
nothing but fire whichever way he looked, for the dragon's seven heads
were vomiting flame.

The horse neighed and reared at the horrible sight, and Petru could not
use the sword he had in readiness.

'Be quiet! this won't do!' he said, dismounting hastily, but holding the
bridle firmly in his left hand and grasping his sword in his right.

But even so he got on no better, for he could see nothing but fire and
smoke.

'There is no help for it; I must go back and get a better horse,' said
he, and mounted again and rode homewards.

At the gate of the palace his nurse, old Birscha, was waiting for him
eagerly.

'Ah, Petru, my son, I knew you would have to come back,' she cried. 'You
did not set about the matter properly.'

'How ought I to have set about it?' asked Petru, half angrily, half
sadly.

'Look here, my boy,' replied old Birscha. 'You can never reach the
spring of the Fairy of the Dawn unless you ride the horse which your
father, the emperor, rode in his youth. Go and ask where it is to be
found, and then mount it and be off with you.'

Petru thanked her heartily for her advice, and went at once to make
inquiries about the horse.

'By the light of my eyes!' exclaimed the emperor when Petru had put his
question. 'Who has told you anything about that? It must have been that
old witch of a Birscha? Have you lost your wits? Fifty years have passed
since I was young, and who knows where the bones of my horse may be
rotting, or whether a scrap of his reins still lie in his stall? I have
forgotten all about him long ago.'

Petru turned away in anger, and went back to his old nurse.

'Do not be cast down,' she said with a smile; 'if that is how the affair
stands all will go well. Go and fetch the scrap of the reins; I shall
soon know what must be done.'

The place was full of saddles, bridles, and bits of leather. Petru
picked out the oldest, and blackest, and most decayed pair of reins,
and brought them to the old woman, who murmured something over them and
sprinkled them with incense, and held them out to the young man.

'Take the reins,' said she, 'and strike them violently against the
pillars of the house.'

Petru did what he was told, and scarcely had the reins touched the
pillars when something happened--HOW I have no idea--that made Petru
stare with surprise. A horse stood before him--a horse whose equal
in beauty the world had never seen; with a saddle on him of gold and
precious stones, and with such a dazzling bridle you hardly dared
to look at it, lest you should lose your sight. A splendid horse, a
