Then the king called to the coachman, and ordered him to get down from
his seat and fetch him the wreath from the wolf's head. But the wolf
heard the order and said: 'My lord and king, I will let you have the
wreath, but I must have something in return.'

'What do you want?' answered the king. 'I will gladly give you rich
treasure in exchange for it.'

'I do not want rich treasure,' replied the wolf. 'Only promise to give
me the first thing that meets you on your way to your castle. In three
days I shall come and fetch it.'

And the king thought to himself: 'I am still a good long way from home,
I am sure to meet a wild animal or a bird on the road, it will be quite
safe to promise.' So he consented, and carried the wreath away with him.
But all along the road he met no living creature till he turned into
the palace gates, where his youngest daughter was waiting to welcome him
home.

That evening the king was very sad, remembering his promise; and when
he told the queen what had happened, she too shed bitter tears. And the
youngest princess asked them why they both looked so sad, and why they
wept. Then her father told her what a price he would have to pay for the
wreath of wild flowers he had brought home to her, for in three days a
white wolf would come and claim her and carry her away, and they would
never see her again. But the queen thought and thought, and at last she
hit upon a plan.

There was in the palace a servant maid the same age and the same height
as the princess, and the queen dressed her up in a beautiful dress
belonging to her daughter, and determined to give her to the white wolf,
who would never know the difference.

On the third day the wolf strode into the palace yard and up the great
stairs, to the room where the king and queen were seated.

'I have come to claim your promise,' he said. 'Give me your youngest
daughter.'

Then they led the servant maid up to him, and he said to her: 'You must
mount on my back, and I will take you to my castle.' And with these
words he swung her on to his back and left the palace.

When they reached the place where he had met the king and given him the
wreath of wild flowers, he stopped, and told her to dismount that they
might rest a little.

So they sat down by the roadside.

'I wonder,' said the wolf, 'what your father would do if this forest
belonged to him?'

And the girl answered: 'My father is a poor man, so he would cut down
the trees, and saw them into planks, and he would sell the planks, and
we should never be poor again; but would always have enough to eat.'

Then the wolf knew that he had not got the real princess, and he swung
the servant-maid on to his back and carried her to the castle. And he
strode angrily into the king's chamber, and spoke.

'Give me the real princess at once. If you deceive me again I will cause
such a storm to burst over your palace that the walls will fall in, and
you will all be buried in the ruins.'

Then the king and the queen wept, but they saw there was no escape.
So they sent for their youngest daughter, and the king said to her:
'Dearest child, you must go with the white wolf, for I promised you to
him, and I must keep my word.'

So the princess got ready to leave her home; but first she went to her
room to fetch her wreath of wild flowers, which she took with her. Then
the white wolf swung her on his back and bore her away. But when they
came to the place where he had rested with the servant-maid, he told her
to dismount that they might rest for a little at the roadside. Then
he turned to her and said: 'I wonder what your father would do if this
forest belonged to him?'

And the princess answered: 'My father would cut down the trees and turn
it into a beautiful park and gardens, and he and his courtiers would
come and wander among the glades in the summer time.'

'This is the real princess,' said the wolf to himself. But aloud he
said: 'Mount once more on my back, and I will bear you to my castle.'

And when she was seated on his back he set out through the woods, and
he ran, and ran, and ran, till at last he stopped in front of a stately
courtyard, with massive gates.

'This is a beautiful castle,' said the princess, as the gates swung back
and she stepped inside. 'If only I were not so far away from my father
and my mother!'

But the wolf answered: 'At the end of a year we will pay a visit to your
father and mother.'

And at these words the white furry skin slipped from his back, and the
princess saw that he was not a wolf at all, but a beautiful youth, tall
and stately; and he gave her his hand, and led her up the castle stairs.

One day, at the end of half a year, he came into her room and said: 'My
dear one, you must get ready for a wedding. Your eldest sister is going
to be married, and I will take you to your father's palace. When the
wedding is over, I shall come and fetch you home. I will whistle outside
the gate, and when you hear me, pay no heed to what your father or
mother say, leave your dancing and feasting, and come to me at once; for
if I have to leave without you, you will never find your way back alone
through the forests.'

When the princess was ready to start, she found that he had put on his
white fur skin, and was changed back into the wolf; and he swung her on
to his back, and set out with her to her father's palace, where he left
her, while he himself returned home alone. But, in the evening, he went
back to fetch her, and, standing outside the palace gate, he gave a
long, loud whistle. In the midst of her dancing the princess heard the
sound, and at once she went to him, and he swung her on his back and
bore her away to his castle.

Again, at the end of half a year, the prince came into her room, as the
white wolf, and said: 'Dear heart, you must prepare for the wedding of
your second sister. I will take you to your father's palace to-day, and
we will remain there together till to-morrow morning.'

So they went together to the wedding. In the evening, when the two were
alone together, he dropped his fur skin, and, ceasing to be a wolf,
became a prince again. Now they did not know that the princess's mother
was hidden in the room. When she saw the white skin lying on the floor,
she crept out of the room, and sent a servant to fetch the skin and
to burn it in the kitchen fire. The moment the flames touched the skin
there was a fearful clap of thunder heard, and the prince disappeared
out of the palace gate in a whirlwind, and returned to his palace alone.

But the princess was heart-broken, and spent the night weeping bitterly.
Next morning she set out to find her way back to the castle, but she
wandered through the woods and forests, and she could find no path or
track to guide her. For fourteen days she roamed in the forest, sleeping
under the trees, and living upon wild berries and roots, and at last she
reached a little house. She opened the door and went in, and found the
wind seated in the room all by himself, and she spoke to the wind and
said: 'Wind, have you seen the white wolf?'

And the wind answered: 'All day and all night I have been blowing round
the world, and I have only just come home; but I have not seen him.'

But he gave her a pair of shoes, in which, he told her, she would be
able to walk a hundred miles with every step. Then she walked through
the air till she reached a star, and she said: 'Tell me, star, have you
seen the white wolf?'

And the star answered: 'I have been shining all night, and I have not
seen him.'

But the star gave her a pair of shoes, and told her that if she put them
on she would be able to walk two hundred miles at a stride. So she drew
them on, and she walked to the moon, and she said: 'Dear moon, have you
not seen the white wolf?'

But the moon answered, 'All night long I have been sailing through the
heavens, and I have only just come home; but I did not see him.'

But he gave her a pair of shoes, in which she would be able to cover
four hundred miles with every stride. So she went to the sun, and said:
'Dear sun, have you seen the white wolf?'

And the sun answered, 'Yes, I have seen him, and he has chosen another
bride, for he thought you had left him, and would never return, and he
is preparing for the wedding. But I will help you. Here are a pair of
shoes. If you put these on you will be able to walk on glass or ice, and
to climb the steepest places. And here is a spinning-wheel, with which
you will be able to spin moss into silk. When you leave me you will
reach a glass mountain. Put on the shoes that I have given you and with
them you will be able to climb it quite easily. At the summit you will
find the palace of the white wolf.'

Then the princess set out, and before long she reached the glass
mountain, and at the summit she found the white wolf's palace, as the
sun had said.

But no one recognised her, as she had disguised herself as an old woman,
and had wound a shawl round her head. Great preparations were going on
in the palace for the wedding, which was to take place next day.
Then the princess, still disguised as an old woman, took out her
spinning-wheel, and began to spin moss into silk. And as she spun the
new bride passed by, and seeing the moss turn into silk, she said to
the old woman: 'Little mother, I wish you would give me that
spinning-wheel.'

And the princess answered, 'I will give it to you if you will allow me
to sleep to-night on the mat outside the prince's door.'

And the bride replied, 'Yes, you may sleep on the mat outside the door.'

So the princess gave her the spinning-wheel. And that night, winding the
shawl all round her, so that no one could recognise her, she lay down on
the mat outside the white wolf's door. And when everyone in the palace
was asleep she began to tell the whole of her story. She told how she
had been one of three sisters, and that she had been the youngest and
the fairest of the three, and that her father had betrothed her to a
white wolf. And she told how she had gone first to the wedding of one
sister, and then with her husband to the wedding of the other sister,
and how her mother had ordered the servant to throw the white fur skin
into the kitchen fire. And then she told of her wanderings through the
forest; and of how she had sought the white wolf weeping; and how the
wind and star and moon and sun had befriended her, and had helped her to
reach his palace. And when the white wolf heard all the story, he knew
that it was his first wife, who had sought him, and had found him, after
such great dangers and difficulties.

But he said nothing, for he waited till the next day, when many
guests--kings and princes from far countries--were coming to his
wedding. Then, when all the guests were assembled in the banqueting
hall, he spoke to them and said: 'Hearken to me, ye kings and princes,
for I have something to tell you. I had lost the key of my treasure
casket, so I ordered a new one to be made; but I have since found the
old one. Now, which of these keys is the better?'

Then all the kings and royal guests answered: 'Certainly the old key is
better than the new one.'

'Then,' said the wolf, 'if that is so, my former bride is better than my
new one.'

And he sent for the new bride, and he gave her in marriage to one of
the princes who was present, and then he turned to his guests, and said:
'And here is my former bride'--and the beautiful princess was led
into the room and seated beside him on his throne. 'I thought she had
forgotten me, and that she would never return. But she has sought
me everywhere, and now we are together once more we shall never part
again.'




Mohammed with the Magic Finger


Once upon a time, there lived a woman who had a son and a daughter. One
morning she said to them: 'I have heard of a town where there is no such
thing as death: let us go and dwell there.' So she broke up her house,
and went away with her son and daughter.

When she reached the city, the first thing she did was to look about and
see if there was any churchyard, and when she found none, she exclaimed,
'This is a delightful spot. We will stay here for ever.'

By-and-by, her son grew to be a man, and he took for a wife a girl who
had been born in the town. But after a little while he grew restless,
and went away on his travels, leaving his mother, his wife, and his
sister behind him.

He had not been gone many weeks when one evening his mother said, 'I am
not well, my head aches dreadfully.'

'What did you say?' inquired her daughter-in-law.

'My head feels ready to split,' replied the old woman.

The daughter-in-law asked no more questions, but left the house, and
went in haste to some butchers in the next street.

'I have got a woman to sell; what will you give me for her?' said she.

The butchers answered that they must see the woman first, and they all
returned together.

Then the butchers took the woman and told her they must kill her.

'But why?' she asked.

'Because,' they said, 'it is always our custom that when persons are ill
and complain of their head they should be killed at once. It is a much
better way than leaving them to die a natural death.'

'Very well,' replied the woman. 'But leave, I pray you, my lungs and my
liver untouched, till my son comes back. Then give both to him.'

But the men took them out at once, and gave them to the daughter-in-law,
saying: 'Put away these things till your husband returns.' And the
daughter-in-law took them, and hid them in a secret place.

When the old woman's daughter, who had been in the woods, heard that her
mother had been killed while she was out, she was filled with fright,
and ran away as fast as she could. At last she reached a lonely spot far
from the town, where she thought she was safe, and sat down on a stone,
and wept bitterly. As she was sitting, sobbing, a man passed by.

'What is the matter, little girl? Answer me! I will be your friend.'

'Ah, sir, they have killed my mother; my brother is far away, and I have
nobody.'

'Will you come with me?' asked the man.

'Thankfully,' said she, and he led her down, down, under the earth, till
they reached a great city. Then he married her, and in course of time
she had a son. And the baby was known throughout the city as 'Mohammed
with the magic finger,' because, whenever he stuck out his little
finger, he was able to see anything that was happening for as far as two
days' distance.

By-and-by, as the boy was growing bigger, his uncle returned from his
long journey, and went straight to his wife.

'Where are my mother and sister?' he asked; but his wife answered: 'Have
something to eat first, and then I will tell you.'

But he replied: 'How can I eat till I know what has become of them?'

Then she fetched, from the upper chamber, a box full of money, which
she laid before him, saying, 'That is the price of your mother. She sold
well.'

'What do you mean?' he gasped.

'Oh, your mother complained one day that her head was aching, so I got
in two butchers and they agreed to take her. However, I have got her
lungs and liver hidden, till you came back, in a safe place.'

'And my sister?'

'Well, while the people were chopping up your mother she ran away, and I
heard no more of her.'

'Give me my mother's liver and lungs,' said the young man. And she gave
them to him. Then he put them in his pocket, and went away, saying: 'I
can stay no longer in this horrible town. I go to seek my sister.'

Now, one day, the little boy stretched out his finger and said to his
mother, 'My uncle is coming!'

'Where is he?' she asked.

'He is still two days' journey off: looking for us; but he will soon be
here.' And in two days, as the boy had foretold, the uncle had found the
hole in the earth, and arrived at the gate of the city. All his money
was spent, and not knowing where his sister lived, he began to beg of
all the people he saw.

'Here comes my uncle,' called out the little boy. 'Where?' asked his
mother. 'Here at the house door;' and the woman ran out and embraced
him, and wept over him. When they could both speak, he said: 'My sister,
were you by when they killed my mother?'

'I was absent when they slew her,' replied she, 'and as I could do
nothing, I ran away. But you, my brother, how did you get here?'

'By chance,' he said, 'after I had wandered far; but I did not know
I should find you!' 'My little boy told me you were coming,' she
explained, 'when you were yet two days distant; he alone of all men has
that great gift.'

But she did not tell him that her husband could change himself into a
serpent, a dog, or a monster, whenever he pleased. He was a very rich
man, and possessed large herds of camels, goats, sheep, cattle, horses
and asses; all the best of their kind. And the next morning, the sister
said: 'Dear brother, go and watch our sheep, and when you are thirsty,
drink their milk!'

'Very well,' answered he, and he went.

Soon after, she said again, 'Dear brother, go and watch our goats.'

'But why? I like tending sheep better!'

'Oh, it is much nicer to be a goatherd,' she said; so he took the goats
out.

When he was gone, she said to her husband, 'You must kill my brother,
for I cannot have him living here with me.'

'But, my dear, why should I? He has done me no harm.'
