and they can't see the castle, because they go on seeing the house;
and so -'

'Oh, DON'T!' said Jane; 'you make my head go all swimmy, like being
on a roundabout.  It doesn't matter!  Only, I hope we shall be able
to see our dinner, that's all - because if it's invisible it'll be
unfeelable as well, and then we can't eat it!  I KNOW it will,
because I tried to feel if I could feel the Lamb's chair, and there
was nothing under him at all but air.  And we can't eat air, and I
feel just as if I hadn't had any breakfast for years and years.'

'It's no use thinking about it,' said Anthea.  'Let's go on
exploring.  Perhaps we might find something to eat.'

This lighted hope in every breast, and they went on exploring the
castle.  But though it was the most perfect and delightful castle
you can possibly imagine, and furnished in the most complete and
beautiful manner, neither food nor men-at-arms were to be found in
it.
'If only you'd thought of wishing to be besieged in a castle
thoroughly garrisoned and provisioned!' said Jane reproachfully.

'You can't think of everything, you know,' said Anthea.  'I should
think it must be nearly dinner-time by now.'

It wasn't; but they hung about watching the strange movements of
the servants in the middle of the courtyard, because, of course,
they couldn't be sure where the dining-room of the invisible house
was.  Presently they saw Martha carrying an invisible tray across
the courtyard, for it seemed that, by the most fortunate accident,
the dining-room of the house and the banqueting-hall of the castle
were in the same place.  But oh, how their hearts sank when they
perceived that the tray was invisible!

They waited in wretched silence while Martha went through the form
of carving an unseen leg of mutton and serving invisible greens and
potatoes with a spoon that no one could see.  When she had left the
room, the children looked at the empty table, and then at each
other.

'This is worse than anything,' said Robert, who had not till now
been particularly keen on his dinner.

'I'm not so very hungry,' said Anthea, trying to make the best of
things, as usual.

Cyril tightened his belt ostentatiously.  Jane burst into tears.



CHAPTER 7
A SIEGE AND BED


The children were sitting in the gloomy banqueting-hall, at the end
of one of the long bare wooden tables.  There was now no hope.
Martha had brought in the dinner, and the dinner was invisible, and
unfeelable too; for, when they rubbed their hands along the table,
they knew but too well that for them there was nothing there BUT
table.

Suddenly Cyril felt in his pocket.

'Right, oh!' he cried.  'Look here!  Biscuits.'

Rather broken and crumbled, certainly, but still biscuits.  Three
whole ones, and a generous handful of crumbs and fragments.

'I got them this morning - cook - and I'd quite forgotten,' he
explained as he divided them with scrupulous fairness into four
heaps.

They were eaten in a happy silence, though they tasted a little
oddly, because they had been in Cyril's pocket all the morning with
a hank of tarred twine, some green fir-cones, and a ball of
cobbler's wax.

'Yes, but look here, Squirrel,' said Robert; 'you're so clever at
explaining about invisibleness and all that.  How is it the
biscuits are here, and all the bread and meat and things have
disappeared?'

'I don't know,' said Cyril after a pause, 'unless it's because WE
had them.  Nothing about us has changed.  Everything's in my pocket
all right.'

'Then if we HAD the mutton it would be real,' said Robert.  'Oh,
don't I wish we could find it!'

'But we can't find it.  I suppose it isn't ours till we've got it
in our mouths.'

'Or in our pockets,' said Jane, thinking of the biscuits.

'Who puts mutton in their pockets, goose-girl?' said Cyril.  'But
I know - at any rate, I'll try it!'

He leaned over the table with his face about an inch from it, and
kept opening and shutting his mouth as if he were taking bites out
of air.

'It's no good,' said Robert in deep dejection.  'You'll only -
Hullo!'

Cyril stood up with a grin of triumph, holding a square piece of
bread in his mouth.  It was quite real.  Everyone saw it.  It is
true that, directly he bit a piece off, the rest vanished; but it
was all right, because he knew he had it in his hand though he
could neither see nor feel it.  He took another bite from the air
between his fingers, and it turned into bread as he bit.  The next
moment all the others were following his example, and opening and
shutting their mouths an inch or so from the bare-looking table.
Robert captured a slice of mutton, and - but I think I will draw a
veil over the rest of this painful scene.  It is enough to say that
they all had enough mutton, and that when Martha came to change the
plates she said she had never seen such a mess in all her born
days.

The pudding was, fortunately, a plain suet roly-poly, and in answer
to Martha's questions the children all with one accord said that
they would NOT have treacle on it - nor jam, nor sugar - 'Just
plain, please,' they said.  Martha said, 'Well, I never - what
next, I wonder!' and went away.

Then ensued another scene on which I will not dwell, for nobody
looks nice picking up slices of suet pudding from the table in its
mouth, like a dog.
The great thing, after all, was that they had had dinner; and now
everyone felt more courage to prepare for the attack that was to be
delivered before sunset.  Robert, as captain, insisted on climbing
to the top of one of the towers to reconnoitre, so up they all
went.  And now they could see all round the castle, and could see,
too, that beyond the moat, on every side, the tents of the
besieging party were pitched.  Rather uncomfortable shivers ran
down the children's backs as they saw that all the men were very
busy cleaning or sharpening their arms, re-stringing their bows,
and polishing their shields.  A large party came along the road,
with horses dragging along the great trunk of a tree; and Cyril
felt quite pale, because he knew this was for a battering-ram.

'What a good thing we've got a moat,' he said; 'and what a good
thing the drawbridge is up - I should never have known how to work
it.'

'Of course it would be up in a besieged castle.'

'You'd think there ought to have been soldiers in it, wouldn't
you?' said Robert.

'You see you don't know how long it's been besieged,' said Cyril
darkly; 'perhaps most of the brave defenders were killed quite
early in the siege and all the provisions eaten, and now there are
only a few intrepid survivors - that's us, and we are going to
defend it to the death.'

'How do you begin - defending to the death, I mean?' asked Anthea.

'We ought to be heavily armed - and then shoot at them when they
advance to the attack.'

'They used to pour boiling lead down on besiegers when they got too
close,' said Anthea.  'Father showed me the holes on purpose for
pouring it down through at Bodiam Castle.  And there are holes like
it in the gate-tower here.'

'I think I'm glad it's only a game; it IS only a game, isn't it?'
said Jane.

But no one answered.

The children found plenty of strange weapons in the castle, and if
they were armed at all it was soon plain that they would be, as
Cyril said, 'armed heavily' - for these swords and lances and
crossbows were far too weighty even for Cyril's manly strength; and
as for the longbows, none of the children could even begin to bend
them.  The daggers were better; but Jane hoped that the besiegers
would not come close enough for daggers to be of any use.

'Never mind, we can hurl them like javelins,' said Cyril, 'or drop
them on people's heads.  I say - there are lots of stones on the
other side of the courtyard.  If we took some of those up, just to
drop on their heads if they were to try swimming the moat.'

So a heap of stones grew apace, up in the room above the gate; and
another heap, a shiny spiky dangerous-looking heap, of daggers and
knives.

As Anthea was crossing the courtyard for more stones, a sudden and
valuable idea came to her.  She went to Martha and said, 'May we
have just biscuits for tea?  We're going to play at besieged
castles, and we'd like the biscuits to provision the garrison.  Put
mine in my pocket, please, my hands are so dirty.  And I'll tell
the others to fetch theirs.'

This was indeed a happy thought, for now with four generous
handfuls of air, which turned to biscuit as Martha crammed it into
their pockets, the garrison was well provisioned till sundown.

They brought up some iron pots of cold water to pour on the
besiegers instead of hot lead, with which the castle did not seem
to be provided.

The afternoon passed with wonderful quickness.  It was very
exciting; but none of them, except Robert, could feel all the time
that this was real deadly dangerous work.  To the others, who had
only seen the camp and the besiegers from a distance, the whole
thing seemed half a game of make-believe, and half a splendidly
distinct and perfectly safe dream.  But it was only now and then
that Robert could feel this.

When it seemed to be tea-time the biscuits were eaten with water
from the deep well in the courtyard, drunk out of horns.  Cyril
insisted on putting by eight of the biscuits, in case anyone should
feel faint in stress of battle.

just as he was putting away the reserve biscuits in a sort of
little stone cupboard without a door, a sudden sound made him drop
three.  It was the loud fierce cry of a trumpet.

'You see it IS real,' said Robert, 'and they are going to attack.'

All rushed to the narrow windows.

'Yes,' said Robert, 'they're all coming out of their tents and
moving about like ants.  There's that Jakin dancing about where the
bridge joins on.  I wish he could see me put my tongue out at him!
Yah!'

The others were far too pale to wish to put their tongues out at
anybody.  They looked at Robert with surprised respect.  Anthea
said:

'You really ARE brave, Robert.'

'Rot!' Cyril's pallor turned to redness now, all in a minute.
'He's been getting ready to be brave all the afternoon.  And I
wasn't ready, that's all.  I shall be braver than he is in half a
jiffy.'

'Oh dear!' said Jane, 'what does it matter which of
you is the bravest?  I think Cyril was a perfect silly to wish for
a castle, and I don't want to play.'

'It ISN'T' - Robert was beginning sternly, but Anthea
interrupted -


'Oh yes, you do,' she said coaxingly; 'it's a very nice game,
really, because they can't possibly get in, and if they do the
women and children are always spared by civilized armies.'

'But are you quite, quite sure they ARE civilized?' asked Jane,
panting.  'They seem to be such a long time ago.'

'Of course they are.'  Anthea pointed cheerfully through the narrow
window.  'Why, look at the little flags on their lances, how bright
they are - and how fine the leader is!  Look, that's him - isn't
it, Robert? - on the grey horse.'

Jane consented to look, and the scene was almost too pretty to be
alarming.  The green turf, the white tents, the flash of pennoned
lances, the gleam of armour, and the bright colours of scarf and
tunic - it was just like a splendid coloured picture.  The trumpets
were sounding, and when the trumpets stopped for breath the
children could hear the cling-clang of armour and the murmur of
voices.

A trumpeter came forward to the edge of the moat, which now seemed
very much narrower than at first, and blew the longest and loudest
blast they had yet heard.  When the blaring noise had died away, a
man who was with the trumpeter shouted:

'What ho, within there!' and his voice came plainly to the garrison
in the gate-house.

'Hullo there!' Robert bellowed back at once.

'In the name of our Lord the King, and of our good lord and trusty
leader Sir Wulfric de Talbot, we summon this castle to surrender -
on pain of fire and sword and no quarter.  Do ye surrender?'

'No,' bawled Robert, 'of course we don't!  Never,

Never, NEVER!'

The man answered back:

'Then your fate be on your own heads.'

'Cheer,' said Robert in a fierce whisper.  'Cheer to show them we
aren't afraid, and rattle the daggers to make more noise.  One,
two, three!  Hip, hip, hooray!  Again - Hip, hip, hooray!  One more
- Hip, hip, hooray!'  The cheers were rather high and weak, but the
rattle of the daggers lent them strength and depth.

There was another shout from the camp across the moat - and then
the beleaguered fortress felt that the attack had indeed begun.

It was getting rather dark in the room above the great gate, and
Jane took a very little courage as she remembered that sunset
couldn't be far off now.

'The moat is dreadfully thin,' said Anthea.

'But they can't get into the castle even if they do swim over,'
said Robert.  And as he spoke he heard feet on the stair outside -
heavy feet and the clank of steel.  No one breathed for a moment.
The steel and the feet went on up the turret stairs.  Then Robert
sprang softly to the door.  He pulled off his shoes.

'Wait here,' he whispered, and stole quickly and softly after the
boots and the spur-clank.  He peeped into the upper room.  The man
was there - and it was Jakin, all dripping with moat-water, and he
was fiddling about with the machinery which Robert felt sure worked
the drawbridge.  Robert banged the door suddenly, and turned the
great key in the lock, just as Jakin sprang to the inside of the
door.  Then he tore downstairs and into the little turret at the
foot of the tower where the biggest window was.

'We ought to have defended THIS!' he cried to the others as they
followed him.  He was just in time.  Another man had swum over, and
his fingers were on the window-ledge.  Robert never knew how the
man had managed to climb up out of the water.  But he saw the
clinging fingers, and hit them as hard as he could with an iron bar
that he caught up from the floor.  The man fell with a plop-plash
into the moat-water.  In another moment Robert was outside the
little room, had banged its door and was shooting home the enormous
bolts, and calling to Cyril to lend a hand.

Then they stood in the arched gate-house, breathing hard and
looking at each other.  jane's mouth was open.

'Cheer up, jenny,' said Robert - 'it won't last much longer.'

There was a creaking above, and something rattled and shook.  The
pavement they stood on seemed to tremble.  Then a crash told them
that the drawbridge had been lowered to its place.

'That's that beast Jakin,' said Robert.  'There's still the
portcullis; I'm almost certain that's worked from lower down.'
