so Oswald had taken them off, and wore his own brown knickerbockers
belonging to his Norfolks. He had tied the pyjamas round his neck, to
carry them easily. He was afraid to leave them in a ditch, as Alice
suggested, because he did not know the roads, and for aught he recked
they might have been infested with footpads. If it had been his own
pyjamas it would have been different. (I'm going to ask for pyjamas next
winter, they are so useful in many ways.)

Noel was a highwayman in brown-paper gaiters and bath towels and a
cocked hat of newspaper. I don't know how he kept it on. And the pig was
encircled by the dauntless banner of our country. All the same, I think
if I had seen a band of youthful travellers in bitter distress about a
pig I should have tried to lend a helping hand and not sat roaring in
the hedge, no matter how the travellers and the pig might have been
dressed.

It was hotter than anyone would believe who has never had occasion to
hunt the pig when dressed for quite another part. The flour got out of
Oswald's hair into his eyes and his mouth. His brow was wet with what
the village blacksmith's was wet with, and not his fair brow alone. It
ran down his face and washed the red off in streaks, and when he
rubbed his eyes he only made it worse. Alice had to run holding the
equestrienne skirts on with both hands, and I think the brown-paper
boots bothered Noel from the first. Dora had her skirt over her arm and
carried the topper in her hand. It was no use to tell ourselves it was a
wild boar hunt--we were long past that.

At last we met a man who took pity on us. He was a kind-hearted man. I
think, perhaps, he had a pig of his own--or, perhaps, children. Honour
to his name!

He stood in the middle of the road and waved his arms. The pig
right-wheeled through a gate into a private garden and cantered up the
drive. We followed. What else were we to do, I should like to know?

The Learned Black Pig seemed to know its way. It turned first to the
right and then to the left, and emerged on a lawn.

'Now, all together!' cried Oswald, mustering his failing voice to give
the word of command. 'Surround him!--cut off his retreat!'

We almost surrounded him. He edged off towards the house.

'Now we've got him!' cried the crafty Oswald, as the pig got on to a bed
of yellow pansies close against the red house wall.

All would even then have been well, but Denny, at the last, shrank from
meeting the pig face to face in a manly way. He let the pig pass him,
and the next moment, with a squeak that said 'There now!' as plain as
words, the pig bolted into a French window. The pursuers halted not.
This was no time for trivial ceremony. In another moment the pig was a
captive. Alice and Oswald had their arms round him under the ruins of a
table that had had teacups on it, and around the hunters and their prey
stood the startled members of a parish society for making clothes for
the poor heathen, that that pig had led us into the very midst of. They
were reading a missionary report or something when we ran our quarry
to earth under their table. Even as he crossed the threshold I heard
something about 'black brothers being already white to the harvest'. All
the ladies had been sewing flannel things for the poor blacks while the
curate read aloud to them. You think they screamed when they saw the Pig
and Us? You are right.

On the whole, I cannot say that the missionary people behaved badly.
Oswald explained that it was entirely the pig's doing, and asked pardon
quite properly for any alarm the ladies had felt; and Alice said how
sorry we were but really it was NOT our fault this time. The curate
looked a bit nasty, but the presence of ladies made him keep his hot
blood to himself.

When we had explained, we said, 'Might we go?' The curate said, 'The
sooner the better.' But the Lady of the House asked for our names and
addresses, and said she should write to our Father. (She did, and we
heard of it too.) They did not do anything to us, as Oswald at one time
believed to be the curate's idea. They let us go.

And we went, after we had asked for a piece of rope to lead the pig by.

'In case it should come back into your nice room,' Alice said. 'And that
would be such a pity, wouldn't it?'

A little girl in a starched pinafore was sent for the rope. And as soon
as the pig had agreed to let us tie it round his neck we came away. The
scene in the drawing-room had not been long. The pig went slowly,

'Like the meandering brook,'

Denny said. Just by the gate the shrubs rustled and opened, and the
little girl came out. Her pinafore was full of cake.

'Here,' she said. 'You must be hungry if you've come all that way.

I think they might have given you some tea after all the trouble you've
had.' We took the cake with correct thanks.

'I wish I could play at circuses,' she said. 'Tell me about it.'

We told her while we ate the cake; and when we had done she said perhaps
it was better to hear about than do, especially the goat's part and
Dicky's.

'But I do wish auntie had given you tea,' she said.

We told her not to be too hard on her aunt, because you have to make
allowances for grown-up people. When we parted she said she would never
forget us, and Oswald gave her his pocket button-hook and corkscrew
combined for a keepsake.

Dicky's act with the goat (which is true, and no kid) was the only thing
out of that day that was put in the Golden Deed book, and he put that in
himself while we were hunting the pig.

Alice and me capturing the pig was never put in. We would scorn to write
our own good actions, but I suppose Dicky was dull with us all away; and
you must pity the dull, and not blame them.

I will not seek to unfold to you how we got the pig home, or how the
donkey was caught (that was poor sport compared to the pig). Nor will I
tell you a word of all that was said and done to the intrepid hunters
of the Black and Learned. I have told you all the interesting part. Seek
not to know the rest. It is better buried in obliquity.


CHAPTER 7. BEING BEAVERS; OR, THE YOUNG EXPLORERS     (ARCTIC OR OTHERWISE)

You read in books about the pleasures of London, and about how people
who live in the country long for the gay whirl of fashion in town
because the country is so dull. I do not agree with this at all. In
London, or at any rate Lewisham, nothing happens unless you make it
happen; or if it happens it doesn't happen to you, and you don't know
the people it does happen to. But in the country the most interesting
events occur quite freely, and they seem to happen to you as much as to
anyone else. Very often quite without your doing anything to help.

The natural and right ways of earning your living in the country are
much jollier than town ones, too; sowing and reaping, and doing things
with animals, are much better sport than fishmongering or bakering or
oil-shopping, and those sort of things, except, of course, a plumber's
and gasfitter's, and he is the same in town or country--most interesting
and like an engineer.

I remember what a nice man it was that came to cut the gas off once
at our old house in Lewisham, when my father's business was feeling
so poorly. He was a true gentleman, and gave Oswald and Dicky over
two yards and a quarter of good lead piping, and a brass tap that only
wanted a washer, and a whole handful of screws to do what we liked with.
We screwed the back door up with the screws, I remember, one night when
Eliza was out without leave. There was an awful row. We did not mean
to get her into trouble. We only thought it would be amusing for her to
find the door screwed up when she came down to take in the milk in the
morning. But I must not say any more about the Lewisham house. It is
only the pleasures of memory, and nothing to do with being beavers, or
any sort of exploring.

I think Dora and Daisy are the kind of girls who will grow up very good,
and perhaps marry missionaries. I am glad Oswald's destiny looks at
present as if it might be different.

We made two expeditions to discover the source of the Nile (or the North
Pole), and owing to their habit of sticking together and doing dull and
praiseable things, like sewing, and helping with the cooking, and taking
invalid delicacies to the poor and indignant, Daisy and Dora were wholly
out of it both times, though Dora's foot was now quite well enough to
have gone to the North Pole or the Equator either. They said they did
not mind the first time, because they like to keep themselves clean; it
is another of their queer ways. And they said they had had a better time
than us. (It was only a clergyman and his wife who called, and hot cakes
for tea.) The second time they said they were lucky not to have been in
it. And perhaps they were right. But let me to my narrating. I hope you
will like it. I am going to try to write it a different way, like the
books they give you for a prize at a girls' school--I mean a 'young
ladies' school', of course--not a high school. High schools are not
nearly so silly as some other kinds. Here goes:

'"Ah, me!" sighed a slender maiden of twelve summers, removing her
elegant hat and passing her tapery fingers lightly through her fair
tresses, "how sad it is--is it not?--to see able-bodied youths and young
ladies wasting the precious summer hours in idleness and luxury."

'The maiden frowned reproachingly, but yet with earnest gentleness, at
the group of youths and maidens who sat beneath an umbragipeaous beech
tree and ate black currants.

'"Dear brothers and sisters," the blushing girl went on, "could we not,
even now, at the eleventh hour, turn to account these wasted lives of
ours, and seek some occupation at once improving and agreeable?"

'"I do not quite follow your meaning, dear sister," replied the
cleverest of her brothers, on whose brow--'


It's no use. I can't write like these books. I wonder how the books'
authors can keep it up.

What really happened was that we were all eating black currants in the
orchard, out of a cabbage leaf, and Alice said--

'I say, look here, let's do something. It's simply silly to waste a day
like this. It's just on eleven. Come on!'

And Oswald said, 'Where to?'

This was the beginning of it.

The moat that is all round our house is fed by streams. One of them is
a sort of open overflow pipe from a good-sized stream that flows at the
other side of the orchard.

It was this stream that Alice meant when she said--

'Why not go and discover the source of the Nile?'

Of course Oswald knows quite well that the source of the real live
Egyptian Nile is no longer buried in that mysteriousness where it lurked
undisturbed for such a long time. But he was not going to say so. It is
a great thing to know when not to say things.

'Why not have it an Arctic expedition?' said Dicky; 'then we could take
an ice-axe, and live on blubber and things. Besides, it sounds cooler.'

'Vote! vote!' cried Oswald. So we did. Oswald, Alice, Noel, and Denny
voted for the river of the ibis and the crocodile. Dicky, H. O., and the
other girls for the region of perennial winter and rich blubber.

So Alice said, 'We can decide as we go. Let's start anyway.'

The question of supplies had now to be gone into. Everybody wanted to
take something different, and nobody thought the other people's things
would be the slightest use. It is sometimes thus even with grown-up
expeditions. So then Oswald, who is equal to the hardest emergency that
ever emerged yet, said--

'Let's each get what we like. The secret storehouse can be the shed in
the corner of the stableyard where we got the door for the raft. Then
the captain can decide who's to take what.'

This was done. You may think it but the work of a moment to fit out an
expedition, but this is not so, especially when you know not whether
your exploring party is speeding to Central Africa or merely to the
world of icebergs and the Polar bear.

Dicky wished to take the wood-axe, the coal hammer, a blanket, and a
mackintosh.

H. O. brought a large faggot in case we had to light fires, and a pair
of old skates he had happened to notice in the box-room, in case the
expedition turned out icy.

Noel had nicked a dozen boxes of matches, a spade, and a trowel, and had
also obtained--I know not by what means--a jar of pickled onions.

Denny had a walking-stick--we can't break him of walking with it--a book
to read in case he got tired of being a discoverer, a butterfly net and
a box with a cork in it, a tennis ball, if we happened to want to play
rounders in the pauses of exploring, two towels and an umbrella in the
event of camping or if the river got big enough to bathe in or to be
fallen into.

Alice had a comforter for Noel in case we got late, a pair of scissors
and needle and cotton, two whole candles in case of caves.

And she had thoughtfully brought the tablecloth off the small table in
the dining-room, so that we could make all the things up into one bundle
and take it in turns to carry it.

Oswald had fastened his master mind entirely on grub. Nor had the others
neglected this.

All the stores for the expedition were put down on the tablecloth and
the corners tied up. Then it was more than even Oswald's muscley arms
could raise from the ground, so we decided not to take it, but only the
best-selected grub. The rest we hid in the straw loft, for there are
many ups and downs in life, and grub is grub at any time, and so are
stores of all kinds. The pickled onions we had to leave, but not for
ever.

Then Dora and Daisy came along with their arms round each other's necks
as usual, like a picture on a grocer's almanac, and said they weren't
coming.

It was, as I have said, a blazing hot day, and there were differences of
opinion among the explorers about what eatables we ought to have taken,
and H. O. had lost one of his garters and wouldn't let Alice tie it up
with her handkerchief, which the gentle sister was quite willing to do.
So it was a rather gloomy expedition that set off that bright sunny day
to seek the source of the river where Cleopatra sailed in Shakespeare
(or the frozen plains Mr Nansen wrote that big book about).

But the balmy calm of peaceful Nature soon made the others less
cross--Oswald had not been cross exactly but only disinclined to do
anything the others wanted--and by the time we had followed the stream
a little way, and had seen a water-rat and shied a stone or two at him,
harmony was restored. We did not hit the rat.

You will understand that we were not the sort of people to have lived so
long near a stream without plumbing its depths. Indeed it was the same
stream the sheep took its daring jump into the day we had the circus.
And of course we had often paddled in it--in the shallower parts. But
now our hearts were set on exploring. At least they ought to have
been, but when we got to the place where the stream goes under a wooden
sheep-bridge, Dicky cried, 'A camp! a camp!' and we were all glad to sit
down at once. Not at all like real explorers, who know no rest, day or
night, till they have got there (whether it's the North Pole, or the
central point of the part marked 'Desert of Sahara' on old-fashioned
maps).

The food supplies obtained by various members were good and plenty
of it. Cake, hard eggs, sausage-rolls, currants, lemon cheese-cakes,
raisins, and cold apple dumplings. It was all very decent, but Oswald
could not help feeling that the source of the Nile (or North Pole) was a
long way off, and perhaps nothing much when you got there.

So he was not wholly displeased when Denny said, as he lay kicking into
the bank when the things to eat were all gone--
