"And knowing this, he wrote such a letter as that," said Paul,
indignantly, "what a hard, unfeeling wretch he must be!"

"I suppose it is vexatious to him to be kept out of his money."

"But he has plenty more. He would never miss it if he had given it to
you outright."

"That is not the way to look at it, Paul. The money is justly his, and
it is a great sorrow to me that I must die without paying it."

"Father," said Paul, after a pause, "will it be any relief to you, if I
promise to pay it,--that is, if I am ever able?"

Mr. Prescott's face brightened.

"That was what I wanted to ask you, Paul. It will be a comfort to me to
feel that there is some hope of the debt being paid at some future day."

"Then don't let it trouble you any longer, father. The debt shall be
mine, and I will pay it."

Again a shadow passed over the sick man's face, "Poor boy," he said,
"why should I burden your young life with such a load? You will have to
struggle hard enough as it is. No, Paul, recall your promise. I don't
want to purchase comfort at such a price."

"No, father," said Paul sturdily, "it is too late now. I have made the
promise and I mean to stick to it. Besides, it will give me something
to live for. I am young--I may have a great many years before me. For
thirteen years you have supported me. It is only right that I should
make what return I can. I'll keep my promise, father."

"May God help and prosper you, my boy," said Mr. Prescott, solemnly.
"You've been a good son; I pray that you may grow up to be a good man.
But, my dear, I feel tired. I think I will try to go to sleep."

Paul smoothed the comforter, adjusting it carefully about his father's
neck, and going to the door went out in search of some wood to place
upon the fire. Their scanty stock of firewood was exhausted, and Paul
was obliged to go into the woods near by, to obtain such loose fagots as
he might find upon the ground.

He was coming back with his load when his attention was drawn by a
whistle. Looking up he discovered Ben Newcome approaching him.

"How are you, Paul?"

"Pretty well, Ben."

"How precious lonesome you must be, mewed up in the house all the time."

"Yes, it is lonesome, but I wouldn't mind that if I thought father would
ever get any better."

"How is he this morning?"

"Pretty low; I expect he is asleep. He said he was tired just before I
went out."

"I brought over something for you," said Ben, tugging away at his
pocket.

Opening a paper he displayed a couple of apple turnovers fried brown.

"I found 'em in the closet," he said.

"Won't Hannah make a precious row when she finds 'em gone?"

"Then I don't know as I ought to take them," said Paul, though, to tell
the truth, they looked tempting to him.

"O, nonsense," said Ben; "they don't belong to Hannah. She only likes to
scold a little; it does her good."

The two boys sat on the doorstep and talked while Paul ate the
turnovers. Ben watched the process with much satisfaction.

"Ain't they prime?" he said.

"First rate," said Paul; "won't you have one?"

"No," said Ben; "you see I thought while I was about it I might as well
take four, so I ate two coming along."

In about fifteen minutes Paul went into the house to look at his father.
He was lying very quietly upon the bed. Paul drew near and looked at him
more closely. There was something in the expression of his father's face
which terrified him.

Ben heard his sudden cry of dismay, and hurriedly entered.

Paul pointed to the bed, and said briefly, "Father's dead!"

Ben, who in spite of his mischievous propensities was gifted with a warm
heart, sat down beside Paul, and passing his arm round his neck,
gave him that silent sympathy which is always so grateful to the
grief-stricken heart.





III.

PAUL'S BRILLIANT PROSPECTS.


Two days later, the funeral of Mr. Prescott took place.

Poor Paul! It seemed to him a dream of inexpressible sorrow. His father
and mother both gone, he felt that he was indeed left alone in the
world. No thought of the future had yet entered his mind. He was wholly
occupied with his present sorrow. Desolate at heart he slipped away from
the graveyard after the funeral ceremony was over, and took his way back
again to the lonely dwelling which he had called home.

As he was sitting in the corner, plunged in sorrowful thought, there was
a scraping heard at the door, and a loud hem!

Looking up, Paul saw entering the cottage the stiff form of Squire
Benjamin Newcome, who, as has already been stated, was the owner.

"Paul," said the Squire, with measured deliberation.

"Do you mean me, sir?" asked Paul, vaguely conscious that his name had
been called.

"Did I not address you by your baptismal appellation?" demanded the
Squire, who thought the boy's question superfluous.

"Paul," pursued Squire Newcome, "have you thought of your future
destination?"

"No, sir," said Paul, "I suppose I shall live here."

"That arrangement would not be consistent with propriety. I suppose you
are aware that your deceased parent left little or no worldly goods."

"I know he was poor."

"Therefore it has been thought best that you should be placed in charge
of a worthy man, who I see is now approaching the house. You will
therefore accompany him without resistance. If you obey him and read the
Bible regularly, you will--ahem!--you will some time or other see the
advantage of it."

With this consolatory remark Squire Newcome wheeled about and strode out
of the house.

Immediately afterwards there entered a rough-looking man arrayed in a
farmer's blue frock.

"You're to come with me, youngster," said Mr. Nicholas Mudge, for that
was his name.

"With you?" said Paul, recoiling instinctively.

In fact there was nothing attractive in the appearance or manners of
Mr. Mudge. He had a coarse hard face, while his head was surmounted by
a shock of red hair, which to all appearance had suffered little
interference from the comb for a time which the observer would scarcely
venture to compute. There was such an utter absence of refinement about
the man, that Paul, who had been accustomed to the gentle manners of his
father, was repelled by the contrast which this man exhibited.

"To be sure you're to go with me," said Mr. Mudge. "You did not
calc'late you was a goin' to stay here by yourself, did you? We've got a
better place for you than that. But the wagon's waitin' outside, so just
be lively and bundle in, and I'll carry you to where you're a goin' to
live."

"Where's that?"

"Wal, some folks call it the Poor House, but it ain't any the worse for
that, I expect. Anyhow, them as has no money may feel themselves lucky
to get so good a home. So jest be a movin', for I can't be a waitin'
here all day."

Paul quietly submitted himself to the guidance of Mr. Mudge. He was so
occupied with the thought of his sad loss that he did not realize the
change that was about to take place in his circumstances.

About half a mile from the village in the bleakest and most desolate
part of the town, stood the Poor House. It was a crazy old building of
extreme antiquity, which, being no longer considered fit for an ordinary
dwelling-house, had been selected as a suitable residence for the town's
poor. It was bleak and comfortless to be sure, but on that very account
had been purchased at a trifling expense, and that was, of course, a
primary consideration. Connected with the house were some dozen acres of
rough-looking land, plentifully overspread with stones, which might have
filled with despair the most enterprising agriculturist. However, it had
this recommendation at least, that it was quite in character with the
buildings upon it, which in addition to the house already described,
consisted of a barn of equal antiquity and a pig pen.

This magnificent domain was under the superintendence of Mr. Nicholas
Mudge, who in consideration of taking charge of the town paupers had
the use of the farm and buildings, rent free, together with a stipulated
weekly sum for each of the inmates.

"Well, Paul," said Mr. Mudge, as they approached the house, in a tone
which was meant to be encouraging, "this is goin' to be your home. How
do you like it?"

Thus addressed, Paul ventured a glance around him.

"I don't know," said he, doubtfully; "it don't look very pleasant."

"Don't look very pleasant!" repeated Mr. Mudge in a tone of mingled
amazement and indignation. "Well, there's gratitude for you. After the
town has been at the expense of providin' a nice, comfortable home for
you, because you haven't got any of your own, you must turn up your nose
at it."

"I didn't mean to complain," said Paul, feeling very little interest in
the matter.

"Perhaps you expected to live in a marble palace," pursued Mr. Mudge, in
an injured tone. "We don't have any marble palaces in this neighborhood,
we don't."

Paul disclaimed any such anticipation.

Mr. Mudge deigned to accept Paul's apology, and as they had now reached
the door, unceremoniously threw it open, and led the way into a room
with floor unpainted, which, to judge from its appearance, was used as a
kitchen.




IV.

LIFE IN A NEW PHASE.


Everything was "at sixes and sevens," as the saying is, in the room Mr.
Mudge and Paul had just entered. In the midst of the scene was a large
stout woman, in a faded calico dress, and sleeves rolled up, working as
if her life or the world's destiny depended upon it.

It was evident from the first words of Mr. Mudge that this lady was his
helpmeet.

"Well, wife," he said, "I've brought you another boarder. You must try
to make him as happy and contented as the rest of 'em are."

From the tone of the speaker, the last words might be understood to be
jocular.

Mrs. Mudge, whose style of beauty was not improved by a decided squint,
fixed a scrutinizing gaze upon Paul, and he quite naturally returned it.

"Haven't you ever seen anybody before, boy? I guess you'll know me next
time."

"Shouldn't wonder if he did," chuckled Mr. Mudge.

"I don't know where on earth we shall put him," remarked the lady.
"We're full now."

"Oh, put him anywhere. I suppose you won't be very particular about your
accommodations?" said Mr. Mudge turning to Paul.

Paul very innocently answered in the negative, thereby affording Mr.
Mudge not a little amusement.

"Well, that's lucky," he said, "because our best front chamber's
occupied just now. We'd have got it ready for you if you'd only wrote a
week ago to tell us you were coming. You can just stay round here," he
said in a different tone as he was about leaving the room, "Mrs. Mudge
will maybe want you to do something for her. You can sit down till she
calls on you."

It was washing day with Mrs. Mudge, and of course she was extremely
busy. The water was to be brought from a well in the yard, and to this
office Paul was at once delegated. It was no easy task, the full pails
tugging most unmercifully at his arms. However, this was soon over, and
Mrs. Mudge graciously gave him permission to go into the adjoining room,
and make acquaintance with his fellow-boarders.

There were nine of them in all, Paul, the newcomer making the tenth.
They were all advanced in years, except one young woman, who was
prevented by mental aberration from supporting herself outside the walls
of the Institution.

Of all present, Paul's attention was most strongly attracted towards one
who appeared more neatly and scrupulously attired than any of the rest.

Aunt Lucy Lee, or plain Aunt Lucy, for in her present abode she had
small use for her last name, was a benevolent-looking old lady, who both
in dress and manners was distinguished from her companions. She rose
from her knitting, and kindly took Paul by the hand. Children are
instinctive readers of character, and Paul, after one glance at her
benevolent face, seated himself contentedly beside her.

"I suppose," said the old lady, socially, "you've come to live with
us. We must do all we can to make you comfortable. Your name is Paul
Prescott, I think Mrs. Mudge said."

"Yes, ma'am," answered Paul, watching the rapid movement of the old
lady's fingers.

"Mine is Aunt Lucy," she continued, "that is what everybody calls me.
So now we know each other, and shall soon be good friends, I hope. I
suppose you have hardly been here long enough to tell how you shall like
it."

Paul confessed that thus far he did not find it very pleasant.

"No, I dare say not," said Aunt Lucy, "I can't say I think it looks very
attractive myself. However, it isn't wholly the fault of Mr. and Mrs.
Mudge. They can't afford to do much better, for the town allows them
very little."

Aunt Lucy's remarks were here interrupted by the apparition of the
worthy landlady at the door.

"Dinner's ready, folks," said that lady, with little ceremony, "and you
must come out quick if you want any, for I'm drove with work, and can't
be hindered long."

The summons was obeyed with alacrity, and the company made all haste to
the dining-room, or rather the kitchen, for it was here that the meals
were eaten.

In the center of the room was set a table without a cloth, a table-cloth
being considered a luxury quite superfluous. Upon this were placed
several bowls of thin, watery liquid, intended for soup, but which, like
city milk, was diluted so as hardly to be distinguishable. Beside each
bowl was a slice of bread.

Such was the bill of fare.

"Now, folks, the sooner you fall to the better," exclaimed the energetic
Mrs. Mudge, who was one of those driving characters, who consider any
time spent at the table beyond ten minutes as so much time wasted.

The present company appeared to need no second invitation. Their
scanty diet had the positive advantage of giving them a good appetite;
otherwise the quality of their food might have daunted them.

Paul took his place beside Aunt Lucy. Mechanically he did as the rest,
carrying to his mouth a spoonful of the liquid. But his appetite was not
sufficiently accustomed to Poor House regime to enable him to relish its
standing dish, and he laid down his spoon with a disappointed look.

He next attacked the crust of bread, but found it too dry to be
palatable.

"Please, ma'am," said he to Mrs. Mudge, "I should like some butter."

Paul's companions dropped their spoons in astonishment at his daring,
and Mrs. Mudge let fall a kettle she was removing from the fire, in
sheer amazement.

"What did you ask for?" she inquired, as if to make sure that her ears
did not deceive her.

"A little butter," repeated Paul, unconscious of the great presumption
of which he had been guilty.

"You want butter, do you?" repeated Mr. Mudge. "Perhaps you'd like a
slice of beefsteak and a piece of plum-pudding too, wouldn't you?"

"I should very much," said Paul, resolved to tell the truth, although he
now began to perceive the sarcasm in his landlady's tone.

"There isn't anything more you would like, is there?" inquired the lady,
with mock politeness.

"No, ma'am," returned Paul after a pause, "I believe not, to-day."

"Very moderate, upon my word," exclaimed Mrs. Mudge, giving vent at
length to her pentup indignation. "You'll be contented with butter and
roast beef and plum-pudding! A mighty fine gentleman, to be sure. But
you won't get them here, I'll be bound."

"So will I," thought Aunt Lucy.

"If you ain't satisfied with what I give you," pursued Mrs. Mudge,
"you'd better go somewhere else. You can put up at some of the great
hotels. Butter, forsooth!"

Having thus given expression to her feelings, she left the room, and
Paul was left to finish his dinner with the best appetite he could
command. He was conscious that he had offended Mrs. Mudge, but the
thoughts of his recent great sorrow swallowed up all minor annoyances,
so that the words of his estimable landlady were forgotten almost as
soon as they were uttered. He felt that he must henceforth look for far
different treatment from that to which he had been accustomed during his
father's lifetime.

His thoughts were interrupted in a manner somewhat ludicrous, by the
crazy girl who sat next to him coolly appropriating to herself his bowl
of soup, having already disposed of her own.

"Look," said Aunt Lucy, quickly, calling Paul's attention, "you are
losing your dinner."

"Never mind," said Paul, amused in spite of his sadness, "she is quite
welcome to it if she likes it; I can't eat it."

So the dinner began and ended. It was very brief and simple, occupying
less than ten minutes, and comprising only one course--unless the soup
was considered the first course, and the bread the second. Paul left
the table as hungry as he came to it. Aunt Lucy's appetite had become
accustomed to the Mudge diet, and she wisely ate what was set before
her, knowing that there was no hope of anything better.

About an hour after dinner Ben Newcome came to the door of the Poor
House and inquired for Paul.

Mrs. Mudge was in one of her crusty moods.

"You can't see him," said she.

"And why not?" said Ben, resolutely.

"Because he's busy."

"You'd better let me see him," said Ben, sturdily.

"I should like to know what's going to happen if I don't," said Mrs.
Mudge, with wrathful eyes, and arms akimbo.

"I shall go home and report to my father," said Ben, coolly.

"Who is your father?" asked Mrs. Mudge, for she did not recognize her
visitor.

"My father's name is Newcome--Squire Newcome, some call him."

Now it so happened that Squire Newcome was Chairman of the Overseers of
the Poor, and in that capacity might remove Mr. Mudge from office if he
pleased. Accordingly Mrs. Mudge softened down at once, on learning that
Ben was his son.

"Oh," said she, "I didn't know who it was. I thought it might be some
idle boy from the village who would only take Paul from his work, but if
you have a message from your father----"

This she said to ascertain whether he really had any message or not, but
Ben, who had in fact come without his father's knowledge, only bowed,
and said, in a patronizing manner, "I accept your apology, Mrs. Mudge.
Will you have the goodness to send Paul out?"

