
"Eu-ro-pean hotel?" said the urchin, accenting the second syllable.

"What kind of a hotel is that?"

"You take a room, and get your grub where you like."

"Yes, that will suit me."

"I'll show you one and take yer bag along for two shillings."

"All right," said our hero. "Go ahead."

The boy shouldered the carpetbag and started in advance, Robert
following. He found a considerable difference between the crowded
streets of New York and the quiet roads of Millville. His spirits rose,
and he felt that life was just beginning for him. Brave and bold by
temperament, he did not shrink from trying his luck on a broader arena
than was afforded by the little village whence he came. Such confidence
is felt by many who eventually fail, but Robert was one who combined
ability and willingness to work with confidence, and the chances were in
favor of his succeeding.

Unused to the city streets, Robert was a little more cautious about
crossing than the young Arab who carried his bag. So, at one broad
thoroughfare, the latter got safely across, while Robert was still on
the other side waiting for a good opportunity to cross in turn. The
bootblack, seeing that communication was for the present cut off by a
long line of vehicles, was assailed by a sudden temptation. For his
services as porter he would receive but twenty-five cents, while here
was an opportunity to appropriate the entire bag, which must be far more
valuable. He was not naturally a bad boy, but his street education had
given him rather loose ideas on the subject of property. Obeying his
impulse, then, he started rapidly, bag in hand, up a side street.

"Hold on, there! Where are you going?" called out Robert.

He received no answer, but saw the baggage-smasher quickening his pace
and dodging round the corner. He attempted to dash across the street,
but was compelled to turn back, after being nearly run over.

"I wish I could get hold of the young rascal!" he exclaimed indignantly.

"Who do you mane, Johnny?" asked a boy at his side.

"A boy has run off with my carpetbag," said Robert.

"I know him. It's Jim Malone."

"Do you know where I can find him?" asked Robert, eagerly. "If you'll
help me get back my bag, I'll give you a dollar."

"I'll do it then. Come along of me. Here's a chance to cross."

Following his new guide, Robert dashed across the street at some risk,
and found himself safe on the other side.

"Now where do you think he's gone?" demanded Robert.

"It's likely he'll go home."

"Do you know where he lives?"

"No.--Mulberry street."

"Has he got any father and mother?"

"He's got a mother, but the ould woman's drunk most all the time."

"Then she won't care about his stealing?"

"No, she'll think he's smart."

"Then we'll go there. Is it far?"

"Not more than twenty minutes."

The boy was right. Jim steered for home, not being able to open the bag
in the street without suspicion. His intention was to appropriate a part
of the clothing to his own use, and dispose of the rest to a pawnbroker
or second-hand dealer, who, as long as he got a good bargain, would not
be too particular about inquiring into the customer's right to the
property. He did not, however, wholly escape suspicion. He was stopped
by a policeman, who demanded, "Whose bag is that, Johnny?"

"It belongs to a gentleman that wants it carried to the St. Nicholas,"
answered Jim, promptly.

"Where is the gentleman?"

"He's took a car to Wall street on business."

"How came he to trust you with the bag? Wasn't he afraid you'd steal
it?"

"Oh, he knows me. I've smashed baggage for him more'n once."

This might be true. At any rate, it was plausible, and the policeman,
having no ground of detention, suffered him to go on.

Congratulating himself on getting off so well, Jim sped on his way, and
arrived in quick time at the miserable room in Mulberry street, which he
called home.

His mother lay on a wretched bed in the corner, half stupefied with
drink. She lifted up her head as her son entered.

"What have you there, Jimmy?" she asked.

"It's a bag, mother."

"Whose is it?"

"It's mine now."

"And where did ye get it?"

"A boy gave it to me to carry to a chape hotel, so I brought it home.
This is a chape hotel, isn't it?"

"You're a smart boy, an' I always said it, Jimmy. Let me open it," and
the old woman, with considerable alacrity, rose to her feet and came to
Jim's side.

"I'll open it myself, mother, that is, I if I had a kay. Haven't you got
one?"

"I have that same. I picked up a bunch of kays in the strate last
week."

She fumbled in her pocket, and drew out half a dozen keys of different
sizes, attached to a steel ring.

"Bully for you, old woman!" said Jim. "Give 'em here."

"Let me open the bag," said Mrs. Malone, persuasively.

"No, you don't," said her dutiful son. "'Tain't none of yours. It's
mine."

"The kays is mine," said his mother, "and I'll kape 'em."

"Give 'em here," said Jim, finding a compromise necessary, "and I'll
give you fifty cents out of what I get."

"That's the way to talk, darlint," said his mother, approvingly. "You
wouldn't have the heart to chate your ould mother out of her share?"

"It's better I did," said Jim; "you'll only get drunk on the money."

"Shure a little drink will do me no harm," said Mrs. Malone.

Meanwhile the young Arab had tried key after key until he found one that
fitted--the bag flew open, and Robert's humble stock of clothing lay
exposed to view. There was a woolen suit, four shirts, half a dozen
collars, some stockings and handkerchiefs. Besides these there was the
little Bible which Robert had had given him by his father just before he
went on his last voyage. It was the only book our hero had room for, but
in the adventurous career upon which he had entered, exposed to perils
of the sea and land, he felt that he would need this as his constant
guide.

"Them shirts'll fit me," said Jim. "I guess I'll kape 'em, and the close
besides."

"Then where'll you git the money for me?" asked his mother.

"I'll sell the handkerchiefs and stockings. I don't nade them," said
Jim, whose ideas of full dress fell considerably short of the ordinary
standard. "I won't nade the collars either."

"You don't nade all the shirts," said his mother.

"I'll kape two," said Jim. "It'll make me look respectable. Maybe I'll
kape two collars, so I can sit up for a gentleman of fashion."

"You'll be too proud to walk with your ould mother," said Mrs. Malone.

"Maybe I will," said Jim, surveying his mother critically. "You aint
much of a beauty, ould woman."

"I was a purty gal, once," said Mrs. Malone, "but hard work and bad luck
has wore on me."

"The whisky's had something to do with it," said Jim. "Hard work didn't
make your face so red."

"Is it my own boy talks to me like that?" said the old woman, wiping her
eyes on her dress.

But her sorrow was quickly succeeded by a different emotion, as the door
opened suddenly, and Robert Rushton entered the room.




CHAPTER XXIV.


A GOOD BEGINNING.

Jim started to his feet at the sight of the equally unwelcome and
unexpected visitor. His mother, ignorant that she saw before her the
owner of the bag, supposed it might be a customer wanting some washing
done.

"Good-morning, sir," said she, "And have yez business with me?"

"No," said Robert, "I have business with your son, if that's he."

"Shure he's my son, and a smart bye he is too."

"He's a little too smart sometimes," returned our hero. "I gave him my
carpetbag to carry this morning, and he ran away with it."

Mrs. Malone's face fell at this unexpected intelligence.

"Shur an' it was a mistake of his," she said. "He's too honest entirely
to stale the value of a pin, let alone a carpetbag."

Meanwhile Jim was rapidly reviewing the situation. He was not naturally
bad, but he had fallen a victim to sudden temptation. He was ashamed,
and determined to make amends by a frank confession.

"My mother is wrong," he said; "I meant to kape it, and I'm sorry.
Here's the bag, wid nothing taken out of it."

"That's right, to own up," said Robert, favorably impressed with his
frank confession. "Give me the bag and it'll be all right. I suppose you
were poor, and that tempted you. I am poor, too, and couldn't afford to
lose it. But I'd rather starve than steal, and I hope you will not be
dishonest again."

"I won't!" said Jim, stoutly. "I'll go with you now to a chape hotel,
and won't charge you nothin'."

"I've got a boy downstairs who will take it. Don't forget what you said
just now."

"No, I won't," said Jim. "Shure if I'd known what a bully young
gentleman you was, I wouldn't have took it on no account."

So Robert descended the stairs, having by his forbearance probably
effected a moral reformation in Jim, and confirmed in him the good
principles, which, in spite of his mother's bad example, had already
taken root in his heart. If the community, while keeping vigilant watch
over the young outcasts that throng our streets, plying their petty
avocations, would not always condemn, but encourage them sometimes to a
better life, the results would soon appear in the diminution of the
offenses for which they are most frequently arrested.

His new guide shouldered Robert's carpetbag, and conducted him to a
hotel of good standing, managed on the European system. Dismissing the
boy with the promised reward, Robert went up to his room on the fifth
floor, and after attending to his toilet, sallied out into the street
and made his way to the warehouse of the merchant who had been
instrumental in raising the fund for him.

"Mr. Morgan is engaged," said a clerk to whom he spoke.

"I will wait for him, if you please," said Robert.

"Is it any business that I can attend to?" asked the clerk.

"No, I wish to see Mr. Morgan himself."

Mr. Morgan was engaged with two gentlemen, and our hero was obliged to
wait nearly half an hour. At the end of that time, the merchant
consented to see him. He did not at first recognize him, but said,
inquiringly, "Well, my young friend, from whom do you come?"

"I come from no one, sir."

"Have you business with me?"

"You do not remember me, Mr. Morgan. Do you remember when the cars came
so near running off the track a short time since at Millville?"

"Certainly I do," said Mr. Morgan, heartily; "and I now remember you as
the brave boy who saved all our lives."

"You gave me your card and told me I might call on you."

"To be sure, I did, and I am very glad to see you. You must go home and
dine with me to-day."

"Thank you, sir, for your kind invitation."

"This is my address," said the merchant, writing it in pencil, and
handing it to Robert. "We dine at half-past six. You had better be at
the door at six. We will then talk over your plans, for I suppose you
have some, and I will do what I can to promote them. At present I am
busy, and am afraid I must ask you to excuse me."

"Thank you, sir," said Robert, gratefully.

He left the office, not a little elated at his favorable reception. Mr.
Morgan, judging from his place of business, must be a man of great
wealth, and could no doubt be of essential service to him. What was
quite as important, he seemed disposed to help him.

"That's a good beginning," thought Robert. "I wish mother knew how well
I have succeeded so far. I'll just write and let her know that I have
arrived safe. To-morrow perhaps I shall have better news to tell."

He went back to his hotel, and feeling hungry, made a substantial meal.
He found the restaurants moderate in price, and within his means.

Six o'clock found him ringing the bell of a handsome brownstone house on
Fifth avenue. Though not disposed to be shy, he felt a little
embarrassed as the door opened and a servant in livery stood before him.

"Is Mr. Morgan at home?" inquired Robert.

"Yes, sir," said the servant, glancing speculatively at the neat but
coarse garments of our hero.

"He invited me to dine with him," said Robert.

"Won't you walk in, sir?" said the servant, with another glance of mild
surprise at the dress of the dinner guest. "If you'll walk in here,"
opening the door of a sumptuously furnished parlor, "I will announce
you. What name shall I say?"

"Robert Rushton."

Robert entered the parlor, and sat down on a sofa. He looked around him
with a little, pardonable curiosity, for he had never before been in an
elegant city mansion.

"I wonder whether I shall ever be rich enough to live like this!" he
thought.

The room, though elegant, was dark, and to our hero, who was used to
bright, sunny rooms, it seemed a little gloomy. He mentally decided that
he would prefer a plain country house; not so plain, indeed, as the
little cottage where his mother lived, but as nice, perhaps, as the
superintendent's house, which was the finest in the village, and the
most magnificent he had until this time known. Its glories were wholly
eclipsed by the house he was in, but Robert thought he would prefer it.
While he was looking about him, Mr. Morgan entered, and his warm and
cordial manner made his boy guest feel quite at his ease.

"I must make you acquainted with my wife and children," he said. "They
have heard of you, and are anxious to see you."

Mrs. Morgan gave Robert a reception as warm as her husband had done.

"So this is the young hero of whom I have heard!" she said.

"I am afraid you give me too much credit," said Robert, modestly.

This modest disclaimer produced a still more favorable impression upon
both Mr. and Mrs. Morgan.

I do not propose to speak in detail of the dinner that followed. The
merchant and his wife succeeded in making Robert feel entirely at home,
and he displayed an ease and self-possession wholly free from boldness
that won their good opinion.

When the dinner was over, Mr. Morgan commenced:

"Now, Robert, dinner being over, let us come to business. Tell me your
plans, and I will consider how I can promote them."

In reply, Robert communicated the particulars, already known to the
reader, of his father's letter, his own conviction of his still living,
and his desire to go in search of him.

"I am afraid you will be disappointed," said the merchant, "in the
object of your expedition. It may, however, be pleasant for you to see
something of the world, and luckily it is in my power to help you. I
have a vessel which sails for Calcutta early next week. You shall go as
a passenger."

"Couldn't I go as cabin-boy?" asked Robert. "I am afraid the price of a
ticket will be beyond my means."

"I think not," said the merchant, smiling, "since you will go free. As
you do not propose to follow the sea, it will not be worth while to go
as cabin-boy. Besides, it would interfere with your liberty to leave the
vessel whenever you deemed it desirable in order to carry on your search
for your father."

"You are very kind, Mr. Morgan," said Robert, gratefully.

"So I ought to be and mean to be," said the merchant. "You know I am in
your debt."

We pass over the few and simple preparations which Robert made for his
long voyage. In these he was aided by Mrs. Morgan, who sent on board,
without his knowledge, a trunk containing a complete outfit,
considerably better than the contents of the humble carpetbag he had
brought from home.

He didn't go on board till the morning on which the ship was to sail. He
went down into the cabin, and did not come up until the ship had
actually started. Coming on deck, he saw a figure which seemed familiar
to him. From his dress, and the commands he appeared to be issuing,
Robert judged that it was the mate. He tried to think where he could
have met him, when the mate turned full around, and, alike to his
surprise and dismay, he recognized Ben Haley, whom he had wounded in his
successful attempt to rob his uncle.




CHAPTER XXV.


A DECLARATION OF WAR.

If Robert was surprised, Ben Haley had even more reason for
