fifty yards of the door. He evidently came alone this time, for I found
but one trail next morning, and he had galloped about in a reckless
manner that was very unusual with him. I had half expected this, and had
set a number of additional traps about the pasture. Afterward I found
that he had indeed fallen into one of these, but, such was his strength,
he had torn himself loose and cast it aside.

I believed that he would continue in the neighborhood until he found her
body at least, so I concentrated all my energies on this one enterprise
of catching him before he left the region, and while yet in this
reckless mood. Then I realized what a mistake I had made in killing
Blanca, for by using her as a decoy I might have secured him the next
night.

I gathered in all the traps I could command, one hundred and thirty
strong steel wolf-traps, and set them in fours in every trail that led
into the canyon; each trap was separately fastened to a log, and each
log was separately buried. In burying them, I carefully removed the sod
and every particle of earth that was lifted we put in blankets, so that
after the sod was replaced and all was finished the eye could detect no
trace of human handiwork. When the traps were concealed I trailed the
body of poor Blanca over each place, and made of it a drag that circled
all about the ranch, and finally I took off one of her paws and made
with it a line of tracks over each trap. Every precaution and device
known to me I used, and retired at a late hour to await the result.

Once during the night I thought I heard Old Lobo, but was not sure of
it. Next day I rode around, but darkness came on before I completed the
circuit of the north canon, and I had nothing to report. At supper one
of the cowboys said, "There was a great row among the cattle in the
north canyon this morning, maybe there is something in the traps there."
It was afternoon of the next day before I got to the place referred to,
and as I drew near a great grizzly form arose from the ground, vainly
endeavoring to escape, and there revealed before me stood Lobo, King
of the Currumpaw, firmly held in the traps. Poor old hero, he had never
ceased to search for his darling, and when he found the trail her body
had made he followed it recklessly, and so fell into the snare prepared
for him. There he lay in the iron grasp of all four traps, perfectly
helpless, and all around him were numerous tracks showing how the cattle
had gathered about him to insult the fallen despot, without daring
to approach within his reach. For two days and two nights he had lain
there, and now was worn out with struggling. Yet, when I went near him,
he rose up with bristling mane and raised his voice, and for the last
time made the canyon reverberate with his deep bass roar, a call for
help, the muster call of his band. But there was none to answer him,
and, left alone in his extremity, he whirled about with all his strength
and made a desperate effort to get at me. All in vain, each trap was a
dead drag of over three hundred pounds, and in their relentless fourfold
grasp, with great steel jaws on every foot, and the heavy logs and
chains all entangled together, he was absolutely powerless. How his
huge ivory tusks did grind on those cruel chains, and when I ventured to
touch him with my rifle-barrel he left grooves on it which are there to
this day. His eyes glared green with hate and fury, and his jaws
snapped with a hollow 'chop,' as he vainly endeavored to reach me and my
trembling horse. But he was worn out with hunger and struggling and loss
of blood, and he soon sank exhausted to the ground.

Something like compunction came over me, as I prepared to deal out to
him that which so many had suffered at his hands.

"Grand old outlaw, hero of a thousand lawless raids, in a few minutes
you will be but a great load of carrion. It cannot be otherwise." Then I
swung my lasso and sent it whistling over his head. But not so fast; he
was yet far from being subdued, and before the supple coils had fallen
on his neck he seized the noose and, with one fierce chop, cut through
its hard thick strands, and dropped it in two pieces at his feet.

Of course I had my rifle as a last resource, but I did not wish to spoil
his royal hide, so I galloped back to the camp and returned with a cowboy
and a fresh lasso. We threw to our victim a stick of wood which he
seized in his teeth, and before he could relinquish it our lassoes
whistled through the air and tightened on his neck.

Yet before the light had died from his fierce eyes, I cried, "Stay,
we will not kill him; let us take him alive to the camp." He was so
completely powerless now that it was easy to put a stout stick through
his mouth, behind his tusks, and then lash his jaws with a heavy cord
which was also fastened to the stick. The stick kept the cord in, and
the cord kept the stick in so he was harmless. As soon as he felt his
jaws were tied he made no further resistance, and uttered no sound, but
looked calmly at us and seemed to say, "Well, you have got me at last,
do as you please with me." And from that time he took no more notice of
us.

We tied his feet securely, but he never groaned, nor growled, nor turned
his head. Then with our united strength we were just able to put him on
my horse. His breath came evenly as though sleeping, and his eyes
were bright and clear again, but did not rest on us. Afar on the great
rolling mesas they were fixed, his passing kingdom, where his famous
band was now scattered. And he gazed till the pony descended the pathway
into the canyon, and the rocks cut off the view.

By travelling slowly we reached the ranch in safety, and after securing
him with a collar and a strong chain, we staked him out in the pasture
and removed the cords.

Then for the first time I could examine him closely, and proved how
unreliable is vulgar report when a living hero or tyrant is concerned.
He had not a collar of gold about his neck, nor was there on his
shoulders an inverted cross to denote that he had leagued himself with
Satan. But I did find on one haunch a great broad scar, that tradition
says was the fang-mark of Juno, the leader of Tannerey's wolf-hounds--a
mark which she gave him the moment before he stretched her lifeless on
the sand of the canyon.

I set meat and water beside him, but he paid no heed. He lay calmly on
his breast, and gazed with those steadfast yellow eyes away past me down
through the gateway of the canyon, over the open plains--his plains--nor
moved a muscle when I touched him. When the sun went down he was still
gazing fixedly across the prairie. I expected he would call up his band
when night came, and prepared for them, but he had called once in his
extremity, and none had come; he would never call again.

A lion shorn of his strength, an eagle robbed of his freedom, or a dove
bereft of his mate, all die, it is said, of a broken heart; and who will
aver that this grim bandit could bear the three-fold brunt, heart-whole?
This only I know, that when the morning dawned, he was lying there still
in his position of calm repose, his body unwounded, but his spirit was
gone--the old kingwolf was dead.

I took the chain from his neck, a cowboy helped me to carry him to the
shed where lay the remains of Blanca, and as we laid him beside her,
the cattle-man exclaimed: "There, you would come to her, now you are
together again."




SILVERSPOT, The Story of a Crow


I

HOW MANY of us have ever got to know a wild animal? I do not mean merely
to meet with one once or twice, or to have one in a cage, but to really
know it for a long time while it is wild, and to get an insight into its
life and history. The trouble usually is to know one creature from his
fellow. One fox or crow is so much like another that we cannot be sure
that it really is the same next time we meet. But once in awhile there
arises an animal who is stronger or wiser than his fellow, who becomes a
great leader, who is, as we would say, a genius, and if he is bigger, or
has some mark by which men can know him, he soon becomes famous in his
country, and shows us that the life of a wild animal may be far more
interesting and exciting than that of many human beings.

Of this class were Courtant, the bob-tailed wolf that terrorized
the whole city of Paris for about ten years in the beginning of the
fourteenth century; Clubfoot, the lame grizzly bear that left such
a terrific record in the San Joaquin Valley of California; Lobo, the
king-wolf of New Mexico, that killed a cow every day for five years,
and the Seonee panther that in less than two years killed nearly three
hundred human beings--and such also was Silverspot, whose history, so
far as I could learn it, I shall now briefly tell.

Silverspot was simply a wise old crow; his name was given because of
the silvery white spot that was like a nickel, stuck on his right side,
between the eye and the bill, and it was owing to this spot that I was
able to know him from the other crows, and put together the parts of his
history that came to my knowledge.

Crows are, as you must know, our most intelligent birds.--'Wise as an
old crow' did not become a saying without good reason. Crows know the
value of organization, and are as well drilled as soldiers--very much
better than some soldiers, in fact, for crows are always on duty, always
at war, and always dependent on each other for life and safety. Their
leaders not only are the oldest and wisest of the band, but also the
strongest and bravest, for they must be ready at any time with sheer
force to put down an upstart or a rebel. The rank and file are the
youngsters and the crows without special gifts.

Old Silverspot was the leader of a large band of crows that made
their headquarters near Toronto, Canada, in Castle Frank, which is a
pine-clad hill on the northeast edge of the city. This band numbered
about two hundred, and for reasons that I never understood did not
increase. In mild winters they stayed along the Niagara River; in cold
winters they went much farther south. But each year in the last week of
February, Old Silverspot would muster his followers and boldly cross the
forty miles of open water that lies between Toronto and Niagara; not,
however, in a straight line would he go, but always in a curve to
the west, whereby he kept in sight of the familiar landmark of Dundas
Mountain, until the pine-clad hill itself came in view. Each year he
came with his troop, and for about six weeks took up his abode on
the hill. Each morning thereafter the crows set out in three bands to
forage. One band went southeast to Ashbridge's Bay. One went north up
the Don, and one, the largest, went northwestward up the ravine. The
last, Silverspot led in person. Who led the others I never found out.

On calm mornings they flew high and straight away. But when it was
windy the band flew low, and followed the ravine for shelter. My windows
overlooked the ravine, and it was thus that in 1885 I first noticed this
old crow. I was a newcomer in the neighborhood, but an old resident
said to me then "that there old crow has been a-flying up and down this
ravine for more than twenty years." My chances to watch were in the
ravine, and Silverspot doggedly clinging to the old route, though now
it was edged with houses and spanned by bridges, became a very familiar
acquaintance. Twice each day in March and part of April, then again
in the late summer and the fall, he passed and repassed, and gave me
chances to see his movements, and hear his orders to his bands, and so,
little by little, opened my eyes to the fact that the crows, though a
little people, are of great wit, a race of birds with a language and a
social system that is wonderfully human in many of its chief points, and
in some is better carried out than our own.

One windy day I stood on the high bridge across the ravine, as the old
crow, heading his long, straggling troop, came flying down homeward.
Half a mile away I could hear the contented 'All's well, come right
along!' as we should say, or as he put it, and as also his lieutenant
echoed it at the rear of the band. They were flying very low to be out
of the wind, and would have to rise a little to clear the bridge on
which I was. Silverspot saw me standing there, and as I was closely
watching him he didn't like it. He checked his flight and called out,
'Be on your guard,' and rose much higher in the air. Then seeing that I
was not armed he flew over my head about twenty feet, and his followers
in turn did the same, dipping again to the old level when past the
bridge.

Next day I was at the same place, and as the crows came near I raised my
walking stick and pointed it at them. The old fellow at once cried out
'Danger,' and rose fifty feet higher than before. Seeing that it was not
a gun, he ventured to fly over. But on the third day I took with me a
gun, and at once he cried out, 'Great danger--a gun.' His lieutenant
repeated the cry, and every crow in the troop began to tower and scatter
from the rest, till they were far above gun shot, and so passed safely
over, coming down again to the shelter of the valley when well beyond
reach. Another time, as the long, straggling troop came down the valley,
a red-tailed hawk alighted on a tree close by their intended route. The
leader cried out, 'Hawk, hawk,' and stayed his flight, as did each crow
on nearing him, until all were massed in a solid body. Then, no longer
fearing the hawk, they passed on. But a quarter of a mile farther on
a man with a gun appeared below, and the cry, 'Great danger--a gun,
a--gun; scatter fur your lives,' at once caused them to scatter widely
and tower till far beyond range. Many others of his words of command I
learned in the course of my long acquaintance, and found that sometimes
a very little difference in the sound makes a very great difference in
meaning. Thus while No. 5 means hawk, or any large, dangerous bird, this
means 'wheel around,' evidently a combination of No. 5, whose root idea
is danger, and of No. 4, whose root idea is retreat, and this again is a
mere 'good day,' to a far away comrade. This is usually addressed to the
ranks and means 'attention.'

Early in April there began to be great doings among the crows. Some new
cause of excitement seemed to have come on them. They spent half the
day among the pines, instead of foraging from dawn till dark. Pairs
and trios might be seen chasing each other, and from time to time they
showed off in various feats of flight. A favorite sport was to dart down
suddenly from a great height toward some perching crow, and just before
touching it to turn at a hairbreadth and rebound in the air so fast
that the wings of the swooper whirred with a sound like distant thunder.
Sometimes one crow would lower his head, raise every feather, and coming
close to another would gurgle out a long note like. What did it all
mean? I soon learned. They were making love and pairing off. The males
were showing off their wing powers and their voices to the lady crows.
And they must have been highly appreciated, for by the middle of April
all had mated and had scattered over the country for their honeymoon,
leaving the sombre old pines of Castle Frank deserted and silent.

II

The Sugar Loaf hill stands alone in the Don Valley. It is still covered
with woods that join with those of Castle Frank, a quarter of a mile
off in the woods, between the two hills, is a pine-tree in whose top
is a deserted hawk's nest. Every Toronto school-boy knows the nest, and,
excepting that I had once shot a black squirrel on its edge, no one had
ever seen a sign of life about it. There it was year after year, ragged
and old, and falling to pieces. Yet, strange to tell, in all that time
it never did drop to pieces, like other old nests.

One morning in May I was out at gray dawn, and stealing gently through
the woods, whose dead leaves were so wet that no rustle was made. I
chanced to pass under the old nest, and was surprised to see a black
tail sticking over the edge. I struck the tree a smart blow, off flew a
crow, and the secret was out. I had long suspected that a pair of
crows nested each year about the pines, but now I realized that it was
Silverspot and his wife. The old nest was theirs, and they were too wise
to give it an air of spring-cleaning and housekeeping each year. Here
they had nested for long, though guns in the hands of men and boys
hungry to shoot crows were carried under their home every day. I never
surprised the old fellow again, though I several times saw him through
my telescope.

One day while watching I saw a crow crossing the Don Valley with
something white in his beak. He flew to the mouth of the Rosedale Brook,
then took a short flight to the Beaver Elm. There he dropped the white
object, and looking about gave me a chance to recognize my old friend
Silverspot. After a minute he picked up the white thing--a shell--and
walked over past the spring, and here, among the docks and the
skunk-cabbages, he unearthed a pile of shells and other white, shiny
things. He spread them out in the sun, turned them over, turned them one
by one in his beak, dropped them, nestled on them as though they were
eggs, toyed with them and gloated over them like a miser. This was his
hobby, his weakness. He could not have explained why he enjoyed them,
any more than a boy can explain why he collects postage-stamps, or a
girl why she prefers pearls to rubies; but his pleasure in them was very
real, and after half an hour he covered them all, including the new
one, with earth and leaves, and flew off. I went at once to the spot
and examined the hoard; there was about a hatfull in all, chiefly white
pebbles, clam-shells, and some bits of tin, but there was also the
handle of a china cup, which must have been the gem of the collection.
That was the last time I saw them. Silverspot knew that I had found his
treasures, and he removed them at once; where, I never knew.

During the space that I watched him so closely he had many little
adventures and escapes. He was once severely handled by a sparrowhawk,
and often he was chased and worried by kingbirds. Not that these did him
much harm, but they were such noisy pests that he avoided their company
as quickly as possible, just as a grown man avoids a conflict with a
noisy and impudent small boy. He had some cruel tricks, too. He had a
way of going the round of the small birds' nests each morning to eat the
new laid eggs, as regularly as a doctor visiting his patients. But we
must not judge him for that, as it is just what we ourselves do to the
hens in the barnyard.

His quickness of wit was often shown. One day I saw him flying down the
ravine with a large piece of bread in his bill. The stream below him was
at this time being bricked over as a sewer. There was one part of two
hundred yards quite finished, and, as he flew over the open water just
above this, the bread fell from his bill, and was swept by the current
out of sight into the tunnel. He flew down and peered vainly into
the dark cavern, then, acting upon a happy thought, he flew to the
downstream end of the tunnel, and awaiting the reappearance of the
floating bread, as it was swept onward by the current, he seized and
bore it off in triumph.

Silverspot was a crow of the world. He was truly a successful crow. He
lived in a region that, though full of dangers, abounded with food. In
the old, unrepaired nest he raised a brood each year with his wife,
whom, by the way, I never could distinguish, and when the crows again
gathered together he was their acknowledged chief.

The reassembling takes place about the end of June--the young crows with
their bob-tails, soft wings, and falsetto voices are brought by their
parents, whom they nearly equal in size, and introduced to society at
the old pine woods, a woods that is at once their fortress and college.
Here they find security in numbers and in lofty yet sheltered perches,
and here they begin their schooling and are taught all the secrets of
success in crow life, and in crow life the least failure does not simply
mean begin again. It means death.

The first week or two after their arrival is spent by the young ones in
getting acquainted, for each crow must know personally all the others in
the band. Their parents meanwhile have time to rest a little after the
work of raising them, for now the youngsters are able to feed themselves
and roost on a branch in a row, just like big folks.

In a week or two the moulting season comes. At this time the old crows
are usually irritable and nervous, but it does not stop them from
beginning to drill the youngsters, who, of course, do not much enjoy the
punishment and nagging they get so soon after they have been mamma's own
darlings. But it is all for their good, as the old lady said when she
skinned the eels, and old Silverspot is an excellent teacher. Sometimes
he seems to make a speech to them. What he says I cannot guess, but
judging by the way they receive it, it must be extremely witty. Each
morning there is a company drill, for the young ones naturally drop into
two or three squads according to their age and strength. The rest of the
day they forage with their parents.

When at length September comes we find a great change. The rabble of
silly little crows have begun to learn sense. The delicate blue iris of
their eyes, the sign of a fool-crow, has given place to the dark brown
eye of the old stager. They know their drill now and have learned sentry
duty. They have been taught guns and traps and taken a special course in
wireworms and green-corn. They know that a fat old farmer's wife is much
less dangerous, though so much larger, than her fifteen-year-old son,
and they can tell the boy from his sister. They know that an umbrella is
not a gun, and they can count up to six, which is fair for young crows,
though Silverspot can go up nearly to thirty. They know the smell of
gunpowder and the south side of a hemlock-tree, and begin to plume
themselves upon being crows of the world. They always fold their wings
three times after alighting, to be sure that it is neatly done. They
know how to worry a fox into giving up half his dinner, and also that
when the kingbird or the purple martin assails them they must dash into
a bush, for it is as impossible to fight the little pests as it is for
the fat apple-woman to catch the small boys who have raided her basket.
All these things do the young crows know; but they have taken no lessons
in egg-hunting yet, for it is not the season. They are unacquainted with
clams, and have never tasted horses' eyes, or seen sprouted corn, and
they don't know a thing about travel, the greatest educator of all. They
did not think of that two months ago, and since then they have thought
of it, but have learned to wait till their betters are ready.

September sees a great change in the old crows, too, Their moulting is
over. They are now in full feather again and proud of their handsome
coats. Their health is again good, and with it their tempers are
improved. Even old Silverspot, the strict teacher, becomes quite jolly,
and the youngsters, who have long ago learned to respect him, begin
really to love him.

He has hammered away at drill, teaching them all the signals and words
of command in use, and now it is a pleasure to see them in the early
morning.

'Company I!' the old chieftain would cry in crow, and Company I would
answer with a great clamor.

'Fly!' and himself leading them, they would all fly straight forward.

'Mount!' and straight upward they turned in a moment.

'Bunch!' and they all massed into a dense black flock.

'Scatter!' and they spread out like leaves before the wind.

'Form line!' and they strung out into the long line of ordinary flight.

'Descend!' and they all dropped nearly to the ground.

'Forage!' and they alighted and scattered about to feed, while two of
the permanent sentries mounted duty--one on a tree to the right, the
other on a mound to the far left. A minute or two later Silverspot
would cry out, 'A man with a gun!' The sentries repeated the cry and
the company flew at once in open order as quickly as possible toward the
trees. Once behind these, they formed line again in safety and returned
to the home pines.

Sentry duty is not taken in turn by all the crows, but a certain number
whose watchfulness has been often proved are the perpetual sentries, and
are expected to watch and forage at the same time. Rather hard on them
it seems to us, but it works well and the crow organization is admitted
by all birds to be the very best in existence.

Finally, each November sees the troop sail away southward to learn new
modes of life, new landmarks and new kinds of food, under the guidance
of the everwise Silverspot.

III

There is only one time when a crow is a fool, and that is at night.
There is only one bird that terrifies the crow, and that is the owl.
When, therefore, these come together it is a woeful thing for the sable
birds. The distant hoot of an owl after dark is enough to make them
withdraw their heads from under their wings, and sit trembling and
miserable till morning. In very cold weather the exposure of their faces
thus has often resulted in a crow having one or both of his eyes frozen,
so that blindness followed and therefore death. There are no hospitals
for sick crows.

But with the morning their courage comes again, and arousing themselves
they ransack the woods for a mile around till they find that owl, and if
they do not kill him they at least worry him half to death and drive him
twenty miles away.

In 1893 the crows had come as usual to Castle Frank. I was walking in
these woods a few days afterward when I chanced upon the track of a
rabbit that had been running at full speed over the snow and dodging
about among the trees as though pursued. Strange to tell, I could see no
track of the pursuer. I followed the trail and presently saw a drop of
blood on the snow, and a little farther on found the partly devoured
remains of a little brown bunny. What had killed him was a mystery until
a careful search showed in the snow a great double-toed track and a
beautifully pencilled brown feather. Then all was clear--a horned owl.
Half an hour later, in passing again by the place, there, in a tree,
within ten feet of the bones of his victim, was the fierce-eyed owl
himself. The murderer still hung about the scene of his crime. For once
circumstantial evidence had not lied. At my approach he gave a guttural
'grrr-oo' and flew off with low flagging flight to haunt the distant
sombre woods.

Two days afterward, at dawn, there was a great uproar among the crows.
I went out early to see, and found some black feathers drifting over the
snow. I followed up the wind in the direction from which they came and
soon saw the bloody remains of a crow and the great double-toed track
which again told me that the murderer was the owl. All around were signs
of the struggle, but the fell destroyer was too strong. The poor crow
had been dragged from his perch at night, when the darkness bad put him
at a hopeless disadvantage.

I turned over the remains, and by chance unburied the head--then started
with an exclamation of sorrow. Alas! It was the head of old Silverspot.
His long life of usefulness to his tribe was over--slain at last by the
owl that he had taught so many hundreds of young crows to beware of.

The old nest on the Sugar Loaf is abandoned now. The crows still come
in spring-time to Castle Frank, but without their famous leader their
numbers are dwindling, and soon they will be seen no more about the old
pine-grove in which they and their forefathers had lived and learned for
ages.




RAGGYLUG, The Story of a Cottontail Rabbit

RAGGYLUG, or Rag, was the name of a young cottontail rabbit. It was
given him from his torn and ragged ear, a life-mark that he got in his
first adventure. He lived with his mother in Olifant's Swamp, where I
made their acquaintance and gathered, in a hundred different ways, the
little bits of proof and scraps of truth that at length enabled me to
write this history.

Those who do not know the animals well may think I have humanized them,
but those who have lived so near them as to know somewhat of their ways
and their minds will not think so.

Truly rabbits have no speech as we understand it, but they have a way of
conveying ideas by a system of sounds, signs, scents, whisker-touches,
movements, and example that answers the purpose of speech; and it must
be remembered that though in telling this story I freely translate from
rabbit into English, I repeat nothing that they did not say.

I

The rank swamp grass bent over and concealed the snug nest where
Raggylug's mother had hidden him. She had partly covered him with some
of the bedding, and, as always, her last warning was to lie low and say
nothing, whatever happens. Though tucked in bed, he was wide awake and
his bright eyes were taking in that part of his little green world that
was straight above. A bluejay and a red-squirrel, two notorious thieves,
were loudly berating each other for stealing, and at one time Rag's
home bush was the centre of their fight; a yellow warbler caught a blue
butterfly but six inches from his nose, and a scarlet and black ladybug,
serenely waving her knobbed feelers, took a long walk up one grass-blade,
down another, and across the nest and over Rag's face--and yet he never
moved nor even winked.

After a while he heard a strange rustling of the leaves in the near
thicket. It was an odd, continuous sound, and though it went this way
and that way and came ever nearer, there was no patter of feet with it.
Rag had lived his whole life in the Swamp (he was three weeks old) and
yet had never heard anything like this. Of course his curiosity was
greatly aroused. His mother had cautioned him to lie low, but that
was understood to be in case of danger, and this strange sound without
footfalls could not be anything to fear.

The low rasping went past close at hand, then to the right, then back,
and seemed going away. Rag felt he knew what he was about; he wasn't
a baby; it was his duty to learn what it was. He slowly raised his
rolypoly body on his short fluffy legs, lifted his little round head
above the covering of his nest and peeped out into the woods. The sound
had ceased as soon as he moved. He saw nothing, so took one step forward
to a clear view, and instantly found himself face to face with an
enormous Black Serpent.

"Mammy," he screamed in mortal terror as the monster darted at him. With
all the strength of his tiny limbs he tried to run. But in a flash the
Snake had him by one ear and whipped around him with his coils to gloat
over the helpless little baby bunny he had secured for dinner.

"Mam-my--Mam-my," gasped poor little Raggylug as the cruel monster began
slowly choking him to death. Very soon the little one's cry would have
ceased, but bounding through the woods straight as an arrow came Mammy.
No longer a shy, helpless little Molly Cottontail, ready to fly from
a shadow: the mother's love was strong in her. The cry of her baby had
filled her with the courage of a hero, and--hop, she went over that
horrible reptile. Whack, she struck down at him with her sharp hind
claws as she passed, giving him such a stinging blow that he squirmed
