"And what is that?"

"To make a tour of the pawnshops, and ascertain whether such an
article has been brought to any one of them."

"Very well, Mr. Lynx.  I leave the matter in your hands.  I trust
everything to your judgment."

"Thank you.  I will try to deserve your confidence.  And now,
good-day.  I may call upon you to-morrow."

"Mr. Lynx left the presence of the lady, and went downstairs.  He had
just reached the bottom of the staircase, when a thin lady glided from
the rear of the hall, and spoke to him.

"Are you the detective summoned by Mrs. Hamilton?" she asked.

"Yes, madam," answered Mr. Lynx, surveying housekeeper attentively.

"I am Mrs. Hill, the housekeper," said she.  "I may add that I am a
cousin of Mrs. Hamilton's."

Mr. Lynx bowed, and waited for further information.  He knew who was
addressing him, for he had questioned Mrs. Hamilton as to the
different inmates of the house.

"I stopped you," said Mrs. Hill, "because I have my suspicions, and I
thought I might help you in this investigation."

"I shall feel indebted to you for any help you can afford.  Do you
mind telling me upon what your suspicions rest?"

"I don't like to accuse or throw suspicions on anyone," said the
housekeeper, but I think it is my duty to help my cousin in this
matter."

"Undoubtedly," said Mr. Lynx, noticing that she paused.  "Proceed."

"You may or may not be aware that my cousin employs a boy of about
sixteen, whom, as I think, she engaged rather rashly, without knowing
anything of his antecedents.  He assists her in her writing and
accounts--in fact, is a sort of secretary.

"His name is Benjamin Barclay, is it not?"

"Yes."

"Do you know anything of his habits?"

"He is very plausible.  In fact, I think his appearance is in his
favor; but I think he is sly.  Still water, you know, runs deep."

Mr. Lynx bowed assent.

"I was disposed," proceeded Mrs. Hill artfully, "to think well of the
boy, and to approve my cousin's selection, until last week he was seen
leaving a well-known gambling house in Thirty-first Street."

"Indeed!  That is certainly suspicious."

"Is it not?"

"Who saw him leaving the gambling house, Mrs. Hill?"

"My son, Conrad."

"Curious that he should have been near at the time!"

"He was taking a walk.  He generally goes out in the evening."

"Of course your son would not visit such a place?"

"Certainly not," answered Mrs. Hill, looking offended at the
suggestion.

"By the way, are the two boys intimate?  Do they seem to like each
other?"

"My Conrad always treats the other boy well, out of common politeness,
but I don't think he likes him very well."

"Is your son in any situation?"

"He is now."

"Was he at the time this Benjamin was engaged by Mrs. Hamilton?"

"No."

"Rather singular that she did not employ your son, instead of seeking
out a stranger, isn't it?"

"Now that you mention it, I confess that I did feel hurt at the slight
to my boy.  However, I don't wish to interfere with Cousin Hamilton,
or obtrude my son upon her."

"Strong jealousy there!" thought the detective.

"So you think this Ben Barclay may have taken the glass?" he said
inquiringly.

"I do.  Since he visits gambling houses, he doubtless squanders money,
and can find a market for more than he can honestly earn."

"As you say, gambling often leads to dishonesty.  Does Mrs. Hamilton
know that her protege visited a gambling house?"

"Yes."

"Mentioned it to him, I suppose?"

"Yes."

"Of course, he denied it?"

"No; he admitted it, but said he received a letter from a stranger
appointing to meet him there.  It is rather curious that he couldn't
show the letter, however.  He pretended he had lost it."

"Did Mrs. Hamilton believe him?"

"I don't know.  I think not, for, though she has not discharged him,
she treats him very coldly."

"Have you any further information to give me?"

"No.  I hope this will be of some service to you."

"I think it will.  Thank you, and good-afternoon."

"There!  I've prejudiced him against Ben," said Mrs. Hill to herself,
with a satisfied smile.  "These detectives are glad of a hint, sharp
as they think themselves.  If he finds out that it is Ben, he will
take all the credit to himself, and never mention me in the matter.
However, that is just what I wish.  It is important that I should not
appear too active in getting the boy into trouble, or I may be thought
to be influenced by interested motives, though, Heaven knows, I only
want justice for myself and my boy.  The sooner we get this boy out of
the house, the better it will be for us."

As Mr. Lynx left the house, he smiled to himself.

"That woman and her son hate Ben Barclay, that much is certain, and
look upon him as an interloper and a rival.  I rather sympathize with
the poor fellow.  I should be sorry to find him guilty, but I shall
not stop short till I have ferreted out the truth."




CHAPTER XXVII
THE TELLTALE TICKET


Conrad still had the pawnbroker's ticket which he had received in
return for the opera glasses, and did not quite know what to do with
it.  He didn't intend to redeem the glass, and if found in his
possession, it would bring him under suspicion.  Now that a detective
had the matter in charge, it occurred to him that it would be well to
have the ticket found in Ben's room.

The two had rooms upon the same floor, and it would, therefore, be
easy to slip into Ben's chamber and leave it somewhere about.

Now, it chanced that Susan, the chambermaid, was about, though Conrad
did not see her, when he carried out his purpose, and, instigated by
curiosity, she peeped through the half-open door, and saw him place
the ticket on the bureau.

Wondering what it was, she entered the room after Conrad had vacated
it, and found the ticket Conrad had placed there.

Susan knew what a pawnbroker's ticket was, and read it with curiosity.

She saw that it was made out to Ben Barclay.

"How, then, did Master Conrad get hold of it?" she said to herself.
"It's my belief he's trying to get Master Ben into trouble.  It's a
shame, it is, for Master Ben is a gentleman and he isn't."

Between the two boys, Susan favored Ben, who always treated her with
consideration, while Conrad liked to order about the servants, as if
they were made to wait upon him.

After Conrad had disposed of the pawn ticket, he said carelessly to
his mother:

"Mother, if I were you, I'd look into Ben's room.  You might find the
opera glass there."

"I don't think he'd leave it there.  He would pawn it."

"Then you might find the ticket somewhere about."

Upon this hint, Mrs. Hill went up to Ben's room, and there, upon the
bureau, she naturally found the ticket.

"I thought so," she said to herself.  "Conrad was right.  The boy is a
thief.  Here is the ticket made out to him by name.  Well, well, he's
brazen enough, in all conscience.  Now shall I show it to Cousin
Hamilton at once, or shall I wait until the detective has reported?"

On the whole, Mrs. Hill decided to wait.  She could delay with safety,
for she had proof which would utterly crush and confound the hated
interloper.

Meanwhile, the detective pursued his investigations.  Of course, he
visited Simpson's, and there he learned that the opera glass, which he
readily recognized from the description, had been brought there a few
days previous.

"Who brought it?" he asked.

"A boy of about sixteen."

"Did he give his name?"

The books were referred to, and the attendant answered in the
affirmative.

"He gave the name of Ben Barclay," he answered.

"Do you think that was his real name?" asked the detective.

"That depends on whether he had a right to pawn it."

"Suppose he stole it?"

"Then, probably, he did not give his real name."

"So I think," said Mr. Lynx quietly.

"Do you know if there is a boy by that name?"

"There is; but I doubt if he knows anything about the matter."

"I will call again, perhaps to-morrow," he added.  "I must report to
my principal what I have discovered."

From Simpson's he went straight to Mrs. Hamilton, who had as yet
received no communication from the housekeeper.

"Well, Mr. Lynx," she asked, with interest, "have you heard anything
of the glass?"

"I have seen it," was the quiet reply.

"Where?"

"At a well-known pawnshop on the Bowery."

"Did you learn who left it?" asked Mrs. Hamilton eagerly.

"A boy--about sixteen years of age--who gave the name of Ben Barclay."

"I can't believe Ben would be guilty of such a disgraceful act!"
ejaculated Mrs. Hamilton, deeply moved.




CHAPTER XXVIII
MRS. HILL'S MALICE


At this moment there was a low knock on the door.

"Come in!" said Mrs. Hamilton.

Mrs. Hill, the housekeeper, glided in, with her usual stealthy step.

"I really beg pardon for intruding," she said, with a slight cough,
"but I thought perhaps I might throw light on the matter Mr. Lynx is
investigating."

"Well?" said the detective, eying her attentively.

"I had occasion to go into Ben's room to see if the girl had put
things in order, when my attention was drawn to a ticket upon the
bureau.  You can tell whether it is of importance," and she handed it,
with an air of deference, to Mr. Lynx.

"What is it?" asked Mrs. Hamilton.

"It is a pawn ticket," answered Mr. Lynx attentively.

"Let me see it, please!"

Mrs. Hamilton regarded it with mingled pain and incredulity.

"I need not say," continued the housekeeper, "that I was surprised and
saddened at this evidence of the boy's depravity.  Cousin Hamilton has
been so kind to him that it seems like the height of ingratitude."

"May I ask, madam," said Mr. Lynx, "if your suspicions had fastened on
this boy, Ben, before you found the pawn ticket?"

"To tell the truth, they had."

"And what reason had you for forming such suspicions?"

"I knew that the boy frequented gambling houses, and, of course, no
salary, however large, would be sufficient for a boy with such
habits."

Mrs. Hamilton did not speak, which somewhat embarrassed Mrs. Hill.
Mr. Lynx, however, was very affable, and thanked her for her
assistance.

"I felt it my duty to assist Cousin Hamilton," said she, "though I am
sorry for that ungrateful boy.  I will now withdraw, and leave you to
confer together."

Mrs. Hill would like to have been invited to remain, but such an
invitation was not given.

"What do you think, Mr. Lynx?" asked Mrs. Hamilton.

"I think your housekeeper does not like Ben Barclay," he answered
dryly.

"And you don't think him guilty?" she asked eagerly.

"No; the boy isn't fool enough, first, to give his own name at the
pawnbroker's, and next, to leave the ticket exposed in his room."

"How then did it come there?"

Mr. Lynx was saved the trouble of answering by another tap on the
door.

"Who is it now?" he said.

He stepped to the door, and opening it, admitted Susan.

"What is it, Susan," asked Mrs. Hamilton, in some surprise.

"Did Mrs. Hill bring you a pawn ticket, ma'am?"

"And what do you know about it?" demanded Mr. Lynx brusquely.

"And did she say she found it on Master Ben's bureau?"

"Yes, Susan," said the mistress; "what can you tell us about it?"

"I can tell you this, ma'am, that I saw Master Conrad steal into the
room this morning, and put it there with his own hands."

"Ha!  this is something to the purpose." said the detective briskly.

"Are you sure of this, Susan?" asked Mrs. Hamilton, evidently shocked.

"I can take my Bible oath of it, ma'am; and it's my belief that he's
tryin' to get Master Ben into trouble."

"Thank you, Susan," said her mistress.  "You have done not only Ben,
but myself, a valuable service.  You can go.  I will see that you do
not regret it."

"Don't tell Mrs. Hill that I told you, or she'd be my enemy for life!"

"I will see to that."

As Susan left the room, Mr. Lynx said:

"You won't require my services any longer.  It is clear enough who
pawned the glass."

"You mean--"

"I mean the boy Conrad, whose mother was so anxious to fix the guilt
upon your young secretary.  If you have the slightest doubt about it,
invite the young gentleman to accompany you to Simpson's to redeem the
opera glass."

"I will."




CHAPTER XXIX
SOME UNEXPECTED CHANGES


When Conrad came home his first visit was to his mother.

"Has anything been found out about the stolen opera glass?" he asked,
with a studied air of indifference.
