
Henry saw the two rifle barrels go up and two flashes of flame leap from
the muzzles. The Indian fell forward and lay still. They went up to him,
and found that he was shot through the head and also through the body.

"We may miss once, but we don't twice," said Tom Ross.

The human mind can be influenced so powerfully by events that the three
felt no compunction at all at the shooting of this fleeing Indian. It
was but a trifle compared with what they had seen the day and night
before.

"We'd better take the weapons an' ammunition o' both uv 'em," said Sol.
"They may be needed, an' some o' the women in that crowd kin shoot."

They gathered up the arms, powder, and ball, and waited a little to see
whether the shots had been heard by any other Indians, but there was
no indication of the presence of more warriors, and the rejoined the
fugitives. Long Jim had dropped back to the end of the line, and when he
saw that his comrades carried two extra rifles, he understood.

"They didn't give no alarm, did they?" he asked in a tone so low that
none of the fugitives could hear.

"They didn't have any chance," replied Henry. "We've brought away all
their weapons and ammunition, but just say to the women that we found
them in an abandoned house."

The rifles and the other arms were given to the boldest and most
stalwart of the women, and they promised to use them if the need came.
Meanwhile the flight went on, and the farther it went the sadder it
became. Children became exhausted, and had to be carried by people so
tired that they could scarcely walk themselves. There was nobody in the
line who had not lost some beloved one on that fatal river bank, killed
in battle, or tortured to death. As they slowly ascended the green slope
of the mountain that inclosed a side of the valley, they looked back
upon ruin and desolation. The whole black tragedy was being consummated.
They could see the houses in flames, and they knew that the Indian war
parties were killing and scalping everywhere. They knew, too, that other
bodies of fugitives, as stricken as their own, were fleeing into the
mountains, they scarcely knew whither.

As they paused a few moments and looked back, a great cry burst from
the weakest of the women and children. Then it became a sad and terrible
wail, and it was a long time before it ceased. It was an awful sound, so
compounded of despair and woe and of longing for what they had lost that
Henry choked, and the tears stood in Paul's eyes. But neither the five
nor Carpenter made any attempt to check the wailing. They thought it
best for them to weep it out, but they hurried the column as much as
they could, often carrying some of the smaller children themselves. Paul
and Long Jim were the best as comforters. The two knew how, each in his
own way, to soothe and encourage. Carpenter, who knew the way to Fort
Penn, led doggedly on, scarcely saying a word. Henry, Shif'less Sol, and
Tom were the rear guard, which was, in this case, the one of greatest
danger and responsibility.

Henry was thankful that it was only early summer the Fourth of July,
the second anniversary of the Declaration of Independence-and that the
foliage was heavy and green on the slopes of the mountain. In this
mass of greenery the desolate column was now completely hidden from any
observer in the valley, and he believed that other crowds of fugitives
would be hidden in the same manner. He felt sure that no living human
being would be left in the valley, that it would be ravaged from end to
end and then left to desolation, until new people, protected by American
bayonets, should come in and settle it again.

At last they passed the crest of the ridge, and the fires in the valley,
those emblems of destruction, were hidden. Between them and Fort Penn,
sixty miles away, stretched a wilderness of mountain, forest, and swamp.
But the five welcomed the forest. A foe might lie there in ambush, but
they could not see the fugitives at a distance. What the latter needed
now was obscurity, the green blanket of the forest to hide them.
Carpenter led on over a narrow trail; the others followed almost in
single file now, while the five scouted in the woods on either flank and
at the rear. Henry and Shif'less Sol generally kept together, and they
fully realized the overwhelming danger should an Indian band, even as
small as ten or a dozen warriors, appear. Should the latter scatter,
it would be impossible to protect all the women and children from their
tomahawks.

The day was warm, but the forest gave them coolness as well as shelter.
Henry and Sol were seldom so far back that they could not see the end
of the melancholy line, now moving slowly, overborne by weariness. The
shiftless one shook his head sadly.

"No matter what happens, some uv 'em will never get out o' these woods."

His words came true all too soon. Before the afternoon closed, two
women, ill before the flight, died of terror and exhaustion, and were
buried in shallow graves under the trees. Before dark a halt was made at
the suggestion of Henry, and all except Carpenter and the scouts sat in
a close, drooping group. Many of the children cried, though the women
had all ceased to weep. They had some food with them, taken in the
hurried flight, and now the men asked them to eat. Few could do it, and
others insisted on saving what little they had for the children. Long
Jim found a spring near by, and all drank at it.

The six men decided that, although night had not yet come, it would be
best to remain there until the morning. Evidently the fugitives were in
no condition, either mental or physical, to go farther that day, and the
rest was worth more than the risk.

When this decision was announced to them, most of the women took it
apathetically. Soon they lay down upon a blanket, if one was to be had;
otherwise, on leaves and branches. Again Henry thanked God that it was
summer, and that these were people of the frontier, who could sleep in
the open. No fire was needed, and, outside of human enemies, only rain
was to be dreaded.

And yet this band, desperate though its case, was more fortunate than
some of the others that fled from the Wyoming Valley. It had now to
protect it six men Henry and Paul, though boys in years, were men in
strength and ability--five of whom were the equals of any frontiersmen
on the whole border. Another crowd of women was escorted by a single man
throughout its entire flight.

Henry and his comrades distributed themselves in a circle about the
group. At times they helped gather whortleberries as food for the
others, but they looked for Indians or game, intending to shoot in
either case. When Paul and Henry were together they once heard a light
sound in a thicket, which at first they were afraid was made by an
Indian scout, but it was a deer, and it bounded away too soon for either
to get a shot. They could not find other game of any kind, and they came
back toward the camp-if a mere stop in the woods, without shelter of any
kind, could be called a camp.

The sun was now setting, blood red. It tinged the forest with a fiery
mist, reminding the unhappy group of all that they had seen. But the
mist was gone in a few moments, and then the blackness of night came
with a weird moaning wind that told of desolation. Most of the children,
having passed through every phase of exhaustion and terror, had fallen
asleep. Some of the women slept, also, and others wept. But the terrible
wailing note, which the nerves of no man could stand, was heard no
longer.

The five gathered again at a point near by, and Carpenter came to them.

"Men," he said simply, "don't know much about you, though I know you
fought well in the battle that we lost, but for what you're doin' now
nobody can ever repay you. I knew that I never could get across the
mountains with all these weak ones."

The five merely said that any man who was a man would help at such a
time. Then they resumed their march in a perpetual circle about the
camp.

Some women did not sleep at all that night. It is not easy to conceive
what the frontier women of America endured so many thousands of times.
They had seen their husbands, brothers, and sons killed in the battle,
and they knew that the worst of torture had been practiced in the Indian
camp. Many of them really did not want to live any longer. They merely
struggled automatically for life. The darkness settled down thicker and
thicker; the blackness in the forest was intense, and they could see the
faces of one another only at a little distance. The desolate moan of the
wind came through the leaves, and, although it was July, the night grew
cold. The women crept closer together, trying to cover up and protect
the children. The wind, with its inexpressibly mournful note, was
exactly fitted to their feelings. Many of them wondered why a Supreme
Being had permitted such things. But they ceased to talk. No sound at
all came from the group, and any one fifty yards away, not forewarned,
could not have told that they were there.

Henry and Paul met again about midnight, and sat a long time on a
little hillock. Theirs had been the most dangerous of lives on the most
dangerous of frontiers, but they had never been stirred as they were
tonight. Even Paul, the mildest of the five, felt something burning
within him, a fire that only one thing could quench.

"Henry," said he, "we're trying to get these people to Fort Penn, and
we may get some of them there, but I don't think our work will be ended
them. I don't think I could ever be happy again if we went straight from
Fort Penn to Kentucky."

Henry understood him perfectly.

"No, Paul," he said, "I don't want to go, either, and I know the others
don't. Maybe you are not willing to tell why we want to stay, but it is
vengeance. I know it's Christian to forgive your enemies, but I can't
see what I have seen, and hear what I have heard, and do it."

"When the news of these things spreads," said Paul, "they'll send an
army from the east. Sooner or later they'll just have to do it to punish
the Iroquois and their white allies, and we've got to be here to join
that army."

"I feel that way, too, Paul," said Henry.

They were joined later by the other three, who stayed a little while,
and they were in accord with Henry and Paul.

Then they began their circles about the camp again, always looking and
always listening. About two o'clock in the morning they heard a scream,
but it was only the cry of a panther. Before day there were clouds, a
low rumble of distant thunder, and faint far flashes of lightning. Henry
was in dread of rain, but the lightning and thunder ceased, and the
clouds went away. Then dawn came, rosy and bright, and all but three
rose from the earth. The three-one woman and two children-had died in
silence in the night, and they were buried, like the others, in shallow
graves in the woods. But there was little weeping or external mourning
over them. All were now heavy and apathetic, capable of but little more
emotion.

Carpenter resumed his position at the head of the column, which now
moved slowly over the mountain through a thick forest matted with
vines and bushes and without a path. The march was now so painful
and difficult that they did not make more than two miles an hour. The
stronger of them helped the men to gather more whortleberries, as it was
easy to see that the food they had with them would never last until they
reached Fort Penn, should they ever reach it.

The condition of the country into which they had entered steadily grew
worse. They were well into the mountains, a region exceedingly wild and
rough, but little known to the settlers, who had gone around it to build
homes in the fertile and beautiful valley of Wyoming. The heavy forest
was made all the more difficult by the presence everywhere of almost
impassable undergrowth. Now and then a woman lay down under the bushes,
and in two cases they died there because the power to live was no longer
in them. They grew weaker and weaker. The food that they had brought
from the Wyoming fort was almost exhausted, and the wild whortleberries
were far from sustaining. Fortunately there was plenty of water
flowing tinder the dark woods and along the mountainside. But they were
compelled to stop at intervals of an hour or two to rest, and the more
timid continually expected Indian ambush.

The five met shortly after noon and took another reckoning of the
situation. They still realized to the full the dangers of Indian
pursuit, which in this case might be a mere matter of accident. Anybody
could follow the broad trail left by the fugitives, but the Iroquois,
busy with destruction in the valley, might not follow, even if they
saw it. No one could tell. The danger of starvation or of death from
exhaustion was more imminent, more pressing, and the five resolved to
let scouting alone for the rest of the day and seek game.

"There's bound to be a lot of it in these woods," said Shif'less Sol,
"though it's frightened out of the path by our big crowd, but we ought
to find it."

Henry and Shif'less Sol went in one direction, and Paul, Tom, and Long
Jim in another. But with all their hunting they succeeded in finding
only one little deer, which fell to the rifle of Silent Tom. It made
small enough portions for the supper and breakfast of nearly a hundred
people, but it helped wonderfully, and so did the fires which Henry and
his comrades would now have built, even had they not been needed for the
cooking. They saw that light and warmth, the light and warmth of glowing
coals, would alone rouse life in this desolate band.

They slept the second night on the ground among the trees, and the next
morning they entered that gloomy region of terrible memory, the Great
Dismal Swamp of the North, known sometimes, to this day, as "The Shades
of Death."




CHAPTER XII. THE SHADES OF DEATH


"The Shades of Death" is a marsh on a mountain top, the great, wet, and
soggy plain of the Pocono and Broad mountains. When the fugitives from
Wyoming entered it, it was covered with a dense growth of pines, growing
mostly out of dark, murky water, which in its turn was thick with a
growth of moss and aquatic plants. Snakes and all kinds of creeping
things swarmed in the ooze. Bear and panther were numerous.

Carpenter did not know any way around this terrible region, and they
were compelled to enter it. Henry was again devoutly thankful that
it was summer. In such a situation with winter on top of it only the
hardiest of men could survive.

But they entered the swamp, Carpenter silent and dogged, still leading.
Henry and his comrades kept close to the crowd. One could not scout in
such a morass, and it proved to be worse than they had feared. The day
turned gray, and it was dark among the trees. The whole place was filled
with gloomy shadows. It was often impossible to judge whether fairly
solid soil or oozy murk lay before them. Often they went down to their
waists. Sometimes the children fell and were dragged up again by the
stronger. Now and then rattle snakes coiled and hissed, and the women
killed them with sticks. Other serpents slipped away in the slime.
Everybody was plastered with mud, and they became mere images of human
beings.

In the afternoon they reached a sort of oasis in the terrible swamp,
and there they buried two more of their number who had perished from
exhaustion. The rest, save a few, lay upon the ground as if dead. On all
sides of them stretched the pines and the soft black earth. It looked to
the fugitives like a region into which no human beings had ever come,
or ever would come again, and, alas! to most of them like a region from
which no human being would ever emerge.

Henry sat upon a piece of fallen brushwood near the edge of the morass,
and looked at the fugitives, and his heart sank within him. They were
hardly in the likeness of his own kind, and they seemed practically
lifeless now. Everything was dull, heavy, and dead. The note of the wind
among the leaves was somber. A long black snake slipped from the marshy
grass near his feet and disappeared soundlessly in the water. He was
sick, sick to death at the sight of so much suffering, and the desire
for vengeance, slow, cold, and far more lasting than any hot outburst,
grew within him. A slight noise, and Shif'less Sol stood beside him.

"Did you hear?" asked the shiftless one, in a significant tone.

"Hear what?" asked Henry, who had been deep in thought.

"The wolf howl, just a very little cry, very far away an' under the
horizon, but thar all the same. Listen, thar she goes ag'in!"

Henry bent his ear and distinctly heard the faint, whining note, and
then it came a third time.

He looked tip at Shif'less Sol, and his face grew white--but not for
himself.

"Yes," said Shif'less Sol. He understood the look. "We are pursued. Them
wolves howlin' are the Iroquois. What do you reckon we're goin' to do,
Henry?"

"Fight!" replied the youth, with fierce energy. "Beat 'em off!"

"How?"

Henry circled the little oasis with the eye of a general, and his plan
came.

"You'll stand here, where the earth gives a footing," he said, "you,
Solomon Hyde, as brave a man as I ever saw, and with you will be Paul
Cotter, Tom Ross, Jim Hart, and Henry Ware, old friends of yours.
Carpenter will at once lead the women and children on ahead, and perhaps
they will not hear the battle that is going to be fought here."

A smile of approval, slow, but deep and comprehensive, stole over the
face of Solomon Hyde, surnamed, wholly without fitness, the shiftless
one. "It seems to me," he said, "that I've heard o' them four fellers
you're talkin' about, an' ef I wuz to hunt all over this planet an' them
other planets that Paul tells of, I couldn't find four other fellers
that I'd ez soon have with me."

"We've got to stand here to the death," said Henry.

"You're shorely right," said Shif'less Sol.

The hands of the two comrades met in a grip of steel.

The other three were called and were told of the plan, which met with
their full approval. Then the news was carried to Carpenter, who quickly
agreed that their course was the wisest. He urged all the fugitives to
their feet, telling them that they must reach another dry place
before night, but they were past asking questions now, and, heavy and
apathetic, they passed on into the swamp.

Paul watched the last of them disappear among the black bushes and
weeds, and turned back to his friends on the oasis. The five lay down
behind a big fallen pine, and gave their weapons a last look. They
had never been armed better. Their rifles were good, and the fine
double-barreled pistols, formidable weapons, would be a great aid,
especially at close quarters.

"I take it," said Tom Ross, "that the Iroquois can't get through at all
unless they come along this way, an' it's the same ez ef we wuz settin'
on solid earth, poppin' em over, while they come sloshin' up to us."

"That's exactly it," said Henry. "We've a natural defense which we can
hold against much greater numbers, and the longer we hold 'em off, the
nearer our people will be to Fort Penn."

"I never felt more like fightin' in my life," said Tom Ross.

It was a grim utterance, true of them all, although not one among them
was bloodthirsty.

"Can any of you hear anything?" asked Henry. "Nothin'," replied
Shif'less Sol, after a little wait, "nothin' from the women goin', an'
nothin' from the Iroquois comin'."

"We'll just lie close," said Henry. "This hard spot of ground isn't more
than thirty or forty feet each way, and nobody can get on it without our
knowing it."

The others did not reply. All lay motionless upon their sides, with
their shoulders raised a little, in order that they might take instant
aim when the time came. Some rays of the sun penetrated the canopy of
pines, and fell across the brown, determined faces and the lean brown
hands that grasped the long, slender-barreled Kentucky rifles. Another
snake slipped from the ground into the black water and swam away. Some
water animal made a light splash as he, too, swam from the presence of
these strange intruders. Then they beard a sighing sound, as of a
foot drawn from mud, and they knew that the Iroquois were approaching,
savages in war, whatever they might be otherwise, and expecting an easy
prey. Five brown thumbs cocked their rifles, and five brown forefingers
