to meet us."

An Indian lad of about eleven years, but large and uncommonly strong
for his age, was walking down the hill toward them. He was dressed
partly in civilized clothing, and his manner was such that he would
have drawn the notice of the observing anywhere. His face was open
and strong, with great width between the eyes, and his gaze was direct
and firm. Robert knew at once that here was an unusual boy, one
destined if he lived to do great things. His prevision was more than
fulfilled. It was Joseph Brant, the renowned Thayendanegea, the most
famous and probably the ablest Indian chief with whom the white men
ever came into contact.

"This is Joseph Brant, the brother of Molly, my wife, and hence my
young brother-in-law," said Colonel Johnson. "Joseph, our new friends
are David Willet, known to the Hodenosaunee as the Great Bear, Robert
Lennox, who seems to be in some sort a ward of Mr. Willet, and Tayoga,
of the Clan of the Bear, of your great brother nation, Onondaga."

Young Thayendanegea saluted them all in a friendly but dignified
way. He, like Tayoga, had a white education, and spoke perfect, but
measured English.

"We welcome you," he said. "Colonel Johnson, sir, my sister has
already seen the strangers from the hill, and is anxious to greet
them."

"Molly, for all her dignity, has her fair share of curiosity," laughed
Colonel Johnson, "and since it's our duty to gratify it, we'll go
forward."

Robert had heard often of Molly Brant, the famous Mohawk wife of
Colonel, afterward Sir William Johnson, a great figure in that region
in her time, and he was eager to see her. He beheld a woman, young,
tall, a face decidedly Iroquois, but handsome and lofty. She wore the
dress of the white people, and it was of fine material. She obviously
had some of the distinguished character that had already set its seal
upon her young brother, then known as Keghneghtada, his famous name of
Thayendanegea to come later. Her husband presented the three, and she
received them in turn in a manner that was quiet and dignified,
although Robert could see her examining them with swift Indian eyes
that missed nothing. And with his knowledge of both white heart and
red heart, of white manner and red manner, he was aware that he stood
in the presence of a great lady, a great lady who fitted into her
setting of the vast New York wilderness. So, with the ornate manner
of the day, he bent over and kissed her hand as he was presented.

"Madam," he said, "it is a great pleasure to us to meet Colonel
Johnson here in the forest, but we have the unexpected and still
greater pleasure of meeting his lady also."

Colonel Johnson laughed, and patted Robert on the shoulder.

"Mr. Willet has been whispering to me something about you," he
said. "He has been telling me of your gift of speech, and by my faith,
he has not told all of it. You do address the ladies in a most
graceful fashion, and Molly likes it. I can see that."

"Assuredly I do, sir," said she who had been Molly Brant, the Mohawk,
but who was now the wife of the greatest man in the north
country. "Tis a goodly youth and he speaks well. I like him, and he
shall have the best our house can offer."

Colonel Johnson's mellow laugh rang out again.

"Spoken like a woman of spirit, Molly," he said. "I expected none the
less of you. It's in the blood of the Ganeagaono and had you answered
otherwise you would have been unworthy of your cousin, Daganoweda,
here."

The young Mohawk chieftain smiled. Johnson, who had married a girl of
their race, could jest with the Mohawks almost as he pleased, and
among themselves and among those whom they trusted the Indians were
fond of joking and laughter.

"The wife of Waraiyageh not only has a great chief for a husband," he
said, "but she is a great chief herself. Among the Wyandots she would
be one of the rulers."

The women were the governing power in the valiant Wyandot nation, and
Daganoweda could pay his cousin no higher compliment.

"We talk much," said Colonel Johnson, "but we must remember that our
friends are tired. They've come afar in bad weather. We must let them
rest now and give them refreshment."

He led the way to the light summer house that he had called a
bower. It was built of poles and thatch, and was open on the eastern
side, where it faced a fine creek running with a strong current. A
fire was burning in one corner, and a heavy curtain of tanned skins
could be draped over the wide doorway. Articles of women's apparel
hung on the walls, and others indicating woman's work stood
about. There were also chairs of wicker, and a lounge covered with
haircloth. It was a comfortable place, the most attractive that Robert
had seen in a long time, and his eyes responded to it with a glitter
that Colonel Johnson noticed.

"I don't wonder that you like it, lad," he said. "I've spent some
happy hours here myself, when I came in weary or worn from hunting or
fishing. But sit you down, all three of you. I'll warrant me that
you're weary enough, tramping through this wintry forest. Blunt, shove
the faggots closer together and make up a better fire."

The command was to a white servant who obeyed promptly, but Madame
Johnson herself had already shifted the chairs for the guests, and had
taken their deerskin cloaks. Without ceasing to be the great lady she
moved, nevertheless, with a lightness of foot and a celerity that was
all a daughter of the forest. Robert watched her with fascinated eyes
as she put the summer house in order and made it ready for the comfort
of her guests. Here was one who had acquired civilization without
losing the spirit of the wild. She was an educated and well bred
woman, the wife of the most powerful man in the colonies, and she was
at the same time a true Mohawk. Robert knew as he looked at her that
if left alone in the wilderness she could take care of herself almost
as well as her cousin, Daganoweda, the young chief.

Then his gaze shifted from Molly Brant to her brother. Despite his
youth all his actions showed pride and unlimited confidence in
himself. He stood near the door, and addressed Robert in English,
asking him questions about himself, and he also spoke to Tayoga,
showing him the greatest friendliness.

"We be of the mighty brother nations, Onondaga and Mohawk, the first
of the great League," he said, "and some day we will sit together in
the councils of the fifty sachems in the vale of Onondaga."

"It is so," said Tayoga gravely, speaking to the young lad as man to
man. "We will ever serve the Hodenosaunee as our fathers before us
have done."

"Leave the subject of the Hodenosaunee," said Colonel Johnson
cheerily. "I know that you lads are prouder of your birth than the old
Roman patricians ever were, but Mr. Willet, Mr. Lennox and I were not
fortunate enough to be born into the great League, and you will
perhaps arouse our jealousy or envy. Come, gentlemen, sit you down
and eat and drink."

His Mohawk wife seconded the request and food and drink were
served. Robert saw that the bower was divided into two rooms the one
beyond them evidently being a sleeping chamber, but the evidences of
comfort, even luxury, were numerous, making the place an oasis in the
wilderness. Colonel Johnson had wine, which Robert did not touch, nor
did Tayoga nor Daganoweda, and there were dishes of china or silver
brought from England. He noticed also, and it was an unusual sight in
a lodge in the forest, about twenty books upon two shelves. From his
chair he read the titles, Le Brun's "Battles of Alexander," a bound
volume of _The Gentleman's Magazine,_ "Roderick Random," and several
others. Colonel Johnson's eyes followed him.

"I see that you are a reader," he said. "I know it because your eyes
linger upon my books. I have packages brought from time to time from
England, and, before I came upon this expedition, I had these sent
ahead of me to the bower that I might dip into them in the evenings if
I felt so inclined. Reading gives us a wider horizon, and, at the same
time, takes us away from the day's troubles."

"I agree with you heartily, sir," said Robert, "but, unfortunately, we
have little time for reading now."

"That is true," sighed Colonel Johnson. "I fear it's going to be a
long and terrible war. What do you see, Joseph?"

Young Brant was sitting with his face to the door, and he had risen
suddenly.

"A runner comes," he replied. "He is in the forest beyond the creek,
but I see that he is one of our own people. He comes fast."

Colonel Johnson also arose.

"Can it be some trouble among the Ganeagaono?"  he said.

"I think not," said the Indian boy.

The runner emerged from the wood, crossed the creek and stood in the
doorway of the bower. He was a tall, thin young Mohawk, and he panted
as if he had come fast and long.

"What is it, Oagowa?" asked Colonel Johnson.

"A hostile band, Hurons, Abenakis, Caughnawagas, and others, has
entered the territory of the Ganeagaono on the west," replied the
warrior. "They are led by an Ojibway chief, a giant, called
Tandakora."

Robert uttered an exclamation.

"The name of the Ojibway attracts your attention," said Colonel
Johnson.

"We've had many encounters with him," replied the youth. "Besides
hating the Hodenosaunee and all the white people, I think he also has
a personal grievance against Mr. Willet, Tayoga and myself. He is the
most bitter and persistent of all our enemies."

"Then this man must be dealt with. I can't go against him
myself. Other affairs press too much, but I can raise a force with
speed."

"Let me go, sir, against Tandakora!" exclaimed young Brant eagerly and
in English.

Colonel Johnson looked at him a moment, his eyes glistening, and then
he laughed, not with irony but gently and with approval.

"Truly 'tis a young eagle," he said, "but, Joseph, you must remember
that your years are yet short of twelve, and you still have much time
to spend over the books in which you have done so well. If I let you
be cut off at such an early age you can never become the great chief
you are destined to be. Bide a while, Joseph, and your cousin,
Daganoweda, will attend to this Ojibway who has wandered so far from
his own country."

Young Brant made no protest. Trained in the wonderful discipline of
the Hodenosaunee he knew that he must obey before he could command. He
resumed his seat quietly, but his eager eyes watched his tall cousin,
the young Mohawk chieftain, as Colonel Johnson gave him orders.

"Take with you the warriors that you have now, Daganoweda," he
said. "Gather the fifty who are now encamped at Teugega. Take thirty
more from Talaquega, and I think that will be enough. I don't know
you, Daganoweda, and I don't know your valiant Mohawk warriors, if you
are not able to account thoroughly for the Ojibway and his men. Don't
come back until you've destroyed them or driven them out of your
country."

Colonel Johnson's tone was at once urgent and complimentary. It
intimated that the work was important and that Daganoweda would be
sure to do it. The Mohawk's eyes glittered in his dark face. He lifted
his hand in a salute, glided from the bower, and a moment later he and
his warriors passed from sight in the forest.

"That cousin of yours, Molly, deserves his rank of chief," said
Colonel Johnson. "The task that he is to do I consider as good as done
already. Tandakora was too daring, when he ventured into the lands of
the Ganeagaono. Now, if you gentlemen will be so good as to be our
guests we'll pass the night here, and tomorrow we'll go to Mount
Johnson."

It was agreeable to Robert, Willet and Tayoga, and they spent the
remainder of the day most pleasantly at the bower. Colonel Johnson,
feeling that they were three whom he could trust, talked freely and
unveiled a mind fitted for great affairs.

"I tell you three," he said, "that this will be one of the most
important wars the world has known. To London and Paris we seem lost
in the woods out here, and perhaps at the courts they think little of
us or they do not think at all, but the time must come when the New
World will react upon the Old. Consider what a country it is, with its
lakes, its forests, its rivers, and its fertile lands, which extend
beyond the reckoning of man. The day will arrive when there will be a
power here greater than either England or France. Such a land cannot
help but nourish it."

He seemed to be much moved, and spoke a long time in the same vein,
but his Indian wife never said a word. She moved about now and then,
and, as before, her footsteps making no noise, being as light as those
of any animal of the forest.

The dusk came up to the door. They heard the ripple of the creek, but
could not see its waters. Madam Johnson lighted a wax candle, and
Colonel Johnson stopped suddenly.

"I have talked too much. I weary you," he said.

"Oh, no, sir!" protested Robert eagerly. "Go on!  We would gladly
listen to you all night."

"That I think would be too great a weight upon us all," laughed
Colonel Johnson. "You are weary. You must be so from your long
marching and my heavy disquisitions. We'll have beds made for you
three and Joseph here. Molly and I sleep in the next room."

Robert was glad to have soft furs and a floor beneath him, and when he
lay down it was with a feeling of intense satisfaction. He liked
Colonel William Johnson, and knew that he had a friend in him. He was
anxious for advancement in the great world, and he understood what it
was to have powerful support. Already he stood high with the
Hodenosaunee, and now he had found favor with the famous Waraiyageh.

They left in the morning for Mount Johnson, and there were horses for
all except the Indians, although one was offered to Tayoga. But he
declined to ride--the nations of the Hodenosaunee were not horsemen,
and kept pace with them at the long easy gait used by the Indian
runner. Robert himself was not used to the saddle, but he was glad
enough to accept it, after their great march through the wilderness.

The weather continued fine for winter, crisp, clear, sparkling with
life and the spirits of all were high. Colonel Johnson beckoned to
Robert to ride by the side of him and the two led the way. Kegneghtada,
despite his extreme youth, had refused a horse also, and was swinging
along by the side of Tayoga, stride for stride. A perfect understanding
and friendship had already been established between the Onondaga and
the Mohawk, and as they walked they talked together earnestly, young
Brant bearing himself as if he were on an equal footing with his
brother warrior, Tayoga. Colonel Johnson looked at them, smiled
approval and said to Robert:

"I have called my young brother-in-law an eagle, and an eagle he truly
is. We're apt to think, Mr. Lennox, that we white people alone gather
our forces and prepare for some aim distant but great. But the Indian
intellect is often keen and powerful, as I have had good cause to
know. Many of their chiefs have an acuteness and penetration not
surpassed in the councils of white men. The great Mohawk whom we call
King Hendrick probably has more intellect than most of the sovereigns
on their thrones in Europe. And as for Joseph, the lad there who so
gallantly keeps step with the Onondaga, where will you find a white
boy who can excel him? He absorbs the learning of our schools as fast
as any boy of our race whom I have ever known, and, at the same time,
he retains and improves all the lore and craft of the red people."

"You have found the Mohawks a brave and loyal race," said Robert,
knowing the colonel was upon a favorite theme of his.

"That I have, Mr. Lennox. I came among them a boy. I was a trader
then, and I settled first only a few miles from their largest town,
Dyiondarogon. I tried to keep faith with them and as a result I found
them always keeping faith with me. Then, when I went to Oghkwaga, I
had the same experience. The Indians were defrauded in the fur trade
by white swindlers, but dishonesty, besides being bad in itself, does
not pay, Mr. Lennox. Bear that in mind. You may cheat for a while with
success, but in time nobody will do business with you. Though you, I
take it, will never be a merchant."

"It is not because I frown upon the merchant's calling, sir. I esteem
it a high and noble one. But my mind does not turn to it."

"So I gather from what I have seen of you, and from what Mr. Willet
tells me. I've been hearing of your gift of oratory. You need not
blush, my lad. If we have a gift we should accept it thankfully, and
make the best use of it we can. You, I take it, will be a lawyer, then
a public man, and you will sway the public mind. There should be grand
occasions for such as you in a country like this, with its unlimited
future."

They came presently into a region of cultivation, fields which would
be green with grain in the spring, showing here and there, and the
smoke from the chimney of a stout log house rising now and then.
Where a creek broke into a swift white fall stood a grist mill, and
from a wood the sound of axes was heard.

Robert's vivid imagination, which responded to all changes, kindled at
once. He liked the wilderness, and it always made a great impression
upon him, and he also took the keenest interest and delight in
everything that civilization could offer. Now his spirit leaped up to
meet what lay before him.

He found at Mount Johnson comfort and luxury that he had not expected,
an abundance of all that the wilderness furnished, mingled with
importations from Europe. He slept in a fine bed, he looked into more
books, he saw on the walls reproductions of Titian and Watteau, and
also pictures of race horses that had made themselves famous at
Newmarket, he wrote letters to Albany on good paper, he could seal
them with either black or red wax, and there were musical instruments
upon one or two of which he could play.

Robert found all these things congenial. The luxury or what might have
seemed luxury on the border, had in it nothing of decadence. There was
an air of vigor, and Colonel Johnson, although he did not neglect his
guests, plunged at once and deeply into business. A little village,
dependent upon him and his affairs had grown up about him, and there
were white men more or less in his service, some of whom he sent at
once on missions for the war. Through it all his Indian wife glided
quietly, but Robert saw that she was a wonderful help, managing with
ease, and smoothing away many a difficulty.

Despite the restraint of manner, the people at Mount Johnson were full
of excitement. The news from Canada and also from the west became
steadily more ominous. The French power was growing fast and the
warriors of the wild tribes were crowding in thousands to the Bourbon
banner. Robert heard again of St. Luc and of some daring achievement
of his, and despite himself he felt as always a thrill at the name,
and a runner also brought the news that more French troops had gone
into the Ohio country.

The fourth night of their stay at Mount Johnson Robert remained awake
