He seemed once more to Harry--youth is a hero-worshiper--omniscient and
omnipotent.  The invasion of the North had failed, and there had been a
terrible loss of good men, officers and soldiers, but, with Lee
standing on the defensive at the head of the Army of Northern Virginia,
in Virginia, the South would be invincible.  He had always won there,
and he always would win there.

Harry sighed, nevertheless.  He had two heroes, but one of them was
gone. He thought again if only Stonewall Jackson had been at
Gettysburg. Lee's terrible striking arm would have smitten with the
hammer of Thor. He would have pushed home the attack on the first day,
when the Union vanguard was defeated and demoralized.  He would have
crushed the enemy on the second day, leaving no need for that fatal and
terrific charge of Pickett on the third day.

"You reached the general first," said Dalton, "but I tried my best to
beat you."

"But I started first, George, old fellow.  That gave me the advantage
over you."

"It's fine of you to say it.  The army has quickened its pace since we
came.  A part of it, at least, ought to arrive at the river to-morrow,
though their cavalry are skirmishing continually on our flanks.  Don't
you hear the rifles?"

Harry heard them far away to right and left, like the faint buzzing of
wasps, but he had heard the same sound so much that it made no
impression upon him.

"Let 'em buzz," he said.  "They're too distant to reach any of us, and
the Army of Northern Virginia is passing on."

Those were precious hours.  Harry knew much, but he did not divine the
full depths of the suspense, suffered by the people beyond the veil
that clothed the two armies.  Lincoln had been continually urging Meade
to pursue and destroy his opponent, and Meade, knowing how formidable
Lee was, and how it had been a matter of touch and go at Gettysburg,
pursued, but not with all the ardor of one sure of triumph.  Yet the
man at the White House hoped continually for victory, and the Southern
people feared that his hopes would come true.

It became sure the next day that they would reach the Potomac before
Meade could attack them in flank, but the scouts brought word that the
Potomac was still a deep and swollen river, impossible to be crossed
unless they could rebuild the bridges.

Finally the whole army came against the Potomac and it seemed to Harry
that its yellow flood had not diminished one particle since he left.
But Lee acted with energy.  Men were set to work at once building a new
bridge near Falling Waters, parts of the ruined pontoon bridges were
recovered, and new boats were built in haste.  But while the workmen
toiled the army went into strong positions along the river between
Williamsport and Hagerstown.

Harry found himself with all of his friends again, and he was proud of
the army's defiant attitude.  Meade and the Army of the Potomac were
not far away, it was said, but the youthful veterans of the South were
entirely willing to fight again.  The older men, however, knew their
danger.  The disproportion of forces would be much greater than at
Gettysburg, and even if they fought a successful defensive action with
their back to the river the Army of the Potomac could bide its time and
await reinforcements.  The North would pour forth its numbers without
stint.

Harry rode to Sherburne with a message of congratulation from General
Lee, who told him that he had selected the possible crossing well, and
that he had shown great skill and valor in holding it until the army
came up. Sherburne's flush of pride showed under his deep tan.

"I did my best," he said to Harry, who knew the contents of the letter,
"and that's all any of us can do."

"But General Lee has a way of inspiring us to do our best."

"It's so, and it's one of the reasons why he's such a great general.
Watch those bridge builders work, Harry!  They're certainly putting
their souls and strength into it."

"And they have need to do so.  The scouts say that the Army of the
Potomac will be before us to-morrow.  Don't you think the river has
fallen somewhat, Colonel?"

"A little but look at those clouds over there, Harry.  As surely as we
sit here it's going to rain.  The rivers were low that we might cross
them on our march into the North, just smoothing our way to Gettysburg,
and now that Gettysburg has happened they're high so we can't get back
to the South.  It looks as if luck were against us."

"But luck has a habit of changing."

Harry rode back to headquarters, whence he was sent with another
dispatch, to Colonel Talbot, whom he found posted well in advance with
the Invincibles.

"This note," said the colonel, "bids us to watch thoroughly.  General
Meade and his army are expected on our front in the morning, and there
must be no chance for a surprise in the night, say a dash by their
cavalry which would cut up our rear guard or vanguard--upon my soul I
don't know which to call it.  Harry, as you can see by the note itself,
you're to remain with us until about midnight, and then make a full
report of all that you and I and the rest of us may have observed upon
this portion of the front or rear, whichever it may be.  Meanwhile we
share with you our humble rations."

Harry was pleased.  He was always glad when chance or purpose brought
him again into the company of the Invincibles.  St. Clair and Langdon
were his oldest comrades of the war, and they were like brothers to
him. His affection for the two colonels was genuine and deep.  If the
two lads were like brothers to him, the colonels were like uncles.

"Is the Northern vanguard anywhere near?" asked Harry.

"Skirmishing is going on only four or five miles away," replied Colonel
Leonidas Talbot.  "It is likely that the sharp shooters will be picking
off one another all through the night, but it will not disturb us. That
is a great curse of war.  It hardens one so for the time being. I'm a
soldier, and I've been one all my life, and I suppose soldiers are
necessary, but I can't get over this feeling.  Isn't it the same way
with you, Hector?"

"Exactly the same, Leonidas," replied Lieutenant-Colonel Hector St.
Hilaire.  "You and I fought together in Mexico, Leonidas, then on the
plains, and now in this gigantic struggle, but under whatever guise
and, wherever it may be, I find its visage always hideous.  I don't
think we soldiers are to blame.  We don't make the wars although we
have to fight 'em."

"Increasing years, Hector, have not dimmed those perceptive faculties
of yours, which I may justly call brilliant."

"Thanks, Leonidas, you and I have always had a proper conception of the
worth of each other."

"If you will pardon me for speaking, sir," said St. Clair, "there is
one man I'd like to find, when this war is over."

"'What is the appearance of this man, Arthur?" asked Colonel Talbot.

"I don't know exactly how he looks, sir, though I've heard of him
often, and I shall certainly know him when I meet him.  You understand,
sir, that, while I've not seen him, he has very remarkable
characteristics of manner."

"And what may those be, Arthur?  Are they so salient that you would
recognize them at once?"

"Certainly, sir.  He has an uncommonly loud voice, which he uses nearly
all the time and without restraint.  Words fairly pour from his tongue.
Facts he scorns.  He soars aloft on the wings of fancy.  Many people
who have listened to him have felt persuaded by his talk, but he is
perhaps not so popular now."

"An extraordinary person, Arthur.  But why are you so anxious to find
him?"

"Because I wish, sir, to lay upon him the hands of violence.  I would
thrash him and beat him until he yelled for mercy, and then I would
thrash him and beat him again.  I should want the original pair of
seven-leagued boots, not that I might make such fast time, but that I
might kick him at a single kick from one county to another, and back,
and then over and over past counting.  I'd duck him in a river until he
gasped for breath, I'd drag him naked through a briar patch, and then
I'd tar and feather him, and ride him on a rail."

"Heavens, Arthur!  I didn't dream that your nature contained so much
cruelty!  Who is this person over whose torture you would gloat like a
red Indian?"

"It is the man who first said that one Southerner could whip five
Yankees."

"Arthur," said Colonel Talbot, "your anger is just and becomes you.
When the war is over, if we all are spared we'll form a group and hunt
this fellow until we find him.  And then, please God, if the gallows of
Haman is still in existence, we'll hang him on it with promptness and
dispatch.  I believe in the due and orderly process of the law, but in
this case lynching is not only justifiable, but it's an honor to the
country."

"Well spoken, Leonidas!  Well spoken!" said Lieutenant-Colonel Hector
St. Hilaire.  "I'm glad that Arthur mentioned the matter, and we'll
bear it in mind.  You can count upon me."

"And here is coffee," said Happy Tom.  "I made this myself, the camp
cook liking me and giving me a chance.  I'd really be a wonderful cook
if I had the proper training, and I may come to it, if we lose the war.
Still, the chance even then is slight, because my father, when red war
showed its edge over the horizon, put all his money in the best British
securities.  So we could do no more than lose the plantation."

"Happy," said Colonel Talbot, gravely rebuking, "I am surprised at your
father.  I thought he was a patriot."

"He is, sir, but he's a financier first, and I may be thankful for it
some day.  I'll venture the prediction right now that if we lose this
war not a single Confederate bill will be in the possession of Thomas
Langdon, Sr.  Others may have bales of it, worth less per pound than
cotton, but not your humble servant's father, who, I sometimes think,
has lots more sense than your humble servant's father's son."

Colonel Leonidas Talbot shook his head slowly.

"Finance is a mystery to me," he said.  "In the dear old South that I
have always known, the law, the army and the church were and are
considered the high callings.  To speak in fine, rounded periods was
considered the great gift.  In my young days, Harry, I went with my
father by stage coach to your own State, Kentucky, to hear that sublime
orator, the great Henry Clay."

"What was he speaking about, sir?" asked Harry.

"I don't remember.  That's not important.  But surely he was the
noblest orator God ever created in His likeness.  His words flowing
like music and to be heard by everybody, even those farthest from the
speaker, made my pulse beat hard, and the blood leap in my veins.  I
was heart and soul for his cause, whatever it was, and, yet I fear me,
though I do not wish to hurt your feelings, Harry, that the state to
which he was such ornament, has not gone for the South with the whole
spirit that she should have shown.  She has not even seceded.  I fear
sometimes that you Kentuckians are not altogether Southern.  You border
upon the North, and stretching as you do a long distance from east to
west and a comparatively short distance from north to south, you thus
face three Northern States across the Ohio--Ohio, Indiana and Illinois,
and the pull of three against one is strong.  You see your position,
don't you? Three Yankee states facing you from the north and only one
Southern state, Tennessee, lying across your whole southern border,
that is three against one.  I fear that these odds have had their
effect, because if Kentucky had sent all of her troops to the South,
instead of two-thirds of them to the North, the war would have been won
by us ere this."

"I admit it," said Harry regretfully.  "My own cousin, who was more
like a brother to me, is fighting on the other side.  Kentucky troops
on the Union side have kept us from winning great victories, and many
of the Union generals are Kentuckians.  I grieve over it, sir, as much
as you do."

"But you and your people should not take too much blame to yourselves,
Harry," said Lieutenant-Colonel Hector St. Hilaire, who had a very soft
heart.  "Think of the many influences to which you were exposed daily.
Think of those three Yankee states sitting there on the other side of
the Ohio--Ohio, Indiana and Illinois--and staring at you so long and so
steadily that, in a way, they exerted a certain hypnotic force upon
you. No, my boy, don't feel badly about it, because the fault, in a
way, is not so much yours as it is that of your neighbors."

"At any rate," said Happy Tom, with his customary boldness and
frankness, "we're bound to admit that the Yankees beat us at making
money."

"Which may be more to our credit than theirs," said Colonel Talbot,
with dignity.  "I have found it more conducive to integrity and a lofty
mind to serve as an officer at a modest salary in the army rather than
to gain riches in trade."

"But somebody has to pay the army, sir."

"Thomas, I regret to tell you that inquiry can be pushed to the point
of vulgarity.  I have been content with things as they were, and so
should you be.  Ah, there are our brave boys singing that noble battle
song of the South!  Listen how it swells!  It shows a spirit
unconquerable!"

Along the great battle front swelled the mighty chorus:

      "Come brothers!  Rally for the right!
       The bravest of the brave
       Sends forth her ringing battle cry
       Beside the Atlantic wave!
       She leads the way in honor's path;
       Come brothers, near and far,
       Come rally round the bonnie blue flag
          That bears a single star."

"A fine song!  A fine song most truly," said Colonel Talbot.  "It
heartens one gloriously!"

But Harry, usually so quick to respond, strangely enough felt
depression. He felt suddenly in all its truth that they had not only
failed in their invasion, but the escape of the army was yet a matter
of great doubt. The mood was only momentary, however, and he joined
with all his heart as the mighty chorus rolled out another verse:

      "Now Georgia marches to the front
       And beside her come
       Her sisters by the Mexique sea
       With pealing trump and drum,
       Till answering back from hill and glen
       The rallying cry afar,
       A Nation hoists the bonnie blue flag
          That bears a single star!"

They sang it all through, and over again, and then, after a little
silence, came the notes of a trumpet from a far-distant point.  It was
played by powerful lungs and the wind was blowing their way but they
heard it distinctly.  It was a quaint syncopated tune, but not one of
the Invincibles had any doubt that it came from some daring detachment
of the Union Army.  The notes with their odd lilt seemed to swell
through the forest, but it was strange to both of the colonels.

"Do any of you know it?" asked Colonel Talbot.

All shook their heads except Harry.

"What is it, Harry?" asked Talbot.

"It's a famous poem, sir, the music of which has not often been heard,
but I can translate from music into words the verse that has just been
played:

      "In their ragged regimentals
       Stood the old Continentals
          Yielding not,
       When the grenadiers were lunging
       And like hail fell the plunging
          Cannon shot;
       When the files of the isles
       From the smoky night encampment
       Bore the banner of the rampant
          Unicorn
       And grummer, grummer,
       Rolled the roll of the drummer,
          Through the morn!"

The bugler played on.  It was the same tune, curious, syncopated and
piercing the night shrilly.  Whole brigades of the South stood in
silence to listen.

"What do you think is its meaning?" asked Lieutenant-Colonel St.
Hilaire.

"It's in answer to our song and at the same time a reproach," replied
Harry, who had jumped at once to the right conclusion.  "The bugler
intends to remind us that the old Continentals who stood so well were
from both North and South, and perhaps he means, too, that we should
stand together again instead of fighting each other."

"Then let the North give up at once," snapped Colonel Talbot.

"But in the trumpeter's opinion that means we should be apart forever."

"Then let him play on to ears that will not heed."

But the bugler was riding away.  The music came faintly, and then died
in one last sighing note.  It left Harry grave and troubled, and he
began to ask himself new questions.  If the South succeeded in forcing
a separation, what then?  But the talk of his comrades drove the
thought from his mind.  Colonel Talbot sent St. Clair, Langdon and a
small party of horsemen forward to see what the close approach of the
daring bugler meant.  Harry went with them.

Scouts in the brushwood quickly told them that a troop of Union cavalry
had appeared in a meadow some distance ahead of them, and that it was
one of their number who had played the song on the bugle.  Should they
stalk the detachment and open fire?  St. Clair, who was in command,
shook his head.

"It would mean nothing now," he said, and rode on with his men, knowing
that the watchful Southern sharpshooters were on their flanks.  It was
night now, and a bright moon was coming out, enabling them to use their
glasses with effect.
