you this evening, in compliance with the request of the committee,
who have thought that my humble efforts would give _eclat_ to the
fair.  I am not a professional reader, but I have ever found pleasure
in reciting the noble productions of our best authors, and I hope to
give you pleasure."

"That'll do, I think," said Fletcher, complacently.  "Now I'll try
The Raven."

In a deep, sepulchral tone, Fletcher read the first verse, which is
quoted below:--

  "Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered weak and weary,
  Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore,
  While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
  As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.
  ''Tis some visitor,' I muttered, 'tapping at my chamber door--
  Only this and nothing more.'"

Was it fancy, or did Fletcher really hear a slow, measured tapping
near him--upon one of the trees, as it seemed?  He started, and
looked nervously; but the noise stopped, and he decided that he had
been deceived, since no one was visible.

The boys within the tree made no other demonstration till Fletcher
had read the following verse:--

  "Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,
  Soon again I heard a tapping, something louder than before.
  'Surely,' said I, 'surely that is something at my window lattice;
  Let me see then what thereat is, and this mystery explore--
  Let my heart be still a moment, and this mystery explore;
  'Tis the wind, and nothing more.'"

Here an indescribable, unearthly noise was heard from the interior of
the tree, like the wailing of some discontented ghost.

"Good  heavens! what's that?" ejaculated Fletcher, turning pale, and
looking nervously around him.

It was growing late, and the branches above him, partially stripped
of their leaves, rustled in the wind.  Fletcher was somewhat nervous,
and the weird character of the poem probably increased this feeling,
and made him very uncomfortable.  He summoned up courage enough,
however, to go on, though his voice shook a little.  He was permitted
to go on without interruption to the end.  Those who are familiar
with the poem, know that it becomes more and more wild and weird as
it draws to the conclusion.  This, with his gloomy surroundings, had
its effect upon the mind of Fletcher.  Scarcely had he uttered the
last words, when a burst of wild and sepulchral laughter was heard
within a few feet of him.  A cry of fear proceeded from Fletcher,
and, clutching his book, he ran at wild speed from the enchanted
spot, not daring to look behind him.  Indeed, he never stopped
running till he passed out of the shadow of the woods, and was well
on his way homeward.

Tom Carver and Hiram crept out from their place of concealment.  They
threw themselves on the ground, and roared with laughter.

"I never had such fun in my life," said Tom.

"Nor I."

"I wonder what Fitz thought."

"That the wood was enchanted, probably; he left in a hurry."

"Yes; he stood not on the order of his going, but went at once."

"I wish I could have seen him.  We must have made a fearful noise."

"I was almost frightened myself.  He must be almost home by this
time."

"When do you think he'll find out about the trick?"

"About the invitation?  Not till he gets a letter from Miss Clinton,
telling him it is all a mistake.  He will be terribly mortified."

Meanwhile Fletcher reached home, tired and out of breath.  His
temporary fear was over, but he was quite at sea as to the cause of
the noises he had heard.  He could not suspect any of his
school-fellows, for no one was visible, nor had he any idea that any
were in the wood at the time.

"I wonder if it was an animal," he reflected.  "It was a fearful
noise.  I must find some other place to practise reading in.  I
wouldn't go to that wood again for fifty dollars."

But Fletcher's readings were not destined to be long continued.  When
he got home from school the next day, he found the following note,
which had been left for him during the forenoon:--


"MR. FITZGERALD FLETCHER,--Dear Sir: I beg to thank you for your kind
proposal to read at our Fair; but I think there must be some mistake
in the matter, as we have never contemplated having any readings, nor
have I written to you on the subject, as you intimate.  I fear that
we shall not have time to spare for such a feature, though, under
other circumstances, it might be attractive.  In behalf of the
committee, I beg to tender thanks for your kind proposal.

  "Yours respectfully,
    "PAULINE CLINTON."

Fletcher read this letter with feelings which can better be imagined
than described.  He had already written home in the most boastful
manner about the invitation he had received, and he knew that before
he could contradict it, it would have been generally reported by his
gratified parents to his city friends.  And now he would be compelled
to explain that he had been duped, besides enduring the jeers of
those who had planned the trick.

This was more than he could endure.  He formed a sudden resolution.
He would feign illness, and go home the next day.  He could let it be
inferred that it was sickness alone which had compelled him to give
up the idea of appearing as a public reader.

Fitz immediately acted upon his decision, and the next day found him
on the way to Boston.  He never returned to the Prescott Academy as a
student.




CHAPTER XXV.

AN INVITATION TO BOSTON.

Harry was doubly glad that he was now in receipt of a moderate
salary.  He welcomed it as an evidence that he was rising in the
estimation of his employer, which was of itself satisfactory, and
also because in his circumstances the money was likely to be useful.

"Five dollars a week!" said Harry to himself.  "Half of that ought to
be enough to pay for my clothes and miscellaneous expenses, and the
rest I will give to father.  It will help him take care of the rest
of the family."

Our hero at once made this proposal by letter.  This is a paragraph
from his father's letter in reply:--


"I am glad, my dear son, to find you so considerate and dutiful, as
your offer indicates.  I have indeed had a hard time in supporting my
family, and have not always been able to give them the comforts I
desired.  Perhaps it is my own fault in part.  I am afraid I have not
the faculty of getting along and making money that many others have.
But I have had an unexpected stroke of good fortune.  Last evening a
letter reached your mother, stating that her cousin Nancy had
recently died at St. Albans, Vermont, and that, in accordance with
her will, your mother is to receive a legacy of four thousand
dollars.  With your mother's consent, one-fourth of this is to be
devoted to the purchase of the ten acres adjoining my little farm,
and the balance will be so invested as to yield us an annual income
of one hundred and eighty dollars.  Many would think this a small
addition to an income, but it will enable us to live much more
comfortably.  You remember the ten-acre lot to the east of us,
belonging to the heirs of Reuben Todd.  It is excellent land, well
adapted for cultivation, and will fully double the value of my farm.

"You see, therefore, my dear son, that a new era of prosperity has
opened for us.  I am now relieved from the care and anxiety which for
years have oppressed me, and feel sure of a comfortable support.
Instead of accepting the half of your salary, I desire you, if
possible, to save it, depositing in some reliable savings
institution.  If you do this every year till you are twenty-one, you
will have a little capital to start you in business, and will be able
to lead a more prosperous career than your father.  Knowing you as
well as I do, I do not feel it necessary to caution you against
unnecessary expenditures.  I will only remind you that extravagance
is comparative, and that what would be only reasonable expenditure
for one richer than yourself would be imprudent in you."


Harry read this letter with great joy.  He was warmly attached to the
little home circle, and the thought that they were comparatively
provided for gave him fresh courage.  He decided to adopt his
father's suggestion, and the very next week deposited three dollars
in the savings bank.

"That is to begin an account," he thought.  "If I can only keep that
up, I shall feel quite rich at the end of a year."

Several weeks rolled by, and Thanksgiving approached.

Harry was toiling at his case one day, when Oscar Vincent entered the
office.

"Hard at work, I see, Harry," he said.

"Yes," said Harry; "I can't afford to be idle."

"I want you to be idle for three days," said Oscar.

Harry looked up in surprise.

"How is that?" he asked.

"You know we have a vacation from Wednesday to Monday at the Academy."

"Over Thanksgiving?"

"Yes."

"Well, I am going home to spend that time, and I want you to go with
me."

"What, to Boston?" asked Harry, startled, for to him, inexperienced
as he was, that seemed a very long journey.

"Yes.  Father and mother gave me permission to invite you.  Shall I
show you the letter?"

"I'll take it for granted, Oscar, but I am afraid I can't go."

"Nonsense!  What's to prevent?"

"In the first place, Mr. Anderson can't spare me."

"Ask him."

"What's that?" asked the editor, hearing his name mentioned.

"I have invited Harry to spend the Thanksgiving vacation with me in
Boston, and he is afraid you can't spare him?"

"Does your father sanction your invitation?"

"Yes, he wrote me this morning--that is, I got the letter this
morning--telling me to ask Harry to come."

Now the country editor had a great respect for the city editor, who
was indeed known by reputation throughout New England as a man of
influence and ability, and he felt disposed to accede to any request
of his.

So he said pleasantly, "Of course, Harry, we shall miss you, but if
Mr. Ferguson is disposed to do a little additional work, we will get
along till Monday.  What do you say, Mr. Ferguson?"

"I shall be very glad to oblige Harry," said the older workman, "and
I hope he will have a good time."

"That settles the question, Harry," said Oscar, joyfully.  "So all
you've got to do is to pack up and be ready to start to-morrow
morning.  It's Tuesday, you know, already."

Harry hesitated, and Oscar observed it.

"Well, what's the matter now?" he said; "out with it."

"I'll tell you, Oscar," said Harry, coloring a little.  "Your father
is a rich man, and lives handsomely.  I haven't any clothes good
enough to wear on a visit to your house."

"Oh, hang your clothes!" said Oscar, impetuously.  "It isn't your
clothes we invite.  It's yourself."

"Still, Oscar--"

"Come, I see you think I am like Fitz Fletcher, after all.  Say you
think me a snob, and done with it."

"But I don't," said Harry, smiling.

"Then don't make any more ridiculous objections.  Don't you think
they are ridiculous, Mr. Ferguson?"

"They wouldn't be in some places," said Ferguson, "but here I think
they are out of place.  I feel sure you are right, and that you value
Harry more than the clothes he wears."

"Well, Harry, do you surrender at discretion?" said Oscar.  "You see
Ferguson is on my side."

"I suppose I shall have to," said Harry, "as long as you are not
ashamed of me."

"None of that, Harry."

"I'll go."

"The first sensible words you've spoken this morning."

"I want to tell you how much I appreciate your kindness, Oscar," said
Harry, earnestly.

"Why shouldn't I be kind to my friend?"

"Even if he was once a printer's devil."

"Very true.  It is a great objection, but still I will overlook it.
By the way, there is one inducement I didn't mention."

"What is that?"

"We may very likely see Fitz in the city.  He is studying at home
now, I hear.  Who knows but he may get up a great party in your
honor?"

"Do you think it likely?" asked Harry, smiling.

"It might not happen to occur to him, I admit.  Still, if we made him
a ceremonious call--"

"I am afraid he might send word that he was not at home."

"That would be a loss to him, no doubt.  However, we will leave time
to settle that question.  Be sure to be on hand in time for the
morning train."

"All right, Oscar."

Harry had all the love of new scenes natural to a boy of sixteen.  He
had heard so much of Boston that he felt a strong curiosity to see
it.  Besides, was not that the city where the "Weekly Standard" was
printed, the paper in which he had already appeared as an author?  In
connection with this, I must here divulge a secret of Harry's.  He
was ambitious not only to contribute to the literary papers, but to
be paid for his contributions.  He judged that essays were not very
marketable, and he had therefore in his leisure moments written a
humorous sketch, entitled "The Tin Pedler's Daughter."  I shall not
give any idea of the plot here; I will only say that it was really
humorous, and did not betray as much of the novice as might have been
expected.  Harry had copied it out in his best hand, and resolved to
carry it to Boston, and offer it in person to the editor of the
"Standard" with an effort, if accepted, to obtain compensation for it.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE VINCENTS AT HOME.

When Harry rather bashfully imparted to Oscar his plans respecting
the manuscript, the latter entered enthusiastically into them, and at
once requested the privilege of reading the story.  Harry awaited his
judgment with some anxiety.

"Why, Harry, this is capital," said Oscar, looking up from the
perusal.

"Do you really think so, Oscar?"

"If I didn't think so, I wouldn't say so."

"I thought you might say so out of friendship."

"I don't say it is the best I ever read, mind you, but I have read a
good many that are worse.  I think you managed the _denouement_
(you're a French scholar, so I'll venture on the word) admirably."

"I only hope the editor of the 'Standard' will think so."

"If he doesn't, there are other papers in Boston; the 'Argus' for
instance."

"I'll try the 'Standard' first, because I have already written for
it."

"All right.  Don't you want me to go to the office with you?"

"I wish you would.  I shall be bashful."

"I am not troubled that way.  Besides, my father's name is well
known, and I'll take care to mention it.  Sometimes influence goes
farther than merit, you know."

"I should like to increase my income by writing for the city papers.
Even if I only made fifty dollars a year, it would all be clear gain."

Harry's desire was natural.  He had no idea how many shared it.
Every editor of a successful weekly could give information on this
subject.  Certainly there is no dearth of aspiring young
writers--Scotts and Shakspeares in embryo--in our country, and if all
that were written for publication succeeded in getting into print,
the world would scarcely contain the books and papers which would
pour in uncounted thousands from the groaning press.

When the two boys arrived in Boston they took a carriage to Oscar's
house.  It was situated on Beacon Street, not far from the Common,--a
handsome brick house with a swell front, such as they used to build
in Boston.  No one of the family was in, and Oscar and Harry went up
at once to the room of the former, which they were to share together.
It was luxuriously furnished, so Harry thought, but then our hero had
been always accustomed to the plainness of a country home.

"Now, old fellow, make yourself at home," said Oscar.  "You can get
yourself up for dinner.  There's water and towels, and a brush."

"I don't expect to look very magnificent," said Harry.  "You must
tell your mother I am from the country."

"I would make you an offer if I dared," said Oscar.

"I am always open to a good offer."

"It's this: I'm one size larger than you, and my last year's suits
are in that wardrobe.  If any will fit you, they are yours."

"Thank you, Oscar," said Harry; "I'll accept your offer to-morrow."

"Why not to-day?"

"You may not understand me, but when I first appear before your
family, I don't want to wear false colors."

"I understand," said Oscar, with instinctive delicacy.

An hour later, the bell rang for dinner.

Harry went down, and was introduced to his friend's mother and
sister.  The former was a true lady, refined and kindly, and her
smile made our hero feel quite at home.

"I am glad to meet you, Mr.  Walton," she said.  "Oscar has spoken of
you frequently."

With Oscar's sister Maud--a beautiful girl two years younger than
himself--Harry felt a little more bashful; but the young lady soon
entered into an animated conversation with him.

"Do you often come to Boston, Mr. Walton?" she asked.

"This is my first visit," said Harry.

"Then I dare say Oscar will play all sorts of tricks upon you.  We
had a cousin visit us from the country, and the poor fellow had a
hard time."

"Yes," said Oscar, laughing, "I used to leave him at a street corner,
and dodge into a doorway.  It was amusing to see his perplexity when
he looked about, and couldn't find me."

"Shall you try that on me?" asked Harry.

"Very likely."

"Then I'll be prepared."

"You might tie him with a rope, Mr. Walton," said Maud, "and keep
