had left home for a boarding-school the morning after I arrived and
returned the day before my departure? If I transformed her to an
angel, it is what every youthful lover does for his mistress. Therein
consists the essence of my story. But slight the change, sweet maids,
to make angels of yourselves.




FANCY'S SHOW-BOX.

A MORALITY.


What is guilt? A stain upon the soul. And it is a point of vast
interest whether the soul may contract such stains in all their depth
and flagrancy from deeds which may have been plotted and resolved
upon, but which physically have never had existence. Must the fleshly
hand and visible frame of man set its seal to the evil designs of the
soul, in order to give them their entire validity against the sinner?
Or, while none but crimes perpetrated are cognizable before an earthly
tribunal, will guilty thoughts--of which guilty deeds are no more than
shadows,--will these draw down the full weight of a condemning
sentence in the supreme court of eternity? In the solitude of a
midnight chamber or in a desert afar from men or in a church while the
body is kneeling the soul may pollute itself even with those crimes
which we are accustomed to deem altogether carnal. If this be true, it
is a fearful truth.

Let us illustrate the subject by an imaginary example. A venerable
gentleman--one Mr. Smith--who had long been regarded as a pattern of
moral excellence was warming his aged blood with a glass or two of
generous wine. His children being gone forth about their worldly
business and his grandchildren at school, he sat alone in a deep
luxurious arm-chair with his feet beneath a richly-carved mahogany
table. Some old people have a dread of solitude, and when better
company may not be had rejoice even to hear the quiet breathing of a
babe asleep upon the carpet. But Mr. Smith, whose silver hair was the
bright symbol of a life unstained except by such spots as are
inseparable from human nature--he had no need of a babe to protect him
by its purity, nor of a grown person to stand between him and his own
soul. Nevertheless, either manhood must converse with age, or
womanhood must soothe him with gentle cares, or infancy must sport
around his chair, or his thoughts will stray into the misty region of
the past and the old man be chill and sad. Wine will not always cheer
him.

Such might have been the case with Mr. Smith, when, through the
brilliant medium of his glass of old Madeira, he beheld three figures
entering the room. These were Fancy, who had assumed the garb and
aspect of an itinerant showman, with a box of pictures on her back;
and Memory, in the likeness of a clerk, with a pen behind her ear, an
inkhorn at her buttonhole and a huge manuscript volume beneath her
arm; and lastly, behind the other two, a person shrouded in a dusky
mantle which concealed both face and form. But Mr. Smith had a shrewd
idea that it was Conscience. How kind of Fancy, Memory and Conscience
to visit the old gentleman just as he was beginning to imagine that
the wine had neither so bright a sparkle nor so excellent a flavor as
when himself and the liquor were less aged! Through the dim length of
the apartment, where crimson curtains muffled the glare of sunshine
and created a rich obscurity, the three guests drew near the
silver-haired old man. Memory, with a finger between the leaves of her
huge volume, placed herself at his right hand; Conscience, with her
face still hidden in the dusky mantle, took her station on the left,
so as to be next his heart; while Fancy set down her picture-box upon
the table with the magnifying-glass convenient to his eye.

We can sketch merely the outlines of two or three out of the many
pictures which at the pulling of a string successively peopled the box
with the semblances of living scenes. One was a moonlight picture, in
the background a lowly dwelling, and in front, partly shadowed by a
tree, yet besprinkled with flakes of radiance, two youthful figures,
male and female. The young man stood with folded arms, a haughty smile
upon his lip and a gleam of triumph in his eye as he glanced downward
at the kneeling girl. She was almost prostrate at his feet, evidently
sinking under a weight of shame and anguish which hardly allowed her
to lift her clasped hands in supplication. Her eyes she could not
lift. But neither her agony, nor the lovely features on which it was
depicted, nor the slender grace of the form which it convulsed,
appeared to soften the obduracy of the young man. He was the
personification of triumphant scorn.

Now, strange to say, as old Mr. Smith peeped through the
magnifying-glass, which made the objects start out from the canvas
with magical deception, he began to recognize the farmhouse, the tree
and both the figures of the picture. The young man in times long past
had often met his gaze within the looking-glass; the girl was the very
image of his first love--his cottage-love, his Martha Burroughs. Mr.
Smith was scandalized. "Oh, vile and slanderous picture!" he exclaims.
"When have I triumphed over ruined innocence? Was not Martha wedded in
her teens to David Tomkins, who won her girlish love and long enjoyed
her affection as a wife? And ever since his death she has lived a
reputable widow!"

Meantime, Memory was turning over the leaves of her volume, rustling
them to and fro with uncertain fingers, until among the earlier pages
she found one which had reference to this picture. She reads it close
to the old gentleman's ear: it is a record merely of sinful thought
which never was embodied in an act, but, while Memory is reading,
Conscience unveils her face and strikes a dagger to the heart of Mr.
Smith. Though not a death-blow, the torture was extreme.

The exhibition proceeded. One after another Fancy displayed her
pictures, all of which appeared to have been painted by some malicious
artist on purpose to vex Mr. Smith. Not a shadow of proof could have
been adduced in any earthly court that he was guilty of the slightest
of those sins which were thus made to stare him in the face. In one
scene there was a table set out, with several bottles and glasses half
filled with wine, which threw back the dull ray of an expiring lamp.
There had been mirth and revelry until the hand of the clock stood
just at midnight, when Murder stepped between the boon-companions. A
young man had fallen on the floor, and lay stone dead with a ghastly
wound crushed into his temple, while over him, with a delirium of
mingled rage and horror in his countenance, stood the youthful
likeness of Mr. Smith. The murdered youth wore the features of Edward
Spencer. "What does this rascal of a painter mean?" cries Mr. Smith,
provoked beyond all patience. "Edward Spencer was my earliest and
dearest friend, true to me as I to him through more than half a
century. Neither I nor any other ever murdered him. Was he not alive
within five years, and did he not, in token of our long friendship,
bequeath me his gold-headed cane and a mourning-ring?"

Again had Memory been turning over her volume, and fixed at length
upon so confused a page that she surely must have scribbled it when
she was tipsy. The purport was, however, that while Mr. Smith and
Edward Spencer were heating their young blood with wine a quarrel had
flashed up between them, and Mr. Smith, in deadly wrath, had flung a
bottle at Spencer's head. True, it missed its aim and merely smashed a
looking-glass; and the next morning, when the incident was imperfectly
remembered, they had shaken hands with a hearty laugh. Yet, again,
while Memory was reading, Conscience unveiled her face, struck a
dagger to the heart of Mr. Smith and quelled his remonstrance with her
iron frown. The pain was quite excruciating.

Some of the pictures had been painted with so doubtful a touch, and
in colors so faint and pale, that the subjects could barely be
conjectured. A dull, semi-transparent mist had been thrown over the
surface of the canvas, into which the figures seemed to vanish while
the eye sought most earnestly to fix them. But in every scene, however
dubiously portrayed, Mr. Smith was invariably haunted by his own
lineaments at various ages as in a dusty mirror. After poring several
minutes over one of these blurred and almost indistinguishable
pictures, he began to see that the painter had intended to represent
him, now in the decline of life, as stripping the clothes from the
backs of three half-starved children. "Really, this puzzles me!" quoth
Mr. Smith, with the irony of conscious rectitude. "Asking pardon of
the painter, I pronounce him a fool as well as a scandalous knave. A
man of my standing in the world to be robbing little children of their
clothes! Ridiculous!"

But while he spoke Memory had searched her fatal volume and found a
page which with her sad calm voice she poured into his ear. It was not
altogether inapplicable to the misty scene. It told how Mr. Smith had
been grievously tempted by many devilish sophistries, on the ground of
a legal quibble, to commence a lawsuit against three orphan-children,
joint-heirs to a considerable estate. Fortunately, before he was quite
decided, his claims had turned out nearly as devoid of law as justice.
As Memory ceased to read Conscience again thrust aside her mantle, and
would have struck her victim with the envenomed dagger only that he
struggled and clasped his hands before his heart. Even then, however,
he sustained an ugly gash.

Why should we follow Fancy through the whole series of those awful
pictures? Painted by an artist of wondrous power and terrible
acquaintance with the secret soul, they embodied the ghosts of all the
never-perpetrated sins that had glided through the lifetime of Mr.
Smith. And could such beings of cloudy fantasy, so near akin to
nothingness, give valid evidence against him at the day of judgment?
Be that the case or not, there is reason to believe that one truly
penitential tear would have washed away each hateful picture and left
the canvas white as snow. But Mr. Smith, at a prick of Conscience too
keen to be endured, bellowed aloud with impatient agony, and suddenly
discovered that his three guests were gone. There he sat alone, a
silver-haired and highly-venerated old man, in the rich gloom of the
crimsoned-curtained room, with no box of pictures on the table, but
only a decanter of most excellent Madeira. Yet his heart still seemed
to fester with the venom of the dagger.

Nevertheless, the unfortunate old gentleman might have argued the
matter with Conscience and alleged many reasons wherefore she should
not smite him so pitilessly. Were we to take up his cause, it should
be somewhat in the following fashion. A scheme of guilt, till it be
put in execution, greatly resembles a train of incidents in a
projected tale. The latter, in order to produce a sense of reality in
the reader's mind, must be conceived with such proportionate strength
by the author as to seem in the glow of fancy more like truth, past,
present or to come, than purely fiction. The prospective sinner, on
the other hand, weaves his plot of crime, but seldom or never feels a
perfect certainty that it will be executed. There is a dreaminess
diffused about his thoughts; in a dream, as it were, he strikes the
death-blow into his victim's heart and starts to find an indelible
blood-stain on his hand. Thus a novel-writer or a dramatist, in
creating a villain of romance and fitting him with evil deeds, and the
villain of actual life in projecting crimes that will be perpetrated,
may almost meet each other halfway between reality and fancy. It is
not until the crime is accomplished that Guilt clenches its gripe upon
the guilty heart and claims it for his own. Then, and not before, sin
is actually felt and acknowledged, and, if unaccompanied by repentance,
grows a thousandfold more virulent by its self-consciousness. Be it
considered, also, that men often overestimate their capacity for evil.
At a distance, while its attendant circumstances do not press upon
their notice and its results are dimly seen, they can bear to
contemplate it. They may take the steps which lead to crime, impelled
by the same sort of mental action as in working out a mathematical
problem, yet be powerless with compunction at the final moment. They
knew not what deed it was that they deemed themselves resolved to do.
In truth, there is no such thing in man's nature as a settled and full
resolve, either for good or evil, except at the very moment of
execution. Let us hope, therefore, that all the dreadful consequences
of sin will not be incurred unless the act have set its seal upon the
thought.

Yet, with the slight fancy-work which we have framed, some sad and
awful truths are interwoven. Man must not disclaim his brotherhood
even with the guiltiest, since, though his hand be clean, his heart
has surely been polluted by the flitting phantoms of iniquity. He must
feel that when he shall knock at the gate of heaven no semblance of an
unspotted life can entitle him to entrance there. Penitence must kneel
and Mercy come from the footstool of the throne, or that golden gate
will never open.




DR. HEIDEGGER'S EXPERIMENT.


That very singular man old Dr. Heidegger once invited four venerable
friends to meet him in his study. There were three white-bearded
gentlemen--Mr. Medbourne, Colonel Killigrew and Mr. Gascoigne--and a
withered gentlewoman whose name was the widow Wycherly. They were all
melancholy old creatures who had been unfortunate in life, and whose
greatest misfortune it was that they were not long ago in their
graves. Mr. Medbourne, in the vigor of his age, had been a prosperous
merchant, but had lost his all by a frantic speculation, and was now
little better than a mendicant. Colonel Killigrew had wasted his best
years and his health and substance in the pursuit of sinful pleasures
which had given birth to a brood of pains, such as the gout and divers
other torments of soul and body. Mr. Gascoigne was a ruined
politician, a man of evil fame--or, at least, had been so till time
had buried him from the knowledge of the present generation and made
him obscure instead of infamous. As for the widow Wycherly, tradition
tells us that she was a great beauty in her day, but for a long while
past she had lived in deep seclusion on account of certain scandalous
stories which had prejudiced the gentry of the town against her. It is
a circumstance worth mentioning that each of these three old
gentlemen--Mr. Medbourne, Colonel Killigrew and Mr. Gascoigne--were
early lovers of the widow Wycherly, and had once been on the point of
cutting each other's throats for her sake. And before proceeding
farther I will merely hint that Dr. Heidegger and all his four guests
were sometimes thought to be a little beside themselves, as is not
infrequently the case with old people when worried either by present
troubles or woeful recollections.

"My dear old friends," said Dr. Heidegger, motioning them to be
seated, "I am desirous of your assistance in one of those little
experiments with which I amuse myself here in my study."

If all stories were true, Dr. Heidegger's study must have been a very
curious place. It was a dim, old-fashioned chamber festooned with
cobwebs and besprinkled with antique dust. Around the walls stood
several oaken bookcases, the lower shelves of which were filled with
rows of gigantic folios and black-letter quartos, and the upper with
little parchment-covered duodecimos. Over the central bookcase was a
bronze bust of Hippocrates, with which, according to some authorities,
Dr. Heidegger was accustomed to hold consultations in all difficult
cases of his practice. In the obscurest corner of the room stood a
tall and narrow oaken closet with its door ajar, within which
doubtfully appeared a skeleton. Between two of the bookcases hung a
looking-glass, presenting its high and dusty plate within a tarnished
gilt frame. Among many wonderful stories related of this mirror, it
was fabled that the spirits of all the doctor's deceased patients
dwelt within its verge and would stare him in the face whenever he
looked thitherward. The opposite side of the chamber was ornamented
with the full-length portrait of a young lady arrayed in the faded
magnificence of silk, satin and brocade, and with a visage as faded as
her dress. Above half a century ago Dr. Heidegger had been on the
point of marriage with this young lady, but, being affected with some
slight disorder, she had swallowed one of her lover's prescriptions
and died on the bridal-evening. The greatest curiosity of the study
remains to be mentioned: it was a ponderous folio volume bound in
black leather, with massive silver clasps. There were no letters on
the back, and nobody could tell the title of the book. But it was well
known to be a book of magic, and once, when a chambermaid had lifted
it merely to brush away the dust, the skeleton had rattled in its
closet, the picture of the young lady had stepped one foot upon the
floor and several ghastly faces had peeped forth from the mirror,
while the brazen head of Hippocrates frowned and said, "Forbear!"

Such was Dr. Heidegger's study. On the summer afternoon of our tale a
small round table as black as ebony stood in the centre of the room,
sustaining a cut-glass vase of beautiful form and elaborate
workmanship. The sunshine came through the window between the heavy
festoons of two faded damask curtains and fell directly across this
vase, so that a mild splendor was reflected from it on the ashen
visages of the five old people who sat around. Four champagne-glasses
were also on the table.

"My dear old friends," repeated Dr. Heidegger, "may I reckon on your
aid in performing an exceedingly curious experiment?"

Now, Dr. Heidegger was a very strange old gentleman whose eccentricity
had become the nucleus for a thousand fantastic stories. Some of these
fables--to my shame be it spoken--might possibly be traced back to
mine own veracious self; and if any passages of the present tale
should startle the reader's faith, I must be content to bear the
stigma of a fiction-monger.

When the doctor's four guests heard him talk of his proposed
experiment, they anticipated nothing more wonderful than the murder of
a mouse in an air-pump or the examination of a cobweb by the
microscope, or some similar nonsense with which he was constantly in
the habit of pestering his intimates. But without waiting for a reply
Dr. Heidegger hobbled across the chamber and returned with the same
ponderous folio bound in black leather which common report affirmed to
be a book of magic. Undoing the silver clasps, he opened the volume
and took from among its black-letter pages a rose, or what was once a
rose, though now the green leaves and crimson petals had assumed one
brownish hue and the ancient flower seemed ready to crumble to dust in
the doctor's hands.

"This rose," said Dr. Heidegger, with a sigh--"this same withered and
crumbling flower--blossomed five and fifty years ago. It was given me
by Sylvia Ward, whose portrait hangs yonder, and I meant to wear it in
my bosom at our wedding. Five and fifty years it has been treasured
between the leaves of this old volume. Now, would you deem it possible
that this rose of half a century could ever bloom again?"

"Nonsense!" said the widow Wycherly, with a peevish toss of her head.
"You might as well ask whether an old woman's wrinkled face could ever
bloom again."

"See!" answered Dr. Heidegger. He uncovered the vase and threw the
faded rose into the water which it contained. At first it lay lightly
on the surface of the fluid, appearing to imbibe none of its moisture.
Soon, however, a singular change began to be visible. The crushed and
dried petals stirred and assumed a deepening tinge of crimson, as if
the flower were reviving from a deathlike slumber, the slender stalk
and twigs of foliage became green, and there was the rose of half a
century, looking as fresh as when Sylvia Ward had first given it to
her lover. It was scarcely full-blown, for some of its delicate red
leaves curled modestly around its moist bosom, within which two or
three dewdrops were sparkling.

"That is certainly a very pretty deception," said the doctor's
friends--carelessly, however, for they had witnessed greater miracles
at a conjurer's show. "Pray, how was it effected?"

"Did you never hear of the Fountain of Youth?" asked Dr. Heidegger,
"which Ponce de Leon, the Spanish adventurer, went in search of two or
three centuries ago?"

"But did Ponce de Leon ever find it?" said the widow Wycherly.

"No," answered Dr. Heidegger, "for he never sought it in the right
place. The famous Fountain of Youth, if I am rightly informed, is
situated in the southern part of the Floridian peninsula, not far from
Lake Macaco. Its source is overshadowed by several gigantic magnolias
which, though numberless centuries old, have been kept as fresh as
violets by the virtues of this wonderful water. An acquaintance of
mine, knowing my curiosity in such matters, has sent me what you see
in the vase."

"Ahem!" said Colonel Killigrew, who believed not a word of the
doctor's story; "and what may be the effect of this fluid on the human
frame?"

"You shall judge for yourself, my dear colonel," replied Dr.
Heidegger.--"And all of you, my respected friends, are welcome to so
much of this admirable fluid as may restore to you the bloom of youth.
For my own part, having had much trouble in growing old, I am in no
hurry to grow young again. With your permission, therefore, I will
merely watch the progress of the experiment."

While he spoke Dr. Heidegger had been filling the four
champagne-glasses with the water of the Fountain of Youth. It was
apparently impregnated with an effervescent gas, for little bubbles
were continually ascending from the depths of the glasses and bursting
in silvery spray at the surface. As the liquor diffused a pleasant
perfume, the old people doubted not that it possessed cordial and
comfortable properties, and, though utter sceptics as to its
rejuvenescent power, they were inclined to swallow it at once. But Dr.
Heidegger besought them to stay a moment.

"Before you drink, my respectable old friends," said he, "it would be
well that, with the experience of a lifetime to direct you, you should
draw up a few general rules for your guidance in passing a second time
through the perils of youth. Think what a sin and shame it would be
if, with your peculiar advantages, you should not become patterns of
virtue and wisdom to all the young people of the age!"

The doctor's four venerable friends made him no answer except by a
feeble and tremulous laugh, so very ridiculous was the idea that,
knowing how closely Repentance treads behind the steps of Error, they
should ever go astray again.

"Drink, then," said the doctor, bowing; "I rejoice that I have so well
selected the subjects of my experiment."

With palsied hands they raised the glasses to their lips. The liquor,
if it really possessed such virtues as Dr. Heidegger imputed to it,
could not have been bestowed on four human beings who needed it more
woefully. They looked as if they had never known what youth or
pleasure was, but had been the offspring of Nature's dotage, and
always the gray, decrepit, sapless, miserable creatures who now sat
stooping round the doctor's table without life enough in their souls
or bodies to be animated even by the prospect of growing young again.
They drank off the water and replaced their glasses on the table.

Assuredly, there was an almost immediate improvement in the aspect of
the party--not unlike what might have been produced by a glass of
generous wine--together with a sudden glow of cheerful sunshine,
brightening over all their visages at once. There was a healthful
suffusion on their cheeks instead of the ashen hue that had made them
look so corpse-like. They gazed at one another, and fancied that some
magic power had really begun to smooth away the deep and sad
inscriptions which Father Time had been so long engraving on their
brows. The widow Wycherly adjusted her cap, for she felt almost like a
woman again.

"Give us more of this wondrous water," cried they, eagerly. "We are
younger, but we are still too old. Quick! give us more!"

"Patience, patience!" quoth Dr. Heidegger, who sat, watching the
experiment with philosophic coolness. "You have been a long time
growing old; surely you might be content to grow young in half an
hour. But the water is at your service." Again he filled their glasses
with the liquor of youth, enough of which still remained in the vase
to turn half the old people in the city to the age of their own
grandchildren.

While the bubbles were yet sparkling on the brim the doctor's four
guests snatched their glasses from the table and swallowed the
contents at a single gulp. Was it delusion? Even while the draught was
passing down their throats it seemed to have wrought a change on their
whole systems. Their eyes grew clear and bright; a dark shade deepened
among their silvery locks: they sat around the table three gentlemen
of middle age and a woman hardly beyond her buxom prime.

"My dear widow, you are charming!" cried Colonel Killigrew, whose eyes
had been fixed upon her face while the shadows of age were flitting
from it like darkness from the crimson daybreak.

The fair widow knew of old that Colonel Killigrew's compliments were
not always measured by sober truth; so she started up and ran to the
mirror, still dreading that the ugly visage of an old woman would meet
her gaze.

Meanwhile, the three gentlemen behaved in such a manner as proved that
the water of the Fountain of Youth possessed some intoxicating
qualities--unless, indeed, their exhilaration of spirits were merely a
lightsome dizziness caused by the sudden removal of the weight of
years. Mr. Gascoigne's mind seemed to run on political topics, but
whether relating to the past, present or future could not easily be
determined, since the same ideas and phrases have been in vogue these
fifty years. Now he rattled forth full-throated sentences about
patriotism, national glory and the people's right; now he muttered
some perilous stuff or other in a sly and doubtful whisper, so
cautiously that even his own conscience could scarcely catch the
secret; and now, again, he spoke in measured accents and a
deeply-deferential tone, as if a royal ear were listening to his
well-turned periods. Colonel Killigrew all this time had been trolling
forth a jolly bottle-song and ringing his glass in symphony with the
chorus, while his eyes wandered toward the buxom figure of the widow
Wycherly. On the other side of the table, Mr. Medbourne was involved
in a calculation of dollars and cents with which was strangely
intermingled a project for supplying the East Indies with ice by
harnessing a team of whales to the polar icebergs. As for the widow
Wycherly, she stood before the mirror courtesying and simpering to her
own image and greeting it as the friend whom she loved better than all
the world besides. She thrust her face close to the glass to see
whether some long-remembered wrinkle or crow's-foot had indeed
vanished; she examined whether the snow had so entirely melted from
her hair that the venerable cap could be safely thrown aside. At last,
turning briskly away, she came with a sort of dancing step to the
table.

"My dear old doctor," cried she, "pray favor me with another glass."

"Certainly, my dear madam--certainly," replied the complaisant doctor.
"See! I have already filled the glasses."

There, in fact, stood the four glasses brimful of this wonderful
water, the delicate spray of which, as it effervesced from the
surface, resembled the tremulous glitter of diamonds.

It was now so nearly sunset that the chamber had grown duskier than
ever, but a mild and moonlike splendor gleamed from within the vase
and rested alike on the four guests and on the doctor's venerable
figure. He sat in a high-backed, elaborately-carved oaken arm-chair
with a gray dignity of aspect that might have well befitted that very
Father Time whose power had never been disputed save by this fortunate
company. Even while quaffing the third draught of the Fountain of
Youth, they were almost awed by the expression of his mysterious
visage. But the next moment the exhilarating gush of young life shot
through their veins. They were now in the happy prime of youth. Age,
with its miserable train of cares and sorrows and diseases, was
remembered only as the trouble of a dream from which they had joyously
awoke. The fresh gloss of the soul, so early lost and without which
the world's successive scenes had been but a gallery of faded
