    You're _nearly crazed to go_.

_Attendant_ is made up of two parts--the stem, _attend_, and the
ending, _ant_ (meaning one who).

The meaning of the word _attendant_ is _one who attends_.

Make out an _analysis_ of the last two lessons, and use it in telling
the story in your own words.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XXXV.


pre sume', _suppose; think without being sure_.

mus'cles, _those parts of the body which give us
  motion, and by which we exert our strength_.

ex tent', _space; distance_.

or'di na ry, _common; usual_.

knowl'edge, _that which is known through study_.

de gree', _measure, as of space or time_.

spent, _used up; exhausted_.

snapped, _broken off_.

de tached', _taken away from_.


       *       *       *       *       *




WHY AN APPLE FALLS.


"Father," said Lucy, "I have been reading to-day that Sir Isaac Newton
was led to make a great discovery, by seeing an apple fall from a tree.
What was there wonderful about the apple falling?"

"Nothing very wonderful in that," replied her father; "but it set him to
thinking of what made it fall."

"Why, I could have told him that," said Lucy; "because the stem snapped
and there was nothing to support it."

"And what then?" asked her father.

"Why, then, of course it must fall."

"Ah!" said her father, "that is the point: why must it fall?"

"I am sure I don't know," said Lucy. "I presume it was because there was
nothing to keep it up."

"Well, Lucy, suppose there was not--does it follow that it must come to
the ground?"

"Yes, certainly," replied Lucy, wonderingly.

"Let us see," said her father; "but first answer this question: What is
an animate object?"

"Any thing that has animal life, and power to move at will," replied
Lucy.

"Very good," said her father; "now, what is an inanimate object?"

"Any thing that does not possess animal life, or can not move at will."

"Very good again," said her father. "Now an apple is, of course, an
inanimate object; and therefore it could not move itself, and Sir Isaac
Newton thought that he would try to find out what power moved it."

"Well, then," said Lucy; "did he find that the apple fell, because it
was forced to fall?"

"Yes," replied her father; "he found that there was some force outside
of the apple itself that acted upon it, otherwise it would have remained
forever where it was, no matter if it were detached from the tree."

"Would it, indeed?" asked Lucy.

"Yes, without doubt," replied her father, "for there are only two ways
in which it could be moved--by its own power of motion, or the power of
something else moving it. Now the first power, you know it does not
have; so the cause of its motion must be the second."

"But every thing falls to the ground as well as an apple, when there is
nothing to keep it up," said Lucy.

"True. There must therefore be some power or force which causes things
to fall," said her father.

"And what is it?" asked Lucy.

"If things away from the earth can not move themselves to it," said her
father, "there can be no other cause of their falling than that the
earth pulls them."

"But," said Lucy, "the earth is no more animate than they are; so how
can it pull?"

"That is not an ordinary question, but I will try an explanation," said
her father. "Sir Isaac Newton discovered that there was a law in nature
called attraction, and that all bodies exert this force upon each
other. The greater the body, the greater is its power of attraction.

"Now, the earth is an immense mass of matter, with which nothing near it
can compare in size. It draws therefore with mighty force all things
within its reach, which is the cause of their falling. Do you understand
this?"

"I think that I do," said Lucy; "the earth is like a great magnet."

"Yes," said her father; "but the attraction of the magnet is of a
particular kind and is only over iron, while the attraction of the earth
acts upon every thing alike."

"Then it is pulling you and me at this moment!" said Lucy.

"Certainly it is," replied her father; "and as I am the larger, it is
pulling me with more force than it is pulling you. This attraction is
what gives every thing weight.

"If I lift up any thing, I am acting against this force, for which
reason the article seems heavy; and the more matter it contains, the
greater is the force of attraction and the heavier it appears to me."

"Then," said Lucy, "if this attraction is so powerful, why do we not
stick to the ground?"

"Because," replied her father, "we are animate beings, and have the
power of motion, by which, to a limited degree, we overcome the
attraction of the earth."

"Well then, father," said Lucy, "if our power of motion can overcome the
attraction, why can not we jump a mile high as well as a foot?"

"Because," replied her father, "as I said before, we can only overcome
the attraction to a certain extent. As soon as the force our muscles
give to the jump is spent, the attraction of the earth pulls us back."

"Did Sir Isaac Newton think of all these things, because he saw the
apple fall?" inquired Lucy.

"Yes; of all these and many more. He was a man of great knowledge. The
name by which the force he discovered is generally known, is the
Attraction of Gravitation, and some time you will learn how this force
keeps the earth, and the sun, moon, and stars, all in their places."


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XXXVI.


en'vy, _wish one's self in another's place_.

doffed, _took off, as an article of dress_.

blithe, _very happy; gay_.

fee, _what is received as pay for service done_.

boast, _object of pride_.

quoth, _spoke_.

hale, _in good health; strong_.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE MILLER OF THE DEE.


  There dwelt a miller, hale and bold,
    Beside the river Dee;
  He worked and sang from morn till night--
    No lark so blithe as he;
  And this the burden of his song
    Forever used to be:
  "I envy nobody--no, not I,
    And nobody envies me!"

  "Thou'rt wrong, my friend," said good King Hal;
    "As wrong as wrong can be;
  For could my heart be light as thine,
    I'd gladly change with thee.
  And tell me now, what makes thee sing,
    With voice so loud and free.
  While I am sad, though I'm a king,
    Beside the river Dee?"

  The miller smiled and doffed his cap:
    "I earn my bread," quoth he;
  "I love my wife, I love my friend,
    I love my children three;
  I owe no penny I can not pay;
    I thank the river Dee,
  That turns the mill that grinds the corn
    That feeds my babes and me."

  "Good friend," said Hal, and sighed the while,
    "Farewell! and happy be!
  But say no more, if thou'dst be true,
    That no one envies thee.
  Thy mealy cap is worth my crown;
    Thy mill, my kingdom's fee;
  Such men as thou are England's boast,
    O miller of the Dee!"


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--In the second stanza of the lesson, _wrong_
becomes very _emphatic_ on account of _repetition_ (being repeated a
number of times). _My_ and _thine_, in the same stanza, are
_emphatic_ on account of _contrast_ (contrary meaning of the words).

Point out an example of _emphasis_ by _repetition_, and an example
of _emphasis_ by _contrast_, in the third stanza.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Hal = Harry = Henry.

Let pupils place _un_ before each of the following words, and give
their meaning.

    changed    burdened    envied


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XXXVII.


fero'cious, _savage; fierce_.

rosette', _an article made to resemble a rose_.

aban'doned, _left forever; given up_.

encoun'ter, _meet face to face_.

in'fluence, _power over others_.

keen, _sharp; piercing_.

reputa'tion, _what is known of a person_.

wit'ness, _see or know by personal presence_.

trail, _track; footsteps_.

alert', _on the watch; careful_.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE JAGUAR.


The jaguar, or as he is sometimes called, the American tiger, is the
largest and most ferocious of the cat family found on this continent.

Some jaguars have been seen equal in size to the Asiatic tiger; but in
most cases the American, animal is smaller. He is strong enough,
however, to drag a horse or an ox to his den--sometimes to a long
distance; and this feat has been frequently observed.

The jaguar is found in all the tropical parts of North and South
America.

While he bears a considerable likeness to the tiger, both in shape and
habits, the markings of his skin are quite different. Instead of being
striped like the tiger, the skin of the jaguar is beautifully spotted.

Each spot resembles a rosette, and consists of a black ring with a
single dark-colored spot in the middle.

Jaguars are not always of the same color; some have skins of an orange
color, and these are the most beautiful. Others are lighter colored; and
some few have been seen that were very nearly white.

There, is a "black jaguar," which is thought to be of a different
species. It is larger and fiercer than the other kinds, and is found
only in South America.

This animal is more dreaded by the inhabitants than the other kinds and
is said always to attack man wherever it may encounter him. All the
other beasts fear it.

Its roar produces terror and confusion among them and causes them to
flee in every direction. It is never heard by the natives without a
feeling of fear, and no wonder; for a year does not pass without a
number of these people falling victims to its ferocity.

It is difficult for one living in a country where such fierce animals
are unknown, to believe that they have an influence over man, to such
an extent as to prevent his settling in a particular place; yet such is
the fact.

In many parts of South America, not only plantations, but whole
villages, have been abandoned solely from fear of the jaguars.

There are men, however, who can deal single-handed with the jaguar; and
who do not fear to attack the brute in its own haunts.

They do not trust to fire-arms, but to a sharp spear. On their left arm
they carry a strong shield.

This shield is held forward and is usually seized by the jaguar. While
it is busied with this, the hunter thrusts at the animal with his sharp
spear, and generally with deadly effect.

A traveler in South America relates the following incident as having
come under his observation:

"Desiring to witness a jaguar hunt, I employed two well-known Indian
hunters, and set out for the forest. The names of these hunters were
Nino and Guapo. Both of them had long been accustomed to hunt the
jaguar, and I felt perfectly safe in their company.

"Guapo, the larger of the two, was a man of wonderful muscular power,
and had the reputation of having at one time killed a black jaguar with
only a stout club.

"When all the preparations had been made for our start, we looked as if
we might capture all the jaguars that came in our way.

"Some hours after we had entered the forest, the quick eye of Guapo
discovered the trail of a large jaguar which he assured me was recently
made.

"Stopping for a moment, both Guapo and Nino looked carefully about in
every direction, and listened attentively, in order that they might see
or hear the animal if he were near.

"Then motioning me to follow at a little distance behind them, they
stepped off quietly in the direction of the trail, Guapo being about
thirty feet in advance of Nino.

"We went forward in this manner several hundred yards, not a word being
spoken, and the keen eyes of both the hunters constantly on the alert.

"Guapo, in the meantime, who seemed to have no fear and became more and
more excited as he approached to where he thought the animal must be,
had increased the distance between himself and Nino considerably.

[Illustration]

"Suddenly a terrific roar, and at the same time a cry of pain and a
shout, warned us that Guapo had met the jaguar.

"Nino bounded forward, and I followed as quickly as I could. A fearful
sight met our eyes!

"The jaguar, which had been hiding in the branches of a large tree, had
sprung down upon Guapo and fastened its terrible teeth in his thigh.

"With a shout filled with fury and determination, Nino at once sprung
forward and savagely attacked the beast with his spear.

"This caused the jaguar to let go its hold of Guapo, who, made furious
from the pain of the wound the animal had given him, turned, and with
his spear attacked it with a mad ferocity as savage as that of the
beast itself.

"In a moment all was over, and the jaguar lay dead at our feet. I
dressed Guapo's wound the best I could, while Nino took the skin from
the body of the animal, which proved to be nearly eight feet long.

"We returned very slowly to the village with the wounded man and our
prize. In a few weeks Guapo had entirely recovered from his wounds, and
was ready for another hunt."


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Let pupils pronounce in concert, and singly,
the following words: _O, most, ferocious, only, whole, hold, slowly,
over, both, roar_.

What tone of voice should be used in reading this lesson?


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Place _re_ before each of the following words, and
then give the meaning of each.

    turned    told    join    capture    call


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XXXVIII.


dikes, _high banks of earth_.

