
For some moments the hermit was silent, then in a constrained voice he
said slowly--

"Because revenge burns fiercely in my breast. I have striven to crush
it, but cannot. I fear to meet him lest I kill him."

"Has he, then, done you such foul wrong?"

"Ay, he has cruelly--fiendishly--done the worst he could. He robbed me
of my only child--but I may not talk of it. The unholy desire for
vengeance burns more fiercely when I talk. 'Vengeance is mine, saith the
Lord.' My constant prayer is that I may not meet him. Good-night."

As the hermit thus put an abrupt end to the conversation he lay down and
drew his blanket over him. Nigel followed his example, wondering at what
he had heard, and in a few minutes their steady regular breathing told
that they were both asleep. Then Baderoon advanced and counted the
bamboo planks from the side towards the centre of the house. When
looking between the heads of the people he had counted the same planks
above. Standing under one he looked up, listened intently for a few
seconds, and drew his kriss. The place was almost pitch dark, yet the
blade caught a faint gleam from without, which it reflected on the
pirate's face as he thrust the long keen weapon swiftly, yet
deliberately, between the bamboos.

A shriek, that filled those who heard it with a thrill of horror, rang
out on the silent night. At the same moment a gush of warm blood poured
over the murderer's face before he could leap aside. Instant uproar and
confusion burst out in the neighbourhood, and spread like wildfire until
the whole town was aroused. When a light was procured and the people
crowded into the hut where the strangers lay, Van der Kemp was found on
his knees holding the hand of poor Babu, who was at his last gasp. A
faint smile, that yet seemed to have something of gladness in it,
flitted across his pale face as he raised himself, grasped the hermit's
hand and pressed it to his lips. Then the fearful drain of blood took
effect and he fell back--dead.

One great convulsive sob burst from the hermit as he leaped up, drew his
knife, and, with a fierce glare in his blue eyes, rushed out of the
room.

Vengeance would indeed have been wreaked on Baderoon at that moment if
the hermit had caught him, but, as might have been expected, the
murderer was nowhere to be found. He was hid in the impenetrable jungle,
which it was useless to enter in the darkness of night. When daybreak
enabled the townspeople to undertake an organised search, no trace of
him could be discovered.

Flight, personal safety, formed no part of the pirate's plan. The guilty
man had reached that state of depravity which, especially among the
natives of that region, borders close on insanity. While the inhabitants
of the village were hunting far a-field for him, Baderoon lay concealed
among some lumber in rear of a hut awaiting his opportunity. It was not
very long of coming.

Towards afternoon the various searching parties began to return, and all
assembled in the market-place, where the chief man, with the hermit and
his party, were assembled discussing the situation.

"I will not now proceed until we have buried poor Babu," said Van der
Kemp. "Besides, Baderoon will be sure to return. I will meet him now."

"I do not agree viz you, mine frond," said the professor. "Zee man is
not a fool zough he is a villain. He knows vat avaits him if he comes."

"He will not come openly," returned the hermit, "but he will not now
rest till he has killed me."

Even as he spoke a loud shouting, mingled with shrieks and yells, was
heard at the other end of the main street. The sounds of uproar appeared
to approach, and soon a crowd of people was seen rushing towards the
market-place, uttering cries of fear in which the word "a-mok" was
heard. At the sound of that word numbers of people--specially women and
children--turned and fled from the scene, but many of the men stood
their ground, and all of them drew their krisses. Among the latter of
course were the white men and their native companions.

We have already referred to that strange madness, to which the Malays
seem to be peculiarly liable, during the paroxysms of which those
affected by it rush in blind fury among their fellows, slaying right and
left. From the terrified appearance of some of the approaching crowd and
the maniac shouts in rear, it was evident that a man thus possessed of
the spirit of amok was venting his fury on them.

Another minute and he drew near, brandishing a kriss that dripped with
the gore of those whom he had already stabbed. Catching sight of the
white men he made straight for them. He was possessed of only one eye,
but that one seemed to concentrate and flash forth the fire of a dozen
eyes, while his dishevelled hair and blood-stained face and person gave
him an appalling aspect.

"It is Baderoon!" said Van der Kemp in a subdued but stern tone.

Nigel, who stood next to him, glanced at the hermit. His face was deadly
pale; his eyes gleamed with a strange, almost unearthly light, and his
lips were firmly compressed. With a sudden nervous motion, unlike his
usually calm demeanour, he drew his long knife, and to Nigel's surprise
cast it away from him. At that moment a woman who came in the madman's
way was stabbed by him to the heart and rent the air with her dying
shriek as she fell. No one could have saved her, the act was so quickly
done. Van der Kemp would have leaped to her rescue, but it was too late;
besides, there was no need to do so now, for the maniac, recognising
his enemy, rushed at him with a shout that sounded like a triumphant
yell. Seeing this, and that his friend stood unarmed, as well as
unmoved, regarding Baderoon with a fixed gaze, Nigel stepped a pace in
advance to protect him, but Van der Kemp seized his arm and thrust him
violently aside. Next moment the pirate was upon him with uplifted
knife, but the hermit caught his wrist, and with a heave worthy of
Samson hurled him to the ground, where he lay for a moment quite
stunned.

Before he could recover, the natives, who had up to this moment held
back, sprang upon the fallen man with revengeful yells, and a dozen
knives were about to be buried in his breast when the hermit sprang
forward to protect his enemy from their fury. But the man whose wife had
been the last victim came up at the moment, and led an irresistible rush
which bore back the hermit as well as his comrades, who had crowded
round him, and in another minute the maniac was almost hacked to pieces.

"I did not kill him--thank God!" muttered Van der Kemp as he left the
market-place, where the relatives of those who had been murdered were
wailing over their dead.

After this event even the professor was anxious to leave the place, so
that early next morning the party resumed their journey, intending to
make a short stay at the next village. Failing to reach it that night,
however, they were compelled to encamp in the woods. Fortunately they
came upon a hill which, although not very high, was sufficiently so,
with the aid of watch-fires, to protect them from tigers. From the
summit, which rose just above the tree-tops, they had a magnificent view
of the forest. Many of the trees were crowned with flowers among which
the setting sun shone for a brief space with glorious effulgence.

Van der Kemp and Nigel stood together apart from the others,
contemplating the wonderful scene.

"What must be the dwelling-place of the Creator Himself when his
footstool is so grand?" said the hermit in a low voice.

"That is beyond mortal ken," said Nigel.

"True--true. Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor mind conceived it.
Yet, methinks, the glory of the terrestrial was meant to raise our souls
to the contemplation of the celestial."

"And yet how signally it has failed in the case of Baderoon," returned
Nigel, with a furtive glance at the hermit, whose countenance had quite
recovered its look of quiet simple dignity. "Would it be presumptuous if
I were to ask why it is that this pirate had such bitter enmity against
you?"

"It is no secret," answered the hermit, in a sad tone. "The truth is, I
had discovered some of his nefarious plans, and more than once have been
the means of preventing his intended deeds of violence--as in the case
of the Dyaks whom we have so lately visited. Besides, the man had done
me irreparable injury, and it is one of the curious facts of human
experience that sometimes those who injure us hate us because they have
done so."

"May I venture to ask for a fuller account of the injury he did you?"
said Nigel with some hesitancy.

For some moments the hermit did not answer. He was evidently struggling
with some suppressed feeling. Turning a look full upon his young friend,
he at length spoke in a low sad voice--

"I have never mentioned my grief to mortal man since that day when it
pleased God to draw a cloud of thickest darkness over my life. But,
Nigel, there is that in you which encourages confidence. I confess that
more than once I have been tempted to tell you of my grief--for human
hearts crave intelligent sympathy. My faithful servant and friend Moses
is, no doubt, intensely sympathetic, but--but--well, I cannot
understand, still less can I explain, why I shrink from making a
confidant of him. Certainly it is not because of his colour, for I hold
that the _souls_ of men are colourless!

"I need not trouble you with the story of my early life," continued the
hermit. "I lost my dear wife a year after our marriage, and was left
with a little girl whose lovely face became more and more like that of
her mother every day she lived. My soul was wrapped up in the child.
After three years I went with her as a passenger to Batavia. On the way
we were attacked by a couple of pirate junks. Baderoon was the pirate
captain. He killed many of our men, took some of us prisoners, sank the
vessel, seized my child, and was about to separate us, putting my child
into one junk while I was retained, bound, in the other."

He paused, and gazed over the glowing tree-tops into the golden horizon,
with a longing, wistful look. At the same time something like an
electric shock passed through Nigel's frame, for was not this narrative
strangely similar in its main features to that which his own father had
told him on the Keeling Islands about beautiful little Kathleen Holbein
and her father? He was on the point of seizing the hermit by the hand
and telling him what he knew, when the thought occurred that attacks by
pirates were common enough in those seas, that other fathers might have
lost daughters in this way, and that, perhaps, his suspicion might be
wrong. It would be a terrible thing, he thought, to raise hope in his
poor friend's breast unless he were pretty sure of the hope being well
founded. He would wait and hear more. He had just come to this
conclusion, and managed to subdue the feelings which had been aroused,
when Van der Kemp turned to him again, and continued his narrative--

"I know not how it was, unless the Lord gave me strength for a purpose
as he gave it to Samson of old, but when I recovered from the stinging
blow I had received, and saw the junk hoist her sails and heard my child
scream, I felt the strength of a lion come over me; I burst the bonds
that held me and leaped into the sea, intending to swim to her. But it
was otherwise ordained. A breeze which had sprung up freshened, and the
junk soon left me far behind. As for the other junk, I never saw it
again, for I never looked back or thought of it--only, as I left it, I
heard a mocking laugh from the one-eyed villain, who, I afterwards found
out, owned and commanded both junks."

Nigel had no doubt now, but the agitation of his feelings still kept him
silent.

"Need I say," continued the hermit, "that revenge burned fiercely in my
breast from that day forward? If I had met the man soon after that, I
should certainly have slain him. But God mercifully forbade it. Since
then He has opened my eyes to see the Crucified One who prayed for His
enemies. And up till now I have prayed most earnestly that Baderoon and
I might _not_ meet. My prayer has not been answered in the way I
wished, but a _better_ answer has been granted, for the sin of revenge
was overcome within me before we met."

Van der Kemp paused again.

"Go on," said Nigel, eagerly. "How did you escape?"

"Escape! Where was I--Oh! I remember," said the hermit, awaking as if
out of a dream "Well, I swam after the junk until it was out of sight,
and then I swam on in silent despair until so completely exhausted that
I felt consciousness leaving me. Then I knew that the end must be near
and I felt almost glad; but when I began to sink, the natural desire to
prolong life revived, and I struggled on. Just as my strength began a
second time to fail, I struck against something. It was a dead cocoa-nut
tree. I laid hold of it and clung to it all that night. Next morning I
was picked up by some fishermen who were going to Telok Betong by the
outer passage round Sebesi Island, and were willing to land me there.
But as my business connections had been chiefly with the town of Anjer,
I begged of them to land me on the island of Krakatoa. This they did,
and it has been my home ever since. I have been there many years."

"Have you never seen or heard of your daughter since?" asked Nigel
eagerly, and with deep sympathy.

"Never--I have travelled far and near, all over the archipelago; into
the interior of the islands, great and small, but have failed to find
her. I have long since felt that she must be dead--for--for she could
not live with the monsters who stole her away."

A certain contraction of the mouth, as he said this, and a gleam of the
eyes, suggested to Nigel that revenge was not yet dead within the
hermit's breast, although it had been overcome.

"What was her name?" asked Nigel, willing to gain time to think how he
ought to act, and being afraid of the effect that the sudden
communication of the news might have on his friend.

"Winnie--darling Winnie--after her mother," said the hermit with deep
pathos in his tone.

A feeling of disappointment came over our hero. Winnie bore not the most
distant resemblance to Kathleen!

"Did you ever, during your search," asked Nigel slowly, "visit the
Cocos-Keeling Islands?"

"Never. They are too far from where the attack on us was made."

"And you never heard of a gun-boat having captured a pirate junk
and----"

"Why do you ask, and why pause?" said the hermit, looking at his friend
in some surprise.

Nigel felt that he had almost gone too far.

"Well, you know--" he replied in some confusion, "you--you are right
when you expect me to sympathise with your great sorrow, which I do most
profoundly, and--and--in short, I would give anything to be able to
suggest hope to you, my friend. Men should _never_ give way to despair."

"Thank you. It is kindly meant," returned the hermit, looking at the
youth with his sad smile. "But it is vain. Hope is dead now."

They were interrupted at this point by the announcement that supper was
ready. At the same time the sun sank, like the hermit's hope, and
disappeared beyond the dark forest.




CHAPTER XX.

NIGEL MAKES A CONFIDANT OF MOSES--UNDERTAKES A LONELY WATCH AND SEES
SOMETHING WONDERFUL.


It was not much supper that Nigel Roy ate that night. The excitement
resulting from his supposed discovery reduced his appetite seriously,
and the intense desire to open a safety-valve in the way of confidential
talk with some one induced a nervously absent disposition which at last
attracted attention.

"You vant a goot dose of kvinine," remarked Verkimier, when, having
satiated himself, he found time to think of others--not that the
professor was selfish by any means, only he was addicted to
concentration of mind on all work in hand, inclusive of feeding.

The hermit paid no attention to anything that was said. His recent
conversation had given vent to a flood of memories and feelings that had
been pent up for many years.

After supper Nigel resolved to make a confidant of Moses. The negro's
fidelity to and love for his master would ensure his sympathy at least,
if not wise counsel.

"Moses," he said, when the professor had raised himself to the seventh
heaven by means of tobacco fumes, "come with me. I want to have a talk."

"Das what I's allers wantin', Massa Nadgel; talkin's my strong point if
I hab a strong point at all."

They went together to the edge of a cliff on the hill-top, whence they
could see an almost illimitable stretch of tropical wilderness bathed in
a glorious flood of moonlight, and sat down.

On a neighbouring cliff, which was crowned with a mass of grasses and
shrubs, a small monkey also sat down, on a fallen branch, and watched
them with pathetic interest, tempered, it would seem, by cutaneous
irritation.

"Moses, I am sorely in need of advice," said Nigel, turning suddenly to
his companion with ill-suppressed excitement.

"Well, Massa Nadgel, you _does_ look like it, but I'm sorry I ain't a
doctor. Pra'ps de purfesser would help you better nor me."

"You misunderstand me. Can you keep a secret, Moses?"

"I kin try--if--if he's not too diffikilt to keep."

"Well, then; listen."

The negro opened his eyes and his mouth as if these were the chief
orifices for the entrance of sound, and advanced an ear. The distant
monkey, observing, apparently, that some unusual communication was about
to be made, also stretched out its little head, cocked an ear, and
suspended its other operations.

Then, in low earnest tones, Nigel told Moses of his belief that Van der
Kemp's daughter might yet be alive and well, and detailed the recent
conversation he had had with his master.

"Now, Moses; what d' ye think of all that?"

Profundity unfathomable sat on the negro's sable brow as he replied,
"Massa Nadgel, I don't bery well know _what_ to t'ink."

"But remember, Moses, before we go further, that I tell you all this in
strict confidence; not a word of it must pass your lips."

The awful solemnity with which Nigel sought to impress this on his
companion was absolutely trifling compared with the expression of that
companion's countenance, as, with a long-drawn argumentative and
remonstrative _Oh!_ he replied:--"Massa--Nadgel. Does you really t'ink I
would say or do any mortal t'ing w'atsumiver as would injure _my_
massa?"

"I'm _sure_, you would not," returned Nigel, quickly. "Forgive me,
Moses, I merely meant that you would have to be very cautious--very
careful--that you do not let a word slip--by accident, you know. I
believe you'd sooner die than do an intentional injury to Van der Kemp.
If I thought you capable of _that_, I think I would relieve my feelings
by giving you a good thrashing."

The listening monkey cocked its ear a little higher at this, and Moses,
who had at first raised his flat nose indignantly in the air, gradually
lowered it, while a benignant smile supplanted indignation.

"You're right dere, Massa Nadgel. I'd die a t'ousand times sooner dan
injure massa. As to your last obserwation, it rouses two idees in my
mind. First, I wonder how you'd manidge to gib me a t'rashin', an'
second, I wonder if your own moder would rikognise you arter you'd tried
it."

At this the monkey turned its other ear as if to make quite sure that it
heard aright. Nigel laughed shortly.

"But seriously, Moses," he continued; "what do you think I should do?
Should I reveal my suspicions to Van der Kemp?"

"Cer'nly not!" answered the negro with prompt decision. "What! wake up
all his old hopes to hab 'em all dashed to bits p'raps when you find dat
you's wrong!"

"But I feel absolutely certain that I'm _not_ wrong!" returned Nigel,
excitedly. "Consider--there is, first, the one-eyed pirate; second,
there is--"

"'Scuse me, Massa Nadgel, dere's no occasion to go all ober it again.
I'll tell you what you do."

"Well?" exclaimed Nigel, anxiously, while his companion frowned savagely
under the force of the thoughts that surged through his brain.

"Here's what you'll do," said Moses.

"Well?" (impatiently, as the negro paused.)

"We're on our way home to Krakatoa."

"Yes--well?"

"One ob our men leabes us to-morrer--goes to 'is home on de coast. Kitch
one ob de steamers dat's allers due about dis time."

"Well, what of that?"

"What ob dat! why, you'll write a letter to your fadder. It'll go by de
steamer to Batavia. He gits it long before we gits home, so dere's
plenty time for 'im to take haction."

"But what good will writing to my father do?" asked Nigel in a somewhat
disappointed tone. "_He_ can't help us."

"Ho yes, he can," said Moses with a self-satisfied nod. "See here, I'll
tell you what to write. You begin, 'Dear fadder--or Dearest fadder--I's
not quite sure ob de strengt' ob your affection. P'raps de safest
way--."

"Oh! get on, Moses. Never mind that."

"Ho! it's all bery well for you to say dat, but de ole gen'leman'll mind
it. Hows'ever, put it as you t'ink best--'Dear fadder, victual your
ship; up anchor; hois' de sails, an' steer for de Cocos-Keelin' Islands.
Go ashore; git hold ob de young 'ooman called Kat'leen Hobbleben--'"

"Holbein, Moses."

"What! is she Moses too?"

"No, no! get on, man."

"Well, 'Dearest fadder, git a hold ob her, whateber her name is, an'
carry her off body and soul, an' whateber else b'longs to her. Take her
to de town ob Anjer an' wait dere for furder orders.' Ob course for de
windin' up o' de letter you must appeal agin to de state ob your
affections, for, as--"

"Not a bad idea," exclaimed Nigel. "Why, Moses, you're a genius! Of
course I'll have to explain a little more fully."

"'Splain what you please," said Moses. "My business is to gib you de
bones ob de letter; yours--bein' a scholar--is to clove it wid flesh."

"I'll do it, Moses, at once."

"I should like," rejoined Moses, with a tooth-and-gum-disclosing smile,
"to see your fadder when he gits dat letter!"

The picture conjured up by his vivid imagination caused the negro to
give way to an explosive laugh that sent the eavesdropping monkey like a
brown thunderbolt into the recesses of its native jungle, while Nigel
went off to write and despatch the important letter.

Next day the party arrived at another village, where, the report of
their approach having preceded them, they were received with much
ceremony--all the more that the professor's power with the rifle had
been made known, and that the neighbourhood was infested by tigers.

There can be little doubt that at this part of the journey the
travellers must have been dogged all the way by tigers, and it was
matter for surprise that so small a party should not have been molested.
Possibly the reason was that these huge members of the feline race were
afraid of white faces, being unaccustomed to them, or, perchance, the
appearance and vigorous stride of even a few stalwart and fearless men
had intimidated them. Whatever the cause, the party reached the village
without seeing a single tiger, though their footprints were observed in
many places.

The wild scenery became more and more beautiful as this village was
neared.

Although flowers as a rule were small and inconspicuous in many parts of
the great forest through which they passed, the rich pink and scarlet of
many of the opening leaves, and the autumn-tinted foliage which lasts
through all seasons of the year, fully made up for the want of them--at
least as regards colour, while the whole vegetation was intermingled in
