scarcer. The owner of the house did not care to spend more than a very
limited sum of money on coals and food. There was nothing in the cottage
for Mrs. Church's supper except a bit of stale cake, a hunch of brown
bread, and a little tea. The tea would have to be drunk without milk,
and with only a modicum of brown sugar, for Mrs. Church was determined
to spend no money, if possible, until Mrs. Hopkins paid the debt which
had been due on the previous day. It was one thing, therefore, for Mrs.
Church's debtors to eat good roast beef and good boiled pork and good
apple-pudding, but it was another thing for Mrs. Church to tolerate it.
She fixed her eyes now on Susy in a very meaning way. Susy had never
appealed to the old lady's fancy, and she appealed less than ever
to-day.

"Come right over here, little girl," said Mrs. Church, waving a thin arm
and motioning Susy to approach.

Susy Hopkins, remembering her blouse and her proud position as a member
of the Cabinet of the Queen of the Wild Irish Girls, felt for a moment
inclined to disobey; but Mrs. Church had a certain power about her, and
she impelled Susy to come forward.

"Stand just in front of me," she said, "and let me look at you. My word!
I never did see a more elegant figure. Don't you think that you are
something like a peacock--fine above and ugly below?"

"No, I don't, Aunt Church," said Susy.

"Tut, tut, child! Don't give me any of your sauce, but just answer a
straight question. Where did you get that bodice? It is singularly fine
for a little girl like you. Where did you get it?"

"I don't think it is any business of yours, Aunt Church."

"Susy!" said her mother in a voice of terror. "Don't talk like that. You
know very well you mustn't be rude to Aunt Church.--Don't mind her,
aunt; she is a very naughty girl."

"I am not, mother," said Susy; "and it's awfully unkind of you to say
it of me. I am not a bit rude. But it is not Aunt Church's affair. I
didn't steal the blouse; I came by it honestly, and it wasn't bought out
of any of Aunt Church's money."

"That remains to be proved," said Mrs. Church. "Susan Hopkins, I don't
like you nor your ways. When I was young I knew a little girl, and you
remind me of her. She had a face summat like yours, no way pretty, but
what you'd call boastful and conceited; and she thought a sight of
herself, and put on gay dress that she had no call to wear. She strutted
about among the neighbors, and they said, 'Fine feathers make fine
birds,' and laughed at her past bearing. But she didn't mind, because
she was a little girl that was meant to go to the bad--and she did. She
learned to be a thief, and she broke her mother's heart, and she was
locked up in prison. In prison she had to wear the ugly convict-dress
with the broad-arrow stamped on all her clothes. Afterwards, when she
came out again, her poor mother had died, and her grandmother likewise;
and her brother, who was the moral image of Tom there, wouldn't receive
her in his house. I haven't heard of her for a long time back, but most
likely she died in the work-house. Well, Susan, you may take my little
story for what it is worth, and much good may it do you."

"I think you are very rude indeed, Aunt Church," said Susy. "I don't see
that I'm bound to submit to your ugly, cruel words. I like this blouse,
and I'll wear it whenever I wish."

"Oh, hoity-toity!" said the old lady; "impudent as well as everything
else. That I should live to see it!--Mary Hopkins, can it be convenient
to you to let me have the remainder of my hundred pounds? There wasn't
any contract but that I could demand it whenever I wanted it, and it is
about convenient to me that I should have it back now. You owe me
between thirty and forty pounds, and I'd like, I will say, to see the
color of my money. It can't be at all ill-convenient to you to give it
to me when you can afford blouses of that quality for your impudent
young daughter. Real lace, forsooth! I know it when I see it. We'll say
Wednesday week to receive the money, and I will come over in my
bath-chair, drawn by Tom, to take it; and I will give Tom a whole
shilling for himself the day I get it back. That will be quite
convenient to you, Mary Hopkins, won't it?"

"Susy," said poor Mrs. Hopkins, "for goodness' sake, leave the
room.--Aunt Church, you know perfectly well that I am not responsible
for the naughty ways of that naughty little girl. It's apologize to you
she shall, and that before you leave this house. And you know that if
you press me now to return the money in full I'll have to sell up the
shop, and the children won't have anything to eat, and we'll all be
ruined. You wouldn't be as cruel as that to your own flesh and blood,
would you?"

"Well, Mary, I only said it to frighten you. I ain't at all a cruel
woman. On the contrary, I am kind-hearted; but I can't stand the sauce
of that little girl of yours. It's my opinion, Mary, that the lost money
of yours is on the back of your Susan, and the sooner you get her to
confess her sin the better it will be for us all."

Now, before Mrs. Hopkins had time to utter a word with regard to this
preposterous and appalling suggestion of Aunt Church's, there came a
loud knock on the little street-door, and, listening in the parlor, the
people within could distinctly hear the rustle of silk petticoats.

"Who in the world can that be?" said Mrs. Hopkins.

Tom turned first red and then white, and rushed into the passage. Susy,
who had been crying in the shop, also appeared on the scene.

"I'll open the door," said Tom. "Do wipe your eyes, Susy; don't let her
see you crying. It's herself, of course."

The knocker was just going to be applied to the door again, when Tom
opened it with a flourish, and there stood, waiting on the steps, a very
brilliant apparition. This was no less a person than Miss Kathleen
O'Hara, in her Sunday best.

Now, Kathleen tried to bear with Mrs. Tennant's advice with regard to
her clothes in the week, but on Sundays she was absolutely determined
that her love of finery should find full vent. Accordingly, from her
store of rich and beautiful garments, she chose the gayest and the most
likely to attract attention. On the present occasion she wore a crimson
velvet toque. Her jacket was bright blue, and she had a skirt to match.
On her neck she wore a rich necklet of flaming beads, which was
extremely becoming to her; and thrown carelessly round her neck and
shoulders was a boa of white fur, and she had a muff to match.
Altogether her radiant dress and radiant face were quite sufficient to
dazzle Tom. But Susy pushed past Tom and held out her hand.

"Oh, Kathleen," she said, "I am glad you have come. You'd best come into
the shop with me; there's company in the parlor, and I don't think you'd
care about it."

Kathleen, of course, was just as pleased to stay in the shop with Susy
as to go into any other part of the house; but just then Mrs. Hopkins
put a sad, distressed face outside the door, and Mrs. Church's voice was
heard in high and grating accents:

"I want to see the person who is talking in the passage."

"Oh! don't go in," said Susy. "It's Aunt Church, and she's dreadful."

"An old lady?" cried Kathleen. "I love old ladies."

She pushed past Susy and made her appearance in the parlor.

Now, Mrs. Church was a person of discernment. She strongly objected to
gay dress on the person of little Susy Hopkins; but, as she expressed
it, she knew the quality. Had she not lived all her earlier days as
housekeeper to a widowed nobleman? Could she ever forget the fine folk
she helped to prepare for in his house? Now, Kathleen, standing in the
tiny room, had a certain look of wealth and distinction about her. Mrs.
Church seemed to sniff the fine quality air in a moment; she even
managed to rise from her chair and drop a little curtsy.

"If it weren't for the rheumatics," she said, "I wouldn't make so bold
as to sit before you, miss."

"But why shouldn't you? I'm sorry you suffer from rheumatism. May I
bring a chair and come and sit near you? Are you Mrs. Hopkins--Susy
Hopkins's mother?"

"Indeed, my dear, I'm truly thankful to say I am not. And what may your
name be, my sweet young lady?"

"Kathleen O'Hara."

"Oh, dear, but it's a mouthful."

"I'm not English," said Kathleen; "I'm Irish. Do you know, in our
country we have old ladies something like you. A good many of them have
dresses like you; and they live in little cottages, and we bring them up
to the castle and give them good food very, very often. There are twelve
of them, and they all live in their tiny cottages close to each other.
We make a great fuss about them. They love to come to the castle for
tea."

"The castle!" said Mrs. Church, more and more impressed. "I should
think they would like it. Who wouldn't like it? It's a very great honor
for an old lady to be entertained to her tea in a castle. And so you
live in a castle, my bonny young lady?"

"Yes; my father owns Carrigrohane Castle."

"Eh, love! it is a mouthful of a word for me to get round my lips. But
never mind; it is but to look at you to see how beautiful and good you
are."

"And you are beautiful, too," said Kathleen. "I mean, you are beautiful
for an old lady. I love the beauty of the old. But I want to see Mrs.
Hopkins, and I want to see Susy. Susy is a great friend of mine."

Mrs. Church opened her eyes very wide; her mouth formed itself into a
round O. An eager exclamation was about to burst from her lips, but she
restrained herself.

"And a very good little girl Susan Hopkins is," she said, after a
moment's pause; "and a particularly great friend of mine, being, so to
speak, my grand-niece.--Mary, my dear, call your little girl in."

Mrs. Hopkins, in some trepidation, crossed the room and called to Susy,
who was still sulking in the shop.

"My visitor and all," she kept saying. "And I wanted to have her all to
myself; I had such a lot to say to her. I never saw anybody quite so
horrible as Aunt Church is to-day."

"Never mind, Susy; never mind," said her mother. "The young lady is
pleasing your aunt like anything, and she has sent for you."

"Come along in, Susan, this minute," called out Mrs. Church. "Come, my
pet, and let's have a little talk."

"Go, Susy, and be quick about it," said her mother.

By the aid of Tom and Mrs. Hopkins, who pushed Susy from behind, she
was induced to re-enter the little parlor. There, indeed, all things had
changed. Kathleen called to her, made room for her on the same chair,
and held her hand. Mrs. Church glanced from one to the other. Only too
well did she see the difference between them. One was a rather plain
little girl, the daughter of her own relation; the other was a lady,
beautiful, stately, and magnificently dressed.

"I know her kind," thought Aunt Church. "I have aired beds for quality
of that sort, and I have watched them when they danced in the big
ballroom, and watched them, too, when their sweethearts came along, and
seen--oh, yes, many, many things have I seen, and many, many things have
I heard of those fair young ladies of quality. She belongs to them, and
she likes that good-for-nothing, pert little Susy Hopkins! Yet it don't
matter to me. Susy shall have my good graces if she has secured those of
Miss Kathleen O'Hara."

Accordingly, Mrs. Church changed her tactics. She praised Susy in
honeyed words to the visitor.

"A good little girl, miss, and deserving of anything that those who are
better off can do for her. She is a great help to her mother.--Mary
Hopkins, come nigh, dear. You are very fond of your Susy, aren't you?"

"Of course I am," said Mrs. Hopkins in an affectionate voice.

Susy longed to keep up her anger, but she could not. She was soon
smiling and flushing.

"And what a neat little bodice my Susy is wearing!" said Mrs. Church.
"And bought with her own hard-earned savings. You wouldn't think so,
would you, miss?"

"It gives her great credit," said Kathleen in a calm voice. "I like
people to wear smart clothes, don't you, Mrs. Church? If you lived on
our estate, I would dress you myself. I love to see our old ladies gaily
dressed. On Christmas Day they come to the castle and have dinner as
well as tea. It is wonderful how smart they look."

"They are very lucky ladies--very lucky," said Mrs. Church. "They don't
wear old bombazine like this, do they?"

"Your dress suits you very well, indeed," said Kathleen; "but my old
ladies wear velveteen dresses. They save them, of course. We don't want
them to be extravagant; but they always come up to the castle in
velveteen dresses, with white caps, and white collars round their necks;
and they look very nice. They have a happy time."

"I am sure they have, miss."

"Yes, they have a very happy time. They want for nothing. There was an
old lady belonging to our house who left a certain sum of money, and the
old ladies get it between them. They get six shillings a week each, and
a dear little house to live in. We are obliged to supply them with as
much coal as they want, and candles, and a new pair of blankets on the
first of every November, and a bale of unbleached calico on the first of
May. You can't think how comfortable they are. And then, of course, we
throw in a lot of extra things--the black velveteen dresses, and other
garments of the same quality."

"It must be a wonderful place to live in. Is it very difficult to get
into one of these houses, missy?"

"I don't know. Would you like to come?"

"That I would."

"I'll write to father and ask him if you may."

"Miss, it would be wonderful."

"You'd be very picturesque amongst them," said Kathleen, gazing at Mrs.
Church with a critical eye. "And you'd have so much to tell them;
because all the rest are Irish, and they have never gone beyond their
own country. But you have seen such a lot of life, haven't you?"

"Miss, I can't express all the tales I could tell. I lived with the
quality for so long. I lived with Lord Henshel until he died; I was
housekeeper there. Oh, I could tell them lots of things."

"It would be very nice if you came over; and I am almost sure there is a
cottage vacant," said Kathleen in a contemplative voice. "It seems
unfair to give the cottages entirely to Irish people. We might have one
English old lady. You would enjoy it; you'd have such a lovely view! And
you might keep your own little pig if you liked."

Mrs. Church was not enamored with the idea of keeping a pig.

"Perhaps fowls would do as well," she said. "I have a great fancy for
birds, and I am fond of new-laid eggs."

"Fowls will do just as well," said Kathleen, rising now carelessly from
her seat. "Well, Mrs. Church, I will write to father and let you know if
there is a vacancy; and you could come back with me in the summer,
couldn't you?"

"Oh, miss, it would be heaven!"

"Can't we go out and have a walk now, Susy?" said Kathleen, who found
the small parlor a little too close for her taste.

Susy rushed upstairs, put on her outdoor jacket and a cheap hat, and,
trying to hide the holes in her gloves, ran downstairs. Kathleen,
however, was the last girl to notice any want in her companion's
wardrobe. She had all her life been so abundantly supplied with clothes
that, although she loved to array herself in fine garments, the want of
them in others never attracted her attention.

"Susy," she said the moment they got out of doors, "what is the matter
with Ruth Craven?"

"With Ruth Craven?" said Susy, who was by no means inclined to waste her
time over such an uninteresting person.

"Yes. You must go to her house; you must insist on seeing her, and you
must find out and let me know what is wrong. She has written me a most
mysterious letter; she has actually asked me to let her withdraw from
our society. Ruth, of all people!"

"It is very queer of her," said Susy, "not to be grateful and pleased,
for she is no better than the rest of us."

"No better than the rest of you, Susy?" said Kathleen, raising her brows
in surprise. "But indeed you are mistaken. The rest of you are not a
patch on her. She is my Prime Minister. I can't allow her to resign."

"Oh, well," said Susy, "if you think of her in that way--"

"Of course I think of her in that way, Susy. I like you very much, and I
want to be kind to everybody; but to compare you or Mary Rand or Rosy
Myers, or any of the others, with Ruth Craven--"

"But she is no better."

"She is a great deal better. She is refined and beautiful. She mustn't
go; I can't allow it. But she has written me such a queer letter, and
implored and besought of me not to come to see her, that I am forced to
accede to her wishes. So you will have to go to her to-night and tell
her that she must meet me on my way to school to-morrow. Tell her that I
will go a bit of the way towards her house; tell her that I will be at
the White Cross Corner at a quarter to nine. You needn't say more. Oh,
Susy, it would break my heart if Ruth did not continue to be a member of
our society."

"I will do what you want, of course," said Susy. "I'd do anything in the
world for you, Kathleen. It was so kind of you to come to see us this
afternoon. You will keep your promise and come and have tea with us,
won't you?"

"I am very sorry, but I am afraid I can't. I do wish I had a home of my
own, and then I'd ask you to have tea with me. But, Susy, how funnily
you were dressed to-day, now that I come to think of it! You did look
odd. That blouse is too smart for the coarse blue serge skirt you were
wearing."

"I know it is; but I can't afford a better skirt. Mother is rather
worried about money just now. I know I oughtn't to tell you, but she is.
And, do you know, before you came in Aunt Church was so horrid. She got
quite dreadful about the blouse, and she tried to make out that I had
stolen the money from mother to buy it. Wasn't it awful of her? I can
tell you it was a blessing when you came in. You changed her altogether.
What did you do to her?"

"Well," said Kathleen, "I rather like old ladies, and she struck me as
something picturesque."

"She's a horrid old thing, and not a bit picturesque. I hate her like
poison."

"That is very wrong of you, Susy. Some day you will get old yourself,
and you won't like people to hate you."

"Well, that's a long way off; I needn't worry about it yet," cried Susy.
"I do hate her very much indeed. And then, you know, when you appeared
she began to butter me up like anything. I hated that the worst of all."

"I am sorry she is that sort of old lady," said Kathleen after a pause;
"but I have promised to try and get her into one of our almshouses. It
would be rare fun to have her there."

"But she is not a bit poor. She oughtn't to go into an almshouse if she
is rich," said Susy.

"Of course she mustn't go into an almshouse if she is rich; but she
doesn't look rich."

"She is quite rich. I think she has saved three hundred pounds. You must
call that rich."

"I'm afraid I don't," said Kathleen.

Susy was silent for a moment.

"There are so many different views about riches," she said at last. "I
am glad you are so tremendously rich that you think nothing of three
hundred pounds. Mother and I often sigh and pine even for _one_ pound.
For instance, now--But I mustn't tell you; it would not be right.
