let the idea that we have a picnic here run away with you. We've got to
watch an' watch an' fight an' fight all the time, an' every day more
Mexicans will come."

"I understand, Mr. Crockett," said Ned. "You know that we may never get
out of here alive, and I know it, too."

"You speak truth, lad," said Crockett, very soberly. "But remember that
it's a chance we take every day here in the southwest. An' it's pleasant
to know that they're all brave men here together. You haven't seen any
flinchin' on the part of anybody an' I don't think you ever will."

"What are you going to do now?" asked Ned.

"I'm goin' to eat dinner, an' after that I'll take a nap. My advice to
you is to do the same, 'cause you'll be on watch to-night."

"I know I can eat," said Ned, "and I'll try to sleep."

He found that his appetite was all right, and after dinner he lay down
in the long room of the hospital. Here he heard the cannon of Santa Anna
still thundering, but the walls softened the sound somewhat and made it
seem much more distant. In a way it was soothing and Ned, although sure
that he could not sleep, slept. All that afternoon he was rocked into
deeper slumber by the continuous roar of the Mexican guns. Smoke floated
over the convent yard and through all the buildings, but it did not
disturb him. Now and then a flash of rifle fire came from the Texans on
the walls, but that did not disturb him, either.

Nature was paying its debt. The boy lying on his blankets breathed
deeply and regularly as he slept. The hours of the afternoon passed one
by one, and it was dark when he awoke. The fire of the cannon had now
ceased and two or three lights were burning in the hospital. Crockett
was already up, and with some of the other men was eating beefsteak at a
table.

"You said you'd try to sleep, Ned," he exclaimed, "an' you must have
made a big try, 'cause you snored so loud we couldn't hear Santa Anna's
cannon."

"Why, I'm sure I don't snore, Mr. Crockett," said Ned, red in the face.

"No, you don't snore, I'll take that back," said Davy Crockett, when the
laugh subsided, "but I never saw a young man sleep more beautifully an'
skillfully. Why, the risin' an' fallin' of your chest was as reg'lar as
the tickin' of a clock."

Ned joined them at the table. He did not mind the jests of those men, as
they did not mind the jests of one another. They were now like close
blood-kin. They were a band of brethren, bound together by the
unbreakable tie of mortal danger.

Ned spent two-thirds of the night on the church wall. The Mexicans let
the cannon rest in the darkness, and only a few rifle shots were fired.
But there were many lights in San Antonio, and on the outskirts two
great bonfires burned. Santa Anna and his generals, feeling that their
prey could not escape from the trap, and caring little for the peons who
had been slain, were making a festival. It is even said that Santa Anna
on this campaign, although he left a wife in the city of Mexico,
exercised the privileges of an Oriental ruler and married another amid
great rejoicings.

Ned slept soundly when his watch was finished, and he awoke again the
next day to the thunder of the cannonade, which continued almost without
cessation throughout the day, but in the afternoon Travis wrote a
letter, a noble appeal to the people of Texas for help. He stated that
they had been under a continual bombardment for more than twenty-four
hours, but not a man had yet been hurt. "I shall never surrender or
retreat," he said. "Then I call on you in the name of liberty, of
patriotism, and of everything dear to the American character, to come to
our aid with all dispatch." He closed with the three words, "Victory or
death," not written in any vainglory or with any melodramatic appeal,
but with the full consciousness of the desperate crisis, and a quiet
resolution to do as he said.

The heroic letter is now in the possession of the State of Texas. Most
of the men in the Alamo knew its contents, and they approved of it. When
it was fully dark Travis gave it to Albert Martin. Then he looked around
for another messenger.

"Two should go together in case of mishap," he said.

His eye fell upon Ned.

"If you wish to go I will send you," he said, "but I leave it to your
choice. If you prefer to stay, you stay."

Ned's first impulse was to go. He might find Obed White, Will Allen and
the Panther out there and bring them back with him, but his second
impulse told him that it was only a chance, and he would abide with
Crockett and Bowie.

"I thank you for the offer, but I think, sir, that I'll stay," he said.

He saw Crockett give him a swift approving glance. Another was quickly
chosen in his stead, and Ned was in the grand plaza when they dropped
over the low wall and disappeared in the darkness. His comrades and he
listened attentively a long time, but as they heard no sound of shots
they were sure that they were now safe beyond the Mexican lines.

"I don't want to discourage anybody," said Bowie, "but I'm not hoping
much from the messengers. The Texans are scattered too widely."

"No, they can't bring many," said Crockett, "but every man counts.
Sometimes it takes mighty little to turn the tale, and they may turn
it."

"I hope so," said Bowie.

The Mexican cannon were silent that night and Ned slept deeply, awaking
only when the dawn of a clear day came. He was astonished at the
quickness with which he grew used to a state of siege and imminent
danger. All the habits of life now went on as usual. He ate breakfast
with as good an appetite as if he had been out on the prairie with his
friends, and he talked with his new comrades as if Santa Anna and his
army were a thousand miles away.

But when he did go upon the church wall he saw that Santa Anna had begun
work again and at a new place. The Mexican general, having seen that his
artillery was doing no damage, was making a great effort to get within
much closer range where the balls would count. Men protected by heavy
planking or advancing along trenches were seeking to erect a battery
within less than three hundred yards of the entrance to the main plaza.
They had already thrown up a part of a breastwork. Meanwhile the Texan
sharpshooters were waiting for a chance.

Ned took no part in it except that of a spectator. But Crockett, Bowie
and a dozen others were crouched on the wall with their rifles.
Presently an incautious Mexican showed above the earthwork. It was
Crockett who slew him, but Bowie took the next. Then the other rifles
flashed fast, eight or ten Mexicans were slain, and the rest fled. Once
more the deadly Texan rifles had triumphed.

Ned wondered why Santa Anna had endeavored to place the battery there in
the daytime. It could be done at night, when it was impossible for the
Texans to aim their rifles so well. He did not know that the pride of
Santa Anna, unable to brook delay in the face of so small a force, had
pushed him forward.

Knowing now what might be done at night, Ned passed the day in anxiety,
and with the coming of the twilight his anxiety increased.




CHAPTER X

CROCKETT AND BOWIE


Unluckily for the Texans, the night was the darkest of the month. No
bonfires burned in San Antonio, and there were no sounds of music. It
seemed to Ned that the silence and darkness were sure indications of
action on the part of the foe.

He felt more lonely and depressed than at any other time hitherto in the
siege, and he was glad when Crockett and a young Tennesseean whom he
called the Bee-Hunter joined him. Crockett had not lost any of his
whimsical good humor, and when Ned suggested that Santa Anna was likely
to profit by the dark he replied:

"If he is the general I take him to be he will, or at least try, but
meanwhile we'll just wait, an' look, an' listen. That's the way to find
out if things are goin' to happen. Don't turn little troubles into big
ones. You don't need a cowskin for a calf. We'll jest rest easy. I'm
mighty nigh old enough to be your grandfather, Ned, an' I've learned to
take things as they come. I guess men of my age were talkin' this same
way five thousand years ago."

"You've seen a lot in your life, Mr. Crockett," said Ned, to whom the
Tennesseean was a great hero.

Crockett laughed low, but deep in his throat, and with much pleasure.

"So I have! So I have!" he replied, "an', by the blue blazes, I can say
it without braggin'. I've seen a lot of water go by since I was runnin'
'roun' a bare-footed boy in Tennessee. I've ranged pretty far from east
to west, an' all the way from Boston in the north to this old mission,
an' that must be some thousands of miles. An' I've had some big times in
New York, too."

"You've been in New York," said Ned, with quick interest. "It must be a
great town."

"It is. It's certainly a bulger of a place. There are thousands an'
thousands of houses, an' you can't count the sails in the bay. I saw the
City Hall an' it's a mighty fine buildin', too. It's all marble on the
side looking south, an' plain stone on the side lookin' north. I asked
why, an' they said all the poor people lived to the north of it. That's
the way things often happen, Ned. An' I saw the great, big hotel John
Jacob Astor was beginnin' to build on Broadway just below the City Hall.
They said it would cost seven hundred thousand dollars, which is an
all-fired lot of money, that it would cover mighty nigh a whole block,
an' that there would be nothin' else in America comin' up to it."

"I'd like to see that town," said Ned.

"Maybe you will some day," said Crockett, "'cause you're young. You
don't know how young you look to me. I heard a lot there, Ned, about
that rich man, Mr. Astor. He got his start as a fur trader. I guess he
was about the biggest fur trader that ever was. He was so active that
all them animals that wore furs on their backs concluded they might as
well give up. I heard one story there about an otter an' a beaver
talkin'. Says the otter to the beaver, when he was tellin' the beaver
good-by after a visit: 'Farewell, I never expect to see you again, my
dear old friend.' 'Don't be too much distressed,' replies the beaver,
'you an' I, old comrade, will soon meet at the hat store.'"

Ned and the Bee-Hunter laughed, and Crockett delved again into his past
life and his experiences in the great city, relatively as great then to
the whole country as it is now.

"I saw a heap of New York," he continued, "an' one of the things I liked
best in it was the theaters. Lad, I saw the great Fanny Kemble play
there, an' she shorely was one of the finest women that ever walked this
troubled earth. I saw her first as Portia in that play of Shakespeare's
called, called, called----"

"'The Merchant of Venice,'" suggested Ned.

"Yes, that's it, 'The Merchant of Venice,' where she was the woman
lawyer. She was fine to see, an' the way she could change her voice an'
looks was clean mirac'lous. If ever I need a lawyer I want her to act
for me. She had me mad, an' then she had me laughin', an' then she had
the water startin' in my eyes. Whatever she wanted me to see I saw, an'
whatever she wanted me to think I thought. An' then, too, she was many
kinds of a woman, different in turn. In fact, Ned, she was just like a
handsome piece of changeable silk--first one color an' then another, but
always clean."

He paused and the others did not interrupt him.

"I don't like cities," he resumed presently. "They crowd me up too much,
but I do like the theater. It makes you see so many things an' so many
kinds of people that you wouldn't have time to see if you had to travel
for 'em. We don't have much chance to travel right now, do we,
Bee-Hunter?"

"A few hundred yards only for our bodies," replied the young
Tennesseean, "but our spirits soar far;

    "'Up with your banner, Freedom,
       Thy champions cling to thee,
    They'll follow where'er you lead them
       To death or victory.
    Up with your banner, Freedom.'"

He merely hummed the words, but Ned caught his spirit and he repeated to
himself: "Up with your banner, Freedom."

"I guess you've heard enough tales from an old fellow like me," said
Crockett. "At least you won't have time to hear any more 'cause the
Mexicans must be moving out there. Do you hear anything, Ned?"

"Nothing but a little wind."

"Then my ears must be deceivin' me. I've used 'em such a long time that
I guess they feel they've got a right to trick me once in a while."

But Ned was thinking just then of the great city which he wanted to see
some day as Crockett had seen it. But it seemed to him at that moment as
far away as the moon. Would his comrades and he ever escape from those
walls?

His mind came back with a jerk. He did hear something on the plain.
Crockett was right. He heard the tread of horses and the sound of wheels
moving. He called the attention of Crockett to the noises.

"I think I know what causes them," said Crockett. "Santa Anna is
planting his battery under the cover of the night an' I don't see, boys,
how we're goin' to keep him from doin' it."

The best of the Texan sharpshooters lined the walls, and they fired
occasionally at indistinct and flitting figures, but they were quite
certain that they did no execution. The darkness was too great. Travis,
Bowie and Crockett considered the possibility of a sortie, but they
decided that it had no chance of success. The few score Texans would be
overwhelmed in the open plain by the thousands of Mexicans.

But all the leaders were uneasy. If the Mexican batteries were brought
much closer, and were protected by earthworks and other fortifications,
the Alamo would be much less defensible. It was decided to send another
messenger for help, and Ned saw Bonham drop over the rear wall and slip
away in the darkness. He was to go to Goliad, where Fannin had 300 men
and four guns, and bring them in haste.

When Bonham was gone Ned returned to his place on the wall. For hours he
heard the noises without, the distant sound of voices, the heavy clank
of metal against metal, and he knew full well that Santa Anna was
planting his batteries. At last he went to his place in the long room of
the hospital and slept.

When dawn came he sprang up and rushed to the wall. There was the
battery of Santa Anna only three hundred yards from the entrance to the
main plaza and to the southeast, but little further away, was another.
The Mexicans had worked well during the night.

"They're creepin' closer, Ned. They're creepin' closer," said Crockett,
who had come to the wall before him, "but even at that range I don't
think their cannon will do us much harm. Duck, boy, duck! They're goin'
to fire!"

The two batteries opened at the same time, and the Mexican masses in the
rear, out of range, began a tremendous cheering. Many of the balls and
shells now fell inside the mission, but the Texans stayed well under
cover and they still escaped without harm. The Mexican gunners, in their
turn, kept so well protected that the Texan riflemen had little chance.

The great bombardment lasted an hour, but when it ceased, and the smoke
lifted, Ned saw a heavy mass of Mexican cavalry on the eastern road.

Both Ned and Crockett took a long look at the cavalry, a fine body of
men, some carrying lances and others muskets. Ned believed that he
recognized Urrea in the figure of their leader, but the distance was too
great for certainty. But when he spoke of it to Crockett the Tenesseean
borrowed Travis' field glasses.

"Take these," he said, "an' if it's that beloved enemy of yours you can
soon tell."

The boy, with the aid of the glasses, recognized Urrea at once. The
young leader in the uniform of a Mexican captain and with a cocked and
plumed hat upon his head sat his horse haughtily. Ned knew that he was
swelling with pride and that he, like Santa Anna, expected the trap to
shut down on the little band of Texans in a day or two. He felt some
bitterness that fate should have done so much for Urrea.

"I judge by your face," said Crockett whimsically, "that it is Urrea.
But remember, Ned, that you can still be hated and live long."

"It is indeed Urrea," said Ned. "Now what are they gathering cavalry out
there for? They can't expect to gallop over our walls."

"Guess they've an idea that we're goin' to try to slip out an' they're
shuttin' up that road of escape. Seems to me, Ned, they're comin' so
close that it's an insult to us."

"They're almost within rifle shot."

"Then these bad little Mexican boys must have their faces scorched as a
lesson. Just you wait here, Ned, till I have a talk with Travis an'
Bowie."

It was obvious to Ned that Crockett's talk with the commander and his
second was satisfactory, because when he returned his face was in a
broad grin. Bowie, moreover, came with him, and his blue eyes were
lighted up with the fire of battle.

"We're goin' to teach 'em the lesson, Ned, beginnin' with a b c," said
Crockett, "an' Jim here, who has had a lot of experience in Texas, will
lead us. Come along, I'll watch over you."

A force of seventy or eighty was formed quickly, and hidden from the
view of the Mexicans, they rushed down the plaza, climbed the low walls
and dropped down upon the plain. The Mexican cavalry outnumbered them
four or five to one, but the Texans cared little for such odds.

"Now, boys, up with your rifles!" cried Bowie. "Pump it into 'em!"

Bowie was a product of the border, hard and desperate, a man of many
fierce encounters, but throughout the siege he had been singularly
gentle and considerate in his dealings with his brother Texans. Now he
was all warrior again, his eyes blazing with blue fire while he shouted
vehement words of command to his men.

The sudden appearance of the Texan riflemen outside the Alamo look Urrea
by surprise, but he was quick of perception and action, and his
cavalrymen were the best in the Mexican army. He wheeled them into line
with a few words of command and shouted to them to charge. Bowie's men
instantly stopped, forming a rough line, and up went their rifles.
Urrea's soldiers who carried rifles or muskets opened a hasty and
excited fire at some distance.

Ned heard the bullets singing over his head or saw them kicking up dust
in front of the Texans, but only one of the Texans fell and but few were
wounded. The Mexican rifles or muskets were now empty, but the Mexican
lancers came on in good order and in an almost solid group, the yellow
sunlight flashing across the long blades of their lances.

It takes a great will to face sharp steel in the hands of horsemen
thundering down upon you, and Ned was quite willing to own afterward
that every nerve in him was jumping, but he stood. All stood, and at the
command of Bowie their rifles flashed together in one tremendous
explosion.

The rifles discharged, the Texans instantly snatched out their pistols,
ready for anything that might come galloping through the smoke. But
nothing came. When the smoke lifted they saw that the entire front of
the Mexican column was gone. Fallen men and horses were thick on the
plain and long lances lay across them. Other horses, riderless, were
galloping away to right and left, and unhorsed men were running to the
rear. But Urrea had escaped unharmed. Ned saw him trying to reform his
shattered force.

"Reload your rifles, men!" shouted Bowie. "You can be ready for them
before they come again!"

These were skilled sharpshooters, and they rammed the loads home with
startling rapidity. Every rifle was loaded and a finger was on every
trigger when the second charge of Urrea swept down upon them. No need of
a command from Bowie now. The Texans picked their targets and fired
straight into the dense group. Once more the front of the Mexican column
