"I wish I'd left you down there," muttered Sam.

"What's that?" demanded Mrs. Payson sharply. "Don't you go to bein'
sassy. It'll be the wuss for ye. You'll come to the gallows some time,
ef you don't mind your p's and q's. I might 'ave stayed there till I
died, an' then you'd have been hung."

"What are, you jawing about?" retorted Sam. "How could I know you was
comin'?"

"You know'd it well enough," returned the old lady. "You'll bring your
mother's gray hairs with sorrer to the grave."

"She ain't got any gray hairs," said Sam doggedly.

"Well, she will have some, ef she lives long enough. I once know'd a boy
just like you, an' he was put in jail for stealin'."

"I ain't a-goin to stay and be jawed that way," said Sam. "You won't
catch me pulling you out of a hole again. I wouldn't have you for a
grandmother for all the world. Tom Baldwin told me, only yesterday, that
you was always a-hectorin' him."

Tom Baldwin was the son of Cynthy Ann, and consequently old Mrs.
Payson's grandson.

"Did Tom Baldwin tell you that?" demanded the old lady abruptly, looking
deeply incensed.

"Yes, he did."

"Well, he's the ungratefullest cub that I ever sot eyes on," exclaimed
his indignant grandmother. "Arter all I've done for him. I'm knittin' a
pair of socks for him this blessed minute. But he sha'n't have 'em. I'll
give 'em to the soldiers, I vum. Did he say anything else?"

"Yes, he said he should be glad when you were gone."

"I'll go right home and tell Cynthy Ann," exclaimed Mrs. Payson, "an'
if she don't w'ip him I will. I never see such a bad set of boys as is
growin' up. There ain't one on 'em that isn't as full of mischief as a
nut is of meat. I'll come up with them, as true as I live."

Full of her indignation, Mrs. Payson gave up her proposed call on Mrs.
Thompson, and, turning about, hurried home to lay her complaint before
Cynthy Ann.

"I'm glad she's gone," said Sam, looking after her, as with resolute
steps she trudged along, punching the snow vigorously with the point
of her blue cotton umbrella. "I pity Tom Baldwin; if I had such a
grandmother as that, I'd run away to sea. That's so!"



CHAPTER XXIV. A CHAPTER FROM HARDEE

A few rods east of the post-office, on the opposite side of the street,
was a two-story building used as an engine-house, The second story
consisted of a hall used for company meetings. This the fire company
obligingly granted to the boys as a drill-room during the inclement
season, until the weather became sufficiently warm to drill out of
doors.

On the Monday afternoon succeeding the preliminary meeting at the
academy, about thirty boys assembled in this hall, pursuant to a
notice which had been given at school and posted up at the tavern and
post-office.

At half-past two Frank entered, accompanied by Mr. Morton.

Some of the boys were already acquainted with him, and came up to speak.
He had a frank, cordial way with boys, which secured their favor at
first sight.

"Well, boys," said he pleasantly, "I believe I am expected to make
soldiers of you."

"Yes, sir," said Charles Reynolds respectfully: "I hope we shall learn
readily and do credit to your instructions."

"I have no fear on that score," was the reply. "Perhaps you may have
some business to transact before we commence our lessons. If so, I will
sit down a few minutes and wait till you are ready."

A short business meeting was held, organized as before.

John Haynes reported that he had spoken to his father, and the question
of allowing the boys the use of the muskets belonging to the town
would be acted upon at the next meeting of the Selectmen. Squire Haynes
thought that the request would be granted.

"What are we going to do this afternoon?" asked Robert Ingalls.

"I can answer that question, Mr. Chairman," said Henry Morton. "We are
not yet ready for muskets. I shall have to drill you first in the proper
position of a soldier, and the military step. Probably it will be a week
before I shall wish to place muskets into your hands. May I inquire how
soon there will be a meeting of the Selectmen?"

John Haynes announced that the next meeting would be held in less than a
week.

"Then there will be no difficulty as to the muskets," said Mr. Morton.

Wilbur Summerfield reported that he had extended an invitation to boys
not connected with the academy to join the company. Several were now
present. Dick Bumstead, though not able to attend that day, would come
to the next meeting. He thought they would be able to raise a company of
fifty boys.

This report was considered very satisfactory.

Tom Wheeler arose and inquired by what name the new company would be
called.

"I move," said Robert Ingalls, "that we take the name of the Rossville
Home Guards."

"If the enemy should invade Rossville, you'd be the first to run,"
sneered John Haynes.

"Not unless I heard it before you," was the quick reply.

There was a general laugh, and cries of "Bully for you, Bob!" were
heard.

"Order!" cried the chairman, pounding the table energetically. "Such
disputes cannot be allowed. I think we had better defer obtaining a name
for our company till we find how well we are likely to succeed."

This proposal seemed to be acquiesced in by the boys generally. The
business meeting terminated, and Mr. Morton was invited to commence his
instructions.

"The boys will please form themselves in a line," said the teacher, in a
clear, commanding voice.

This was done.

The positions assumed were, most of them, far from military. Some stood
with their legs too far apart, others with one behind the other, some
with the shoulders of unequal height. Frank alone stood correctly,
thanks to the private instructions he had received.

"Now, boys," said Mr. Morton, "when I say 'attention!' you must all look
at me and follow my directions implicitly. Attention and subordination
are of the first importance to a soldier. Let me say, to begin with,
that, with one exception, you are all standing wrong."

Here there was a general shifting of positions. Robert Ingalls, who had
been standing with his feet fifteen inches apart, suddenly brought them
close together in a parallel position. Tom Wheeler, who had been resting
his weight mainly on the left foot, shifted to the right. Moses Rogers,
whose head was bent over so as to watch his feet, now threw it so far
back that he seemed to be inspecting the ceiling. Frank alone remained
stationary.

Mr. Morton smiled at the changes elicited by his remarks, and proceeded
to give his first command.

"Heels on the same line!" he ordered.

All the boys turned their heads, and there was a noisy shuffling of
feet.

"Quit crowding, Tom Baldwin!" exclaimed Sam Rivers in an audible tone.

"Quit crowding, yourself," was the reply. "You've got more room than I,
now."

"Silence in the ranks!" said the instructor authoritatively. "Frank
Frost, I desire you to see that the boys stand at regular distances."
This was accomplished.

"Turn out your feet equally, so as to form a right angle with each
other. So."

Mr. Morton illustrated his meaning practically. This was very necessary,
as some of the boys had very confused ideas as to what was meant by a
right angle.

After some time this order was satisfactorily carried out.

"The knees must be straight. I see that some are bent, as if the weight
of the body were too much for them. Not too stiff! Rivers, yours are too
rigid. You couldn't walk a mile in that way without becoming very tired.
There, that is much better. Notice my position."

The boys, after adjusting their positions, looked at the rest to see how
they had succeeded.

"Don't look at each other," said Mr. Morton. "If you do you will be
certain to make blunders. I notice that some of you are standing with
one shoulder higher than the other. The shoulders should be square, and
the body should be erect upon the hips. Attention! So!"

"Very well. Haynes, you are trying to stand too upright. You must not
bend backward. All, incline your bodies a little forward. Frank Ingalls
is standing correctly."

"I don't think that's very soldierly," said John Haynes, who felt
mortified at being corrected, having flattered himself that he was right
and the rest were wrong.

"A soldier shouldn't be round-shouldered, or have a slouching gait,"
said the instructor quietly; "but you will find when you come to march
that the opposite extreme is attended with great inconvenience and
discomfort. Until then you must depend upon my assurance."

Mr. Morton ran his eye along the line, and observed that most of the
boys were troubled about their arms. Some allowed them to hang in stiff
rigidity by their sides. One, even, had his clasped behind his back.
Others let theirs dangle loosely, swinging now hither, now thither.

He commented upon these errors, and added, "Let your arms hang
naturally, with the elbows near the body, the palm of the hand a
little turned to the front, the little finger behind the seam of the
pantaloons. This you will find important when you come to drill with
muskets. You will find that it will economize space by preventing your
occupying more room than is necessary. Frank, will you show Sam Rivers
and John Haynes how to hold their hands?"

"You needn't trouble yourself," said John haughtily, but in too low
a voice, as he supposed, for Mr. Morton to hear. "I don't want a
clodhopper to teach me."

Frank's face flushed slightly, and without a word he passed John and
occupied himself with showing Sam Rivers, who proved more tractable.

"No talking in the ranks!" said Mr. Morton, in a tone of authority. "If
any boy wishes to ask any explanation of me he may do so, but it is a
breach of discipline to speak to each other."

"My next order will be, 'Faces to the front!'" he resumed, after a pause.
"Nothing looks worse than to see a file of men with heads turned in
various directions. The eyes should be fixed straight before you,
striking the ground at about fifteen paces forward."

It required some time to have this direction properly carried out. Half
an hour had now passed, and some of the boys showed signs of weariness.

"I will now give you a little, breathing-spell for ten minutes," said
Mr. Morton. "After this we will resume our exercises."

The boys stretched their limbs, and began to converse in an animated
strain about the lesson which they had just received.

At the expiration of ten minutes the lesson was resumed, and some
additional directions were given.

It will not be necessary for us to follow the boys during the remainder
of the lesson. Most of them made very creditable progress, and the line
presented quite a different appearance at the end of the exercise from
what it had at the commencement.

"I shall be prepared to give you a second lesson on Saturday afternoon,"
announced Mr. Morton. "In the meantime it will be well for you to
remember what I have said, and if you should feel inclined to practice
by yourselves, it will no doubt make your progress more rapid."

These remarks were followed by a clapping of hands on the part of the
boys--a demonstration of applause which Mr. Morton acknowledged by a bow
and a smile.

"Well, how do you like it?" asked Frank Frost of Robert Ingalls.

"Oh, it's bully fun!" returned Bob enthusiastically. "I feel like a hero
already."

"You're as much of one now, Bob, as you'll ever be," said Wilbur
good-naturedly.

"I wouldn't advise you to be a soldier," retorted Bob. "You're too fat
to run, and would be too frightened to fight."

"I certainly couldn't expect to keep up with those long legs of yours,
Bob," said Wilbur, laughing.

The boys dispersed in excellent humor, fully determined to persevere in
their military exercises.



CHAPTER XXV. ELECTION OF OFFICERS

For the six weeks following, Mr. Morton gave lessons twice a week to the
boys. At the third lesson they received their muskets, and thenceforth
drilled with them. A few, who had not been present at the first two
lessons, and were consequently ignorant of the positions, Mr. Morton
turned over to Frank, who proved an efficient and competent instructor.

At the end of the twelfth lesson, Mr. Morton, after giving the order
"Rest!" addressed the boys as follows:

"Boys, we have now taken twelve lessons together. I have been very much
gratified by the rapid improvement which you have made, and feel that it
is due quite as much to your attention as to any instructions of mine.
I can say with truth that I have known companies of grown men who have
made less rapid progress than you.

"The time has now come when I feel that I can safely leave you to
yourselves, There are those among you who are competent to carry on the
work which I have commenced. It will be desirable for you at once to
form a company organization. As there are but fifty on your muster-roll,
being about half the usual number, you will not require as many
officers. I recommend the election of a captain, first and second
lieutenants, three sergeants and three corporals. You have already
become somewhat accustomed to company drill, so that you will be able to
go on by yourselves under the guidance of your officers. If any
doubtful questions should arise, I shall always be happy to give you any
information or assistance in my power.

"And now, boys, I will bid you farewell in my capacity of instructor,
but I need not say that I shall continue to watch with interest your
progress in the military art."

Here Mr. Morton bowed, and sat down.

After the applause which followed his speech had subsided, there was
a silence and hush of expectation among the boys, after which Charles
Reynolds rose slowly, and, taking from the seat beside him a package,
advanced toward Mr. Morton and made a brief speech of presentation,
having been deputed by the boys to perform that duty.

"MR MORTON: I stand here in behalf of the boys present, who wish to
express to you their sense of your kindness in giving them the course of
lessons which has just ended. We have taken up much of your time, and no
doubt have tried your patience more than once. If we have improved, as
you were kind enough to say, we feel that it is principally owing to our
good fortune in having so skilful a teacher. We wish to present you some
testimonial of the regard which we have for you, and accordingly ask
your acceptance of this copy of 'Abbott's Life of Napoleon.' We should
have been glad to give you something more valuable, but we are sure you
will value the gift for other reasons than its cost."

Here Charles Reynolds sat down, and all eyes were turned toward Mr.
Morton. It was evident that he was taken by surprise. It was equally
evident that he was much gratified by this unexpected token of regard.

He rose and with much feeling spoke as follows:

"My dear boys, for you must allow me to call you so, I can hardly tell
you how much pleasure your kind gift has afforded me. It gives me the
assurance, which indeed, I did not need, that you are as much my friends
as I am yours. The connection between us has afforded me much pleasure
and satisfaction. In training you to duties which patriotism may
hereafter devolve upon you, though I pray Heaven that long before that
time our terrible civil strife may be at an end, I feel that I have
helped you to do something to show your loyal devotion to the country
which we all love and revere." Here there was loud applause. "If you
were a few years older, I doubt not that your efforts would be added to
those of your fathers and brothers who are now encountering the perils
and suffering the privations of war. And with a little practise I am
proud to say that you would not need to be ashamed of the figure you
would cut in the field.

"I have little more to say. I recognize a fitness in the selection of
the work which you have given me. Napoleon is without doubt the greatest
military genius which our modern age has produced. Yet he lacked one
very essential characteristic of a good soldier. He was more devoted to
his own selfish ends than to the welfare of his country. I shall value
your gift for the good wishes that accompany it, and the recollection of
this day will be among my pleasantest memories."

Mr. Morton here withdrew in the midst of hearty applause.

When he had left the hall a temporary organization for business purposes
was at once effected. Wilbur Summerfield was placed in the chair, and
the meeting proceeded at once to an election of officers.

For a week or two past there had been considerable private canvassing
among the boys. There were several who would like to have been elected
captain, and a number of others who, though not aspiring so high,
hoped to be first or second lieutenants. Among the first class was John
Haynes. Like many persons who are unpopular, he did not seem to be at
all aware of the extent of his unpopularity.

But there was another weighty reason why the choice of the boys
would never have fallen upon him. Apart from his unpopularity, he was
incompetent for the posts to which he aspired. Probably there were not
ten boys in the company who were not more proficient in drill than he.
This was not owing to any want of natural capacity, but to a feeling
that he did not require much instruction and a consequent lack of
attention to the directions of Mr. Morton. He had frequently been
corrected in mistakes, but always received the correction with
sullenness and impatience. He felt in his own mind that he was much
better fitted to govern than to obey, forgetting in his ambition that it
is those only who have first learned to obey who are best qualified to
rule others.

Desirious of ingratiating himself with the boys, and so securing their
votes, he had been unusually amiable and generous during the past week.
At the previous lesson he had brought half a bushel of apples, from
which he had requested the boys to help themselves freely. By this means
he hoped to attain the object of his ambition.

Squire Haynes, too, was interested in the success of his son.

"If they elect you captain, John," he promised, "I will furnish you
money enough to buy a handsome sash and sword."

Besides John, there were several others who cherished secret hopes of
success. Among these were Charles Reynolds and Wilbur Summerfield. As
for Frank Frost, though he had thought little about it, he could not
help feeling that he was among those best qualified for office, though
he would have been quite content with either of the three highest
offices, or even with the post of orderly sergeant.

Among those who had acquitted themselves with the greatest credit was
our old friend Dick Bumstead, whom we remember last as concerned in
rather a questionable adventure. Since that time his general behavior
had very much changed for the better. Before, he had always shirked work
when it was possible. Now he exhibited a steadiness and industry which
surprised no less than it gratified his father.

This change was partly owing to his having given up some companions who
had done him no good, and, instead, sought the society of Frank. The
energy and manliness exhibited by his new friend, and the sensible views
which he took of life and duty, had wrought quite a revolution in Dick's
character. He began to see that if he ever meant to accomplish anything
he must begin now. At Frank's instance he had given up smoking, and this
