thought of as mad, especially after he had a severe illness, which made
the people so anxious that he was puffed up with the notion of his
own importance.

[Illustration: ROME IN THE TIME OF AUGUSTUS CAESAR.]

He put to death all who offended him, and, inheriting some of Tiberius'
distrust and hatred of the people, he cried out, when they did not
admire one of his shows as much as he expected, "Would that the people
of Rome had but one neck, so that I might behead them all at once." He
planned great public buildings, but had not steadiness to carry them
out; and he became so greedy of the fame which, poor wretch, he could
not earn, that he was jealous even of the dead. He burned the books of
Livy and Virgil out of the libraries, and deprived the statues of the
great men of old of the marks by which they were known--Cincinnatus of
his curls, and Torquatus of his collar, and he forbade the last of the
Pompeii to be called Magnus.

He made an expedition into Gaul, and talked of conquering Britain, but
he got no further than the shore of the channel, where, instead of
setting sail, he bade the soldiers gather up shells, which he sent home
to the Senate to be placed among the treasures of the Capitol, calling
them the spoils of the conquered ocean. Then he collected the German
slaves and the tallest Gauls he could find, commanded the latter to dye
their hair and beards to a light color, and brought them home to walk
in his triumph. The Senate, however, were slow to understand that he
could really expect a triumph, and this affronted him so much that, when
they offered him one, he would not have it, and went on insulting them.
He made his horse a consul, though only for a day, and showed it with
golden oats before it in a golden manger. Once, when the two consuls
were sitting by him, he burst out laughing, to think, he said, how with
one word he could make both their heads roll on the floor.

The provinces were not so ill off, but the state of Rome was unbearable.
Everybody was in danger, and at last a plot was formed for his death;
and as he was on his way from his house to the circus, and stopped to
look at some singers who were going to perform, a party of men set upon
him and killed him with many wounds, after he had reigned only five
years, and when he was but thirty years old.




CHAPTER XXXII.

CLAUDIUS AND NERO.

A.D. 41-68.


Poor dull Claudius heard an uproar and hid himself, thinking he was
going to be murdered like his nephew, but still worse was going to
befall him. They were looking for him to make him Emperor, for he was
the last of his family. He was clumsy in figure, though his face was
good, and he was a kind-hearted man, who made large promises, and tried
to do well; but he was slow and timid, and let himself be led by wicked
men and women, so that his rule ended no better than that of the former
Caesars.

He began in a spirited way, by sending troops who conquered the southern
part of Britain, and making an expedition thither himself. His wife
chose to share his triumph, which was not, as usual, a drive in a
chariot, but a sitting in armor on their thrones, with the eagles and
standards over their heads, and the prisoners led up before them. Among
them came the great British chief Caractacus, who is said to have
declared that he could not think why those who had such palaces as there
were at Rome should want the huts of the Britons.

Claudius was kind to the people in the distant provinces. He gave the
Jews a king again, Herod Agrippa, the grandson of the first Herod, who
was much loved by them, but died suddenly after a few years at Caesarea,
after the meeting with the Tyrians, when he let them greet him as a god.
There were a great many Jews living at Rome, but those from Jerusalem
quarrelled with those from Alexandria; and one year, when there was a
great scarcity of corn, Claudius banished them all from Rome.

[Illustration: CLAUDIUS.]

Claudius was very unhappy in his wives. Two he divorced, and then
married a third named Messalina, who was given up to all kinds of
wickedness which he never guessed at, while she used all manner of arts
to keep up her beauty and to deceive him. At last she actually married a
young man while Claudius was absent from Rome; but when this came to his
knowledge, he had her put to death. His last wife was, however, the
worst of all. She was the daughter of the good Germanicus, and bore her
mother's name of Agrippina. She had been previously married to Lucius
Domitius AEnobarbus, by whom she had a son, whom Claudius adopted when he
married her, though he had a child of his own called Britannicus, son to
Messalina. Romans had never married their nieces before, but the power
of the Emperors was leading them to trample down all law and custom, and
it was for the misfortune of Claudius that he did so in this case, for
Agrippina's purpose was to put every one out of the way of her own son,
who, taking all the Claudian and Julian names in addition to his own, is
commonly known as Nero. She married him to Claudius' daughter Octavia,
and then, after much tormenting the Emperor, she poisoned him with a
dish of mushrooms, and bribed his physician to take care that he did not
recover. He died A.D. 54, and, honest and true-hearted as he
had been, the Romans were glad to be rid of him, and told mocking
stories of him. Indeed, they were very bad in all ways themselves, and
many of the ladies were poisoners like Agrippina, so that the city
almost deserved the tyrant who came after Claudius. Nero, the son of
Agrippina by her first marriage, and Britannicus, the son of Claudius
and Messalina, were to reign together; but Nero was the elder, and as
soon as his poor young cousin came to manhood, Agrippina had a dose of
poison ready for him.

Nero, however, began well. He had been well brought up by Seneca, an
excellent student of the Stoic philosophy, who, with Burrhus, the
commander of the Praetorian Guard, guided the young Emperor with good
advice through the first five years of his reign; and though his wicked
mother called herself Augusta, and had equal honors paid her with her
son, not much harm was done to the government till Nero fell in love
with a wicked woman, Poppaea Sabina, who was a proverb for vanity, and
was said to keep five hundred she-asses that she might bathe in their
milk to preserve her complexion. Nero wanted to marry this lady, and as
his mother befriended his neglected wife Octavia, he ordered that when
she went to her favorite villa at Baiae her galley should be wrecked,
and if she was not drowned, she should be stabbed. Octavia was divorced,
sent to an island, and put to death there; and after Nero married
Poppaea, he quickly grew more violent and savage.

Burrhus died about the same time, and Seneca alone could not restrain
the Emperor from his foolish vanity. He would descend into the arena of
the great amphitheatre and sing to the lyre his own compositions; and he
showed off his charioteering in the circus before the whole assembled
city, letting no one go away till the performance was over. It very much
shocked the patricians, but the mob were delighted, and he chiefly cared
for their praises. He was building a huge palace, called the Golden
House because of its splendid decorations; and, needing money, he caused
accusations to be got up against all the richer men that he might have
their hoards.

[Illustration: NERO.]

A terrible fire broke out in Rome, which raged for six days, and
entirely destroyed fourteen quarters of the city. While it was burning,
Nero, full of excitement, stood watching it, and sang to his lyre the
description of the burning of Troy. A report therefore arose that he had
actually caused the fire for the amusement of watching it; and to put
this out of men's minds he accused the Christians. The Christian faith
had begun to be known in Rome during the last reign, and it was to Nero,
as Caesar, that St. Paul had appealed. He had spent two years in a hired
house of his own at Rome, and thus had been in the guard-room of the
Praetorians, but he was released after being tried at "Caesar's
judgment-seat," and remained at large until this sudden outburst which
caused the first persecution. Then he was taken at Nicopolis, and St.
Peter at Rome, and they were thrown into the Mamertine dungeon. Rome
counts St. Peter as her first bishop. On the 29th of June,
A.D. 66, both suffered; St. Paul, as a Roman citizen, being
beheaded with the sword; St. Peter crucified, with his head, by his own
desire, downwards. Many others suffered at the same time, some being
thrown to the beasts, while others were wrapped in cloths covered with
pitch, and slowly burnt to light the games in the Emperor's gardens. At
last the people were shocked, and cried out for these horrors to end.
And Nero, who cared for the people, turned his hatred and cruelty
against men of higher class whose fate they heeded less. So common was
it to have a message advising a man to put himself to death rather than
be sentenced, that every one had studied easy ways of dying. Nero's old
tutor, Seneca, felt his tyranny unbearable, and had joined in a plot for
overthrowing him, but it was found out, and Seneca had to die by his own
hand. The way he chose, and his wife too for his sake, was to open their
veins, get into a warm bath, and bleed to death.

Nero made a journey to Greece, and showed off at Olympus and the
Isthmus, at the same time robbing the Greek cities of numbers of their
best statues and reliefs to adorn his Golden House; for the Romans had
no original art--they could only imitate the Greeks and employ Greek
artists. But danger was closing in on Nero. Such an Emperor could be
endured no longer, and the generals of the armies in the provinces began
to threaten him, they not being smitten dumb and helpless as every one
at Rome seemed to be.

The Spanish army, under an officer named Galba, who was seventy-two
years old, but to whom Augustus had said when he was a little boy, "You
too shall share my taste of empire," began to move homewards to attack
the tyrant, and the army from Gaul advanced to join it. Nero went nearly
wild with fright, sometimes raging, sometimes tearing his hair and
clothes; and the people began to turn against him in anger at a dearth
of corn, saying he spent everything on his own pleasures. As Galba came
nearer, the nobles and knights hoped for deliverance, and the Praetorian
Guard showed that they meant to join their fellow-soldiers, and would
not fight for him. The wretched Emperor found himself alone, and vainly
called for some one to kill him, for he had not nerve to do it himself.
He fled to a villa in the country, and wandered in the woods till he
heard that, if he was caught, he would be put to death in the "ancient
fashion," which he was told was being fixed with his neck in a forked
stick and beaten to death. Then, hearing the hoofs of the horses of his
pursuers, he set a sword against his breast and made a slave drive it
home, and was groaning his last when the horsemen came up. He was but 30
years old, and was the last Emperor who could trace any connection, even
by adoption, with Augustus. He perished A.D. 68.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE FLAVIAN FAMILY.

62-96.


The ablest of all Nero's officers was Titus Flavius Vespasianus, a
stern, rigid old soldier, who, with his son of the same name, was in the
East, preparing to put down a great rising of the Jews. He waited to see
what was going to happen, and in a very few weeks old Galba had offended
the soldiers by his saving ways; there was a rising against him, and
another soldier named Otho became Emperor; but the legions from Gaul
marched up under Vitellius to dethrone him, and he killed himself to
prevent other bloodshed.

When the Eastern army heard of these changes, they declared they would
make an Emperor like the soldiers of the West, and hailed Vespasian as
Emperor. He left his son Titus to subdue Judea, and set out himself for
Italy, where Vitellius had given himself up to riot and feasting. There
was a terrible fight and fire in the streets of Rome itself, and the
Gauls, who chiefly made up Vitellius' army, did even more mischief than
the Gauls of old under Brennus; but at last Vespasian triumphed.
Vitellius was taken, and, after being goaded along with the point of a
lance, was put to death. There had been eighteen months of confusion,
and Vespasian began his reign in the year 70.

It was just then that his son Titus, having taken all the strongholds in
Galilee, though they were desperately defended by the Jews, had advanced
to besiege Jerusalem. All the Christians had heeded the warning that our
blessed Lord had left them, and were safe at a city in the hills called
Pella; but the Jews who were left within were fiercely quarrelling among
themselves, and fought with one another as savagely as they fought with
the enemy. Titus threw trenches round and blockaded the city; and the
famine within grew to be most horrible. Some died in their houses, but
the fierce lawless zealots rushed up and down the streets, breaking into
the houses where they thought food was to be found. When they smelt
roasting in one grand dwelling belonging to a lady, they rushed in and
asked for the meat, but even they turned away in horror when she
uncovered the remains of her own little child, whom she had been eating.
At last the Roman engines broke down the walls of the lower city, and
with desperate struggling the Romans entered, and found every house full
of dead women and children. Still they had the Temple to take, and the
Jews had gathered there, fancying that, at the worst, the Messiah would
appear and save them. Alas! they had rejected Him long ago, and this was
the time of judgment. The Romans fought their way in, up the marble
steps, slippery with blood and choked with dead bodies; and fire raged
round them. Titus would have saved the Holy Place as a wonder of the
world, but a soldier threw a torch through a golden latticed window, and
the flame spread rapidly. Titus had just time to look round on all the
rich gilding and marbles before it sank into ruins. He took a terrible
vengeance on the Jews. Great numbers were crucified, and the rest were
either taken to the amphitheatres all over the empire to fight with wild
beasts, or were sold as slaves, in such numbers that, cheap as they
were, no one would buy them. And yet this wonderful nation has lived on
in its dispersion ever since. The city was utterly overthrown and sown
with salt, and such treasures as could be saved from the fire were
carried in the triumph of Titus--namely, the shew-bread table, the
seven-branched candlestick, and the silver trumpets--and laid up as
usual among the spoils dedicated to Jupiter. Their figures are to be
seen sculptured on the triumphal arch built in honor of Titus, which
still stands at Rome.

[Illustration: ARCH OF TITUS.]

These Flavian Caesars were great builders. Much had to be restored at
Rome after the two great fires, and they built a new Capitol and new
Forum, besides pulling down Nero's Golden House, and setting up on part
of the site the magnificent baths known as the Baths of Titus. Going to
the bath, to be steamed, rubbed, anointed, and perfumed by the slaves,
was the great amusement of an idle Roman's day, for in the waiting-rooms
he met all his friends and heard the news; and these rooms were splendid
halls, inlaid with marble, and adorned with the statues and pictures
Nero had brought from Greece. On part of the gardens was begun what was
then called the Flavian Amphitheatre, but is now known as the Colosseum,
from the colossal statue that stood at its door--a wonderful place, with
a succession of galleries on stone vaults round the area, on which every
rank and station, from the Emperor and Vestal Virgins down to the
slaves, had their places, whence to see gladiators and beasts struggle
and perish, on sands mixed with scarlet grains to hide the stain, and
perfumed showers to overcome the scent of blood, and under silken
embroidered awnings to keep off the sun.

Vespasian was an upright man, and though he was stern and unrelenting,
his reign was a great relief after the capricious tyranny of the last
Claudii. He and his eldest son Titus were plain and simple in their
habits, and tried to put down the horrid riot and excess that were
ruining the Romans, and they were feared and loved. They had great
successes too. Britain was subdued and settled as far as the northern
hills, and a great rising in Eastern Gaul subdued. Vespasian was accused
of being avaricious, but Nero had left the treasury in such a state that
he could hardly have governed without being careful. He died in the year
79, at seventy years old. When he found himself almost gone, he desired
to be lifted to his feet, saying that an Emperor should die standing.

[Illustration: VESUVIUS PREVIOUS TO THE ERUPTION OF A.D. 63.]

He left two sons, Titus and Domitian. Titus was more of a scholar than
his father, and was gentle and kindly in manner, so that he was much
beloved. He used to say, "I have lost a day," when one went by without
his finding some kind act to do. He was called the delight of mankind,
and his reign would have been happy but for another great fire in Rome,
which burnt what Nero's fire had left. In his time, too, Mount Vesuvius
suddenly woke from its rest, and by a dreadful eruption destroyed the
two cities at its foot, Herculaneum and Pompeii. The philosopher
Plinius, who wrote on geography and natural history, was stifled by the
sulphurous air while fleeing from the showers of stones and ashes
cast up by the mountain. His nephew, called Pliny the younger, has left
a full account of the disaster, and the cloud like a pine tree that hung
over the mountain, the noises, the earthquake, and the fall at last of
the ashes and lava. Drusilla, the wife of Felix, the governor before
whom St. Paul pleaded, also perished. Herculaneum was covered with solid
lava, so that very little could be recovered from it; but Pompeii, being
overwhelmed with dust or ashes, was only choked, and in modern days has
been discovered, showing perfectly what an old Roman town was
like--amphitheatre, shops, bake-houses, and all. Some skeletons have
been found: a man with his keys in a cellar full of treasure, a priest
crushed by a statue of Isis, a family crowded into a vault, a sentry at
his post; and in other cases the ashes perfectly moulded the impression
of the figure they stifled, and on pouring plaster into them the forms
of the victims have been recovered, especially two women, elder and
younger, just as they fell at the gate, the girl with her head hidden in
her mother's robe.

[Illustration: PERSECUTION OF THE CHRISTIANS.]

Titus died the next year, and his son-in-law Tacitus, who wrote the
history of those reigns, laid the blame on his brother Domitian, who was
as cruel and savage a tyrant as Nero. He does seem to have been shocked
at the wickedness of the Romans. Even the Vestal Virgins had grown
shameless, and there was hardly a girl of the patrician families in Rome
well brought up enough to become one. The blame was laid on forsaking
the old religion, and what the Romans called "Judaising," which meant
Christianity, was persecuted again. Flavius Clemens, a cousin of the
Emperor, was thus accused and put to death; and probably it was this
which led to St. John, the last of the Apostles, being brought to Rome
and placed in a cauldron of boiling oil by the Lateran Gate; but a
miracle was wrought in his behalf, and the oil did him no hurt, upon
which he was banished to the Isle of Patmos.

The Colosseum was opened in Domitian's time, and the shows of
gladiators, fights with beasts, and even sea-fights, when the arena was
flooded, exceeded all that had gone before. There were fights between
women and women, dwarfs and cranes. There is an inscription at Rome
which has made some believe that the architect of the Colosseum was one
Gandentius, who afterwards perished there as a Christian.

Domitian affronted the Romans by wearing a gold crown with little
figures of the gods on it. He did strange things. Once he called
together all his council in the middle of the night on urgent business,
