as though trying to shut out the scene which had such a fascination for
her.

The face of the girl wore such a ghastly color, that Nick could not
wonder at her fright, but he shook his head. He felt he was the man now,
and it would not do for him to show any weakness.

"It isn't the Judgment Day, Nellie; for, according to the Bible, it will
come in a different way than this. There are a good many things which
are not understood by folks, and I suppose this must be one of them."

"I can smell burning wood," broke in the sister, leaning forward and
snuffing the smoky air.

"I am sure I do, and that's what is making all this trouble."

"But suppose, Nick, these woods are on fire? How far is it back to where
we entered them?"

"About three miles, and it is five to the open country ahead, where we
leave them; but there is the creek, less than a mile ahead, so if we
should find the woods burning, we can stop there till it is over."

The sister, however, had suggested a danger to the brother which alarmed
him. The mare had been walking slowly, for it seemed more in harmony
with the scene that she should do so. The driver now jerked the lines so
sharply that she pricked up her ears and started off at a rapid gait,
that is as the mare herself doubtless looked upon traveling.

The first real thrill of alarm came to the lad, when he recalled that if
a fire should appear, he and his sister were in the worst possible
position: there were three miles of forest behind and five in front.

The mare seemed to awaken to a sense of danger, for she threw up her
head with unusual sprightliness, struck into a trot so rapid that Nick
was a little frightened, lest in the gloom the carriage should come in
contact with some obstruction which he could not detect in time.

"See there!"

As Nellie uttered the exclamation, she caught the arm of her brother and
pointed ahead, but there was no need of her doing so, for he had seen
the peril. The road immediately in front was filled with heavy smoke,
which, as it rolled forward, caused them to cough almost to the
strangulation point. At the same time, a crimson streak of flame shot
in and out of the murky vapor, like the flashing of lightning: the fire
was burning immediately in front and it would not do to go further.

Nick stopped the horse, and, half rising and bending forward, peered
into the suffocating vapor. Then he turned and looked behind him, in
which direction Nellie was also gazing.

"How is it there?" he asked.

"There is plenty of smoke, but I see no fire."

"Then we must go back."

The road was quite narrow, though there was room for two teams to pass
each other, and Nick turned the frightened mare as quickly as he could;
she was so nervous and fidgety that it was hard work to control her, but
she was headed toward Dunbarton, after some difficulty, and as soon as
the rein was given her, away she went at a spanking trot.

But neither the brother nor sister was relieved of fear, for the smoke
grew denser every minute, and Nick might well ask himself whether he
would be able to pass the three miles before he could reach the safety
of the open country.

The question was answered much sooner than he anticipated. The sharp
crackling was heard, and they caught glimpses of the fiery tongues
leaping in and out among the dried leaves and vegetation on either hand.
Suddenly the flames seemed to meet in front in such a rushing, roaring
volume that it was vain to think of pushing any further in the face of
it.

"Oh, Nick," moaned Nellie, shrinking close to him, "we are going to be
burned alive!"

"It does look bad, Nellie, but we mustn't give up yet; one thing is
certain, it won't do to try to reach Dunbarton to-day."

"But we can't go homeward."

"It doesn't look so bad that way as it does toward Dunbarton: we must
try one of the roads, and I would rather work toward home than away from
it."

Nick was busy while talking; he saw that the mare was becoming
panic-stricken, and it required all his strength and firmness to keep
her from breaking away from him.

[Illustration: "O Nick," moaned Nellie, "we are going to be burned
alive."]

By using the whip, he managed to turn her again in the road, and then he
struck her sharply with the lash.

"Nellie, catch hold of my arm," he said to her, feeling that even if
everything came out in the best form, a severe struggle was before them.

The mare sniffed, and, glancing to her right and left, gave a whinny of
terror as she dropped into her swiftest trot, which, a minute after, she
changed to a gallop; but Nick brought her down instantly to her more
natural gait.

Nellie slipped her arm under the elbow of her brother, and then clasped
her two hands, so as to hold fast for the shock which she believed would
soon come.

A large branch had fallen across the road, and Nick did not catch sight
of it until too late to check the flying mare. The carriage seemed to
bound fully a foot into the air, and an ominous wrench told the driver
that it had suffered material damage.

But there was no time to stop and examine; the terrified horse sprang
into a gallop again, and this time Nick did not restrain her.

There was smoke all around them; the air was hot and suffocating; they
could hear the crackling of flames, and now and then the crimson flash
through the murky vapor showed that a frightful forest fire was raging
on every hand.

Still the mare kept forward at the same swift gallop, and Nick knew that
more than once she felt the blistering heat on her haunches. It is a
strange peculiarity of the horse, which often shows a wonderful degree
of intelligence, that he generally loses his wits when caught in a
conflagration. Instead of running away from the flames he often charges
among them, and there remains, fighting those who are trying to save
him.

Very probably the mare would have acted similarly in the instance of
which I am speaking had the circumstances permitted it; but there was
fire all about her, and the temptation was as strong, therefore, in one
direction as another.

Nick kept his self-possession. He knew by the desperate energy with
which Nellie clung to his arm that she was helpless, and that every
minute they were likely to plunge headlong into and among the roaring
flames.

He could not guide the mare, which was now controlled by her own
instinctive desire to escape a danger which was on every hand. He merely
sought to direct her, so far as possible, in the hope that he might save
the carriage from being dashed to pieces.

When he saw the flames meeting across the road he shouted to Nellie to
hold her breath, and he did the same, until they had swept through the
fiery, strangling ring, and were able to catch a mouthful of the smoky
and scorching atmosphere beyond.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

THROUGH THE FIRE.


It was hard to remain cool when surrounded by such peril as were Nick
and Nellie Ribsam but the sturdy lad acquitted himself like a hero.

His belief was that all the woods were not on fire--that is, the entire
tract was not burning at once, and that, as a consequence, if he could
break through the flaming circle in which he was caught, he could place
himself and sister in front of the danger, so to speak, and then they
would be able to run away from it altogether.

If such were the case, it followed that just then speed was the most
important of all things, and for that reason he kept the mare on her
sweeping gallop, at the imminent risk of dashing the carriage to pieces
every minute.

He was glad that he did not meet any vehicles, for it not only showed
that no one else in the neighborhood was placed in the same extremity
as were he and his sister, but it lessened the danger of collision.

Nick thought it was all over with them, when a fiery serpent, as it
seemed, darted across from one side of the road to the other, directly
in front. It was at the height of five or six feet, and coiling itself
about a dry pine it shot horizontally toward another pine, wrapped with
a flaming girdle, which sent out a line of fire to meet it, like the
intense blaze seen when a blow-pipe is used.

It was a curious manifestation, and it would be hard to explain it, for,
though a strong wind was blowing, that would not account for the fact
that the two tongues of fire, as they really were, met each other in
this fashion across the road, for of a necessity they extended
themselves in opposite directions.

They did not burn steadily, but whisked back and forth, just as it may
be imagined two serpents would have done who saw the fugitives coming,
and, making ready, said by their actions, "Thus far, but no farther."

To Nick Ribsam it looked like the flaming sword of Hazael, sweeping
across the highway; but it would never do to hesitate, and the mare
galloped straight on. The fiery serpents darted angrily at each other,
but the head of the horse glided beneath and the boy caught a hot blast
as he shot by.

"Where is the bridge?" shouted Nellie, who could see nothing, and who
clung more desperately than ever to the supporting arm of her brother.

"It must be close at hand--there it is!"

So it was, indeed, but the fire was ahead of them; the whole structure
was one mass of flames, roaring and crackling with fury.

The scene that followed was a dreadful one: the sight of the
furnace-like structure set the mare wild, and she broke into a dead run
toward the blazing mass of kindling wood, determined to plunge headlong
into it.

Nick Ribsam rose to his feet, and bent back with might and main, but he
might as well have tried to check a runaway locomotive: the mare took
the bit in her teeth and was beyond control.

With a presence of mind which did him credit, Nick wrenched her to one
side, while she was at the height of this mad flight, so that the hub of
the fore wheel struck a tree at the side of the road, checking the
vehicle so abruptly that both traces snapped as if they were ribbons,
and the mare continued her gallop in the direction of the bridge.

The momentum of Nellie threw her violently against the dashboard, while
Nick, before he could let go the reins, was jerked out the carriage,
and, lighting on his feet, ran a dozen steps ere he could check himself
and free his hands from the reins.

He stopped almost on the edge of the creek, and caught one glimpse of
the mare as she bounded out of sight into the smoke and flames, and was
gone forever.

The lad felt a pang of sorrow for the foolish beast, who stood as good a
chance of saving herself as he, had she but used a tithe of common
sense; but there was no time for mourning, and he ran back to the
vehicle, where Nellie was crouching, and crying violently.

"Why, Nellie, I am ashamed of you!" said her brother, reprovingly. "Is
it going to mend matters to sit down and cry?"

"But how can I help it, Nick?" she asked, rubbing her red eyes with her
apron and trying to check herself; "I don't see how you can keep from
crying yourself!"

"I'm glad I ain't such a ninny as you, and when I get home I am going to
tell father and mother."

"You needn't be so smart," said Nellie, beginning to fire up under the
reproof of her brother; "you haven't got home yet."

"And mighty little chance I would stand of ever getting there if I
should sit down like you and begin to blubber. Come out of the carriage
and go with me."

Nellie's face was very red and there were tears on her cheeks, her
countenance wearing a strange appearance in the lurid haze around them.

The girl did not make any objection, for she could not do otherwise than
lean on the strong arm of her brother, who never seemed to lose his head
over anything. Every minute or so a distressing feeling came over
them--such a feeling as we can imagine would be ours were we suddenly to
find ourselves shut in a room where the air was so impure we could not
breathe it.

There was a gasping, hurried inhalation of the strangling hot smoke--a
coughing and filling of the eyes with tears, and then a frantic rush of
several steps, during which the breath was held until a chance to get a
mouthful of fresh air was gained.

It was useless to turn back. The children were in the very heart of the
wood, and the conflagration was raging so furiously on both sides, and
in front and rear, that it was impossible to escape in either direction.

But for the timely arrival at the edge of the creek they must have
perished a few minutes later, and they could not feel certain as yet
that even water would save them.

The creek was so low, that when they hurriedly picked their way down the
bank to it, Nick could have taken Nellie on his back and carried her
across without wetting her feet; but there was nothing to be gained by
doing so, as the fire was burning as fiercely on one side as on the
other.

The conflagration must stop when it should reach the margin of the
stream, and Nick drew a sigh of relief, feeling that they were safe.

"We will wait here till the fire is done burning," said he, standing
with the hand of his sister in his own, while he gazed about him on the
extraordinary scene.

The day had been quite warm, and Nick and Nellie, pausing on the bank of
the shrunken creek, began to find themselves exceedingly uncomfortable;
for not only was there a great increase of heat, but the smoke was too
heavy to be breathed without great pain and irritation to the lungs.

"It looks as if we are to be strangled to death, after all," Nick said,
"for it is hard to breathe now, and it is growing worse every minute."

"Let's go up by the pond: it isn't far away."

"It must be as bad there as anywhere else, but we shall die if we stay
here."

There seemed little choice in the matter, but one of the impossibilities
is for a boy or girl to stand still when suffering, and the suggestion
of Nellie was acted upon at once.

She had released the arm of Nick, who started up the right bank, she
following close behind him. The walking was easy, for the creek had
receded from the greater portion of the bed it usually occupied, and
that had become hardened by long exposure to the heat of the sun.

It was not far to the pond of which I have spoken, and which occupied an
extent of an acre, or perhaps more. The place was a favorite with the
boys of the neighborhood, and some of the most delightful swims Nick
Ribsam had ever enjoyed were in that sheet of water.

The water was cold, clear, and deep in many places. What more tempting
resort for a tired, thirsty and overheated lad can be imagined
especially when he knows that it will be a piece of disobedience for him
to go there?

"That's the place," he exclaimed, hastening his footsteps; "when we get
there, we'll have a chance to breathe."

"Hurry up, then, Nick, for I can't stand this much longer."




CHAPTER XXXIV.

CALLING IN VAIN.


The distress of the brother and sister became greater every minute. They
walked hurriedly along the bank of the creek, their path through the
gloom illuminated now and then by the flashes of fire which shot through
the strangling volumes of vapor. Nick, more than likely, would have gone
astray but for his familiarity with the neighborhood.

It seemed to him as if the smoke, heavy, dense, sulphurous and
suffocating, caused by the burning forest, was driven toward the bed of
the stream, where it was pressed down by the weight from above, until it
was the utmost he and Nellie could do to inhale enough of the
contaminated air to sustain life.

They hurried and struggled forward as best they could, and at last
caught the glimmer of the broad expanse of water, which presented
itself in the light of a haven of refuge to them.

It was a most welcome relief indeed, for they were now assured of one
thing--they could not die the frightful death that overtook the poor
mare. This broad expanse of cool, refreshing water could not burn up, no
matter how fervent the heat that might envelop its shores. Its cool
depths offered a refreshing refuge, such as can hardly be understood by
one who is not suffering similarly.

But it was rather curious that the boy and girl had endured more from
the suffocating vapor than from the fire itself. Looking down at their
garments, they were surprised to find them scorched in several places,
and Nellie gave just the faintest scream when a pungent odor directed
her gaze to a large hole burning in her dress.

Nick glanced around, and, understanding what the matter was, called
rather sharply:

"Pinch it out!"

She was already doing so, and she asked:

"Why don't you pinch out that fire on your coat?"

Just then her brother jumped into the air and shouted, "Oh--ouch!" for
the burning sleeve had gone through the shirt and reached the bare skin.
He whipped off his coat in a twinkling, dipped it hastily into the
water, doing the same with his right elbow, the element which
extinguished the smoking garment being very grateful to the scorched
limb.

"Nellie," said he, "just cast your eye over me, and let me know whether
there are any more fires going."

He made up his mind that if she reported other conflagrations breaking
