soon as you can," and then he dove back into his bedroom.

Several minutes passed and George Strong put in an appearance.

"Dalling said you wanted to see Captain Putnam," he said. "The captain
has left for Buffalo on business. Can I do anything for you?"

"Mr. Strong, a wicked trick has been played on me!" burst out Josiah
Crabtree.

"A trick?"

"Yes. My teeth are gone, the new set I had made! Some cadet has taken
them!"

"Can it be possible!" murmured George Strong. "Where did you leave
them?"

"In that glass on the stand. Oh, what shall I do? My other set is at the
dentist's, getting fixed."

"Maybe I can send for them."

"Hardly, since the dentist is at Ithaca. Oh, what a wretch, to take my
teeth! I cannot go to the classroom without my teeth. I would be the
laughing-stock of the entire school! It is a dreadful state of affairs!"

"I don't see how I can help you out, sir," answered George Strong,
sympathetically.

"I shall have to stay here until something is done. See if you can't
find the cadet who took the teeth."

"I will do what I can," answered George Strong, and left the room.

Josiah Crabtree was walking up and down nervously, when there came a
timid knock on the door. He opened it to confront Mumps.

"Well, Fenwick, what do you want?" demanded the teacher, harshly. The
sneak of the school generally had some tale of woe to tell, and he was
just now in no humor to listen to any such recital.

"Please, Mr. Crabtree, did you lose anything?" asked Mumps, nervously.

"Ha! what is that? Come in! What do you know?" cried Josiah Crabtree,
and caught Mumps by the arm.

"I didn't do it--really and truly I didn't!" cried the sneak, in sudden
terror. "I--I only found it out by accident."

"About my--er--my teeth?"

"Yes, sir."

"What do you know about them, Fenwick? Quick; out with it!"

"Oh, sir, please don't hurt my arm so!"

"Tell me what you know."

"I--I know where your teeth are, sir, I--I saw them put there last
night."

"Where are they?"

"Hanging on the chandelier in Classroom Eight."

"And who put them there?" roared the teacher, in amazement.

"Pepper Ditmore, sir. But, oh, sir, please don't say I told on him or
he'll hammer the life out of me!" cried Mumps, in alarm.

"How did he get them?"

"I don't know that, sir. I--I went downstairs to--er--to put away a book
for another cadet and I saw Pepper Ditmore sneak into Room Eight. I
watched him, and he threw a string with the teeth on 'em up over the
chandelier. I thought they might be yours, so I came here to find out."

"Did you get the--er--the teeth?"

"Oh, no, sir. They are too high up. You'll have to get a ladder to get
them down."

"The rascal!" howled Josiah Crabtree. "Oh, wait till I get my hands on
him! But I must get the teeth first." He thought for a moment. "Fenwick,
find Snuggers and send him to me at once."

"Yes, sir."

"And don't say a word of this to any one," added the teacher, as the
sneak hurried off.

It took Mumps fully five minutes to locate Peleg Snuggers. Wondering
what was wanted, the general utility man hurried to the teacher's
apartment.

"I want you to get my set of teeth," said Josiah Crabtree. "I am told
they are fastened to the chandelier in Room Eight. Get a ladder and get
them down immediately. And do it as quietly as you can."

"Yes, sir," answered Snuggers, and left to do the errand. "Teeth on the
chandelier!" he murmured, "Wot an idee! Bet some o' the cadets did thet
trick! How funny he did look without his grinders in!"

Pepper had not told any one about his trick, but on a blackboard in the
hall he had chalked the words:

            _Set of Teeth For Sale!
          See Chandelier in Room No. 8.
            Crabtree, A.M., O.I.C._

This scrawl had attracted the attention of fully a score of cadets, and
one after another they entered the classroom designated to find out what
it meant. When they saw the teeth dangling in the air they set up a
roar.

"Hello, look at the set of teeth!"

"They must belong to old Crabtree!"

"Wonder what he wants for them?"

"I reckon teeth come high, by the look of things!"

The crowd of cadets kept growing larger, until the room was crowded.
Then one cadet took a blackboard eraser and threw it at the teeth. This
was a signal for a general discharge of all sorts of things at the
dangling object.

In the midst of the excitement George Strong came in.

"Boys! boys! Be quiet!" cried the teacher. "What is the meaning of so
much noise?" And then he, too, caught sight of the dangling teeth. "Who
placed those there?" he asked.

There was no reply, and he was on the point of sending a cadet for a
step-ladder when the door opened and in came Peleg Snuggers with the
very thing wanted.

"Mr. Crabtree sent me to git 'em," explained the general utility man.

"Hurrah! Peleg to the rescue!" cried Andy.

"Now, Peleg, do the great balancing act," said Fred Century.

"I will hold the ladder for you, Snuggers," said Mr. Strong. "Boys,
stand back," he added, afraid that some of the lads might attempt some
joke while the general utility man was in the air.

The step-ladder was placed in position and Snuggers mounted cautiously
to the top. He could just reach the chandelier and the teeth, and it
took him some time to cut the teeth loose.

"I'll take 'em right to Mr. Crabtree," he said on coming down. "He's in
a mighty big hurry for 'em."

"Very well," returned George Strong.

Pepper was watching matters closely and he at once guessed that somebody
had told Josiah Crabtree where the teeth were.

"It must have been the fellow who spotted me last night," reasoned The
Imp. "Wonder if he told my name? If he did----" Pepper ended the
question with a big sigh.

With great eagerness Josiah Crabtree received the set of teeth and
examined them to see if they were all right. Then, having placed them
where they belonged, he strode forth from his room in quest of the cadet
who had played the trick.

Pepper was just sitting down at the breakfast table when there was a
sudden step behind him and the next moment he found himself jerked out
of his place.

"You come with me, young man!" stormed Josiah Crabtree. "I have an
account to settle with you!"

"What do you want, Mr. Crabtree?" asked The Imp, as meekly as he could.

"You know well enough!" cried the teacher. "Come!" And he led Pepper out
of the mess-hall. His grip on the youth's arm was so firm that it hurt
not a little.

"Mr. Crabtree, you are hurting my arm."

"I don't care if I am!" snapped the teacher. "You come along!" And he
fairly dragged Pepper along the hall.

"Where to?"

"You'll soon see."

"What is wrong?"

"You know well enough, Ditmore. You took my--er--my set of teeth! You
have made me the laughing-stock of the whole school! You shall suffer
for it!"

"Who says I took the teeth?"

"John Fenwick saw you place them on the chandelier! Oh, you need not
deny it."

"Mumps! Well, he always was a sneak!" answered Pepper.

"He is a nice, manly youth."

With a firm grip still on Pepper's arm, the irate teacher led the way to
a room looking out on the rear. It was an apartment less than ten feet
square, and plainly furnished with two chairs and a couch. In one corner
was a stand with a washbowl and pitcher of water. The single window was
stoutly barred.

"Going to make a prisoner of me?" asked Pepper, as the door was opened
and he was thrust into the room.

"You shall stay here for the present," snapped Josiah Crabtree. "When I
let you out I think you'll be a sadder and perhaps a wiser boy."

"Am I to have my breakfast?"

"No," answered the teacher.

Then he banged the door shut, locked it, and walked swiftly away.




CHAPTER XXI

A GRAVE ACCUSATION


"Well, I suppose I ought not to complain," mused Pepper, as he sat down
on one of the chairs. "A fellow can't have his fun without paying for
it. But just wait till I catch Mumps! I'll give him a piece of my mind,
and maybe more!"

He got up presently and looked out of the window. He could see but
little excepting a stretch of snow. The cell-like room was almost
without heat, and he had to clap his hands together, and stamp his feet,
to keep warm.

"I think I'd give a dollar for some breakfast," he muttered. "Wonder if
I could attract the attention of one of the servants and bribe him to
get me something?"

As he walked around the little room his eyes caught some writing on the
wall. There were several bits of doggerel, one running as follows:

          "I am a prisoner of old Josiah,
           I'd feel much better if I had a fire!"

"I can sympathize with that fellow," murmured Pepper, as he slapped his
hands across his chest, trying to get up more circulation. Then he
walked around the room, reading another doggerel or two. Finally he drew
out a lead pencil.

"Guess I'll play Shakespeare myself," he murmured, and after some
thought, scribbled down the following:

                        "And I am jugged
          Alone in solitude, and by myself
          Alone. I sit and think, and think,
          And think again. Old Crabtree,
          Base villain that he is, hath put me here!
          And why? Ah, thereby hangs a tale, Horatio!
          His teeth, the teeth that chew the best of steak
          Set on our table--those I found and hid;
          And Mumps, the sneak, hath told on me! Alas!
          When will my martyrdom end?"

Having finished his attempt at blank verse, Pepper continued to walk
around the room. He was hungry and cold, and inside of an hour grew
somewhat desperate.

"Crabtree has no right to starve me and allow me to catch cold," he told
himself. "I don't believe Captain Putnam will stand for it. I'm going to
attract some attention."

He took up one of the chairs and with it commenced to pound on the door.
He had been pounding for several minutes when he heard some one on the
outside.

"Pepper!" came in a low voice.

"Oh, Jack, is that you?"

"Yes. Stop that noise, or I'll get caught."

"I want to get out. I haven't had any breakfast, and it is as cold as
Greenland in here."

"If I had a key I'd let you out, but it isn't in the lock," went on the
young major.

"Try some of the other keys, Jack."

"I will," was the reply, and the young major hurried off, to return with
several keys from other doors. But not one of them fitted the lock
before him.

"Too bad!" he murmured.

"Major Ruddy!" came in the harsh voice of Josiah Crabtree behind him.
"What are you doing here?"

"I came to talk to Ditmore," answered Jack, boldly.

"Who gave you permission?"

"Nobody, I came as major of the battalion. When a cadet is placed in the
guardhouse the major has a right to go and see him."

"Hum!" growled Josiah Crabtree. He took but little interest in the
military side of the school and consequently did not know all the
rules. "Well, I can do the talking here. You are excused."

"Mr. Crabtree, Ditmore tells me that he is very cold, and he has had no
breakfast."

"Ha! So he is complaining, eh? Well, I'll attend to him. You may go."

"Are you going to give him his breakfast?"

"Yes--when he deserves it--not before."

"How about keeping him in such a cold room?"

"That is my affair."

"If he gets sick will you take the blame?"

"Major Ruddy, I am not here to be questioned by you!" snapped the
dictatorial teacher.

"Pepper belongs to my command and he is my personal friend. I don't
think you have any right to starve him and keep him in a cold room in
such weather as this. I shall complain to Captain Putnam as soon as he
gets back, and, in the meantime, complain to Mr. Strong."

"I am in charge while Captain Putnam is away."

"Then, if Pepper takes cold from this, you'll be to blame, and you'll
foot the doctor's bill," answered Jack, and walked away.

He spoke so sharply that Josiah Crabtree became worried, and, a little
later, Pepper was served with a cup of black coffee and several slices
of bread without butter. It was a meager meal, but it was better than
nothing, and The Imp disposed of all there was of it. Then a servant
appeared with a couple of blankets used by the cadets when in camp.

"You can wrap yourself in these if you are cold, so Mr. Crabtree says,"
said the servant. And he went out again, locking the door as before.

"Humph! Must take me for an Indian!" muttered Pepper. Nevertheless, he
wrapped the blankets around him and then felt considerably warmer.

The morning passed slowly, and at noon Pepper was given a bowl of soup
and several additional slices of unbuttered bread. The soup was hot and
good, and he wished there was more of it.

"Mr. Crabtree says that is all you can have," said the waiter who served
him.

"Crabbed Crabtree!" muttered Pepper, and said no more.

In the middle of the afternoon, directly after school was over, Josiah
Crabtree appeared. This time he was accompanied by George Strong.

"Ditmore, we have come to have a talk with you!" cried Crabtree. "And
let me say at the start that I want the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, as they say in court."

"Are you going to try me for my life?" demanded The Imp.

"I am going to try you on a very serious charge," snapped Josiah
Crabtree.

"Do not be too hasty, Mr. Crabtree," put in George Strong, mildly.

"Mr. Crabtree, if you want to know about the teeth, let me confess that
I took them and hung them up where they were found," said Pepper.

"Ha! so you are willing to confess, eh?"

"I am. I did it for fun--but I suppose you don't see the fun," added
Pepper, dryly, so dryly in fact that George Strong had to turn away to
hide a sudden smile.

"It was a low, contemptible trick!" returned Josiah Crabtree. "But I
must say I do not think it quite as bad as your other doings."

"My other doings?" asked The Imp, somewhat mystified.

"Mr. Crabtree, do not be hasty, I beg of you," put in the under teacher.

"Ditmore, how did you get the teeth?" demanded Josiah Crabtree.

"It was very easy, sir, if you must know. I went into the vacant bedroom
next to your room, climbed from one window to the other, and the trick
was done."

"Were you alone?"

"Yes, sir, absolutely alone."

"Have you been alone when visiting the other rooms in this building?"
demanded Josiah Crabtree, sharply.

"Mr. Crabtree----" began George Strong, but the head teacher motioned
for the assistant to be silent.

"I--I don't understand," stammered Pepper.

"You have shown your expertness in visiting rooms during the night, and
without awakening anybody," went on Josiah Crabtree, coldly. "Some time
ago other rooms were visited in this building, and various things were
taken--some things of great value--things which have not been returned.
Now, Ditmore----"

"Mr. Crabtree, stop!" cried Pepper, and his eyes flashed with sudden
fire. "I know what is in your mind now! But don't you dare to accuse me!
Don't you dare!"

"I want you to tell me the truth."

"I have told you all I know. I took the teeth as a joke, and I put them
where they could easily be found."

