was natural enough, after we were married, and there is no reason
why we should not get on very well together.

"I tell you what, I will go down the first thing tomorrow to
Southampton, and will sail at once for Ostend. There I will pay her
off, alter her rig, and ship a fresh crew. I will draw my money
from the bank. If things go well, I shall be set up again. If they
go badly, there will be some long faces at Tattersall's on settling
day, but I shall be away, and the money will be enough if we have
to cruise for a couple of years, or double that, before she gives
in.

"I shall try mild measures for a good bit; be very respectful and
repentant and all that. If I find after a time that that does not
fetch her, I must try what threats will do. Anyhow, she won't leave
until she steps on shore to be married, or safer still, till I can
get a clergyman on board to marry us there. Would you like to go
with us?"

"If the thing bursts up, there is nothing I should like better."

"You will have to help me carry her off, Jim, and the day that she
signs her name Bertha Carthew I will give you a couple of thousand
pounds."

"That is a bargain," the man said. "It is a good scheme altogether,
if we can hit upon some plan for carrying her away."

"It is of no use to think of that, until we know where she will be.
I don't see at present how it is to be done, but I know that there
is always a way if one can think of it. You telegraph to me every
day Poste Restante, Ostend, or wherever I am stopping. I will send
you the name of the hotel I put up at directly I get there. You had
better send someone down at once to Ryde to let you know what she
is doing, and when she comes up to town; it is just on the cards
that they may not come for a bit, but may go for a cruise in
Mallett's yacht, as they did last autumn. Anyhow, let me know, and
if I telegraph for you to come over, cross by the next boat.

"Likely enough I may run over myself as soon as I get the business
there going all right; but of course I shall stay there if I can. I
should get it done in half the time if I were present to push
things on. Of course, you will run down and see how the horse is
getting on, and pick up any information that you can, and let me
know about it."

"I will put that into good hands, Carthew. It is better that I
should stay here and watch things at Tattersall's; then I can keep
you informed how things are looking every day, and be ready to
start as soon as I get your telegram. But, of course, you won't do
anything until after the race is run."

"No, I feel as safe as a man can as to Rosney, but even if he wins
I shall carry my idea out. I have had enough of the turf, and burnt
my fingers enough over it, and I shall be glad to settle down as a
country gentleman again. If I lose I shall make a private sale of
all my horses before I leave the course. That ought to bring me in
another seven or eight thousand pounds for our trip."



Chapter 10.

"There is the Phantom getting under way," the skipper said, as his
turn up and down the deck brought him close to Frank.

"So she is. I saw her owner go ashore less than an hour ago."

"Yes; he came on board again five minutes ago. The men began to
bustle about directly he got on deck. I do hope they won't put in
again as long as we are here. The hands are as savage as bulls, and
though they remembered what you told them, and there were no rows
on shore last night, I shall be glad when we ain't in the same port
with the Phantom, for I am sure that if two or three men of each
crew were to drop in to the same pub, there would be a fight in no
time. And really I could not blame them. It is not in human nature
to lose a race like that without feeling very sore over it. I hope
she is off. Anyhow, as we are going to Cowes this evening, it will
be a day or two before the hands are likely to run against each
other, and that will give them time to cool down a bit.

"There is one thing. I bet the Phantom won't enter against us at
Cowes. If we were to give them a handsome beating there, it would
show everyone that they would have had no chance of winning the Cup
if it had not been for the accident."

"No, I don't suppose that we shall meet again this season, and
indeed I don't know that I shall do any more racing myself, except
that I shall feel it as a sort of duty to enter for the Squadron's
open race.

"I think, by the course she is laying, that the Phantom is off to
Southampton. Perhaps she is going to meet somebody there. Anyhow,
she is not likely to be back until we have started for Cowes."

Frank sat for some time with the paper in his hand, but, although
he glanced at it occasionally, his mind took in nothing of its
contents. Again and again he watched the Phantom. Yes, she was
certainly going to Southampton Water.

From what Bertha had said to him the evening before, he had
received a strong hope that she would reject Carthew. Nothing was
more probable than that he should have gone ashore that morning,
fresh from his victory, to put the question to her, and his speedy
return and his order to make sail as soon as he got on deck
certainly pointed to the fact that she had refused him.

A load of care seemed to be lifted from Frank's mind. From the
first, when he had found that Carthew was a visitor at Lady
Greendale's, he had been uncomfortable. He knew the man's
persevering nature, and recognised his power of pleasing when he
desired to do so. He was satisfied that, when he himself was
refused, the reason Bertha gave him was, as far as she knew, the
true one; but he had since thought that possibly she might then,
although unsuspected by herself, have been to some extent under the
spell of Carthew's influence. When she had declined two
unexceptional offers, he had been almost convinced that Carthew,
when the time came, would receive a more favourable answer. But he
had watched them closely on the few occasions when he had seen them
together in society, and, certain as he had felt at other times, he
had come away somewhat puzzled, and said to himself:

"She is captivated by his manner, as any girl might be, but I doubt
whether she loves him."

This impression, however, had always died out in a short time, and
he had somehow come to accept the general opinion unquestioningly,
that she would accept Carthew when he proposed. He had been
prepared to face the alternative of either suffering her to marry a
scoundrel, or of taking a step more repugnant to him, which would
probably end by an entire breach of his friendship with the
Greendales, that of telling them this story. He was therefore
delighted to find that the difficulty had been solved by Bertha
herself without his intervention, and felt absolutely grateful for
the accident which had cost him the Queen's Cup, but had at the
same time opened Bertha's eyes to the man's true character. Soon
after two o'clock he went ashore in the gig, and at the half hour
Lady Greendale and Bertha came down.

"The Osprey looks like a bird shorn of its wings," he said, as he
handed them into the boat; "and though the men have made everything
as tidy as they could, the two missing spars quite spoil her
appearance."

"That does not matter in the least, Frank," Lady Greendale said.
"We know how she looks when she is at her best. We shall enjoy a
quiet sail in her just as much as if she were in apple-pie order."

"You look fagged, Lady Greendale, though you are pretty well
accustomed to gaiety in town."

Lady Greendale did indeed look worn and worried. For the last two
or three days, Bertha's manner had puzzled her and caused her some
vague anxiety. That morning the girl had come in from the garden
and told her that she had just refused Mr. Carthew, and, although
she had never been pleased at the idea of Bertha's marrying him,
the refusal had come as a shock.

Personally she liked him. She believed him to be very well off, but
she had expected Bertha to do much better, and she by no means
approved of his fondness for the turf. She had been deeply
disappointed at the girl's refusal of Lord Chilson, on whom she had
quite set her mind. The second offer had also been a good one.
Still, she had reconciled herself to the thought of Bertha's
marrying Carthew. His connection with the turf had certainly
brought him into contact with a great many good men, he was to be
met everywhere, and she could hardly wonder that Bertha should have
been taken with his good looks and the brilliancy of his
conversation. The refusal, then, came to her not only as an
absolute surprise, but as a shock.

She considered that Bertha had certainly given him, as well as
everyone else, reason to suppose that she intended to accept him.
Many of her intimate friends had spoken to her as if the affair was
already a settled matter, and when it became known that Bertha had
refused him, she would be set down as a flirt, and it would
certainly injure her prospects of making the sort of match that she
desired. She had said something of all this to the girl, and had
only received the reply:

"I know what I am doing, mamma. I can understand that you thought I
was going to marry him. I thought so myself, but something has
happened that has opened my eyes, and I have every reason to be
thankful that it has. I dare say you think that I have behaved very
badly, and I am sorry; but I am sure that I am doing right now."

"What have you discovered, Bertha? I don't understand you at all."

"I don't suppose you do, mamma. I cannot tell you what it is. I
told him that I would not tell anybody."

"But you don't seem to mind, Bertha; that is what puzzles me. A
girl who has made up her mind to accept a man, and who finds out
something that seems to her so bad that she rejects him, would
naturally be distressed and upset. You seem to treat it as if it
were a matter of no importance."

"I don't quite understand it myself, mamma. I suppose that my eyes
have been opened altogether. At any rate, I feel that I have had a
very narrow escape. I was certainly very much worried when I first
learned about this, two days ago, and I was even distressed; but I
think that I have got over the worry, and I am sure that I have
quite got over the distress."

"Then you cannot have cared for him," Lady Greendale said,
emphatically.

"That is just the conclusion that I have arrived at myself, mamma,"
Bertha said, calmly. "I certainly thought that I did, and now I
feel sure that I was mistaken altogether."

Lady Greendale could say nothing further.

"I had better send off a note to Frank, my dear," she said,
plaintively. "Of course you are not thinking of going out sailing
after this."

"Indeed, I am, mamma. Why shouldn't we? Of course I am not going to
say anything here of what has happened. If he chooses to talk about
it he can, but I don't suppose that he will. It is just the end of
the season, and we need not go back to town at all, and next spring
everyone will have forgotten all about it. You know what people
will say: 'I thought that Greendale girl was going to marry Carthew.
I suppose nothing has come of it. Did she refuse him I wonder, or
did he change his mind?' And there will be an end of it.  The end
of the season wipes a sponge over everything. People start afresh,
and, as somebody says--Tennyson, isn't it? or Longfellow?--they
'let the dead past bury its dead.'"

Lady Greendale lifted her hands in mild despair, put on her things,
and went down to the boat with Bertha.

"I have brought a book, mamma," the latter said as they went down.
"I shall tell Frank about this, though I shall tell no one else. I
always knew that he did not like Mr. Carthew. So you can amuse
yourself reading while we are talking."

"You are a curious girl, Bertha," her mother said, resignedly. "I
used to think that I understood you; now I feel that I don't
understand you at all."

"I don't know that I understand myself, mamma, but I know enough of
myself to see that I am not so wise as I thought I was, and
somebody says that 'When you first discover you are a fool it is
the first step towards being wise,' or something of the sort.

"There is Major Mallett standing at the landing, and there is the
gig. I think that she is the prettiest boat here."

The mainsail was hoisted by the time they reached the side of the
yacht, and the anchor hove short, so that in two or three minutes
they were under way.

"She looks very nice," Lady Greendale said. "I thought that she
would look much worse."

"You should have seen her yesterday, mamma, when we passed her,
with the jagged stumps of the topmast and bowsprit and all her
ropes in disorder, the sails hanging down in the water and the
wreckage alongside. I could have cried when I saw her. At any rate,
she looks very neat and trim now.

"Where is the Phantom, Major Mallett?"

"She got under way at eleven o'clock, and has gone up to
Southampton," he replied, quietly, but with a half-interrogatory
glance towards her.

She gave a little nod, and took a chair a short distance from that
in which Lady Greendale had seated herself.

"Has he gone for good?" Frank asked, as he sat down beside her.

"Of course he has," she said. "You don't suppose, after what I told
you last night, that I was going to accept him."

"I hoped not," he said, gravely. "You cannot tell what a relief it
has been to me. Of course, dear, you will understand that so long
as you were to marry a man who would be likely to make you happy I
was content, but I could not bear to think of your marrying a man I
knew to be altogether unworthy of you."

"You know very well," she said, "that you never intended to let me
marry him. As I said to you last night, I feel very much aggrieved,
Major Mallett. You had said you would be my friend, and yet you let
this go on when you could have stopped it at once. You let me get
talked about with that man, and you would have gone on letting me
get still more talked about before you interfered. That was not
kind or friendly of you."

"But, Bertha," he remonstrated, "the fact that we had not been
friends, and that he had beaten me in a variety of matters, was no
reason in the world why I should interfere, still less why you
should not marry him. When I was stupid enough to tell you that
story, years ago, I stated that I had no grounds for saying that it
was he who played that trick upon my boat, and it would have been
most unfair on my part to have brought that story up again."

"Quite so, but there was the other story."

"What other story?" Frank asked in great surprise.

"The story that George Lechmere came and told me two days ago," she
said, gravely.

"George Lechmere! You don't mean to say--"

"I do mean to say so. He behaved like a real friend, and came to
tell me the story of Martha Bennett.

"He told me," she went on, as he was about to speak, "that you had
made up your mind to tell mamma about it, directly you heard that I
was engaged to Mr. Carthew. That would have been something, but
would hardly have been fair to me. If I had once been engaged to
him, it would have been very hard to break it off, and naturally it
would have been much greater pain to me then than it has been now."

"I felt that. But you see, Bertha, until you did accept him, I had
no right to assume that you would do so. At least so I understood
it, and I did not feel that in my position I was called upon to
interfere until I learned that you were really in danger of what I
considered wrecking your life's happiness."

"I understand that," she said, gently, "and I know that you acted
for the best. But there are other things you have not told me,
Major Mallett--other things that George Lechmere has told me. Did
you think that it would have been of no interest to me to know that
you had forgiven the man who tried to take your life; and, more
than that, had restored his self respect, taken him as your
servant, treated him as a friend?"

The tears stood in her eyes now.

"Don't you think, Frank, that was a thing that I might have been
interested to know--a thing that would raise you immeasurably in
the eyes of a woman--that would show her vastly more of your real
character than she could know by meeting you from day to day as a
friend?"

"It was his secret and not mine, Bertha. It was known to but him
and me. Never was a man more repentant or more bitterly regretful
for a fault--that was in my eyes scarcely a fault at all--except
that he had too rashly assumed me to be the author of the ruin of
the girl he loved. The poor fellow had been half maddened, and was
scarce responsible for his actions. He had already suffered
terribly, and the least I could do was to endeavour to restore his
self respect by showing him that I had entirely forgiven him. Any
kindness that I have shown him he has repaid ten-fold, not only by
saving my life, but in becoming my most sincere and attached
friend. I promised him that I would tell no one, and I have never
done so, and no one to this day knows it, save his father and
mother.

"How then could I tell even you? You must see yourself that it was
impossible that I could tell you. Besides, the story was of no
interest save to him and me; and above all, as I said, it was his
secret and not mine."

"I see that now," she said. "Still, I am so sorry, so very sorry,
that I did not know it before.

"You see, Frank," she went on, after a pause; "we women have to
make or unmake our lives very much in the dark. No one helps us,
and if we have not a brother to do so, we are groping in the dark.
Look at me. Here was I, believing that Mr. Carthew, whom I met
everywhere in society, was, except that he kept race horses and bet
heavily, as good as other men. He was very pleasant, very good
looking, generally liked, and infinitely more amusing than most men
one meets. How was I to tell what he really was?

"On the other hand, there were you, my dear friend, who, I knew,
had shown yourself a very brave soldier, and whom also everyone
liked and spoke well of, but of whose real character I did not know
much, except on the side that was always presented to me; and now I
find you capable of what I consider a grand act of generosity."

"You overrate the matter altogether, Bertha. The man shot me by
mistake. The fellow he took me for richly deserved shooting. When
he found it was a mistake, the poor fellow was bitterly sorry for
it. Surely, there was nothing more to be said about it."

The girl sat silent for some time.

"Well, it is all cleared up now," she said at last. "There is no
reason why we should not be friends as of old."

"None whatever," he said. "There has been only--" and he stopped
short.

"Only what, Frank?"

"Nothing," he said. "We will be just as we were, Bertha. I will try
and be the good elder brother, and scold you and look after you,
and warn you, if it should be necessary, until you get under other
guidance."

"It will be some time," she said, quietly, "before that happens. I
have had a sharp lesson."

"And did you really care for him much, Bertha?"

"I don't think that I really cared for him at all," she said. "That
is not the lesson that I was thinking of."

He saw the colour mount into her cheeks as she twisted the
handkerchief she held into a knot. Then, turning to him, she said:

"Frank, are you never going to give me a chance again?"

He could not misunderstand her.

"Do you mean--can you mean, Bertha?" he said, in a low tone. "Do
you mean that if I ask you the same question again you will give me
a different answer?"
