
Straight down the line he went, sometimes stopping a girl at her third
or fourth line, rarely allowing them to read farther than the eleventh
or twelfth.

Nora was the second Phi Sigma Tau to undergo the ordeal. As she briskly
delivered the opening lines, the actor stopped her. Taking the book from
her, he turned to the part where Touchstone, quaintly humorous, holds
forth upon "the lie seven times removed."

"Read this," he said briefly, holding out the book to Nora.

Nora began and read glibly on, unconsciously emphasizing as she did so.
Down one page she read and half way through the next before Mr. Southard
seemed satisfied.

Then he again held conversation with Miss Tebbs, who nodded and looked
smilingly toward Nora, who stood scowling faintly, rather ill-pleased at
attracting so much attention.

"It looks as though Nora had made an impression, doesn't it!" whispered
Jessica to Grace, who was about to reply when Mr. Southard motioned to
her. Grace, who knew the scene by heart, went fearlessly forward, and
read the lines with splendid emphasis. Marian and Eva Allen followed
her, and acquitted themselves with credit. Then Eleanor's turn came.
Handing her coat, which she had taken off and carried upon her arm, to
Edna Wright, she walked proudly over, then, without a trace of
self-consciousness, began the reading of the designated lines. Her voice
sounded unusually clear and sweet, yet lacked something of the power of
expression displayed by Grace in her rendering of the same scene. When
she had finished she handed the book back with an air of studied
indifference she was far from feeling. She had decided in her own mind
that Rosalind was the part best suited to her, and felt that the honor
now lay between herself and Grace. No other girls, with the exception of
Nora, had been allowed to read as much of any scene as they two had been
requested to read.

But Eleanor had reckoned without her host, for there was one girl who
had not as yet come to the front. The girl was Anne Pierson, who in some
mysterious manner had been all but overlooked, until Miss Tebbs spied
her standing between Grace and Nora.

"Can you spare us a moment more, Mr. Southard?" said Miss Tebbs to the
actor, who was preparing to leave. "You have almost missed hearing one
of my best girls. Come here, Anne, and prove the truth of my words."

Grace drew a long breath of relief. She had eagerly awaited Anne's turn
and was about to call Miss Tebbs's attention to Anne, just as that
teacher had observed her.

As most of the girls present had heard Anne recite, there was a great
craning of necks and a faint murmur of expectancy as she took her place.
They expected her to live up to her reputation and she had scarcely
delivered the opening line before they realized that she would not
disappoint them.

Her musical voice vibrated with expression and the mock-serious
bantering tones in which she delivered Rosalind's witty speeches caused
Mr. Southard to smile and nod approvingly as she gave full value to the
immortal lines. Her change of voice from Rosalind to Orlando was wholly
delightful, and so charmingly did she depict both characters that when
she ended with Orlando's exit she received a little ovation from the
listening girls, in which Mr. Southard and Miss Tebbs joined.

"She's won! She's won! I'm so glad," Grace said softly to Nora and
Jessica. "I wanted her to play Rosalind, and I knew she could do it.
Look, girls! Mr. Southard is shaking hands with her."

True enough, Anne was shyly shaking hands with the great actor, who was
congratulating her warmly upon her recent effort.

"I have never before heard an amateur read those lines as well as you
have to-day, Miss Pierson," he said. "I am sure Rosalind will be safe
with you, for few professional women could have done better. If I am
anywhere near here when your play is enacted, I shall make it a point to
come and see it."

Shaking hands warmly with Miss Tebbs and bowing to the admiring girls,
Mr. Southard hurriedly departed, leaving his audience devoured with
curiosity as to the chosen ones.

Anne stood perfectly still, looking rather dazed. The unexpected had
happened. She was to have not only a part, but the best part, at that.
The girls gathered eagerly about her, congratulating her on her success,
but she was too overcome to thank them, and smiled at them through a
mist of tears.

"Look at Eleanor," whispered Nora to Grace. "She's so angry she can't
see straight. She must have wanted to play Rosalind herself. I told you
she'd sulk if she couldn't be the leading lady."

Grace glanced over toward Eleanor, who stood biting her lip, her hands
clenched and her face set in angry lines.

"She looks like the 'Vendetta' or the 'Camorra' or some other Italian
vengeance agency, doesn't she?" said Nora with a giggle.

Grace laughed in spite of herself at Nora's remark, but regretted it the
next moment, for Eleanor saw the glances directed toward her and heard
Nora's giggle. She turned white and half started toward Grace, then
stopped, and, turning her back upon the Phi Sigma Tau, began talking to
Edna Wright.

Just then Miss Tebbs, who had been busy with her list, announced that
she would now name the cast, and all conversation ceased as by magic.

Miriam Nesbit was intrusted with the "Duke," while Marian Barber was to
play "Frederick," his brother. Jessica was in raptures over "Phebe,"
while Nora had captured "Touchstone," Eva Allen, "Audrey," and, to her
great delight, Grace was told that she was to play "Orlando," with
Eleanor as "Celia." The other parts were assigned among the sophomores
and freshmen who had made the best showing, Mabel Allison getting the
part of Jaques.

"You will report for rehearsal next Tuesday afternoon after school, when
typewritten copies of your parts will be handed you," said Miss Tebbs,
as she was about to leave the room.

The moment Miss Tebbs ceased talking the girls began, as they gathered
in little groups around the lucky ones and gave vent to their feelings
with many exclamations of approval and congratulation. Several girls
approached Eleanor, but she fairly ran from them and hurried out of the
gymnasium after Miss Tebbs with Edna Wright and Daisy Culver at her
heels.

"There goes Eleanor after Miss Tebbs," observed Marian Barber. "What do
you suppose she's up to now?"

"Oh, never mind her," said Nora impatiently. "You'll see enough of her
during rehearsal. It will be so pleasant to rehearse with her,
considering that she isn't on speaking terms with any of us."

Had the girl chums known then what Eleanor "was up to," it would have
been a matter of surprise and indignation to all of them. After
imperiously commanding her satellites to wait for her in the corridor,
Eleanor overtook Miss Tebbs just outside Miss Thompson's office.

"I want to speak to you, Miss Tebbs," said Eleanor as the teacher
paused, her hand on the doorknob.

"Well, what can I do for you, Miss Savell?"

"I want to speak to you about the play. I wish to play Rosalind," said
Eleanor with calm assurance.

"But, my dear child, Anne Pierson is to play Rosalind," replied Miss
Tebbs. "Mr. Southard particularly commended her work. Did you not hear
what he said?"

"Oh, yes; I heard him complimenting her," replied Eleanor complacently,
"but I feel sure that I can do more with it than she can. I did not do
my best work to-day. Besides, Miss Pierson is too short. I am certain of
making a better appearance."

"What you say about appearance is quite true, Miss Savell," replied Miss
Tebbs frankly. "Beyond a doubt you would make a beautiful Rosalind; but
I am convinced that no other girl can enact the part with the spirit and
dash that Miss Pierson can. Your part of Celia is very well suited to
you, and you can win plenty of applause playing it. You must understand,
however, that once having given out a part, I should not attempt to take
it from the girl I had given it to simply because some other girl
desired it. That would be both unfair and unjust. The only thing I could
promise you would be to allow you to understudy Rosalind in case
anything happened to Miss Pierson. Would you care to understudy the
part?"

Eleanor was silent for a moment. Miss Tebbs, looking a trifle impatient,
stood awaiting her reply.

"I should like to do that," Eleanor said slowly, a curious light in her
eyes. "Thank you very much, Miss Tebbs."

"You are welcome," replied the teacher. "Be sure and be prompt at
rehearsal next Tuesday."

As Miss Tebbs entered the office, Eleanor turned and walked slowly down
the corridor.

"So Miss Tebbs thinks I ought to be satisfied with 'Celia,'" she
muttered. "Very well, I'll rehearse Celia, but I'll understudy Rosalind,
and it will be very strange if something doesn't happen to Miss
Pierson."




CHAPTER XX

THE ANONYMOUS LETTER


After the parts had been given out, rehearsals for the play went merrily
on. There were many hitches at first, but finally things settled down to
smooth running order, and as the time for its presentation approached
Miss Tebbs had good reason to feel jubilant. Each girl seemed bent on
distinguishing herself, and that teacher was heard laughingly to declare
that she had an "all star cast."

In spite of rehearsals, Grace Harlowe's team found time for a few
basketball games, and whipped the senior team twice in succession, much
to the disgust of Captain Julia Crosby, who threatened to go into deep
mourning over what she called "her dead and gone team." She even
composed a mournful ditty, which she sang in their ears in a wailing
minor key whenever she passed any of them, and practically tormented
them, until they actually did win one hard-fought victory over the
juniors, "just to keep Julia from perpetrating her eternal chant," as
one of them remarked.

Eleanor had outwardly settled down to the routine of school work in a
way that surprised even her aunt. But inwardly she was seething with
rebellion toward Miss Thompson and hatred of the Phi Sigma Tau. She had
fully determined that Anne Pierson should never play Rosalind, and had
hit upon a plan by which she hoped to accomplish her ends. The Phi Sigma
Tau were completely carried away with Anne's impersonation of
Shakespeare's heroine, and any blow struck at Anne would be equally felt
by the others. Anne had been absent from one rehearsal and thus Eleanor
had had an opportunity to show her ability. She had done very well and
Miss Tebbs had praised her work, though in her secret heart Eleanor knew
that Anne's work was finer than her own. But the means of gratifying her
own personal vanity blinded her to everything except the fact that she
wanted to play Rosalind regardless of Anne's superior ability.

To settle Miss Thompson was not so easy a matter, and though Eleanor
racked her brain for some telling method of vengeance, no inspiration
came until one afternoon in early March. Professor La Roche, irritated
to the point of frenzy, ordered her from his class, with instructions to
report herself to Miss Thompson. As she entered the open door of the
principal's office she noticed that the room was empty of occupants. She
stopped, hesitated, then went softly in, a half-formed idea in her mind
that did not at first assume definite shape.

"If Miss Thompson comes in, I suppose I shall have to report myself,"
thought Eleanor. "While I'm here, I'll just look about and see if
I can't find some way to even up that public apology she made me make."

Gliding over to the open desk, she ran her eye hastily over the various
papers spread out upon it. At first she found nothing of importance, but
suddenly she began to laugh softly, her face lighted with malicious
glee.

"Here's the wonderful paper that Miss Tabby Cat Thompson is going to read
before the 'Arts and Crafts Club' to-morrow," she murmured. "I heard her
telling Miss Chester about it yesterday. She said it took her six weeks
to prepare it on account of the time she spent in looking up her facts.
It will take me less than six minutes to dispose of it."

Seizing the essay with both hands, she tore it across, and then tore it
again and again, until it was literally reduced to shreds. These she
gathered into a heap and left in the middle of the desk. Glancing about
to see that no one was near, she was about to step into the corridor
when she heard the sound of approaching footsteps. Quick as a flash she
flung open the door of the little lavatory just outside the office and
concealed herself just as a girl turned from the main corridor into the
short passage leading to the principal's office. Eleanor, holding the
door slightly ajar, peered stealthily out at the new-comer, who was none
other than Grace Harlowe.

Having no recitation that hour, Grace had run up to the office to obtain
Miss Thompson's permission to use the gymnasium that afternoon for
basketball practice. A hasty glance inside the office revealed to Grace
that the principal was not there. She hesitated a moment, walked toward
the desk, then turned and went out again.

The moment she turned the corner, Eleanor darted out of the lavatory and
fled down the corridor, just as the bell rang for the end of the period.
In a moment the main corridor was filled with girls from the various
classrooms, and, joining them, Eleanor entered the study hall without
reporting her dismissal from French class.

She was somewhat nervous and trembled a little at the thought of her
near discovery, but felt not the slightest qualm of conscience at her
ruthless destruction of another's property. On the contrary, she
experienced a wicked satisfaction, and smiled to herself as she pictured
Miss Thompson's consternation when the latter should discover her loss.
Best of all, the principal would never find out who did it, for Eleanor
vowed never to admit her guilt.

She decided to go at once to Professor La Roche and apologize, so that
he would not report her to Miss Thompson. Without a doubt an effort
would be made to find the culprit, and if it were proven that she did
not return to the study hall as soon as dismissed from French, she might
be asked to account for it, and thus call down suspicion upon herself.

On her way to rhetoric recitation, she stopped at Professor La Roche's
door, greatly astonishing him by a prettily worded apology, which he
readily accepted and beamed upon her with forgiving good-nature. Feeling
that she had bridged that difficulty, Eleanor entered the classroom to
find Miss Thompson talking in low, guarded tones to Miss Chester, who
looked both, shocked and surprised. She caught the words "entirely
destroyed," "serious offence" and "investigate at once," Then the
principal left the room and Miss Chester turned to the class and began
the recitation.

To Eleanor's surprise, nothing was said of the matter that day. School
was dismissed as usual, and the girls went out without dreaming that on
the morrow they would all be placed under suspicion until the person
guilty of the outrage was found.

The following morning, after opening exercises, Miss Thompson stated
briefly the destruction of her paper.

"I was out of my office barely ten minutes," she said, "yet when I
returned some one had ruthlessly torn the essay to bits and left the
pieces piled in the middle of my desk. As I had spent considerable time
and research in getting the subject matter together, the destruction of
the paper is particularly annoying. Whoever was contemptible enough to
engage in such mischief must have known this. It looks like a deliberate
attempt to insult me. It is hard to believe one of my girls guilty, yet
it is not probable that any one outside could be responsible. A girl who
would wilfully do such a thing is a menace to the school and should be
removed from it. I am not going to any extreme measures to find the
miscreant. Were I to question each girl in turn I fear the offender
might perjure herself rather than admit her guilt. But I am confident
that sooner or later I shall know the truth of the matter."

As Miss Thompson concluded, she looked over the roomful of girls who sat
watching her with serious faces. Which one of them was guilty? Time
alone would tell.

At recess that morning the subject of the play was for once forgotten in
the excitement occasioned by the principal's recent disclosure. Groups
of girls indignantly denied even the thought of such mischief.

"I don't believe Miss Thompson would ever suspect us of any such thing,"
remarked Jessica to her friends.

"Of course not, goose," replied Grace. "She knows us too well for that."

But it was with a peculiar apprehension of something unpleasant that
Grace answered a summons to the principal's office just before school
closed for the day.

"Grace," she said, as the young girl entered the office, "were you in my
office yesterday afternoon between half past one and a quarter of two?"

"Why, yes, Miss Thompson. I came to ask permission to use the gymnasium,
but you were out, so I came back and asked you just before school
closed."

"Yes, I remember that you did," replied the principal. "However, I want
you to read this."

Grace took the paper, looking rather perplexed, and read:

          "Ask Miss Harlowe what she was doing in your
          office between half past one and a quarter of two
          yesterday."

                                              "A PASSERBY."

"Why--why----" stammered Grace, her eyes growing large with wonder.
"I don't understand. I came here at that time, for I looked at the
clock as I came in, but I was only here for a second."

Then the truth dawned upon her. "Why, Miss Thompson," she cried, "you
surely don't think I tore up your essay?"

"No, Grace, I don't," replied the principal. "But I believe that the one
who wrote this note is the one who did do it, and evidently wishes to
