part of the infantry and artillery had not been sent off early in the
day, the experiment might have been turned into a brilliant victory. As
it was, William was so surprised and alarmed at the resistance he had
encountered, that he remained some days at the Boyne without advancing.
He had been told by all, except the Duke of Schomberg, that the
resistance of the Irish would be contemptible, and the most forward of
those who had scoffed at the courage of the Irish had been the
Enniskilleners, who had themselves, on the day of battle, shown so
unmistakably the white feather. After this the king disliked and despised
these troops, and hung them without ceremony, when taken in those acts of
plunder and slaughter to which they were so much addicted.

So far from the flight of King James discouraging the army, it caused
universal joy. It was his constant vacillation, interference, and
cowardly action which had paralysed his troops; and they felt that, now
they were free to act without his interference, they would be able to
cope with the invaders.

William at once offered favourable terms, if Ireland would submit to his
authority; but these were declined, partly owing to the powerful
influence of France, partly to the fear that the terms would not be
observed, partly to the apprehension of all the gentry, that the lands
which they had but just recovered from the hands of Cromwell's settlers
would be again taken from them.

At the battle of the Boyne, Walter Davenant, with his father's troop, had
taken part in all the desperate charges upon the enemy. During the long
hours the battle had lasted, the cavalry had been incessantly engaged.
Time after time they had charged down upon the Dutch squares, and no
sooner had the ranks been reformed, after recoiling from the line of
fixed bayonets, than they were called upon to charge in another
direction.

Walter's heart beat high as they dashed into the midst of the French
infantry, or shattered and drove before them the Danish horse; but there
was little time to think, and, looking back upon the day when all was
over, it seemed to him a chaos of excitement and confusion, of which he
could hardly recall even the chief incidents.

As the troops halted for the night, they were in no way dispirited at the
result of the battle, as the retreat had been begun before a blow was
struck. They knew that it was neither intended nor hoped that the ground
would be successfully held; and every man felt a pride in the thought
that some eighteen thousand newly-raised Irish levies, of whom but a
small portion of the infantry were armed with muskets, had sustained,
throughout a long summer's day, the attacks of more than double their
number of veteran troops, supported by fifty pieces of artillery.

The loss of the Irish horse had been comparatively small. Charging a
square, in the days when the bayonet was fixed in the muzzle of the gun,
was not the desperate undertaking that it now is, when from the hedge of
steel issues a rolling and continuous fire. The French regiment, once
broken, had been cut down with scarce any resistance, while the mercenary
cavalry had been defeated with the greatest ease. Thus, among the brigade
of the Irish horse there were but few fallen friends to mourn, and
nothing to mar the pride that every man felt, in the behaviour of the
Irish troops against such overwhelming odds. That the king had fled,
everyone knew, but the feeling was one of relief.

"His absence is more than a victory to us," Captain Davenant said, as,
with a group of officers, he sat by a fire, made of a fence hastily
pulled down. "His majesty has his virtues, and, with good counsellors,
would make a worthy monarch; but among his virtues military genius is not
conspicuous. I should be glad, myself, if Lauzun and the French would
also take their departure, and let us have Mountcashel's division back
again from France. If we are left to ourselves, with our own generals,
Sarsfield and Mountcashel, we can tire out this continental riffraff that
William has gathered together. The dissensions caused by French
interference have been our ruin, so far; leave us to ourselves, and we
shall do. The Irish today have proved their fighting qualities; and, if
proper use is made of the resources and difficulties of the country, I
defy them to conquer us. I feel more hopeful now than I have done since
the first day we took the field."

"Do you think we shall fight another battle before Dublin, father?"
Walter asked.

"I have no idea what the generals will decide, Walter, but I should
imagine that we shall march to the west. We had a strong position today,
but in the open field, at present, we could not hope to cope with
William's superior numbers and great artillery train. His guns were
little use to him yesterday; but on level ground they would tear our
ranks to pieces, without our being able to make any return. Among the
rivers and bogs and mountains of the west, we should find scores of
places which we could hold against them. Besides, in my opinion we should
not fight pitched battles, but should harass them with continuous marches
and attacks, leaving them masters only of the ground they stand on,
until, at last, we completely wear them out and exhaust them."

"Then you think we shall abandon Dublin altogether?"

"I think so, Walter."

"But will they not persecute the Catholics, when they have them in their
power?"

"There may be some disturbance in the city, Walter, before the English
troops march in; but William will, no doubt, put an end to this as soon
as he arrives. He cannot wish to drive the Catholics of Ireland to
desperation. At any rate, I do not think we need feel at all uneasy about
those at home. Lying on the coast to the east of the town of Dublin, and
altogether out of the track of the movements of troops, there is little
fear of trouble there. In our district there is little preponderance, in
numbers, of one religion over the other; and unless the presence of
troops, or worse, of those savages from Enniskillen or Derry, excite
them, there is little fear of the Protestants of that neighbourhood
interfering with our people, especially as they have no grounds for
complaint in the past. No, I do not think that you need disquiet
yourself, in the slightest, about those at home."

As Captain Davenant had thought probable, the Irish army, after marching
into Dublin in good order, with flags flying and music playing, left on
the following day for the west. They were accompanied by most of the
leading Catholic families; and on their departure the corporation at once
wrote to William, inviting him to enter the capital. Before his arrival,
however, the Protestant mob destroyed a great quantity of property
belonging to the Catholics, and carried their excesses to such a point
that the town would probably have been destroyed by fire, had not the
better classes of Protestants armed themselves, and taken energetic steps
to repress the tumult.

As the troops marched into Dublin, Walter said to Captain Davenant:

"Can I ride over to see how they are at home? They will have heard of the
battle. Mother and grandmother must be terribly anxious."

"I shall be glad for you to go, Walter, for it would greatly ease their
minds at home; but we are to start again, almost immediately, and
probably the whole army will have marched off before you get back in the
morning. There is no saying what may occur, after we have gone. There may
be a general attack upon the Catholics. At any rate, it will be dangerous
in the extreme for a single officer, in our uniform, to be riding through
the town after we have left. Even in the country villages there must be
intense excitement, and anyone in the king's uniform might be fired at,
in passing through any of the Protestant settlements."

"Well, father, suppose I do not start until it gets dark, then I can get
home without attracting notice. There I can put on a suit of my old
clothes, and bring my uniform out in my valise."

"Well, perhaps you might manage in that way, Walter; and I should be very
glad to relieve their minds at home, and to know how they are going on.
If you like, you can stop there for a day or two. I don't suppose that
William will be here with his troops, for a few days. He has learned that
our army is not to be despised, and he may hesitate to advance upon
Dublin, until he receives certain news that we have moved away, and that
he will not have to fight another battle for the possession of the city.
Should you hear that William's troops have arrived in the town, you will
of course make a detour, so as to avoid it, on your way to rejoin us; and
now I will write a letter, at once, for you to take to your mother."

As soon as it was dark, Walter mounted and started for Bray, where he
arrived without molestation on the way. His arrival was an immense relief
to the ladies, who had been suffering an agony of suspense since the news
of the battle had reached them. King James's hurried arrival, and panic
flight to Waterford, had caused the most alarming reports as to the
battle to circulate throughout the country, and by many it was supposed
that his army had been utterly destroyed. Walter's arrival, then, with
the news that his father, as well as himself, had passed through the day
unhurt, was an immense relief; and they were grateful to learn that, so
far from having been routed, the Irish army had accomplished its object,
of fighting the battle and then falling back in perfect order and without
molestation.

"Father says, mother, that he believes next time, when we shall be no
longer hampered by the interference of the king, we shall be able to make
even a better fight of it, especially if, as we all hope, the French
officers will follow the king's example and take themselves off."

"How long are you going to stay, Walter?"

"I shall stay over tomorrow, mother, and start next morning early. I
ought to be able to come up to the army before night, but, if not, I
shall overtake them on the march next day."

"I wish I was older," Godfrey, who had been listening to the account of
the battle, said. "It is so hard to have to stay at home here, while you
and father are having such fun!"

"You would not think it was fun, if you were with us, Godfrey," Walter
said. "I used to think it would be fun, but I don't think so now. Just
while the fighting is going on, one is so excited that one doesn't think
of the danger, but when it is over, it is awful to see the gaps in the
ranks, and to know that so many of those who were riding with you have
fallen, and that it may be your turn, next time."

"Ah, it's all very well for you to talk, Walter, because you are going
through it all, but you would think just the same as I do, if you were in
my place."

"That is true enough, Godfrey. Anyhow, I am glad you are not old enough.
I don't mean that I should not like to have you with us, but then there
would be nobody at home with mother. Now, if anything happens to father
and me, she has got you, and as you grow up you will be able to look
after her, and take care of her. It is bad enough for her having two of
us in the war. It would be worse, still, if there were three."

As, the next evening, Walter heard that there was news that William's
troops had not yet moved from the Boyne, he thought that it was safe to
take the direct road through Dublin. He had laid aside his uniform, on
reaching home, and in the morning started in his civilian clothes, with
the uniform in the valise, strapped behind the saddle. He carried his
sword, as usual, for almost all gentlemen at that time rode armed, and
this would therefore excite neither comment nor attention. He carried
also a brace of pistols, in a belt underneath his coat.

On arriving in Dublin, he found the greatest uproar and excitement
prevailing. Mobs of men were marching through the streets, smashing the
windows of Catholics and sacking the houses. Fortunately, he was warned,
before he got into the thick of the tumult, by meeting some women running
and crying loudly. He asked what was the matter, and learned that their
houses had been sacked, and that any Catholic found in the street was
being beaten and ill treated. As Walter was anxious to avoid anything
which might arrest his journey westward, he made his way out of the town,
as soon as possible, and was heartily glad when he reached the outskirts,
and gave rein to his horse.

He passed many groups of people as he rode. Some were Protestants, making
their way to Dublin to join in the greeting to William and his army, on
their arrival. Others were Catholics, afraid to remain in their abodes
now that the army had retired west, and journeying to the capital, where
they believed that William would prevent disorder and pillage. It needed
no inquiry, as to the religion of the respective groups. The Protestants
were for the most part men, and these came along shouting and waving
their weapons, wild with exultation over the triumph of their cause. The
Catholics were of all ages and both sexes. Many of them had carts, and
were carrying with them their most valued possessions. All wore an
expression of grief and anxiety.

As Walter rode into one village, a fray was going on. A party of
Protestants, riding boisterously along, had knocked down a woman with a
child in her arms, and had answered the angry remonstrance of the
peasants with jeers and laughter. Stones had begun to fly. The
Protestants had drawn their swords; the villagers had caught up hoes,
spades, and other weapons, and a fierce fight was going on. The women,
with shrill cries, encouraged the peasants, and aided them by hurling
stones at the rioters. Walter saw that his interference would be of no
avail, and, with a heavy heart at the bitter hatred which the two parties
in Ireland exhibited for each other, he turned from the road, made a
circuit round the village, and continued his way. After that, he avoided
all towns and villages, and slept at night in the cabin of a peasant,
lying some little distance from the road. The following day he again
pressed on, and before evening overtook the retiring army.

On the arrival of King William with his army in Dublin, a proclamation
was issued assuring all, save those who resisted his authority, of his
protection, and threatening severity against those who disturbed the
peace or committed outrage on personal property. Letters of protection
were granted to all who applied for them and, hearing this, Jabez
Whitefoot at once went into Dublin, to apply for protection for the
family of Captain Davenant. On hearing, however, that no persecution of
Catholics would be allowed, and that the army was likely to march west,
at once, in pursuit of the Irish, he thought it better to leave the
matter alone, as his application would only draw the attention of the
authorities to the fact of Captain Davenant and his son being engaged in
the hostile army. He felt sure that the ladies need fear no molestation,
save from the soldiers or Northerners, as his own influence with the
Protestants of his neighbourhood would suffice to prevent these from
interfering with the household at the castle.

The Irish army marched towards the Shannon, and were concentrated part in
the neighbourhood of Athlone, and part at Limerick. William shortly
prepared to follow them. He, too, divided his army into two columns. The
main body, under his own command, took the road to Limerick; while the
other division, consisting of five regiments of cavalry and twelve of
infantry, was despatched, under the command of General Douglas, for the
purpose of investing the fortress of Athlone.

As the armies marched west, their path was marked by wholesale outrage
and destruction. Although protections were granted to the peasants and
inhabitants of the towns and villages through which the armies marched,
they were entirely disregarded by the soldiers, who plundered, ill used,
and sometimes murdered the defenceless people, carrying away without
payment all provisions on which they could lay their hands.

The king sometimes hanged those who were caught in these acts of plunder
and slaughter, but this had but little effect. The Dutch soldiers, alone,
maintained their order and discipline. The foreign mercenaries, composed
for the most part of the sweepings of the great cities, behaved with a
brutality and cruelty almost without example, and which was acknowledged
by all the historians of the time, Protestant as well as Catholic.
Indeed, the Protestant inhabitants suffered even more than the Catholics,
for many of the latter fled at the approach of the army, while the
Protestants, regarding them as friends and deliverers, remained quietly
at home, and suffered every insult and outrage at the hands of this horde
of savages, who were perfectly indifferent as to the religion of those
they plundered.

Captain Davenant's troop was with the force which had retired to Athlone,
and there awaited the approach of the column of General Douglas. The
reports of the conduct of the enemy, that were brought in by the flying
peasants, filled the Irish troops with indignation and rage, and when, on
arriving before the town, General Douglas sent a messenger to demand its
surrender, Colonel Grace, who commanded, only replied by firing a pistol
towards him.

Athlone stood on either side of the Shannon. The town on the eastern bank
of the river was called "the English town," that on the western "the
Irish "--a distinction existing in many of the Irish towns, where the
early English settlers found it expedient to live apart from the Irish,
for mutual protection against attack. Colonel Grace had retired to the
west bank of the river, which was strongly fortified, destroying the
English town and breaking down part of the bridge across the river.

The garrison consisted of three regiments of foot and nine troops of
horse; and when Douglas erected his batteries and opened fire on the
castle, they replied briskly, and their guns got the better of those in
the batteries. A strong detachment of horse and mounted grenadiers was
sent by Douglas to Lanesborough, some miles north of the town, with
orders to pass the river at that point, but the post was held by Irish
troops, who easily repulsed the attempt.

It was next proposed to pass the river at a ford a short distance from
the bridge; but the troops had little heart for the enterprise, as the
ford was covered by field works erected by the Irish.

The assailants were already reduced to considerable straits. They had
consumed all provisions found in the town, plundering without mercy the
Protestant inhabitants, who had been well treated by the Irish troops,
while the conduct of the army effectually deterred the country people
from bringing in provisions.

The circulation of the report that General Sarsfield, with fifteen
thousand men, was on the march to cut off the besiegers of Athlone,
determined General Douglas to make a speedy retreat. In his fear of being
cut off, he abandoned all his heavy baggage, and, quitting the high road,
made his way by unfrequented routes, which added to the hardships of the
march. In its retreat, the column was accompanied by the unhappy
Protestant inhabitants, who feared to remain behind, lest the Irish
should retaliate upon them the sufferings which had been inflicted upon
their countrymen.

In the meantime, the main English army had done but little. In Dublin, a
commission had been appointed to examine into and forfeit the lands of
all Catholics, and adherents of King James, and having set this machine
at work, the king proceeded with his army southward through Carlow,
