"Do you know me, boy?" asked Curtis, turning now and addressing
Dodger.

"Yes; you are Mr. Waring."

"You remember where you last saw me?"

"Yes, sir. At your uncle's house on Madison Avenue."

"Quite right."

"How did you come here? Where is the old man whose valise I brought
from the Albany boat?"

Curtis smiled, and drew from his pocket a gray wig and whiskers.

"You understand now, don't you?"

"Yes, sir; I understand that I have been got here by a trick."

"Yes," answered Curtis, coolly. "I have deemed it wise to use a little
stratagem. But you must be hungry. Sit down and eat your supper while
I am talking to you."

Dodger was hungry, for it was past his usual supper time, and he saw
no reason why he should not accept the invitation.

Accordingly, he drew his chair up to the table and began to eat.
Curtis seated himself on the other chair.

"I have a few questions to ask you, and that is why I arranged this
interview. We are quite by ourselves," he added, significantly.

"Very well, sir; go ahead."

"Where is my Cousin Florence? I am right, I take it, in assuming that
you know where she is."

"Yes, sir; I know," answered Dodger, slowly.

"Very well, tell me."

"I don't think she wants you to know."

Curtis frowned.

"It is necessary I should know!" he said, emphatically.

"I will ask her if I may tell you."

"I can't wait for that. You must tell me at once."

"I can't do that."

"You are mistaken; you can do it."

"Then, I won't!" said Dodger, looking his companion full in the face.

Curtis Waring darted a wicked look at him, and seemed ready to attack
the boy who was audacious enough to thwart him, but he restrained
himself and said:

"Let that pass for the present. I have another question to ask. Where
is the document you took from my uncle's desk on the night of the
burglary?"

And he emphasized the last word.

Dodger looked surprised.

"I took no paper," he said.

"Do you deny that you opened the desk?" asked Curtis.

"No."

"When I came to examine the contents in the presence of my uncle, it
was found that a document--his will--had disappeared, and with it a
considerable sum of money."

And he looked sharply at Dodger.

"I don't know anything about it, sir. I took nothing."

"You can hardly make me believe that. Why did you open the desk if you
did not propose to take anything?"

"I did intend to take something. I was under orders to do so, for I
wouldn't have done it of my own free will; but the moment I got the
desk open I heard a cry, and looking around, I saw Miss Florence
looking at me."

"And then?"

"I was startled, and ran to her side."

"And then you went back and completed the robbery?"

"No, I didn't. She talked to me so that I felt ashamed of it. I never
stole before, and I wouldn't have tried to do it then, if--if some one
hadn't told me to."

"I know whom you mean--Tim Bolton."

"Yes, Tim Bolton, since you know."

"What did he tell you to take?"

"The will and the money."

"Eactly. Now we are coming to it. You took them, and gave them to
him?"

"No, I didn't. I haven't seen him since that night."

Curtis Waring regarded the boy thoughtfully. His story was
straightforward, and it agreed with the story told by Tim himself.
But, on the other hand, he denied taking the missing articles, and yet
they had disappeared.

Curtis decided that both he and Tim had lied, and that this story had
been concocted between them.

Probably Bolton had the will and the money--the latter he did not care
for--and this thought made him uneasy, for he knew that Tim Bolton was
an unscrupulous man, and quite capable of injuring him, if he saw the
way clear to do so.

"My young friend," he said, "your story is not even plausible. The
articles are missing, and there was no one but yourself and Florence
who were in a position to take them. Do you wish me to think that my
Cousin Florence robbed the desk?"

"No, sir; I don't. Florence wouldn't do such a thing," said Dodger,
warmly.

"Florence. Is that the way you speak of a young lady?"

"She tells me to call her Florence. I used to call her Miss Florence,
but she didn't care for it."

"It seems you two have become very intimate," said Curtis, with a
sneer.

"Florence is a good friend to me. I never had so good a friend
before."

"All that is very affecting; however, it isn't to the point. Do you
know," he continued, in a sterner tone, "that I could have you
arrested for entering and breaking open my uncle's desk with
burglarious intent?"

"I suppose you could," said Dodger; "but Florence would testify that I
took nothing."

"Am I to understand, then, that you refuse to give me any information
as to the will and the money?"

"No, sir; I don't refuse. I would tell you if I knew."

Curtis regarded the boy in some perplexity.

He had every appearance of telling the truth.

Dodger had one of those honest, truthful countenances which lend
confirmation to any words spoken. If the boy told the truth, what
could have become of the will--and the money? As to the former, it
might be possible that his uncle had destroyed it, but the
disappearance of the money presented an independent difficulty.

"The will is all I care for," he said, at length. "The thief is
welcome to the money, though there was a considerable sum."

"I would find the will for you if I could," said Dodger, earnestly.

"You are positive you didn't give it to Bolton?"

"Positive, sir. I haven't seen Tim since that night."

"You may be speaking the truth, or you may not. I will talk with you
again to-morrow," and Curtis arose from his chair.

"You don't mean to keep me here?" said Dodger, in alarm.

"I shall be obliged to do so."

"I won't stay!" exclaimed Dodger, in excitement, and he ran to the
door, meaning to get out; but Curtis drew a pistol from his pocket and
aimed it at the boy.

"Understand me, boy," he said, "I am in earnest, and I am not to be
trifled with."

Dodger drew back, and Curtis opened the door and went out, bolting it
after him.




Chapter XIX.
An Attempt To Escape.


While Dodger had no discomfort to complain of, it occurred to him that
Florence would be alarmed by his long absence, for now it seemed
certain that he would have to remain overnight.

If only he could escape he would take care not to fall into such a
trap again.

He went to the window and looked out, but the distance to the ground
was so great--for the room was on the third floor--that he did not
dare to imperil his life by attempting a descent.

If there had been a rope at hand he would not have felt afraid to make
the attempt.

He examined the bed to see if it rested upon cords, but there were
slats instead.

As has already been said, there were no houses near by.

That part of the city had not been much settled, and it was as
solitary as it is in the outskirts of a country village.

If he could only reveal his position to some person outside, so as to
insure interference, he might yet obtain his freedom.

With this thought he tore a blank leaf from one of the books in the
room, and hastily penciled the following lines:

    "I am kept a prisoner in this house. I was induced to come
    here by a trick. Please get some one to join you, and come
    and demand my release."

Some weeks before Dodger could not have written so creditable a note,
but he had greatly improved since he had been under the influence and
instruction of Florence.

Dodger now posted himself at the window and waited anxiously for some
one to pass, so that he might attract his attention and throw down the
paper.

He had to wait for fifteen minutes. Then he saw approaching a young
man, not far from twenty-one, who looked like a young mechanic,
returning from his daily work.

Now was Dodger's opportunity. He put his head out of the window and
called out:

"Hello, there!"

The young man looked and saw him at the window.

"What do you want?" he asked.

"Catch this paper, and read what there is on it." He threw down the
leaf, which, after fluttering in the gentle evening breeze, found its
way to the ground and was picked up.

After reading it, the young man looked up and said: "I'll go around to
the door and inquire."

He was as good as his word. He went to the outer door and rang the
bell.

Julius came to the door.

"What's wanted, boss?" he said.

"You've got a boy locked up in a room."

"Who told you, boss?"

"He threw down a paper to me, telling me he was kept a prisoner."

"What did he say?" asked Julius.

The young man read the note aloud.

"What have to say to that, you black imp?" he demanded, sternly.

The ready wit of Julius served him in this emergency.

"Dat boy is crazy as a loon, boss!" he answered, readily. "We have to
keep him shut up for fear he'll kill some of us."

"You don't say!" ejaculated the young mechanic. "He don't look like
it."

"No, he don't; dat's a fact, boss. Fact is, dat boy is the artfullest
lunytick you ever seed. He tried to kill his mother last week."

"Is that true?"

"Dat's so, boss. And all de while he looks as innocent as a baby. If I
was to let him out he'd kill somebody, sure."

"I never would have believed it," said the young man.

"If you want to take the risk, boss, you might go up and see him. I
believe he's got a carvin'-knife about him, but I don't dare to go up
and get it away. It would be as much as this niggah's life is worth."

"No," answered the young man, hastily. "I don't want to see him. I
never did like crazy folks. I'm sorry I gave you the trouble to come
to the door."

"Oh, no trouble, boss."

"I guess I've fixed dat boy!" chuckled Julius. "Ho, ho! he can't get
ahead of old Julius! Crazy as a loon, ho, ho!"

Dodger waited anxiously for the young man to get through his
