in the dark that, crafty as the Welshmen may be, I do not think there
is a chance of their getting within a hundred yards of any of our
posts, without being seen; especially as the moon is still half full."

"Do you think that there is any chance of our being disturbed, Master
Oswald?" Roger said, as they took up their post under a low, stunted
tree.

"I do not think so. If Glendower's spies have told him that the main
body, of those who surprised him this morning, have returned to Chirk;
he may be sure that enough have been left, to hold the place
successfully against him and his wild followers, till assistance can
reach us; and he would have nothing to gain by recapturing his house,
for he could not hold it long against the force assembled at Chirk.
Besides, he must know, well enough, that if he is to fight
successfully, it must be in the woods. Whether he has studied the black
art, or no, there is little doubt that he has turned his attention
greatly to military matters, and that he is a foe who is not to be
despised. He is playing a deep game, and will give us a deal of
trouble, unless I am greatly mistaken, before we have done with him."

"I hear all sorts of strange stories of his powers, Master Oswald."

"Yes; but you see, Roger, the spirits who, as they say, serve him,
cannot be of much use; or they would have warned him of the coming of
Talbot, and we should not have taken him unawares, this morning."

"That is true enough," Roger said, in a tone of relief. "For my part, I
am not greatly alarmed at spirits. The good abbot used to threaten me
that I should be carried off by them, unless I mended my ways; but I
always slept soundly enough, and never saw aught to frighten me. They
used to say that the spirits of some of the dead monks used to walk in
the convent garden, but though my cell looked down upon it, and I have
often stood there by the hour, never did I see anything to frighten me.

"If the Welsh do come, what are we to do, master--fight them?"

"By no means, Roger. Our duty is to watch, and not to fight. You must
lift up your voice, and shout as loud as you can, and then we must run
to the gate. There we can make a fight, till the rest join us. But,
whatever you do, do not shout until I tell you. A false alarm would
raise the whole garrison; and, if naught came of it, would make us a
laughing stock."

While they were talking, both were keeping a close lookout on the
ground in front of them, and also to the right and left, for the
watches were two hundred yards apart, and they had to make sure that no
party of the enemy slipped unseen between them. Suddenly Roger plucked
Oswald's sleeve, and said in a whisper:

"Unless my eyes deceive me, master, I saw two dark figures flit from
that clump of bushes, some forty yards away, to those next to them.
There they go again!"

"I see them, Roger. It may be that they are spies, who have crept up
close. Let us give chase to them."

"Shall I shout, master?"

"No, no. This is not an attack. Stoop as low as you can or, if they
look back, they will see that great figure of yours, and be off like
hares. Run as softly as you can."

Stooping low, they set off at a run and, being certain that the figures
were making straight for the forest, they did not pause to get another
glimpse of them, but ran straight on. They had gone some seventy or
eighty yards, when they heard a stifled exclamation; and then, without
further attempt at concealment, two figures rose from a bush twenty
yards ahead, and fled for the forest. There was no more occasion for
stooping and, at the top of their speed, Oswald and Roger pursued the
fugitives.

These ran fast, but Oswald, who had outpaced his heavier companion,
came up to them when within fifty yards of the edge of the forest; and,
passing them, drew his sword and faced them.

"Surrender," he said, "or I will cut you down."

Instead of the fierce spring that he had anticipated, the two figures
stopped suddenly, exchanged a word in Welsh, and then dropped their
cloaks. To Oswald's astonishment, two young women stood before him.
They evidently belonged to the upper class. Both were richly dressed.
They wore heavy gold chains round their necks, and bracelets of the
same metal; set, as Oswald noticed by the reflection of the moon, with
jewels. They had also brooches, and their girdles were held in with
massive gold clasps.

By this time Roger had come up, and stood staring with astonishment.

"Take these, good fellows," the girl said in English, as she began to
unfasten her necklace. "Take these, and let us go. They will make you
rich."

"I am an esquire of Sir Henry Percy," Oswald said, "and I rob not
women. By your appearance, I should judge you to be daughters of
Glendower."

"It would be useless to deny it," one of the girls said, proudly.

"Why do you come spying here?" Oswald said. "Surely, among your
father's warriors, others better suited for such work might have been
found."

"We were not spying," the girl replied. "We have lain hidden all day,
and were but making our escape."

"How can that be, madam? We had a guard all round the castle, and know
that none can have escaped."

"Being an esquire, you are a gentleman, sir, and will not disclose what
I am about to tell you; though, indeed, now that our father's house is
in your hands, it boots not much whether the secret is known. There is
a secret passage from the castle that opens into these bushes, and it
was through that that we issued out; having been in hiding all day, in
the secret chamber from which it leads.

"Well, sir, we are your prisoners; and shall, I suppose, be sent to
London, there to be held until our father is in the usurper's hands,
which will not be, believe me, for years yet."

Oswald was silent. The two girls, some seventeen or eighteen years of
age, both possessed singular beauty they had inherited from their
father; and bore themselves with an air of fearlessness that won his
admiration. He was still but a lad and, thinking of the years these
fair girls might pass in a prison, he felt a deep pity for them. He
drew Roger aside.

"What think you, Roger? Must we send these fair young girls to prison?"

"In faith, I know not, master. Having been shut up many a time in a
cell, I have a sort of fellow feeling for prisoners; and indeed, two
fairer maidens I have never seen. Our orders were to look after
Welshmen, and see that they did not attack us. No word was said of
Welsh women. And besides, they were running away, and not thinking of
attacking us."

"That is all very well, Roger, but I cannot deceive myself. There is no
doubt that it is our duty to take these two maidens prisoners, but my
heart aches at the thought that they might pass years of their lives in
a prison. They are not responsible for their father's misdeeds and
ambition, and it may be that, if they are restored, Glendower may be
induced to treat those who fall into his hands mercifully. None but
ourselves know of this, and no one need ever know.

"I will risk it, anyhow," he said after a short pause. "I know that I
am not doing my duty in letting them go; and that, were it ever known,
I should lose all chance of further advancement, if indeed I did not
lose my life. However, it need never be known, and my conscience would
sorely trouble me, whenever I thought of them shut up in one of King
Henry's prisons."

He turned to the girls again.

"Think you, ladies," he asked, "that were you in the king's hands, your
father would make terms and submit himself?"

"Certainly not," the one who had spoken before said. "He has other
children--sons and daughters--and he would not dream of abandoning his
rights, and betraying his country, to obtain the liberty of two of us."

"In that case, then, your imprisonment would in no degree stop this
war, or bring about a renewal of peace between the two countries?"

"Certainly not; and as for us, we would strangle ourselves in prison,
did we think that any thought of us would turn our father from his
noble purpose."

"Then in that case," Oswald said quietly, "it is clear that your
captivity would do nought to bring about peace, or to allay the
troubles that have now begun. Therefore I will take on me to let you
go, though in so doing I may be failing somewhat in my duty. Only
promise me that, in the future, you will use what influence you may
possess with your father, to obtain kind treatment for prisoners who
may fall into his hands."

The expression of haughty defiance, that they had hitherto worn, faded
from the girls' faces.

"We shall never forget your kindness, sir," one said, in a low voice.
"We thank you, with all our hearts; not so much for our own sake, as
for our father's. He has been cruelly ill used. He has much to trouble
him, and although I know that our captivity would not turn him from his
purpose, it could not but greatly grieve and trouble him, and he has
already troubles enough on his shoulders.

"Will you accept one of these jewels, as a token only of our gratitude
for your kindness, shown this night to us?"

"Thanks, lady, but no gift will I take. I am failing in my duty, but at
least it shall not be said that I received aught for doing so."

"Then at least--" the girl began, turning to Roger.

"No, lady," the man-at-arms said. "I am neither knight nor esquire, but
a simple soldier; but I take no presents for saving two maidens from
capture and captivity. I have been a monk all my life, though now a
man-at-arms. Never before have I had an opportunity of doing aught of
kindness for a woman, and I am glad that the chance has fallen in my
way."

"May I ask the name of one who has done us such kindness?" the girl
said, turning to Oswald.

"It were best not, lady. It is a service that might cost me my head,
were it to be bruited about. 'Tis best, then, that even you should not
know it. I doubt not that you would preserve the secret; but you would
perhaps mention it to your father, and it were best that it were known
to none."

The girls were silent for a minute.

"Sir," the elder said, after exchanging a word or two with her sister,
"we would ask a boon of you. The successes in a war are not always on
one side. My sister and I will think often of one who has so greatly
befriended us; and were you, by any accident of war, to fall into the
Welsh hands, and should evil befall you, it would be a deep grief to
us. We pray you then, sir, to accept this little gold necklet. Its
value is small, indeed, but it was given to me when a child by my
father. My name and his are engraved on the clasp. Should you, at any
time of stress, send this to my father; right sure am I that, on
recognizing it, he would treat as dear friends those who have done so
much for his daughters. I pray you to accept it, and to wear it always
round your neck or wrist; and if it should never prove useful to you,
it will at least recall us to your thoughts."

"I cannot be so churlish, lady, as to refuse your token so offered; and
though I hope that it will not be needful to use it as you say--for,
indeed, I expect to return very shortly to my lord in Northumberland--it
will be a pleasant remembrance of the service that a good fortune has
enabled me to render, to two fair maidens. Be assured that I shall ever
keep your necklet, for the sake of the givers.

"And now, farewell! We must be back at our post, for the captain of the
guard will be going his round, and we might be missed."

"We shall never forget you, sir. May the blessing of God fall on you,
for your kind deed!"

"May all good fortune attend you!" Oswald answered; and then, with
Roger, he made his way back to his post; while the girls hurried on,
and entered the forest.



Chapter 11: Bad News.


"This has been a strange adventure, Roger."

"A very strange one, master. Lord Grey would tear his hair, if he knew
that those two pretty birds had been hiding in the cage all day, and he
never knew it. However, I see not that it can do us harm. Nay, more,
there is a probability that it may even benefit us, for if it should
happen, by ill fortune, we should ever fall into the hands of the
Welsh, and they should abstain from cutting our throats then and there,
perchance these young ladies would repay the service we have rendered
them, by taking us under their protection."

"It may be so, indeed, Roger, though I hope that I shall never hear
more of tonight's adventure. We may reason as we will, but there is no
doubt that, although we had no instructions touching the capture of
women, we have failed in our duty."

"That will in no way trouble me, Master Oswald. When I was a monk, I
failed in my duty scores of times, and am no whit the worse for it;
rather the better, indeed, since it is owing to my failures that I am
now a free man-at-arms, instead of being mewed up for life in a
convent. I shall not sleep one wink less, for having saved two of the
prettiest girls I ever saw from having been shut up, for years, in a
prison."

"I am afraid your sense of duty is not strong, Roger."

"I am afraid not, master, saving in the matter of doing my duty in face
of an enemy."

"You mean, Roger, that you will do your duty when it so pleases you,
and not otherwise."

"I expect that is the way with a good many of us," Roger laughed. "I
wonder whether Lord Grey had any idea that Glendower's daughters were
in the house when we arrived there?"

"I know not, but I remember now that they had men searching, for some
time, for signs of secret passages. Whether it was from any idea that
Glendower's daughters might be hidden away, I know not."

"Truly it might have been," Roger said, "for I saw, among the spoil
that was carried off when the others rode for Chirk, some silks and
stuffs that looked like feminine garments.

"There is somebody coming across from the next post," he broke off.
"Doubtless it is the captain. You would not tell him what we have
done?"

"Certainly not, Roger. My uncle is an old soldier, and though he would
not, for my sake, say anything about it, I think not that he would
approve of what has been done. 'Tis best, at any rate, to keep it
entirely to ourselves."

"All quiet here, as elsewhere?" Alwyn asked as he came up.

"All quiet, Uncle."

"'Tis well; for although methinks that we could hold the place against
the Welshmen, we could hardly hope that some of our posts would not be
cut off, before they could reach the house. It is well to keep watch,
but the more I think of it, the more I feel that Glendower will scarce
attack us. He could not hold the place, did he gain it; and it might
well be that, after we were turned out again, the place would be
destroyed, seeing that it would need two or three hundred men to be
shut up here, in garrison."

After waiting half an hour, Alwyn again made the round of the posts,
and then went in to rouse the party that were to relieve them. As soon
as these issued out, the sentries were called in, and stretched
themselves for three hours' sleep.

Before day dawned, a messenger rode in from Chirk, bearing Earl
Talbot's orders for the evacuation of the house, as there could be no
advantage in retaining it; and, were it empty, Glendower might return
there, and afford them another opportunity for capturing him.

On the following day the party broke up. Lord Grey rode with his men to
Ruthyn, and the forty men-at-arms from Ludlow returned to that town;
where, a few days later, the news arrived that Glendower, with a large
following, had established himself on the rugged height of Corwen, and
was engaged in strengthening the ancient fortifications on its summit.

For a time there was quiet on the border, and then came the startling
news that Glendower had suddenly surprised, plundered, and burnt to the
ground the town of Ruthyn, where a fair was being held at the time.
Then, having obtained great booty, and greatly injured his enemy Lord
Grey, he again retired. It was evident that no local force of
sufficient strength could be found to pursue Glendower into his
fastnesses on the ranges of Berwyn and Snowdon, and nothing was done
until, three months later, the king, on his return from Scotland,
marched into Wales with the levies of Warwickshire, Leicestershire, and
eight other adjacent counties, while orders were issued to the people
of Shrewsbury, and other towns on the eastern border, to hold
themselves in readiness to repel any movement of the Welsh in that
direction.

The king, however, accomplished nothing. Glendower, with his following,
took refuge among the forests of Snowdon; and the English army marched
along the north coast, putting to the sword a few bands of peasantry,
who ventured to oppose them; crossed to the Isle of Anglesey and,
entering the Franciscan monastery of Llanfaes, slew some of the monks
and carried the rest to England, and established a community of English
monks in the convent. This was done because the Franciscans had been
supporters of the late king, and were believed to have given aid and
encouragement to Glendower.

The Welsh expedition was, therefore, no more successful than the Scotch
had been.

For a time, matters settled down. Glendower was occupied in
strengthening his position. So much had his reputation spread, that
large numbers of Welshmen who had settled in England now sold their
property, gave up their positions and abandoned their careers, and made
their way across the border to join him. Still, for some months no
operations were undertaken, on either side; and, a week after the
return of the king and his forces, Sir Edmund Mortimer said to Oswald:

"I will no longer keep you and your following from your lord's side. I
have largely strengthened my garrison, and twenty men, however valiant,
are no longer of importance. As you know, I should not have asked Percy
to aid me, had I not thought that, perchance, he might have come
himself, bringing with him two or three hundred men; and that my sister
might have accompanied him. Maybe, if matters go on quietly on the
northern marches, he may be able to do so yet; but I fear that the
Scotch will take advantage of the troubles here, and may, for aught I
know, have entered into communication with Glendower, so that they may
together harass the kingdom. I have written several times to him,
telling him what good service you and his men have rendered; and that I
would I had five hundred such good fighters with me, in which case I
would undertake, single handed, to bring this fellow to reason.

"I have written a letter which I will hand you to deliver, saying that,
as at present things are quiet and Glendower is in hiding among the
mountains, I have sent you back to him; not without the hope that,
should greater events take place, he himself will come hither, for a
while, to give me the benefit of his knowledge of border warfare, even
if he comes accompanied only by my sister and a dozen spears. I may
tell you that, some two months since, he wrote saying that he should be
glad to have you, and the captain of his garrison of Alnwick, back
again; and I then wrote to him, saying that while the king was in Wales
I would hold you, seeing that Glendower might make a great foray here,
while the king was hunting for him in the north; but that, as soon as
he left with his army, I would send you home."

Alwyn and the men were all well pleased when they heard that they were
to return; for, since the raid on Glendower's house, their life had
been a dull one, to which even the fact that they were receiving pay
from Sir Edmund, as well as from Percy, was insufficient to reconcile
them; and it was with light hearts that they started, on the following
morning, for the north, arriving at Alnwick ten days after leaving. Sir
Hotspur came down into the courtyard, as they rode into the castle.

"Welcome back, Oswald; and you, my trusty Alwyn!

"I thank you all, my men, for the manner in which you have borne
yourselves, and that you have shown the men of the west how stoutly we
Northumbrians can hold our own, in the day of battle. I am glad,
indeed, to find that all that went have returned home; some bearing
scars, indeed, but none disabled. I will instruct your captain to grant
all of you a month's leave, to pay a visit to your families.

"You must sup with us tonight, Alwyn, and give us a full account of
your doings, and also your frank opinion as to the state of things in
the west, and the probability of long trouble with this strange
Welshman, who has so boldly taken up arms, and defied the strength of
England."

It was nearly a year since the party had left Alnwick, and Oswald had,
in that time, greatly increased in height and strength. He was now
eighteen, and as he was nearly six feet in height, and his figure had
filled out greatly since he had left his home, he might well have
passed as three or four years older than his real age. That evening,
Alwyn gave a full account of their fray with the Welsh.

"These men fight stoutly, Alwyn," Percy said, when he had concluded his
story.

"Right stoutly, Sir Henry, and were their discipline equal to their
bravery, they would be formidable opponents, indeed; but as it is, they
are quite unable to stand against men-at-arms in a set battle. In this
respect they are by no means equal to the Scotch, but for surprises, or
irregular fighting, I could wish to see no better men."

"It is an unfortunate affair," Percy said. "It seemed that we had
finished with Wales, at Llewellyn's death, and that the two nations had
become one. In London, and many other places, they were settled among
us. Numbers of them studied at our universities, and in Shropshire,
Radnor, Flint, and other border counties I have heard that most of the
labouring men were Welsh, and have come to speak our language; and
indeed, they form no small portion of the garrisons of the castles; so
much so that I fear that, should the Welsh really ravage the border
counties, 'tis like that not a few of the castles will fall into their
hands by the treachery of their fellow countrymen in the garrisons.

"Sir Edmund speaks very highly of you, Oswald, not only for your
behaviour in the fight, which was reported to him by Sir James Burgon,
a knight well fitted to judge in such matters, but as an inmate of his
castle. He said that, from your conversation, he has conceived a high
opinion of you.

"At present things are somewhat quiet here, and it were well that you
should, like your uncle, take a holiday for a time, and visit your
father and mother. They have sent over, several times, for news of
you."

The next morning Oswald mounted and rode off, attended by Roger, who
had asked Oswald to take him with him, as he had no relations he cared
to visit. Alwyn was going for a few days only, and indeed, would
probably have declined to take a holiday at all, had not Oswald
earnestly begged him to go with him.

"'Tis two years since you have been there," Oswald said.

"That is so, Oswald, but I have often been longer without seeing my
brother; and, in truth, of late I have had so little to do, with but
twenty men to look after, that I long for regular work and drill again.
Still, it were best that I went with you. There are turbulent times on
hand, both on this border, in Wales, and maybe in France. I may get
