"And get burned up myself? I should be fool to run such a risk as that."

This consideration suggested itself to the old man's judgment, and he
promised to bring up a lamp before long.

This he really did. Jasper found it a great relief. He was now broad
awake, the effect of the drug having passed off.

There was nothing to do, indeed, but his thoughts were busy, and he
tried hard to devise some method of escape, in case he should not be
released.

The next morning breakfast was brought to him about eight o'clock. It
was not till ten that the sliding-door was opened and the face of Jack
appeared at the opening.

"Well, boy, how do you like your quarters?" he asked, with a
disagreeable smile.

"Not at all," answered Jasper. "Why do you keep me here?"

"We had reasons for putting you here."

"What were they?"

"First and foremost, you knew too much."

"Were you afraid I should betray you?" asked Jasper.

"You might."

"I promise not to, if you will let me go."

"That's all very well, but when you get out you might break your
promise."

"Then it would be for the first time," said Jasper, proudly. "I never
break my promises."

"You talk well, boy, but it's easy to talk."

"It's all I can do. There is no way of proving what I say."

"That's so; and that's the reason I'm going to keep you."

"At that rate, you will have to keep me all my life."

"No; there's another way."

"What is it?" asked Jasper, eagerly.

"Join us, and when you're in the same box you won't go to blabbing."

"What do you mean by joining you?" asked Jasper, though he was afraid he
understood only too well.

"You ought to be smart enough to know that."

"I don't know what your business is," said our hero.

"You don't!" said Jack, ironically. "Perhaps you think we're commission
merchants, or bankers, or something of that kind, Bill and me?"

"I don't think you are either of them," said Jasper, laughing.

"Why not?"

"You don't look like a commission merchant or a banker."

"What do I look like, eh, boy?"

"You may be angry if I answer that question."

"No, I won't. Go ahead!"

"You look as if you didn't get your living in any way so honest as
that."

"Well, suppose you are right?"

"Then I am sorry. I wish you would reform and lead a different life."

"No preaching! I didn't bargain for that."

"Then all I have to say is, you are in no danger from me. I shall not
betray you."

"Perhaps you are to be trusted, but I can't run the risk. You must join
us."

"You may be wicked yourself. You have no right to make me so," said
Jasper, firmly.

"That's all nonsense. The world owes me a living, and you, too."

"Not without work. I'm going to work for my living."

"I mean you shall. You shall work for me."

"That kind of work will do the world no good. I want to do something
useful."

"So you shall. You shall help us bleed some of these bloated
aristocrats. They've got more money than is good for them--more than
they have any business to keep."

"I don't agree with you," said Jasper.

"You'd better. It is for your interest," said Jack, frowning.

"It can't be for my interest to become a law-breaker."

"Then you can stay here till you rot!" retorted the burglar, roughly.
"You won't come out of this chamber till you have agreed to become one
of us."

There was something in this threat which startled Jasper, bold and brave
as he was.

"Such an outrage won't be permitted," he said.

"Won't it?" sneered Jack. "We'll see about that. I'll take the risk. You
don't know me yet," he added, with an oath.

"Is it wholly because you are afraid I will betray you that you treat me
in this way?" asked Jasper.

"No."

"What other reason have you?"

"I'll tell you. You're the sort of boy we want. You ain't any whining,
milk-and-water sort of boy. You're brave and spirited. You would be
worth a good deal to us."

Burglar though Jack was, Jasper was not insensible to the compliment.
Any boy likes to be considered spirited, even if he does not deserve it,
and he felt flattered by this tribute, which he felt that he deserved,
at least, in part.

"I am glad you have a good opinion of my courage," he said, "but I think
I can find a better use for it than in the career you open to me. If I
accepted your proposal from fear of imprisonment it would show that I
was not such a boy as you describe."

"You are an obstinate fool!" said Jack, with a frown.

"I am obstinate in this," said Jasper, composedly. "You want to spoil my
life by making me a criminal."

"Do you mean to call me a criminal!" exclaimed Jack, angrily.

"I call you nothing--I only take you at your word."

"You'll talk differently from this a week from now!" said Jack,
prepariug to shut the sliding-door.

"Do you mean to keep me in this dark hole a week?" asked Jasper, unable
to repress a shudder.

"Ha! that disturbs you, does it?" asked the other, smiling sardonically.

"Yes, it does. You don't think I fancy it, do you?"

"Well, you know the way to end your imprisonment."

"Is there only one way?"

"There's only one way. Tell the old man, Nathan, when you've made up
your mind to accept my offer."

Without waiting for a reply Jack pushed the sliding-door in its place,
and once more Jasper found himself in the dark.




CHAPTER XXVII.

AN UNEXPECTED FRIEND.


Three days and nights passed, and Jasper was still in confinement. Three
times a day Nathan came to bring him his meals. Each time he asked our
hero:

"Are you ready to join our friends?"

And each time Jasper answered:

"No!"

"You must like staying here," said the old man.

"I am very tired of it," said Jasper, with a sigh.

"You can come out any time," said Nathan.

"Let me out now, then."

"Oh, no, my dear young friend," said Nathan, shaking his head, "not
until you accept Jack's offer."

"Good heavens!" thought Jasper, "can it be possible that in the middle
of a great city I can be imprisoned like this, with hundreds passing the
house every hour? I wish I could be heard outside."

But this was impossible, owing to the peculiar situation of the room.
The prospects of our young hero were certainly gloomy enough. But
there's an old saying that the darkest hour is just before the dawn, and
deliverance was nearer than Jasper supposed.

On the fourth day, at noon, Jasper heard steps ascending the stairs. He
supposed it to be the old man, with his dinner, and he looked up
listlessly as the sliding-door was opened. But instead of the wrinkled
face of Nathan he beheld the fresh face of a young girl, apparently
about sixteen years of age. She regarded the prisoner with curiosity and
surprise.

"Here's your dinner," she said.

"Thank you," said Jasper. "Where is the old man that generally comes
up?"

"Uncle Nathan? Oh, he's gone out for a little while."

"He's your uncle, then?"

"Yes."

"Do you live here?"

"I've only just come. He sent for me. What do they keep you here for?"
she asked, her face expressing curiosity. "Are you sick?"

"I'm sick of being cooped up here."

"Then why do you stay?"

"Because I have to. Your uncle won't let me out."

"Why not?"

"Hasn't he told you?"

"No. He only told me to bring up your dinner. I thought it was a man. I
didn't know it was a boy."

"You want to know why I am confined here?"

"Yes, if you'll tell me."

"It is because your uncle is afraid I'll inform the police against him
and the men who come here."

"I don't know much about them. Are they bad people, then?"

"I am afraid they are. They do things that make them liable to be
arrested."

"What! my uncle, too?" asked the girl, who appeared to be startled.

"I am not sure about him, but I feel sure about two men who come here.
Their names are Jack and Bill."

"I know. I have seen them both. One is a young man, the other must be
near fifty. He's stout."

"Yes."

"How long do you think they will keep you here?"

"Until I agree to join them in breaking the laws."

"That's too bad," said the girl, compassionately. "Isn't it awful to be
shut up there?"

"Yes, it is. I've been here three or four days, and it seems as many
weeks. Don't you think you could help me to escape?" asked Jasper, in a
lower tone.

The girl looked frightened.

"I wouldn't dare to," she said.

"Wouldn't you, if you were sure your uncle wouldn't find out?"

"Yes, I would," she answered, heartily.

"Don't you think you could manage it?" asked Jasper, eagerly.

"I don't know. I wish I could," she answered, with evident sincerity.

"Nancy!" called the old man's voice from below, sharply, "hasn't that
boy got through yet?"

"Coming, uncle," she answered.

"I'll speak with you again when I bring up your supper," she said, as
she hurried down stairs.

She left Jasper eager and excited. At last he had made a friend in the
camp of his enemies, and there was hope ahead.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

ESCAPE.


Jasper waited impatiently for supper-time, not that he was hungry, for
excitement had taken away his appetite, but because he was feverish with
anxiety as to his prospects of release.

"Suppose the old man should suspect her and come up with the supper
himself," he thought, anxiously.

But his anxiety proved groundless.

A little after five the door was opened and disclosed the young girl,
Nancy. His face lighted up joyfully.

"I'm glad it's you, Nancy," he said. "I was afraid I should see your
uncle. Does he suspect anything?"

"No; he scolded me for allowing you so long to eat your dinner, that's
all."

"I'll take it off the plate and eat afterward. Now, I want to talk a
little. Have you found out any way to help me?"

"I don't know. Do you think you could get out of this window?"

Jasper looked at the aperture critically.

"Yes, I think I could," he said, after a pause, "with some one on the
other side to pull me through."

"I'll do that," said Nancy.

"You will? You're a trump! What am I to do afterward? Can you help me to
leave the house?"

"That's what I've been thinking," said Nancy. "I'm afraid it wouldn't do
to let you out at the front door. It's locked and bolted, and the bolt
squeaks. I've tried it to see."

"The windows?" suggested Jasper, anxiously.

"No, I am afraid not."

"Then if I can't leave the house, it's no use to get out of this room."

"Yes, there's another way out, but it requires courage."

"I'm not a coward," said Jasper.

"No, you don't look like it," said Nancy, who was more favorably
disposed toward Jasper on account of his good looks.

"Thank you," said Jasper, gratified. "Now tell me, what is your plan?"

"There's a scuttle through which you can get out on the roof. Would you
dare to do it?"

"Yes; I might get on to some other roof."

"Yes, but you might slip off."

"I am not afraid. You think of that because you are a girl."

"Yes. I would rather stay here than trust myself on the roof."

"Do you know if the next house is higher than this?"

"Yes, it is."

"That's very awkward," said Jasper, thoughtfully.

"But there are some windows in the side of the house. You might get in
at one of them."

"And be taken for a house-breaker? Well, I must run the risk, any way.
When do you think I had better try it?"

"To-night. There'll be nobody in the house to-night but uncle and me."

"That's good," said Jasper, reflecting that Nathan looked feeble, and
being small in size would not be more than a match for his strength if
the worst came to the worst.

"When does your uncle go to bed?" he asked.

"At eleven."

"When will you come for me?"

"At twelve, or a little after."

"Are the nights dark now?" asked Jasper. "It would be rather ticklish
being on the roof if it were pitch dark."

"No, the moon will be up then."

"That's all right. If you find out anything else that will help, let me
know."

"Yes, I will."

"Nancy!"

"Yes, uncle!" answered the girl. "To-night at twelve!" she said, in a
low voice, and hurried down stairs.

Jasper, in thinking over the plan he had in view, realized that it was
one that would probably require all his courage and nerve. It would be a
great relief to get through without accident. But he never thought of
backing out. He felt that anything was better than to be confined longer
in his present prison.

It seemed a long time to wait, especially in the darkness, for the oil
was burned out in his lamp, and there was no chance of asking for a
further supply. He had forgotten it when Nancy came up with his supper.
However, he felt that it was of no particular consequence, as he was so
soon to be released.

So the hours passed. He did not permit himself to fall asleep, lest he
should not be awake when Nancy came.

At last he heard a faint noise at the door, and saw Nancy standing
outside with a candle.

"Are you ready?" she whispered.

"Yes, ready and waiting."

"Now try to get through, and I will help you."

She set down the candle, and Jasper set about his task. It was a tight
squeeze, but at last he got out, and stood on his feet in the entry.

