

"Aunt Rose," exclaimed Tom Gray, several mornings after the Christmas
dance, "I have a scheme; but, before I ask your permission to carry it
out, I want you to grant it."

"Why do you ask it at all, then, Tom, dear?" answered his aunt.

"Because we want your seal and sanction upon the undertaking," replied
Tom, giving the old lady an affectionate squeeze. "Is it granted, little
Lady Gray?" he asked.

"I am merely groping about in the dark, my boy, but I trust to your good
sense not to ask me anything too outrageous. Tell me what it is quickly,
so that I may know exactly how deeply I am implicated."

"Well," said Tom, "here's the scheme in a nutshell. I want to give a
picnic."

Mrs. Gray groaned.

"A picnic, boy? Whoever heard of a picnic in mid-winter. What mad notion
is this?"

"But you have given your consent, aunty, and no honorable woman can go
back on her word."

"So I have, child, but explain to me quickly what a winter picnic is so
that I may know the worst at once."

"A winter picnic is a glorious tramp in the woods, with a big camp-fire
at noon, for food, warmth and rest, and then a tramp back again."

"And can I trust to you to take good care of my four girls? Anne and
Jessica are not giants for strength. You must not walk them too far, or
let them get chilled; and, if you find they are growing tired, you must
bring them straight back."

"On my word of honor, as a gentleman and a Gray, I promise," said Tom,
solemnly.

"And you will all be in before dark?" continued Mrs. Gray.

"We promise," continued the young people.

"Wear your stoutest shoes and warmest clothing," she went on.

"We promise," they cried.

"And we want a lot of lunch, aunt," said Tom coaxingly, "and some nice
raw bacon for cooking and eating purposes."

"You shall have everything you want," said Mrs. Gray, "but who will
carry the lunch?"

"We will distribute it on the backs of our four pack mules," replied
Grace. "But Hippy must carry the coffee-pot. He's not to be trusted with
food."

"Now, wouldn't it be a remarkable sight to see a pack mule eating off
his own back!" observed Hippy. "There are several animals that can turn
their heads all the way around, I believe, but not the human animal."

"We had better start as soon as possible," broke in Tom. "Hurry up,
girls, and get ready, while the servants fix the lunch."

In half an hour eight young people, well muffled and mittened, started
off toward the open country. It was a clear, cold day and the
snow-covered fields and meadows sparkled in the sunshine.

"If I were a gypsy by birth, as well as by inclination," declared Tom,
as they trudged gayly along, "I should take to the road in the early
spring, and never see a roof again until cold weather."

"But being a member of a respectable family and about to enter college,
you have to sleep in a bed under cover?" added David.

"It's partly that," said Tom, "and partly the cold weather that is
responsible for my good behavior two thirds of the year. If I lived in a
warm climate all the year around, every respectable notion I had would
melt away in a week and I'd take to the open forever."

"I have never been in the woods in the winter time," said Anne. "Are
they very beautiful?"

"One of the finest sights in the world," cried Tom enthusiastically, his
wholesome face glowing from his exercise.

Just then they climbed an old stone wall and entered a forest known as
"Upton Wood," which covered an area of ten miles or more in length and
several miles across.

"It is beautiful," said Anne as she gazed up and down the wooded aisles
carpeted in white. "It is like a great cathedral. I could almost kneel
and pray at one of these snow covered stumps. They are like altars."

"The fault I find with the woods in winter," observed Grace, "is that
there is nothing to do in them, no birds and beasts to make things
lively, no flowers to pick, no brooks to wade in. Just an everlasting
stillness."

"I admit there's not much social life," replied Tom. "The inhabitants
either go to sleep or fly south, most of them. But don't forget the
rabbits and squirrels and----"

"And an occasional bear," interrupted Reddy. "They have been seen in
these parts."

"Worse than bears," said Hippy. "Wolves!"

"Goodness!" ejaculated Tom. "You are doing pretty well. I didn't know
this country was so wild. But that's going some."

"Oh, well, as to that," said David, "nobody has ever really seen
anything worse than wildcats, and we have to take old Jean's word for it
about the wolves. He claimed to have seen wolves in these woods three
years ago. As a matter of fact they chased him out, and he was obliged
to turn civilized for three months."

"Who is old Jean?" asked Tom, much interested.

"He is a French-Canadian hunter who has lived somewhere in this forest
for years. He comes into town occasionally, looking like Daniel Boone,
dressed in skins with a squirrel cap, and carrying a bunch of rabbits
that he sells to the butchers."

"He's a great sight," said Grace. "I saw him on his snowshoes one day.
He was coming down Upton Hill, where we coasted, you know, Anne, and he
sped along the fields faster than David's motor cycle."

They had been walking for some time over the hard-packed snow and were
now well into the forest, which hemmed them in on every side and seemed
to stretch out in all directions into infinite space.

"Reddy, are you perfectly sure we won't get lost in this place?"
demanded Jessica at last.

They had been walking along silently intent on their own thoughts.
Perhaps it was the grandeur of the great snow-laden trees that oppressed
them; perhaps the vast loneliness of the place, where nothing was
stirring, not even a rabbit.

"We're all right," returned Reddy. "My compass tells me. We go due north
till we want to start home and then we can either turn around and go
back due south or turn west and go home by the road."

"I have neither compass nor watch," said Hippy, "but nature's timepiece
tells me that it's lunch time. This cold air gives me an appetite."

"Gives you one?" cried David. "You old anaconda, you were born with an
appetite. You started eating boiled dumplings when you were two years
old."

"Who told you so?" demanded Hippy.

"Never mind," said David. "It's an old story in Oakdale."

"Let's feed the poor soul," interposed Grace. "It would be wanton
cruelty to keep him waiting any longer."

"He'll have to make the fire, then," said Reddy. "Make him pay for his
dumplings if he wants 'em so early."

"All right, Carrots," cried Hippy. "I'll gather fagots and make a fire,
just to keep you from talking so much."

"I'll help you, Hippy," said Nora. "I'm not ashamed to admit that I am
very hungry too. It's the people who are never able to eat at the table,
and then go off and feed up in the pantry, who always manage to shirk
their work."

The others all laughed.

"Let's make a fair division of labor," put in Grace, "so as to prevent
future talk."

While some of them gathered sticks and dried branches, the others began
clearing away the snow in an open space, where the fire could be built.

Anne and Jessica unpacked the luncheon and poured some coffee from a
glass jar into a tin pot to be heated, while Tom peeled several long
switches and impaled pieces of bacon on the ends to be cooked over the
fire, which was soon blazing comfortably.

"How do you like this, girls?" he asked presently, when the broiling
bacon began to give out an appetizing smell and the hot coffee added its
fragrance to the air. "How's this for a winter picnic?"

"I like it better than a summer picnic," interposed Hippy. "The food is
better and there are no gnats."

"Gnats are very fond of fat people," said Reddy. "They drink down their
blood like--circus lemonade."

"Get busy and give me some coffee, Red-head," said Hippy, who sat on a
stump and ate energetically, while the others were broiling their slices
of bacon.

"Here, Hippy," said Nora, pouring out a steaming cupful, "if it wasn't
interesting to watch you store it away, perhaps I wouldn't wait on you
hand and foot like this."

"This is the best way in the world to cook bacon," said Tom, holding his
wand over the fire with several pieces of bacon stuck on the forked
ends.

"A very good method, if your stick doesn't burn up," replied Anne.
"There! Mine fell into the fire. I knew it would."

Meantime, Jessica and Grace were frying the rest of the slices in a pan.

"That's good enough, but this is better and quicker," said Grace.
"There's no reason for dispensing with all the comforts of a home just
because you choose to be a woodsman, Tom."

They never forget how they enjoyed that luncheon, devouring everything
to the ultimate crumb and the final drop of hot coffee.

Although it was bitterly cold, they did not feel the chill. The brisk
walk, the warm fire and their hearty meal had quickened their blood, and
even Anne, the smallest and most delicate of them all, felt something of
Tom's enthusiasm for the deep woods.

At last it was time to start again.

The boys were trampling down the fire while the girls began stowing the
cups and coffee-pot into a basket. The woods seemed suddenly to have
grown very quiet.

"How still it is," whispered Anne. "I feel as if everything in the world
had stopped. There is not a breath stirring."

"Perhaps it has," answered Grace. "But we mustn't stop, even if
everything else has, now that the fire is out, or we'll freeze to
death."

She was just about to call the others briskly, for the air was beginning
to nip her cheeks, when something in the faces of the four boys made her
pause.

They were standing together near the remains of the fire, and seemed to
be listening intently.

Not a sound, not even the crackling of a branch disturbed the stillness
for a moment and then, from what appeared to be a great distance, came a
long, howling wail, so forlorn, so weird, it might have been the cry of
a spirit.

"What is it?" whispered the other girls, creeping about Grace.

"I think we'd better be hurrying along, now, girls," said David in a
natural voice. "It's getting late."

"You can't deceive us, David," replied Grace calmly. "We know it's
wolves."




CHAPTER XIX

WOLVES!


Wolves! The name was terrifying enough. But their cry, that
long-drawn-out, hungry call, gave the picnickers a chill of
apprehension.

"We must take the nearest way out of the wood, Reddy," exclaimed Tom.
"They are still several miles off, and, if we hurry, we may reach the
open before they do."

All started on a run, David helping Anne to keep up with the others
while Reddy looked after Jessica. Nora and Grace were well enough
trained in outdoor exercise to run without any assistance from the boys.
Indeed, Grace Harlowe could out-run most boys of her own age.

"Go straight to your left," called Reddy, consulting his compass as he
hurried Jessica over the snow.

Again they heard the angry howl of the wolves, and the last time it
seemed much nearer.

"It's a terrible business, this running after a heavy meal," muttered
Hippy, gasping for breath as he stumbled along in the track of his
friends. "I'll make a nice meal for 'em if they catch me," he added,
"and it looks as if I'd be the first to go."

"Reddy, are you sure you're right?" called Tom. "The woods don't seem to
be thinning out as they are likely to do toward the edge."

"Keep going," called Reddy, confident of the direction. "You see, we had
gone pretty far in, but I believe the open country is about a mile this
way."

A mile? Good heavens! Jessica and Anne were already stumbling from
exhaustion, while Hippy was quite winded. Another five minutes of this
and at least three of the party would be food for wolves, unless
something could be done. So thought David, who, breathless and light
headed, was now almost carrying Anne.

"Hurrah!" cried Grace, who had been running ahead of the others. "Here's
Jean's hut!"

There, sure enough, right in front of them, was a little house built of
logs and mud.

Had it been put in that particular spot years ago just to save their
eight lives now? Anne wondered vaguely as she blindly stumbled on.

As Grace lifted the wooden latch of the door, she looked over her
shoulder. Not three hundred yards away loped five gaunt, gray animals.
Their tongues hung limply from the sides of their mouths and their eyes
glowered with a fierce hunger.

"Hurry!" she cried, in an agony of fear. "Oh, hurry!"

Tom and David were carrying Anne now, while Jessica was half staggering,
assisted by Nora and Reddy. Hippy, the perspiration pouring from his
face, brought up the rear, and they had scarcely pulled him in and
barred the door before the wolves had reached the hut and were leaping
against the walls howling and snarling.

Nobody spoke for some time. Those who were not too tired were busy
thinking.

What was to be done? Eight young people, on a bitter cold winter
afternoon, shut up in a hut in the middle of a forest while five
half-starved wolves besieged the door.

Presently Tom Gray began to look about him.

There was a fireplace in the hut, which, by great good luck, contained
the remains of a large backlog. More fuel was stacked in the corner,
chiefly brushwood and sticks. He made a fire at once and the others
gathered around the blaze, for they felt the penetrating chill now,
after their rapid and exhausting flight through the forest.

"Here's a rifle," exclaimed Grace, who was also exploring, while Tom
kindled the fire.

"Good!" cried Tom. "Let's see it. It may be our salvation."

He seized the gun and examined the barrel, but, alas, there was only one
shot left in it. They searched the hut for more cartridges, but not one
could they find.

In the meantime the wolves, which might have been taken for large collie
dogs at a little distance, were trotting around the house, leaping
against the door and windows and occasionally giving a blood-curdling
howl.

"Suppose you feed me to them?" groaned Hippy. "You could get almost to
Oakdale before they finished me."

The suggestion seemed to break the apprehensive silence that had settled
down upon them, and they burst out laughing, one and all; even Anne, who
was lying on a bearskin in front of the fire.

"I suppose the beasts were driven down from the hills by hunger, and
when they smelled the fat bacon frying, the woods couldn't hold them,"
observed David. "I have always heard that a hungry wolf could smell
something to eat on another planet."

"Well, what are we going to do?" demanded Nora. "If we leave this
charming abode of Jean's, we shall be eaten alive, and if we stay in it
we shall starve."

"You won't starve for a while yet, child. You have only just eaten. You
remind me of the story of the people who were locked up in a vault in a
cemetery. They divided the candle into notches and decided to eat a
notch apiece every day. They had just finished the last notch, and were
expecting to die at any moment of starvation, when somebody unlocked the
door, and how long do you suppose they had been shut up!"
