retiring behind a hut, as also did his followers, resolved that Marizano
should forfeit his life even though his own should be the penalty.  Very
bitter were his thoughts, for his tribe had suffered from that villain
at a former period, and he longed to rid the land of him.

As he thought thus he looked at his followers with an expression of
doubt for he knew too well that the Manganja were not a warlike tribe,
and feared that the few who remained with him might forsake him in the
hour of need.  Indeed, much of his own well-known courage was to be
attributed to the fact, that his mother had belonged to a family more or
less nearly connected with the Ajawa, who are very warlike--too much so,
in truth, for it is they who, to a large extent are made use of by the
slave-dealers to carry on war with the neighbouring tribes.  Kambira's
men, however, looked resolute, though very grave.

While he was thus meditating vengeance, he observed that one of the
approaching band advanced alone without arms, and making signs of peace.
This surprised him a little, but dreading treachery, he kept under the
shelter of a hut until the stranger was close to the village; then,
observing that the party on the hill had laid down their arms and seated
themselves on the grass, he advanced, still, however, retaining his
weapons.

The stranger was a little man, and appeared timid, but seeing that the
chief evidently meant no mischief, and knowing that the guns of his
friends had him within range, he drew near.

"Where come you from?" demanded Kambira.

To this Antonio--for it was he--replied that his party came from the
coast; that they wanted to pass through the land to see it, and to find
out what it produced and what its people had to sell; that it was led by
two Englishmen, who belonged to a nation that detested slavery--the same
nation that sent out Dr Livingstone, who, as everybody knew, had passed
through that land some years before.  They were also, he said,
countrymen of the men of God who had come out to teach the Manganja the
Truth, who had helped them in their troubles, delivered them from the
slave-traders, and some of whom had died in their land.  He added that
there were Manganja men and women in their company.

The "men of God" to whom Antonio referred, and to whom he had been
expressly told by Harold Seadrift to refer, were those devoted
missionaries mentioned in a previous chapter, who, under the leadership
of the amiable and true-hearted Bishop Mackenzie, established a mission
among these very Manganja hills in the year 1861.  By a rare combination
of Christian love and manly courage under very peculiar circumstances,
they acquired extraordinary power and influence over the natives in the
space of a few months, and laid the foundation of what might have been--
perhaps may yet be--true Christianity in Central Africa.  But the
country was unhappily involved at the time in one of the wars created by
the Portuguese and Arab slave-traders.  The region was almost
depopulated by man-stealers, and by the famine that resulted from the
culture of the land having been neglected during the panic.  The good
bishop and several of his devoted band sank under the combined effects
of climate and anxiety, and died there, while the enfeebled remnant were
compelled, sorrowfully, to quit the field, to the deep regret of the
surviving Manganja.  [_The Story of the Universities' Mission to Central
Africa_, by the Reverend Henry Rowley.--We can heartily recommend this
to the young--ay, and to the old--as being, next to the Adventures of
Williams in the South Seas, one of the most interesting records of
missionary enterprise that we ever read.]

When, therefore, Antonio mentioned Bishop Mackenzie and Dr Livingstone,
a gleam of intelligent interest lit up Kambira's swarthy countenance,
and he was about to speak, but suddenly checked himself, and a stern
frown chased the gleam away.

"The Manganja," he said, after a few moments' silence, during which poor
Antonio eyed him with some distrust, "know well that these men of God
were not of the same country as the Arab and the Portuguese; that they
hated slavery and loved the Manganja, and that the graves of some of
them are with us now; but we know also that some white men are great
liars.  How am I to make sure that your leaders are English?  Why did
you not bring down the Manganja men and women you say are with you?"

"The women were footsore, and fell behind with their men," answered
Antonio, "and we thought it best not to wait for them."

"Go," rejoined Kambira, waving his hand; "if you be true men let the
Englishmen come to me, and also the Manganja, _without guns_, then I
will believe you.--Go."

The peremptory manner in which this was said left no room for reply.
Antonio therefore returned to his friends, and the chief to his cover.

On consultation and consideration it was agreed that Kambira's advice
should be acted on, "For," said Disco, removing the pipe with which he
had been solacing himself during Antonio's absence, "we can plant our
fellers on the knoll here with a blunderbuss each, and arrange a signal
so that, if there should be anything like foul play, we'd have nothin'
to do but hold aloft a kercher or suthin o' that sort, an' they'd pour a
broadside into 'em afore they could wink--d'ee see?"

"Not quite clearly," replied Harold, smiling, "because some of our
fellows can't take an aim at all, much less a good one, so they'd be as
likely to shoot us as them."

Disco pondered this a little, and shook his head, then shook the ashes
out of his pipe, and said that on the whole he was willing to risk it--
that they "could not expect to travel through Afriky without risking
summat."

As Chimbolo with his wife and the rest of the party came up at that
moment the case was put before him.  He at once advised compliance with
Kambira's request saying that the presence of himself and his friends
would be quite sufficient to put the chief's mind at rest.

In a few minutes the plan was carried out and Kambira satisfied of the
good faith of his visitors.  Nevertheless he did not at once throw open
his arms to them.  He stood upon his dignity; asked them a good many
questions, and answered a good many more, addressing himself always to
Antonio as the spokesman, it being a point of etiquette not to address
the principal of the party.  Then, presents were exchanged, in the
management of which a considerable time was spent.  One of the warriors
having in the meantime been despatched to recall the fugitives, these
began to pour out of the woods, the frail old people and forsaken
toddlers being the last to return, as they had been the last to fly.

After this, fires were kindled, fowls were chased, caught, slain,
plucked, roasted, and boiled; hippopotamus-flesh was produced, the
strangers were invited to make themselves at home, which they very soon
did.  Beer and bang were introduced; the celebrated fiddler was
reinstated, the dance, which had been so long delayed, was at last
fairly begun, and, as if to make the picture perfect and felicity
complete, the moon came out from behind a thick cloud, and clothed the
valley with a flood of silver light.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

REVEALS DISCO'S OPINIONS ABOUT SAVAGES, AND THE SAVAGES' OPINIONS OF
DISCO, AND OTHER WEIGHTY MATTERS.

As two or three of Harold's people were not very well just at that time,
he resolved to remain at Kambira's village for a few days to give them
rest, and afterwards to push on to the country of his friend Chimbolo.

This arrangement he came to the more readily that he was short of
provisions, and Kambira told him that a particular part of the country
near the shores of a lake not far distant abounded with game of all
sorts.

To Disco Lillihammer he explained his plans next day, while that worthy,
seated under the shade of a banyan-tree, was busily engaged with what he
styled his "mornin' dooties"--namely, the filling and smoking of his
cutty-pipe.

"You see, Disco," he said, "it won't do to knock up the men with
continuous travel, therefore I shall give them a spell of rest here.
Kambira tells me that there is plenty of game, large and small, to be
had not far off, so that we shall be able to replenish our stock of meat
and perchance give the niggers a feast such as they have not been
accustomed to of late, for it is not too much to expect that our rifles
will do more execution, at all events among lions and elephants, than
native spears.  Besides, I wish to see something of the people, who,
being what we may call pure out-and-out savages--"

"Savages!" interrupted Disco, removing his pipe, and pointing with the
stem of it to the village on an eminence at the outskirts of which they
were seated; "d'ee call them folk savages?"

Harold looked at the scene before him, and paused for a few moments; and
well he might, for not fifty yards off the blacksmith was plying his
work energetically, while a lad sat literally _between_ a pair of native
bellows, one of which he blew with his left hand, the other with his
right and, beyond these, groups of men and women wrought at their
primitive looms or tilled their vegetable gardens and patches of land.

"Savages!" repeated Disco, still pointing to the village with the stem
of his pipe, and gazing earnestly at his companion, "humph!"

It is probable that Disco might have said more, but he was an accurate
judge of the precise moment when a pipe is about to go out, and delay
will prove fatal.  He therefore applied himself diligently to suck and
cherish the dying spark.  Having revived its powers to such an extent
that clouds enveloped his visage, and his nose, being red, loomed
luridly through them, he removed the pipe, and again said, "Humph!  They
ain't a bit more savages, sir, than you or me is."

"Perhaps not," replied Harold.  "To say truth, it would be difficult to
point out any peculiarity that justifies the name, except the fact that
they wear very little clothing, and neither go to school nor church."

"They wears no clothin'," rejoined Disco, "'cause they don't need for to
do so; an' they don't go to church or school, 'cause they hain't got
none to go to--that same bein' not the fault o' the niggers, but o' them
as knows better."

"There's truth in what you say, Disco," returned Harold, with a smile,
"but come, you must admit that there is something savage in the custom
they have of wearing these hideous lip-rings."

The custom to which he referred is one which prevails among several of
the tribes of Africa, and is indeed so utterly hideous and outrageous
that we should be justified in refusing to believe it, were we not
assured of the fact by Dr Livingstone and other missionaries and
travellers of unquestionable integrity.  The ring is worn in the upper
lip, not hanging from it but fitted into a hole in it in such a manner
as to thrust the lip straight and far out from the face.  As the ring is
about the size of an ordinary napkin-ring, it may be easily believed,
that time is required for the formation of the deformity.  At an early
age the middle of the upper lip of a girl is pierced close to the nose,
and a small pin introduced to prevent the hole closing up.  After it is
healed the pin is taken out and a larger one forced into its place, and
so for weeks, months, and years the process of increasing the size of
the lip goes on, until a ring of two inches in diameter can be
introduced.  Nearly all the women in these parts use this ring, or, as
it is called, pelele.  Some make them of bamboo, others of ivory or tin.
When a wearer of the pelele smiles, the action of the cheek muscles
draws the lip tight which has the effect of raising the ring towards the
eyebrows, so that the nose is seen in the middle of it, and the teeth
are exposed, a revelation which shows that the latter have been chipped
to sharp points so as to resemble the teeth of a cat or crocodile.

"No doubt," said Disco, in reply to Harold's remark, "the lip-rings are
uncommon ugly, but the principle o' the thing, sir, that's w'ere it is,
the principle ain't no wuss than ear-rings.  The savages, as we calls
'em, bores holes in their lips an' sticks rings into 'em.  The civilised
folk, as we calls ourselves, bores holes in their ears an' sticks rings
into 'em.  W'ere's the difference? that's wot _I_ want to know."

"There's not much difference in principle," said Harold, laughing, "but
there is a great difference in appearance.  Ear-rings hang gracefully;
lip-rings stick out horribly."

"H'm! it appears to me that that's a matter o' taste, now.  Howsoever, I
do admit that lip-rings is wuss than ear-rings; moreover it must make
kissin' somewhat difficult, not to say onpleasant, but, as I said
before, so I says again, It's all in the principle w'ere it lies.  W'y,
look here, sir,--savages, as we call 'em, wear brass rings round their
necks, our women wear gold and brass chains.  The savages wear anklets,
we wear bracelets.  They have no end o' rings on their toes, we have 'em
on our fingers.  Some savages shave their heads, some of us shaves our
faces.  Their women are raither given to clothin' which is too short and
too narrer, ours come out in toggery far too wide, and so long
sometimes, that a feller daren't come within a fathom of 'em astarn
without runnin' the risk o' trampin' on, an' carrying away some o' the
canvas.  The savage women frizzes out their hair into most fantastical
shapes, till the very monkeys has to hold their sides sittin' in the
trees larfin' at 'em--and wot do _we_ do in regard to that?  W'y, some
of _our_ women puts on a mixture o' hairy pads, an' combs, an' pins, an'
ribbons, an' flowers, in a bundle about twice the size o' their heads,
all jumbled together in such a way as to defy description; an' if the
monkeys was to see _them_, they'd go off into such fits that they'd
bu'st altogether an' the race would become extinct in Afriky.  No, sir;
it's my opinion that there ain't no such thing as savages--or, if you
choose to put it the tother way, we're all savages together."

Disco uttered the last part of his speech with intense energy, winding
it up with the usual slap on the thigh, delivered with unusual fervour,
and then, becoming aware that the vital spark of the cutty had all but
fled, he applied himself to its resuscitation, in which occupation he
found relief to his feelings, and himself formed a brilliant
illustration of his remarks on savage customs.

Harold admitted that there was much truth in what he said, but rather
inclined to the opinion that of the two sets of savages the uncivilised
were, if anything, the wildest.  Disco however, contrary to his usual
habits, had nailed his colours to the mast on that point and could not
haul them down.  Meanwhile Harold's opinion was to some extent justified
by the appearance of a young man, who, issuing from the jungle close at
hand, advanced towards them.

Most of the men at the village displayed a good deal of pride, if not
taste, in the arrangement of their hair.  Some wore it long and twisted
into a coil which hung down their backs; others trained and stiffened it
in such a way that it took the form of buffalo horns, while some allowed
it to hang over the shoulders in large masses, and many shaved it either
entirely, or partially in definite patterns.  But the young dandy who
now approached outdid all others, for he had twisted his hair into
innumerable little tails, which, being stiffened by fillets of the inner
bark of a tree, stuck straight out and radiated from the head in all
directions.  His costume otherwise was simple enough, consisting merely
of a small kilt of white calico.  He was accompanied by Antonio.

"We've be come from Kambira," said the interpreter, "to tell you for
come to feast."

"All right," said Disco, rising; "always ready for wittles if you only
gives us an hour or two between times.--I say, Tony," (he had by that
time reduced the interpreter's name to this extent), "ask this feller
what he means by makin' sitch a guy of hisself."

"Hims say it look well," said Antonio, with a broad grin.

"Looks well--eh? and ask him why the women wear that abominable pelele."

When this question was put to the black dandy, he looked at Disco
evidently in surprise at his stupidity.  "Because it is the fashion," he
said.

"They wear it for beauty, to be sure!  Men have beards and whiskers;
women have none, and what kind of creature would woman be without
whiskers, and without a pelele?  She would have a mouth like a man, and
no beard!"

The bare idea of such a state of things tickled the dandy so much that
he went into roars of laughter, insomuch that all the radiating tails of
his head quivered again.  The effect of laughter and tails together was
irresistible.  Harold, Disco, and Antonio laughed in sympathy, till the
tears ran down their cheeks, and then returned to the village where
Kambira and his chief men awaited them.

While enjoying the feast prepared for them, Harold communicated his
intentions and desires to the chief, who was delighted at the prospect
of having such powerful allies on a hunting expedition.

The playful Obo meanwhile was clambering over his father's person like a
black monkey.  He appeared to be particularly fond of his father, and as
love begets love, it is not surprising that Kambira was excessively fond
of Obo.  But Obo, becoming obstreperous, received an amicable punch from
his father, which sent him headlong into a basket of boiled
hippopotamus.  He gave a wild howl of alarm as Disco snatched him out of
the dish, dripping with fat, and set him on his knee.

"There, there, don't blubber," said the seaman, tenderly wiping off the
fat while the natives, including Kambira, exploded with laughter.  "You
ain't burnt, are you?"

As Obo could not reply, Disco put his finger into the gravy from which
the urchin had been rescued, and satisfied himself that it was not hot
enough to have done the child injury.  This was also rendered apparent
by his suddenly ceasing to cry, struggling off Disco's knee, and
renewing his assaults on his easy-going father.

Accepting an egg which was offered him by Yohama, Harold broke it, and
entered into conversation with Kambira through the medium of Antonio.

"Is your boy's mother a--Hollo! there's a chick in this egg," he
exclaimed, throwing the offensive morsel into the fire.

Jumbo, who sat near the place where it fell, snatched it up, grinned,
and putting it into his cavernous mouth, swallowed it.

"Dem's betterer wid chickies," he said, resuming his gravity and his
knife and fingers,--forks being held by him in light esteem.

"Ask him, Antonio, if Obo's mother is alive," said Harold, trying
another egg, which proved to be in better condition.

The interpreter, instead of putting the question without comment, as was
his wont, shook his head, looked mysterious, and whispered--"No better
ask dat.  Hims lost him's wife.  The slave-hunters cotch her some time
ago, and carry her off when hims away hunting.  Hims awful mad, worser
dan mad elerphint when hims speak to 'bout her."

Harold of course dropped the subject at once, after remarking that he
supposed Yohama was the child's grandmother.

"Yis," said Antonio; "she be Kambira's moder, an' Obo's gran'moder--bof
