a thick rope would have been too heavy for the kite to carry--just as it
had been too heavy for the strength of the eagle.  A slender cord,
therefore, like that they were obliged to make, required to be
faultless--else the life of some one of them might be sacrificed while
attempting the ascent.

With a foreknowledge of this, it is hardly necessary to say that Ossaroo
did his best in the manufacture of that rope--every strand of it being
twisted between his index finger and his thumb, as smoothly and evenly
as if he had been spinning it for a fishing-line.

The framework of the kite was made out of split culms of the ringall
bamboo; which, on account of its strength, elasticity, and lightness,
was far superior for the purpose to any species of exogenous wood; while
the glue for laying on the paper was procured from the root of an arum--
grated, and then boiled into a glutinous starch.

In about a week after the notion of a kite had been "hatched" in the
brain of Caspar, the bird itself might have been seen outside the door
of the hut--full-fledged and ready for flight!



CHAPTER FORTY FOUR.

FLYING THE KITE.

The kite having been thus prepared, they only waited for an opportunity
of flying it--for a day when the wind should be sufficiently strong, and
blowing from the right quarter--that is, towards that portion of the
precipice over which it appeared best that the paper-bird should be
dispatched.  This was the same place, where the ladders had been set,
and where they had unsuccessfully endeavoured to send up the bearcoot.

They had already ascended one of the isolated cairns of rock, that stood
within the valley nearly opposite this part of the cliff; and from its
top they had been able to get a view--though not a very good one--of a
portion of the sloping declivity of the mountain above.  It appeared to
be covered with snow--here and there supporting huge masses of
something, either boulders of rock, or dark-coloured lumps of ice.  The
eyes of our adventurers rested on these with the greatest interest: as
they had done upon a former occasion, when about to send the bearcoot
among them.  Now they had conceived higher hopes than ever--founded upon
the presence of these masses.  If they should succeed in flying the kite
into their midst, and there dropping it, it was not only possible, but
highly probable, that it might either get the rope warped around one of
them, or itself become caught between two, so as to hold fast.  To
render this the more practicable, they had furnished its wings with
spurs--in other words, they had left the cross-piece of bamboo to extend
on each side about a foot beyond the edge of the paper; and near the end
of each extension, they had placed other pieces transversely, and lashed
them firmly--so that they might act as the flukes of an anchor.

They had spared neither pains nor ingenuity to ensure success.  They had
done all, that man could do, to deserve it.

Fortune was so far favourable, as not to keep them long in suspense.
Only two or three days had passed, when one came, on which the wind blew
in their favour--exactly as they wanted it.  It was a stiff breeze,
steady in the right direction, and strong enough to carry up the largest
of paper kites.

Proceeding to the place, where the ladders were set, with the huge bird
carried in the arms of Ossaroo, they made ready for its flight.  Karl
was to start the kite, and guide its ascent from the ground; while
Caspar and the shikaree were to run out with the rope: as it would
require the united strength of both to hold such a broad-breasted bird
against the wind.  They had taken the precaution to cut away the bushes
to a long distance backwards from the cliff, and so clear the track:
there was therefore nothing to impede them while paying out the string.

It was arranged that Karl should have direction of the movement, and
give out the signal for them to start.

It was a moment of vivid emotion, as each of he three placed himself in
the position assigned to him--Karl by the kite, with its backbone in one
hand, and its tail in the other--Ossaroo clutching the rope--and Caspar
by his side, holding the great coil in readiness for delivery.

Karl poised the creature upon the stump of its tail; and then, lifting
with all his strength--so as to raise it several feet from the ground--
he gave forth the signal at the highest pitch of his voice.

At the same instant, Caspar and the shikaree ran backward--tightening
the rope as they went; and like a vast vulture with outspread wings, the
bird soared silently upward into the air.

It rose with a regular majestic motion, soon overtopping the trees that
grew near, and still mounting on towards the summit of the cliff.

Karl cheered as he saw it ascend.  The others were too busy in the
performance of their parts to find time for this expression of triumph;
and not until the kite had soared high into the heavens, and appeared
many yards above the brow of the beetling precipice, did Caspar and
Ossaroo respond to the cheering of Karl.  Then both together gave vent
to their excited feelings in a long-continued hurrah!

"Let go now, Ossaroo!" cried Karl, shouting so as to be heard above the
wind.  "You, Caspar, keep hold of the end of the cord."

Ossaroo, obedient to the order, suddenly slackened his hold--at the same
time springing towards Caspar, and prudently seizing the end along with
him.

The kite, thus released, like some huge bird that had received its
death-wound, turned head downwards towards the earth; and, after making
various sinuous evolutions through the air, flouting its long tail first
in one direction then in another--it was seen darting down towards the
acclivity of the mountain.  At length, passing behind the summit of the
cliffs, it was no longer visible to the eyes of those who had aided it
in its lofty flight, and then left it helplessly to fall.

So far they had succeeded to the utmost of their expectations.  The kite
had alighted, just where they wanted it.

But now arose the question--would it stay there?  In other words, would
it be caught among the rocks, and hold fast?

If not, they would have to fly it again and again, until it should get
fastened above, or until the experiment should prove a failure.

Karl stepped forward to decide the point--the others looking on with an
eagerness of glance, that betrayed how deep was their interest in the
result.

Karl's hand trembled as he laid hold of the cord.  At first he pulled
upon it in a gentle way--hand over hand--so as merely to take in the
slack.

At length it began to tighten, requiring greater strength to take it in:
as if the kite was still free, and dragging over the snow.

This produced anything but a pleasant anticipation; and as the rope came
to hand, foot after foot, and yard after yard, a shadow, that had stolen
over the countenances of all three, became sensibly darker.

Only for a short while did this shadow remain.  It vanished, more
suddenly than it had arisen: when they saw the running cord become
abruptly checked, and then tighten as Karl continued to draw it in.  He
pulled upon it, at first exerting only a part of his strength, as if
afraid that it might again come loose.  After awhile, gaining
confidence, he pulled with all his power.  It still held fast!

Ossaroo and Caspar now joined their strength to his; and all three
pulled together.

Hurrah! the kite would not come!  The cord kept its place, stretching to
the bottom of the cliff, as taut as the main-stay of a ship!

Ejaculations of joy escaped from all three at the same instant of time:
and for some moments they stood, tightly clutching the rope, and holding
it firmly: as if in dread of its being dragged out of their grasp by
some hostile and invisible hand.

At length Karl suggested the propriety of making the cord secure, by
fastening it to some object.  A large upright stone, close by the bottom
of the cliff, appeared to be the most proper thing; and to this they
determined upon tying it.

Still keeping it taut--lest by slackening it they might disturb the
anchor aloft--they moved hand over hand along the rope, until they had
got close to the bottom of the precipice.  Then, while Karl and Caspar
still held on, Ossaroo gathered up the slack; and, turning it several
times round the stone, securely _belayed_ it.

Nothing more remained but to make the steps--which had been already
designed--adjust them in their places--climb up to the top of the
cliff--and be free as the mountain breeze, which would there be blowing
around them!

The thought of such a lucky deliverance filled them once more with
joyous imaginings; and they stood around the stone, to which the rope
had been attached--congratulating themselves, as if they had already
escaped.

They knew there would still be some time required to make the steps, and
fix them in their places; but, since they no longer doubted their
ability to accomplish the ascent, the interval of time might be passed
cheerfully enough; and, with this pleasant anticipation, they went back
to their workshop in the best of spirits, and cooked themselves a more
careful dinner than they had eaten since the discovery of the daphne
trees.



CHAPTER FORTY FIVE.

THE ROPE-LADDER.

It took them another day--with their blades all busy from morning till
night--to prepare the pegs which were to constitute the "rounds" of
their rope-ladder.  More than a hundred were required: as the cliff
where the rope passed up was over a hundred yards in height; and the
steps were intended to be placed at equal distances of about two feet
apart.

It had been their design at first to insert the steps in the rope--
between the strands of which it was composed; but, on reflection, a
better plan suggested itself.  By opening the strands to let in the
pieces of wood, the rope might be weakened, so much as to endanger its
breaking; and this alone, above all things, was to be avoided.  It was
deemed more prudent to leave the cord untouched, and place the sticks
crosswise outside of it.  Whipped round with strong pieces of other
cord, they could easily be made to keep their places--more especially
as, with the hands of the climber grasping the rope above, no one stick
would have to carry the full weight of his body; and, even should one of
them slip a little out of place, there would be no great danger of an
accident arising out of the circumstance.

It occupied them a second day in twining the pieces of string, required
for tying the sticks in their places; and, upon the morning of the
third, they returned to the cliff, with the intention of transforming
the cord, that the kite had carried up, into a rope-ladder.

The mode by which they intended to effect this purpose will be easily
understood--after what has been already said respecting it.  The little
sticks were to be laid transversely against the rope, and then so
tightly tied in their places, as to prevent them from slipping down.
The first was to be attached about the height of a man's waist from the
ground; and the second on a level with his chin.  Then with the feet
resting upon the first, and the left hand grasping the rope above, it
would be possible to fix another at the height of the chin, as it would
then be.  By climbing up to the second, a fourth could be placed at a
little distance above; and thus in succession, till the top of the cliff
should be attained.

It was not supposed, that any one could continue the process of
attaching the steps, till all were set in their places; nor did they
contemplate being able to complete the work in a little time.  On the
contrary, they expected it to occupy them for days; and they knew,
moreover, that long intervals of rest would be required by any one who
should have to execute it.  Standing upon such unstable footing, for any
considerable length of time, would be both irksome and fatiguing; and
they were about to enter upon the task with a full knowledge of its
difficulties.

On reaching the cord they at once set to work upon it.  Rather should it
be said, that one of them did so: for only one could work at a time in
this, the last labour, as they supposed, they would have to perform in
that lone valley.

In attaching the steps to the rope, Ossaroo was allowed to act as sole
operator: since neither of the others understood the handling of cordage
so well as he.  They could but act as spectators and the only purpose
which their presence could serve, was to cheer the shikaree by their
company and conversation.

By good fortune it was not necessary for Ossaroo to fix any steps to the
first thirty feet of the kite cord.  One of the long ladders which they
had made enabled him to ascend that far without using the sticks; and,
indeed, all of the ladders might have served in this way, had the kite
carried its cord up the cliff within reach of them.  Unfortunately, this
did not happen to be the case; and only the first ladder could be made
available.

Placing it nearly parallel with the rope, Ossaroo mounted up; and, when
near its top, commenced attaching the steps.  He had carried up along
with him about a dozen of the little sticks, with cords to correspond--
in a sort of pouch, which he had formed with the skirts of his cotton
tunic.

Karl and Caspar below, seated upon stones, and Fritz squatted on the
ground, watched the movements of the shikaree with deep and speechless
interest.

It was not a very long time, before he had adjusted the first two pegs
in their proper places; and, then letting himself off the ladder, and
placing both his feet upon the first cross-piece, in a way that they
balanced one another and kept the stick in a horizontal position--he
proceeded to attach the third about the height of his chin.

To do this required, a good deal of adroitness; but Ossaroo was gifted
with this quality to a high degree; and, so far as his footing was
concerned, the Hindoo was as much at home upon a rope, as would have
been one of those monkeys sacred to the believers in his Brahministic
creed.

Any other feet would soon have become tired--resting upon such a slender
support; but Ossaroo had been accustomed to climbing the tall lofty
palms, until his toes had acquired a certain degree of prehensile power;
and the smallest branch or protuberance on the trunk of a tree, or even
a knot on a rope, was footing enough to enable him to hold on for many
minutes at a time.  He had no difficulty, therefore, in balancing
himself upon the sticks, which he had already attached; nor ascending
from one to the other, as each was got into its place.  In this way he
proceeded, until the stock which he had taken up with him was exhausted,
and his apron hung empty.  Then, letting himself down from step to step,
and cautiously returning to the wooden ladder, he descended to the
bottom of the cliff.

Karl or Caspar might have rendered his coming down unnecessary, as
either could have carried so light a "hod" up the ladder; but there was
good reason why Ossaroo should make the descent--that was, to rest and
refresh himself.

He did not remain very long below--just long enough to let the blood
circulate along the soles of his naked feet--and then, with his apron
distended--being once more full of sticks--he reclimbed the ladder,
swung himself out upon the cord, and clambered up the steps he had
already fixed in their places.

His second stock of sticks becoming exhausted as the first, he again
revisited the earth; again allowed himself an interval of rest; and then
ascended as before.

With Ossaroo proceeding in this fashion, the remainder of the day was
spent--a long interval being allowed for dinner; which Karl and Caspar,
having nothing else to do, had cooked with extra care.  They did not go
home to the hut to perform their culinary operations.  There would have
been no advantage in doing so: since the kitchen accommodation there was
not a whit better than where they were at work; and the larder contained
nothing more than what they had brought along with them--some dried
ibex-meat.  But Karl had not been idle for a portion of the time; and
had collected various roots and fruits that, when roasted, not only
helped out the meal, but rendered it sufficiently luxurious for stomachs
like theirs, no longer fastidious.

After dinner, Ossaroo indulged in a long smoke of his favourite "bang;"
and, stimulated by this, returned to his task with renewed energy.

So successful was he in its accomplishment, that, before sunset he had
full fifty steps in place; which, along with the wooden ladder, enabled
him to climb nearly a third of the way up the cliff.

Of course darkness put an end to his operations for that day; and with
the intention of continuing them on the morrow, both the operator and
spectators wended their way back to the hut--Karl and Caspar showing as
much respect to Ossaroo, as if he had been the master architect, and
they only his assistants or labourers.  Even Fritz appeared to be
impressed with the belief that the shikaree was the most important
personage in the party: for every time that the latter descended from
the cliff the dog had paid his "devoirs" to him, frisking around,
leaping up, and looking steadfastly in his face, as if congratulating
him on being their deliverer!

On the road home Fritz continued these demonstrations--springing against
the legs of the shikaree so as occasionally to impede his progress,
evidently convinced--either from his own observation or from the respect
which he saw the others were paying him--that the Hindoo was the hero of
the day!



CHAPTER FORTY SIX.

OSSAROO MAKES A QUICK DESCENT.

Next morning, as soon as they had despatched an early meal, they
returned to their work--that is, Ossaroo to work, the others to watch.

Unfortunately on this day the weather was unfavourable for operations.
There was a high wind, not continuous, but blowing in short, quick
puffs--gusty and violent.

As Ossaroo hung upon the rope half-way up the precipice, the wind acting
upon his body, carried him at times several feet out from the face of
the cliff--causing him also to oscillate violently from side to side,
notwithstanding that the rope was fast at both ends.

It was fearful to look at him thus suspended, and swinging in mid-air.
At times the hearts of the spectators were filled with consternation,
lest the brave shikaree should either have his brains dashed out against
the beetling cliff; or, being forced to let go his hold, be flung far
out, and falling upon the rocks below, get crushed to atoms.

Often during the earlier part of the day were the alarms of Karl and
Caspar raised to such a height, that they shouted to Ossaroo to come
down; and when down, entreated him not to go up again until, by the
lulling of the wind, the danger should become diminished.

Their entreaties, however, were of no avail.  The shikaree, accustomed
all his life to braving the elements, felt no fear of them; but on the
contrary, seemed to feel a pride, if not an actual pleasure, in thus
daring danger.

Even while swinging out from the cliff, and oscillating along its
_facade_--like the pendulum of some gigantic clock--he was seen tying
the strings and adjusting the pieces of stick, as coolly, as if he had
been standing upon _terra firma_ at the bottom!

Thus, nearly to the hour of noon, did Ossaroo continue his arduous
undertaking--of course with the usual intervals of rest, during each of
which Karl and Caspar reiterated their entreaties for him to desist and
leave the work to be executed at a more favourable opportunity.  Fritz,
too, while lavishing his caresses on the daring climber, seemed to look
persuadingly into his face--as if he knew there was danger in what the
Hindoo was doing.

It was all in vain.  The shikaree, while resisting all their efforts to
restrain him, seemed to scorn the danger which they dreaded; and,
without hesitation, returned to his perilous task.

And no doubt he would have succeeded in accomplishing it, allowing due
time for its completion.  It was not the wind that would have shaken him
from that rope, to which he clung with the tenacity of a spider.  Had
the support proved true, he could have held on, even though it had been
blowing a hurricane!

It was not in this that his chief danger lay; nor from such source was
it to come; but from one altogether unexpected and unthought-of.

It was near the hour of noon, and Ossaroo had already succeeded in
setting the steps up to about half the height of the cliff.  He had
descended for a fresh supply of sticks; and, having gone up the
tree-ladder, and swung himself back upon the kite cord, was just
commencing to clamber up it--as he had already done nearly a score of
times.

The eyes of Karl and Caspar were upon him, following his movements, as
they had been doing all along; for, despite his frequent repetition of
the ascent, it was always a perilous performance, and interesting to
behold.

Just as he had got free from the ladder, and fairly out upon the rope, a
cry came from his lips that thrilled the hearts of the spectators with
alarm: for they knew that the utterance was one of terror.  They needed
no explanation of that cry; for at the same moment that it reached their
ears, they perceived the danger that had caused Ossaroo to utter it.  He
was descending along the facade of the cliff--not gliding down the rope
of his own free will, but as if the kite had got loose at the top, and,
yielding to the weight of his body, was being dragged over the surface
of the snow!

At first, he appeared to be descending only very slowly; and, but for
the cries he was putting forth, and the slackening of the rope below,
they upon the ground might not have been aware of what was going on.
But they had not regarded his movements for many seconds, before
perceiving the true state of the case, and the fearful peril in which
their faithful shikaree was now placed.
