his woe-begone face unconsciously towards her.  Even the much-increased
grey tinge in the hair and beard, the lines of despair on the brow, and
the hollow cheeks could not disguise the face that she loved so well.  A
sharp cry burst from her, and she made an attempt to rush towards him,
but the iron grip of Peter restrained her.

"It's a dead man he'll be if you do!" he said, in a stern but low tone.
"Don't you see de janissary?  Your _promise_--"

"Yes, yes!  I'll restrain myself _now_, Peter.  Do let me stay a
minute--just to look--"

"No, _no_!  Come 'long wid you--idle t'ing!" he exclaimed, with sudden
severity, and apparent though not real violence, for at the moment his
watchful eye had observed one of the slave guards approaching them.

As the two went hurriedly past the place where Hugh Sommers was sitting,
he looked up with an expression of pity.

"Poor thing!" he said.  "The black scoundrel is cruel to you, and I am
powerless to kick him!"

He clinked the fetters on his legs significantly as he spoke.

The mingled pathos and indignation of the loved voice was too much for
poor Hester.  She was on the point of exclaiming "Father!" when Peter's
great black paw extinguished her mouth, and was not removed till they
were out of danger.

"You's like all de rest ob de womans," said the negro, as they hurried
through the streets; "awrful dif'cult to manidge.  Come 'long, we'll go
home and hab a talk ober it."

Hester was too miserable to reply.  She did not again speak till they
were both safe in the boudoir.

There she sat down on the bed, laid her face in her hands, and burst
into a passion of tears, while Peter stood looking on, his head nearly
touching the low ceiling, his bulky frame filling half the remainder of
the little room, and two mighty unbidden tears in his great eyes.

"Das right, Geo'giana," he said, in a soft voice; "cry away, it'll do
you good.  Nuffin like cryin' w'en you's fit to bust!  An' w'en you's
got it ober we'll talk all about it."

"Oh, Peter!" cried Hester, drying her eyes somewhat impatiently; "how
_could_ you be so cruel?  Why--why could you not have waited just one
minute to let me look at him?"

"Because, my dear, de man wid de whip was comin', an' he'd bery soon hab
laid it across my back," replied the negro gently.

"And what if he had done so?" demanded Hester, with a slight touch of
indignation; "could you not have suffered a little whipping for my
sake?"

"Yes, Geo'giana," returned Peter, with much humility, "I could suffer
great deal more'n dat for your sake; but dere's no sich t'ings as
_little_ whippin's know'd ob in dis yar town.  W'en de lash am goin' he
usu'lly makes de hair fly.  Moreober, dey whip womans as well as mans,
an' if he was to took de bit out ob your pretty shoulder, I couldn't
suffer dat, you know.  Likewise," continued Peter, becoming more
argumentative in his manner, "you was just a-goin' to took de bit in
your teef; an' if you'd bin allowed to frow your arms round your
fadder's neck an' rub all de black ober his face what would hab bin de
consikence?"

Peter felt his position so strong at this point that he put the question
almost triumphantly, and Hester was constrained to acknowledge that he
had acted wisely after all.

"But," continued she, with still a little of reproach in her tone, "what
was the use of taking me to see my darling father at all, if this is all
that is to come of it?"

"You's a leetle obstropolous in you' fancies, Geo'giana.  Dis am _not_
all what's to come ob it.  You see, I has pity on your poo' heart, so I
t'ink you might go ebery oder day an' hab a good look at your fadder;
but how kin you go if you not know whar he works?  So I tooked you to
show you de way.  But I's a'most sorry I did now, for you's got no
self-'straint, an' if you goes by you'self you'll git took up for
sartin', an' dey'll whip your fadder till he's dead, or frow him on de
hooks, or skin him alive, or--"

"Oh, horrible!  Don't say such dreadful things, Peter!" exclaimed
Hester, covering her face with her hands.

Feeling that he had said quite enough to impress the poor girl with the
absolute necessity of being careful, he promised earnestly never again
to allude to such dreadful things.

"But, Geo'giana," he added impressively, "you mus' promise me on your
word ob honour, w'ich Geo'ge Foster says English gen'lemans _neber_
break--an' I s'pose he's right."

"Yes, quite right, Peter; true gentlemen _never_ break their word."

"An' I s'pose female gen'lemans am de same."

"Of course!  Go on," replied the girl, with a faint smile.

"Well, as I was 'bout to say, you mus' promise me on your word ob
honour, dat you'll neber go _alone_ to see your fadder, but allers in
company wid Sally; dat you neber, neber speak to him, an' dat you neber
make you'self know'd to him till de right time comes."

"These are hard conditions, Peter, but I see the reasonableness of them
all, and promise--at least I promise to do my best."

"Das 'nuff, Geo'giana.  Neezer man nor womans kin do more'n deir best.
Now I mus' bid you good-day, so keep up your heart an' you'll see
eberyt'ing come right in de end."

With these cheering words the sympathetic negro took his leave; and
Hester, resuming her embroidery, sat down at her little window, not to
work, but to gaze dreamily at the beautiful sea, and cast about in her
mind how she should act in order to alleviate if possible her father's
sad condition.

That very afternoon she received a visit from her stolid but
affectionate friend Sally, who at once said that she knew of a splendid
plan for doing him a great deal of good.

"And what is your plan?" asked Hester eagerly.

"Gib him two or t'ree biscuits," said Sally.

Her friend received the suggestion with a look of disappointment.

"What a stupid thing you are, Sally!  How could that do him any good?"

Sally looked at her friend with an air of pity.

"Didn't you say he was awrful t'in?" she asked.

"Thin?  Oh yes--dreadfully thin."

"Well, den, isn't dat 'cause he not hab 'nuff to eat?  _I_ knows it,
bress you!  I's bin wid a missis as starved me.  Sometimes I t'ink I
could eat my shoes.  Ob course I got awrful t'in--so t'in dat w'en I
stood side-wise you could hardly see me.  Well, what de way to get fat
an' strong?  Why, eat, ob course.  Eat--eat--eat.  Das de way.  Now,
your fadder git not'ing but black bread, an' not 'nuff ob dat; an' he
git plenty hard work too, so he git t'in.  So, what I prupposes is to
gib him two good biskits ebery day.  We couldn't gib him more'n two,
'cause he'd hab to hide what he couldn't eat at once, an' de drivers
would be sure to diskiver 'em.  But two biskits could be gobbled quick
on de sly, an' would help to make him fat, an' to make you easy."

"So they would," said Hester, eagerly entertaining the idea after this
explanation; "you're a clever girl, Sally--"

"You say I's stoopid jest now!"

"So I did, Sally.  Forgive me!  I was stupid besides unkind for saying
so.  But how shall we manage it?  Won't the guards see us doing it?"

"No fear, Geo'giana!  De guards am fools--t'ink dere's nobody like 'em.
Dey forgit.  All de asses in Algiers am like 'em.  Dis de way ob it.
You an' me we'll go to markit ebery day wid baskits on our arms, an
we'll ob course go round by de walls, where your fadder works.  No doubt
it's a roundabout way, but what ob dat?  We'll go at de hour your fadder
feeds wid de oder slabes, an' as we pass we'll drop de two biskits in
his lap."

"But won't he be taken by surprise, Sally?"

"De fust time--yes; but dat won't prevent him gobblin' up de biskits
quick.  Neber fear, you an' me'll manidge it 'tween us."

"Thank you, dear Sally, I'll never, _never_ forget your kindness, and we
will try your plan to-morrow."



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

HESTER AND HER FATHER SEVERELY TESTED.

The very next day, accordingly, Hester Sommers and her friend sallied
forth to present Hugh Sommers with a couple of biscuits!

It was arranged that the two girls should carry baskets of fruit on
their heads, and that Hester should have the biscuits conveniently in
her right hand, so as to be able to drop them into her father's lap
without stopping or even checking her pace as they passed.

Of course, Hester was by this time thoroughly alive to the danger of her
intended proceedings, both to herself and her father, and was firmly
resolved to restrain her feelings.  Nevertheless, she could not help
trembling when she came in sight of the gang, with which her father
worked.

Sally observed this and grasped her by the arm.

"Geo'giana," she said, "if you gibs way, or speaks, or trembles, or
busts up in any way, I grips you by de neck, as I once did before, an'
shobes you along wid scolds and whacks--so you look out!"

"Anxiety for my darling father will be a much more powerful restraint,
Sally, than your threats," replied the poor girl.

Nevertheless, the threat was not without its effect, for it showed
Hester that she must have been on the point of giving way, and impressed
on her more than ever the necessity of self-restraint.

"W'ich am him?  I don't see him," said the negress as they advanced.

"There he is, don't you see, just before us," replied Hester, in a low,
hurried voice.

"No, I's growin' blind, I t'ink."

"There--look! by himself, on the stone.  He seems always to sit on the
same spot at dinner-time."

"Oh yes, I sees.  Now you go on--stiddy.  Mind what you's about!"

With a brief prayer for help to control herself, Hester went straight to
where her father sat.  He was languidly chewing a piece of the
regulation black bread at the time, and looked up at her with the vacant
indifference born of despair.

The desire to fall on his neck and kiss him was, need we say, almost
irresistible, but the poor girl had received strength for the duty in
hand.  She went close to him--even brushed past him--and dropped the
biscuits into his lap.

At first the poor man was so astonished that he gazed after the retiring
figure and made no effort to conceal this unexpected addition to his
meal.  Fortunately, his wits revived before any of the guards observed
him.  He slid the biscuits into his shirt bosom with conjurer-like
facility, and at the same moment broke off a large bit of one, which he
devoured with unwonted satisfaction.  The addition did not indeed
furnish the unfortunate slave with a full meal, but it at least tended
towards that desirable end, and sent him to work with a full heart,
because of the assurance that there was in the city, at all events, one
human being--and that being, strange to say, a negress!--who pitied him
in his forlorn condition.

During the remainder of that day Hugh Sommers almost forgot his toils in
consequence of his mind being so thoroughly taken up with meditation on
the wonderful incident.  At night, although wearied, almost worn out,
and anxious to sleep, he found it impossible to rest in the dismal
Bagnio.  It chanced that he occupied the cell which had formerly been
apportioned to George Foster on the occasion of his first visit to that
cheerless prison, and his next neighbour was the despairing Frenchman
who had given such poor comfort to the middy in his distress.  Finding
that this Frenchman spoke English so well, and that they worked together
in the same gang during the day, Hugh Sommers had struck up an
acquaintance with him, which, after they had spent some weeks together
in toiling by day and groaning side by side at night, ripened into a
curious sort of growling friendship.

This friendship began with a quarrel.  The night in which they were
first placed in neighbouring cells, or niches, followed a day in which
Sommers had received an application of the bastinado, and been put into
irons for fierce rebellion.  Being a man of strong emotions, he had
groaned a little as he lay trying to sleep in spite of his suffering
feet.  Failing of his purpose, he took to thinking about Hester, and the
groans which had been but feeble for himself became more intense on her
account.

"Can you not stop that noise?" growled the irate Frenchman, who was kept
awake by it.

"I'm sorry to disturb you, friend," said Sommers gently, for he was
really an unselfish man; "but if you knew all I've had to suffer you
would excuse me."

"Oh, _I_ know what you have had to suffer!" said his comrade testily.
"I saw you get the bastinado; I've had it often myself, but--it is
bearable!"

"It's not that, man!" returned the Englishman, with a touch of
indignation.  "If I had nothing to worry me but the pain of my feet I'd
have been asleep by now.  I have worse things to groan about than you
can guess, maybe."

"Well, well, monsieur," said the Frenchman, in a resigned tone, as he
raised himself on one elbow and leaned his back against the stone wall,
"since you have driven sleep from my eyes, perhaps you will give
employment to my ears, by telling me for what it is that you groan?"

There was something so peculiar in the tone and manner in which this was
said--so cool and off-hand, yet withal so kind--that Sommers at once
agreed.

"I'll do it," he said, "if you will treat me to the same thing in
return.  Fair exchange!  You see, I am by profession a merchant, and
must have value for what I give."

And thus on that night the two unfortunates had exchanged confidences,
and formed the friendship to which we have referred.

To this man, then--whose name was Edouard Laronde--Sommers related the
incident that had occurred that day during the noontide period of rest.

"It is strange.  I know not what to think," said Laronde, when his
friend concluded.  "If it had been a white girl I could have understood
that it might be your daughter in disguise, though even in this case
there would have been several reasons against the theory, for, in the
first place, you tell me that your daughter--your Hester--is very
pretty, and no pretty English girl could go about this city in any
disguise without being discovered at once.  Now you tell me that this
girl was black--a negress?"

"Ay, as black as a coal," responded the merchant.

"Well, if, as you say, your Hester is pretty--"

"Pretty, man!  She's not pretty," interrupted the Englishman
impatiently; "I tell you she is beautiful!"

"Of course, I understand," returned the other, with a smile that the
darkness of the place concealed, "I should have said beautiful!  Well,
thick lips and flat nose and high cheek-bones and woolly hair are, you
know, incompatible with beauty as understood by Englishmen--"

"Or Frenchmen either," added Sommers.  "That's quite true, Laronde,
though I must confess that I paid no attention to her face when she was
approaching me, and after she dropped the biscuits in my lap she was so
far past that I only saw a bit of her black cheek and her back, which
latter, you know, was enveloped from head to foot in that loose blue
cotton thing which does not tell much about the wearer."

"True, true," returned the Frenchman; "and, after all, even if the
girl's features had not been negro-like, you could not have been sure
that it was her, for some of the blacks who come from the interior of
Africa have features quite as classical as our own."

"Laronde," said the merchant impressively, "I wonder to hear you, who
have a daughter of your own, suggest that I could fail to recognise my
Hester in any disguise.  Why, if she were to paint her face scarlet and
her nose pea-green I'd see through it by the beautiful shape of the
features and the sweet expression of her face."

"Forgive me, Monsieur Sommers, I doubt not that you would.  As to your
reference to _my_ daughter, you forget that she was a little child when
I last saw her, so I have no experience of a father's powers of
penetrating disguises."

Laronde sighed deeply at this point, and then hurriedly continued, as if
to prevent further reference to his own sorrows.

"It is possible, however," he said, "that she may pass you again
to-morrow, and so give you another opportunity of seeing her features.
But let me ask, my friend, what will you do if you discover that she
_is_ your Hester?"

"Do?" exclaimed the merchant, with an energetic action that caused his
fetters to rattle.  "I--I--I'll--well--I don't know what I'll do!"

"Of course you don't!" returned Laronde, with something of the old
cynicism in his tone.  "You Englishmen are always so cock-sure--as you
express it--of success that you make no provision for defeat or failure.
It may seem very heroic, but it is mere pride and folly.  Now, if you
will take a real friend's advice, you will go out to-morrow with the
determination to curb yourself and refrain from taking any notice
whatever of this girl, whether she turns out to be your daughter or not,
and leave her to work out her plan, for you may be quite sure she has
some end in view.  Just consider what would be the consequence of your
giving way to your feelings and embracing her.  You would by so doing
expose her disguise, cause her to be taken up and sent to the harem of
