slightly arrested his attention, as he supposed it to be a tuft of the
dry grass or a globe-cactus (_echinocactus_)--a species of which they
had seen much of late, and to which it bore a considerable resemblance.
It was evident, however, on closer scrutiny it was not that.

The little hares seemed to notice it about the same time; and, prompted
by curiosity, they drew nearer and nearer to it.  There was nothing
about its appearance to alarm them.  They had never been attacked by an
enemy in that shape.  To all appearance it had neither teeth nor claws,
and consequently they had nothing to fear.

Encouraged by the absence of all danger, and vieing with each other in
boldness, the little creatures advanced, first one and then the other, a
few inches farther, and so on, until their noses almost touched the
strange object.  All at once the clew-like body flew out, displaying a
sharp-snouted four-footed animal, whose long serpent-like tail, at the
same instant, sweeping around caught one of the hares in its prehensile
embrace!  The little creature uttered a shrill squeak, while its
companion bounded off in terror.

The opossum (for it was no other than an old she 'possum), now turned
upon her tail; and, seizing the head of the hare in her hog-like jaws,
killed it at a single "cranch."  She then released it from the coil;
and, laying it out upon the grass, would have made a meal of it then and
there, had she been permitted to do so.  But that was not ordained to
be.

The lynx, who was crouching forward, not twenty feet from the briars,
had been a witness to all this.  At first it seemed to give him chagrin.
In a little while, however, he appeared rather to like it than
otherwise.

"On second thoughts," said he to himself, "it is better as it is.  The
'possum has saved me the trouble of catching the hare, and I might have
missed it withal.  _She_ has _captured_ the game, but _I_ shall _eat_
it, I guess."

These thoughts he certainly had--for they were as clearly expressed by
his actions, as if he had been gifted with speech and had uttered them
aloud.  In accordance with them, therefore, he crept on, intending to
spring upon the 'possum unawares.

The latter, however, before commencing to eat, like all who know that
they have done a guilty deed, raising herself to her full height, looked
around to see if any one had been a witness to the act.  Her eyes fell
upon the lynx; and, hastily seizing the hare in her teeth, she plunged
into the bramble.

The lynx, seeing that further concealment was of no use, bounded forward
with curved back and mane erect.  He did not at once follow into the
briars, but ran around them, in order to discover at what point the
'possum had hid herself.  He was not without apprehensions that _she
might have a hole there_.  If so, good-bye to both hare and 'possum,
thought he.

It appeared not, however; for, after a few circlings around the patch,
he was seen to dash boldly in.

For some time nothing could be seen of either lynx or 'possum.  The
patch covered only a few yards of the prairie, but it was a regular
"brake," with vines, briars, and thistles, thickly interwoven and
canopied with leaves.  Neither uttered any noise; but the motion of the
leaves, and of the brambles at different points, told that a hot pursuit
was going on underneath--the pursued no doubt baffling the pursuer, by
her body being much smaller and better adapted for squeezing through
narrow places.

For some minutes this curious chase was kept up.  Then the 'possum
glided out into the open ground, to the astonishment of all still
carrying the hare in her mouth.  She made directly for the tree, and
proceeded to climb it, grasping the trunk with her fore-arms, like a
human being.  Her taking to the tree also excited surprise, as it was a
small one--not over thirty feet high--and the young hunters knew that
the lynx could climb as well as she.

The latter now came out of the bramble; and with one bound sprang to the
foot of the pecan.  He did not follow up immediately, but stopped a
moment to breathe himself, evidently exulting--as he knew he could
easily climb after, and feeling satisfied that he now had his game safe
and secure.

"Treed at last, old mother 'possum!" soliloquised he, although not
_aloud_.  "I'll get you now, an' if I don't give you a good woppin' for
the trouble you've put me to--_see if I don't_!  I wouldn't eat ye,
nohow--you ain't sweet enough for that--but I'll eat that hare, an' I'll
chastise you for using it so!"

And with this determination he galloped up the pecan, his claws rattling
against the bark.

By this time the opossum had got near the top of the tree, and out upon
one of the branches that grew horizontally.  Along this the lynx
followed; and had arrived almost within reach of the object of his
pursuit, when the opossum, suddenly lapping the branch with her tail,
let herself down to the limb below!  The lynx appeared for a moment as
if about to spring after; but the limb was a slender one, and he was not
sure that he might be able to grasp it.  He, therefore, turned back,
evidently chagrined; and, descending by the main trunk, ran out upon the
branch now occupied by the opossum.  The latter, as before, again let
herself down to another limb; and then, without waiting for her pursuer,
to another still lower, until she hung on the very lowermost branch of
the tree!

The boys thought she was about to drop to the ground, and endeavour to
escape to the woods.  That, however, was not her intention, for she knew
the lynx would soon overtake her if she made the attempt.  She had got
into the safest situation possible, under the circumstances, and _she_
seemed to know it.  She therefore continued to hang on the lowest limb
of the pecan--so near its extremity, that the branch bent under her
weight.  It would not have carried another 'possum--much less the
heavier body of a lynx; and the latter, with the "eye of a lynx," saw
that at a glance.

Mortified as he was, however, he was determined to satisfy himself by a
trial.  He first crawled out upon the limb, proceeding with great
caution as far as he dared venture; and then with outstretched claw
endeavoured to reach the rings of her tail, thinking he might scratch
them off.  In this he was not successful.  He could barely touch the
tail with his toes; and he might just as well have tried to open the
claws of an eagle.  He next mounted the brands above, thinking this
would bring him nearer; but he soon discovered his mistake.  Again he
ran out upon the limb where the opossum hung, and looked for a moment as
if determined to spring down upon her, and carry her along with him to
the earth; but the distance deterred him, and after a while he skulked
back and squatted himself in a fork of the tree.

He did not rest long before a new thought, seemed to strike him.  The
'possum was not so very high above the ground; perhaps he could spring
up and seize her by the nose?  It was at all events easy to make the
trial.  And with this intention he descended to the foot of the tree,
and ran out to the spot over which she was hanging.  But she was higher
than he had calculated; and, like the fox with the grapes, after a few
leaps he gave it up.  He was resolved, however, to make her stand a
siege; and, thinking he would be as comfortable where he was, he did not
return to the tree, but sat down upon the grass, keeping his eyes fixed
upon his antagonist.

All this while the old 'possum hung quietly upon her tail, holding the
hare in her teeth.  From the moment she had secured herself in her
present position, she seemed to have no fear of her antagonist.  On the
contrary, her countenance exhibited the expression of a malicious
laugh--and this was as evident to the spectators, as words could have
made it.  The cunning creature plainly enjoyed the chagrin she was
causing to the "catamount."

At intervals, however, the thought seemed to stray across her mind as to
how it would all end: and then she assumed a graver look.  The lynx, was
determined--she saw that in his face--to make her stand a long siege.
It would be, therefore, a question of patience and hunger.  For the
latter she was prepared; and, to enable her to endure it the better, she
passed the hare into her hand-like fore-feet, and commenced tearing and
eating it!

This was too much for the patience of the lynx.  He could bear it no
longer, but rose suddenly to his feet; and, with mane erect, rushed up
the tree again, and out upon the branch where hung the opossum.  This
time, without stopping to calculate the danger, he sprang forward,
throwing his fore-feet around the other's hips, and seizing her tail in
his teeth.  The branch creaked, then broke, and both fell together to
the earth!

For a moment the lynx seemed stunned by the fall; but, the next moment,
he was "himself again."  He raised himself up; arched his back like a
true cat; and, with a wild scream, pounced down upon the 'possum.  He
seemed to have forgotten the hare, which the other had dropped in her
fall.  Revenge was the passion that now raged strongest within him.
Revenge caused him to forget that he was hungry.

The opossum, as soon as she came to the ground, had suddenly clewed
herself up; and now presented the same appearance as when she first came
upon the stage.  Head, neck, limbs, and tail, were no longer visible--
nothing but a round ball of thick, woolly hair!  At this the catamount
tugged with "teeth and toe-nails."  He worried it for not less than ten
minutes, until he became weary.  The 'possum was dead to all appearance;
and this the other seemed to think,--or whether he did or not, at all
events, he became tired, and left off worrying her.  The sweeter
morsel--the hare--was before his eyes; and this, perhaps, tempted him to
desist, preferring to try his teeth for a while upon it.  Leaving the
'possum at length, he turned round and seized upon the hare.

At this moment Francois let Marengo slip, and the whole party rushed
forward with shouts.

The lynx, seeing his retreat cut off from the timber, struck out upon
the prairie; but the great hound soon overtook him; and after a short
but desperate fight, put an end to his poaching.

The young hunters in the pursuit had picked up the hare, which the lynx
had dropped in his flight.  When the chase was over they came back to
the tree, with the intention of getting the dead 'possum, which they
meant to cook for their supper.  To their astonishment no 'possum was
there--neither in the tree, nor the briar-patch beside it, nor anywhere!
The sly creature had been "playing 'possum" throughout all that
terrible worrying; and, finding the coast clear, had "unclewed" herself,
and stolen off to her hiding-place under the roots of some neighbouring
tree!

Nothing remained but the body of the lynx and the poor little carcass of
the hare.  The former none of our adventurers cared to eat, although it
is often eaten both by the trappers and Indians--and the latter was so
torn and chawed as to render it worthless.  So, since no other game--not
even a squirrel--could be found about the place, all four--Lucien,
Basil, Francois, and _Marengo_, went to sleep--for the first time since
the commencement of their journey--_supperless_!



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

AN ODD ADVENTURE BEFORE BREAKFAST.

They had plenty of meat for their breakfast though--such as it was--and
came nigh paying dearly enough for it.

The three brothers slept lying along the ground within a few feet of one
another.  Their tent was gone, and, of course, they were in the open
air.  They were under a large spreading tree, and, wrapped in their
blankets, had been sleeping soundly through the night.  Day was just
beginning to break, when something touched Francois on the forehead.  It
was a cold, clammy object; and, pressing upon his hot skin, woke him at
once.  He started as if a pin had been thrust into him; and the cry
which he uttered awoke also his companions.  Was it a snake that had
touched him?  Francois thought so at the moment, and continued to think
so while he was rubbing his eyes open.  When this feat was accomplished,
however, he caught a glimpse of some object running off, that could not
be a snake.

"What do you think it was?" inquired Basil and Lucien, in the same
breath.

"A wolf, I think," replied Francois.  "It was his cold nose I felt.
See! yonder it goes.  See--see--there are two of them!"

Francois pointed in the direction in which the two animals were seen to
run.  Basil and Lucien looked, and saw them as well.  They were about
the size of wolves, but appeared to be quite black, and not like wolves
at all.  What could they be?  They had suddenly passed into a darker
aisle among the trees, and the boys had only caught a glimpse of them as
they went in.  They could still distinguish their two bodies in the
shade, but nothing more.  What could they be?  Perhaps javalies?  This
thought, no doubt, occurred to the brothers, because of their late
adventure with these animals.

"They are too large, and run too clumsily, for javalies," said Lucien.

"Bears?" suggested Francois.

"No, no; they are not large enough for bears."

All three were puzzled.

They had risen upon their hands and knees, disencumbered themselves of
their blankets, and each had grasped his gun, which they always kept
close by them when asleep.

They remained in this position, straining their eyes up the gloomy alley
after the two black objects that had stopped about fifty yards distant.
All at once the form of a man rose up before them, and directly in front
of the animals.  Instead of retreating from the latter, as the boys
expected, the upright figure stood still.  To their further
astonishment, the two animals ran up to it, and appeared to leap against
it, as if making an attack upon it!  But this could not be--since the
figure did not move from its place, as one would have done who had been
attacked.  On the contrary, after a while, it stooped down, and appeared
to be caressing them!

"A man and two dogs," whispered Francois; "perhaps an Indian!"

"It may be a man," returned Lucien, also speaking in a whisper.  "I know
not what else it could be; but those _are no dogs_, or I never saw
such."

This Lucien uttered with emphasis and in a serious tone, that caused the
brothers to draw closer to each other.

During all this time Marengo stood by, restrained by them from rushing
forward.  The dog had not awaked until the first cry of Francois roused
him.  He was wearied with the long gallop of the preceding days; and,
like his masters, had been sleeping soundly.  As all started almost
simultaneously, a word from Basil had kept him in--for to this he had
been well trained--and without a signal from him he was not used to
attack any creature, not even his natural enemies.  He therefore stood
still, looking steadily in the same direction as they, and at intervals
uttering a low growl that was almost inaudible.  There was a fierceness
about it, however, that showed he did not regard the strange objects as
friends.  Perhaps he knew what they were, better than any of the party.

The three mysterious creatures still remained near the same spot, and
about fifty yards from the boys.  They did not remain motionless though.
The two smaller ones ran over the ground--now separating from the
upright figure and then returning again, and appearing to caress it as
before.  The latter now and then stooped, as if to receive their
caresses, and--when they were not by--as though it was gathering
something from the ground.  It would then rise into an upright position,
and remain motionless as before.  All their manoeuvres were performed in
perfect silence.

There was something mysterious--awe-inspiring in these movements; and
our young hunters observed them, not without feelings of terror.  They
were both puzzled and awed.  They scarcely knew what course to adopt.
They talked in whispers, giving their counsels to each other.  Should
they creep to their horses, mount, and ride off?  That would be of no
use; for if what they saw was an Indian, there were, no doubt, others
near; and they could easily track and overtake them.  They felt certain
that the strange creatures knew they were there--for indeed their
horses, some thirty yards off, could be plainly heard stamping the
ground and cropping the grass.  Moreover, one of the two animals had
touched and smelt Francois; so there could be no mistake about _it_
being aware of their presence.  It would be idle, therefore, to attempt
getting off unawares.  What then?  Should they climb into a tree?  That,
thought they, would be of just as little use; and they gave up the idea.
They resolved, at length, to remain where they were, until they should
either be assailed by their mysterious neighbours, or the clearer light
might enable them to make out who and what these were.

As it grew clearer, however, their awe was not diminished; for they now
saw that the upright figure had two thick strong-looking arms, which it
held out horizontally, manoeuvring with them in a singular manner.  Its
colour, too, appeared reddish, while that of the small animals was deep
black!  Had they been in the forests of Africa, or _South_ instead of
_North_ America, they would have taken the larger figure for that of a
gigantic ape.  As it was, they knew it could not be that.

The light suddenly became brighter--a cloud having passed off the
eastern sky.  Objects could be seen more distinctly, and then the
mystery, that had so long held the young hunters in torturing suspense,
was solved.  The large animal reared up and stood with its side towards
them; and its long pointed snout, its short erect ears, its thick body
