thrilling subject that it will be interesting to try.  The difficulty
will be to keep within the limit; only three thousand words--"

"Only!  My dear, do you know what three thousand words mean?  I counted
up one sheet of foolscap, and it came to two hundred and fifty.  How on
earth could one find enough to say about life to fill twelve whole
pages?"

Flora was transparently in earnest, her blue, opaque-looking eyes roving
from face to face, inviting sympathy and understanding; but Susan gave a
clear little laugh of derision.

"I could fill volumes!  It's a wonderful, wonderful theme--a voyage into
the dark--a battle to be fought, a victory to be won, a mountain to be
climbed, or perhaps no mountain at all, but just a long, long road, on a
dead level plain.  Work and effort, and failure and success, sorrow and
joy, and at the end the secret--the great secret--solved at last!"

Susan's voice trembled, her slight little form shook with emotion, she
pressed her hands against her knees to still their trembling.  The girls
stared at the floor, or exchanged furtive glances of embarrassment.
Susan was "too too for words" in her high falutin' moods; she talked
just like people in books; silly nonsense that no one could understand!
She was going to leave school when she was eighteen and help her mother
in the house, because the two elder girls wanted to be teachers.  Why
couldn't she say so straight out, instead of mooning about secrets, and
battles, and mountains to be climbed?  Flora sniggered into her
handkerchief, Barbara gaped, Nancy tilted her head, and rolled her eyes
to the ceiling, Dreda wakened out of her dream, and sat up flushed and
eager.

"Susan, _stop_!  You mustn't!  If you tell us your ideas we may copy
them without meaning to do it...  If you put thoughts into our heads
they stay there and grow, and we can't send them away, but they are
_yours_.  You ought to keep them to yourself."

"My dear, she says she has enough to fill a volume.  She needn't grudge
a few to her starving friends," cried Nancy in would-be reproach.
"Confide in me, Susan dear!  I'll sit at your feet, and gobble up all
the pearls that you drop, and perhaps in the end I may win the prize
myself.  I don't see why it should be taken for granted that only two
girls have a chance.  There's a lot of vulgar prejudice in this school,
but Mr Rawdon will judge with an unbiased mind.  I have thought more
than once when I've been reading his books that the style was rather
like my own, and I've a sort of a--kind of a--what's the
word?--_premonition_ that he'll like me best."

There was a general laugh, but Nancy was a favourite despite her teasing
ways, so the laughter was good-tempered and sympathetic, and it was easy
to see that if by chance the prize fell to her lot the award would be a
popular one.  Nancy was incurably lazy, but the conviction lingered in
the minds of her companions that "she could be clever if she chose," and
it would seem quite in character that she should suddenly wake up to the
surprise and confusion of her competitors.  Dreda looked round with an
anxious air, as if recognising a new, and formidable competitor.  She
determined to begin making notes that very evening, and asked suddenly:

"Has anyone seen my stylo?  My things seem to be bewitched nowadays.
They are always disappearing.  I searched for my French book for a solid
hour yesterday, and this morning it was my penknife, and now it's the
pen--I waste half my time hunting and searching."

"You are so untidy.  If you would be more methodical--"

"I didn't ask for moral reflections, Barbara.  I asked for my pen."

"Is it a black one?  A little stumpy black one--about so long?"

"Yes--yes!  That's it.  Have you seen it, Nancy?"

Nancy stroked her chin with a meditative air.

"I _did_ see a stylo somewhere!  I remember noticing it--a very nice
one.  Quite new."

"Yes--yes; that's it.  Where was it?  Do think, Nancy!  Cudgel your
brains."

"I am cudgelling them--I'm cudgelling _hard_."  Nancy nipped her chin
between her finger and thumb, and knitted her brows till her eyebrows
appeared to meet.  "I saw it this morning.  It was lying on a shelf,
near a window.  I can see it before me now."  She waved her hand in the
air.  "Like a picture.  Distinctly!"

"Yes--yes--yes!  But where?  _Think_!  In the big classroom?"

"No-o; I think not.  No; certainly not the big classroom?"

"Miss Drake's room, then?  The study?  Number 5?  Our bedroom?  If you
can see it distinctly, you _must_ know."

Nancy frowned on, apparently plunged in thought, then slowly a flash
seemed to irradiate her features.

"I have it!" she cried triumphantly.  "It was in the window of the
chemist's shop!  I saw it as we passed by in walk.--A beautiful black
brand-new stylo!"

The audience sniggered with enjoyment, for though not quite so heartless
as their brothers, it cannot be denied that most school-girls take a
mischievous delight in teasing their companions.  Dreda Saxon was,
moreover, from this point of view an amusing victim, for when a joke was
directed against herself her sense of humour was temporarily eclipsed,
and she took refuge in what was laughingly dubbed "heroics."  Now, as
usual, her eyes flashed, her chin tilted itself in air, and her voice
swelled in deep-toned reproof.

"That is not funny, Nancy--it is _unkind_!  To laugh at people who are
in trouble is a sign of a mean, unprincipled mind.  I am surprised that
you condescend to such depths."

A shriek of laughter followed this reproof, and as she marched
majestically from the room Dreda caught a glimpse of Nancy beaming and
unrepentant, pretending to wring tears out of a dry pocket-handkerchief.
In that moment she mentally added three "heads" to the essay on life,
and headed them with large capital letters: Misunderstanding.  Mockery.
Faithless Friends.

During the next week Dreda spent every moment that could be spared from
ordinary school-work in working at her essay, alternating between wild
elation and depths of despair as her thoughts flowed or flagged.  Her
home letter was full of the all-absorbing topic, but Rowena's reply was
a great surprise--for behold, pessimistic repinings had given place to
an outlook which was positively jaunty in tone.

"It's a nice old world, after all," Rowena wrote.  "It is stupid to
allow oneself to get humped, for sometimes at the very moment when you
believe that all is over, the very nicest things are just about to
begin.  Put that in your essay, and make moral reflections.  `Oft-times
in our ignorance we believe ... but looking back over a gap of time we
can see--A trivial word, a passing glance, the choice of a road, on such
trifles may depend ...  Discipline is good for us all, but joy cometh in
the morning.'  You know the sort of thing.  For once I really wish I
could write your essay for you.  I feel just in the mood to write pages.
I've been out riding with Mr Seton and his cousins three times this
week, and the exercise is so exhilarating.  The cousins are staying at
the Manor House--such nice girls!  We have taken quite a fancy to one
another, and they lend me a mount, so that we can go about together Mr
Seton sends you his best wishes for the competition.  We talked about it
together when we were riding to-day.  He is so clever, and has such
beautiful thoughts.  He is looking forward most awfully to his life, and
says it gets better and better all the time.  I feel quite ashamed to
remember how depressed and discontented I have been, and how irritable
with poor old Maud.  She can't help it, poor dear, if she _is_ stupid;
one ought to be patient with her, and satisfied with a peaceful home
life!  I _am_ satisfied now.  To-morrow I go to lunch at the Manor
House."

"But it was to _me_ he offered the mount," was Dreda's comment, not
without a touch of offence.  Then with a benevolent impulse: "Oh, well,
Ro can have it until the holidays, and then he'll take me."  Rowena's
suggestions as to the essay were too valuable to be ignored, and the
fact that they were in exact contradiction of the pessimistic passages
on persecution last added, was no hindrance to an author of Etheldreda's
ingenuity.  She had simply to write, "On the other hand, it may be
said," and in came Rowena's reflections as pat as possible.  During
those next few days her versatile mind seized on everything that she
heard, saw, or read, which could by any possibility be turned into
material for the essay, until page after page was filled with her big
straggling handwriting, and while her companions were still biting their
pens in search of inspiration, she was confronted by the task of
reducing her masterpiece by at least one-half of its length.  And what a
task that was!

"Really," she told Susan with a sigh, "cutting down is more difficult
than making-up!  I read over each bit by itself, and it seems as if I
love it more than all the rest put together, and I simply can't _endure_
to lose it; but the next bit is the same, and the next, and the next."
She rolled her eyes dramatically to the ceiling.  "I am like a mother,
called upon to sacrifice one of her children.  Whichever I choose, it
will break my heart!  How I wish I could send in two papers, and have
two chances!"

Such a proceeding was, of course, out of the question, so with much
groaning and lamentation Dreda cut out the quieter passages, reserving
the highly coloured flights of fancy which she considered more likely to
attract an author of Mr Rawdon's standing.  When at last the typed
copies of the twelve essays were circulated in the school it was found,
as had been expected, that Susan and Dreda had far out-distanced the
other competitors, but Susan's most devoted admirers confessed that her
production appeared tame and dull when compared with Dreda's sparkling
eloquence.

"I don't quite know what she's driving at," Barbara admitted, "but it
sounds awfully grand all the same; and dear old Sue's so painfully in
earnest!  We'd better resign ourselves to the worst, for Dreda's bound
to get the prize, and lord it over us for the rest of the term.  Our
lives won't be worth living."

"It's the unexpected that happens in this world.  I have a feeling that
there will be strange developments about this prize.  Wait and see!"
said Nancy, darkly.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

After a week's circulation in the school, the twelve typed essays upon
"My life, and what I hope to do with it," were packed up and sent to Mr
Rawdon for judgment, and Miss Drake begged her pupils to dismiss the
subject from their minds as far as possible.

"Mr Rawdon has promised to attend our prize-giving on December the
nineteenth, and will announce the result of the competition himself, so
that nothing can be gained by discussing the matter before then.  It
will be useless to question me, for I shall know he more than
yourselves, and we have the serious work of preparing for examinations
before us.  Give your whole minds to your work, and don't waste time on
useless speculation."

"Easier said than done," was Dreda's comment on this exhortation as she
walked to the hockey field with Susan after the class was dismissed.
"It's easy for The Duck to be calm and cold-blooded; she isn't in it,
and doesn't much care how it's decided; but to you and me it means life
or death.  Susan, tell me exactly how you will feel if my name is read
out.  Will you hate me with a deadly hatred?"

"Dreda, how can you?  As if I could ever hate you--as if such a thing
were possible!"  Susan was breathless with horror, her brown eyes turned
reproachfully upon her friend.  "Would you hate me?"

"Yes," returned Dreda calmly; "I should.  At that moment my love would
change into gall and bitterness.  I should hate the very sight of your
face.  Of course,"--she drew a deep sigh of complacence--"of course, in
the end my better nature would prevail, but I'm so emotional, you know--
my heart is strung by every breath--like an Aeolian harp.--I could not
answer for myself for the first few moments, so keep out of my way,
darling, if you get the prize, until I have fought my battle and
overcome."

"I hope you will win, Dreda.  I expect you will.  All the girls think
your essay the best.  I should be miserable if I won and you were
angry," said little Susan in a low, pained voice.  But Dreda was too
much occupied with a sudden suspicion to notice the pathos of her
attitude.

"Do _you_ think it the best?"  Susan hesitated painfully; her nature was
so transparently honest that she could never succeed in disguising her
real sentiments.

"I like--bits of it--awfully, Dreda!"

"Like the curate's egg.  Thanks.  But not all?"

"Not--equally well, dear."

"You think your own is better?"  Susan's usually sallow face was flooded
with a painful red.

"It sounds horribly conceited to say so, Dreda.  I wish you hadn't
asked.  It's only my own opinion, dear.  All the others like yours best.
I believe it will win.  Honestly I do."

Dreda walked on in silence, her lips compressed, her back very stiff and
erect.  She deigned no answer until the pavilion was only a few yards
distant, and even then her voice had a strained, unnatural tone.

"I think we will not discuss the subject any more.  Miss Drake said, if
you remember, that she would rather we didn't.  We ought to respect her
wishes."

"I'm sorry," said Susan meekly.  She was not the one who had introduced
the subject, but she was quite willing to take the blame upon herself,
willing to endure any amount of blame if only Dreda would be kind and
love her once more.

For the rest of the term the whole routine of the school was arranged
for the benefit of those girls who were going in for the different
examinations at Christmas; and those who, like Dreda, had not entered
their names were necessarily somewhat left out in the cold.  They took
part in the same classes, but it was not in teacher-nature to take quite
so keen an interest in them as in those whose prowess might add to the
reputation of the school.  If an ordinary scholar were inclined to
"slack," now was her chance to do so with the least chance of discovery
or punishment, and it is to be feared that Dreda, among others, did not
disdain to do so.

"I disapprove of this modern method of _cram_," she announced in a home
letter.  "Young girls need rest and amusement, not one long, continual
grind; and I don't think it's feminine to be so learned.
Accomplishments give far more pleasure, and you ought to be unselfish in
life.  I should like a new dress for the prize-giving, please.
Something very nice--blue--and extra well made, because it may be
noticed a good deal.  I'm so glad you are all coming.  It will be nice
for you to see Mr Rawdon.  I am looking forward to it fearfully much."

The new dress arrived in due course, and was all that could be desired.
Dreda beamed complacently as she fastened the last button and regarded
her reflection in the glass at two o'clock on the afternoon of the
nineteenth of December; but her satisfaction was somewhat damped by the
discovery that her favourite little pearl brooch was missing, making
still another of those mysterious disappearances by which she had been
annoyed during the whole of the term.

"I really can _not_ bear it.  It's too much!  It would try the patience
of Job!" she cried passionately.  "Someone is bent on driving me
frantic, and whoever she is she's a mean, dastardly wretch.
Sometimes,"--her eyes flashed upon Nancy, who sat upon her bed leisurely
brushing out her long brown mane--"sometimes, Nancy, I believe it is
_You_."

Susan, glancing fearfully across the room, saw Nancy's shoulders give a
slight involuntary jerk, but she made no other sign of perturbation, and
voice and manner remained as usual, calmly nonchalant.

"_Do_ you?" she queried, smiling.  "How interesting!  And what has led
you to that conclusion, may I ask?"

"Your own character.  You take a delight in teasing and worrying and
mystifying people out of their senses.  You probably think it amusing to
hide my things, and see me rushing about searching desperately in every
corner.  I'm good sport, I suppose, because I'm so easily roused.
Things affect me more than other people, because I'm so sensitive.  I'm
like--"

"An Aeolian harp--I know!  I've heard the comparison before," said
Nancy, with a quiet nod of the head which was infinitely exasperating.
Dreda stamped her foot upon the floor.

"Have you hidden my brooch or have you not?  Answer me this moment!  I
have not time to waste."

Nancy rose to her feet and selected a hair ribbon from a drawer with an
air of unruffled composure.

"I'm sorry, but I find myself unable to oblige you.  If I am the person
who has been playing tricks with your things all this time, you can
hardly expect me to prove my guilt out of my own mouth.  On the other
hand, if I am innocent--"

"Well?"

"Then I should naturally be too proud and wounded to vindicate my
honour!"

Dreda stood irresolute--swayed one moment towards penitence, the next to
anger.  From the farther end of the room Susan mutely gesticulated
appeals for peace.  What would have happened next it is impossible to
say, for at that moment a knock sounded at the door, and a voice cried:

"Miss Saxon.  Wanted, please!  In the drawing-room."

No need to inquire the meaning of that summons!  Dreda flew breathlessly
downstairs, and in the moment of opening the drawing-room door beheld
her four dear visitors standing in the alcove made by a rounded window--
father, mother, and two sisters.  Such darlings--such darlings; so
infinitely more attractive than the other relations with whom the room
was full!  Father was handsomer than ever, mother so sweet and elegant,
Maud was for the moment quite animated, while Rowena in her blue dress
and ermine furs was a beauty--so dazzling a beauty, and withal so sweet,
and bright, and womanly in expression, that the schoolgirl sister was
breathless with admiration.  When the first greetings were over and the
parents were talking to Miss Drake, Dreda slipped her hand within
