new friends of yours, and still more, keep clear of the places they
visit.  If you've been led in once, rather cut off your right hand than
be led in again, that's all!"

What spirit of infatuation possessed Tom Drift, that he did not spring
for very life at the proffered help, that he did not besiege this
friend, however blunt and outspoken, and compel his timely aid?  Alas,
for his blindness and folly!

Scowling round at the speaker, he muttered an oath, and said, "What on
earth concern is it of yours who my friends are and where I go?  Mind
your own business."

And so, thrusting rudely away the hand that might, by God's grace, have
saved him, he swept farther and farther out towards the dark waters.

One final and great hope was still reserved for him, and that was
Charlie's visit.  But to Tom that prospect was becoming day by day mere
distasteful.  As the days wore on, and Tom sunk deeper and deeper into
the snare prepared for him, the thought of a week in the society of one
so upright and pure as Charlie became positively odious.  The effort to
conceal his new condition would be almost impossible, and yet to admit
it to him would be, he felt, to shatter for ever the only friendship he
really prized.  He racked his brain for expedients and excuses to avert
the visit, but without avail.  If he pleaded illness Charlie would be
the first to rush to his bedside; if he pleaded hard work Charlie would
insist on sharing it, or improving its few intervals of rest; if he
pleaded disinclination Charlie would devise a hundred other plans to
please him.  In short, Charlie's visit was inevitable, and as he looked
forward to it he writhed in misgiving and anxiety.

His visits to the music-hall were meanwhile continuing, and his circle
of acquaintance at that evil haunt enlarging.  He was duly installed as
one of the "fast set" at Saint Elizabeth's, and under its auspices had
already made his _debut_ at other scenes and places than that of his
first transgression.  He was known by sight to a score of billiard-
markers, potmen, blacklegs, and lower characters still, and was on
nodding terms with fully half of them.  He had lost considerably more
than he had gained at billiards, and was still further emptying his
purse at cards.  Quick work for a few weeks!  So quickly and fatally,
alas!  Will the infection, once admitted, spread, especially in a
patient whose moral constitution has undergone so long a course of slow
preparation as Tom's had.

The day came at last.  Tom had carefully hidden away his worst books and
his spirits; he had bathed his face half a dozen times, to remove the
traces of last night's intemperance he had gathered together from the
corners where they had for so long lain neglected the books and relics
of his Randlebury days, and restored them to their old places; he had
brightened me up, and he had taken pains to purify his room from the
smell of rank tobacco; and then he sauntered down to the station.

How my heart beat as the train came into the platform!  _His_ head was
out of the window, and _his_ hand was waving to us a hundred yards off;
and the next minute he had burst from the carriage, and seized Tom by
the hands.

"How are you, old Tom?  I thought we'd never get here; how glad I am to
set eyes on you!  Isn't this a spree?"  And not waiting for Tom's answer
he hauled his traps out of the carriage in a transport of delight.

Still the same jovial, honest, fine-hearted boy.

"Hi! here! some of you," he shouted to a porter, "look after these
things, will you, and get us a cab.  I tell you what, Tom, you've got to
come up home with me first, and we can have dinner there; then I'll come
on to your den, and we can pack our knapsacks and sleep, and then start
by the five train to-morrow morning."

Thus he bustled, and thus he brought back the old times on poor Tom
Drift.  Without the heart to speak, he helped his friend to collect his
luggage, and when they were fairly started in the cab he even smiled
feebly in reply to the boy's sallies.

"Tom, you rascal, didn't I tell you you weren't to knock yourself up,
eh?  Why can't you do what you're told?  Why, I declare you're as thin
as a hurdle, and as black under the eyes as if you had been fighting
with a collier.  You ought to be ashamed of yourself!  Look at me; do
all I can I can't get up an interesting pallor like you, and I've
fretted enough over those conic sections (comic sections Jim always
calls them).  Never mind!  Wait till I get you down to the sea."

And so he rattled on, while Tom leaned back in his seat and winced at
every word.

When they reached Mr Newcome's of course there was a scene of eager
welcome on one side and boisterous glee on the other.  Tom, as he looked
on, sighed, as well he might, and wished he could have been spared the
torture of this day.

Charlie tore himself away from his mother, to drag his friend into the
house.

"Look at this object!" he cried; "did you ever see such a caution to
students?  If we do nothing else in Kent we shall scare the crows, eh,
Tom?"

"Charlie!" exclaimed his mother; "you have come home quite rude!  I hope
you'll excuse him, Mr Drift."

Mr Drift said nothing, and looked and felt extremely miserable.

"He looks really ill, poor fellow!" said Mrs Newcome to her husband.
"I wonder they allow the students to overwork themselves in that way."

And then they sat down to dinner--a meal as distasteful to Tom as it was
joyful to Charlie and his parents.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

HOW TOM DRIFT PARTED WITH HIS BEST FRIEND.

Charlie could not fail to discover before long that there was something
wrong with my master.

Never before had he known him so silent, so spiritless, so mysterious.
No effort could rouse him into cheerfulness or conversation, and for the
first time for three years Charlie felt that Tom was sorry to see him.
Naturally, he put it all down to the results of overwork.  Tom in his
letters had always represented himself as engrossed in study.  Even the
few hurried scrawls of the past few weeks he had excused on the same
ground.  It never once occurred to the simple-minded schoolboy that a
chum of his could possibly be struggling in the agonies of shame and
temptation and he know nothing of it; he who knew so little of evil
himself, was not the one to think or imagine evil where any other
explanation was possible.

And yet Tom's manner was so strange and altered, that he determined, as
soon as they should find themselves alone, to make an effort to
ascertain its cause.

The opportunity came when the two youths, having bid farewell to Mr and
Mrs Newcome, found themselves at last in Tom's lodgings in Grime
Street.

"Well," said Charlie, with all the show of cheerfulness he could muster,
for his spirits had been strangely damped by the irresponsive gloom of
his old schoolfellow--"well! here's the den at last.  Upon my word, old
man, I've seen livelier holes!  Why don't you explore and find some
place a trifle less dead-alive?  But I dare say it's convenient to be
near the Hospital, and when a fellow's working, it doesn't much matter
what sort of a place he's in, as long as there's not a row going on
under his window--and I don't suppose there's much chance of that here,"
said Charlie, looking out into the black street with a kind of shudder.

Tom said nothing; he wished his friend would not everlastingly be
talking of hard work and study in the way he did.  However Charlie
intended it, it was neither more nor less than a talking at him, and
that he could not stand.

Charlie took no notice of his silence, but continued his inspection of
the dismal apartment, lighting up with pleasure at the sight of the old
Randlebury relics.

"My old rod!" exclaimed he, taking down the very rod with the lance-wood
top which had figured so conspicuously in a certain adventure three
years ago; "how jolly to see it again!  I'm afraid you don't get much
use for it here.  And our fencing-sticks, too; see, Tom, here's the very
place where you got under my guard and snipped a bit out of the basket.
Ha, ha! what a crack that was!  And here's the picture of old
Randlebury, with you at your window, and me lying on the grass (and
looking uncommonly like a recently felled tree).  Look here, Tom, this
window here is where Jim and I hang out now.  It used to be Callaghan's.
By the way, do you ever see Call?  He's in London, articled to a
solicitor.  A pretty lawyer he'll make!  Have you seen him yet, Tom?"

Tom, during this rattle, had been looking listlessly out of the window.
He now turned round with a start and said--

"Eh? what did you say?"

The look which accompanied the words was so haggard and miserable, that
Charlie's pity was instantly touched.  He stepped across the room and
put his arm in Tom's as he stood, and said,--

"Tom, old boy, what's wrong?"

Tom said nothing, but walked away and leaned against the mantelpiece.

"What is it, Tom?  Are you ill, or in trouble?  You'll tell me, won't
you?"

Tom still remained silent, but his flushing face and restless lips
showed that the appeal had at least been heard.

"Old boy," continued Charlie, venturing again nearer, "we never used to
have secrets.  I'm sure something's the matter.  Mayn't I know what it
is?  Very likely I can't help you; but I could try."

Tom's lips quivered.  The old influence was fast coming back.  Already
in his mind he was picturing himself telling Charlie all and with his
help extricating himself from the slough into which he had sunk.  How
_could_ he stand unmoved with that voice, familiar by many a memory of
simple courageous goodness, again falling on his ear; and that appealing
face, one so loved and delighted in, again turned to his?

"I'm afraid it's something more than ill health, old boy.  You've
something on your mind.  Oh! why won't you at least tell me what it is?"

Tom could stand it no longer.  He _must_ speak.  Whatever the confession
cost him, whatever its effect would be on his old schoolfellow's
friendship, Charlie must know all.  To him at least he could not play
the hypocrite or the deceiver.  He had turned from the mantelpiece, his
hand was held out to take that of his friend's, he was just about to
speak, when the door of his room opened, and there entered Gus,
Mortimer, and two companions.

"Here he is!" cried Gus, not noticing that Tom had company.  "Tommy, old
man, you're in luck.  Old Owl has got a supper on to-night, no end of
punch, my boy, and he's expecting you; and afterwards we're going for a
regular night of it to the-- Hullo! who's your friend?"

He caught sight of Charlie at this moment, and for an instant failed to
recognise in Tom's companion the boy whom he had treated so shamefully
at Gurley races.  But he remembered him in a moment.

"What, surely--yet upon my honour so it is, our young sporting friend.
How are you, Charlie, my boy?  Here's a game!  You'll come too, of
course?  Mortimer, this fellow is Drift's special--up to all the
wrinkles, no end of a knowing blade."

During this brief and rapid salutation Tom and Charlie, I need hardly
say, were speechless.  One in utter despair, the other in utter rage and
astonishment.  In both the revulsion of feeling caused by the
interruption was almost stupefying, and they stood for a moment staring
at the intruders in simple bewilderment.

Tom was the first to find words.  His cheeks were white, and his voice
almost choked as he said to Gus,--

"I wish you'd go.  I'm engaged."

"So you are," said Gus, with a sneer; "but I say.  Tom, old man, I wish
you'd come.  It's too good a thing to miss."

"Go away!" almost gasped Tom.

"Oh, of course an Englishman's house is his castle," said Gus, offended
at this unusual rebuff; "you're a fool, though, that's all.  We were
going to have a spree to-night that would make all sprees of the past
month look foolish.  Come along, don't be an ass; and bring young
mooney-face; I dare say by this time he knows what's what as well as you
or me, Tom; eh, Jack?"

"Lookth tho," replied the amused Jack.

By this time Charlie had found words.  The truth of course had all
flashed in upon him; he knew the secret now of Tom's strange manner, of
the neglected letters, of the haggard looks, of the reluctant welcome.

And he knew, too, that but for this untimely incursion he would have
heard it all from Tom himself, penitent and humble, instead of, as now,
hardened and desperate.

And he recognised in the miserable little swaggering dandy before him
the author and the promoter of his friend's ruin; on him therefore his
sudden rage expended itself.

"You little cowardly wretch!" he exclaimed, addressing Gus, "haven't you
done mischief enough to Tom already?  Go out of his room!"

Poor Charlie!  Nothing could have been more fatal to his hopes than this
rash outbreak.  The words had scarcely escaped his lips before he saw
the mischief he had done.

Tom's manner suddenly altered.  All signs of shame and penitence
disappeared as he stepped with a swagger up to Charlie and exclaimed,--

"What business have you to attack my friends?  Get out yourself!"

"Bravo, Tom, old man," cried the delighted Gus.  "Do you hear, young
prig? walk off, you're not wanted here."

Charlie stood for one moment stunned and irresolute.  Had there been in
Tom's face the faintest glimmer of regret, or the faintest trace of the
old affection, he would have stayed and braved all consequences.  But
there was neither.  The spell that bound Tom Drift, his fear of being
thought a milksop, had changed him utterly, and as Charlie's eyes turned
with pleading look to his they met only with menace and confusion.

"Go!" repeated Tom, driven nearly wild by the mocking laugh in which
Mortimer and his two companions joined.

This, then, was the end of their friendship--so full of hope on one
side, so full of promise on the other.

It was a strange moment in the lives of those two.  To one it was the
wilful throwing away of the last and best chance of deliverance, to the
other it was the cruel extinction of a love and trust that had till now
bid fair to stand the wear of years to come.

"Get out, I say!" said Tom Drift, once more goaded to madness by the
pitying sneers of Mortimer.

Charlie stayed no longer.  Half stunned, and scarcely knowing what he
did, with one wild, mute prayer at his heart, he turned without a word
and left the room.

Tom's friends followed his departure with mocking laughter, and watched
his slowly retreating figure down the street with many a foul jest, and
then returned to congratulate Tom Drift on his deliverance.

"Well," said Gus, "you are well rid of _him_, at any rate.  What a lucky
thing we turned up just when we did!  He'd have snivelled you into a
shocking condition.  Why, what a weak-minded fellow Tom is; ain't he,
Jack?"

"Wathah," replied Jack, with a laugh.

Meanwhile Tom had abandoned even himself.  He hated his friends, he
hated himself, he hated Charlie and cursed himself for having ever
allowed him within his doors.  He took no notice of Gus's gibes for a
long time.  At last, "Ugh!" said he, "never mind if I'm weak-minded or
not, I'm sick of all this.  Suppose we go off to the supper, and I'll
stand treat afterwards at the music-hall?"

And crushing his hat on his head, he dashed out of the house utterly
reckless and desperate.

Need I say my thoughts were with the poor injured boy, who, stung with
