rewarded by finding six fat seals entangled in the net and inflated
almost to bursting with the water that had drowned them.

Thus they were supplied with "beef," and, what was of almost equal
importance, with oil, which enabled them to fry the leanest food,
besides affording them the means of making a steadier and stronger light
than that of the log fires to which they had hitherto been accustomed.

It may be here remarked by captious readers, if such there be, that this
cannot appropriately be styled the beginning of that grand sealing, or,
as it is now styled, "swile huntin'," industry, which calls into action
every year hundreds of steam and other vessels, and thousands of men,
who slaughter hundreds of thousands of seals; which produces mints of
money, and in the prosecutions of which men dare the terrible dangers of
ice-drift and pack, in order that they may bludgeon the young seals upon
the floes.

As well might it be objected that a tiny rivulet on the mountain-top is
not the fountain-head of a mighty river, because its course is not
marked by broad expanses and thundering cataracts.  Grummidge's net was
undoubtedly the beginning, the tiny rill, of the Newfoundland
seal-fishery, and even the bludgeoning was initiated by one of his
party.  It happened thus:--

Big Swinton went out one morning to try his fortune with the bow and
arrow in the neighbourhood of a range of cliffs that extended far away
to the northward.  Swinton usually chose to hunt in solitude.  Having
few sympathies with the crew he shut up his feelings within his own
breast and brooded in silence on the revenge he was still resolved to
take when a safe opportunity offered, for the man's nature was
singularly resolute and, at the same time, unforgiving.

Now it chanced that Grummidge, in utter ignorance of where his foe had
gone, took the same direction that morning, but started some time later,
intending to explore the neighbourhood of the cliffs in search of
sea-fowls' eggs.

On reaching the locality, Swinton found that a large ice-floe had come
down from the Arctic regions, and stranded on the shore of the island.
On the ice lay a black object which he rightly judged to be a seal.  At
first, he supposed it to be a dead one, but just as he was about to
advance to examine it the animal raised its head and moved its tail.
Love of the chase was powerful in Swinton's breast.  He instantly
crouched behind a boulder, and waited patiently till the seal again laid
its head on the ice as if to continue its nap.

While the seaman crouched there, perfectly motionless, his brain was
active.  Arrows, he feared, would be of little use, even if he were
capable of shooting well, which he was not.  Other weapon he had none,
with the exception of a clasp-knife.  What was he to do?  The only
answer to that question was--try a club.  But how was he to get at the
seal with a club?

While pondering this question he observed that there was another seal on
the same mass of ice, apparently sleeping, behind a hummock.  He also
noticed that both seals were separated from the water by a considerable
breadth of ice--especially the one behind the hummock, and that there
was a tongue of ice extending from the floe to the shore by which it
seemed possible to reach the floe by patient stalking without disturbing
the game.  Instantly Swinton decided on a plan, and commenced by
crawling into the bushes.  There, with his clasp-knife, he carefully cut
and peeled a club which even Hercules might have deigned to wield.

With this weapon he crawled on hands and knees slowly out to the floe,
and soon discovered that the seals were much larger than he had at first
supposed, and were probably a male and a female.  Being ignorant of the
nature of seals, and only acquainted with the fact that the tender nose
of the animal is its most vulnerable part, he crept like a cat after a
mouse towards the smaller seal, which he judged to be the female, until
near enough to make a rush and cut off its retreat to the sea.  He then
closed with it, brought his great club down upon its snout, and laid it
dead upon the ice.  Turning quickly round, he observed, to his surprise,
that the male seal instead of making for the water, as he had expected,
was making towards himself in floundering and violent bounds!

It may be necessary here to state that there are several kinds of seals
in the northern seas, and that the "hood seal"--or, as hunters call it
the "dog-hood"--is among the largest and fiercest of them all.  The male
of this species is distinguished from the female by a singular hood, or
fleshy bag, on his nose, which he has the power to inflate with air, so
that it covers his eyes and face--thus forming a powerful protection to
his sensitive nose, for, besides being elastic, the hood is uncommonly
tough.  It is said that this guard will even resist shot and that the
only sure way of killing the dog-hood seal is to hit him on the neck at
the base of the skull.

Besides possessing this safeguard, or natural buffer, the dog-hood is
full of courage, which becomes absolute ferocity when he is defending
the female.  This is now so well known that hunters always try to kill
the male first, if possible, when the female becomes an easy victim.

Swinton saw at a single glance that he had to deal with a gigantic and
furious foe, for the creature had inflated its hood and dilated its
nostrils into two huge bladders, as with glaring eyes it bounced rather
than rushed at him in terrific rage.  Feeling that his arrows would be
useless, the man flung them and the bow down, resolving to depend
entirely on his mighty club.  Being possessed of a good share of brute
courage, and feeling confident in his great physical strength, Swinton
did not await the attack, but ran to meet his foe, swung his ponderous
weapon on high, and brought it down with tremendous force on the seal's
head, but the hood received it and caused it to rebound--as if from
indiarubber--with such violence that it swung the man to one side.  So
far this was well, as it saved him from a blow of the dog-hood's flipper
that would probably have stunned him.  As it was, it grazed his
shoulder, tore a great hole in his strong canvas jacket and wounded his
arm.

Experience usually teaches caution.  When the seal turned with increased
fury to renew the assault Swinton stood on the defensive, and as soon as
it came within reach brought his club down a second time on its head
with, if possible, greater force than before; but again the blow was
broken by the hood, though not again was the man struck by the flipper,
for he was agile as a panther and evaded the expected blow.  His foot
slipped on the ice, however, and he fell so close to the seal that it
tumbled over him and almost crushed him with its weight.  At the same
time the club flew from his hand.

Though much shaken by the fall, the seaman scrambled to his feet in time
to escape another onslaught, but, do what he would, he could make no
impression on the creature's head, because of that marvellous hood, and
body blows were, of course, useless.  Still Big Swinton was not the man
to give in easily to a seal!  Although he slipped on the ice and fell
several times, he returned again and again to the encounter until he
began to feel his strength going.  As muscular power was his sole
dependence, a sensation of fear now tended to make matters worse; at
last he tripped over a piece of ice, and the seal fell upon him.

It was at this critical point that Grummidge came in sight of the
combatants, and ran at full speed to the rescue.  But he was still at a
considerable distance, and had to cross the tongue of ice before he
could reach the floe.

Meanwhile the seal opened its well-armed jaws to seize its victim by the
throat.  Swinton felt that death stared him in the face.  Desperation
sharpened his ingenuity.  He thrust his left hand as far as possible
down the throat of his adversary, and, seizing it with the other arm
round the neck, held on in a tight though not loving embrace!

The struggle that ensued was brief.  The seal shook off the man as if he
had been but a child, and was on the point of renewing the attack when
it caught sight of Grummidge, and reared itself to meet this new enemy.

Grummidge possessed a fair-sized clasp-knife.  Armed with this, he
rushed boldly in and made a powerful stab at the creature's heart.

Alas! for the poor man, even though his stabbing powers had been good
instead of bad, for he would only have imbedded the short weapon in a
mass of fat without touching the heart.  But Grummidge was a bad
stabber.  He missed his aim so badly as to plunge his weapon into the
hood!  Nothing could have been more fortunate.  The air escaped and the
hood collapsed.  At the same moment Grummidge received an ugly scratch
on the cheek which sent him sprawling.  As he rose quickly he observed
Swinton's club, which he grasped and brought vigorously down on the
seal's now unprotected nose, and felled it.  Another effective blow
terminated its career for ever, and then the victor turned to find that
Big Swinton lay on the ice, quite conscious of what was going on though
utterly unable to move hand or foot.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

TELLS OF DEATH AND DISASTER.

To bind up Swinton's wounds, some of which were ugly ones, was the first
business of Grummidge, after he had hastily staunched the blood which
was flowing copiously from his own cheek.  The stout seaman was well
able to play the part of amateur surgeon, being a handy fellow, and he
usually carried about with him two or three odd pieces of spun-yarn for
emergencies--also a lump of cotton-waste as a handkerchief, while the
tail of his shirt served at all times as a convenient rag.

Having finished the job he looked earnestly at the pale face and closed
eyes of his old enemy, and said--"You've bin pretty much banged about
old chap--eh?"

As the wounded man made no reply, Grummidge rose quickly, intending to
run to the settlement for help, knowing that no time should be lost.  He
was hastening away when Swinton stopped him.

"Hallo! hold on!" he shouted.  Grummidge turned back.

"You--you're not goin' to leave me, are you?" demanded his enemy,
somewhat sternly, "I--I shall die if you leave me here on the cold ice."

An involuntary shudder here bore testimony to the probability of his
fear being well grounded.

"Swinton," replied Grummidge, going down on one knee, the more
conveniently to grasp the unwounded hand of his foe, "you mistake my
c'rackter entirely.  Though I'm not much to boast on as a man, I ain't
quite a devil.  I was only goin' to run to Wagtail Bay to start some o'
the boys with a stretcher to fetch ye--an' it's my belief that there's
no time to be lost."

"Right you are, Grummidge," replied the poor man in a faint voice, "so
little time that if you leave me here the boys will only find some human
beef to carry back, an' that won't be worth the trouble."

"Don't say that, old chap," returned the other, in a low, gruff voice
which was the result of tender feeling.  "Keep up heart--bless you, I'll
be back in no time."

"All right," said Swinton, with a resigned look, "go an' fetch the boys.
But I say, Grummidge, shake hands before you go, I don't want to carry
a grudge agin you into the next world if I can help it.  Goodbye."

"No, no, mate, if that's to be the way of it I'll stick to 'ee.  D'ye
think you could manage to git on my back?"

"I'll try."

With much heaving, and many half-suppressed groans from the one, and
"heave-ho's" from the other, Big Swinton was at last mounted on his
comrade's broad shoulders, and the two started for home.  It was a long
and weary journey, for Grummidge found the road rough and the load
heavy, but before night he deposited his old enemy in a bunk in the
large room of the settlement and then himself sank fainting on the
floor--not, we need scarcely add, from the effect of sentimental
feeling, but because of prolonged severe exertion, coupled with loss of
blood.

Two days later Grummidge sat by the side of Swinton's bunk.  It was
early forenoon, and they were alone--all the other men being out on
various avocations.

Blackboy, the large dog, lay asleep on the floor beside them.

Suddenly the dog jumped up, ran to the door, and began to whine
restlessly.

"Wolves about, I suppose," said Grummidge, rising and opening the door.

Blackboy bounded away in wild haste.

"H'm! he seems in a hurry.  Perhaps it's a bear this time.  Well, mate,
how d'ye feel now?" he added, closing the door and returning to his
seat.

"Grummidge," said the sick man, in a low voice, "I'll never git over
this.  That seal have done for me.  There's injury somewheres inside o'
me, I feel sure on it.  But that's not what I was going to speak about.
I want to make a clean breast of it afore I goes.  I've been a bad man,
Grummidge, there's no question about that in my own mind, whatever may
be in the mind of others.  I had even gone the length of making up my
mind to murder _you_, the first safe chance I got, for which, and all
else I've done and thought agin ye, I ax your pardon."

"You have it" said his friend earnestly.  "Thank 'ee.  That's just what
I expected, Grummidge.  Now what I want to know is, d'ye think God will
forgive _me_?"

The seaman was perplexed.  Such a question had never been put to him
before, and he knew not what to answer.  After a few moments'
consideration, he replied--

"What you say is true, Swinton.  You've bin a bad lot ever since I've
know'd ye.  I won't go for to deny that.  As to what the Almighty will
do or won't do, how can I tell?  I wish I knew more about such things
myself, for I'd like to help you, but I can't."

Suddenly an idea flashed into his mind and he continued:--

"But it do seem to me, Swinton, that if a poor sinner like me is willin'
to forgive ye, ain't the Almighty likely to be _much more_ willin'?"

"There's somethin' in _that_, Grummidge--somethin' in that," said the
sick man eagerly.  Then the hopeful look disappeared as he added slowly,
"but I fear, Grummidge, that what you say don't quite fit my case, for
I've got a notion that the Almighty must have been willin' all my life
to save me from myself, and that all my life I've bin refusin' to listen
to Him."

"How d'ye make that out, boy?"

"This way.  There's bin somethin' or other inside o' me, as far back as
I can remember, that somehow didn't seem to be me, that has been always
sayin' `Don't' to me, whenever I was a-goin' to do a mean thing.  Now, I
can't help thinkin' that it must have bin God that spoke, for a man
would never say `Don't' to himself, an' then go right off an' do it,
would he?"

"That's more than I can tell," answered Grummidge.  "I remember hearin'
Master Burns a-talkin' on that point wi' the cappen, an' he thought it
was conscience or the voice of God."

"Well, conscience or no conscience, I've resisted it all my life,"
returned the sick man, "an' it do seem a mean, sneakin' sort o' thing to
come to the Almighty at the very last moment, when I can't help myself,
an' say, `I'm sorry.'"

"It would be meaner to say `I'm _not_ sorry,' wouldn't it?" returned
Grummidge.  "But, now I think of it, Master Burns did read one or two
things out o' that writin' that he's so fond of, which he says is the
Word of God.  If it's true what he says, he may well be fond of it, but
I wonder how he has found that out.  Anyway, I remember that one o' the
things he read out of it was that the Lamb of God takes away the sins of
the world; an' he explained that Jesus is the Lamb of God, an' that he
stands in our place--takes our punishment instead of us, an' fulfils the
law instead of us."

The sick man listened attentively, even eagerly, but shook his head.

"How can any _man_ stand in my place, or take my punishments?" he said,
in a tone savouring almost of contempt.  "As far as I can see, every man
will have enough to do to answer for himself."

"That's just what come into my mind too, when I heard Master Burns
speak," returned the other; "but he cleared that up by explainin' that
Jesus is God as well as man--`God with us,' he said."

"That do seem strange," rejoined the sick man, "and if true," he added
thoughtfully, "there's somethin' in it, Grummidge, somethin' in it to
give a man comfort."

"Well, mate, I'm of your mind about that, for if God himself be for us,
surely nobody can be agin us," said the seaman, unconsciously
paraphrasing the word of Scripture itself.  "Blow high or blow low, that
seems to me an anchor that you an' me's safe to hang on to."

The conversation was interrupted at this point by the sudden entrance of
Jim Heron with an arrow sticking in the fleshy part of his back.

"Attacked by savages!" he gasped.  "Here, Grummidge, lend a hand to haul
out this--I can't well reach it.  They came on us behind the big store,
t'other side o' the settlement, and, after lettin' fly at us took to
their heels.  The lads are after them.  I got separated from the boys,
and was shot, as you see, so I came--hah! pull gently, Grummidge--came
back here that you might haul it out, for it's hard to run an' fight
with an arrow in your back."

"Stay here, Jim," said Grummidge, after hastily extracting the shaft.
"You couldn't do much with a wound like that.  I'll take your place and
follow up the men, and you'll take mine here, as nurse to Swinton.  We
mustn't leave him alone, you know."

Eager though Jim Heron was at first for the fray, the loss of blood had
reduced his ardour and made him willing to fall in with this proposal.

"Good-bye, Grummidge," cried Swinton, as the former, having snatched up
his knife and bow, was hastening to the door.

"Good-bye--good-bye, mate," he responded, turning back and grasping the
proffered hand.  "You'll be all right soon, old chap--and Jim's a better
nurse than I am."
