Sam and Robin glanced at each other in silence, then turned to have
another gaze at the scene.

"We've found," said Sam, slowly and impressively, "a robber's nest!"

"D'you think so, Sam?"

"Think so!  I'm sure of it.  Just think.  There is nothing on such an
island as this to attract any one at all--much less robbers or pirates--
except the fact that it _is_ unattractive, and, apparently, far removed
from the haunts of honest men.  Depend upon it, Robin, that the pirates
whom we saw have made this their head-quarters and place of deposit for
their booty--their bank as it were, for it's too small for their home;
besides, if it were such, we should see a colony of women and children.
No--this is the great Pirate Bank of the Southern Seas, and yonder we
behold the secretary and cashier!"

"And what," said Robin with a laugh, "if there should be a few clerks in
the bank?  We might perhaps find them troublesome fellows to deal with."

"We might, Robin.  Would it not be wise to return and let Slagg and
Stumps know what we have discovered, and take counsel together before we
act."

"Agreed," said Robin.  "Isn't it strange though," he added, as they
turned to retrace their steps, "that there are no buildings of any
kind--only a little garden."

"It is somewhat puzzling, I confess, but we shall--"

He stopped abruptly, and stood rooted to the ground, for there, on a
rock in front of him, with her light, graceful figure, and flowing
golden hair, pictured against the blue sky, stood a little girl,
apparently about six or seven years of age--an angel as it seemed to the
amazed youths!

She had caught sight of the strangers at the very moment they had
observed her, and stood gazing at them with a half eager, half terrified
look in her large lustrous eyes.

With a sudden and irresistible impulse Robin extended his arms towards
her.  She made a little run towards him, then stopped, and the look of
fear again came over her beautiful face.  Robin was afraid to advance
lest he should frighten her.  So, with an earnest look and smile, he
said, "Come here, little one."

She answered the invitation by bounding towards our hero and clasping
him round the neck, causing him to sit down rather abruptly on a rock
which lay conveniently behind.

"Oh!  I'm so glad you've come at last!" said the child, in English so
good that there could be no question as to her nationality.  "I was
quite sure mamma would send to fetch me away from this tiresome place,
but you've been so long of coming--so very _very_ long."

The thought of this, and perhaps the joy of being "sent for" at last,
caused her to sob and bury her face in Robin's sympathetic bosom.

"Cheer up, little one, and don't cry," said Robin, passing his hand over
her sunny hair, "your Father, at all events, has sent for you, if not
your mother."

"I have no father," said the child, looking up quickly.

"Yes you have, little one; God is your father."

"Did _He_ send you to fetch me?" she asked in surprise.

"I have not the smallest doubt," answered Robin, "that He sent us to
take care of you, and take you to your mother if that be possible.  But
tell me, little one, what is your name?"

"Letta."

"And your surname?"

"My what!" exclaimed Letta, opening her large eyes to their widest,
causing both Sam and Robin to laugh.

"Your other name, dear," said Sam.

"I have no other name.  Mamma always called me Letta--nothing else."

"And what was mamma's name?" asked Robin.

"It was mamma, of course," replied Letta, with a look of wonder that so
silly a question should be asked.

Sam and Robin exchanged looks, and the former shook his head.  "You'll
not get much information out of her, I fear.  Ask her about the
pirates," he whispered.

"Letta," said Robin, settling the child more comfortably on his knee--an
attention which she received with a sigh of deep contentment,--"are the
people here kind to you?"

"Yes, very kind.  Old Meerta is as kind to me almost as mamma used to
be, but I don't love her so much--not nearly so much,--and blind Bungo
is a dear old man."

"That's nice.  And the others--are they kind to you?"

"What others?  Oh, I suppose you mean the men who come and stay for a
time, and then go off again.  O no!  They are not kind.  They are bad
men--very naughty; they often fight, and I think call each other bad
names, but I don't understand their language very well.  They never hurt
me, but they are very rough, and I don't like them at all.  They all
went away this morning.  I was _so_ glad, for they won't be back again
for a good long while, and Meerta and Bungo won't get any more hard
knocks, and whippings, till they come back."

"Ha! they won't come back in a hurry--not these ones at least," said Sam
in a voice that frightened Letta, inducing her to cling closer to Robin.

"Don't be afraid, little one," said the latter, "he's only angry with
the bad men that went away this morning.  Are there any of them still
remaining here?"

"What, in the caves?"

"Ay, in the caves--or anywhere?"

"No they're all away.  Nobody left but me and Meerta and blind Bungo."

"Is it a long time since you came here?"

"O yes, very _very_ long!" replied the child, with a sad weary look; "so
long that--that you can't think."

"Come, dear; tell us all about it," said Robin in a coaxing tone,--"all
about mamma and how you came here."

"Very well," said Letta, quite pleased with the request.  Clearing her
little throat with the emphasis of one who has a long story to tell, she
began with the statement that "mamma was a darling."

From this, as a starting-point, she gave an amazing and rambling account
of the joys and toys of infancy, which period of life seemed to have
been spent in a most beautiful garden full of delicious fruits and
sunshine, where the presiding and ever present angel was mamma.  Then
she told of a dark night, and a sudden awaking in the midst of flames
and smoke and piercing cries, when fierce men seized her and carried her
away, put her into a ship, where she was dreadfully sick for a long long
time, until they landed on a rocky island, and suddenly she found
herself "there,"--pointing as she spoke to the little garden below them.
While she was yet describing her feelings on arrival, a voice shouting
Letta was heard, and she instantly struggled from Robin's knee.

"O let me go!" she cried.  "It's Meerta calling me, and I never let her
call twice."

"Why?  Would she be angry?"

"No, but she would be sorry.  Do let me go!"

"But won't you let us go too?" asked Sam.

"O yes, if you want to come.  This is the road," she added, as she took
Robin by the hand; "and you must be very careful how you go, else you'll
fall and hurt yourselves."

Great was the amazement, and not slight the alarm of Meerta, when she
beheld her little charge thus piloting two strangers down the hill.  She
spoke hurriedly to her blind companion, and at first seemed disposed to
hide herself, but the man evidently dissuaded her from such a course,
and when Letta ran forward, seized her hard old hands and said that God
had sent people to take her back to mamma, she dismissed her fears and
took to laughing immoderately.

It soon became evident to our adventurers that the woman was in her
dotage, while the old man was so frail that only a few of the sands of
life remained to run.  They both understood a little English, but spoke
in such a remarkably broken manner, that there was little prospect of
much additional information being obtained from them.

"You hungry--hungry?" asked the old woman, with a sudden gleam of
hospitality.  "Come--come--me gif you for heat."

She took Robin by the hand and led him towards a cavern, the mouth of
which had not been visible higher up the mountain.  Sam followed, led by
Letta.

The interior of the cavern was lofty and the floor level.  Besides this,
it was sumptuously furnished in a fashion singularly out of keeping with
the spot and its surroundings.  Pictures hung on the walls, Persian rugs
lay on the floors.  Ottomans, covered with silk and velvet, were strewn
about here and there, among easy-chairs of various kinds, some formed of
wicker-work--in the fantastic shapes peculiar to the East--others of
wood and cane, having the ungainly and unreasonable shapes esteemed by
Western taste.  Silver lamps and drinking-cups and plates of the finest
porcelain were also scattered about, for there was no order in the
cavern, either as to its arrangement or the character of its decoration.
In the centre stood several large tables of polished wood, on which
were the remains of what must have been a substantial feast--the dishes
being as varied as the furniture--from the rice and egg messes of
Eastern origin, to the preserved sardines of the West.

"Ha! ha!" laughed the weird old creature who ushered the astonished
youths into this strange banqueting hall, "the rubberts--rubbers--you
calls dem?"

"Robbers, she means; that's the naughty men," explained Letta, who
seemed to enjoy the old woman's blunders in the English tongue.

"Yis, dats so--roberts an' pyrits--ha! ha! dems feed here dis mornin'.
You feed dis afternoons.  Me keeps house for dem.  Dey tinks me alone
wid Bungo an' Letta, ho! ho! but me's got cumpiny dis day.  Sit down an'
grub wat yous can.  Doo you good.  Doo Letta and Bungo good.  Doos all
good.  Fire away!  Ha! ha-a!  Keep you's nose out o' dat pie, Bungo, you
brute.  Vous git sik eff you heat more."

Regardless of this admonition, the poor old man broke off a huge mass of
pie-crust, which he began to mouth with his toothless gums, a quiet
smile indicating at once his indifference to Meerta and consequences,
while he mumbled something about its not being every day he got so good
a chance.

"Das true," remarked the old woman, with another hilarious laugh.  "Dey
go hoff awful quick dis day."

While Sam and Robin sat down to enjoy a good dinner, or rather
breakfast, of which they stood much in need, Letta explained in a
disjointed rambling fashion, that after a feed of this kind the naughty
men usually had a fight, after which they took a long sleep, and then
had the dishes cleaned up and the silver things locked away before
taking their departure from the cave for "a long, long time," by which,
no doubt, she indicated the period spent on a pilfering expedition.  But
on this particular occasion, she added, while the naughty men were
seated at the feast, one of their number from their ship came hastily in
and said something, she could not tell what, which caused them at once
to leap up and rush out of the cave, and they had not come back since.

"And they're not likely to come back, little one," said Robin through a
mouthful of rice.

"Ha! ha-a!" laughed Sam through a mouthful of pie-crust.

"Ho! ho!" cried the old woman, with a look of surprise, "yous bery brav
boy, I dessay, but if dem roberts doos kum back, you soon laugh on wrong
side ob de mout', for dey screw yous limbses off, an' ho! skrunch yous
teeth hout, an' roast you 'live, so you better heat w'at yous can an' go
hof--fast as you couldn't."

"I say, Robin," said Sam, unable to restrain a smile at the expression
of Letta's face, as she listened to this catalogue of horrors, "that
speech might have taken away our appetites did we not know that the
`roberts' are all dead."

"Dead!" exclaimed the old woman with a start and a gleam of serious
intelligence, such as had not before appeared on her wrinkled visage;
"are de roberts _all_ dead?"

"All," replied Sam, who thereupon gave the old pair a full account of
what had been witnessed on the shore.

Strange to say, the old man and woman were much depressed by the news,
although, from what they afterwards related, they had been very cruelly
treated by the pirates, by whom they had been enslaved for many years.
Nay, old Meerta even dropped a tear or two quietly to their memory, for,
as she remarked, by way of explanation or excuse, "dey wasn't all so bad
as each oder."

However, she soon recovered her composure, and while Sam Shipton
returned to the shore to fetch their comrades to the cave, she told
Robin, among other things, that the pirates had brought Letta to the
island two years before, along with a large quantity of booty, but that
she did not know where she came from, or to whom she belonged.

Sam Shipton resolved to give his comrades the full benefit of the
surprise in store, therefore, on returning to them, he merely said that
he had left Robin in a rather curious place in the interior, where they
had discovered both food and drink in abundance, and that he had come to
conduct them to it.

By that time the seaman whom they had rescued had recovered
considerably, and was able to walk with assistance, though still rather
confused in his mind and disposed to be silent.  At first he expressed a
desire to be left to sleep where he was, but on being told that the
place they were going to was not far-off and that he would be able to
rest longer and much more comfortably there than where he was, he braced
himself up and accompanied them, leaning on Sam and Jim Slagg as he
staggered along.

Need it be said that both Slagg and Stumps shouted with surprise when
they came suddenly in sight of the garden; that they lost the power of
utterance on beholding Robin holding familiar converse with an old hag,
a blind man, and a small angel; and that they all but fell down on
entering the pirate's cave?

No, it need not be said; let us pass, therefore, to the next scene in
this amazing drama.

Of course Robin had prepared the inhabitants of the garden for the
arrival of his friends.  He had also learned that the pirates, in the
hurry of departure, had not only left everything lying about, but had
left the key of their treasure-cave in the lock.  Old Meerta offered to
show him the contents, but Robin determined to await the arrival of his
friends before examining the place.

When Slagg and Stumps had breakfasted, and the sailor had been laid on a
comfortable couch, where he immediately fell fast asleep, Robin pulled
the key of the treasure-cave out of his pocket and asked his comrades to
follow him.  Wondering at the request, they did so.

The cave referred to lay at the inner extremity of the banqueting
cavern, and was guarded by a massive door of wood.  Opening this, Robin
allowed the old woman to enter first and lead the way.  She did so with
one of her wild "ho! ho's!" being obviously much excited at the
opportunity of showing to the visitors the contents of a cavern which
she had never before been permitted to enter, save in the company of the
pirates.  Entering the small doorway, through which only a subdued light
penetrated, she went to a ledge or natural shelf of rock and took down a
silver lamp of beautiful workmanship, which had probably belonged to a
church or temple.  Lighting it, she ushered them through a natural
archway into an inner cavern, round the walls of which were heaped in
piles merchandise and wealth of all kinds in great profusion and
variety.  There were bales of broadcloth and other fabrics from the
looms of Tuscany; tweeds from the factories of Scotland; silks, satins
and velvets in great rolls, mingled with lace, linen, and more delicate
fabrics.  Close beside these piles, but not mixed with them, were boxes
of cutlery and other hardware, and, further on, chests of drawers
containing spices from the East, chests of tea and coffee, barrels of
sugar, and groceries of all kinds.

These things were not thrown together in confusion, but arranged in
systematic order, as if under the management of an expert store-keeper,
and a desk with business-books on it seemed to indicate that a careful
record was kept of the whole.

Among the miscellaneous merchandise stood several large and massive
chests of ancient material and antique form.  Taking a bunch of small
keys from a nail on the wall, the old woman proceeded to open these and
exhibit their contents with much of the interest and simple delight
exhibited by a child in displaying her treasures to new companions.

Handing the silver lamp to Robin, who with his comrades looked on in
silent surprise, she opened the first chest.  It was loaded to the lid
with jewellery of all kinds, which sparkled in the light with dazzling
brilliancy, for even to the inexperienced eyes of the observers, many of
the gems were obviously of the finest quality, and almost priceless in
value.  There was no order in the arrangement of these--bracelets,
ear-rings, watches, etcetera, of European manufacture lying side by side
with the costly golden wreaths and tiaras of India, and the more massive
and gorgeous brooches, nose-rings, neck-rings, and anklets peculiar to
semi-barbaric lands.

The next chest was filled with gold, silver, and bronze drinking-cups
and goblets, lamps, vases, and urns, that had been gathered from the
ships of many countries.  Then there were chests which contained little
barrels full of gold and silver coin of every realm, from the huge
golden doubloon of Spain to the little silver groschen of Germany.
Besides all this varied wealth, there were piles of arms of all
nations--richly chased scimitars of Eastern manufacture, the clumsy
cutlasses of England, long silver-handled pistols of Oriental form,
bluff little "bull-dog" revolvers, cavalry sabres, breech-loading
rifles, flint-lock muskets, shields, spears, bows and arrows--in short,
