
Whatever opinion the reader may have by this time formed of Branwen, we
wish it to be understood that she had "a way with her" of insinuating
herself into the good graces of all sorts and conditions of men--
including women and children.  She was particularly successful with
people of disagreeable and hardened character.  It is not possible to
explain why, but, such being the case, it is not surprising that she
soon wormed herself into the confidence of the old woman, to such an
extent, that the latter was ere long tempted to make her more or less of
a confidant.

One day, about a week after the arrival of our heroine in the camp, old
Ortrud asked her how she would like to live always in the green woods.
The look of uncertainty with which she put the question convinced the
captive that it was a leading one.

"I should like it well," she replied, "if I had pleasant company to live
with."

"Of course, of course, my dear, you would need that--and what company
could be more pleasant than that of a good stout man who could keep you
in meat and skins and firewood?"

Any one with a quarter of Branwen's intelligence would have guessed at
once that the woman referred to her absent son, about whose good
qualities she had been descanting at various times for several days
past.  The poor girl shuddered as the light broke in on her, and a
feeling of dismay at her helpless condition, and being entirely in the
power of these savages, almost overcame her, but her power of
self-restraint did not fail her.  She laughed, blushed in spite of
herself, and said she was too young to look at the matter in _that_
light!

"Not a bit; not a bit!" rejoined Ortrud.  "I was younger than you when
my husband ran away with me."

"Ran away with you, Ortrud?" cried Branwen, laughing outright.

"Ay; I was better-looking then than I am now, and not nigh so heavy.  He
wouldn't find it so easy," said the woman, with a sarcastic snort, "to
run away with me now."

"No, and he wouldn't be so much inclined to do so, I should think,"
thought Branwen, but she had the sense not to say so.

"That's a very, very nice hunting shirt you are making," remarked
Branwen, anxious to change the subject.

The woman was pleased with the compliment.  She was making a coat at the
time, of a dressed deer-skin, using a fish-bone needle, with a sinew for
a thread.

"Yes, it is a pretty one," she replied.  "I'm making it for my younger
son, who is away with his brother, though he's only a boy yet."

"Do you expect him back soon?" asked the captive, with a recurrence of
the sinking heart.

"In a few days, I hope.  Yes, you are right, my dear; the coat is a
pretty one, and he is a pretty lad that shall wear it--not very handsome
in the face, to be sure; but what does that matter so long as he's stout
and strong and kind?  I am sure his elder brother, Addedomar, will be
kind to you though he _is_ a bit rough to me sometimes."

Poor Branwen felt inclined to die on the spot at this cool assumption
that she was to become a bandit's wife; but she succeeded in repressing
all appearance of feeling as she rose, and, stretching up her arms, gave
vent to a careless yawn.

"I must go and have a ramble now," she said.  "I'm tired of sitting so
long."

"Don't be long, my dear," cried the old woman, as the captive left the
hut, "for the ribs must be nigh roasted by this time."

Branwen walked quickly till she gained the thick woods; then she ran,
and, finally sitting down on a bank, burst into a passion of tears.  But
it was not her nature to remain in a state of inactive woe.  Having
partially relieved her feelings she dried her tears and began to think.
Her thinking was seldom or never barren of results.  To escape somehow,
anyhow, everyhow, was so urgent that she felt it to be essential to the
very existence of the universe--her universe at least--that she should
lift herself out of the Impossible into the Stick-at-nothing.  The thing
_must_ be done--by miracle if not otherwise.

And she succeeded--not by miracle but by natural means--as the reader
shall find out all in good time.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE PRINCE UNDERTAKES STRANGE WORK.

When Prince Bladud entered upon what he really believed would be his
last journey, he naturally encountered very different experiences, being
neither so ignorant, so helpless, nor so improvident as his helpless
follower.

After a good many days of unflagging perseverance, therefore, he reached
the neighbourhood of the Hot Swamp, in good spirits and in much better
health than when he set out.  He was, indeed, almost restored to his
usual vigour of body, for the fever by which he had been greatly
weakened had passed away, and the constant walking and sleeping in fresh
air had proved extremely beneficial.  We know not for certain whether
the leprosy by which he had been attacked was identical in all respects
with the fatal disease known in the East, or whether it was something
akin to it, or the same in a modified form.  The only light which is
thrown by our meagre records on this point is that it began with fever
and then, after a period of what seemed convalescence, or inaction, it
continued to progress slowly but surely.  Of course the manner in which
it had been caught was more than presumptive evidence that it was at
least of the nature of the fatal plague of the East.

Although his immunity from present suffering tended naturally to raise
the spirits of the prince, it did not imbue him with much, if any, hope,
for he knew well he might linger for months--even for years--before the
disease should sap all his strength and finally dry up the springs of
life.

This assurance was so strong upon him that, as we have said, he once--
indeed more than once--thought of taking his own life.  But the
temptation passed quickly.  He was too conscientious and too brave to do
that; and had none of that moral cowardice which seeks escape from the
inevitable in hoped-for oblivion.  Whether his life was the gift of many
gods or of one God, he held that it was a sacred trust which he was
bound in honour to guard.  Therefore he fought manfully against
depression of spirits, as one of the destroyers of life, and even
encouraged hope, frequently looking at the fatal white spot on his
shoulder, and trying to persuade himself that it was not spreading.

In this state of mind Bladud arrived one day at the abode of the hunter
of the Hot Swamp.  It was not, indeed, close to the springs which caused
the swamp, but stood in a narrow sequestered gully quite five miles
distant from it.  The spot had been chosen as one which was not likely
to be discovered by wanderers, and could be easily defended if it should
be found.  Moreover, its owner, as Bladud had been warned, was a fierce,
morose man, who loved solitude and resented interference of any kind,
and this was so well known in the thinly-peopled neighbourhood that
every one kept carefully out of his way.

Sometimes this eccentric hunter appeared at the nearest village--twenty
miles distant from his home--with some pigs to barter for the few
commodities which he wanted from time to time; but he and his horse,
cow, and dogs ate up all the remaining produce of his small farm--if
such it might be called.

It was a beautiful evening when the prince walked up to the door of the
little hut, in front of which its owner was standing, eyeing him with a
forbidding scowl as he approached.

He was in truth a strange and formidable man, such as one would rather
not meet with in a lonely place.  There appear to have been giants in
those days; for this hunter of the Hot Swamp was nearly, if not quite,
as tall as Bladud himself, and to all appearance fully as strong of
limb.  A mass of black hair covered his head and chin; a skin
hunting-shirt his body, and a hairy boar-skin was thrown across his
broad shoulders.  Altogether, he seemed to his visitor the very
personification of ferocity.  A huge bow, ready strung, leaned against
his hut.  As Bladud advanced with his own bow unstrung, the man
apparently scorned to take it up, but he grasped and leaned upon a staff
proportioned to his size.

Anxious to propitiate this mysterious being, the prince approached with
steady, unaffected ease of manner, and a look of goodwill which might
have conciliated almost any one; but it had no effect on the hunter.

"What want ye here?" he demanded, when his visitor was near enough.

"To enter your service."

"_My_ service!" exclaimed the man with a look of surprise that for a
moment banished the scowl.  "I want no servant.  I can serve myself well
enough.  And, truly, it seems to me that a man like you should be
ashamed to talk of service.  You are more fitted for a master than a
servant.  I trow you must have some bad motive for seeking service with
a man like me.  Have you murdered any one, that you flee from the face
of your fellows and seek to hide you here?"

"No, I am not a murderer."

"What then?  Are you desirous of becoming one, and making me your
victim?" asked the hunter, with a look of contempt; "for you will find
that no easy job, stout though you be.  I have a good mind to crack your
crown for coming here to disturb my solitude!"

"Two can play at that game," replied Bladud, with a seraphic smile.
"But I am truly a man of peace.  I merely want to look after your cattle
for occupation; I will gladly live in the woods, away from your
dwelling, if you will let me serve you--my sole desire being, like your
own, to live--and, if need be, to die--alone."

For a few moments there was a softened expression on the hunter's face
as he asked, in a tone that had something almost of sympathy in it--

"Is there a woman at the bottom of this?"

"No.  Woman has nothing to do with it--at least, not exactly--not
directly," returned Bladud.

"Hah!" exclaimed the man, paying no regard to the modification implied
in the answer; and advancing a step, with eager look, "did she tempt you
on and then deceive you; and scorn you, and forsake you for another
man?"

"You mistake me.  The poor woman I was thinking of was an old one,
labouring under a deadly disease."

On hearing this the hunter's softened look vanished, and his former
scowl returned.

"Go!" he said, sternly; "I can take care of the cattle myself, without
help.  But stay, a man of your peaceful nature and humility may,
perchance, not be too proud to take charge of pigs."

Bladud flushed--not so much because of the proposal as the tone of
contempt in which it was uttered; but, remembering his condition and his
object, he mastered his feelings.

"I am willing to take charge of your pigs," he said, in a quiet tone;
"where do they feed?"

"A goodish bit from here.  Not far from the Hot Swamp, that lies on the
other side of the hill."

The man pointed to a high ridge, just visible beyond the gully in which
his hut lay concealed, which was clothed from base to summit with dense
forest.

"There are plenty of pigs there," he continued in a milder tone.  "How
many I don't know, and don't care.  I brought the old ones here, and
they have multiplied.  If you choose to keep them together, you are
welcome.  I want only a few of them now and then.  When I do, I hunt
them together and drive them with my dogs.  You may kill and eat of them
as you please; but don't come nigh my hut, mind you, else will I put an
arrow in your heart."

"Good, I will take care," returned the prince gravely.  "And if you come
nigh _my_ dwelling, is it understood that I am to put an arrow in _your_
heart?  I could easily do it, for I am a fair marksman."

Something approaching almost to a smile crossed the hunter's swart
visage at this reply.  It did not last, however.

"Go!" he said.  "Keep your jesting for the pigs, if they have a mind to
listen."

"I will try them.  Mayhap they are more sociable than their owner.  And
now, master, might I ask for the loan of one of your dogs?  It might be
useful in herding."

"None of them would follow you.  Yet--yes, the pup might do so.  It has
not yet come to care for me much."

So saying, the man went to the rear of his hut, and, from the kennel
there, fetched a young but full-grown dog, somewhat resembling a
retriever, which gambolled joyously at the prospect of being let out for
a run.

"There, take him.  He comes of a good breed.  Keep the leash on his neck
till you have given him his first feed; he'll follow you after that."

"What is his name?" asked the prince.

"No name.  Like his master in that!"

Taking the leash in his hand, Bladud said farewell, and went away into
the woods, while the hunter of the Swamp, turning round, stooped as he
entered his hut, and shut the door behind him.

It may seem strange that the prince should thus voluntarily seek for
menial occupation, but, in truth, he shrank from the idea of living
absolutely to himself alone, and felt a strong desire to have some sort
of responsibility in connection with a human being, however short his
life on earth might be, or however uncouth the individual with whom he
might have to do--for man is intensely social, as only those who have
dwelt in absolute solitude can thoroughly understand.

CHAPTER NINETEEN.

PRINCE BLADUD TAKES POSSESSION OF HIS ESTATE AND BEGINS BUSINESS.

Pondering over the circumstances of the strange being from whom he had
just parted, Bladud proceeded to the summit of the hill, or ridge of
high land, on the other side of which lay the region in which he had
made up his mind to end his days.

It took him full two hours to make his way through the dense underwood
to the top; but when this point was reached, the magnificent panorama of
land and water which met his view was a feast to his eyes, which for a
time caused him to forget his forlorn condition.

In all directions, wherever he gazed, ridges and knolls, covered with
dense woods and richest vegetation, were seen extending from his
elevated outlook to the distant horizon.  Cliffs, precipices, dells, and
bright green open spaces varied the landscape; and in the bottom of the
great valley which lay immediately beneath his feet there meandered a
broad river, in whose waters were reflected here and there the
overhanging trees, or green patches of its flower-bespangled banks, or
the rich browns and yellows of spots where these banks had been broken
away by floods; while, elsewhere, were seen glittering patches of the
blue sky.

Far away in the extreme distance a soft cloud of thin transparent vapour
hung steadily over a partially open space, which he rightly conjectured
to be the Hot Swamp, of which he had often heard wondrous stories in his
boyhood, but which he had not been permitted to visit, owing to the
tribes living near the springs having been at war with his father.
During his absence in the East, King Hudibras had attacked and almost
exterminated the tribes in question, so that the Hot Swamp region, just
at the time when the prince arrived, was a land of desolation.

Though desolate, however, it was, as we have tried to show, exceeding
lovely, so that our wanderer was ravished with the prospect, and seated
himself on a bank near the top of the ridge to contemplate its beauties
in detail.

His canine companion sat down beside him, and looked up inquiringly in
his face.

During the first part of the journey the pup had strained a good deal at
the leash, and had displayed a strong desire to return to its former
master, as well as a powerful objection to follow its new one.  It had
also, with that perversity of spirit not uncommon in youth, exhibited a
proneness to advance on the other side of bushes and trees from its
companion, thus necessitating frequent halts and numerous
disentanglements.  On all of these occasions Bladud had remonstrated in
tones so soft, and had rectified the error so gently, that the pup was
evidently impressed.  Possibly it was an observant pup, and appreciated
the advantages of human kindness.  Perhaps it was a sagacious pup, and
already recognised the difference between the old master and the new.

Be this as it may, Bladud had not been long seated there in a state of
dreamy abstraction, when he became conscious of the inquiring look.
Returning it with interest, but without speaking, he gazed steadily into
the soft brown eyes that were turned up to his.  At last the prince
opened his lips, and the dog, turning his head slightly to one side with
a look of expectancy, cocked his ears.

"Browneyes," he said, "you'll grow to be a fine dog if you live."

There was the slightest possible tremor in the pup's tail.  Of course
there might have been more than a tremor if the caudal appendage had
been at liberty instead of being sat upon.  It was enough, however, to
indicate a tendency to goodwill.

"Come here, Browneyes," said Bladud, holding out his hand.

But the pup was hardly prepared for such a complete and sudden
concession as the invitation implied.  He repeated the tremor, however,
and turned his head to the other side, by way of a change, but sat
