
As Ailie did not quite understand this, she said, "Poor thing!" and
again held out her hand.

"Try it with a small taste o' mate," suggested Briant.

"Right," said the captain.  "Hand me the biscuit-bag, Glynn.  There,
now, Ailie, try it with that."

Ailie took the piece of biscuit offered to her by her father, and held
it out to the monkey, who advanced with nervous caution, and very
slowly, scratching its side the while.  Putting out its very small hand,
it touched the biscuit, then drew back the hand suddenly, and made a
variety of sounds, accompanied by several peculiar contortions of
visage, all of which seemed to say, "Don't hurt me, now; _don't_ deceive
me, pray."  Again it put forth its hand, and took the biscuit, and ate
it in a very great hurry indeed; that is to say, it stuffed it into the
bags in its cheeks.

Ailie gave it a bit more biscuit, which it received graciously, and
devoured voraciously; whereupon she put forth her hand, and sought to
pat the little creature on the head.  The attempt was successful.  With
many slight grins, as though to say, "Take care, now, else I'll bite,"
the small monkey allowed Ailie to pat its head and stroke its back.
Then it permitted her to take hold of its hand, and draw it towards her.
In a few minutes it showed evident symptoms of a desire to be patted
again, and at length it drew timidly towards the child, and took hold of
her hand in both of its delicate pink paws.  Ailie felt quite tenderly
towards the creature, and stroked its head again, whereupon it seemed
suddenly to cast aside all fear.  It leaped upon her knee, put its
slender arms as far round her neck as possible, said "Oo-oo-wee!"
several times in a very sad tone of voice, and laid its head upon her
bosom.

This was too much for poor Ailie; she thought of the dead mother of this
infant monkey, and wept as she stroked its hairy little head and
shoulders.  From that time forward the monkey adopted Ailie as its
mother, and Ailie adopted the monkey as her child.

Now the behaviour of that monkey during the remainder of that voyage was
wonderful.  Oh, you know, it was altogether preposterous, to say the
very least of it.  Affection, which displayed itself in a desire to
conciliate the favour of every one, was ingrained in its bones; while
deception, which was evinced in a constant effort to appear to be intent
upon one thing, when it was really bent upon another, was incorporated
with its marrow!

At first it was at war with every one, excepting, of course, Ailie, its
adopted mother; but soon it became accustomed to the men, and in the
course of a few days would go to any one who called it.  Phil Briant was
a particular favourite; so was Rokens, with whose black beard it played
in evident delight, running its slender fingers through it,
disentangling the knots and the matted portions which the owner of the
beard had never yet been able to disentangle in a satisfactory way for
himself; and otherwise acting the part of a barber and hairdresser to
that bold mariner, much to his amusement, and greatly to the delight and
admiration of the whole party.

To say that that small monkey had a face, would be to assert what was
unquestionably true, but what, also, was very far short of the whole
truth.  No one ever could make up his mind exactly as to how many faces
it had.  If you looked at it at any particular time, and then shut your
eyes and opened them a moment after, that monkey, as far as expression
went, had another and a totally different face.  Repeat the operation,
and it had a third face; continue the process, and it had a fourth face;
and so on, until you lost count altogether of its multitudinous faces.
Now it was grave and pensive; anon it was blazing with amazement; again
it bristled with indignation; then it glared with anger, and presently
it was all serene--blended love and wrinkles.  Of all these varied
expressions, that of commingled surprise and indignation was the most
amusing, because these emotions had the effect of not only opening its
eyes and its mouth to the form of three excessively round O's, but also
raised a small tuft of hair just above its forehead into a bristling
position, and threw its brow into an innumerable series of wrinkles.
This complex expression was of frequent occurrence, for its feelings
were tender and sensitive, so that it lived in the firm belief that its
new friends (always excepting Ailie) constantly wished to insult it; and
was afflicted with a chronic state of surprise at the cruelty, and of
indignation at the injustice, of men who could wantonly injure the
feelings of so young, and especially so small a monkey.

When the men called it, it used to walk up to them with calm, deliberate
condescension in its air; when Ailie held out her hand, it ran on its
two legs, and being eager in its affections, it held out its arms in
order to be caught up.  As to food, that monkey was not particular.  It
seemed to be omnivorous.  Certain it is that it never refused anything,
but more than once it was observed quietly to throw away things that it
did not relish.  Once, in an unguarded moment, it accepted and chewed a
small piece of tobacco; after which it made a variety of entirely new
faces, and became very sick indeed--so sick that its adopted mother
began to fear she was about to lose her child; but after vomiting a good
deal, and moaning piteously for several days, it gradually recovered,
and from that time entertained an unquenchable hatred for tobacco, and
for the man who had given it to him, who happened to be Jim Scroggles.

Ailie, being of a romantic temperament, named her monkey Albertino, but
the sailors called him Jacko, and their name ultimately became the
well-known one of the little foundling, for Ailie was not obstinate; so,
seeing that the sailors did not or could not remember Albertino, she
soon gave in, and styled her pet Jacko to the end of the chapter, with
which piece of information we shall conclude _this_ chapter.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

RENCONTRE WITH SLAVE-TRADERS--ON BOARD AGAIN--A START, A MISFORTUNE, A
GHOST STORY, A MISTAKE, AND AN INVITATION TO DINNER.

On the evening of the second day after the capture of Jacko, as the
canoe was descending the river and drawing near to the sea-coast, much
to the delight of everyone--for the heat of the interior had begun to
grow unbearable--a ship's boat was observed moored to the wharf near the
slave-station which they had passed on the way up.  At first it was
supposed to be one of the boats of the _Red Eric_, but on a nearer
approach this proved to be an erroneous opinion.

"Wot can it be a-doin' of here?" inquired Tim Rokens, in an abstracted
tone of voice, as if he put the question to himself, and therefore did
not expect an answer.

"No doubt it's a slaver's boat," replied the trader; "they often come up
here for cargoes of niggers."

"Och! the blackguards!" exclaimed Phil Briant, all his blood rising at
the mere mention of the horrible traffic; "couldn't we land, capting,
and give them a lickin'?  I'll engage meself to put six at laste o' the
spalpeens on their beam-ends."

"No, Phil, we shan't land for that purpose; but we'll land for some
gunpowder an' a barrel or two of plantains; so give way, lads."

In another moment the bow of the canoe slid upon the mud-bank of the
river close to the slaver's boat, which was watched by a couple of the
most villainous-looking men that ever took part in that disgraceful
traffic.  They were evidently Portuguese sailors, and the scowl of their
bronzed faces, when they saw the canoe approach the landing-place,
showed that they had no desire to enter into amicable converse with the
strangers.

At this moment the attention of the travellers was drawn to a gang of
slaves who approached the wharf, chained together by the neck, and
guarded by the crew of the Portuguese boat.  Ailie looked on with a
feeling of dread that induced her to cling to her father's hand, while
the men stood with folded arms, compressed lips, and knitted brows.

On the voyage up they had landed at this station, and had seen the
slaves in their places of confinement.  The poor creatures were
apparently happy at that time, and seemed totally indifferent to their
sad fate; but their aspect was very different now.  They were being
hurried away, they knew not whither, by strangers whom they had been
taught to believe were monsters of cruelty besides being cannibals, and
who had purchased them for the purpose of killing them and eating their
bodies.  The wild, terrified looks of the men, and the subdued looks and
trembling gait of the women showed that they expected no mercy at the
hands of their captors.

They hung back a little as they drew near to the boat, whereupon one of
their conductors, who seemed to be in command of the party, uttered a
fierce exclamation in Portuguese, and struck several of the men and
women indiscriminately severe blows with his fists.  In a few minutes
they were all placed in the boat, and the crew had partly embarked, when
Phil Briant, unable to restrain himself, muttered between his teeth to
the Portuguese commander as he passed--

"Ye imp o' darkness, av I only had ye in the ring for tshwo minits--jist
tshwo--ah thin, wouldn't I polish ye off."

"Fat you say, sare?" cried the man, turning fiercely towards Briant, and
swearing at him in bad English.

"Say, is it?  Oh, then _there's_ a translation for ye, that's understood
in all lingos."

Phil shook his clenched fist as close as possible to the nose of the
Portuguese commander without actually coming into contact with that
hooked and prominent organ.

The man started back and drew his knife, at the same time calling to
several of his men, who advanced with their drawn knives.

"Ho!" cried Briant, and a jovial smile overspread his rough countenance
as he sprang to a clear spot of ground and rolled up both sleeves of his
shirt to the shoulders, thereby displaying a pair of arms that might, at
a rapid glance, have been mistaken for a pair of legs--"that's yer game,
is it? won't I stave in yer planks! won't I shiver yer timbers, and
knock out yer daylights, bless yer purty faces!  I didn't think ye had
it in ye; come on darlints--toothpicks and all--as many as ye like; the
more the better--wan at a time, or all at wance, it don't matter, not
the laste, be no manes!"

While Briant gave utterance to these liberal invitations, he performed a
species of revolving dance, and flourished his enormous fists in so
ludicrous a manner, that despite the serious nature of the fray the two
parties were likely to be speedily engaged in, his comrades could not
restrain their laughter.

"Go it, Pat!" cried one.

"True blue!" shouted another.

"Silence!" cried Captain Dunning, in a voice that enforced obedience.
"Get into the canoe, Briant."

"Och! capting," exclaimed the wrathful Irishman, reproachfully, "sure ye
wouldn't spile the fun?"

"Go to the canoe, sir."

"Ah! capting dear, jist wan round!"

"Go to the canoe, I say."

"I'll do it all in four minits an' wan quarter, av ye'll only shut yer
eyes," pleaded Phil.

"Obey orders, will you?" cried the captain, in a voice there was no
mistaking.

Briant indignantly thrust his fists into his breeches pockets, and
rolled slowly down towards the canoe, as--to use one of his own
favourite expressions--sulky as a bear with a broken head.

Meanwhile the captain stepped up to the Portuguese sailors and told them
to mind their own business, and let _honest_ men alone; adding, that if
they did not take his advice, he would first give them a licking and
then pitch them all into the river.

This last remark caused Briant to prick up his ears and withdraw his
fists from their inglorious retirement, in the fond hope that there
might still be work for them to do; but on observing that the
Portuguese, acting on the principle that discretion is the better part
of valour, had taken the advice and were returning to their own boat, he
relapsed into the sulks, and seated himself doggedly in his place in the
canoe.

During all this little scene, which was enacted much more rapidly than
it had been described, master Jacko, having escaped from the canoe, had
been seated near the edge of the wharf, looking on, apparently, with
deep interest.  Just as the Portuguese turned away to embark in their
boat, Ailie's eye alighted on her pet; at the same moment the foot of
the Portuguese commander alighted on her pet's tail.  Now the tails of
all animals seem to be peculiarly sensitive.  Jacko's certainly was so,
for he instantly uttered a shriek of agony, which was as quickly
responded to by its adopted mother in a scream of alarm as she sprang
forward to the rescue.  When one unintentionally treads on the tail of
any animal and thereby evokes a yell, he is apt to start and trip--in
nine cases out of ten he does trip.  The Portuguese commander tripped
upon this occasion.  In staggering out of the monkey's way he well-nigh
tumbled over Ailie, and in seeking to avoid her, he tumbled over the
edge of the wharf into the river.

The difference between the appearance of this redoubtable slave-buying
hero before and after his involuntary immersion was so remarkable and
great that his most intimate friend would have failed to recognise him.
He went down into the slimy liquid an ill-favoured Portuguese, clad in
white duck; he came up a worse-favoured monstrosity, clothed in mud!
Even his own rascally comrades grinned at him for a moment, but their
grins changed into a scowl of anger when they heard the peals of
laughter that burst from the throats of their enemies.  As for Briant,
he absolutely hugged himself with delight.

"Och! ye've got it, ye have," he exclaimed, at intervals.  "Happy day!
who'd ha' thought it? to see him tumbled in the mud after all by purty
little Ailie and Jacko.  Come here to me Jacko, owld coon.  Oh, ye swate
cratur!"

Briant seized the monkey, and squeezed it to his breast, and kissed it--
yes, he actually kissed its nose in the height of his glee, and
continued to utter incoherent exclamations, and to perpetrate
incongruous absurdities, until long after they had descended the river
and left the muddy Portuguese and his comrades far behind them.

Towards evening the party were once more safe and sound on board the
_Red Eric_, where they found everything repaired, and the ship in a fit
state to proceed to sea immediately.

His Majesty King Bumble was introduced to the steward, then to the cook,
and then to the caboose.  Master Jacko was introduced to the ship's crew
and to his quarters, which consisted of a small box filled with straw,
and was lashed near the foot of the mizzen-mast.  These introductions
having been made, the men who had accompanied their commander on his
late excursion into the interior, went forward and regaled their
messmates for hours with anecdotes of their travels in the wilds of
Africa.

It is well-known, and generally acknowledged, that all sublunary things,
pleasant as well as unpleasant, must come to an end.  In the course of
two days more the sojourn of the crew of the _Red Eric_ on the coast of
Africa came to a termination.  Having taken in supplies of fresh
provisions, the anchor was weighed, and the ship stood out to sea with
the first of the ebb tide.  It was near sunset when the sails were
hoisted and filled by a gentle land breeze, and the captain had just
promised Ailie that he would show her blue water again by breakfast-time
next morning, when a slight tremor passed through the vessel's hull,
causing the captain to shout, with a degree of vigour that startled
everyone on board, "All hands ahoy! lower away the boats, Mr Millons,
we're hard and fast aground on a mud-bank!"

The boats were lowered away with all speed, and the sails dewed up
instantly, but the _Red Eric_ remained as immovable as the bank on which
she had run aground; there was, therefore, no recourse but to wait
patiently for the rising tide to float her off again.  Fortunately the
bank was soft and the wind light, else it might have gone ill with the
good ship.

There is scarcely any conceivable condition so favourable to quiet
confidential conversation and story-telling as the one in which the men
of the whale-ship now found themselves.  The night was calm and dark,
but beautiful, for a host of stars sparkled in the sable sky, and
twinkled up from the depths of the dark ocean.  The land breeze had
fallen, and there was scarcely any sound to break the surrounding
stillness except the lipping water as it kissed the black hull of the
ship.  A dim, scarce perceptible light rendered every object on board
mysterious and unaccountably large.

"Wot a night for a ghost story," observed Jim Scroggles, who stood with
a group of the men, who were seated on and around the windlass.

"I don't b'lieve in ghosts," said Dick Barnes stoutly, in a tone of
voice that rendered the veracity of his assertion, to say the least of
it, doubtful.

"Nother do I," remarked Nikel Sling, who had just concluded his culinary
operations for the day, and sought to employ his brief interval of
relaxation in social intercourse with his fellows.  Being engaged in
ministering to the animal wants of his comrades all day, he felt himself
entitled to enjoy a little of the "feast of reason and the flow of soul"
at night:

"No more duv I," added Phil Briant firmly, at the same time hitting his
thigh a slap with his open hand that caused all round him to start.

"You don't, don't you?" said Tim Rokens, addressing the company
generally, and looking round gravely, while he pushed the glowing
tobacco into his pipe with the point of a marline-spike.

To this there was a chorus of "Noes," but a close observer would have
noticed that nearly the whole conversation was carried on in low tones,
and that many a glance was cast behind, as if these bold sceptics more
than half expected all the ghosts that did happen to exist to seize them
then and there and carry them off as a punishment for their unbelief.

Tim Rokens drew a few whiffs of his pipe, and looked round gravely
before he again spoke; then he put the following momentous question,
with the air of a man who knew he could overturn his adversary whatever
his reply should be--

"An' why don't ye b'lieve in 'em?"

We cannot say positively that Tim Rokens put the question to Jim
Scroggles, but it is certain that Jim Scroggles accepted the question as
addressed to him, and answered in reply--

"'Cause why?  I never seed a ghost, an' nobody never seed a ghost, an' I
don't b'lieve in what I can't see."

Jim said this as if he thought the position incontestable.  Tim regarded
him with a prolonged stare, but for some time said nothing.  At last he
emitted several strong puffs of smoke, and said--

"Young man, did you ever _see_ your own mind?"

"No, in course not."

"Did anybody else ever see it?"

"Cer'nly not."

"Then of course you don't believe in it!" added Rokens, while a slight
smile curled his upper lip.
