Conchita is still young, in her earliest teens, having just turned
twelve.  But even at this age a New Mexican maiden is deemed old enough
for matrimony; and Manuel, to do justice to him, has eyes upon her with
this honest intent.  For months he had made up his mind to have her for
his wife--long before their forced flight into the Llano Estacado.  And
now that they are in the desert, with no competitor near--for Chico does
not count as one--he has fancied the time come for the consummation of
his hopes.

But just when the fair fruit seems ripe for plucking, like the fox in
the fable, he discovers it is beyond his reach.  What is worse still,
another, taller than he, and who can reach higher, is likely to gather
it.

Ever since the arrival of Walt Wilder in the valley he has been watching
the movements of the latter.

Not without observing that between the great Texan hunter and the little
Mexican _muchacha_ there has sprung up an attachment of a suspicious
nature.

He has not heard them express it in speech, for in this way they cannot
communicate with one another; but certain looks and gestures exchanged,
unintelligible to others, have been easily interpreted by the Indian as
the signs of a secret and mutual understanding between them.

They have driven the poor peon well nigh distracted with jealousy--felt
all the keener from its being his first experience of it, all the
angrier from consciousness of his own honest love--while he believes
that of the intruder to have a different intent.

As the days and hours pass he observes new incidents to sharpen his
suspicions and strengthen his jealous ire.

In fine, he arrives at the conclusion that Conchita--long loved by him,
long vainly solicited--has surrendered her heart to the gigantic Texan,
who like a sinister shadow, a ghoul, a very ogre, has chanced across the
sunlight of his path.

Under the circumstances, what is he to do?  He is powerful in passion,
but weak in physical strength.  Compared with his rival, he is nought.
In a conflict the Texan would crush him, squeeze the breath out of his
body, as a grizzly bear would that of a prairie squirrel or ground
gopher.

He does not show open antagonism--does not think of it.  He knows it
would but end in his ruin--his utter annihilation.

Still, he is not despairing.

With the instincts peculiar to his race, he contemplates revenge.  All
his idle hours are spent brooding over plans to frustrate the designs of
his rival--in short, to put him out of the way altogether.

More than once has a thought of poison passed through his mind as the
surest way of effecting his fiendish purpose, as also the safest; and
upon this mode of killing the Texan he has at length determined.

That very day he has been engaged in making ready for the deed--
preparing the potion.  Certain plants he has found growing in the
valley, well known among his people as poisonous, will furnish him with
the means of death--a slow, lingering death, therefore all the surer to
avert suspicion from the hand that has dealt it.

To all appearance, Walt Wilder is doomed.  He has escaped the spears,
arrows, and tomahawks of the Tenawa savages to fall a victim to a
destroyer, stealthy, subtle, unseen.

And is the noble Texan--guide, ranger, and hunter--thus sadly to
succumb?  No.  Fate has not decreed his death by such insidious means.
A circumstance, apparently accidental, steps in to save him.  On this
very day, when the poison it being prepared for him, the poisoner
receives a summons that for the time at least, will frustrate his foul
plans.  His master commands him to make ready for a journey.  It is an
errand similar to that he has been several times sent upon before.  He
is to proceed to the settlements on the Rio Grande, where Don Valerian
has friends with whom, in his exile, he keeps up secret correspondence,
Manuel acting as messenger.  Thence the trusted peon is to bring back,
as oft before, despatches, news, provisions--the last now more than ever
needed, on account of the stranger guests so unexpectedly thrown upon
his hospitality.

Manuel is to commence his journey on the following day at the earliest
hour of dawn.  There will be no chance for him now to carry out his
nefarious design.  It must remain uncompleted till his return.

While chafing at the disappointment, he sees Conchita stealing out from
the house and entering the cotton-wood grove.  He follows her with a
caution equalling her own, but from a far different cause.  Crouching on
through the trees, he takes stand behind a trunk, and, concealed by it,
becomes spectator of all that passes.  He is at first surprised at
seeing three where he expected only two.  Pleased also; for it gives him
hope the girl's errand may not be the keeping of a love appointment.
But as the triangular conference proceeds; above all, when it arrives at
its conclusion, and he sees the Texan raise Conchita in his arms, giving
her that kiss, the echo of which is distinctly audible to him, his blood
boils, and with difficulty does he restrain himself from rushing up to
the spot, and taking the lives of all three, or ending his own if he
fail.

For a time he stands erect, with his _machete_ drawn from its sheath,
his eyes flashing with the fires of jealous vengeance.  Fortunately for
those upon whom they are bent, an instinct of self-preservation stays
him.  His hand is ready, but his heart fails him.  Terrible as is his
anger, it is yet controlled by fear.  He will wait for a more favourable
time and surer opportunity.  A safer means, too--this more than aught
else restraining him.  While still in intense agitation, he sees
Hamersley depart, leaving the other two to themselves.  And now, as
other kisses are exchanged between the lovers, his jealous fury becomes
freshly excited, and for the second time he is half resolved to rush
forward and kill--kill.

But again his fears gain the ascendency, and his hand refuses to obey
the dictates of his angry heart.  With the bare blade held tremblingly,
he continues spectator of that scene which fills his breast with
blackest, bitterest emotion.  He has not the courage to interrupt it.
Calculating the chances, he perceives they are against him.  Should he
succeed in killing the Texan, with Conchita standing by and bearing
witness to the deed, would be to forfeit his own life.  He could find it
in his heart to kill her too; but that would lead to the same result.
Failing in his first blow, the great hunter would have him under his
heel, to be crushed as a crawling reptile.

Thus cogitating, he sticks to his place of concealment, and overlooks
the love scene to its termination; then permits the lovers to depart in
peace--the woman he so wildly loves, the man he so madly hates.

After they have gone out of the grove, he advances towards the log upon
which they were seated.  Himself taking seat on it, he there ponders
upon a plan of vengeance surer and safer than the assassin's steel.

It is no longer his intent to employ poison.  A new idea has entered his
brain--has been in it ever since receiving notice of the journey on
which he is about to set forth; in truth, suggested by this.  A scheme
quite as efficient as poisoning, but also having a purpose far more
comprehensive, for it includes others besides his rival the Ranger.  Of
late neglectful of his duties, Colonel Miranda has severely chided him,
thus kindling the hereditary antipathy of his race towards the white
man.

His master is to be among the victims--in short, all of them, his
fellow-servant, Chico, excepted.  Should the diabolical plan prove a
success, not one of them can escape ruin, and most of them may meet
death.



CHAPTER THIRTY SIX.

A TALE OF PERIL.

Thanks to the skill of Don Prospero, exerted with kind assiduity,
Hamersley's wounds are soon healed, his strength completely restored.
Doubtless the tender nursing of the "angel" has something to do with his
rapid recovery, while her presence, cheerful as gentle, does much to
remove the gloom from his spirits, caused by the terrible disaster he
had sustained.  Long before reaching convalescence he has ceased to
lament the loss of his property, and only sorrows as he reflects on the
fate of his brave followers, whose lives were sacrificed in the effort
to preserve it.

Happily, however, as time passes the retrospect of the red carnage loses
something of its sanguinary hue, its too vivid tints becoming gradually
obscured in the oblivion of the past with the singular surroundings of
the present.  Amid these his spirit yields itself to pleasanter
reflections.  How could it be otherwise?

Still, with restored strength, his curiosity has been increasing, till
it has reached a point of keenness requiring to be satisfied.  He
wonders at all around him, especially the strange circumstance of
finding his old friend and duelling second in such an out-of-the-way
place.  As yet, Miranda has only given him a hint, though one pretty
much explaining all.  There has been a revolution; and they are
refugees.

But the young Kentuckian is curious to learn the details, about which,
for some reason, the Mexican has hitherto preserved silence.  His
reticence has been due to an injunction of the doctor, who, still under
some anxiety about the recovery of his patient, forbade imparting to him
particulars that might have an injurious effect on his nervous system,
sadly debilitated by the shock it has received.

Don Prospero is an acute observer.  He perceives the growing interest
which Hamersley takes in the sister of his host.  He knows the story of
the Chihuahua duel; and thinks that the other story--that of the
disastrous revolution--told in detail, might retard the convalescence of
his patient.  Counselled by him, Colonel Miranda has refrained from
communicating it.

Ignorant of the cause, Hamersley is all the more eager to learn it.
Still, his curiosity does not impel him to importunate inquiry.  In the
companionship of such kind friends he can afford to be patient.

Walt Wilder has no curiosity of any kind.  His thoughts have become
centred, his whole soul wrapped up in Conchita.  The heart of the
colossal hunter has received a shock such as it never had before; for,
as he declared himself, he is in love for the first time in his life.

Not but that he has made love before, after a fashion.  For he has
shared his tent with more than one Indian squaw, drank and danced with
those nondescript damsels who now and then find their way to the forts
of the fur-traders scattered among the Rocky Mountains and along the
border-land of the prairies.  To all this he has confessed.

But these have been only interludes, "trifling love scrapes."  His
present affair with the little mestiza is different.  Her sparkling
black eyes pierced deeper and more direct--"straight plum-centre to his
heart," as, in professional jargon, he described it.

The invalid is at length convalescent; the doctor removes the seal of
injunction placed upon the lips of Colonel Miranda, and the latter
fulfils his promise made to give a narrative of the events which have
led to their residence in that remote and solitary spot.

The two seated together sipping Paseno wine and smoking cigars, the
Mexican commences his tale.

"We are refugees, as I've already stated, and came here to save our
heads.  At least, there was danger of my losing mine--or, rather, the
certainty of it--had we not succeeded in making our escape from
Albuquerque.  The word _pronunciamento_ explains all.  A revolt of the
troops under my command, with a name, that of the leader, will give you
a key to the whole affair."

"Uraga!" exclaims Hamersley, the word coming mechanically from his red
lips; while a cloud passes over his brow, and a red flush flecks the
pallor on his cheeks.  "Captain Uraga!  'Twas he?"

"It was."

"The scoundrel!  I thought so."

"Not Captain Uraga now, but Colonel; for the reward of his treason
reached him simultaneously with its success, and the traitor is now in
command of the district from which I have been, deposed.  Not only that,
but, as I have heard, he has appropriated my house--the same where,
twelve months ago, I had the pleasure of showing you some hospitality.
Contrasting it with our present humble abode, you will see, senor, that
my family affairs have not prospered, any more than my political
fortunes.  But to the narration.

"Not long after you left us I made application to the Government for an
increase to the mounted force at my disposal.  This had become necessary
for due protection of the district from our warlike neighbours in the
west--the Navajoes.  They had made several raids upon the river
settlements, and carried off goods, cattle, and a number of captives.
The force I had made requisition for was obtained; but not the right
men, or at least the officers I should have chosen to command it.  A
troop of light cavalry was sent me--Lancers.  You may imagine my
chagrin, not to say disgust, when I saw Captain Gil Uraga at its head.
Marching into the town of Albuquerque, he reported himself for duty.

"I need not tell you how unpleasant it was for me to have such a fellow
for subordinate.  In addition to our Chihuahua duel, there were many
reasons for my having an aversion to him--one, and not the least, that
which I have already hinted to you--his pretensions to be the suitor of
my sister."

Hamersley writhes as he listens, the red spot on his cheek spreading and
flushing redder.

Miranda proceeds--

"He continued his ill-received attentions whenever chance gave him an
opportunity.  It was not often.  I took care of that; though, but for
precautions and my authority as his superior officer, his advances
would, no doubt, have been bolder--in short, persecutions.  I knew that
to my sister, as to myself, his presence was disagreeable, but there was
no help for it.  I could not have him removed.  In all matters of
military duty he took care to act so that there should be no pretext for
a charge against him.  Besides, I soon found that he was in favour with
one of the Government dignitaries.  Though I did not then know why, I
learnt it afterwards; and why he, of all others, had been sent to
Albuquerque.  The _sap_ had commenced for a new revolution, and he was
one of its secret fomenters.  He had been chosen by the _parti pretre_
as a fitting agent to act in that district, of which, like myself, he
was a native.

"Having no suspicion of this, I only thought of him in regard to his
impertinent solicitation of my sister; and against this I could restrain
him.  He was polite; obsequiously so, and cautiously guarded in his
gallantries; so that I had no cause for resorting to the _desafio_.  I
could only wait and watch.

"The vigil was not a protracted one; though, alas! it ended differently
from what I expected.  About two months after his coming under my
command, the late _grito_ was proclaimed all over Mexico.  One morning
as I went down to the military quarters I found confusion and
disturbance.  The soldiers were under arms, many of them drunk, and
vociferating `_Viva Santa Anna!  Viva el Coronel Uraga_!'  Hearing this,
I at once comprehended all.  It was a _pronunciamento_.  I drew my
sword, thinking to stem the tide of treason; and called around me such
of my followers as were still faithful.  It was too late.  The poison
had spread throughout the whole command.  My adherents were soon
overpowered, several of them killed; myself wounded, dragged to the
_carcel_, and there locked up.  The wonder is that I was not executed on
the spot; since I know Gil Uraga thirsted for my life.  He was only
restrained, however, by a bit of caution; for, although I was not put to
death on that day, he intended I should never see the sun rise upon
another.  In this he was disappointed, and I escaped.

"I know you will be impatient to learn how," resumes the refugee, after
rolling and igniting a fresh cigarrito.  "It is somewhat of an incident,
and might serve the writer of a romance.  I owe my life, my liberty,
and, what is more, my sister's safety, to our good friend Don Prospero.
In his capacity of military surgeon he was not compromised like the rest
of us; and after the revolt in the cuartel he was left free to follow
his vocation.  While seeking permission to dress the wound I had
received, chance conducted him to a place where he could overhear a
conversation that was being carried on between Uraga and one of his
lieutenants--a ruffian named Roblez, fit associate for his superior.
They were in high glee over what had happened, carousing, and in their
cups not very cautious of what they said.  Don Prospero heard enough to
make him acquainted with their scheme, so diabolical you will scarcely
give credence to it.  I was to be made away with in the night--carried
up to the mountains, and there murdered!  With no traces left, it would
be supposed that I had made my escape from the prison.  And the good
doctor heard other designs equally atrocious.  What the demons
afterwards intended doing when my sister should be left unprotected--"

Something like a groan escapes from the listener's lips, while his
fingers move nervously, as if clutching at a weapon.

"Devoted to me, Don Prospero at once resolved upon a course of action.
There was not a moment to be lost.  He obtained permission to attend me
professionally in the prison.  It was a cheap grace on Uraga's part,
considering his ulterior design.  An attendant, a sort of hospital
assistant, was allowed to accompany the doctor to the cell, carrying his
lints, drugs, and instruments.  Fortunately, I had not been quite
stripped by the ruffians who had imprisoned me, and in my own purse,
along with that of Don Prospero, was a considerable sum of gold--enough
for tempting the attendant to change clothes and places with me.  He was
the more ready to do so, relying upon a story he intended to tell--that
we had overpowered and compelled him.  Poor fellow!  As we afterwards
learnt, it did not save him.  He was shot the next morning to appease
the chagrin of Uraga, furious at our escape.  We cannot help feeling
regret for his fate; but, under the circumstances, what else could have
been done?

"We stepped forth from the _carcel_, the doctor leading the way, and I,
his assistant, bearing the paraphernalia after him.  We passed out of
the barracks unchallenged.  Fortunately, the night was a dark one, and
the guards were given to carousing.  The sentries were all intoxicated.

"By stealth, and in silence, we hastened on to my house, where I found
Adela, as you may suppose, in a state of agonised distress.  But there
was no time for words--not even of explanation.  With two of my servants
whom I could trust, we hastily collected some of our animals--horses and
pack-mules.  The latter we loaded with such things as we could think of
as being requisite for a journey.  We intended it to be a long one--all
the way across the great prairies.  I knew there would be no safety for
us within the limits of New Mexico; and I remembered what you had said
but a few months before--your kind proffer of hospitality, should it
ever be my fate to seek refuge in your country.  And to seek it we set
forth, leaving my house untenanted, or only in charge of the remaining
domestics, from whom gold had gained a promise not to betray us.  The
doctor, Adela and myself, the two peons who had volunteered to accompany
us, with the girl, Conchita, composed our travelling party.  I knew we
dared not take the route usually travelled.  We should be followed by
hostile pursuers and forced back, perhaps slain upon the spot.  I at
least would have had a short shrift.  Knowing this, we made direct for
the mountains, with whose passes I was familiar, having traversed them
in pursuit of the savages.

"We passed safely through the Sierra, and kept on towards the Rio Pecos.
Beyond this river all was unknown to us.  We only knew that there lay
the Llano Estacado, invested with mysterious terrors--the theme of our
childhood's fears--a vast stretch of desert, uninhabited, or only by
savages seeking scalps, by wild beasts ravening for blood, by hideous
reptiles--serpents breathing poison.  But what were all these dangers to
that we were leaving behind?  Nothing, and this thought inspired us to
proceed.

"We crossed the Pecos and entered upon the sterile plain.  We knew not
how far it extended; only that on the other side lay a fertile country
through which we might penetrate to the frontier settlements of your
great free nation.  This was the beacon of our hopes, the goal of
safety.

"We travelled in an easterly course; but there were days when the sun
was obscured by clouds; and then, unguided, we had either to remain at
rest or run the chance of getting strayed.

"We toiled on, growing weak for want of food, and suffering terribly
from thirst.  No water was to be found anywhere--not a drop.

"Our animals suffered as ourselves.  Staggering under the weight of
their loads, one by one they gave out, dropping down upon the desert
plain.  Only one held out bravely to the last--the mustang mare that
brought you to our present abode.  Yes, Lolita survived to carry my dear
sister, as if she understood the value we all placed upon her precious
burden.  The others gave out--first the horses ridden by Don Prospero
and myself, then the pack-mules.  Fortunately, these fell near the spot
where we at length found relief--near enough for their loads, and two of
themselves, to be afterwards recovered.

"One day, as we toiled on afoot, in the hourly expectation of death, we
came in sight of this fair spot.  It appeared to us a Paradise, as you
say it did to yourself.  Under our eyes were green trees and the gleam
of crystal streams; in our ears the songs of birds we had never expected
to hear again.  Chance had brought us direct to the path, the only one
by which the valley can be reached from the upper plain.  Inspirited by
the fair spectacle below, we gained strength enough to descend.  We
drank of the sweet water, and procured food from the branches of the
trees that shaded it.  It was the season when fruits and berries were
abundant.  Afterwards we discovered game, and were successful in
capturing it.

"Soon with restored strength we were able to go back, and recover the
paraphernalia we had left upon the plain, along with two of the mules
that, after resting, had regained their feet, and could stagger on a
little farther.

"At first we only thought of making this a temporary resting-place;
though there seemed but slight hope of being able to continue our
journey.  But as the days passed, and we were left undisturbed, we began
to realise the fact that we had found an asylum, safe as pleasant.

"It was not likely that anyone would discover the track we had taken in
our flight.  Even the resentment of Uraga would scarce pursue us across
the Staked Plain.  In any case, there was no help for it but to remain
in the valley, as we had not animals enough to carry us on.  Our only
alternative was to go back to the Del Norte--a thing not to be thought
of.  We resolved, therefore, on staying, at least for a time.  I had
conceived a plan for communicating with my friends in New Mexico, and am
not without hope that sooner or later we may get tidings that will make
it safe for as to return.  In our country, as you know, there is nothing
permanent; and we have hopes ere long to see the Liberal party once more
in the ascendant.

"Our resolution to remain here becoming fixed we sot about making our
situation as comfortable as circumstances would permit.  We erected this
humble tenement whose roof now shelters us.  We turned fishermen and
hunters; in the last my sister proving more accomplished than any of
us--a real huntress, as you have seen.  We have enjoyed the life
amazingly; more especially our worthy _medico_, who is an enthusiastic
naturalist, and here finds a rare opportunity of gratifying his
scientific tastes.  For subsistence we have not had to depend altogether
upon the chase.  Manuel, one of our peons, an old muleteer, makes an
occasional trip to Albuquerque, the route of which he has good reason to
remember.  I send him with messages, and to purchase provisions.  He is
cautious to make his approaches under cover of night, and do his
marketing with circumspection.  With our gold, not yet all gone, he is
enabled to bring back such commodities as we stand in need of; while a
friend, entrusted with the secret of our hiding-place, keeps us informed
of the _novedades_.  Now you know all."



CHAPTER THIRTY SEVEN.

THE INTERCEPTED LETTER.

Colonel Miranda, having told the tale of his perilous escape, for a time
remains silent and reflective.  So does his listener.  Both are thinking
on the same subject--the villainy of Gil Uraga.

Hamersley first breaks silence, asking the question,--

"Did you get my letter?"

"What letter?"

"I wrote you only one.  Now I think of it, you could not have received
it.  No.  By the time it would reach Albuquerque, you must have been
gone from there."

"I got no letter from you, Don Francisco.  You say you sent one.  What
was the nature of its contents?"

