though a well-dressed corpse had been rolled over on its face.  I at
once recognised it as the body of the major, whom I supposed to have
fallen dead where he lay.

"Good heavens!  Clayley, look here!" cried I; "poor Blossom's killed!"

"No, I'll be hanged if I am!" growled the latter, screwing his neck
round like a lizard, and looking up without changing the attitude of his
body.  Clayley was convulsed with laughter.  The major sheathed his head
again, as he knew that another shot from the howitzer might soon be
expected.

"Major," cried Clayley, "that right shoulder of yours projects over at
least six inches."

"I know it," answered the major, in a frightened voice.  "Curse the
tree!--it's hardly big enough to cover a squirrel;" and he squatted
closer to the earth, pressing his arms tighter against his sides.  His
whole attitude was so ludicrous that Clayley burst into a second yell of
laughter.  At this moment a wild shout was heard from the guerilleros.

"What next?" cried I, running toward the front, and looking out upon the
prairie.

"Them wild-cats are gwine to cla'r out, Cap'n," said Lincoln, meeting
me.  "I kin see them hitchin' up."

"It is as you say!  What can be the reason?"

A strange commotion was visible in the groups of horsemen.  Scouts were
galloping across the plain to a point of the woods about half a mile
distant, and I could see the artillerists fastening their mules to the
howitzer-carriage.  Suddenly a bugle rang out, sounding the "Recall",
and the guerilleros, spurring their horses, galloped off towards
Medellin.

A loud cheer, such as was never uttered by Mexican throats, came from
the opposite edge of the prairie; and looking in that direction I beheld
a long line of dark forms debouching from the woods at a gallop.  Their
sparkling blades, as they issued from the dark forest, glistened like a
cordon of fireflies, and I recognised the heavy footfall of the American
horse.  A cheer from my men attracted their attention; and the leader of
the dragoons, seeing that the guerilleros had got far out of reach,
wheeled his column to the right and came galloping down.

"Is that Colonel Rawley?" inquired I, recognising a dragoon officer.

"Why, bless my soul!" exclaimed he, "how did you get out?  We heard you
were jugged.  All alive yet?"

"We have lost two," I replied.

"Pah! that's nothing.  I came out expecting to bury the whole kit of
you.  Here's Clayley, too.  Clayley, your friend Twing's with us; you'll
find him in the rear."

"Ha!  Clayley, old boy!" cried Twing, coming up; "no bones broken? all
right?  Take a pull; do you good--don't drink it all, though--leave a
thimbleful for Haller there.  How do you like that?"

"Delicious, by Jove!" ejaculated Clayey, tugging away at the major's
flask.

"Come, Captain, try it."

"Thank you," I replied, eagerly grasping the welcome flask.

"But where is old Bios? killed, wounded, or missing?"

"I believe the major is not far off, and still uninjured."

I despatched a man for the major, who presently came up, blowing and
swearing like a Flanders trooper.

"Hilloa, Bios!" shouted Twing, grasping him by the hand.

"Why, bless me, Twing, I'm glad to see you!" answered Blossom, throwing
his arms around the diminutive major.  "But where on earth is your
pewter?" for during the embrace he had been groping all over Twing's
body for the flask.

"Here, Cudjo!  That flask, boy!"

"Faith, Twing, I'm near choked; we've been fighting all day--a devil of
a fight!  I chased a whole squad of the cursed scoundrels on Hercules,
and came within a squirrel's jump of riding right into their nest.
We've killed dozens; but Haller will tell you all.  He's a good fellow,
that Haller; but he's too rash--rash as blazes!  Hilloa, Hercules! glad
to see you again, old fellow; you had a sharp brush for it."

"Remember your promise, Major," said I, as the major stood patting
Hercules upon the shoulder.

"I'll do better, Captain.  I'll give you a choice between Hercules and a
splendid black I have.  Faith! it's hard to part with you, old Herky,
but I know the captain will like the black better: he's the handsomest
horse in the whole army; bought him from poor Ridgely, who was killed at
Monterey."

This speech of the major was delivered partly in soliloquy, partly in an
apostrophe to Hercules, and partly to myself.

"Very well, Major," I replied.  "I'll take the black.  Mr Clayley,
mount the men on their mules: you will take command of the company, and
proceed with Colonel Rawley to camp.  I shall go myself for the Don."

The last was said in a whisper to Clayley.

"We may not get in before noon to-morrow.  Say nothing of my absence to
anyone.  I shall make my report at noon tomorrow."

"And, Captain--" said Clayley.

"Well, Clayley?"

"You will carry back my--."

"What?  To which friend?"

"Of course, to Mary of the Light."

"Oh, certainly!"

"In your best Spanish."

"Rest assured," said I, smiling at the earnestness of my friend.

I was about moving from the spot, when the thought occurred to me to
send the company to camp under command of Oakes, and take Clayley along
with me.

"Clayley, by the way," said I, calling the lieutenant back, "I don't see
why you may not carry your compliments in person.  Oakes can take the
men back.  I shall borrow half a dozen dragoons from Rawley."

"With all my heart!" replied Clayley.

"Come, then; get a horse, and let us be off."

Taking Lincoln and Raoul, with half a dozen of Rawley's dragoons, I bade
my friends good-night.

These started for camp by the road of Mata Cordera, while I with my
little party brushed for some distance round the border of the prairie,
and then climbed the hill, over which lay the path to the house of the
Spaniard.

As I reached the top of the ridge I turned to look upon the scene of our
late skirmish.

The cold, round moon, looking down upon the prairie of La Virgen, saw
none of the victims of the fight.

The guerilleros in their retreat had carried off their dead and wounded
comrades, and the Americans slept underground in the lone corral: but I
could not help fancying that gaunt wolves were skulking round the
inclosure, and that the claws of the coyote were already tearing up the
red earth that had been hurriedly heaped over their graves.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

THE COCUYO.

A night-ride through the golden tropical forest, when the moon is
bathing its broad and wax-like frondage--when the winds are hushed and
the long leaves hang drooping and silent--when the paths conduct through
dark aisles and arbours of green vine-leaves, and out again into bright
and flowery glades--is one of those luxuries that I wish we could obtain
without going beyond the limits of our own land.

But no.  The romance of the American _northern_ forest--the romance that
lingers around the gnarled limbs of the oak, and the maple, and the
elm--that sighs with the wintry wind high up among the twigs of the
shining sycamore--that flits along the huge fallen trunks--that nestles
in the brown and rustling leaves--that hovers above the bold cliff and
sleeps upon the grey rock--that sparkles in the diamond stalactites of
the frost, or glides along the bosom of the cold black river--is a
feeling or a fancy of a far different character.

These objects--themselves the emblems of the stony and iron things of
nature--call up associations of the darker passions: strange scenes of
strife and bloodshed; struggles between red and white savages; and
struggles hardly less fierce with the wild beasts of the forest.  The
rifle, the tomahawk, and the knife are the visions conjured up, while
the savage whoop and the dread yell echo in your ear; and you dream of
_war_.

Far different are the thoughts that suggest themselves as you glide
along under the aromatic arbours of the American _southern_ forest,
brushing aside the silken foliage, and treading upon the shadows of
picturesque palms.

The cocuyo lights your way through the dark aisles, and the nightingale
cheers you with his varied and mimic song.  A thousand sights and
sounds, that seem to be possessed of some mysterious and narcotic power,
lull you into silence and sleep--a sleep whose dream is _love_.

Clayey and I felt this as we rode silently along.  Even the ruder hearts
of our companions seemed touched by the same influence.

We entered the dark woods that fringed the arroyo, and the stream was
crossed in silence.  Raoul rode in advance, acting as our guide.

After a long silence Clayey suddenly awoke from his reverie and
straightened himself up in the saddle.

"What time is it, Captain?" he inquired.

"Ten--a few minutes past," answered I, holding my watch under the
moonlight.

"I wonder if the Don's in bed yet."

"Not likely: he will be in distress; he expected us an hour ago."

"True, he will not sleep till we come; all right then."

"How all right then?"

"For our chances of a supper; a cold pasty, with a glass of claret.
What think you?"

"I do not feel hungry."

"But I do--as a hawk.  I long once more to sound the Don's larder."

"Do you not long more to see--"

"Not to-night--no--that is until after supper.  Everything in its own
time and place; but a man with a hungry stomach has no stomach for
anything but eating.  I pledge you my word, Haller, I would rather at
this moment see that grand old stewardess, Pepe, than the loveliest
woman in Mexico, and that's `Mary of the Light'."

"Monstrous!"

"That is, until after I have supped.  Then my feelings will doubtless
take a turn."

"Ah!  Clayey, you can never love!"

"Why so, Captain?"

"With you, love is a sentiment, not a passion.  You regard the fair
blonde as you would a picture or a curious ornament."

"You mean to say, then, that my love is `all in my eye'?"

"Exactly so, in a literal sense.  I do not think it has reached your
heart, else you would not be thinking of your supper.  Now, I could go
for days without food--suffer any hardship; but, no--you cannot
understand this."

"I confess not.  I am too hungry."

"You could forget--nay, I should not be surprised if you have already
forgotten--all but the fact that your mistress is a blonde, with bright
golden hair.  Is it not so?"

"I confess, Captain, that I should make but a poor portrait of her from
memory."

"And, were I a painter, I could throw _her_ features upon the canvas as
truly as if they were before me.  I see her face outlined upon these
broad leaves--her dark eyes burning in the flash of the cocuyo--her long
black hair drooping from the feathery fringes of the palm--and her--"

"Stop!  You are dreaming, Captain!  Her eyes are not dark--her hair is
not black."

"What!  Her eyes not dark?--as ebony, or night!"

"Blue as a turquoise!"

"Black!  What are you thinking of?"

"`Mary of the Light'."

"Oh, that is quite a different affair!" and my friend and I laughed
heartily at our mutual misconceptions.

We rode on, again relapsing into silence.  The stillness of the night
was broken only by the heavy hoof bounding back from the hard turf, the
jingling of spurs, or the ringing of the iron scabbard as it struck
against the moving flanks of our horses.

We had crossed the sandy spur, with its chaparral of cactus and
mezquite, and were entering a gorge of heavy timber, when the practised
eye of Lincoln detected an object in the dark shadow of the woods, and
communicated the fact to me.

"Halt!" cried I, in a low voice.

The party reined up at the order.  A rustling was heard in the bushes
ahead.

"_Quien viva_?" challenged Raoul, in the advance.

"_Un amigo_," (A friend), was the response.

I sprang forward to the side of Raoul and called out:

"_Acercate! acercate_!"  (Come near!)

A figure moved out of the bushes, and approached.

"_Esta el Capitan_?"  (Is it the captain?)

I recognised the guide given me by Don Cosme.

The Mexican approached, and handed me a small piece of paper.  I rode
into an opening, and held it up to the moonlight; but the writing was in
pencil, and I could not make out a single letter.

"Try this, Clayley.  Perhaps your eyes are better than mine."

"No," said Clayley, after examining the paper.  "I can hardly see the
writing upon it."

"_Esperate mi amo_!"  (Wait, my master), said the guide, making me a
sign.  We remained motionless.

The Mexican took from his head his heavy _sombrero_, and stepped into a
darker recess of the forest.  After standing for a moment, hat in hand,
a brilliant object shot out from the leaves of the _palma redonda_.  It
was the cocuyo--the great firefly of the tropics.  With a low, humming
sound it came glistening along at the height of seven or eight feet from
the ground.  The man sprang up, and with a sweep of his arm jerked it
suddenly to the earth.  Then, covering it with his hat, and inverting
his hand, he caught the gleaming insect, and presented it to me with the
ejaculation:

"_Ya_!"  (Now!)

"_No muerde_," (It does not bite), added he, as he saw that I hesitated
to touch the strange, beetle-shaped insect.

I took the cocuyo in my hand, the green, golden fire flashing from its
great round eyes.  I held it up before the writing, but the faint
glimmer was scarcely discernible upon the paper.

"Why, it would require a dozen of these to make sufficient light," I
said to the guide.

"_No, Senor; uno basti--asi_;" (No, sir; one is enough--thus); and the
Mexican, taking the cocuyo in his fingers, pressed it gently against the
surface of the paper.  It produced a brilliant light, radiating over a
circle of several inches in diameter!

Every point in the writing was plainly visible.

"See, Clayley!" cried I, admiring this lamp of Nature's own making.
"Never trust the tales of travellers.  I have heard that half a dozen of
these insects in a glass vessel would enable you to read the smallest
type.  Is that true?" added I, repeating what I had said in Spanish.

"_No, Senor; ni cincuenta_," (No, sir; nor fifty), replied the Mexican.

"And yet with a single cocuyo you may.  But we are forgetting--let us
see what's here."

I bent my head to the paper, and read in Spanish:

"_I have made known your situation to the American commander_."

There was no signature nor other mark upon the paper.

"From Don Cosme?"  I inquired, in a whisper to the Mexican.

"Yes, Senor," was the reply.

"And how did you expect to reach us in the corral?"

"_Asi_," (So), said the man, holding up a shaggy bull's hide, which he
carried over his arm.

"We have friends here, Clayley.  Come, my good fellow, take this!" and I
handed a gold eagle to the peon.

"Forward!"

The tinkling of canteens, the jingling of sabres, and the echo of
bounding hoofs recommenced.  We were again in motion, filing on through
the shadowy woods.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

LUPE AND LUZ.

Shortly after, we debouched from the forest, entering the open fields of
