procure specimens and furnish information that will add to the sum of
human knowledge--would degenerate into the mere butcher, who supplies
himself and his men with meat; or into the semi-murderer, who delights
in shedding the blood of inferior animals.  The fact is, that the
naturalist and the hunter are indispensably necessary to each
other--`both are best,' to use an old expression; and when both are
combined in one, as in the case of the great American ornithologist
Audubon, that is best of all."

"Betterer than both," suggested Peterkin.

But to return from this digression.

In less than quarter of an hour we gained a position well to leeward of
the buffalo, which grazed quietly near the edge of the bushes, little
dreaming of the enemies who were so cautiously approaching to work its
destruction.

"Keep well in rear of me, Ralph," said Peterkin, as we halted behind a
bush to examine our rifles.  "I'll creep as near to him as I can, and if
by any chance I should not kill him at the first shot, do you run up and
hand me your gun."

Without waiting for a reply, my companion threw himself on his breast,
and began to creep over the plain like a snake in the grass.  He did
this so well and so patiently that he reached to within forty yards of
the bull without being discovered.  Then he ceased to advance, and I saw
his head and shoulders slowly emerge from among the grass, and presently
his rifle appeared, and was slowly levelled.  It was one of our
large-bore single-barrelled rifles.

He lay in this position for at least two minutes, which seemed to me a
quarter of an hour, so eager was I to see the creature fall.  Suddenly I
heard a sharp snap or crack.  The bull heard it too, for it raised its
huge head with a start.  The cap of Peterkin's rifle had snapped, and I
saw by his motions that he was endeavouring, with as little motion as
possible, to replace it with another.  But the bull caught sight of him,
and uttering a terrific roar charged in an instant.

It is all very well for those who dwell at home in security to think
they know what the charge of an infuriated buffalo bull is.  Did they
see it in reality, as I saw it at that time, tearing madly over the
grass, foaming at the mouth, flashing at the eyes, tossing its tail, and
bellowing hideously, they would have a very different idea from what
they now have of the trials to which hunters' nerves are frequently
exposed.

Peterkin had not time to cap.  He leaped up, turned round, and ran for
the woods at the top of his speed; but the bull was upon him in an
instant.  Almost before I had time to realise what was occurring, I
beheld my companion tossed high into the air.  He turned a distinct
somersault, and fell with a fearful crash into the centre of a small
bush.  I cannot recall my thoughts on witnessing this.  I remember only
experiencing a sharp pang of horror and feeling that Peterkin must
certainly have been killed.  But whatever my thoughts were they must
have been rapid, for the time allowed me was short, as the bull turned
sharp round after tossing Peterkin and rushed again towards the bush,
evidently with the intention of completing the work of destruction.

Once again I experienced that strange and sudden change of feeling to
which I have before referred.  I felt a bounding sensation in my breast
which tingled to my finger-ends.  At the same time my head became clear
and cool.  I felt that Providence had placed the life of my friend in my
hands.  Darting forward in advance of the bush, I awaited the charge of
the infuriated animal.  On it came.  I knew that I was not a
sufficiently good shot to make sure of hitting it in the brain.  I
therefore allowed it to come within a yard of me, and then sprang
lightly to one side.  As it flew past, I never thought of taking aim or
putting the piece to my shoulder, but I thrust the muzzle against its
side and pulled both triggers at once.

From that moment consciousness forsook me, and I knew not what had
occurred for some minutes after.  The first object that met my confused
vision when I again opened my eyes was Peterkin, who was seated close
beside me on the body of the dead buffalo, examining some bloody
scratches on the calf of his left leg.  He had evidently been attempting
to restore me to consciousness, for I observed that a wet handkerchief
lay on my forehead.  He muttered to himself as he examined his wounds--

"This comes of not looking to one's caps.  Humph!  I do believe that
every bone in my body is--ah! here's another cut, two inches at least,
and into the bone of course, to judge from the flow of blood.  I wonder
how much blood I can afford to lose without being floored altogether.
Such a country!  I wonder how high I went.  I felt as if I'd got above
the moon.  Hollo, Ralph! better?"

I sat up as he said this, and looked at him earnestly.

"My dear Peterkin, then you're not killed after all."

"Not quite, but pretty near.  If it had not been for that friendly bush
I should have fared worse.  It broke my fall completely, and I really
believe that my worst hurts are a few scratches.  But how are _you_,
Ralph?  Yours was a much more severe case than mine.  You should hold
your gun tighter, man, when you fire without putting it to your
shoulder."

"How? why? what do you mean?"

"Simply this, that in consequence of your reckless manner of holding
your rifle, it came back with such a slap on your chest that it floored
you."

"This, then, accounts for the pain I feel in it.  But come," said I,
rising and shaking my limbs to make sure that no bones were broken; "we
have reason to be very thankful we have escaped so easily.  I made sure
that you were killed when I saw you flying through the air."

"I always had a species of cat-luck about me," replied Peterkin, with a
smile.  "But now let us cut off a bit o' this fellow to take back with
us for Jack's supper."

With some difficulty we succeeded in cutting out the buffalo's tongue by
the root, and carried it back to the village, where, after displaying it
as an evidence of our prowess, we had it cooked for supper.

The slight hurts that we had received at the time of this adventure were
speedily cured, and about two weeks after that we were all well enough
to resume our journey.



CHAPTER TEN.

WATER APPRECIATED--DESTRUCTIVE FILES, ETCETERA.

Our first start from the village where we had been entertained so
hospitably and so long was productive of much amusement to ourselves and
to the natives.

We had determined to accept of three oxen from the chief, and to ride
these when we felt fatigued; but we thought it best to let our native
porters carry our baggage on their shoulders, as they had hitherto done.

When the animals were led up to our hut, we could not refrain from
laughing.  They were three sturdy-looking dark-skinned oxen, with
wicked-looking black eyes and very long horns.

"Now, Jack, do you get up first," said Peterkin, "and show us what we
are to expect."

"Nay, lad; I am still entitled to be considered an invalid: so you must
get up first, and not only so, but you must try them all, in order that
I may be enabled to select the quietest."

"Upon my word, you are becoming despotic in your sickness, and you
forget that it is but a short time since I came down from a journey to
the sky, and that my poor bones are still tender.  But here goes.  I was
born to be victimised, so I submit to the decrees of Fate."

Peterkin went up to one of the oxen and attempted to mount it; but the
animal made a demonstration of an intention to gore him, and obstinately
objected to this.

"Hold him tight, Mak," he cried, after several futile attempts to mount.
"I was always good at leap-frog when a schoolboy; see if I don't bring
my powers into play now."

So saying, he went behind the ox, took a short race and sprang with the
agility of a monkey over its tail on to its back!  The ox began to kick
and sidle and plunge heavily on receiving this unexpected load; but its
rider held on well, until it took it into its head to dart under a
neighbouring tree, the lower branches of which swept him off and caused
him to fall with a heavy plump to the ground.

"I told you so," he cried, rising with a rueful face, and rubbing
himself as he limped forward.  However, his pain was more than half
affected, for the next minute he was on the back of another ox.  This
one also proved restive, but not so much so as the first.  The third was
a very quiet animal, so Jack appropriated it as his charger.

Having bade adieu to the chief and rubbed noses with him and with
several of our friends in the village, we all three got upon our novel
steeds and set forth.  But we had not got away from the village more
than a mile when the two restive oxen began to display a firm
determination to get rid of their intolerable burden.  Mine commenced to
back and sidle, and Peterkin's made occasional darts forward, and then
stopping suddenly, refused to budge a step.  We lost all patience at
last, and belaboured them soundly with twigs, the effect of which was to
make them advance rather slowly, and evidently under protest.

"Look out for branches," cried Peterkin as we came up to a narrow belt
of wood.

I had scarcely time to raise my head when I was swept off my seat and
hurled to the ground by a large branch.  Peterkin's attention was drawn
to me, and his ox, as if aware of the fact, seized the opportunity to
swerve violently to one side, thereby throwing its rider off.  Both
animals gave a bellow, as of triumph, erected their tails, and ran away.
They were soon recaptured, however, by our negroes; and mounting once
more, we belaboured them well and continued our journey.  In course of
time they became more reconciled to their duties; but I cannot say that
I ever came to enjoy such riding, and all of us ultimately agreed that
it was a most undesirable thing to journey on ox-back.

Thus we commenced our journey over this desert or plain of Africa, and
at the end of many weeks found ourselves approaching that part of the
country near the equator in which the gorilla is said to dwell.  On the
way we had many adventures, some of an amusing, some of a dangerous
character, and I made many additions to my collection of animals,
besides making a number of valuable and interesting notes in my journal;
but all this I am constrained to pass over, in order to introduce my
reader to those regions in which some of our most wonderful adventures
occurred.

One or two things, however, I must not omit to mention.

In passing over the desert we suffered much from want of water.
Frequently the poor oxen had to travel two or three days without tasting
a drop, and their distress was so great that we more than once thought
of turning them adrift at the first good watering-place we should come
to, and proceed, as formerly, on foot; for we had all recovered our
wonted vigour, and were quite capable of standing the fatigues of the
journey as well as our men.  But several times we had found the country
destitute of game, and were reduced to the point of starvation; so we
continued to keep the oxen, lest we should require them for food.

On one occasion we were wending our way slowly along the bed of what in
the rainy season would become a large river, but which was now so
thoroughly dry that we could not find even a small pool in which the
oxen might slake their thirst.  They had been several days absolutely
without a drop of water, while we were reduced to a mouthful or two per
man in the day.  As we could not exist much longer without the
life-giving fluid, Jack dismounted, and placing the load of one of the
men on the ox's back, sent him off in advance to look for water.  We had
that morning seen the footprints of several animals which are so fond of
water that they are never found at any great distance from some spot
where it may be found.  We therefore felt certain of falling in with it
ere long.

About two hours afterwards our negro returned, saying that he had
discovered a pool of rain-water, and showing the marks of mud on his
knees in confirmation of the truth of what he said.

"Ask him if there's much of it, Mak," said Jack, as we crowded eagerly
round the man.

"Hims say there be great plenty ob it--'nuff to tumble in."

Gladdened by this news we hastened forward.  The oxen seemed to have
scented the water from afar, for they gradually became more animated,
and quickened their pace of their own accord, until they at last broke
into a run.  Peterkin and I soon outstripped our party, and quite
enjoyed the gallop.

"There it is," cried my comrade joyfully, pointing to a gleaming pond in
a hollow of the plain not two hundred yards off.

"Hurrah!"  I shouted, unable to repress my delight at the sight.

The oxen rushed madly forward, and we found that they were away with us.
No pulling at our rope-bridles had any effect on them.  My companion,
foreseeing what would happen, leaped nimbly off just as he reached the
margin of the pond.  I being unable to collect my thoughts for the
emergency, held on.  My steed rushed into the water up to the neck, and
stumbling as he did so, threw me into the middle of the pond, out of
which I scrambled amidst the laughter of the whole party, who came up
almost as soon as the oxen, so eager were they to drink.

After appeasing our own thirst we stood looking at the oxen, and it
really did our hearts good to see the poor thirsty creatures enjoy
themselves so thoroughly.  They stood sucking in the water as if they
meant to drink up the whole pond, half shutting their eyes, which became
mild and amiable in appearance under the influence of extreme
satisfaction.  Their sides, which had been for the last two days in a
state of collapse, began to swell, and at last were distended to such an
extent that they seemed as if ready to burst.  In point of fact the
creatures were actually as full as they could hold; and when at length
they dragged themselves slowly, almost unwillingly, out of the pool, any
sudden jerk or motion caused some of the water to run out of their
mouths!

Some time after that we were compelled to part with our poor steeds, in
consequence of their being bitten by an insect which caused their death.

This destructive fly, which is called tsetse, is a perfect scourge in
some parts of Africa.  Its bite is fatal to the horse, ox, and dog, yet,
strange to say, it is not so to man or to wild animals.  It is not much
larger than the common house-fly, and sucks the blood in the same manner
as the mosquito, by means of a proboscis with which it punctures the
skin.  When man is bitten by it, no more serious evil than slight
itching of the part follows.  When the ox is bitten no serious effect
follows at first, but a few days afterwards a running takes place at the
eyes and nose, swellings appear under the jaw and on other parts of the
body, emaciation quickly follows, even although the animal may continue
to graze, and after a long illness, sometimes of many weeks, it dies in
a state of extreme exhaustion.

The tsetse inhabits certain localities in great numbers, while other
places in the immediate neighbourhood are entirely free.  Those natives,
therefore, who have herds of cattle avoid the dangerous regions most
carefully; yet, despite their utmost care, they sometimes come
unexpectedly on the _habitat_ of this poisonous fly, and lose the
greater part of their cattle.

When our poor oxen were bitten and the fatal symptoms began to appear,
we knew that their fate was sealed; so we conducted them into a pleasant
valley on which we chanced to alight, where there was plenty of grass
and water, and there we left them to die.

Another incident occurred to us in this part of our journey which is
worthy of record.

One day Peterkin and I had started before our party with our rifles, and
had gone a considerable distance in advance of them, when we
unexpectedly came upon a band of natives who were travelling in an
opposite direction.  Before coming up with their main body, we met with
one of their warriors, who came upon us suddenly in the midst of a
wooded spot, and stood rooted to the earth with fear and amazement; at
which, indeed, we were not much surprised, for as he had probably never
seen white faces before, he must have naturally taken us for ghosts or
phantoms of some sort.

He was armed with shield and spear, but his frame was paralysed with
terror.  He seemed to have no power to use his weapons.  At first we
also stood in silent wonder, and returned his stare with interest; but
after a few seconds the comicality of the man's appearance tickled
Peterkin so much that he burst into a fit of laughter, which had the
effect of increasing the terror of the black warrior to such a degree
that his teeth began to chatter in his head.  He actually grew livid in
the face.  I never beheld a more ghastly countenance.

"I say, Ralph," observed my companion, after recovering his composure,
"we must try to show this fellow that we don't mean him any harm, else
he'll die of sheer fright."

Before I could reply, or any steps could be taken towards this end, his
party came up, and we suddenly found ourselves face to face with at
least a hundred men, all of whom were armed with spears or bows and
arrows.  Behind them came a large troop of women and children.  They
were all nearly naked, and I observed that they were blacker in the skin
than most of the negroes we had yet met with.

"Here's a pretty mess," said Peterkin, looking at me.

"What is to be done?" said I.

"If we were to fire at them, I'd lay a bet they'd run away like the
wind," replied my comrade; "but I can't bear to think of shedding human
blood if it can possibly be avoided."

While we spoke, the negroes, who stood about fifty yards distant from
us, were consulting with each other in eager voices, but never for a
moment taking their eyes off us.

"What say you to fire over their heads?"  I suggested.

