"It's beast," shouted Anders, "not knows his name in Ingliss."

"Humph! a man with half an eye might see it is `beast,'" retorted the
Captain in an undertone.

As he spoke, the "beast" changed its course and bore down upon them.  As
it drew near the Englishmen became excited, for the size of the creature
seemed beyond anything they had yet seen.  Strange to say, the Eskimos
looked at it with their wonted gaze of calm indifference.

"It's the great sea-serpent at last," said Benjy, with something like
awe on his countenance.

"It does look uncommon like it," replied the Captain, with a perplexed
expression on his rugged visage.  "Get out the rifles, lad!  It's as
well to be ready.  D'ye know what it is, Chingatok?"

Again the giant uttered the unpronounceable name, while Benjy got out
the fire-arms with eager haste.

"Load 'em all, Ben, load 'em all, an' cram the Winchester to the
muzzle," said the Captain.  "There's no sayin' what we may have to
encounter; though I _have_ heard of a gigantic bit of seaweed bein'
mistaken for the great sea-serpent before now."

"That may be, father," said Benjy, with increasing excitement, "but
nobody ever saw a bit of seaweed swim with the activity of a gigantic
eel like _that_.  Why, I have counted its coils as they rise and sink,
and I'm quite sure it's a hundred and fifty yards long if it's an inch."

Those in the other boats were following the Captain's example,--getting
out and charging the fire-arms,--and truly there seemed some ground for
their alarm, for the creature, which approached at a rapid rate,
appeared most formidable.  Yet, strange to say, the Eskimos paid little
attention to it, and seemed more taken up with the excitement of the
white men.

When the creature had approached to within a quarter of a mile, it
diverged a little to the left, and passed the boats at the distance of a
few hundred yards.  Then Captain Vane burst into a sudden laugh, and
shouted:--

"Grampuses!"

"What?" cried Leo.

"Grampuses!" repeated the Captain.  "Why, it's only a shoal of grampuses
following each other in single file, that we've mistaken for one
creature!"

Never before was man or boy smitten with heavier disappointment than was
poor Benjy Vane on that trying occasion.

"Why, what's wrong with you, Benjy?" asked his father, as he looked at
his woeful countenance.

"To think," said the poor boy, slowly, "that I've come all the way to
the North Pole for _this_!  Why I've believed in the great sea-serpent
since ever I could think, I've seen pictures of it twisting its coils
round three-masted ships, and goin' over the ocean with a mane like a
lion, and its head fifty feet out o' the water!  Oh! it's too bad, I'd
have given my ears to have seen the great sea-serpent."

"There wouldn't have been much of you left, Benjy, if you had given
_them_."

"Well, well," continued the boy, not noticing his father's remark, "it's
some comfort to know that I've all _but_ seen the great sea-serpent."

It is some comfort to us, reader, to be able to record the fact that
Benjy Vane was not doomed to total disappointment on that memorable day,
for, on the same evening, the voyagers had an encounter with walruses
which more than made up for the previous misfortune.

It happened thus:--

The three boats were proceeding abreast, slowly but steadily over the
still calm sea, when their attention was attracted by a sudden and
tremendous splash or upheaval of water, just off what the Captain styled
his "port bow."  At the same moment the head of a walrus appeared on the
surface like a gigantic black bladder.  It seemed to be as large as the
head of a small elephant, and its ivory tusks were not less than two
feet long.  There was a square bluntness about the creature's head, and
a savage look about its little bloodshot eyes, which gave to it a very
hideous aspect.  Its bristling moustache, each hair of which was six
inches long, and as thick as a crow quill, dripped with brine, and it
raised itself high out of the water, turning its head from side to side
with a rapidity and litheness of action that one would not have expected
in an animal so unwieldy.  Evidently it was looking eagerly for
something.

Catching sight of the three boats, it seemed to have found what it
looked for, and made straight at them.  Leo quietly got ready his
Winchester repeater, a rifle which, as the reader probably knows, can
discharge a dozen or more shots in rapid succession; the cartridges
being contained in a case resembling a thick ram-rod under the barrel,
from which they are thrust almost instantaneously into their places.

But before the creature gained the boats, a second great upheaval of
water took place, and another walrus appeared.  This was the real enemy
of whom he had been in quest.  Both were bulls of the largest and most
ferocious description.  No sooner did they behold each other, than, with
a roar, something betwixt a bark and a bellow, they collided, and a
furious fight began.  The sea was churned into foam around them as they
rolled, reared, spurned, and drove their tusks into each other's skulls
and shoulders.

The boats lay quietly by, their occupants looking on with interest.  The
Eskimos were particularly excited, but no one spoke or acted.  They all
seemed fascinated by the fight.

Soon one and another and another walrus-head came up out of the sea, and
then it was understood that a number of cow walruses had come to witness
the combat!  But the human audience paid little regard to these, so much
were they engrossed by the chief actors.

It might have been thought, from the position of their tusks, which are
simply an enlargement and prolongation of the canine teeth, that these
combatants could only strike with them in a downward direction, but this
was not so.  On the contrary, they turned their thick necks with so much
ease and rapidity that they could strike in all directions with equal
force, and numerous were the wounds inflicted on either side, as the
blood-red foam soon testified.

We have said that the human spectators of the scene remained inactive,
but, at the first pause, the Captain said he thought they might as well
put a stop to the fight, and advised Leo to give one of them a shot.

"We'll not be the worse for a fresh steak," he added to Benjy, as Leo
was taking aim.

The effect of the shot was very unexpected.  One of the bulls was hit,
but evidently not in a deadly manner, for the motion of the boat had
disturbed Leo's aim.  Each combatant turned with a look of wild surprise
at the interruptor, and, as not unfrequently happens in cases of
interference with fights, both made a furious rush at him.  At the same
moment, all the cows seemed to be smitten with pugnacity, and joined in
the attack.  There was barely time to get ready, when the furious
animals were upon them.  Guns and rifles were pointed, axes and spears
grasped, and oars gripped.  Even the women seized each a spear, and
stood on the defensive.  A simultaneous volley checked the enemy for a
moment, and sent one of the cows to the bottom; but with a furious
bellow they charged again.

The great anxiety of the defenders was to prevent the monsters from
getting close to the boats, so as to hook on to them with their tusks,
which would probably have overturned them, or penetrated the inflated
sides.  In either case, destruction would have been inevitable, and it
was only by the active use of oar, axe, and spear that this was
prevented.

Twice did one of the bulls charge the Captain's boat, and on both
occasions he was met by the tremendous might of Chingatok, who planted
the end of an oar on his blunt nose, and thrust him off.  On each
occasion, also, he received a shot from the double barrel of Benjy, who
fired the first time into his open mouth, and the second time into his
eye, but an angry cough from the one, and a wink from the other showed
that he did not mind it much.  Meantime the Captain, with the Winchester
repeater, was endeavouring--but vainly, owing to the motions of the
giant, and the swaying of the boat--to get a shot at the beast, while
Toolooha, with an axe, was coquetting with a somewhat timid cow near the
stern.

At last an opportunity offered.  Captain Vane poured half a dozen balls
as quick as he could fire into the head of the bull, which immediately
sank.

Not less vigorously did the occupants of the other boats receive the
charge.  Leo, being more active than the Captain, as well as more expert
with his repeater, slew his male opponent in shorter time, and with less
expenditure of ammunition.  Butterface, too, gained much credit by the
prompt manner in which he split the skull of one animal with an axe.
Even Oblooria, the timid, rose to the occasion, and displayed
unlooked-for heroism.  With a barbed seal-spear she stood up and invited
a baby walrus to come on--by looks, not by words.  The baby accepted the
invitation--perhaps, being a pugnacious baby, it was coming on at any
rate--and Oblooria gave it a vigorous dab on the nose.  It resented the
insult by shaking its head fiercely, and endeavouring to back off, but
the barb had sunk into the wound and held on.  Oblooria also held on.
Oolichuk, having just driven off a cow walrus, happened to observe the
situation, and held on to Oblooria.  The baby walrus was secured, and,
almost as soon as the old bull was slain, had a line attached to it, and
was made fast to the stern.

"Well done, little girl!" exclaimed Oolichuk in admiration, "you're
almost as good as a man."

Among civilised people this might have been deemed a doubtful
compliment, but it was not so in Eskimo-land.  The little maid was
evidently much pleased, and the title of the Timid One, which Oolichuk
was wont to give her when in a specially endearing frame of mind, was
changed for the Brave One from that day.  In a few more minutes the last
charge of the enemy was repulsed, and those of them that remained alive
dived back to that native home into which the slain had already sunk.

Thus ended that notable fight with walruses.

After consummating the victory with three cheers and congratulating each
other, the conquerors proceeded to examine into the extent of damage
received.  It was found that, beyond a few scratches, the _Faith_ and
the _Hope_ had escaped scathless, but the _Charity_ had suffered
considerably.  Besides a bad rip in the upper part of the gunwale, a
small hole had been poked in her side below water, and her air-chamber
was filling rapidly.

"Come here, quick, uncle," cried Alf, in consternation, when he
discovered this.

To his surprise the Captain was not so much alarmed as he had expected.

"It won't sink you, Alf, so keep your mind easy," he said, while
examining the injury.  "You see I took care to have the boats made in
compartments.  It will only make you go lop-sided like a lame duck till
I can repair the damage."

"Repair it, uncle! how can--"

"Never mind just now, hand out a blanket, quick; I'll explain after; we
must undergird her and keep out as much water as we can."

This operation was soon accomplished.  The blanket was passed under the
boat and made fast.  By pressing against the injured part it checked the
inflow of water.  Then the cargo was shifted, and part of it was
transferred to the other boats, and soon they were advancing as
pleasantly, though not as quickly as before, while the Captain explained
that he had brought a solution of gutta-percha for the express purpose
of repairing damages to the boats, but that it was impossible to use it
until they could disembark either on land or on an iceberg.

"We'll come to another berg ere long, no doubt, shan't we, Chingatok?"
he asked.

The Eskimo shook his head and said he thought not, but there was a small
rocky islet not far from where they were, though it lay somewhat out of
their course.

On hearing this the Captain changed his course immediately, and rowed in
the direction pointed out.

"There's wind enough up there, Benjy," remarked his father, looking up
to the sky, where the higher clouds were seen rapidly passing the lower
strata to the northward, "but how to get the kites set up in a dead calm
is more than I can tell."

"There is a way out of the difficulty, father," said Benjy, pointing
behind them.

He referred to a slight breeze which was ruffling the sea into what are
called cat's paws far astern.

"Right boy, right.  Prepare to hoist your tops'ls, lads," shouted the
Captain.

In a few minutes the kites were expanded and the tow-lines attached.
When the light breeze came up they all soared, heavily, it is true, but
majestically, into the sky.  Soon reaching the upper regions, they
caught the steady breeze there, and towed the boats along at the rate of
eight or ten miles an hour.

In two hours they sighted the islet which Chingatok had mentioned, and,
soon afterwards, had landed and taken possession of it, in the usual
manner, under the name of Refuge Island.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

DISCOURSES OF DEEP THINGS.

The islet, or rock, for it was little more, which the explorers had
reached, was low and extremely barren.  Nevertheless it had on it a
large colony of sea-fowl, which received the strangers with their wonted
clamour of indignation--if not of welcome.

As it was near noon at the time, the Captain and Leo went with their
sextants to the highest part of the island to ascertain its position;
the Eskimos set about making an encampment, unloading the boats,
etcetera, and Alf, with hammer and botanical box, set off on a short
ramble along the coast, accompanied by Benjy and Butterface.

Sometimes these three kept together and chatted, at other times they
separated a little, each attracted by some object of interest, or
following the lead, it might have been, of wayward fancy.  But they
never lost sight of each other, and, after a couple of hours, converged,
as if by tacit consent, until they met and sat down to rest on a ledge
of rock.

"Well, I _do_ like this sort o' thing," remarked Benjy, as he wiped his
heated brow.  "There is something to me so pleasant and peaceful about a
low rocky shore with the sun blazing overhead and the great sea
stretching out flat and white in a dead calm with just ripple enough to
let you know it is all alive and hearty--only resting, like a
good-humoured and sleepy giant."

"Why, Ben, I declare you are becoming poetical," said Alf with a smile;
"your conceptions correspond with those of Buzzby, who writes:--

  "`Great Ocean, slumb'ring in majestic calm,
  Lies like a mighty--a mighty--'

"I--I fear I've forgotten.  Let me see:--

  "`Great Ocean, slumb'ring in majestic calm,
  Lies like a mighty--'"

"Giant in a dwalm," suggested Benjy.

"We'll change the subject," said Alf, opening his botanical box and
taking out several specimens of plants and rocks.  "See, here are some
bits of rock of a kind that are quite new to me."

"What's de use ob dem?" inquired Butterface with a look of earnest
simplicity.

"The use?" said Benjy, taking on himself to reply; "why, you flat-nosed
grampus, don't you know that these bits of rock are made for the express
purpose of being carried home, identified, classified, labelled, stuck
up in a museum, and stared at by wondering ignoramuses, who care nothing
whatever about them, and know less.  Geologists are constantly going
about the world with their little hammers keeping up the supply."

"Yes, Butterface," said Alf, "Benjy is partly correct; such specimens
will be treated as he describes, and be stared at in blank stupidity by
hundreds of fellows like himself, but they will also be examined and
understood by geologists, who from their profound knowledge of the plans
which our Creator seems to have had in arranging the materials of the
earth, are able to point out many interesting and useful facts which are
not visible to the naked and unscientific eye, such, for instance, as
the localities where coal and other precious things may be found."

"Kin dey tell whar' gold is to be found, massa Alf?"

"O yes, they can tell that."

"Den it's dis yer chile as wishes," said Butterface with a sigh, "dat he
was a jollygist."

"Oh!  Butterface, you're a jolly goose at all events," said Benjy;
"wouldn't it be fun to go and discover a gold mine, and dig up as much
as would keep us in happy idleness all the rest of our lives?  But I
say, Alf, have you nothing better than geological specimens in your
box--no grubological specimens, eh?"

Alf replied by producing from his box a paper parcel which contained
some of the required specimens in the shape of biscuit and pemmican.

"Capital!  Well, you are a good fellow, Alf.  Let us make a table-cloth
of the paper--now, you undisciplined black, don't glare so at the
victuals, else you'll grow too hungry for a moderate supply."

When the trio were in the full swing of vigorous feeding, the negro
paused, with his mouth full, to ask Alf what would be the use of the
North Pole when it was discovered.

"Make matches or firewood of it," said Benjy just as he was about to
stop up his impudent mouth with a lump of pemmican.

"Truly, of what use the Pole itself may be--supposing it to exist in the
form of a thing," said Alf, "I cannot tell, but it has already been of
great use in creating expeditions to the Polar regions.  You know well
enough, Butterface, for you've been round the Capes of Good Hope and
Horn often enough, what a long long voyage it is to the eastern seas, on
the other side of the world, and what a saving of time and expense it
would be if we could find a shorter route to those regions, from which
so many of our necessaries and luxuries come.  Now, if we could only
discover an open sea in the Arctic regions which would allow our ships
to sail in a straight line from England across the North Pole to
Behring's Straits, the voyage to the East would be reduced to only about
5000 miles, and we should be able to reach Japan in three or four weeks.
Just think what an advantage that would be to commerce!"

"Tea at twopence a pound an' sugar to match--not to mention molasses and
baccy, you ignorant nigger!" said Benjy;--"pass the biscuits."

"An' now, massa Alf," said Butterface with an eager look, "we's
diskivered dis open sea--eh!"

