American, English, French, German, Japanese, and other troops, and a
quick attack was made upon Tien-Tsin and Pekin, and the suffering
foreigners in China were rescued. In this campaign the American soldiers
did their full share of the work and added fresh laurels to the name of
Old Glory.

The tax upon the strength of the newly elected Vice-President had been
very great, and he was glad to surrender the duties of governor into the
hands of his successor. But as Vice-President, Theodore Roosevelt became
the presiding officer of the United States Senate, a position of equal
if not greater importance.

As President of the Senate it is said that Mr. Roosevelt was kind yet
firm, and ever on the alert to see that affairs ran smoothly. He
occupied the position only for one short winter session, and during that
time nothing came under discussion that was of prime importance,
although my young readers must remember that all the work accomplished
in our Senate is of more or less magnitude.

"He was very earnest in his work," says one who was in the Senate at
that time. "As was his usual habit, he took little for granted, but
usually started to investigate for himself. He knew the rules
thoroughly, and rarely made an error."

For a long time the newly elected Vice-President had been wanting to get
back to his favorite recreation, hunting. Despite the excitement of
political life, he could not overcome his fondness for his rifle and the
wilderness. He felt that an outing would do his system much good, and
accordingly arranged for a five weeks' hunting trip in northwestern
Colorado.

In this trip, which he has himself described in one of his admirable
hunting papers, he had with him two companions, Dr. Gerald Webb of
Colorado Springs, and Mr. Philip K. Stewart, an old friend who in former
years had been captain of the Yale base-ball team.

The party went as far as the railroad would carry them, and then started
for a settlement called Meeker, forty miles distant. The weather was
extremely cold, with the thermometer from ten to twenty degrees below
zero, but the journey to Meeker was made in safety, and here the hunters
met their guide, a well-known hunter of that region named Goff, and
started with him for his ranch, several miles away.

Theodore Roosevelt would have liked to bring down a bear on this trip,
but the grizzlies were all in winter quarters and sleeping soundly, so
the hunt was confined to bob-cats and cougars. The hunting began early,
for on the way to the ranch the hounds treed a bob-cat, commonly known
as a lynx, which was secured without much trouble, and a second bob-cat
was secured the next day.

The territory surrounding Goff's ranch, called the Keystone, was an
ideal one for hunting, with clumps of cottonwoods and pines scattered
here and there, and numerous cliffs and ravines, the hiding-places of
game unnumbered. The ranch home stood at the foot of several well-wooded
hills, a long, low, one-story affair, built of rough logs, but clean and
comfortable within.

The two days' ride in the nipping air had been a severe test of
endurance, and all were glad, when the ranch was reached, to "thaw out"
before the roaring fire, and sit down to the hot and hearty meal that
had been prepared in anticipation of their coming.

The hunters had some excellent hounds, trained especially for bob-cats
and cougars, animals that were never allowed to go after small game
under any circumstances. Theodore Roosevelt was much taken with them
from the start, and soon got to know each by name.

"In cougar hunting the success of the hunter depends absolutely upon his
hounds," says Mr. Roosevelt. And he described each hound with great
minuteness, showing that he allowed little to escape his trained eye
while on this tour.

On the day after the arrival at the ranch the party went out for its
first cougar, which, as my young readers perhaps know, is an animal
inhabiting certain wild parts of our West and Southwest. The beast grows
to a size of from six to nine feet in length, and weighs several hundred
pounds. It is variously known as a puma and panther, the latter name
sometimes being changed to "painter." When attacked, it is ofttimes
exceedingly savage, and on certain occasions has been known to kill a
man.

In Colorado the cougar is hunted almost exclusively with the aid of
hounds, and this was the method adopted on the present occasion. With
the pen of a true sportsman, Mr. Roosevelt tells us how the hounds were
held back until a cougar trail less than thirty-six hours old was
struck. Then off went the pack along the cliffs and ravines, with the
hunters following on horseback. The trail led up the mountain side and
then across the valley opposite, and soon the hounds were out of sight.
Leading their steeds, the hunters went down the valley and followed the
dogs, to find they had separated among the bare spots beyond. But soon
came a welcome sound.

"The cougar's treed," announced the guide. And so it proved. But when
the hunters came closer, the cougar, an old female, leaped from the
tree, outdistanced the dogs, and leaped into another tree. Then, as the
party again came up, the beast took another leap and started to run
once more. But now the hounds were too quick, and in a trice they had
the cougar surrounded. Slipping in, Theodore Roosevelt ended the
struggles of the wild beast by a knife-thrust behind the shoulder.

The next day there was another hunt, and this had rather a tinge of
sadness to it. The dogs tracked a mother cougar, who occupied her den
with her three kittens. The hounds rushed into the hole, barking
furiously, and presently one came out with a dead kitten in his mouth.

"I had supposed a cougar would defend her young to the last," says Mr.
Roosevelt, "but such was not the case in this instance. For some minutes
she kept the dogs at bay, but gradually gave ground, leaving her three
kittens." The dogs killed the kittens without loss of time, and then
followed the cougar as she fled from the other end of her hole. But the
hounds were too quick for her, and soon had her on the ground. Theodore
Roosevelt rushed up, knife in one hand and rifle in the other. With the
firearm he struck the beast in the jaws, and then ended the struggle by
a knife-thrust straight into the heart.

To many this may seem a cruel sport, and in a certain sense it assuredly
is; but my young readers must remember that cougars and other wild
beasts are a menace to civilization in the far West, and they have been
shot down and killed at every available opportunity. More than this, as
I have already mentioned, Theodore Roosevelt is more than a mere hunter
delighting in bloodshed. He is a naturalist, and examines with care
everything brought down and reports upon it, so that his hunting trips
have added not a little to up-to-date natural history. The skulls of the
various animals killed on this trip were forwarded to the Biological
Survey, Department of Agriculture, Washington, and in return Mr.
Roosevelt received a letter, part of which stated:--

"Your series of skulls from Colorado is incomparably the largest, most
complete, and most valuable series ever brought together from any single
locality, and will be of inestimable value in determining the amount of
individual variation."




CHAPTER XXIII

THE ROOSEVELT FAMILY IN THE ADIRONDACKS--THE PAN-AMERICAN EXPOSITION AT
BUFFALO--SHOOTING OF PRESIDENT MCKINLEY--THE VICE-PRESIDENT'S
VISIT--DEATH OF THE PRESIDENT


Theodore Roosevelt's companions of the hunt remained with him for
fourteen days, after which they departed, leaving him with Goff, the
ranchman and hunter already mentioned.

When the pair were alone, they visited Juniper Mountain, said to be a
great ground for cougars and bob-cats, and there hunted with great
success. All together the trip of five weeks' hunting netted fourteen
cougars, the largest of which was eight feet in length and weighed 227
pounds. Mr. Roosevelt also brought down five bob-cats, showing that he
was just as skilful with his rifle as ever.

The hero of San Juan Hill fairly loved the outdoor exercise of the hunt,
and spent three weeks in keen enjoyment after his companions had
departed. During this time it snowed heavily, so that the hunters were
often compelled to remain indoors. As luck would have it there were
other ranches in that vicinity, with owners that were hospitable, so
that they did not have to go into camp, as would otherwise have been the
case.

On the last day of the hunt, Theodore Roosevelt was able to bring down
the largest cougar yet encountered. The hounds were on the trail of one
beast when they came across that of another and took it up with but
little warning.

"We're going to get a big one now," said Goff. "Just you wait and see."

"Well, if we do, it will be a good ending to my outing," responded
Theodore Roosevelt.

The cougar was at last located by the hounds in a large pinyon on the
side of a hill. It had run a long distance and was evidently out of
breath, but as the hunters drew closer, it leaped to the ground and
trotted away through the snow. Away went the hounds on the new trail of
the beast.

"He's game, and he'll get away if he can," said the guide.

At the top of another hill the cougar halted and one of the hounds
leaped in, and was immediately sent sprawling by a savage blow of the
wild animal's paw. Then on went the cougar as before, the hounds barking
wildly as they went in pursuit.

When Theodore Roosevelt came up once more, the cougar was in another
pinyon tree, with the hounds in a semicircle on the ground below.

"Now I think I've got him," whispered Theodore Roosevelt to his
companion, and advanced on foot, with great cautiousness. At first he
could see nothing, but at last made out the back and tail of the great
beast, as it lay crouched among the branches. With great care he took
aim and fired, and the cougar fell to the ground, shot through the back.

At once the hounds rushed in and seized the game. But the cougar was not
yet dead, and snapping and snarling the beast slipped over the ground
and down a hillside, with the dogs all around it. Theodore Roosevelt
came up behind, working his way through the brush with all speed. Then,
watching his chance, he jumped in, hunting-knife in hand, and despatched
the game.

"A good haul," cried Goff. And later on he and his men came to the
conclusion that it was the same cougar that had carried off a cow and a
steer and killed a work horse belonging to one of the ranches near by.

The five weeks spent in the far West strengthened Theodore Roosevelt a
great deal, and it was with renewed energy that he took up his duties as
Vice-President of our nation.

In the meantime, however, matters were not going on so well at home.
Among the children two had been very sick, and in the summer it was
suggested that some pure mountain air would do them a great deal of
good.

"Very well, we'll go to the mountains," said Mr. Roosevelt, and looked
around to learn what place would be best to choose.

Among the Adirondack Mountains of New York State there is a reservation
of ninety-six thousand acres leased by what is called the Adirondack
Club, a wealthy organization of people who have numerous summer
cottages built within the preserve.

Among the members was a Mr. McNaughten, an old friend of the Roosevelt
family, and he suggested that they occupy his cottage until the close of
the season. This invitation was accepted, and the whole Roosevelt family
moved up to the spot, which was located at the foot of Mount Marcy, the
largest of the mountains in that vicinity. Here Mr. Roosevelt spent much
time in hunting and fishing, and also in writing. The family were not
forgotten, and he frequently went out with the whole party, rowing and
exploring. Sometimes they took baskets of lunch with them and had
regular picnics in the woods, something the Roosevelt children enjoyed
very much.

In the meantime the Pan-American Exposition at Buffalo, New York, had
been opened, and day after day it was thronged with visitors.
Vice-President Roosevelt had assisted at the opening, and he was one of
many who hoped the Exposition would be a great success.

At the Exposition our government had a large exhibit, and it was thought
highly proper that President McKinley should visit the ground in his
official capacity and deliver an address. Preparations were accordingly
made, and the address was delivered on September 5 to a most
enthusiastic throng.[3]

[Footnote 3: For this speech in full, and for what happened after it was
delivered, see "American Boys' Life of McKinley."]

On the following day the President was driven to the Temple of Music, on
the Exposition grounds, there to hold a public reception. The crowds
were as great as ever, but perfectly orderly, and filed in at one side
of the building and out at the other, each person in turn being
permitted to grasp the Chief Magistrate's hand.

For a while all went well, and nobody noticed anything unusual about a
somewhat weak-faced individual who joined the crowd, and who had one
hand covered with a handkerchief. As this rascal came up to shake hands,
he raised the hand with the handkerchief and, using a concealed pistol,
fired two shots at President McKinley.

For an instant everybody was dazed. Then followed a commotion, and while
some went to the wounded Executive's assistance, others leaped upon the
dastardly assassin and made him a prisoner.

There was an excellent hospital upon the Exposition grounds, and to this
President McKinley was carried. Here it was found that both bullets had
entered his body, one having struck the breastbone and the other having
entered the abdomen. The physicians present did all they possibly could
for him, and then he was removed to the residence of Mr. Millburn, the
President of the Exposition.

In the meantime, all unconscious of the awful happening that was to have
such an influence upon his future, Mr. Roosevelt had been enjoying
himself with his family, and helping to take care of the children that
were not yet totally recovered from their illness. All seemed to be
progressing finely, and he had gone off on a little tour to Vermont, to
visit some points of interest and deliver a few addresses.

He was at Isle La Motte, not far from Burlington, when the news reached
him that President McKinley had been shot. He had just finished an
address, and for the moment he could not believe the sad news.

"Shot!" he said. "How dreadful!" And could scarcely say another word. He
asked for the latest bulletin, and, forgetful of all else, took the
first train he could get to Buffalo, and then hastened to the side of
his Chief.

It was truly a sad meeting. For many years these two men had known each
other, and they were warm friends. Their methods were somewhat
different, but each stood for what was just and right and true, and each
was ready to give his country his best service, no matter what the cost.

It was a sad time for the whole nation, and men and women watched the
bulletins eagerly, hoping and praying that President McKinley might
recover. Every hour there was some slight change, and people would talk
it over in a whisper.

In a few days there were hopeful signs, and the physicians, deceived by
them, said they thought the President would recover. This was glad news
to Theodore Roosevelt. Yet he lingered on, fearful to go away, lest the
news should prove untrue and he should be needed. But then there was a
still brighter turn, and he thought of his own family, and of the fact
that one of his children was again ill.

"I will return to my family," said he to two of his closest friends.
"But if I am needed here, let me know at once." And his friends promised
to keep him informed. Two days later he was back among the Adirondacks,
in the bosom of his family.

The prayers of a whole nation were in vain. William McKinley's mission
on earth was finished, and one week after he was shot he breathed his
last. His wife came to bid him farewell, and so did his other relatives,
and his friend of many years, Mark Hanna, and the members of his
Cabinet.

"It is God's way," murmured the dying Executive. "His will be done, not
ours." Then like a child going to sleep, he relapsed into
unconsciousness, from which he did not recover. He died September 14,
1901, at a little after two o'clock in the morning.

It was the last of a truly great life. Illustrious men may come and go,
but William McKinley will be remembered so long as our nation endures.
As a soldier and a statesman he gave his best talents to better the
conditions of his fellow-creatures, and to place the United States where
we justly belong, among the truly great nations of the world.




CHAPTER XXIV

THEODORE ROOSEVELT'S TRAMP UP MOUNT MARCY--A MESSAGE OF IMPORTANCE--WILD
MIDNIGHT RIDE THROUGH THE MOUNTAINS--ON THE SPECIAL TRAINS FROM NORTH
CREEK TO BUFFALO


With a somewhat lighter heart, Theodore Roosevelt returned to the
Adirondacks and joined his family on Wednesday, three days previous to
President McKinley's death. The last report he had received from Buffalo
was the most encouraging of any, and he now felt almost certain that the
President would survive the outrageous attack that had been made upon
his person.

"He will get well," said several who lived close by. "You need not worry
about his condition any longer."

On the following day it was planned to go up to Colton Lake, five miles
from where the family was stopping. Some friends went along, and in the
party were Mrs. Roosevelt and several of the children. Two guides
accompanied them, and it was decided to spend the night at a camp on
the lake, returning home the following day.

The next morning it rained, but in spite of this drawback Theodore
Roosevelt, leaving the ladies and children to return to the cottage,
started to climb Mount Marcy. Such an undertaking was exactly to his
liking, and he went up the rough and uneven trail with the vigor of a
trained woodsman, the guide leading the way and the other gentlemen of
the party following.

At last, high up on the side of Mount Marcy, the party reached a small
body of water known as Tear of the Clouds, and here they rested for
lunch.

"You are certainly a great walker, Mr. Roosevelt," remarked one of the
gentlemen during the progress of the lunch.

