bearing the name:--

     JOHN SCHINKELWITZ.

"The first name's right, at any rate," said Tom, laughing. "I suppose
you are the clerk, then."

"Yes."

"How long have you been here?"

"Four weeks."

"Is it a good business?"

"Very good. My Dutch friend pays me five dollars a day, and I sleep
here."

"Among the groceries?"

"Yes; it saves me the expense of a bed outside, and that is a good deal.
I haven't saved quite enough to pay you yet, Tom, but I can soon."

"No hurry, John. I have been lucky since I saw you."

"I am glad to hear it, Tom. Did the claim prove more productive?"

"No; but I have been speculating. Guess how much money I have with me."

"A hundred and fifty dollars."

"More."

"Two hundred."

"More yet."

"Not three hundred, Tom?"

"I won't make you guess any more. I have seven hundred dollars. No
wonder you look surprised. I'll tell you how I made it;" and Tom
repeated the story of his purchase and its profitable sale.

"I am not so much surprised now," said Miles, "for in this country a man
will have what he takes a fancy to, no matter what it costs. I am glad
the good luck came to you and Mr. Ferguson. I shouldn't mind having that
amount of money myself."

"What would you do with it?"

"I would buy out my employer, and then I could make money fast."

"Does he want to sell?"

"Yes, he wants to go to the mines."

"Would he sell for such a small sum?"

"Yes; there isn't much of a stock, but we are constantly replenishing. I
tell you what, Tom, _you_ buy him out, and I'll manage the business."

"Are you in earnest, John?"

"Certainly I am."

"But I want to send some money home," objected Tom.

"How much?"

"A hundred dollars at least."

"I'll lend you the hundred, my lad," said Ferguson, "and fifty more, and
you can take your own money and buy the business. I don't favor acting
hastily, in general, but I have faith in our friend here, and I am led
to believe that the enterprise will be a profitable one."

"You'll be my partner, Tom, and I'll give you a third of the profits
without your doing a thing. If you work with me, you shall have as much
more as will be satisfactory."

"I would rather go back to the mines, John, and leave you to manage this
business by yourself. A quarter of the profits will satisfy me."

"No, it shall be a third. As you furnish the capital, that is only
fair."

"We may be counting our chickens too soon. Perhaps your Dutch friend,
whose name I can't pronounce, won't sell."

"Here he is to speak for himself."

A short German, with a ponderous frame, and a broad, good-humored face,
here entered the grocery, panting with the exertion of walking, and
looked inquiringly at Tom and the Scotchman.

"Herr Schinkelwitz, this is my friend, Tom Nelson," said Miles.

"Glad to see you, mine vriend," said the German, addressing Ferguson.

"No, that is Mr. Ferguson," said Miles, smiling. "I should have
introduced him first."

"Wie gehts, Herr Ferguson?" said the grocer. "You have one strange
name."

"Your name seems strange to me," said the Scotchman.

"Oh, no; Schinkelwitz is a very common name. Most peoples admire my
name."

Tom was considerably amused, but Herr Schinkelwitz did not observe the
smile which he could not repress.

"I have told my friends you would like to sell out the business," said
Miles.

"Oh, ja, it is a good business, but my health is not good. I think it
will be much better at the mines. You will do well to buy it yourself."

"I would if I had money enough."

"Ja, I must have the money, for I shall need it."

"My friend here has money, and may buy of you," said Miles, indicating
Tom.

"What, the boy?"

"Yes."

"Where did he get so much money?"

"At the mines."

"Oh, ja, that is a good place to get gold. Well, my young vriend, I will
sell cheap."

It will not be necessary to enter into a detailed account of the
negotiation. It is enough to say that for the sum of seven hundred
dollars Herr Schinkelwitz made over the business to Herr Tom, as he
called him, and our hero found himself penniless, but the owner of a
grocery. In half an hour it was all completed.

"Now, Tom, you are my boss," said Miles. "Shall I put your name
outside?"

"No, John, put your own. I am only a silent partner, you know."

"I congratulate you, Tom," said Ferguson. "Here are two hundred dollars,
for which you can give me your note."

"Two hundred?"

"Yes; you will need some yourself, besides what you send to your
father."

"Suppose I can't pay you back?"

"Then I will levy on the grocery, my lad," said Ferguson.




CHAPTER XXII.

A GAMBLING-HOUSE.


Having completed this important business arrangement, the two friends
went out to explore the town. The limits were narrow compared with those
of the flourishing city of the present day. Where the Palace and Grand
hotels now stand was a sand-hill, and the bay encroached upon the
business part of the city far more than now.

Scarcely a stone's throw from the grocery, on Montgomery street, between
California and Sacramento, was the office of Adams' Express, which
advertised to forward gold-dust and packages by every steamer.

"I will go in here, Mr. Ferguson," said Tom. "I shall not feel
comfortable till I have started this money homeward. I am sure it will
be wanted."

"Right, my lad. We will attend to it, by all means."

They entered the building,--a very humble one it would now be
considered,--but they found other customers before them, and had to wait
for their turn.

"What can I do for you?" asked the clerk, in a quick, business-like
tone.

"I want to send home a hundred dollars," said Tom.

"Give me the address."

This was done, the money paid over, and a receipt returned in two
minutes.

"How long before my father will receive the money?" asked Tom.

"The steamer starts in three days. About a month will be needed."

Then Tom moved aside, and the next man took his place.

"I am glad that is attended to," said Tom, relieved. "Now, Mr. Ferguson,
I will go wherever you wish."

"We had better secure a lodging," said the Scotchman. "When we are sure
of a bed we can walk about at our leisure."

Lodgings were to be had, but they were generally very dear. The first
room looked at was five dollars per day, without board,--a price our
friends were unwilling to pay. Finally they found a decent, though small
room, with rather a narrow bed, which could be had for three fifths of
that sum, and they engaged it.

"We will have to go back to the mines soon," said Tom. "San Francisco is
too expensive for us to live in."

"You can afford it better than I, Tom," said his friend.

"Why?"

"Because you have a business that brings you in an income."

"Oh, I forgot that," said our hero, smiling. "Things happen so fast here
that I haven't got used to my new position. Do you think I invested my
money wisely, Mr. Ferguson?"

"Yes, my lad, since your agent is a trustworthy, honest man."

"I am sure I can trust John Miles."

"If I were not confident of it, also, I would not have encouraged you to
take so important a step."

"I think I won't write to father about it," said Tom, after a pause. "He
might think I had acted foolishly, and become anxious. If I succeed,
then I shall be glad to surprise him. I think I shall make money; but I
don't want to count on it too much. I shall be ready to go back with you
to the mines whenever you say the word."

As they sauntered about, gazing curiously at the motley sights around
them, they heard strains of music. It appeared to proceed from a large
wooden building, with a jutting roof, under which, on benches, lounged a
number of persons, some of them Mexicans, in their native costumes,
smoking cigarettes. A large American flag was displayed over the door,
and a crowd was constantly passing in and out.

"Let us go in," said Tom.

His companion making no objection, they entered. The first sight of the
interior made clear the character of the place. There were numerous
tables, spread with games,--faro, monte, and roulette,--each surrounded
by an absorbed and interested group. "Easy come, easy go," was the rule
with the early California pioneers, and the gaming-table enlisted in its
service many men who would not have dreamed at home that they could ever
be brought to tolerate such an instrument of evil.

Tom was a country boy, and unsophisticated, but he could not help
understanding the nature of the business which brought so many to the
place.

"I suppose they are gambling," he said.

"Yes, poor, deluded creatures!" said the Scotchman, who had been brought
up to an abhorrence of games of chance. "They are wasting their time and
their substance, and foolishly laying up for themselves future misery."

Had this remark been heard it would have excited indignation, and
perhaps subjected the speaker to insult; but the players were too
intent upon their varying chances to pay any attention to the remarks of
by-standers.

"I hope, Tom, you will never yield to the seductive lures of the
gaming-table," continued Ferguson.

"I don't think there is much danger," said Tom. "I have always been
taught that gambling is wicked."

"May you long feel so, my lad!"

Tom did, however, watch the players with interest. He saw money lost and
won, without understanding exactly how it was decided. From the game his
attention was drawn to the gamesters. He was led to notice,
particularly, a young man of prepossessing countenance, who was
evidently profoundly excited. From time to time he drew out a roll of
gold pieces, which he placed on a card, and invariably lost. He must
have had a considerable sum; but, small or large, he was in ill-luck,
and constantly lost. As he neared the end of his resources the feverish
blush upon his handsome features was succeeded by a deep pallor, and
there was no mistaking the expression of deep anguish and despair which
announced that he had reached the end.

Tom became painfully interested in the young man, and silently drew the
attention of his companion to him. When the end came, and the victim,
thoroughly "cleaned out," turned to go out, Tom said, in a low voice,
"Let us follow him."

Ferguson acquiesced. He, too, had become interested, and the young man's
expression as he passed our two friends was so despairing that Ferguson
felt some alarm as to the effect of his disappointment upon his mind.

Once in the street, Ferguson and Tom followed the unfortunate young man
into an obscure street, keeping up with difficulty, for his pace was
rapid and excited. It proved to be a fortunate thing, for when he
supposed himself free from observation the young man drew a pistol, and,
with an incoherent exclamation, placed it in contact with his temple.

Tom sprang forward, and so did the Scotchman; but the boy was the
quicker and more agile, and dashed the pistol aside just in time to
prevent a suicide.

"Why did you do that?" asked the baffled would-be-suicide, gloomily,
turning his gaze upon Tom.

"I was afraid you were going to kill yourself."

"So I was."

"What could induce you to take such a rash step?" asked Ferguson.

"I have been a reckless fool. I have lost all my money at the accursed
gambling-table, and my life is not worth retaining."

"It appears to me," said the Scotchman, quietly, "that you set too high
a value upon money. You have certainly been very foolish to risk it at
the gaming-table, and the loss will no doubt inconvenience you; but was
your money all you had to live for?"

The young man regarded Ferguson with some surprise; but his excitement
was evidently abated. The quiet tone of the speaker had a favorable
effect upon him.

"I didn't think of it in that light," he admitted.

