a long mirror; come and see yourself in the glass. Can't you fancy what
you are like?"

But Irene started away.

"No, no, no!" she said. "There's a pool at the bottom of the garden, and
there are water-lilies all around it. We'll go, both of us, and look at
ourselves there; that will be much prettier."

"As you please. I am quite indifferent; only I want you to respect
yourself, Irene."

"Respect myself? But then, no one else does."

"Well, I intend to respect you, and I can only do it by your respecting
yourself. Come along; let us look at ourselves in the pool. I am
considered fairly good-looking--I don't pretend to deny it; but I am
nothing to you to-day, for you gave me a very tiring night."

"So I did, you poor dear! This white dress is rather nice, but I
wouldn't wear it for mother for all the world; I only wear it now. Now
then, come along."

The two raced downstairs; the servants peeped out from different corners
in astonishment. Miss Irene, who would make such a show of herself, was
absolutely pretty in her shady hat of softest white, and her white dress
to match, and that face, which, notwithstanding all her naughtiness, was
and must ever be beautiful above ordinary faces.

By-and-by the girls reached the pool. They both fell on their knees, and
Rosamund desired Irene to gaze at her reflection.

"Here are some forget-me-nots," said Rosamund. "I am going to make a
wreath to put round your hair. Take your hat off."

She made a little wreath in a few minutes, and twined them through
Irene's curling locks.

"Now look again. What do you see?"

"Why, she is somebody rather--I mean she is beautiful, very beautiful,"
said Irene in a low voice. "But she is not me."

"She is you. Look again. Don't you see that soft little mouth, and that
nose, so beautifully formed, and those bright, bright eyes, and that
hair, and the whole thing? It was God who made you, Irene, and He made
you beautiful, and beautiful people have a great gift."

Irene ceased to look at herself. She flung off the forget-me-not wreath
and turned to Rosamund.

"Now, what do you mean by all this lecturing?" she said.

"Beautiful people have a great responsibility," continued Rosamund in a
stout voice. "They are sent into the world to make it better. As far as
I can make out, up to the present time you have done nothing whatever
but make the world worse. You have never, so far as I can tell, been
kind to your mother. You have made the servants most unhappy. You have
done your utmost to render your governesses' position impossible."

"Because I hate them, and don't want to learn."

"Not want to learn," said Rosamund, "with that forehead so full, so
intelligent? Why, you could learn in a flash. You could get knowledge
with the utmost ease, and you would love it when once you began. If I am
to be your friend you have got to turn over a new leaf. There, I have
said enough about yourself for the present. Just let us walk about until
tea-time."

"No; I want to go in the boat."

"We won't go in the boat till after tea. I want to talk to you."

"I wonder why I am obeying you?" said Irene, slipping her hand inside
Rosamund's.

"Because I mean you to."

"I wonder why I'm not hating you?"

"Because if you did I should leave you."

"I couldn't let you go. It seems to me the whole world is different
since I got you. But do tell me, you are not very good yourself?"

"I am not at all so good. Ask the people at Sunnyside what they think of
me. There is my dearest friend lying at death's door--that is not my
fault, of course; but when I can smile at all when I remember her, you
must see for yourself that there is a great deal that is very far from
good in me. But there, now, I want to talk about Miss Frost."

"Now, why?" said Irene. "That horror! That dreadful stick-in-the-mud!
Oh, she is detestable! I cannot tell you how I loathe her."

"You do, because you don't understand her."

"And pray do you?"

"I understand her more than you do; and in any case I could not be cruel
to her."

"But she is so old, and so ugly."

"I thought you didn't mind about people's appearance. You said so a
minute ago."

"Well, I didn't; but it seems to me that you have opened my eyes. If I
am so beautiful I ought to be with beautiful people, like you, Rosamund;
for, now I come to look at you, you are very beautiful."

"It is by no means necessary that you should be with beautiful people;
but you should give pleasure to people who are not beautiful, because
they would like to look at you, and hear your voice, and be refreshed by
your kind actions."

"Good gracious me! Kind actions!" said Irene.

"In future I believe they will be kind. Now, please understand you have
been exceedingly cruel to Miss Frost."

"I want her to go."

"She is not going."

"How do you know? I did think those wood-lice would finish her. I
thought and thought, and the happy idea came to me this morning. I was
quite certain she'd give notice, just as Carter did. They could take her
on at the Merrimans'. It seems to me that my governesses always find a
berth near, so as to spread the fame of my dreadful character."

"Well, she is not going. She can't go. She has a little brother and
sister, and she has got to provide for them."

"What do you mean by that?"

"She has got to feed and clothe them, and to put them to school, and do
everything for them. If she left your mother's house she would have no
money, and might find it difficult to get another post. So she is not
going. I asked her to stay, and she is going to teach me as well as
you."

"Dear me!"

"Yes; and we are going to make it exceedingly interesting. I mean you to
learn a lot. I assure you, if I come here and give up the next few
months of my life to you, I don't mean to do nothing in the time. I want
to work hard, and you will have to work hard too. I am not bound to stay
with you for a single hour. The moment your pranks begin, the moment I
hear of any more toads being put into the bread-pan, or wasps and
caterpillars descending on poor James's head, or spiders put down the
housemaids' backs, or leeches being allowed to run about your bedroom, I
shall just go off. If you want me you must refrain from that sort of
thing."

"But won't I have any outlet?"

"Indeed you will have plenty."

"Of what sort?"

"You will see. But there is the tea-bell; let us go in."

Irene looked wonderfully thoughtful, for her. She walked slowly by
Rosamund's side into the house. Still slowly, and with that thoughtful
expression on her face; she passed along the hall until she reached the
pretty parlor where tea was always served. Here Lady Jane herself was
waiting in a state of nervous expectancy, and here was Miss Frost, very
pale, shaky, and troubled, declaring stoutly to Lady Jane that "they"
were running about inside her still.

When the girls entered there was a moment of silence, then a start of
surprise, for Irene in white, and wearing her pretty shady hat, looked a
totally different Irene from the untidy little creature who usually
rushed about in her red frock at all hours and seasons. Rosamund gave
Lady Jane a warning glance to take no notice of Irene, who flung
herself, very much in her old manner, into a chair exactly opposite Miss
Frost.

Of course she was going to be good. At least she supposed she must. It
was horrid work, she so infinitely preferred being naughty; but then
there was Rosamund, and Rosamund wished it, and she--oh, she did not
really think she loved Rosamund, but she had a strange sort of longing
to be with her, and Rosamund was free as air, and could go at any
moment. Therefore, to keep Rosamund, she must be good. But that needn't
prevent her staring hard at Miss Frost, which she proceeded to do with
great alacrity.

Meanwhile Lady Jane poured out tea, and talked in her lady-like and
refined tones to Rosamund, who replied in exactly the same style.

"Are they alive still?" asked Irene when there was a slight pause in the
conversation; and she fixed her dancing eyes full on her governess's
face.

"Oh, Irene, it was unkind!" began Miss Frost; but Rosamund hastily
interrupted.

"Irene, you know what I mean. That subject is not to be alluded to. Miss
Frost, I beg of you not to speak of it before Irene, and do for
goodness' sake eat a good meal. Forgive me, Lady Jane, but I want us all
to have a very good tea; and as it is such a lovely, lovely day, may we
go for a little picnic afterwards, and take our supper with us into the
woods? Will you come too, and Miss Frost? It would be so delightful!"

Lady Jane's plan had been to leave Irene entirely to herself. She was to
have so many hours' lessons in the day, which generally resulted in not
working at all, and the rest of her time she spent either in her boat or
hatching mischief to annoy some inmate of the house. But now the idea of
a picnic, with supper out-of-doors, on this most glorious summer's day,
was altogether new.

"We might have the governess-cart, mightn't we, mothery?" said Irene,
turning her eyes away from Miss Frost, and gazing at her mother with
great anxiety and interest.

"Certainly, dear, but I"----

"Oh, you must come too," said Rosamund.

She knew very well that Lady Jane would say that she could not go out on
the anniversary of her husband's death; but she felt at the same time
that it was necessary for Irene's reform that both her mother and
governess should accompany her.

"I want us all to go," she said. "I have got a plan in my head. You will
let us, won't you?--Irene, you and I will choose what supper we will
take, after tea is over. And now, will you kindly pass me the
plum-jam--yes, and the butter too?"

What a masterful young person Rosamund Cunliffe was, and how Irene began
to lean upon her! She no longer troubled herself even to glance at Miss
Frost, who in consequence began to get back her courage and to make a
good tea. "The creatures," as she termed them, were certainly less
lively, and on the whole she felt better and more disposed to believe
the doctor.

As soon as tea was over Rosamund took Irene out of the room, and they
went together to the cook.

"Now, the very first thing you are to say to cook is this," said
Rosamund: "'Cook, I am exceedingly sorry I put a toad into your
bread-pan, and I am not going to do it again. I want you to give me the
very nicest supper you can possibly collect at short notice.' You must
put on your very prettiest manner when you speak to cook. Will you,
Irene?"

"It will be horrid work, for she isn't a lady, you know."

"She is far more a lady than you were when you put the toad into the
bread-pan."

"You are sharp, aren't you?" said Irene.

"Because you need it. I won't be sharp with you soon, for I know you are
going to be a model girl, and the most beautiful creature in the whole
country. You don't know how nice it will feel after being naughty for so
long."

"I wonder if it will?" said Irene, beginning to dance along by
Rosamund's side.

The necessary apology was made to the cook, who received it with dubious
surprise, the other servants standing near; but when they saw Irene
glancing in their direction they darted off in more or less pretended
terror. Cook, however, was mollified by Rosamund's sweet face, and an
excellent supper was packed in a hamper.

The governess-cart was brought round to the front door, and Lady Jane,
to her own amazement and much against her will, took the reins and drove
as far as Parson's Dale, a most lovely spot four miles away. Miss Frost
felt the soft evening air fanning her cheeks and taking some of the
nervousness out of her. Irene sat thoughtful, and looking exquisitely
pretty. Rosamund chatted on all sorts of subjects. In short, such a day
had never before been known to the younger girl.




CHAPTER XIV.

SCHOOL AT THE FOLLIES.


Jane Denton had a hard fight for her life. For days she hovered between
this world and the next. Two or three doctors came to see her. She had
two trained nurses; bulletins were put up at the door; no one was
allowed to come in. The girls who were staying with Mrs. Brett were
strictly forbidden to have any communication with the infected house;
Rosamund and Irene were equally forbidden to go near Sunnyside.

But at last there came a day when there was a decided improvement. The
diphtheria was gone, and the young patient began slowly to pass from
danger to convalescence. Then a load seemed to be lifted from every
one's breast; and Rosamund really turned, as she expressed it, to
consider her future life. During the time of waiting she had a certain
influence over Irene; not, perhaps, so much as on the first day, when
that young lady, charmed, bewildered, and amazed by Rosamund's firmness,
had followed her lead unflinchingly. Rosamund now had to consider
herself. She wrote, therefore, a long letter to her mother.

"I could not do so," she thought, "while Jane lay between life and
death, when there was a strong chance of the school at Sunnyside not
existing any more. But now I must write to dear mother and tell her the
truth."

Accordingly, the following letter reached Mrs. Cunliffe on a certain
morning early in July:

     "MY DARLING MOTHER,--You know all about Jane, of course, and that
     she is now better--in fact, quite out of danger. In a short time
     they will take her away, probably to some seaside place, the house
     will be disinfected, and the girls will come back to their work.
     Miss Archer, the English governess, will be as strict and as
     unsympathetic as ever, and Mademoiselle Omont will teach excellent
     French, no doubt.

     "Now, mother darling, you may have heard, or you may not have
     heard, that I am in disgrace at Sunnyside. I could not give up
     Irene, and in consequence the Professor says that I am not to
     return to the school. He means by that that I am to be in a sense
     expelled. I felt his words very acutely when he uttered them, for I
     didn't wish to do anything contrary to your desires; but I felt
     that I could not give up Irene. I was the first person who had any
     influence over her, and she was running wild and becoming a torment
     to her neighbors. I don't know what she would have come to in the
     end. So I elected, mother darling, to go straight to Lady Jane's
     instead of to Mrs. Brett, when dear Jane was so ill. Now I am
     established here at The Follies, and I am not allowed to go back to
     Sunnyside. Doubtless you know that, and perhaps you are angry with
     your own Rosamund. But I asked your leave to stay, and you gave it,
     although you did not know all the circumstances. Will you, dear
     mother, write to Professor Merriman and ask him to tell you exactly
     why he wishes to expel me? He will probably give you a very sorry
     story; but you must believe it or not as you please. I think you
     know your Rosamund better than he does. I am not going back to
     Sunnyside, for they would not accept me; but, at the same time, I
     do not feel at all a disgraced girl; and I should like the
     Merrimans to be friends with me, and I should still like sometimes
     to see Jane and Laura Everett, and some of the other girls--not
     Lucy Merriman, for she is not in the least to my taste; but even
     she does not greatly matter now that I am no longer living in the
     house with her. The fact is, dear mother, I could not have been a
     good girl had I stayed long in the house with Lucy, for she managed
     in some extraordinary manner to rub me the wrong way. She was so
     extra good, so punctilious, and so proper; she didn't suit me one
     bit, and I didn't suit her one little bit either. I was becoming
     quite a naughty girl. I never was too good--was I, mother dear?
     Perhaps, darling, I'd have become an awfully naughty Rosamund had
     it not been for Irene--poor little wild Irene; but she was really
     and truly much naughtier than I ever thought of being, and her
     example shocked me and pulled me up, and I resolved to try to be
     good for her sake.

     "But I do like Professor Merriman, although I know he does not like
     me; and I believe they are very poor. So I wish you would find
     another pupil in my place--some ordinary kind of girl, who would
     pay about the same sum; or perhaps, mother, as you are so very well
     off, you might pay the money for her. What do you say to that? It
     is just a notion of mine. There is my cousin Anice: you know how
     her mother frets because she is not well educated. Well, she would
     be well educated at the Merrimans', for the two governesses, as
     well as the masters who come for occasional lessons, are
     first-rate. Now, just think that over, only don't let my name
     appear in the matter.

     "Well, dearest, that's all about the Merrimans for the present. I
     am staying with Irene; but she knows that if she plays any very
     serious pranks I go. Meanwhile you must not suppose that I am
     letting my lessons alone. I am working very hard with Miss Frost.
     She is a dear creature when you get to know her, and she is very
     fond of me. I told you about those dreadful insects that that
     wicked child made her swallow. Well, she is all right again now,
