In speaking of the early life of Abe's father and mother, Dennis threw
in the remark that "the Hankses was some smarter than the Lincolns." It
was not "smartness" that made Abe Lincoln grow to be a greater man than
Dennis Hanks. There are men in Springfield to-day who say, "There were a
dozen smarter men in this town than Mr. Lincoln when he happened to be
nominated, and peculiar conditions prevailing at that time brought about
his election to the presidency!"

True greatness is made of goodness rather than smartness. Abraham
Lincoln was honest with himself while a boy and a man, and it was
"Honest Abe" who became President of the United States. The people loved
him for his big heart--because he loved them more than he loved himself
and they knew it. In his second inaugural address as President he used
this expression: "With malice toward none, with charity for all." This
was not a new thought, but it was full of meaning to the country because
little Abe Lincoln had _lived_ that idea all his life, with his own
family, his friends, acquaintances, and employers. He became the most
beloved man in the world, in his own or any other time, because he
himself loved everybody.

Mrs. Crawford, the wife of "Old Blue Nose," used to laugh at the very
idea of Abe Lincoln ever becoming President. Lincoln often said to her:
"I'll get ready and the time will come." He got ready in his father's
log hut and when the door of opportunity opened he walked right into the
White House. He "made himself at home" there, because he had only to go
on in the same way after he became the "servant of the people" that he
had followed when he was "Old Blue Nose's" hired boy and man.


ONE PARTNER IN THE WHITE HOUSE, THE OTHER IN THE POOR HOUSE

Then there was William H. Herndon, known to the world only because he
happened to be "Lincoln's law partner." His advantages were superior to
Lincoln's. And far more than that, he had his great partner's help to
push him forward and upward. But "poor Billy" had an unfortunate
appetite. He could not deny himself, though it always made him ashamed
and miserable. It dragged him down, down from "the President's partner"
to the gutter. That was not all. When he asked his old partner to give
him a government appointment which he had, for years, been making
himself wholly unworthy to fill, President Lincoln, much as he had loved
Billy all along, could not give it to him. It grieved Mr. Lincoln's
great heart to refuse Billy anything. But Herndon did not blame himself
for all that. He spent the rest of his wretched life in bitterness and
spite--avenging himself on his noble benefactor by putting untruths into
the "Life of Lincoln" he was able to write because Abraham Lincoln,
against the advice of his wife and friends, had insisted on keeping him
close to his heart. It is a terrible thing--that spirit of spite! Among
many good and true things he _had_ to say about his fatherly law
partner, he poisoned the good name of Abraham Lincoln in the minds of
millions, by writing stealthy slander about Lincoln's mother and wife,
and made many people believe that the most religious of men at heart was
an infidel (because he himself was one!), that Mr. Lincoln sometimes
acted from unworthy and unpatriotic motives, and that he failed to come
to his own wedding. If these things had been true it would have been
wrong to publish them to the prejudice of a great man's good name--then
how much more wicked to invent and spread broadcast falsehoods which
hurt the heart and injure the mind of the whole world--just to spite the
memory of the best friend a man ever had!

The fate of the firm of Lincoln & Herndon shows in a striking way how
the world looks upon the heart that hates and the heart that loves, for
the hateful junior partner died miserably in an almshouse, but the
senior was crowned with immortal martyrdom in the White House.


THE RIVAL FOR LOVE AND HONORS

Stephen A. Douglas, "the Little Giant," who had been a rival for the
hand of the fascinating Mary Todd, was also Lincoln's chief opponent in
politics. Douglas was small and brilliant; used to society ways, he
seemed always to keep ahead of his tall, uncouth, plodding competitor.
After going to Congress, Mr. Lincoln was encouraged to aspire even
higher, so, ten years later, he became a candidate for the Senate.
Slavery was then the burning question, and Douglas seemed naturally to
fall upon the opposite side, favoring and justifying it in every way he
could.

Douglas was then a member of the Senate, but the opposing party
nominated Lincoln to succeed him, while "the Little Giant" had been
renominated to succeed himself. Douglas sneered at his tall opponent,
trying to "damn him with faint praise" by referring to him as "a kind,
amiable and intelligent gentleman." Mr. Lincoln challenged the Senator
to discuss the issues of the hour in a series of debates.

Douglas was forced, very much against his will, to accept, and the
debates took place in seven towns scattered over the State of Illinois,
from August 21st to October 15th, 1858. Lincoln had announced his belief
that "a house divided against itself cannot stand;" therefore the United
States could not long exist "half slave and half free."

"The Little Giant" drove from place to place in great style, traveling
with an escort of influential friends. These discussions, known in
history as the "Lincoln-Douglas Debates," rose to national importance
while they were in progress, by attracting the attention, in the
newspapers, of voters all over the country. They were attended, on an
average, by ten thousand persons each, both men being accompanied by
bands and people carrying banners and what Mr. Lincoln called
"fizzlegigs and fireworks."

Some of the banners were humorous.

         ------------------------
        |                        |
        |  Abe the Giant-Killer  |
        |                        |
         ------------------------

was one. Another read:

         -----------------------------------------------------------
        |                                                           |
        |  Westward the Star of Empire takes its way;               |
        |The girls link on to Lincoln, their mothers were for Clay. |
        |                                                           |
         -----------------------------------------------------------

At the first debate Lincoln took off his linen duster and, handing it to
a bystander, said:

"Hold my coat while I stone Stephen!"

In the course of these debates Lincoln propounded questions for Mr.
Douglas to answer. Brilliant as "the Little Giant" was, he was not
shrewd enough to defend himself from the shafts of his opponent's wit
and logic. So he fell into Lincoln's trap.

"If he does that," said Lincoln, "he may be Senator, but he can never be
President. I am after larger game. The battle of 1860 is worth a hundred
of this."

This prophecy proved true.




CHAPTER XVIII

HOW EMANCIPATION CAME TO PASS


When Abraham Lincoln was a small boy he began to show the keenest
sympathy for the helpless and oppressed. The only time he betrayed anger
as a child was, as you already have learned, when he saw the other boys
hurting a mud-turtle. In his first school "composition," on "Cruelty to
Animals," his stepsister remembers this sentence: "An ant's life is as
sweet to it as ours is to us."

As you have read on an earlier page, when Abe grew to be a big, strong
boy he saved a drunken man from freezing in the mud, by carrying him to
a cabin, building a fire, and spent the rest of the night warming and
sobering him up. Instead of leaving the drunkard to the fate the other
fellows thought he deserved, Abe Lincoln, through pity for the helpless,
rescued a fellow-being not only from mud and cold but also from a
drunkard's grave. For that tall lad's love and mercy revealed to the
poor creature the terrible slavery of which he was the victim. Thus Abe
helped him throw off the shackles of drink and made a man of him.


BLACK SLAVES AND WHITE

As he grew older, Abe Lincoln saw that the drink habit was a sort of
human slavery. He delivered an address before the Washingtonian
(Temperance) Society in which he compared white slavery with black, in
which he said:

"And when the victory shall be complete--when there shall be neither a
slave nor a drunkard on the earth--how proud the title of that land
which may truly claim to be the birthplace and the cradle of both those
revolutions that have ended in that victory."

This address was delivered on Washington's Birthday, 1842. The closing
words throb with young Lawyer Lincoln's fervent patriotism:

"This is the one hundred and tenth anniversary of the birth of
Washington; we are met to celebrate this day. Washington is the
mightiest name of earth, long since the mightiest in the cause of civil
liberty, still mightiest in moral reformation. On that name no eulogy is
expected. It cannot be. To add to the brightness of the sun or glory to
the name of Washington is alike impossible. Let none attempt it. In
solemn awe we pronounce the name and, in its naked, deathless splendor,
leave it shining on."

It was young Lincoln's patriotic love for George Washington which did so
much to bring about, in time, a double emancipation from white slavery
and black.

Once, as President, he said to a boy who had just signed the temperance
pledge:

"Now, Sonny, keep that pledge and it will be the best act of your life."

President Lincoln was true and consistent in his temperance principles.
In March, 1864, he went by steamboat with his wife and "Little Tad," to
visit General Grant at his headquarters at City Point, Virginia.

When asked how he was, during the reception which followed his arrival
there, the President said, as related by General Horace Porter:

"'I am not feeling very well. I got pretty badly shaken up on the bay
coming down, and am not altogether over it yet.'

"'Let me send for a bottle of champagne for you, Mr. President,' said a
staff-officer, 'that's the best remedy I know of for sea-sickness.'

"'No, no, my young friend,' replied the President, 'I've seen many a
man in my time seasick ashore from drinking that very article.'

"That was the last time any one screwed up sufficient courage to offer
him wine."


"THE UNDER DOG"

Some people are kinder to dumb animals--is it _because_ they are
dumb?--than to their relatives. Many are the stories of Lincoln's
tenderness to beasts and birds. But his kindness did not stop there, nor
with his brothers and sisters in white. He recognized his close
relationship with the black man, and the bitterest name his enemies
called him--worse in their minds than "fool," "clown," "imbecile" or
"gorilla"--was a "Black Republican." That terrible phobia against the
negro only enlisted Abraham Lincoln's sympathies the more. He appeared
in court in behalf of colored people, time and again. The more bitter
the hatred and oppression of others, the more they needed his
sympathetic help, the more certain they were to receive it.

"My sympathies are with the under dog," said Mr. Lincoln, one day,
"though it is often that dog that starts the fuss."

The fact that the poor fellow may have brought the trouble upon himself
did not make him forfeit Abraham Lincoln's sympathy. That was only a
good lesson to him to "Look out and do better next time!"


THE QUESTION OF EMANCIPATION

After he went to Washington, President Lincoln was between two fires.
One side wanted the slaves freed whether the Union was broken up or not.
They could not see that declaring them free would have but little
effect, if the government could not "back up" such a declaration.

The other party did not wish the matter tampered with, as cheap labor
was necessary for raising cotton, sugar and other products on which the
living of millions of people depended.

The extreme Abolitionists, who wished slavery abolished, whether or no,
sent men to tell the President that if he did not free the slaves he was
a coward and a turncoat, and they would withhold their support from the
Government and the Army.

Delegations of Abolitionists from all over the North arrived almost
daily from different cities to urge, coax and threaten the President.
They did not know that he was trying to keep the Border States of
Maryland, Kentucky and Missouri from seceding. If Maryland alone had
gone out of the Union, Washington, the national capital, would have been
surrounded and forced to surrender.

Besides, at this time, the armies of the North were losing nearly all
the battles.

To declare all the slaves down South freed, when the Government could
not enforce such a statement and could not even win a battle, would be
absurd. To one committee the President said: "If I issued a proclamation
of emancipation now it would be like the Pope's bull (or decree) against
the comet!"

A delegation of Chicago ministers came to beg Mr. Lincoln to free the
slaves. He patiently explained to them that his declaring them free
would not make them free. These men seemed to see the point and were
retiring, disappointed, when one of them returned to him and whispered
solemnly:

"What you have said to us, Mr. President, compels me to say to you in
reply that it is a message from our divine Master, through me,
commanding you, sir, to open the doors of bondage that the slave may go
free!"

"Now, isn't that strange?" the President replied instantly. "Here I am,
studying this question, day and night, and God has placed it upon me,
too. Don't you think it's rather odd that He should send such a message
by way of that awful wicked city of Chicago?"

The ministers were shocked at such an answer from the President of the
United States. They could not know, for Mr. Lincoln dared not tell them,
that he had the Emancipation Proclamation in his pocket waiting for a
Federal victory before he could issue it!


THE PROCLAMATION

Then, came the news of Antietam, a terrible battle, but gained by the
Northern arms. At last the time had come to announce the freeing of the
slaves that they might help in winning their liberties. The President
had not held a meeting of his Cabinet for some time. He thought of the
occasion when, as a young man he went on a flatboat trip to New Orleans
and saw, for the first, the horrors of negro slavery, and said to his
companions:

"If ever I get a chance to hit that thing I'll hit it hard!"

Now the "chance to hit that thing"--the inhuman monster of human
slavery--had come, and he was going to "hit it hard."

He called the Cabinet together. Edwin M. Stanton, the Secretary of War,
has described the scene:

"On the 22nd of September, 1862, I had a sudden and peremptory call to a
Cabinet meeting at the White House. I went immediately and found the
historic War Cabinet of Abraham Lincoln assembled, every member being
present. The President hardly noticed me as I came in. He was reading a
book of some kind which seemed to amuse him. It was a little book. He
finally turned to us and said:

"'Gentlemen, did you ever read anything from "Artemus Ward?" Let me read
you a chapter that is very funny.'

"Not a member of the Cabinet smiled; as for myself, I was angry, and
looked to see what the President meant. It seemed to me like buffoonery.
He, however, concluded to read us a chapter from 'Artemus Ward,' which
he did with great deliberation. Having finished, he laughed heartily,
without a member of the Cabinet joining in the laughter.

"'Well,' he said, 'let's have another chapter.'

"I was considering whether I should rise and leave the meeting abruptly,
when he threw the book down, heaved a long sigh, and said:

"'Gentlemen, why don't you laugh? With the fearful strain that is upon
me night and day, if I did not laugh I should die, and you need this
medicine as much as I do.'

"He then put his hand in his tall hat that sat upon the table, and
pulled out a little paper. Turning to the members of the Cabinet, he
said:

"'Gentlemen, I have called you here upon very important business. I have
prepared a little paper of much significance. I have made up my mind
that this paper is to issue; that the time is come when it should issue;
that the people are ready for it to issue.

"'It is due to my Cabinet that you should be the first to hear and know
of it, and if any of you have any suggestions to make as to the form of
this paper or its composition, I shall be glad to hear them. But the
paper is to issue.'

"And, to my astonishment, he read the Emancipation Proclamation of that
date, which was to take effect the first of January following."
