complete vibrations a certain note, key, or pitch as you may please to
call it, makes each second, or how many times the particles of air
vibrate back and forth when that especial note is sent out.

"Suppose, for example, a note makes 240 complete vibrations a second
while traveling 1,120 feet; if we divide 1,120 by 240 we shall get
4.66 as the wave length of this note. So it is the pitch to which a
note is keyed that helps determine its distance; and the force
employed to start the note sent out through the magnetic field. That
is why a message projected into the ether from a high-power station
carries a greater distance than one sent from a station where the
power is weaker. It is by power and pitch, then, not by length that we
gauge wireless waves. Do you see that?"

A chorus of assent greeted the question.

"That's bully!" Bob announced boyishly; then blushed at the
undignified ejaculation.

"Don't you be fussed, young man," smiled Mr. Crowninshield. "We're all
of an age here."

"I quite forgot," apologized the tutor.

"That is exactly what I want you to do," returned the master of
Surfside. "Ignore us old people. We are only listening in, anyway, and
have no earthly right to be here."

"Still, I wish to treat you with----"

"It's all right, Bob. We understand," put in Mrs. Crowninshield
reassuringly.

"Well, then, if you will excuse me I'm off again," replied the boy.
"And now that we've got wave lengths settled to our satisfaction we
must remember some other things. One is that sound travels not only
through the air but through the water. In fact, sounds are louder
under water than they are above it. Water is not only a better medium
for carrying sound but also, since it contains fewer obstructions,
sound waves travel farther through it. Another thing which we must not
forget is that our ears do not hear all the sounds that go on about
us. The merciful Lord has arranged that when there are less than
twenty-four vibrations a second, or more than forty thousand they
escape us. But a wireless instrument, on the contrary is spared
nothing, having attached to it a detector that catches every sound and
an amplifier that magnifies it and makes it discernible to our ears.
When you listen in on a wireless telephone you will be uncontestably
conscious of this. Also you must take into consideration that the
waves sent out by a radio transmitter are not choppy, irregular ones
such as you get when a stone is tossed into the water; wireless waves
go out in regular, well-formed relays that neither overlap nor obscure
one another. Were this not so the signals made would be jumbled
together and utterly unintelligible."

"Sure they would!" Bob's young brother nodded.

"Now to insure these several results we are compelled to resort to the
help of scientific apparatus. Therefore at every receiving station we
have devices that will intercept the waves as they come in;
retransform them into electrical oscillations; and catching the weak
oscillations make them strong enough to be read. Hence we use some
type of induction coil by means of which a battery current of such low
pressure and diffused flow as scarcely to be felt will be transformed
or concentrated into a pressure that is very powerful. In order to
form wireless waves we must have a frequency of at least one hundred
thousand vibrations a second; and as it is out of the question to
produce these by mechanical means we employ a group of Leyden jars.
Such jars you have of course seen. They have in them two pieces of
tinfoil separated by glass, which is a nonconductor of electric
currents, and various other acids and minerals. When you connect a
number of these small jars together you have a battery as powerful as
that of a large single jar."

"I never saw jars like those," objected Dick.

Bob beamed at the intelligence of the demurrer.

"When I say jar," explained he, "it does not necessarily mean that
these jars are of the round, cylindrical shape that comes to mind when
you mention the word; on the contrary Leyden jars are often flat
because such a form makes them more compact. That is also why we use
several little ones instead of one big one. But whatever their shape
the principle involved is always the same. When the terminals are
connected with a current the jar will not only receive but will retain
a charge equal in pressure to that of the device sending the current.
And when you go even farther and bring the terminals near together,
the quick discharge that takes place creates an electric spark which
is in reality a series of alternating flashes that come so fast as to
be blurred into what appears to be one. Could we separate these
flashes we should find that each of them lasts less than a thousandth
part of a second. The frequency of such oscillations is regulated by
what is technically termed capacity, that is the size of the Leyden
jar. The smaller the capacity the greater the frequency of the
flashes.

"Now this spark, or oscillatory discharge emitted from the Leyden jar,
does not result from a single traveling of the current all in one
direction; instead the electricity moves back and forth, or
alternates, and the space where the discharge takes place (and which,
by the way, can be lengthened or decreased as pleases the operator) is
known as the spark gap."

"But I should think this explosion of the spark would make a noise,"
commented Walter.

"Bully for you, little brother!" returned Bob, smiling at His
Highness. "You are quite an electrician. If the current is strong, or,
in other words, if the discharge is a high frequency one, it does.
Hence something has to be used to deaden the sound just as a muffler
is used on a motor boat. It is important, however, that this muffler
should not prevent the operator from watching the condition of his
spark for otherwise he could not keep track of his battery or know
whether it was on the job or not. So you will find little peepholes
of mica or glass in the sides of the muffler."

"Windows," murmured Nancy grasping the idea and translating it into
the vernacular.

"Exactly," Bob agreed. Evidently his audience were understanding what
he was trying to make clear to them.

"Now we have our high frequency oscillations occurring in the spark
discharged from the Leyden jar and jumping the spark gap; nevertheless
they would not do us any good were there not some way to use and
regulate them. This brings us to the induction coil of which I spoke a
second ago."

"It sounds very terrible," smiled Mrs. Crowninshield.

"It isn't, though," answered Bob, returning the smile. "In fact it is
a very simple device--nothing more than a dozen or so twists of copper
wire reeled about a wooden frame exactly as strands of thread might be
wound round a spool. One end of the inductance is connected
permanently with the ground and from the other end two movable wires
go out, one of which can be connected with the spark gap and the other
with the antenna that goes into the air and catches the sound waves.
There isn't anything very terrible about that, you see."

"Antenna is what butterflies have," suggested Nancy vaguely.

"Quite right!" assented the wireless man. "Only radio antennae are not
to feel with--at least not in the same way. Nevertheless they do reach
out and capture the sound. On all wireless stations you will notice
the masts that support them. Sometimes there is one wire, sometimes a
group. It is the wires themselves, remember, not the masts, which are
the antennae. Nowadays, however, you will occasionally see an indoor
aerial used in connection with small, low-power outfits. It does away
with the masts and outside equipment and frequently serves the same
purpose quite satisfactorily. But most persons prefer the older method
and for long-distance work it has, up to date proved to be
indispensable. Now the antenna has both electrical capacity and
inductance, and when connected up with the apparatus a wireless
operator can at will cause it to disturb the magnetic fields
surrounding the earth."

"You didn't say how high these masts had to be, Bob," put in Mr.
Crowninshield. "Are they always the same length?"

"Oh, no, indeed, sir," was the prompt response. "Their length varies
according to the type of service required of them. I'm glad you asked
the question. Sometimes the masts are about two hundred feet high;
again they may approximate four hundred and eighteen feet. And
sometimes in emergencies you will discover no masts at all, the wires
being fastened instead to captive balloons or kites which hold them in
place long enough to send or receive hasty messages. This latter
method is usually resorted to in wartime or during army or navy
maneuvers. There are also compact radio sets to be had that can be
carried on mule-back and set up and taken down on a hurried army
march. On shipboard the ordinary masts of the vessel serve, of
course, to support the antenna."

"Thank you, Bob. That is exactly what I wanted to know," said Mr.
Crowninshield.

"I'm glad, sir. Now you'd think by this time we had everything
necessary to produce our wireless waves and yet we haven't. There is
still one thing almost more important than all the rest that we have
not yet spoken of."

"What's that, Bob?" piped Walter.

"The tuner. You recall that at the beginning I mentioned the pitch,
note, or key of the sound produced or received?"

"Yes," returned the class in chorus.

"Well, it is in that tune or pitch, or whatever you prefer to call it,
that a large measure of the secret of wireless lies. To be successful
in getting and sending messages we must tune the oscillations, or key
the signals caused by the discharge of the battery in our Leyden jar,
so that they will be in harmony (or at precisely the same pitch) with
the antenna circuit. That is, the parts of the instrument must
synchronize, just as two persons who would talk together must speak in
the same language. This adjustment is made in the inductance coil
because although both the Leyden jar where the spark is generated that
causes the oscillations and the antenna can be regulated independently
of each other a few turns of the inductance coil affects each circuit.
After the two circuits have been adjusted to the same frequency they
are said to synchronize. Often to reach this result a device is used
that states precisely the wave length, and after the frequency of one
circuit has been ascertained the other can easily be adjusted to
correspond with it. The length of the wave is, you see, dependent on
the largeness of the antenna and the capacity, or strength of current,
of the Leyden jar. Just as a child uses a big stone to produce the
largest splash and greatest waves so we must have a powerful force
behind our wave lengths to make them carry most successfully. In
accordance with this law, generally speaking, we find short wave
lengths used for low power, short-distance outfits; and long wave
lengths for high-power circuits whose aim is to traverse continents
and oceans."

Bob pushed back his chair.

"I think," said he, "we have now come to a good stopping place and we
will call the lesson off for to-day. If you digest all I have told
you, you will have had an ample radio starter."

"You haven't said much about sending messages," complained Dick.

"That is quite another story," smiled the boy's tutor, "and such a
long one that were I to tell it to you now it would mean you would get
no sailing or swimming to-day."

Instantly Dick was on his feet, Leyden jars and inductance coils
forgotten.

"We'll cut it out then," he laughed. "Who is for a swim? I'll race any
man to the bath-house!" And off he went at top speed.




CHAPTER XV

TIDINGS


Two days later O'Connel's first signal came.

Bob was at his early morning task of oiling and tightening up his
apparatus and cleaning it, and both Dick and Walter were hovering
near, watching him and learning all they could concerning the proper
care of the equipment. Having made everything shipshape the young
radio operator slipped the double head receiver over his forehead and
prepared to listen in for his customary interval. Suddenly the boys
saw him start excitedly and motion them to stop talking. With face
alight he was leaning forward eagerly. Then came the sharp click of
the Morse code and after an interval with radiant face the elder lad
wriggled out of his trappings.

"What is it? What is it?" cried his two companions, hardly able to
contain their curiosity.

"It was O'Connel."

"What did he say? Is the dog there? Where was the yacht?"

Breathlessly the questions tumbled one over the other.

"The _Siren_ is anchored off Gloucester and bound north, probably to
Bar Harbor. A dog they call Trixie, but which O'Connel thinks is
Lola, is aboard the boat. The description we gave him seems to fit
her. He says she isn't very well--won't eat and seems either homesick
or seasick. Mr. Daly is quite worried about her."

"For goodness' sake don't tell Dad or Mother that. They'll have a
fit," Dick cried. "Should Lola die I believe my father would shoot
Daly down."

"But I've got to give him the message."

"You needn't repeat all of it, need you?"

"Oh, I think you ought to tell them," Walter put in. "They would
rather know, I'm sure."

"Dad will storm fit to raise the dead."

"We can't help it," answered His Highness.

"I am of the kid's opinion," Bob replied slowly. "I think we should
tell your father and mother the whole truth just as O'Connel has sent
it."

"Prepare for a nice, pleasant tornado, then," said Dick, "for you will
get it all right."

"I wish I could have talked with O'Connel," declared Bob thoughtfully.
"I did all I dared. You see, until our license comes I am not expected
to transmit messages from this station. We have to get from the
government both an operator's license and a permit for the station;
and although I put in the application promptly there is so much red
tape about it that it seems as if the inspector would never show up.
If I had been caught sending a message this morning without these
blooming papers there would have been the deuce of a row. However, I
took a chance because I felt the emergency demanded it, and because
being one of Uncle Sam's own men he couldn't very well put up the kick
that I was not competent to handle a wireless outfit. Still, I shan't
dare do it again."

"Isn't there anything we can do to hustle up the inspector?" inquired
Dick.

"I'm afraid not, son. Government inspectors are not a hurrying race,"
was Bob's whimsical reply. "However, I telephoned our local man
yesterday and something may happen to-day. He and I used to be on
quite good terms when he occasionally dropped in at Seaver Bay. I told
him that if I could not get a station license pretty soon our whole
outfit would be no good to us this season. He promised he would take
up the matter at once. With that I had to be satisfied. Whether he
does anything or not remains to be seen."

"I suppose O'Connel understands this difficulty, doesn't he?" mused
Dick.

"Oh, he knows, all right, why I can't answer him. I've assured him
that his tidings have come through and that is all he wants to know,"
Bob answered. "He has dealt with the government himself and is
familiar with its deliberate habits. Besides, there really isn't much
we can say."

"Maybe you think that," grinned Dick, "but wait until you tell Dad
that Lola is sick and hear him sputter. You will believe then that
there is quite a bit that can be said. And if you get my mother to add
her comments you will have plenty to relay over the wire."

The prophecy was indeed true, as Bob King proved after he had raced
across the grass and overtaken Mr. and Mrs. Crowninshield on a tour of
inspection to the rose gardens.

"News, Bob?" questioned the capitalist, wheeling about to meet the
flying figure. "What is it? Let us have it quickly."

Carefully the message was repeated.

"Off Gloucester, eh, and bound north? Humph! And they've re-christened
the poor little pupsie Trixie! Hang them! O'Connel thinks she isn't
well? Of course she isn't seasick. Lola has been out on our yacht a
hundred times. The reason she won't eat is because she is
lonesome--misses her home and family. The wretches! I wish I had Daly
here! I'd wring his neck," blustered Mr. Crowninshield.

"Isn't there anything we can do, Archibald? We simply must get that
dog back before she dies. Poor little Lola! She was such a dependent
little creature. It is terrible, terrible!"

"There, there, my dear! Don't go all to pieces over it. Aren't we
doing all we can? Do you want Daly to smell a rat and toss his stolen
property into the sea? Dacie says to give him rope enough and in time
he will hang himself, and I am inclined to think the advice wise.
Still, that does not prevent me from wishing I could lay hands on
Daly. I'd like nothing better than to thrash the life out of him."

"I suppose you will telephone the detective the news we've received,"
suggested Bob, in order to quell the rising storm and divert Mr.
Crowninshield's attention.

"Yes, I'll get New York on the wire right away. It is as well Lyman
and his pal should know Lola is sick and that they can't dally round
forever."

"Shall you be back for the wireless lesson?" called Bob, uncertain
whether to ask the question or not.

"Oh, sure! It won't help matters for us to sit around and wail the
whole morning. We'll be on deck for your radio talk at the usual
time."

"All right, sir."

True to their agreement, at the appointed hour both Mr. and Mrs.
Crowninshield made their appearance on the piazza and joined the group
of young people who awaited their coming. They had, as Bob expressed
it, cooled off a bit and were no longer in such an agitated frame of
mind; nevertheless anxiety had left its mark by keying the master's
voice to a sharper note, and shadowing the lady's brow with a frown of
annoyance.

"I suppose you let out on O'Connel, didn't you, after he got through
talking this morning?" was the first remark of the owner of Surfside.

"I couldn't say more than a word. Our license hasn't come yet, you
know."

"That's so, darn it! I never saw anything in all my born life with so
many rules attached to it as this wireless business. It is one tangle
of rules, rules, rules! You might as well be tied up in a net,"
fretted the man.

"There do seem to be a good many rules at first glance," returned Bob
pleasantly. "However, when you examine them most of them are both
necessary and wise. And after all when each radio operator knows in
black and white what he can do and what he can't it is far simpler."

"I suppose so," grumbled Mr. Crowninshield.

"Besides, there are always slackers at every job," continued Bob.
"Rules help to keep such persons up to the mark and prevent
carelessness and accidents."

"Yes, I fancy that is so," came more graciously from the still irate
gentleman.

"Then all stations are not alike. That compass station at Bell Reef,
for example, that you were asking me about yesterday; the government
lays out specific duties and makes special rules for such a station,
as in fact it does for all radio stations. Some of these rules relate
to the care of the place and the cleaning and general overhauling of
apparatus at stated intervals. There are, you see, certain instruments
which must be cleaned and readjusted every day; certain others every
week, others every month, and some every six months. It simply means
making sure that your outfit is in the pink of condition with every
part functioning as it should. There are, of course, operators who
would see that this was done anyway, rules or no rules; but like every
other profession there might be men who, off on an isolated spot with
no one to keep them up to the mark, would grow careless and slovenly.
