"'Cause dat's de way he hoed on when we was huntin' wid him last year.
He nebber larns fro' 'sperience."

"That's a very fine-looking young fellow," remarked Nigel, referring to
the Dyak youth who had just returned, and who, with a number of other
natives, was watching the visitors with profound interest while they
ate.

As the young man referred to was a good sample of the youth of his
tribe, we shall describe him.  Though not tall, he was well and strongly
proportioned, and his skin was of a reddish-brown colour.  Like all his
comrades, he wore little clothing.  A gay handkerchief with a gold lace
border encircled his head, from beneath which flowed a heavy mass of
straight, jet-black hair.  Large crescent-shaped ornaments hung from his
ears.  His face was handsome and the expression pleasing, though the
mouth was large and the lips rather thick.  Numerous brass rings
encircled his arms above and below the elbows.  His only other piece of
costume was a waist-cloth of blue cotton, which hung down before and
behind.  It ended in three bands of red, blue, and white.  There were
also rows of brass rings on his legs, and armlets of white shells.  At
his side he wore a long slender knife and a little pouch containing the
materials for betel-chewing.

"Yes, and he is as good as he looks," said the hermit.  "His name is
Gurulam, and all the people of his tribe have benefited by the presence
in Borneo of that celebrated Englishman Sir James Brooke,--Rajah Brooke
as he was called,--who did so much to civilise the Dyaks of Borneo and
to ameliorate their condition."

The prophecy of Moses about the professor was fulfilled.  Just as it was
growing dark that genial scientist returned, drenched to the skin and
covered with mud, having tumbled into a ditch.  His knuckles also were
skinned, his knees and shins damaged, and his face scratched, but he was
perfectly happy in consequence of having secured a really splendid
specimen of a "bootterfly" as big as his hand; the scientific name of
which, for very sufficient reasons, we will not attempt to inflict on
our readers, and the description of which may be shortly stated by the
single word--gorgeous!

Being fond of Verkimier, and knowing his desire to obtain a full-grown
orang-utan, Gurulam went off early next morning to search for one.
Half-a-dozen of his comrades accompanied him armed only with native
spears, for their object was not to hunt the animal, but to discover one
if possible, and let the professor know so that he might go after it
with his rifle, for they knew that he was a keen sportsman as well as a
man of science.

They did not, indeed, find what they sought for, but they were told by
natives with whom they fell in that a number of the animals had been
seen among the tree-tops not more than a day's march into the forest.
They hurried home therefore with this information, and that day--
accompanied by the Dyak youths, Nigel, the hermit, and Moses--Verkimier
started off in search of the mias; intending to camp out or to take
advantage of a native hut if they should chance to be near one when
night overtook them.

Descending the hill region, they soon came to more level ground, where
there was a good deal of swamp, through which they passed on Dyak roads.
These roads consisted simply of tree-trunks laid end to end, along
which the natives, being barefooted, walk with ease and certainty, but
our booted hunters were obliged to proceed along them with extreme
caution.  The only one who came to misfortune was, as usual, the
professor; and in the usual way!  It occurred at the second of these
tree-roads.

"Look, look at that remarkable insect!" exclaimed Nigel, eagerly, in the
innocence of his heart.  The professor was in front of him; he
obediently looked, saw the insect, made an eager step towards it, and
next moment was flat on the swamp, while the woods rang with his
companions laughter.  The remarkable insect, whatever it was, vanished
from the scene, and the professor was dragged, smiling though confused,
out of the bog.  These things affected him little.  His soul was large
and rose superior to such trifles.

The virgin forest into which they penetrated was of vast extent;
spreading over plain, mountain, and morass in every direction for
hundreds of miles, for we must remind the reader that the island of
Borneo is considerably larger than all the British islands put together,
while its inhabitants are comparatively few.  Verkimier had been
absolutely revelling in this forest for several months--ranging its
glades, penetrating its thickets, bathing, (inadvertently), in its
quagmires, and maiming himself generally, with unwearied energy and
unextinguishable enthusiasm; shooting, skinning, stuffing, preserving,
and boiling the bones of all its inhabitants--except the human--to the
great advantage of science and the immense interest and astonishment of
the natives.  Yet with all his energy and perseverance the professor had
failed, up to that time, to obtain a large specimen of a male
orang-utan, though he had succeeded in shooting several small specimens
and females, besides catching the young one which he had tamed.

It was therefore with much excitement that he learned from a party of
bees'-wax hunters, on the second morning of their expedition, that a
large male mias had been seen that very day.  Towards the afternoon they
found the spot that had been described to them, and a careful
examination began.

"You see," said Verkimier, in a low voice, to Nigel, as he went a step
in advance peering up into the trees, with rifle at the "ready" and
bending a little as if by that means he better avoided the chance of
being seen.  "You see, I came to Borneo for zee express purpose of
obtaining zee great man-monkey and vatching his habits.--Hush!  Do I not
hear somet'ing?"

"Nothing but your own voice, I think," said Nigel, with a twinkle in his
eye.

"Vell--hush!  Keep kviet, all of you."

As the whole party marched in single file after the professor, and were
at the moment absolutely silent, this order induced the display of a
good many teeth.

Just then the man of science was seen to put his rifle quickly to the
shoulder; the arches of the forest rang with a loud report; various
horrified creatures were seen and heard to scamper away, and next moment
a middle-sized orang-utan came crashing through the branches of a tall
tree and fell dead with a heavy thud on the ground.

The professor's rifle was a breech-loader.  He therefore lost no time in
re-charging, and hurried forward as if he saw other game, while the rest
of the party--except Van der Kemp, Nigel, and Gurulam--fell behind to
look at and pick up the fallen animal.

"Look out!" whispered Nigel, pointing to a bit of brown hair that he saw
among the leaves high overhead.

"Vere?  I cannot see him," whispered the naturalist, whose eyes blazed
enough almost to melt his blue glasses.  "Do _you_ fire, Mr Roy?"

"My gun is charged only with small-shot, for birds.  It is useless for
such game," said Nigel.

"Ach!  I see!"

Up went the rifle and again the echoes were startled and the animal
kingdom astounded, especially that portion at which the professor had
fired, for there was immediately a tremendous commotion among the leaves
overhead, and another orang of the largest size was seen to cross an
open space and disappear among the thick foliage.  Evidently the
creature had been hit, but not severely, for it travelled among the
tree-tops at the rate of full five miles an hour, obliging the hunters
to run at a rapid pace over the rough ground in order to keep up with
it.  In its passage from tree to tree the animal showed caution and
foresight, selecting only those branches that interlaced with other
boughs, so that it made uninterrupted progress, and also had a knack of
always keeping masses of thick foliage underneath it so that for some
time no opportunity was found of firing another shot.  At last, however,
it came to one of those Dyak roads of which we have made mention, so
that it could not easily swing from one tree to another, and the
stoppage of rustling among the leaves told that the creature had halted.
For some time they gazed up among the branches without seeing anything,
but at last, in a place where the leaves seemed to have been thrust
aside near the top of one of the highest trees, a great red hairy body
was seen, and a huge black face gazed fiercely down at the hunters.

Verkimier fired instantly, the branches closed, and the monster moved
off in another direction.  In desperate anxiety Nigel fired both barrels
of his shot-gun.  He might as well have fired at the moon.  Gurulam was
armed only with a spear, and Van der Kemp, who was not much of a
sportsman, carried a similar weapon.  The rest of the party were still
out of sight in rear looking after the dead mias.

It was astonishing how little noise was made by so large an animal as it
moved along.  More than once the hunters had to halt and listen intently
for the rustling of the leaves before they could make sure of being on
the right track.

At last they caught sight of him again on the top of a very high tree,
and the professor got two more shots, but without bringing him down.
Then he was seen, quite exposed for a moment, walking in a stooping
posture along the large limb of a tree, but the hunter was loading at
the time and lost the chance.  Finally he got on to a tree whose top was
covered with a dense mass of creepers which completely hid him from
view.  Then he halted and the sound of snapping branches was heard.

"You've not much chance of him now," remarked the hermit, as they all
stood in a group gazing up into the tree-top.  "I have often seen the
mias act thus when severely wounded.  He is making a nest to lie down
and die in."

"Zen ve must shoot again," said the professor, moving round the tree and
looking out for a sign of the animal.  At last he seemed to have found
what he wanted, for raising his rifle he took a steady aim and fired.

A considerable commotion of leaves and fall of broken branches followed.
Then the huge red body of the mias appeared falling through, but it was
not dead, for it caught hold of branches as it fell and hung on as long
as it could; then it came crashing down, and alighted on its face with
an awful thud.

After firing the last shot Verkimier had not reloaded, being too intent
on watching the dying struggles of the creature, and when it fell with
such violence he concluded that it was dead.  For the same reason Nigel
had neglected to reload after firing.  Thus it happened that when the
enormous brute suddenly rose and made for a tree with the evident
intention of climbing it, no one was prepared to stop it except the Dyak
youth Gurulam.  He chanced to be standing between the mias and the tree.

Boldly he levelled his spear and made a thrust that would probably have
killed the beast, if it had not caught the point of the spear and turned
it aside.  Then with its left paw it caught the youth by the neck,
seized his thigh with one of its hind paws, and fixed its teeth in his
right shoulder.

Never was man rendered more suddenly and completely helpless, and death
would have been his sure portion before the hunters had reloaded if Van
der Kemp had not leaped forward, and, thrusting his spear completely
through the animal's body, killed it on the spot.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

BEGINS WITH A TERRIBLE FIGHT AND ENDS WITH A HASTY FLIGHT.

The hunt, we need scarcely say, was abruptly terminated, and immediate
preparations were made for conveying the wounded man and the two orangs
to the Dyak village.  This was quickly arranged, for the convenient
bamboo afforded ready-made poles wherewith to form a litter on which to
carry them.

The huge creature which had given them so much trouble, and so nearly
cost them one human life, was found to be indeed of the largest size.
It was not tall but very broad and large.  The exact measurements, taken
by the professor, who never travelled without his tape-measure, were as
follows:--

Height from heel to top of head, 4 feet 2 inches.

Outstretched arms across chest, 7 feet 8 inches.

Width of face, 1 foot 2 inches.

Girth of arm, 1 foot 3 inches.

Girth of wrist, 5 inches.

The muscular power of such a creature is of course immense, as Nigel and
the professor had a rare chance of seeing that very evening--of which,
more presently.

On careful examination by Nigel, who possessed some knowledge of
surgery, it was found that none of Gurulam's bones had been broken, and
that although severely lacerated about the shoulders and right thigh, no
very serious injury had been done--thanks to the promptitude and vigour
of the hermit's spear-thrust.  The poor youth, however, was utterly
helpless for the time being, and had to be carried home.

That afternoon the party reached a village in a remote part of the
forest where they resolved to halt for the night, as no other
resting-place could be reached before dark.

While a supper of rice and fowl was being cooked by Moses, Van der Kemp
attended to the wounded man, and Nigel accompanied the professor along
the banks of the stream on which the village stood.  Having merely gone
out for a stroll they carried no weapons except walking-sticks,
intending to go only a short distance.  Interesting talk, however, on
the character and habits of various animals, made them forget time until
the diminution of daylight warned them to turn.  They were about to do
so when they observed, seated in an open place near the stream, the
largest orang they had yet seen.  It was feeding on succulent shoots by
the waterside: a fact which surprised the professor, for his inquiries
and experience had hitherto taught him that orangs never eat such food
except when starving.  The fat and vigorous condition in which this
animal was, forbade the idea of starvation.  Besides, it had brought a
Durian fruit to the banks of the stream and thrown it down, so that
either taste or eccentricity must have induced it to prefer the shoots.
Perhaps its digestion was out of order and it required a tonic.

Anyhow, it continued to devour a good many young shoots while our
travellers were peeping at it in mute surprise through the bushes.  That
they had approached so near without being observed was due to the fact
that a brawling rapid flowed just there, and the mias was on the other
side of the stream.  By mutual consent the men crouched to watch its
proceedings.  They were not a little concerned, however, when the brute
seized an overhanging bough, and, with what we may style sluggish
agility, swung itself clumsily but lightly to their side of the stream.
It picked up the Durian which lay there and began to devour it.  Biting
off some of the strong spikes with which that charming fruit is covered,
it made a small hole in it, and then with its powerful fingers tore off
the thick rind and began to enjoy a feast.

Now, with monkeys, no less than with men, there is many a slip 'twixt
the cup and the lip, for the mias had just begun its meal, or, rather,
its dessert, when a crocodile, which the professor had not observed and
Nigel had mistaken for a log, suddenly opened its jaws and seized the
big monkey's leg.  The scene that ensued baffles description!  Grasping
the crocodile with its other three hands by nose, throat, and eyes, the
mias almost performed the American operation of gouging--digging its
powerful thumbs and fingers into every crevice and tearing open its
assailant's jaws.  The crocodile, taken apparently by surprise, went
into dire convulsions, and making for deep water, plunged his foe
therein over head and ears.  Nothing daunted, the mias regained his
footing, hauled his victim on to a mudbank, and, jumping on his back
began to tear and pommel him.  There was nothing of the prize-fighter in
the mias.  He never clenched his fist--never hit straight from the
shoulder, but the buffeting and slapping which he gave resounded all
over the place.  At last he caught hold of a fold of his opponent's
throat, which he began to tear open with fingers and teeth.  Wrenching
himself free with a supreme effort the crocodile shot into the stream
and disappeared with a sounding splash of its tail, while the mias waded
lamely to the shore with an expression of sulky indignation on its great
black face.

Slowly the creature betook itself to the shelter of the forest, and we
need scarcely add that the excited observers of the combat made no
attempt to hinder its retreat.

It is said that the python is the only other creature that dares to
attack the orang-utan, and that when it does so victory usually declares
for the man-monkey, which bites and tears it to death.

The people of the village in which the hunters rested that night were
evidently not accustomed to white men--perhaps had never seen them
before--for they crowded round them while at supper and gazed in silent
wonder as if they were watching a group of white-faced baboons feeding!
They were, however, very hospitable, and placed before their visitors an
abundance of their best food without expecting anything in return.
Brass rings were the great ornament in this village--as they are,
indeed, among the Dyaks generally.  Many of the women had their arms
completely covered with them, as well as their legs from the ankle to
the knee.  Their petticoats were fastened to a coil of rattan, stained
red, round their bodies.  They also wore coils of brass wire, girdles of
small silver coins, and sometimes broad belts of brass ring-armour.

It was break of dawn next morning when our hunters started, bearing
their wounded comrade and the dead orangs with them.

Arrived at the village they found the people in great excitement
preparing for defence, as news had been brought to the effect that the
pirates had landed at the mouth of the river, joined the disaffected
band which awaited them, and that an attack might be expected without
delay, for they were under command of the celebrated Malay pirate
Baderoon.

Nigel observed that the countenance of his friend Van der Kemp underwent
a peculiar change on hearing this man's name mentioned.  There was a
combination of anxiety, which was unnatural to him, and of resolution,
which was one of his chief characteristics.

"Is Baderoon the enemy whom you saw on the islet on our first night
out?" asked Nigel, during a ramble with the hermit that evening.

"Yes, and I fear to meet him," replied his friend in a low voice.

Nigel was surprised.  The impression made on his mind since their
intercourse was that Van der Kemp was incapable of the sensation of
fear.

"Is he so very bitter against you?" asked Nigel.

"Very," was the curt reply.

"Have you reason to think he would take your life if he could?"

"I am sure he would.  As I told you before, I have thwarted his plans
more than once.  When he hears that it is I who have warned the Orang
Kaya against him, he will pursue me to the death, and--and I _must not_
meet him."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Nigel, with renewed surprise.

But the hermit took no note of the exclamation.  Anxiety had given place
to a frown, and his eyes were fixed on the ground.  It seemed to Nigel
so evident that he did not wish to pursue the subject, that he slightly
changed it.

"I suppose," he said, "that there is no fear of the Dyaks of the village
being unable to beat off the pirates now that they have been warned?"

"None whatever.  Indeed, this is so well-known to Baderoon that I think
he will abandon the attempt.  But he will not abandon his designs on me.
However, we must wait and see how God will order events."

Next morning spies returned to the village with the information that the
pirates had taken their departure from the mouth of the river.
