gave them to understand that they could not obtain a sufficient supply
of necessaries at that place, but offered to pilot them to a harbour a
short way to the southward, where they might procure all they required.

Instead, therefore, of landing and going in chase of the buffaloes, as
they had proposed doing, they set sail under their new pilot, and in a
short time came to an anchor in the harbour of Valparaiso, not far from
the town of Santiago.

None of the missing ships were here to be seen, nor could tidings be
obtained of them.  They found, however, a large ship, which, as they
sailed in, welcomed them by beat of drum, supposing that they were
Spaniards.  At once, therefore, pulling on board, they rudely undeceived
the crew by clapping them all down below, with the exception of one man.
He, managing to jump overboard, swam to shore and alarmed the
inhabitants, who speedily took refuge inland, carrying all they had time
to snatch up.

On examining their prize, the _Grand Captain_, they found that she was
laden with eighteen hundred jars of wine, upwards of twenty five
thousand pesos of gold, and a crucifix of gold set with emeralds.  Going
on shore, they found a further quantity of wine, and supplied themselves
with bread and all other necessaries in great abundance of which they
stood in need.  They also plundered a church of its ornaments and
relics, among which were two cruets, a silver chalice, and an
altar-cloth.  All these, according to the curious notions which governed
the rovers, were bestowed, as his share of the booty, on Master Fletcher
the chaplain, who did not consider that he was in any way bound to
decline them.

Having carried off the pilot of the _Grand Captain_, who, being a Greek,
was called Juan Greigo, as well as the ship herself, they set sail, and,
piloted by the friendly native, steered northward, until they reached
the place where they had taken him on board.  He was here, being loaded
with presents, set on shore, seeming very grateful for the way he had
been treated.

As the _Golden Hind_ sailed towards the Line, a sharp look-out was kept
for the missing vessels, while at the same time a search was made for a
convenient harbour into which they could run and refit the ship, as
likewise set up one of the pinnaces.  The Admiral was anxious to do
this, as the boat was too small to carry sufficient men should they
encounter any Spaniards, and the ship was too large to put into small
harbours.

As soon as the pinnace was completed, he intended to sail to the
southward and examine every creek and small bay on the way, so that
should either of the missing vessels have run in for shelter, she might
be discovered.

With this object, on the 19th of December the _Golden Hind_ entered a
bay not far from the southward of Coquimbo, then called Cyppo, and
inhabited by Spaniards.  Fourteen of the seamen having landed, they were
observed by the people of the town, who speedily, to the number of three
hundred--of whom a hundred were mounted Spaniards, the others naked
Indians, running like dogs at their heels, showing the miserable
condition to which they were reduced--came out to attack them.

They were descried in time by the English seamen, who, scrambling round
the rocks, gained their boats.  One man, however, Richard Minjoy, vowing
that he would not be put to flight by a hundred despicable Spaniards,
remained on the rocks, daring them to come on; but he had not long thus
stood when an arrow pierced him, and the Indians being sent to drag him
up to the beach, he was there cruelly beheaded by the Spaniards, who cut
off his right hand and plucked out his heart, then setting up the body,
made the Indians shoot at it.  All this was done in the sight of the
crew.

After this exhibition of their cruel vengeance the Spaniards retired,
leaving the body to be devoured by the beasts of the field and fowls of
the air; but the seamen, in spite of the risk they ran, went on shore
and buried it.

This not being the sort of place the English were in search of, nor the
treatment they desired, they speedily got under weigh, and came on the
following day to a convenient harbour some distance to the northward of
Cyppo.  Here some time was spent in refitting the ship, and bringing her
into better sailing trim, as also in building the pinnace.

As soon as the latter was finished, the Admiral, with a party of picked
men, set sail to proceed to the southward; but a contrary wind springing
up, he was compelled to return.  In this bay vast quantities of fish
resembling the gurnard were found, so that in two or three hours, with
only four or five hooks and lines, sometimes four hundred were taken.

Sailing on the 19th, two days afterwards they reached an island off a
high cape, where they found four Indians fishing from their canoes.
These men undertook to pilot them to a place where fresh water was to be
found.

The natives fulfilled their promise, but the amount of water was very
insufficient for the requirements of the ship.  While constantly looking
out for fresh water, they discovered a Spaniard lying asleep, probably
drunk, with a bag containing four thousand Spanish ducats.  Without
disturbing the poor man's slumbers, they relieved him of his charge,
which they carried off.

Again landing, they met another Spaniard with an Indian boy, driving
eight llamas, each laden with two leathern bags, and in each bag was
found fifty pounds weight of refined silver.  Unable to endure the
thoughts of a Spanish gentleman turning carrier, they relieved him of
his charge, themselves becoming drivers, but directing the animals
towards their boats.  The entire weight of the booty thus acquired was
eight hundred pounds.

Proceeding northwards, they saw several Indian towns, the people from
which came off in a curious kind of boat, bringing various sorts of
fish, wishing to exchange them for knives, beads, and looking-glasses.
Even the old men were as willing to accept such trifles as the young.
They, like the rest of their countrymen, appeared to be of a mild and
agreeable disposition.

The boats, if they could be so-called, were perfect novelties to the
voyagers.  They consisted of two large inflated skins fixed side by
side, with a board on the top of them, on which the paddler sat,
carrying his merchandise.  They are known as _balsas_.

The _Hind_ next came off the town of Normarena, governed by two
Spaniards.  Drake, wishing to obtain further refreshments, sent on shore
to invite them to traffic.  Rather from fear than love they consented,
and among other things sent off several llamas, which were in height and
length about the size of a small cow; but they must have been of great
strength, for three full-grown men and a boy were seen seated on the
back of one of them, their feet not reaching the ground.  The sheep, as
they were called, had necks like camels, but their heads much resembled
those of ordinary sheep.  Their wool was exceedingly fine.  The
Spaniards employed them to carry loads of silver from the mines.  The
voyagers heard that, throughout the province of Cuzco, so rich was the
soil that every hundred pounds of earth yielded twenty-five pounds of
pure silver.  This, of course, was an absurdity; but so inflamed were
their minds with ideas respecting the wealth of the country, that they
were ready to believe anything told them.

From this place no harbour in which the missing vessels could have taken
refuge was found, until the _Golden Hind_ arrived off the town of Arica,
on the 7th of February.  The country around it appeared rich and
fertile; the port was frequented by vessels from Lima and other parts of
Peru, and was inhabited by Spaniards.

Here two vessels were found at anchor, the crews of which were on shore,
and the voyagers visiting them discovered upwards of forty bars of
silver, each weighing about twenty pounds.  These they carried off, and,
without communicating with the people on shore, proceeded on to Ylo.
From thence, on their way to Lima, they met another bark at Arequipa,
which had begun to load with gold and silver; but, hearing of their
proceedings, the crew had re-landed her cargo.

Shortly afterwards they met another vessel laden with linen, and,
thinking that it might be useful, they took her with them.  As the
Admiral was now preparing for more active proceedings, collecting the
prizes, he hoisted their canvas, lashed their helms, and, the wind being
off shore, sent them sailing away across the Pacific.  Great must have
been the astonishment of the natives of some distant islands, when these
tenantless barks arrived off their shores.  So rapid had been the
progress of the _Golden Hind_, that on the 15th of February she entered
Callao, the port of Lima, before news of her being on the coast had
reached those who resided there.

They here found a fleet of thirty ships, among which the _Golden Hind_
brought up, no one suspecting her character.  Had they not been anxious
about their missing vessels, they would have been tempted to take
possession of the unarmed merchantmen.

Before their character was discovered, they visited several of the
vessels in search of information, but they could hear nothing of their
friends.  They were told, however, that on the 3rd of February a large
ship, called the _Cacafuego_, laden with a rich cargo of gold and
silver, had sailed for Panama, from which point all goods were carried
across the isthmus to the Atlantic shore, to be transmitted to Spain.

Having obtained all the information he required, Drake pulled round in a
boat to the different ships, on board one of which, belonging to a
certain Michael Angelo, one thousand five hundred bars of plate, besides
a chest of silver royals, and silk, linen, and other things, were found.
Of these the owners were quickly relieved.  Several other ships were
visited, and whatever articles of value were found on hoard them taken,
though the whole did not amount to much.  The crews being mostly on
shore, no resistance was offered.

While thus employed they saw a stranger entering the port, but she got
timely notice of how the English were engaged, and, nutting about, made
her escape to sea.  Not knowing, however, the direction they intended to
sail, she stood northward, and only deferred for a time falling into the
hands of her enemies, for she was soon afterwards captured.

The two largest ships were carried out of the harbour, where their
mainmasts were cut away, while the cables of the smaller vessels were
chopped through, so that they might drift wherever the tide might carry
them.

These precautions were not unnecessary.  Drake at once made chase after
the rich prize he had heard of, but there was still the risk of his
being overtaken.  While yet in sight of the port, the _Golden Hind_ lay
becalmed, and from her deck two large vessels were seen standing off the
land to attack her.  The boats were lowered, and the crews pulled with
might and main to keep ahead.

Nearer and nearer their enemies approached.  The odds were fearfully
against them.  The English well knew that the Spanish ships would be
crowded with men, who would, in overwhelming numbers, should they get
alongside, endeavour to crush them.  But their hearts did not fail.
Cheering each other they rowed on, resolved if overtaken to fight to the
last.  Drake, however, had no idea of risking an action, for even though
he might gain the victory, his ship and many of his people would be
injured, and he would probably be compelled to abandon his undertaking.

As the voyagers watched the approaching foe, to their great joy they saw
cats'-paws playing over the ocean; then their sails were filled by a
breeze, which increased to a fresh gale, and away they flew on their
desired course.

Still the Spanish ships followed, and the next morning appeared to be
gaining on the _Golden Hind_.  By noon, however, they were seen to haul
their wind and turn back, the reason being that the Spaniards, in their
hurry to get on board, had forgotten to bring with them any provisions,
and, like other men, had no desire to fight on empty stomachs.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

VOYAGE OF SIR FRANCIS DRAKE, CONTINUED--A.D. 1579.

The _Golden Hind_ chases the _Cacafuego_--Pursued by the Spaniards--
Captures several vessels--The Line crossed--When off Cape Francisco a
sail seen ahead--The _Cacafuego_ heaves to--Is captured and plundered--
Dismissed with a letter from Drake--The _Hind_ puts into Cano--Other
prizes taken--Sails for Guatuico--A council interrupted, and judge and
prisoners carried off--Booty obtained--The pilot Da Silva and all
prisoners set at liberty--The _Hind_ sails northward--Bitter cold--
Driven to the southward--Puts into the bay of San Francisco--A fort
built--Natives appear--Friendly behaviour--Strange ceremonies--Visit
from the King, who makes his country over to her Majesty--Drake
horrified at the attempt of the natives to worship him--They at length
take their departure--Drake's excursion into the country--Sees deer--
Coneys--Native huts--Preparations for departure--Grief of the natives--
The _Golden Hind_ sails away--The country named Albion.

Onward pressed the _Golden Hind_, her crew eager to overtake the
richly-laden _Cacafuego_, or the _Spitfire_, as we will translate her
name.  Drake considered that she was likely to touch at other ports to
take in more cargo, and, trusting to that circumstance and to her being
occasionally becalmed, he confidently hoped to overtake her before she
could reach Panama and land her cargo.

The sharpest of look-outs was kept ahead, and the seamen were constantly
in the fore-top straining their eyes in expectation of catching sight of
her white canvas.  Every port was narrowly scanned on the chance of her
having put in there.  When the wind fell, the crew eagerly leapt into
the boats to pull ahead.  When there was a breeze every inch of canvas
the ship could carry was spread to urge her along.  The chase would
prove a rich prize, for her cargo was worth many times more than that of
all the vessels they had hitherto captured.

Drake was not aware all this time that he had enemies following astern,
resolved to sink the _Golden Hind_, and hang the bold rover captain and
every one of his pirate crew, for such they considered them, or, should
they escape, purposing to lie in wait for them as they should attempt to
pass again to the eastward through the Straits of Magellan.

A favouring breeze filling her sails, the _Golden Hind_ pressed on.  The
ports of Paita, Saint Helena, and Guayaquil were successively passed;
but, on the principle that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush,
they hove to some time after leaving Callao to capture a ship they
sighted on their way, the one which had before escaped.

Another they took in the port of Paita, partly laden with wine, and a
third, laden with ships' stores, besides eighty pounds weight in gold.
They made quick work of it, however, for they had just heard that a
vastly superior force was on the look-out for them.

When near the Line they captured another vessel, belonging to Gabriel
Alvarez.  From him, as well as from the prisoners taken in the other
ships, the information they had before received was confirmed, that the
_Cacafuego_ was but a short distance ahead of them.  Their hopes,
therefore, rose higher than ever.  Drake, who was not less eager than
his men to capture the rich argosy, to sharpen their eyesight promised
to the first that should discover her the gold chain he wore round his
neck.

It was the ist of March.  The Line was passed.  Far off, on the
starboard bow, the lofty headland of Cape Francisco was seen, though dim
and indistinct.  All day long the seamen, with eager eyes, had been
looking out ahead and on either side, hoping to espy the tiny speck of
white just above the horizon.  The day was clear, the sun shone brightly
down from an unclouded sky, and the _Golden Hind_ in hot haste sped on,
her canvas spread wide on either side to catch the breeze.  Midday was
passed.  In spite of the heat every one was on deck, the eyes of most of
the ship's company, whether there or aloft, looking in the direction
they were going.

Presently a shout rose from the summit of the highest mast, to which
John Drake, a seaman, had climbed--

"A sail, a sail! right ahead!"

"Should the stranger prove to be the _Cacafuego_, the chain of gold
shall be yours, John," replied the Admiral.

If human muscles could have urged on the _Golden Hind_ at a greater
speed than she was going, the men would have exerted their strength
until they had dropped.  They could do nothing, however, but stand on
deck or cling to the masts and shrouds, looking at the distant sail with
still more eagerness than before.

Gradually the topsails of the stranger rose above the horizon, then her
courses or lower sails, then the hull itself came into view.  As they
examined her from the trucks to the water's edge, they were more and
more convinced that she was the argosy of which they had been so long in
chase.  What was their astonishment, at length, to see her clew up her
sails and heave to!

"Is she so strongly armed that she can venture to stop and fight us?"
was the question.

No one had anticipated that she earned guns.  Such had not been the
practice of the Spaniards in those seas, for they had been fully
convinced that no enemies could venture through the straits to wrest
their ill-gotten treasures from their hands.  Hitherto they had enjoyed
the monopoly of tyrannising over the Indians, and of all the profitable
commerce carried on along the coast.  Drake had aroused them from their
sleep of security.

The _Golden Hind_ got nearer and nearer to the stranger.  John Drake
felt convinced that he had won the Admiral's chain.  Presently the ship
ahead was seen to put her helm up and make all sail, endeavouring to
escape; but it was too late,--already she was within range of the guns
of the _Golden Hind_, which forthwith began pouring forth their shot,
aimed not at her hull--that was too precious to be injured--but at her
masts and spars.  The English were rejoiced to see the efforts made by
the Spanish captain to escape, for this convinced them that his cargo
was a valuable one, or he would not have run the risk of losing his life
or the lives of his men from the iron shot which came rattling on board.
Another shout, triumphant and jubilant, rose from the deck of the
_Golden Hind_.  The mast of the chase was shot away, and the
adventurers, soon getting up to her, made fast alongside.

She was indeed the _Cacafuego_.  The captors eagerly pressed on board,
the Spanish captain and his crew having no heart to oppose them.  He
confessed that, when he hove to, he had taken the _Golden Hind_ for a
Spanish ship, sent by the Viceroy with some special message for him to
convey to Panama, and great had been his astonishment when he discovered
her real character.  The Admiral, setting all sail, carried his prize
away from the land, out of the track of passing vessels or of the
Spanish squadron sent in chase of him, that he might at his leisure
transfer her cargo to the hold of the _Golden Hind_.

Unbounded was the delight of the seamen when they found that the riches
she contained were fully equal to the amount they had been led to
expect.  At first, to be sure, they found chiefly fruit, conserves,
meal, and sugar; but before long they ferreted out cases of jewels and
precious stones, thirteen chests of silver royals, eighty pounds weight
of gold twenty-six tons of uncoined silver, not to speak of two very
beautiful silver-gilt drinking-bowls and like trifles; the whole valued
at 360,000 pesos, or somewhere like 75,000 pounds,--in these days equal
to a million of money, not taking into account the precious stones and
other booty.  The bowls, with which Drake was mightily pleased, belonged
to the pilot, and when the Admiral told him he must have one of them for
a punch-bowl, to show his contempt and hatred of the English, he
presented the other to the Admiral's steward.  Nearly six days were
spent in unloading the ship of her precious cargo, when she was allowed
to proceed on her way to Panama; Drake having presented to the captain,
Juan de Anton, some linen and other articles, and a letter addressed to
Captain Winter and other officers of the squadron, requesting them,
should they fall in with him, to give him double the value of anything
they might receive, and treat him well.

The _Golden Hind_ then stood off the coast, to avoid any Spanish vessels
that might be on the look-out for her.  Though still searching for the
missing ships, the explorers had now very little hope of finding them.

Both officers and crew, indeed, began to pine for home, with a great
desire also to carry the enormous wealth they had obtained with them.
Drake's great object was now--having repaired and stored the ship--to go
in search of a passage round the northern end of America into the
Atlantic Ocean.  That one existed he had ever believed, though he little
thought of the icy barrier which blocked it up.  His hope was that he
should find it, and that then he and his companions should speedily with
joy return to their longed-for homes.

He now shaped a course for the island of Cano, off the coast of
Nicaragua.  On his way he fell in with one more Spanish ship, laden with
linens, silk, and china dishes, and a falcon of finely-wrought gold, on
the breast of which was set a large emerald.  Having taken only the more
valuable portions of the cargo, the vessel was dismissed, an Indian and
a pilot only being detained.

On the 16th of March they reached Cano, when they entered a fresh water
river suitable for their object.  While the _Hind_ and the pinnace lay
at anchor, about a mile from the shore, suddenly they found the vessels
quiver and shake as if they had struck a rock.  A terrible earthquake
was taking place, the effects of which were felt even at that distance
from the land.

They here obtained fresh water, wood, and an abundance of fish, besides
monkeys and several animals killed on shore.  While the ship was here,
the pinnace, being dispatched on active duty, brought in a prize, laden
with honey, butter, and other commodities, besides which were letters
from the King of Spain to the Governor of the Philippines, and charts,
or sea cards, as they were called.  The latter afterwards proved of
considerable value to the voyagers.

The Admiral, considering it prudent, with a long voyage in prospect, to
thoroughly provision the ship, determined to put into some place where
he might, either by fair means or by force, obtain a sufficient quantity
of the articles he considered necessary.  He therefore compelled the
pilot who had last been taken to steer the ship to Guatulco.  He reached
that place in safety.  As soon as they had dropped anchor, the boats
were lowered and a well-armed party hastened on shore.

Marching up to the largest building, they found a council of the
principal inhabitants, who altogether consisted only of seventeen
Europeans, trying a number of Indians accused of forming a plot to burn
the place.  To the astonishment of the Spaniards, and to the no small
joy probably of the accused Indians, all were hurried on board, when the
judge was compelled, upon the threat of being carried off, to write to
his fellow-townsmen, advising them to offer no resistance.

While he was thus kept as a hostage, the place was ransacked; but the
only valuable booty collected was a bushel of silver reals.  One of the
party, however, Thomas Moon, observing a Spanish gentleman running off
in great fright, pursued and took from him a chain of gold and some
jewels.

The rovers obtained also numerous articles of provision, clothing,
stores, and suchlike, which they much needed.  They here landed the
Portuguese pilot Nuna da Silva, whom they had brought from the Cape de
Verdes, and likewise set at liberty all the other prisoners they had
taken.

Having thus arranged their business on shore, on the 16th of April they
set sail, standing out into the ocean.  Obtaining a fair wind, they
steered northward for one thousand four hundred leagues, until they
reached the forty-second degree of north latitude.  Here they found the
cold so intense, that many of the crew suffered greatly.  The air was
biting in the extreme, and even the ropes of the ship on which the rain
fell became covered with ice.  This occurred not only at night, but
during the day, when the sun was shining.

As they sailed two degrees farther north, the seamen could scarcely keep
themselves warm with the thickest clothing they could put on.  They
found it difficult also, even with double the number of men, to work the
ropes and trim the sails.  The crew, not without reason, began to
murmur, and declared that they should never be able to endure the cold.
The Admiral, however, urged them to persevere.  They were standing on
when they found themselves close to a shore trending to the westward,
and, compelled by a contrary wind, they put into a bay, where they
brought up; but the anchorage appearing very insecure, they sailed out
again.  The Admiral would have continued on his course again in search
of a passage, but a northerly wind springing up, drove the _Golden Hind_
once more to the southward.

Though it was in the height of summer, the cold continued so bitter,
that many would have taken to their beds had they not been compelled to
attend to the working of the ship.  During this time also the sky became
so overcast with clouds and thick mists, that it was impossible to take
an observation.  At length they came to the conclusion that there was no
passage at all along the north shore of America, or that it was so
blocked up with ice as to be impassable.  They ran in and dropped anchor
in a roadstead, since called the Bay of San Francisco.

The following day the natives came down to the beach, and sent off a man
in a canoe, who, as he approached, stood up and made a long speech,
using a variety of gesticulations, moving his hands and turning his head
about in all directions.  His address concluded, he turned back and made
for the shore.  In a short time he came again, and behaved exactly in
the same manner; a third time he appeared, bringing with him as a
present a bunch of feathers, much like those of a black crow, all neatly
and cleverly put together, forming a sort of crown, such as was also
worn by the principal persons in attendance on the chief.  He also
produced a small basket made of rushes, filled with a herb, which the
natives called _tabak_, from which the French take the word _tabac_, and
the English tobacco.  Having tied this to a pole, he placed it in the
boat alongside.

Drake would at once have recompensed him with several articles, but the
only thing he would receive was a hat, which was floated off to him.

As the ship had sprung a leak and required to be put on shore, she was
carried nearer, in order that her cargo might be landed, and that she
might be repaired.

In order to guard against any attack from the natives, the Admiral
decided on throwing up a fort, in which, for security, their valuable
cargo and stores might be placed, and which would serve as a protection
to themselves.

While the English were thus employed, the natives were seen coming over
the brow of a hill, at the foot of which, close to the beach, the fort
was being built.  At first only a few warriors appeared, armed with bows
and arrows, then more and more came.  The seamen sprang to their arms;
Drake ordered them not to fire or to show any sign of alarm.

The savages, it appeared, however, had no hostile intentions, for they
approached in a humble fashion, as if they were inclined rather to
reverence the white strangers than to attack them.  Their numbers still
further increased.

It being intimated to them by signs that they must lay aside their bows
and arrows, they willingly did as they were directed.  The example of
the first parties was followed by the rest.  Drake, anxious to secure
their good-will by every possible means, distributed among them various
articles of clothing, of which they stood greatly in need.  As the
natives by their reverential gestures appeared to look upon their
visitors as beings of a superior order, Drake, shocked at the thoughts
of allowing himself or his men for a moment to be so worshipped, tried
to make them understand that he and his companions required clothing as
much as they did, as also food and water, for which purpose he and his
companions ate and drank in their presence.  Notwithstanding this,
nothing apparently could remove the idea entertained by the Indians that
the white men were divinities.

In return for the shirts, linen, cloths, and other articles they had
received, they offered feather ornaments, net-work bags, quivers made of
deer-skin, and various skins.

The costume of these people was not very elaborate.  The women wore on
their shoulders the skins of deer, with the hair upon them, in addition
to which they had petticoats formed of rushes combed out, hanging down
from their waists to their knees.  They appeared to be very obedient to
their lords and masters, and did not even venture to move without asking
permission.  The men wore scarcely any clothing whatever.

Having satisfied their curiosity, or whatever brought them to visit the
strangers, they retired towards some woods seen in the distance, where
their dwellings were supposed to be.

Scarcely had they reached the woods, when they began weeping and crying
out, the women especially shrieking in shrill tones, the sounds,
although they were three-quarters of a mile off, reaching to the fort.

Drake wisely considered, in consequence of the experience he had had
with other savages, notwithstanding the humble way in which they had
behaved, that it would be dangerous to trust them too much, well aware,
also, that any trifling event might cause a breach of the peace.

For two days none of the savages came near the voyagers, who were thus
able to finish the fort without interruption.  It was constructed of
rough stones and stakes, so that with their guns and crossbows it might
easily be defended against any number of assailants.

At the end of two days a still larger number of people than before
appeared in the distance, men, women, and children, who brought with
them, as they had before, feathers and bags of _tabak_, as propitiatory
offerings.  On reaching the top of a hill they stopped, when one of
their number, who appeared to be their chief, commenced an oration in a
loud voice, which could be clearly heard, though he was at some
distance; while he used at the same time the strangest and most violent
gestures, exerting himself until he was breathless.

When he had concluded, the rest bowed their bodies, crying "Oh!" as if
to give their consent to the truth of all he had spoken.  This done, the
men, leaving their bows and arrows on the top of the hill with their
women and children, approached the fort with their presents.  As they
did so, the women began shrieking in the most piteous tones, tearing
their flesh with their nails, and dashing themselves against hard stones
and stumps of trees and prickly bushes until blood streamed from their
cheeks and all parts of their bodies.  Supposing that they were
performing some rite in honour of the diabolical beings they worshipped,
Drake, to avert the evil which might ensue should he calmly sanction
such a proceeding, ordered his men to fall on their knees, he himself
setting the example.  There they offered up prayers to God, that He
would in His own good pleasure open the eyes of the savages, that they
might in due time be called to a knowledge of Himself and Jesus Christ,
whom He hath sent to be the salvation of the Gentiles.

While the chaplain was reading certain portions in the Bible, and the
seamen were joining in the prayers and singing psalms, the savages
watched them attentively, at every pause uttering "Oh!" as if highly
pleased.

The service over, the savages approached, and their first request was
that the English would again sing them some psalms.

On further presents being offered them, they left them behind, wishing
to show that they had not come to receive such things.  Towards the end
of another three days a still larger number of people appeared: so
great, indeed, was the concourse, that it seemed as if the whole
population of the country for a considerable distance must have been
assembled.

From the midst of the crowd two persons were seen approaching, who from
their gestures were supposed to be heralds.  As far as could be
understood, their _Hioh_ or King was at hand, and desired to pay the
strangers a visit.

One of the heralds spoke in a low soft voice, as if to prompt his
companion; the other repeated word by word what was said in a loud and
sonorous tone.  The speech lasted half an hour.  At the end of it they
requested that something might be sent to their _Hioh_, as a token that
he would be received as a friend.

With this request Drake willingly complied, and a suitable present was
