Thus Mr Sudberry landed his first and last salmon--a ten-pounder--and
thus, brilliantly, terminated his three-months' rustication in the
Highlands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

But this was not the end of the whole affair--by no means.  Mr Sudberry
and family returned to London, and they took that salmon with them.  A
dinner-party of choice friends was hastily got up to do honour to the
superb fish, and on that occasion Fred and his father well-nigh
quarrelled on the point of, "who caught the salmon!"  Mr Sudberry
insisting that the man who hooked the fish was the real catcher of it,
and Fred scouting the ridiculous notion, and asserting that he who
played and landed it was entitled to all the honour.  The point was
settled, however, in some incomprehensible way, without the self-denying
disputants coming to blows; and everyone agreed that it was, out of
sight, the best salmon that had ever been eaten in London.  Certainly,
it was one of the merriest parties that ever ate a salmon, for Mr
Sudberry's choice friends were of an uncommonly genial stamp.  Jones,
the head clerk, (the man with the red nose and humble aspect), was
there, and so brilliant was Mr Sudberry that Jones was observed to
smile!--the first instance on record of his having given way to levity
of demeanour.  Lady Knownothing was there too, and before the evening
was over she knew a few things that surprised but did not in the least
convince her.  Oh, no! she knew everything so thoroughly that there was
no possibility on earth of increasing _her_ stock of knowledge!  Truly
it was a happy party, and Mr Sudberry enjoyed himself so much that he
volunteered the Highland fling in the drawing-room--George whistling the
music--on which occasion he, (Mr Sudberry), swept nearly half the
tea-service off the table with his coat-tails, and Mrs Sudberry was so
happy that she didn't care a button--and said so!

But this was not the end of it yet, by any means.  That winter Hector
and Flora Macdonald visited London and were received by the Sudberrys
with open arms.  The result was that Lucy became intensely botanical in
her tastes, and routed out the old plants.  Of course Hector could not
do less than assist her, and the finale was, that these two scientific
individuals were married, and dwelt for many years thereafter in the
Highlands.  Strange to say, George and Flora fell in love with each--But
why say more?  We do not mean to write the history of these two
families.  It is enough to say, that every summer, for many years after
that, the Sudberrys spent two or three months in the Highlands with the
Macdonalds, and every winter the Macdonalds spent a similar period with
the Sudberrys.  On the former of these occasions Fred renewed his
intercourse with Mr McAllister, and these two became so profoundly,
inconceivably, deep and metaphysical, besides theological, in their
converse, that they were utterly incomprehensible to everyone except
themselves.

Best of all, Jacky became a good boy!  Yes; that day on the hills with
Peter was the beginning of it--old Moggy, Willie, and Flora, were the
continuation of it--and Jacky became good, to the unspeakable joy of his
mother.

Old Moggy lived to a fabulous age, and became at last as wrinkled as a
red herring.  For all we know to the contrary, she may be alive yet.
Willie lived with her, and became a cultivator of the soil.  But why go
on?  Enough has been said to show that no ill befell any individual
mentioned in our tale.  Even Mrs Brown lived to a good old age, and was
a female dragon to the last.  Enough has also been said to prove, that,
as the old song has it, "we little know what great things from little
things may rise."



STORY TWO, CHAPTER 1.

WHY I DID NOT BECOME A SAILOR.

There is mystery connected with the incidents which I am about to
relate.  Looked at from one point of view, the whole affair is
mysterious--eminently so; yet, regarded from another point of view, it
is not so mysterious as it seems.  Whatever my reader may think about it
as he goes along, I entreat him to suspend his judgment until he has
reached the conclusion of my narrative.  My only reason for bringing
this mysterious matter before the public is, that, in addition to
filling me with unutterable surprise, it had the effect of quenching one
of my strongest desires, and effectually prevented my becoming a sailor.

This, I freely admit, is not in itself a sufficient reason to justify my
rushing into print.  But when I regard the matter from what may be
termed a negative point of view, I do feel that it is not absolutely
presumptuous in me to claim public attention.  Suppose that Sir John
Franklin had never gone to sea; what a life of adventure and discovery
would have been lost to the world! what deeds of heroism undone, and,
therefore, untold!  I venture to think, that if that great navigator had
not gone to sea, it would have been a matter of interest, (knowing what
we now know), to have been told that such was the case.  In this view of
the matter I repeat it, as being of possible future interest, that the
incident I am about to relate prevented my becoming a sailor.

I am said to be a soft boy--that is to say, I _was_ said to be soft.
I'm a man now, but, of course, I was a boy once.  I merely mention this
to prove that I make no pretension whatever to unusual wisdom; quite the
reverse.  I hate sailing under false colours--not that I ever did sail
under any colours, never having become a sailor--and yet I shouldn't say
that, either, for that's the very point round which all the mystery
hangs.  I _did_ go to sea!  I'm rather apt to wander, I find, from my
point, and to confuse my own mind, (I trust not the reader's).  Perhaps
the shortest way to let you understand how it was is to tell you all
about it.

My name is Robert Smith--not an unusual name, I am given to understand.
It was of little use to me during the period of my boyhood, for I never
got any other name than Bob--sometimes _soft_ was added.  I had a
father.  He loved me.  As a natural consequence, I loved him.  He was
old, partially bald, silver-haired, kind, affectionate, good, five feet
six, and wore spectacles.  I, at the time I write of; was young, stout,
well-grown, active, and had a long nose--much too long a nose: it was
the only point in regard to which I was sensitive.  It was owing to the
length of this member, I believe, that I once went by the name of
Mozambique.  You see, I conceal nothing.  The remarkable--the
mysterious--the every way astonishing incidents I am about to relate,
require that I should be more than usually careful and particular in
stating things precisely as I saw them and understood them at the time.

In this view of the matter I should remark that the softness with which
I was charged did not refer to my muscles--they were hard and well
developed--but to my intellect.  I take this opportunity of stating that
I think the charge unjust.  But, to conclude my description of myself; I
am romantic.  One of my dearest companions used to say that my nose was
the same, minus the tic!  What he meant by that I never could make out.
I doubt if he himself knew.

My chief delight in my leisure hours was to retire to my bedroom and
immerse myself in books of travel and adventure.  This was my mania.  No
one can conceive the delight I experienced in following heroes of every
name over the pathless deep and through the trackless forests of every
clime.  My heart swelled within me, and the blood rushed through my
veins like liquid fire, as I read of chasing lions, tigers, elephants,
in Africa; white bears and walrus in the Polar regions; and deer and
bisons on the American prairies.  I struggled long to suppress the flame
that consumed me, but I could not.  It grew hotter and hotter.  At last,
it burst forth--and this brings me to the point.

I thought--one dark, dismal night in the middle of November--I thought,
(mind, I don't say I determined; no, but I thought), of running away
from home and going to sea!

I confess it with shame.  The image of my dear father rose before me
with a kind and sorrowful look.  I repented; started to my feet, and
seized the book I was reading with the intention of tossing it into the
fire.  In doing so, I accidentally turned over a leaf.  There was an
illustration on the page.  I looked at it.  An African savage firing the
whole contents of a six-barrelled revolver down the throat of a Bengal
tiger, without, apparently, doing it any harm!  I thought not of the
incongruous combination.  My soul was fired anew.  Once again I thought
of running away from home and going to sea--not by any means with the
intention of remaining at sea, but for the purpose of reaching foreign--
if possible--unknown lands.

Having conceived the thought, I rose calmly, shut the book carefully,
but with decision, thrust my hands firmly into my pockets, knitted my
brows, and went out in search of my bosom friend John Brown--also a
commonplace name, I believe--at least, so it is said.

Jack, as I used to call him, had a mother, but no father--his father
died when Jack was an infant.  I've often fancied that there was a
delicate bond of union between us here.  He had a mother, but no father.
I had a father, but no mother.  Strange coincidence!  I think the fact
helped to draw us together.  I may be wrong, but I think so.  Jack was
on a visit to us at the time, so I had only to cross the passage to
reach his room.

"Come in," he cried, as I knocked.

"Jack, come to my room.  It's more comfortable than yours.  I want your
advice."

He rose, in some surprise, and followed me.

If John Brown's name was commonplace, his person was certainly not so.
He looked like a young lord.  He was a noble fellow, by nature if not by
birth.  A clear, sunny face, masculine chin and nose, sweet, firm mouth,
the eye of an eagle, and the soft, curly, golden hair of a child.  Tall,
broad-shouldered, elegant, bold as a lion, gentle and kind as a lamb--
such was my best, my dearest friend, Jack.

"Jack," said I, "I'm going to run away!"

My friend fell into a chair, put both legs straight out, and looked at
me in speechless amazement for a second; then he burst into an
uncontrollable fit of laughter.

"Jack," I repeated, "I'm going to run away."

"You'll do nothing of the sort," said he.

"And," I continued, regardless of his remark, "I mean that you shall run
away with me."

"I'll do nothing of the sort," he replied.  "But come, Bob, my boy,
you're joking.  Surely this is not the object for which you called me
out of my room."

"Indeed it is.  Listen to me, Jack."  (I looked at him impressively.  He
returned the look, for Jack was earnest as well as gay.) "You know that
my dear father positively refused to let me go abroad, although I have
entreated him to do so again and again.  Now I think that's hard, you
know.  I love my dear father very much, but--"

"You love yourself better.  Is that it?"

"Well, put it so if you choose.  I don't care.  I'm going to run away,
and if you won't go with me you can stay at home--that's all."

"Come, come, Bob, don't be cross," said Jack, kindly; "you know you
don't mean it."

"But I do; and I'm sure I don't see what it is that prevents you from
going too," said I, testily.

"H'm! well, there is a small matter, a sort of moral idea, so to speak,
that prevents."

"And what is that?"

"Respect for my mother!  Bob, my boy, I've been too deeply imbued with
that in my babyhood to shake it off now, even if I wished to do so; but
I don't, Bob, I don't.  I'm proud of my mother, and, moreover, I
remember her teachings.  There's one little verse I used to repeat to
her every Sunday night, along with the rest of the ten commandments,
`Honour thy father and thy mother,' etcetera.  It seems to me that
running away is rather flying in the face of that.  Doesn't it strike
you in that light, Bob?"

I was silent.  I felt that I had no argument against such reasoning.
Jack rose.

"It's late, Bob; we are to start on our fishing expedition to-morrow
morning at six, so it behoves us to get into bed.  Good-night! and think
over it!"

I seized his hand and pressed it warmly.

"Good-night, Jack, I will!"



STORY TWO, CHAPTER 2.

My bedroom was a small one, with little furniture in it.  A small iron
stove in the fire-place acted instead of a grate, and as I was
accustomed to read late my father allowed me to light it in cold
weather.  It was blazing cheerfully when Jack left me, and the bright
gleams of ruddy light that darted through the chinks of the door and
fell on the opposite wall, threw the light of my solitary candle quite
into the shade.

I have already remarked that the night was dark and dismal.  In addition
to that, it was stormy.  The wind moaned drearily among the venerable
elms that surrounded our quiet country residence, and ever and anon came
in sharp, fitful gusts that caused the window-frames to rattle, and even
shook the house, at times, to its foundation.  Heavy drops of rain fell
occasionally on the window-panes, and in a few minutes the storm broke
forth in full violence.

As the old house had stood many such, in years gone by, I did not give
myself much concern about the gale; but pulled down the blind, placed my
little table and books near the stove, and, drawing in my chair, sat
down to think.  How long I remained in this condition I cannot tell; but
my reveries were broken by the large clock on the stairs striking
twelve.

I started up, and clinching my hands exclaimed aloud, "No!  I've made up
my mind, I _won't_ run away!"  Under the impulse of the feeling I threw
open the door of the stove and heaped on fresh coals, muttering to
myself; as I did so, "No, I won't run away, I won't run away; no, no,
no, I won't run a--"

I was checked suddenly by my eye falling a second time on that terrific
African savage sending from his revolver a charge down the throat of
that magnificent Bengal tiger, that would have blown the inside entirely
out of any living creature smaller than an elephant.  I sat down.  I
gazed at the picture.  I read the account.  I followed up the
adventurous savage.  My head reeled with excitement.  A strange terrible
heat seemed to dart like lightning through my veins, and the book began
to flicker before my eyes.  I became alarmed.

"Surely some terrible fever is seizing on me!"  I exclaimed, and in the
terror of the thought I started up and paced my room rapidly.  But the
fire increased, and my head swam.  I meditated ringing the bell and
alarming the household; but the thought of this quieted me, and
gradually I became calmer.

It was at this moment that my former resolution returned upon me with
tenfold violence.  "I'll submit to this no longer," I growled between my
teeth; "I _will_ run away!"

The instant I said that, I felt as if I were imbued with a determination
that nothing could shake.  Jack's reasoning never once came into my
mind.  I took down the knapsack that hung on a nail ready packed for the
intended fishing expedition of the morrow.  I buckled it on; put on my
thickest shoes, and, seizing a stout cudgel, issued softly from my
apartment, and tapped gently at Jack's door.

"Come in!"

I entered, and was overwhelmed with surprise at finding my friend
standing in the middle of the room accoutred for the road just like
myself.  He put his finger to his lips.

"Hush!  Bob.  I was on the point of going to your room to say that I've
made up my mind to run away with you."

I was staggered.  I did not relish this unaccountable change.  If I had
persuaded him to go, it would have been all right; but to find him thus
ready and eager was unnatural.  I felt as if I were accountable for this
change in his opinions and actions, and immediately, strange to say,
experienced a tendency to dissuade him.

"But, Jack, you forget what you said to me some hours ago."

"No, I don't," he answered, gloomily.

"Perhaps we'd better think over it again."

"No, we won't.  Come, Bob, don't show the white feather now.  Don't
waste time.  It's about dawn.  It's too late to reason.  You have
tempted me, and I have given in."

Saying this, he seized me by the collar and pushed me before him.

And now the mysterious events which I am about to relate began.  The
conduct of my friend Jack on this occasion was in itself a mystery.  He
was by nature the gentlest and most inoffensive of human beings, except
when circumstances required him to act vigorously: then he was a lion--
irresistible.  Since the commencement of our acquaintance, which was of
many years' standing, he had never by word or look given me the
slightest cause for anger; and yet here he was grasping me violently by
the collar and pushing me forcibly before him.

I did not get angry.  My conscience smote me.  I said to myself; "Ah!
this is the result of evil conduct.  I have tempted Jack to act against
his judgment; he is no longer what he was."

Instead of melting under this feeling, I became hardened.  I stepped
out, and so dragged my friend after me down the back stairs which led to
the lower part of the house, where the servants slept.  Jack whispered,
"All right," and let go his hold.

"Now we must be cautious," I said, in a low tone, as we proceeded to
traverse the passage, on each side of which were the rooms occupied by
the servants.  We took off our shoes and advanced on tip-toe.  At the
far end of the passage we heard a sound like a trombone.  That was the
butler; we knew of his snoring propensities, and so were not alarmed.
His door was open; so was his mouth--I could see that plainly, as I
passed, by the dim light of a candle which he always burned at night.
The butler was excessively fat.  I merely mention this because it
accounts for the fact of his not awaking when we unlocked the street
door.  Fat people are not easily wakened.

The lock of the door was an old-fashioned large one.  It grated slightly
as Jack turned the key; then at a certain point the key lost control
over it, and it shot back with a report like a pistol-shot!  My heart
flew to my mouth, and almost choked me.  The butler gave a double snort
and turned in his bed as Jack and I darted round an angle of the wall
and hid in a dark corner.  The butler soon gave unquestionable evidence
that he had not been thoroughly aroused, and we were about to issue from
our place of concealment, when the door of our man-servant's room
opened, and he peeped out.  Edwards--that was his name--was a stout
young fellow, and we felt certain that he would not rest satisfied until
he had found out the cause of the noise.

We were right.  He stepped cautiously into the passage with a poker in
his hand.  My heart sank within me.  Just at that moment a cat darted
across the passage with its back and tail up, and its eyes glaring.
Edwards flung the poker at it, missed the cat, and knocked over an old
tin umbrella-stand, with which the poker made a hideous clatter on the
stone floor of the passage.

"Ha! you brute!  Wot? it's you as is makin' all that row, is it?"

"Oh, dear, Edwards, what's happened?" cried a shrill voice from the
other end of the passage--it was cook.

"Oh, nothin', only the cat," replied the man as he sauntered into the
butler's room.  The butler seemed at that moment to have been smitten
with a fit of apoplexy--we could see him from our dark corner;--he grew
purple in the face, gasped once or twice, choked awfully, and then sat
up in bed staring like a maniac.

"Oh!  Jack," I whispered in horror.

"Don't be alarmed; it's only his usual way of waking up.  I've seen him
do it often."

"What noise is that?  What's going on down there?" cried a deep bass
voice in the distance.  It was my father.  No one replied.  Presently my
father's bedroom bell rang with extreme violence.  Edwards rushed out of
the butler's room.  The butler fell back, opened his mouth, and
pretended to be asleep--snoring moderately.  This of itself would have
undeceived any one, for when the old hypocrite was really asleep he
never snored _moderately_.  The cook and housemaid uttered two little
shrieks and slammed their respective doors, while the bell rang
violently a second time.

"Now for it," whispered Jack.  He opened the back door softly, and we
darted out.  A streak of pale light on the horizon indicated the
approach of day.  We tried to close the door behind us, but we heard the
butler choke, gasp, and shout at the top of his voice, "Hi! hallo!"  At
the same instant the old dinner-gong sent a peal of horrible sound
through the house, and we took to flight filled with unutterable terror.

Oh, how we did run!  We had scarcely cleared the offices and got fairly
into the avenue when we heard Edwards shout as he started in pursuit.

We were both good runners, but Jack soon took the lead, and kept it by
about five yards.  Our feet scarcely touched the ground.  I felt as if I
had wings, so great was my terror.  We reached the end of the avenue.
The gate was full five feet high.  To my inexpressible amazement, Jack
went clear over it with one bound!

I have never been able to analyse my feelings and impulses on that
occasion.  I am, and always was, rather a poor jumper; yet, without
hesitation, without even a doubt as to my ability to clear it, I went at
that gate like an Irish hunter at a stone wall, and leaped fairly over
it!  The leap did not even check my pace for an instant.  I remember, in
the whirl and confusion of the moment, that I attributed my almost
superhuman powers to terror; but the feeling that we were pursued again
absorbed all my faculties.

We dashed on at a killing pace, and, strange to say, without feeling the
slightest fatigue.  Having cleared the avenue, we mounted the high
ground in the neighbourhood, passed the church, entered the village, and
