
Before President Lincoln's day there had been a succession of
administrations when no children's voices rang through the stately
rooms and corridors of the White House, so it was indeed a change when
the three Lincoln boys arrived, in March of 1861, bringing with them
all the clatter and chatter which belongs to normal healthy boyhood.
Robert, who was then eighteen years old only stayed in the White House
for his father's inauguration, then went back to Harvard to finish his
education, and Willie, and Theodore or "Tad" as he was always called,
from his own pronunciation of his name, (the little fellow had a
serious defect in his speech which made it hard for him to pronounce
words clearly) were left to make the dignified White House echo with
their merry laughter and conversations, as they romped through its long
passages, careless of the fact that they were on historic ground, as
they scattered their balls, bats, kites and other treasures wherever
they chose.

They had few playmates, with whom they were allowed to play frequently,
except two boys, the sons of a government official, and the four boys'
fertile brains were keen to think out all sorts of exciting and
mischievous plans which kept their families on the alert to restrain
their actions within the bounds of safety and propriety. The boys who
were playmates of Tad and Willie were Budd and Hally Taft, and although
they were older than the Lincoln boys, they were much like them in
temperament and in looks, Budd was fair like Willie Lincoln, and Hally
dark, and more like Tad, whose eyes were bright and brown, in keeping
with his quick imperious disposition.

One evening in the spring, the four boys were taken to see a minstrel
show in the city. They were thrilled by what they heard and saw, and
decided on the spot that they would give a show themselves, and began
between the numbers to plan when and where to give it. But, on the
following day, when they discussed it again there seemed to be no room
suited to their plans either in the White House or at the Taft's, but
finally they decided that by having some partitions in the Taft attic,
which was roughly divided into small bedrooms, taken down, they could
be accommodated. However, fortune favoured the preservation of the Taft
home by a sudden shifting of the boys' interest in the direction of the
White House. Mrs. Lincoln was called to New York for a week; Willie and
Tad had such severe colds and the weather was so rainy, that she wished
them to be amused in the house during her absence, and that could only
be done by giving them the society of their playmates. Accordingly one
day Hally and Budd were thrown into a state of feverish excitement by
the arrival of a messenger with Mrs. Lincoln's invitation for them to
spend a whole week at the White House.

Besides delivering the invitation, the messenger also asked whether
Willie and Tad were there, as they had not been at home since breakfast
time, although they had been traced to the Capitol, where they had been
seen sitting in the gallery of the House of Representatives, and later
treated to lunch in the restaurant of Congress by a gentleman whom the
boys always amused, then they had been seen playing marbles with some
of the pages in the Capitol, but now where were they? The messenger who
was well acquainted with the truants, seemed more amused than alarmed
over their disappearance, and soon carried back a note to Mrs. Lincoln
accepting the invitation for Budd and Hally, provided the truants
should be found! While Budd and Hally were excitedly helping to pack
their clothes in a small valise, for the visit, in walked the
wanderers. They carried a very large and much dilapidated umbrella
which Tad said they had borrowed from the cook--doubtless a Southern
mammy who took an endless delight in the boys' pranks, and aided them
all she could in their mischievous plans. Tad's pockets were bulging
with marbles, which showed how successfully he had played his game with
the pages earlier in the day, and both boys had entirely forgotten that
they had bad colds. All four soon set out in high glee together, while
Tad gave a whoop of joy as they left the house.

"You bet we'll have a good time!" he exclaimed, and from all
descriptions of that visit, they certainly must have had it.

On the following day there was a review, and the boys all rode in the
President's carriage, looking as severe and dignified as if they had
never had a mischievous idea, but, with a feeling of mistrust that such
dignity might be only skin deep, a member of the Taft family went to
the White House to find out what was going on. To her relief she saw
that the building was still standing, but on being ushered in, she
noticed that all the orderlies, soldiers and doorkeepers wore broad
grins. Asking where the boys were, and being ushered upstairs she came
upon Tad, who instantly called out:

"Oh, say, we've got a circus in the attic. We're minstrels. I've got to
be blacked up and Willie can't get his dress on--it's too big. Pin it
up, will you? Hurry!"

The horrified question, "Does the President know it?" was answered
impatiently by Tad.

"Oh, yes, he knows it," said Tad. "He doesn't care. He's got some
general or other in there. Come on--hurry!"

Willie was meanwhile struggling with the long, flowered skirt of a
lilac silk reception dress of Mrs. Lincoln's, and Budd was getting into
one of her ruffled morning wrappers, while Tad began to sing at the top
of his voice:

"Old Abe Lincoln came out of the wilderness----"

"Hush," cautioned Budd, "the President will hear you."

"I don't care if pa does hear, and he don't care either," said Tad.
"We're going to sing that in the show." And sing it they did!

Another day when Tad was shouting out a campaign song at the Tafts'
about "Old Abe splitting rails," Willie asked Mrs. Taft if she did not
think it was disrespectful of Tad to sing such a song. Tad overheard
what he said, and kicked a chair, as he always did when displeased, and
said:

"Well, everybody in this world knows Pa _did_ use to split rails!" But
when Mrs. Taft explained to him why she thought he ought not to say or
sing this, Tad said with equal decision:

"Well, I'll sing John Brown's body then." However headstrong he seemed,
he was really very affectionate, and willing to be convinced that he
was wrong, if any one approached him in the right way.

There was much to occupy the boys' attention in Washington, and they
were especially interested in the models of locomotives and steamboats
in the Patent Office, where they spent much time, and they were also
sometimes to be found making a survey of the White House grounds under
the guidance of a good-natured engineer. At other times they invaded
the McClellans' house, where they were allowed to play with the baby
and where General and Mrs. McClellan were very kind to them, and of
course they never missed a review, even riding in the staff, when the
bridle of Willie's horse was held by the Duc de Chartres and Budd's by
the Comte de Paris, while Hally and Tad rode in front of the aides,
sitting as erect and stiff as if they were the chief features in the
parade.

On another day, Tad was not allowed to go to the review, as he had not
been well the day before. The review took place across the Long Bridge,
and after the President's carriage had passed down the line, a rickety
cart came clattering by, drawn by a shambling old horse, and driven by
a grinning negro boy. In it were Tad, Willie, Budd and Hally in new
Zouave uniforms, their swords at a salute! Many a soldier sighed and
smiled as that cart passed by, but there was never a smile on the faces
of the Zouaves, who had paid the darkey a quarter from their precious
circus money to drive that load of glory!

Having the uniform ready they formed themselves into a military company
called "Mrs. Lincoln's Zouaves." Much amused by their military
enthusiasm she presented them with a flag, and the President formally
reviewed them. Willie was colonel, Budd, major, and Hally, captain,
while Tad insisted on having the rank of drum-major or nothing, and all
of them had old-fashioned swords which were given to them by General
McClellan, who greatly enjoyed their pranks and sometimes suggested new
ones. When other amusements failed, the quartet spent their time on the
flat roof of the White House, which was perfectly safe, being
surrounded by a strong balustrade. There they built a cabin, and the
roof was in turn a quarter-deck, or a fort, and they used to raise and
lower the flag with proper ceremony, and look off through a spy-glass
for a "strange sail," and Budd's sister tells how one day when she
ascended to the stronghold with a stern demand for her scissors, which
had been missing for several days she was received at the "side" with
such strict naval etiquette that she meekly retreated without the
scissors.

That first year when President Lincoln was in office was a happy one
for his boys and their companions, but all too soon the pleasures came
to an end, for Willie Lincoln was stricken with typhoid fever, of which
he died. Then the Tafts left Washington and moved to the north, so of
the merry group of boys, "Tad" alone remained to enliven the White
House, and to amuse himself as best he could in the long days which
seemed so quiet in comparison to those which he and his companions had
spent together.

But Tad, who was now ten years old, was equal to any emergency, and as
resourceful as a dozen ordinary boys, and after the first bitter
loneliness had worn off, he made as much commotion by himself as all
four boys had made together, and soon became an object of popular
attention, as he galloped madly around the grounds on his pony, driving
him at break-neck speed, or training his team of dogs on the lawn, or
urging his goats to do some impossible feat.

One of the stories told about him at that time was that on a certain
day a party of dignified ladies were solemnly and with due reverence
inspecting the famous East room, when they heard a deafening clatter at
the end of the corridor where the Lincolns' private apartments were,
then came a shout of "Get out of the way there!" and Tad the
irrepressible, galloped into the room driving a tandem team of goats
harnessed to a chair! Up the room and down again and out of the front
entrance went the goats and Tad like a flash of lightning, leaving the
ladies aghast at a spectacle to which they had found no reference in
their guide books.

To his mother's great distress, an interested but not over-thoughtful
friend, gave Tad a tool chest, which of course delighted him, and which
at once suggested to him the idea of opening a cabinet shop to
manufacture furniture for hospital use, but he fortunately discovered
an old wagon to experiment on, and forgot the shop; turning his
attention also to any and every object which he could bore, chisel, saw
or hack with his tools. Nothing was said in remonstrance until he began
to experiment on the old-fashioned mahogany furniture in the East room,
when that tool chest mysteriously disappeared and no amount of
searching ever brought it to light again.

As he was unable to exist without some new outlet for his feelings he
decided to have a theatre and give shows, for which purpose he
appropriated an unused room in the White House, and had a fine time
fitting it up with a stage, seats, orchestra, drop-curtain and all. At
that time, Mr. Carpenter, an artist, was at work on a portrait of
President Lincoln and his Cabinet, and when it was found necessary to
take several photographs of the room in the White House which was to be
the background for the painting, Tad's theatre was offered to the
photographers to use in developing their pictures, and Mr. Carpenter
used to tell with a chuckle of delight how all went well till Tad
suddenly discovered the invasion of his room, when he fell upon the
artist and blamed him in a fiery burst of temper, for letting the men
into his room, and then went up and calmly locked the door, pocketed
the key and walked off, leaving the astonished photographers without
occupation, as their apparatus and chemicals were in the room. But that
made no difference to tyrant Tad--no one should go into his theatre, he
said, and no amount of urging moved him. Finally the President was
asked to deal with the young rebel, as was usual when Tad's behaviour
presented impossibilities to the general public. Mr. Lincoln was
sitting ready to be photographed at the time. He listened quietly to
the story, and then called Tad and told him to go and open the door.
Tad rushed off, muttering and shaking his head but he absolutely
refused to obey, even though Mr. Carpenter made use of all the
arguments he could think of, to make him yield. Reluctantly the artist
went back to the room where the President sat and he at once asked:

"Has the boy opened that door?"

Mr. Carpenter was obliged to say that he had not, and Lincoln slowly
rose, compressing his lips and strode out of the room. Soon he
returned, carrying the key, which he handed to the artist saying
apologetically:

"He is a peculiar child. He was violently excited when I went to him. I
said 'Tad, do you know you are making your father a great deal of
trouble?' He burst into tears and at once gave me the key."

This little incident shows the affectionate side of tyrant Tad who
could always be led, but never driven, and it was to his father's
gentle diplomacy that the fiery, impulsive little fellow always
responded.

Often Tad would perch on his father's knee, or even on his shoulder,
while weighty conferences were going on, and sometimes would insist on
spending a whole evening in the executive mansion, finally falling
asleep on the floor, when the President would tenderly pick him up and
carry him off to bed.

At other times, with affairs of the gravest importance awaiting his
consideration, President Lincoln would sit with his arms around the
boy, telling him anecdotes and stories of which he had an endless fund,
until the boy's drowsy eyes closed, when President Lincoln would gently
carry him to his room, and then go back to ponder on weighty matters of
national importance far into the night, but never retiring for the
night without a last look at the little fellow who was the supreme joy
and comfort of his life.

He was very fond of animals, and for a long while goats were his
special favourites, during which time a large and flourishing family of
them decorated the lawns and roads about the White House, and that the
goats were very important members of the family is shown by the fact
that at a time when Mrs. Lincoln and Tad had gone away for a week and
the family were living at the Soldiers' Home, Lincoln wrote to his
wife: "Tell dear Tad that poor Nanny Goat is lost and we are in
distress about it. The day you left, Nanny was found resting herself
and chewing her little cud on the middle of Tad's bed, but now she's
gone! The gardener kept complaining that she spoilt the flowers, till
it was decided to bring her down to the White House, which was done,
but on the second day she disappeared and has not been heard of since."

Tad was evidently consoled for this tragic event by not one goat, but a
whole family of them, for about a year later Mr. Lincoln ended a
business telegram to his wife in New York with the words: "Tell Tad the
goats and father are very well," and with a gleam of that humour for
which he was famous, the great-hearted, patient man added, "especially
the goats!"

[Illustration: _Tyrant Tad and Abraham Lincoln_]

Again a friend of the Lincolns' sent them a fine live turkey to be used
for the President's Christmas dinner, but long before that time the
turkey and Tad had become bosom friends. Tad named him Jack and used
more patience in trying to teach him tricks than he could ever be
persuaded to give to his lessons. One day just before the holiday,
while President Lincoln was discussing a matter of gravest importance
with his cabinet ministers, Tad burst into the room as if shot out of a
cannon and sobbing as if nothing could ever comfort him. Of course,
business came to a standstill while Tad explained; Jack was about to be
killed, he must not be killed, it was wicked, and Tad had forced the
executioners to stay their hands while he laid the case before the
President. Jack should _not_ be killed! sobbed out the indignant little
tyrant.

"But," said the President quietly, "Jack was sent to be killed and
eaten for this very Christmas."

"I can't help it," roared Tad, between his sobs. "He's a good turkey
and I don't want him killed."

The President of the United States paused in the midst of the important
business under discussion, and with the gravity due to a solemn
occasion, took a card and wrote on it an order of reprieve for the
turkey, which Tad seized, and fled with all speed, and Jack's life was
saved. He became very tame, and roamed peacefully about the grounds at
will, enduring petting and teasing alternately, from his capricious
young master. At that time the White House was guarded by a company of
soldiers from Pennsylvania with whom the turkey was a great favourite.
The tents of these soldiers were on the Potomac side of the White
House, at the end of the South lawn, and in the summer of 1864 a
commission was sent down from Pennsylvania to take the votes of the
Pennsylvania soldiers in Washington for the coming election. Tad was,
as usual, much interested in what was going on, and dragged his father
to the window to see the soldiers voting, while Jack stalked around
among them, apparently intelligent and interested.
