glasses, you old detective, and look and see what you can find. If you
can find Coulter on our basket, I'll eat my head," Carl hazarded with
confidence.

"You hear him, witnesses," Hal said, holding up an impressive finger.

Then taking the basket from Martin, he inverted it.

"Will you never acknowledge, oh, you unbeliever, that I am wiser than
you?" he presently jeered. "Come! Look at the thing yourself over here
under the lamp. If that word isn't 'Coulter' I'll eat both your head
and mine."

"Jove! It _is_ Coulter!" was all Carl could stammer.

"What did I tell you!"

"But why should Mr. Coulter send a Christmas basket to us?" speculated
Carl in an awed whisper.

"I'm not telling you why. I've not got as far as that," Hal answered.
"All I said was that the name, Coulter, was written on both baskets and
that the natural conclusion is that Mr. Coulter was their sender."

"I don't believe it. Why, it would be ridiculous," Carl protested. "Mr.
Coulter probably never so much as heard of us in all his life. Why
should he? I'm sure we don't know him."

"I'm afraid your theory isn't quite sound, Hal," rejoined Mrs.
McGregor. "While it is possible that for some reason of his own Mr.
Coulter, for whom you work, may have sent you a Christmas basket there
is not one shred of anything to link him up with us. Mr. McGregor, it
is true, was in Davis and Coulter's employ many years; but he was only
one of many hundred workmen and scarcely knew old Mr. Coulter by sight.
Since the old gentleman has died and the son has come into the firm the
last thread that bound us to the company has been snapped. Old Mr.
Coulter is gone, and McGregor, with his twenty-five years of service in
the mills, is forgotten. As for this young John Coulter who has taken
his father's place--I've never set eyes on him."

"But why should the name be on each of the baskets?" Hal insisted,
still unwilling to surrender the idea he cherished.

"Ask the market man, laddie. It's a question for him. My notion is that
in the rush somebody put it there by mistake," replied Carl's mother.
"The marvel isn't that Coulter was written on the baskets; the marvel
is that some word in Choctaw or Egyptian wasn't on 'em. Why, if you'd
seen those clerks down at the store going round as if their heads were
clean off their bodies you wouldn't wonder queer things were written on
the hampers we got. I'm amazed they arrived at all."

"But somebody sent them," Hal affirmed.

"I'll join you there! Somebody sent them," nodded Mrs. McGregor. "Up to
that point your arguments are perfectly logical. Those baskets never
came of themselves. But as for Mr. John Coulter being their giver--why,
you are mad as a March hare to think it for a moment. What would he be
doing with all his college education and his years of study in Europe
sending the likes of us Christmas presents? He has plenty of presents
to give in his own family, I guess."

"Well, maybe you're right and the name only happened," Hal conceded.
"Still, it's queer, isn't it? Queer that the name should be Coulter, I
mean."

"It's a coincidence for you because you chance to work for him; but to
us it means nothing."

"Yes, I can see that now," Hal agreed. "Then I guess there is nothing
left before going home but to see Carlie carry out his little wager."

"My wager?" Carl repeated.

"You were going to eat your head if the name of Coulter was on the
bottom of this basket, remember."

"Oh!" Carl grinned a sickly grin.

"Going to default?"

"No, not default--merely postpone the ceremony," Carl declared.

"Oh, you old crawler! Well, if you are going to put off the show I must
be getting home or Mother will think I have been waylaid and my watch
stolen. So long, everybody, and pleasant dreams." Then thrusting his
face back into the room through the narrowing crack of the door, he
added with elfish leer, "Just the same, I still think that Coulter had
something to do with those baskets."

Before a protest could be raised the door banged and he was gone.




CHAPTER XIII

HAL REPEATS HIS VISIT


Whoever the mysterious Mr. X was he succeeded in keeping his identity a
secret much better than did the donors of the O'Dowd's Christmas
dinner. A secret when shared by too many becomes no secret at all and
so, alas, it proved in this case. And yet no deliberate prattling
divulged the story. Its betrayal was purely accidental.

On the morning following the holiday, which, by the way, chanced to be
Sunday, Mrs. O'Dowd came up to borrow the McGregor's can opener. In
Mulberry Court somebody was always borrowing. An inventory of each
family's possessions gradually became public property, so that all the
neighbors knew exactly where to turn for anything needed. In fact, the
residents of the house so planned their purchases that they would not
overlap what the dwelling already contained. Nobody thought, for
example, of buying a washing machine since the Murphys had one; nor did
any one see cause for investing in a wringer, when a perfectly good one
was owned by the McGregors. Even such small things as egg beaters,
double boilers, and ice picks, all had an established place of
residence and were used in a community spirit. All day long from
morning until night little boys and girls trailed up and down the long
flights of stairs either to borrow or to return to their rightful
owners articles that had been a-visiting. It almost required a card
catalogue to keep track of where one's things were.

"Do you know who has the egg beater?" Mrs. McGregor would interrogate
on a baking day.

And some of the children whose function it was to procure or carry
hence the egg beater generally recalled its whereabouts.

"It's down to Murphys', Ma," Martin would shout. "Don't you remember
that Thursday she was making custard?"

Oh, yes; Mrs. McGregor did recollect. It flashed into her mind at the
time that with eggs so high the Murphys might well do without custard.
Nevertheless, she had not said so. One did not venture to criticize
one's neighbors--even if the gossip connected with the various
borrowings did entail first-hand information concerning their affairs.
For by common consent it was not Mulberry Court etiquette to borrow
without stating exactly the service required of the article in
question. When, for instance, you sent an emissary to ask for the
O'Dowds' ironing board you said:

"Can Ma take the ironing board so she can iron out Mary's dress 'cause
she's got to have her white one clean to speak a piece in at school."

Then the O'Dowds knew exactly why the ironing board was needed and just
how necessary it was to have it, and not only did they promptly deliver
it up, but the next time you met them they inquired how Mary got on
speaking her piece and whether she was frightened or not. In this way a
friendly interest was created.

To have borrowed the ironing board and not have detailed the
accompanying facts would have been a heinous crime and would have
exempted any person from loaning it. Under such circumstances it would
have been perfectly excusable to send back word by the messenger:

"Mrs. O'Dowd is sorry but she is using the ironing board herself
to-day."

But when Mary was to speak a piece, that was quite a different matter.

Mulberry Court had a pride in its tenants.

Mary McGregor certainly must not appear in a dress that had not been
freshly ironed. Why, the people on the street would think Mulberry
Court bereft of all sense of propriety! No, indeed. Mary McGregor must
make a fitting showing if the whole house had to turn to to achieve the
desired result. And if by any chance her family could not iron her
dress, why somebody else must. Mulberry Court would make a proper
showing no matter at what personal sacrifice.

And the same self-respecting spirit came to the fore on all great
occasions. When the Sullivan's baby was christened was not Mrs.
Sullivan arrayed in Mrs. McGregor's bonnet, Mrs. O'Dowd's coat, and
Mrs. Murphy's skirt, that she might make a truly genteel impression?
There was the dignity of Mulberry Court to be maintained.

Thus it followed that borrowing was no unusual act and therefore when
on Sunday morning Mrs. O'Dowd presented herself at the McGregor's door
and announced that she was going to have a chowder of canned corn for
dinner and wanted the can opener, beyond a conversation as to the
nourishment corn chowder contained; the brand of canned goods one
bought; the price of it per can; the quantity of milk required and the
price of that milk per quart, nothing further was said, unless it was,
perhaps, to mention the crackers and inquire whether the O'Dowds used
pilot biscuit or oysterettes. But of course the can opener was not
denied and while Mary went to fetch it and Mrs. McGregor continued
cutting Nell's hair Mrs. O'Dowd, with arms akimbo, reviewed the
pleasures of the day before and compared Christmas dinners.

"Such a feast as we had," declared she. "Such turkey! It melted in your
mouth and ran down your throat almost before you had the chance to
taste it. And the sweet potatoes! You'd believe, actually, they were
just dug up out of the ground! Had you sweet potatoes in your basket,
Martin?"

"Sure we had!" returned the small boy, not to be outdone.

"And then the celery! It was that handsome it was fit to be set on a
bonnet--I'm telling you the truth."

"Mary gave the celery," lisped Nell.

"Hush!" Martin cried. "You weren't to tell that."

"I didn't tell what I gave. Ma told me not to and I haven't," announced
wee Nell proudly.

"But you're not to tell what anybody gave," Martin commanded. "I
haven't told a thing, have I, Ma?" concluded he in triumph.

"Hush, Martin, hush!" cautioned his mother quickly. "Pay no heed to
them, Mrs. O'Dowd; sure after the holiday they hardly know what they're
saying."

"But--but----" Mrs. O'Dowd glanced keenly about, viewing the guilty
faces and the indignant looks the older children centered on the two
small culprits. She was a quick-witted woman and instantly put two and
two together.

"So it was Mary sent the celery, was it?" repeated she. "And who, pray,
bought the turkey?" The temptation the question presented was too great
for the youthful conspirators.

"Uncle Fwedewic! Uncle Fwedewic!" cried Nell and Martin in a breath.

"He bought it wiz his very own money," Nell went on to explain before
she could be stopped.

Oh, the game was all up now! Of what use was it to pretend anything
after that? Martin heaved a sigh of delight. For days the secret had
trembled on his tongue, making life uncomfortable and unnatural.
Constitutionally it was his habit to let slip from that artless member
anything that lurked at its tip and as a result he held secrets in
abhorrence. Now the truth was out and he for one was glad it was. He
would no longer be dreading an encounter with the O'Dowds or be under
the trying necessity of acting a part.

"The candy was mine," he announced calmly. "I gave it and Uncle
Frederick paid the man."

Julie ventured over the threshold.

"So it's you we have to thank for our dinner!" she exclaimed.

"You don't have us to _thank_," put in Mrs. McGregor quickly.

"But you surely wouldn't have me be taking a dinner like that and not
thanking you for it," said Julie. "And neither O'Dowd nor I had an
inkling! Think of our coming up here Christmas morning and all of you
keeping so mum!"

"We'd have kept mum longer, if it hadn't been for Nell and Martin,"
Carl asserted. "I don't see why they couldn't shut up, Ma."

"A secret's no easy treasure to have in one's possession," Mrs. O'Dowd
put in quickly. "And you must remember they are but mites--Nell and
Martin. Indeed, in my opinion, it's a miracle they didn't blurt it out
long before this. You wouldn't get a child of mine to hold his peace
any such while; neither the big ones nor the little could do it. Well,
well! It was a happy day you gave us and you certainly deserved the
dinner you got yourselves. And you had no notion when you sent ours you
were to have one of your own."

"No! When it came we thought for a moment you had sent our present
back," Carl explained.

"In other words, you were going without your dinner to give it to us,"
commented Julie.

"We had our tree," Mary interrupted. "We didn't need both things."

"It's few would have done what you did," Julie remarked quietly.
"O'Dowd and I will not be forgetting it, either."

Tears came into the eyes of the little woman and as if words failed her
she wheeled about and disappeared down the dim hallway.

"At least, she was not put out by our doing it," commented Mrs.
McGregor, after her neighbor had gone. "I feared some she might be. But
evidently she accepted the gift just as we meant it. So that's settled!
Now if we could only find out where our own dinner came from and say as
much to its giver, I'd be entirely content. I've taxed my brain until
my head is fair aching and still I'm no nearer having an idea where
that basket of ours came from than the man in the moon."

"I guess you will just have to rate it as coming from the fairies,"
smiled her brother, "and let the matter rest there; that is, unless Hal
Harling gets another inspiration."

"Another inspiration! Sure the inspiration he had wasn't worth much,"
sniffed Mrs. McGregor. "Unless he can provide a better one than that I
sha'n't be listening to him."

"You may as well not be slandering him, for here he is now," Carl
cried, jumping up to admit his chum whose footfall he had heard on the
stairs.

"I'm not slandering him," Mrs. McGregor continued, imperturbably
greeting the visitor. "In fact, what I've said about him I'd as lief
say to his face. I'm telling them, laddie," said she, turning brightly
to Hal, "that I have scant opinion of you as a detective."

The big fellow laughed good-humoredly.

"They are not putting me on the Scotland Yard force yet, I must own,"
he admitted. "But how do you know that I won't track down Mr. X yet?
Give me time. No great mystery can be solved all in a minute."

"I've let you sleep on it and so far as I can see you are no better off
this morning than you were last night," was the crisp retort.

"I'm not, and that's the truth," Hal returned, pulling off his coat.
"I'm simply going to bury the matter the way a dog buries a bone, and
then some day I'll dig it up and go to work at it again."

"I guess that's as good a scheme as any," Captain Dillingham declared.
"Sometimes if you do not fuss at a riddle it solves itself. Come, sit
down and talk to us while Nell gets her hair cut. It may help to keep
her quiet."

The child, seated on the table and muffled to her neck in her mother's
apron, brightened.

"Tell story," commanded she. "Hal tell story."

"I? Not on your life!" protested the big fellow in consternation. "I
never told a story in all my days. Your uncle Frederick will tell you
one."

"Uncle Frederick will do nothing of the sort," growled the captain, as
he puffed contentedly at his pipe. "It's Hal who is going to tell the
story. He is going to explain to us exactly what they do with the bales
of cotton when they reach the mill."

"That? Oh, I can tell you that, all right, for I see it done from
morning to night, year in and year out. But I don't call that a story,
do you?"

"It will be a story to us, no matter what it is to you, for remember
that although I have often loaded cotton and carried it hither and
thither round the world I've never seen what became of it after we
thumped it down on the dock."

"Haven't you? That's funny!" smiled Hal. "And yet after all I don't
know as it is, either. How should you know what is done with it? I
shouldn't have if I hadn't happened to spend my days at Davis and
Coulter's. Well, then, as soon as we get the bales we first weigh them
and make a record of each. Then they are opened up and the matted
material is spread out so the coarsest of the dirt, such as leaves,
sand, stems, and bits of dry pods will be loosened and fall out. To
accomplish this we have opening machines of various kinds with beaters,
fans, and rollers and by these methods the cotton is cleaned and
pressed into a flat sheet or lap. Afterward we start in to mix the
varieties in the different bales."

"What for?" questioned Carl.

"Oh, because to get good results you have to have a blend of
varieties," Hal explained.

"But isn't cotton cotton?" inquired Mary.

"Not a bit it isn't," grinned young Harling. "Some cotton is far and
away better than another. Often it has had better care, better weather,
or better soil; or maybe it has grown more evenly and therefore has
less unripe stuff mixed in with it. Or perhaps it was a finer, more
highly cultivated kind in the first place. There are a score of
explanations. Anyhow it is better, and because it is we do not use it
all by itself. Instead we use it to grade up some that is less fine in
quality. After the bales have been classified we take a little of this
and a little of that until we have struck a good average. It goes
without saying that we never mix two extremes, or put the best and the
worst together. That wouldn't do at all. We aim to produce a mean
between these two qualities. All this mixing is not, however, done by
hand, as you might think to hear me talk. No, indeed! We have
bale-breakers or cotton-pullers to do the work. We simply put several
sheets or laps of different quality cotton one on top of another and
then let the spikes of the machines tear it into fragments and mix it
up."

"Oh!" Mary murmured.

"Afterward comes the scutching," went on Hal, "which is really only a
continuation of the same process although the scutching machine makes
the laps of cotton of more even thickness. Next we card the material to
find out where we stand. It is brushed or combed out--whichever you
prefer to call it, and the remaining dirt and short, unripe fibers are
removed. This leaves the real thing, and the machine gathers it up and
twists it into a sort of rope about an inch in diameter called a
sliver."

"What a funny name!" Tim remarked.

"I suppose it is when you stop to think of it," Hal answered. "Well,
anyhow, that's what a sliver is. In some mills they draw the cotton out
into these long strands and double together four or eight slivers
before they are carded. The carding lengthens or stretches them to the
size of one and therefore you get a greater uniformity of size. Beside
that, all the crossed or snarled fibers are arranged so that they lie
out straight and smooth, and when this is done the material is ready
for the bobbin and fly frames."

"And what, for goodness' sake, might those be?" demanded Captain
Dillingham.

