ull des nat'ally bus' right wide open. Run, Brer Fox, run! He bin
feedin' me on mutton the whole blessid mawnin' en now he done gone atter
mo'. Run, Brer Fox, run!'

"Yit, Brer Fox ain't run. He up'n ax Brer Rabbit how de mutton tas'e.

"'He tas'e mighty good 'long at fus', but nuff's a nuff, en too much is
a plenty. Run, Brer Fox, run! He ull ketch you, sho'!'

"Yit, Brer Fox ain't run. He up'n 'low dat he b'leeve he want some
mutton hisse'f, en wid dat he onloose de trap en let Brer Rabbit out, en
den he tuck'n git in dar. Brer Rabbit ain't wait fer ter see w'at de
upshot gwine ter be, needer--I boun' you he ain't. He des tuck'n gallop
off in de woods, en he laff en laff twel he hatter hug a tree fer ter
keep fum drappin' on de groun'."

"Well, but what became of Brother Fox?" the little boy asked, after
waiting some time for Uncle Remus to proceed.

"Now, den, honey," said the old man, falling back upon his dignity, "hit
e'en about takes all my spar' time fer ter keep up wid you en Brer
Rabbit, let 'lone keepin' up wid Brer Fox. Ole Brer Rabbit tuck'n tuck
keer hisse'f, en now let Brer Fox take keer hisse'f."

"I say de word!" exclaimed Aunt Tempy.


FOOTNOTES:

[32] Forehead.

[33] During slavery, the ringing of the nine-o'clock bell in the towns
and villages at night was the signal for all negroes to retire to their
quarters.




XXXII

BRER 'POSSUM GETS IN TROUBLE


When Uncle Remus began his story of Billy Malone and Miss Janey, Daddy
Jack sat perfectly quiet. His eyes were shut, and he seemed to be
dozing; but, as the story proceeded, he grew more and more restless.
Several times he was upon the point of interrupting Uncle Remus, but he
restrained himself. He raised his hands to a level with his chin, and
beat the ends of his fingers gently together, apparently keeping time to
his own thoughts. But his impatience exhausted itself, and when Uncle
Remus had concluded, the old African was as quiet as ever. When Brother
Fox was left so unceremoniously to his fate, Daddy Jack straightened
himself temporarily and said:--

"Me yent bin-a yerry da tale so. 'E nice, fer true, 'e mek larf come;
oona no bin-a yerry um lak me."

"No," said Uncle Remus, with grave affability, "I 'speck not. One man,
one tale; 'n'er man, 'n'er tale. Folks tell um diffunt. I boun' yo' way
de bes', Brer Jack. Out wid it--en we ull set up yer, en hark at you en
laff wid you plum twel de chick'ns crow."

Daddy Jack needed no other invitation. He clasped his knee in his hands
and began:--

"Dey is bin lif one Man wut plan' some pea in 'e geerden. 'E plan' some
pea, but 'e mek no pea; B'er Rabbit, 'e is fine um. 'E fine um un 'e eat
um. Man mek no pea, B'er Rabbit 'e 'stroy um so. 'E plan' dem pea; dey
do grow, un 'e go off. 'E come bahk; pea no dere. B'er Rabbit teer um up
un mek 'e cud wit' dem. So long tam, Man say 'e gwan ketch um, un 'e no
ketch um. Man go, B'er Rabbit come; Man come, B'er Rabbit go. Bumbye,
Man, 'e is git so mad, 'e y-eye bin-a come red; 'e crack 'e toof, 'e do
cuss. 'E oby 'e gwan ketch B'er Rabbit nohow. Dun 'e is bin-a call 'e
lilly gal. 'E talk, 'e tell 'im fer let B'er Rabbit go troo da geerden
gett. Lil gal say yasser. 'E talk, 'e tell 'im wun B'er Rabbit go troo
da gett, dun 'e mus' shed da gett, un no le'm come pas' no mo'. Lil gal
say yasser.

"Ole Man is bin-a gone 'bout 'e wuk; lil gal, 'e do lissun. B'er Rabbit,
'e come tippy-toe, tippy-toe; gone in da geerden; eat dem pea tel 'e
full up; eat tel he mos' git seeck wit' dem pea. Dun 'e start fer go
out; 'e fine da gett shed. 'E shek um, 'e no open; 'e push um, 'e no
open; 'e fair grunt, 'e push so hard, 'e no open. 'E bin-a call da lil
gal; e' say:--

"'Lil gal, lil gal! cum y-open da gett. 'T is hu't me feelin' fer fine
da gett shed lak dis.'

"Lil gal no talk nuttin'. B'er Rabbit say:--

"''T is-a bin hu't me feelin', lil gal! Come y-open da gett, lil gal,
less I teer um loose from da hinch.'

"Lil gal v'ice come bahk. 'E talk:

"'Daddy say mus'n'.'

"B'er Rabbit open 'e mout'. 'E say:--

"'See me long sha'p toof? 'E bite you troo un troo!'

"Lil gal skeer; 'e tu'n loose de gett un fly. B'er Rabbit _gone_! Ole
Man come bahk; 'e ahx 'bout B'er Rabbit. Lil gal say:--

"''E done gone, daddy. I shed da gett, I hol' um fas'. B'er Rabbit bin
show 'e toof; 'e gwan fer bite-a me troo un troo. I git skeer', daddy.'
Man ahx:--

"'How 'e gwin fer bite you troo un troo, wun 'e toof fix bite grass?
B'er Rabbit tell one big tale. 'E no kin bite-a you. Wun 'e come 'g'in,
you shed dem gett, you hol' um tight, you no le'm go pas' no mo'.' Lil
gal say yasser.

"Nex' day mawnin', Man go 'long 'bout 'e wuk. Lil gal, 'e play 'roun',
un 'e play 'roun'. B'er Rabbit, 'e is come tippy-tippy. 'E fine gett
open; 'e slip in da geerden. 'E chew dem pea, 'e gnyaw dem pea; 'e eat
tel dem pea tas'e bad. Dun 'e try fer go out; gett shed fas'. 'E no kin
git troo. 'E push, gett no open; 'e keek wit' um fut, gett no open; 'e
butt wit' um head, gett no open. Dun 'e holler:--

"'Lil gal, lil gal! come y-open da gett. 'E berry bad fer fool wit' ole
man lak me. I no kin hol' me feelin' down wun you is do lak dis. 'E
berry bad.'

"Lil gal hol' 'e head down; 'e no say nuttin'. B'er Rabbit say:--

"'Be shame, lil gal, fer do ole man lak dis. Me feelin' git wusser. Come
y-open de gett 'fo' I is teer um down.'

"Lil gal say: 'Daddy say mus'n'.'

"B'er Rabbit open 'e y-eye wide; 'e is look berry mad. 'E say:--

"'See me big y-eye? I pop dis y-eye stret at you, me kill-a you dead.
Come y-open da gett 'fo' me y-eye pop.'

"Lil gal skeer fer true. 'E loose de gett, 'e fair fly. B'er Rabbit done
_gone_! Lil gal daddy bahk. 'E ahx wey is B'er Rabbit. Lil gal say:--

"''E done gone, daddy. I hol' gett fas'; 'e is bin-a 'come berry mad. 'E
say he gwan pop 'e y-eye at me, shoot-a me dead.' Man say:--

"'B'er Rabbit tell-a too big tale. How 'e gwan shoot-a you wit' 'e
y-eye? 'E y-eye sem lak turrer folks y-eye. Wun 'e come some mo', you
shed dem gett, you hol' um fas'.' Lil gal say yasser.

"Nex' day mawnin', Man go, B'er Rabbit come. 'E is ma'ch in da gett un
eat-a dem pea tel 'e kin eat-a no mo'. 'E sta't out; gett shed. 'E no
kin come pas'. 'E shek, 'e push, 'e pull; gett shed. Dun 'e holler:--

"'Lil gal, lil gal! come y-open da gett. 'Tis berry bad fer treat you'
kin lak dis. Come y-open da gett, lil gal. 'Tis full me up wit' sorry
wun you do lak dis.'

"Lil gal, 'e no say nuttin'. B'er Rabbit say:--

"''E berry bad fer treat you' kin lak dis. Tu'n go da gett, lil gal.'
Lil gal say:--

"'How you is kin wit' me, B'er Rabbit?'

"'You' gran'daddy foller at' me nuncle wit' 'e dog. Da mek we is kin.
Come y-open da gett, lil gal.'"

"Dat ole Rabbit wuz a-talkin', mon!" exclaimed Aunt Tempy,
enthusiastically.

"Lil gal no say nuttin' 't all!" Daddy Jack went on, with renewed
animation. "Dun B'er Rabbit say:--

"'See me long, sha'p toof, lil gal? Me bite-a you troo un troo.' Lil gal
say:--

"'Me no skeer da toof. 'E bite nuttin' 'tall 'cep' 'e bite grass.' B'er
Rabbit say:--

"'See me big y-eye? I pop um at you, shoot-a you dead.' Lil gal say:--

"Me no skeer da y-eye. 'E sem lak turrer folks y-eye.' B'er Rabbit
say:--

"'Lil gal, you mek me 'come mad. I no lak fer hu't-a me kin. Look at me
ho'n! I run you troo un troo.'

"B'er Rabbit lif 'e two year up; 'e p'int um stret at da lil gal. Lil
gal 'come skeer da ho'n; 'e do tu'n go da gett; 'e fly fum dey-dey."

"Well, ef dat don't beat!" exclaimed Aunt Tempy, laughing as heartily as
the little boy. "Look at um one way, en Rabbit year does look lak sho'
nuff ho'ns."

"Lil gal tu'n go da gett," Daddy Jack continued; "B'er Rabbit _gone_!
Man come bahk; 'e ahx wey is B'er Rabbit. Lil gal cry; 'e say 'e skeer
B'er Rabbit ho'n. Man say 'e is hab no ho'n. Lil gal is stan' um down 'e
see ho'n. Man say da ho'n is nuttin' 't all but B'er Rabbit year wut 'e
yeddy wit'. 'E tell lil gal nex' tam B'er Rabbit come, 'e mus' shed da
gett; 'e mus' run fum dey-dey un leaf um shed. Lil gal say yasser.

"Man gone, B'er Rabbit come. 'E is go in da gett; 'e eat-a dem pea tel
'e tire'. 'E try fer go pas' da gett, gett shed. 'E call lil gal; lil
gal _gone_! 'E call, call, call; lil gal no yeddy. 'E try fer fine crack
in da palin'; no crack dey. 'E try fer jump over; de palin' too high.
'E 'come skeer; 'e is 'come so skeer 'e squot 'pun da groun'; 'e shek,
'e shiver.

"Man come bahk. 'E ahx wey B'er Rabbit. Lil gal say 'e in da geerden.
Man hug lil gal, 'e is lub um so. 'E go in da geerden; 'e fine B'er
Rabbit. 'E ketch um--'e ca' um off fer kill um; 'e mad fer true. Lil gal
come holler:--

"'Daddy, daddy! missus say run dere! 'E wan' you come stret dere!'

"Man tie B'er Rabbit in da bag; 'e hang um on tree lim'. 'E say:--

"'I gwan come bahk. I l'arn you fer mek cud wit' me green pea.'

"Man gone fer see 'e missus. Bumbye, B'er 'Possum is bin-a come pas'. 'E
look up, 'e ketch glimp' da bag 'pun da lim'. 'E say:--

"'Ki! Wut dis is bin-a hang in da bag 'pun da tree-lim'?' B'er Rabbit
say:--

"'Hush, B'er 'Possum! 'T is-a me. I bin-a lissen at dem sing in da
cloud.'

"B'er 'Possum lissen. 'E say:--

"'I no yed dem sing, B'er Rabbit.'

"'Hush, B'er 'Possum! How is I kin yeddy dem sing wun you is mek-a da
fuss dey-dey?'

"B'er 'Possum, 'e hoi' 'e mout' still, 'cep' 'e do grin. B'er Rabbit
say:--

"'I yed dem now! I yed dem now! B'er 'Possum, I wish you is yeddy dem
sing!'

"B'er 'Possum say 'e mout' water fer yeddy dem sing in da cloud. B'er
Rabbit, 'e say 'e is bin-a hab so long tarn 'quaintun wit' B'er 'Possum,
'e le'm yeddy dem sing. 'E say:--

"'I git fum da bag. I tu'n-a you in tel you is yeddy dem sing. Dun you
is git fum da bag, tel I do come bahk un 'joy mese'f.'

"B'er 'Possum, 'e do clam up da tree; 'e git dem bag, 'e bring um down.
'E tak off da string; 'e tu'n B'er Rabbit go. 'E crawl in un 'e quile
up. 'E say:--

"'I no yeddy dem sing, B'er Rabbit!'

"'Hi! wait tel da bag it tie, B'er 'Possum. You yed dem soon nuff!' 'E
wait.

"'I no yeddy dem sing, B'er Rabbit!'

"'Hi! wait tel I clam da tree, B'er 'Possum. You yed dem soon nuff!' 'E
wait.

"'I no yeddy dem sing, B'er Rabbit!'

"'Wait tel I fix um 'pun da lim', B'er 'Possum. You yed dem soon nuff!'
'E wait.

"B'er Rabbit clam down; 'e run 'way fum dey-dey; 'e hide in da bush
side. Man come bahk. 'E see da bag moof. B'er 'Possum say:--

"'I no yeddy dem sing. I wait fer yed um sing!'

"Man t'ink 'e B'er Rabbit in da bag. 'E say:--

"'Ah-yi-ee! I mekky you yed dem sing!'

"Man teka da bag fum da tree-lim'; 'e do slam da bag 'gin' da face da
ye't'. 'E tek-a 'e walkin'-cane, un 'e beat B'er 'Possum wut is do um no
ha'm tel 'e mos' kill um. Man t'ink B'er Rabbit mus' bin dead by dis. 'E
look in da bag; 'e 'tretch 'e y-eye big; 'e 'stonish'. B'er Rabbit, 'e
do come fum da bush side; 'e do holler, 'e do laff. 'E say:--

"'You no is ketch-a me! I t'ief you' green pea,--I t'ief um some mo',--I
t'ief um tel I dead!'

"Man, 'e 'come so mad, 'e is fling hatchet at B'er Rabbit un chop off 'e
tail."

At this moment Daddy Jack subsided. His head drooped forward, and he was
soon in the land of Nod. Uncle Remus sat gazing into the fireplace, as
though lost in reflection. Presently, he laughed softly to himself, and
said:--

"Dat's des 'bout de long en de short un it. Mr. Man clip off Brer Rabbit
tail wid de hatchet, en it bleed so free dat Brer Rabbit rush off ter
de cotton-patch en put some lint on it, en down ter dis day dat lint
mos' de fus' t'ing you see w'en Brer Rabbit jump out'n he bed en tell
you good-bye."

"But, Uncle Remus, what became of Brother 'Possum?"

Uncle Remus smacked his lips and looked wise.

"Don't talk 'bout Brer 'Possum, honey, ef dat ar Mr. Man wuz nice folks
lak we all is, en I ain't 'spute it, he tuck'n tuck Brer 'Possum en
bobbycue 'im, en I wish I had a great big piece right now. Dat I does."




XXXIII

WHY THE GUINEA-FOWLS ARE SPECKLED


One night, while the little boy was watching Uncle Remus broil a piece
of bacon on the coals, he heard a great commotion among the
guinea-fowls. The squawking and _pot-racking_ went on at such a rate
that the geese awoke and began to scream, and finally the dogs added
their various voices to the uproar. Uncle Remus leaned back in his chair
and listened.

"I 'speck may be dat's de patter-rollers gwine by," he said, after a
while. "But you can't put no 'pen'unce in dem ar Guinny-hins, 'kaze
dey'll wake up en holler ef dey year deyse'f sno'. Dey'll fool you,
sho'."

"They are mighty funny, anyhow," said the little boy.

"Dat's it!" exclaimed Uncle Remus. "Dey looks quare, en dey does quare.
Dey ain't do lak no yuther kinder chick'n, en dey ain't look lak no
yuther kinder chick'n. Yit folks tell me," the old man went on,
reflectively, "dat dey er heap mo' kuse lookin' now dan w'at dey use'
ter be. I year tell dat dey wuz one time w'en dey wuz all blue, 'stid er
havin' all dem ar teenchy little spots on um."

"Well, how did they get to be speckled, Uncle Remus?" asked the little
boy, seeing that the old man was disposed to leave the subject and
devote his attention to his broiling bacon.

Uncle Remus did not respond at once. He turned his meat over carefully,
watched it a little while, and then adroitly transferred it to the cover
of a tin bucket, which was made to answer the purpose of a plate. Then
he searched about in the embers until he found his ash-cake, and in a
little while his supper was ready to be eaten.

"I ain't begrudgin' nobody nothin'," said Uncle Remus, measuring the
victuals with his eye; "yit I'm monst'us glad Brer Jack ain't nowhar's
'roun', 'kaze dey ain't no tellin' de gawm dat ole nigger kin eat. He
look shaky, en he look dry up, en he ain't got no toof, yit w'ence he
set hisse'f down whar dey any vittles, he des nat'ally laps hit up. En
let 'lone dat, he ull wipe he mouf en look' roun' des lak he want mo'.
Time Miss Sally see dat ole nigger eat one meal er vittles, I boun' you
he hatter go back down de country. I ain't begrudgin' Brer Jack de
vittles," Uncle Remus went on, adopting a more conciliatory tone, "dat I
ain't, 'kaze folks is got ter eat; but, gentermens! you be 'stonish'
w'en you see Brer Jack 'pesterin' 'long er he dinner."

The little boy sat quiet awhile, and then reminded Uncle Remus of the
guinea-fowls.

"Tooby sho', honey, tooby sho'! W'at I doin' runnin' on dis-a-way 'bout
ole Brer Jack? W'at he done ter me? Yer I is gwine on 'bout ole Brer
Jack, en dem ar Guinny-hins out dar waitin'. Well, den, one day Sis Cow
wuz a-grazin' 'bout in de ole fiel' en lookin' atter her calf. De wedder
wuz kinder hot, en de calf, he tuck'n stan', he did, in he mammy
shadder, so he kin keep cool, en so dat one flip un he mammy tail kin
keep the flies off'n bofe un um. Atter w'ile, 'long come a drove er
Guinnies. De Guinnies, dey howdied, en Sis Cow, she howdied, en de
Guinnies, dey sorter picked 'roun' en sun deyse'f; en Sis Cow, she crap
de grass en ax um de news er de neighborhoods. Dey went on dis a-way
twel 't wa'n't long 'fo' dey year mighty kuse noise out dar t'er side
er de ole fiel'. De Guinnies, dey make great 'miration, des lak dey does
deze days, en ole Sis Cow fling up 'er head en look all 'roun'. She
ain't see nothin'.

"Atter w'ile dey year de kuse fuss 'g'in, en dey look 'roun', en bless
gracious! stan'in' right dar, 'twix' dem en sundown, wuz a great big
Lion!"

"A Lion, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy, in amazement.

"Des ez sho' ez you er settin' dar, honey,--a great big Lion. You better
b'leeve dey wuz a monst'us flutterment 'mungs de Guinnies, en ole Sis
Cow, she looked mighty skeer'd. De Lion love cow meat mos' better dan he
do any yuther kinder meat, en he shake he head en 'low ter hisse'f dat
he'll des about ketch ole Sis Cow en eat 'er up, en take en kyar de calf
ter he fambly.

"Den he tuck'n shuck he head, de Lion did, en make straight at Sis Cow.
De Guinnies dey run dis a-way, en dey run t'er way, en dey run all
'roun' en 'roun'; but ole Sis Cow, she des know she got ter stan' 'er
groun', en w'en she see de Lion makin' todes 'er, she des tuck'n drapt
'er head down en pawed de dirt. De Lion, he crope up, he did, en crope
'roun', watchin' fer good chance fer ter make a jump. He crope 'roun',
he did, but no diffunce which a-way he creep, dar wuz ole Sis Cow hawns
p'intin' right straight at 'im. Ole Sis Cow, she paw de dirt, she did,
en show de white er her eyes, en beller way down in 'er stomach.

"Dey went on dis a-way, dey did, twel bimeby de Guinnies, dey see dat
Sis Cow ain't so mighty skeer'd, en den dey 'gun ter take heart. Fus'
news you know, one un um sorter drap he wings en fuzzle up de fedders en
run out 'twix' Sis Cow en de Lion. W'en he get dar, he sorter dip down,
he did, en fling up dirt des lak you see um do in de ash-pile. Den he
tuck'n run back, he did, en time he git back, 'n'er one run out en raise
de dus' 'twix' Sis Cow en de Lion. Den 'n'er one, he run out en dip down
en shoo up de dus'; den 'n'er one run out en dip down, en 'n'er one en
yit 'n'er one, twel, bless gracious! time dey all run out en dip down
en raise de dus', de Lion wuz dat blin' twel he ain't kin see he han'
befo' 'im. Dis make 'im so mad dat he make a splunge at Sis Cow, en de
old lady, she kotch 'im on her hawns en got 'im down, en des nat'ally
to' intruls out."

"Did she kill the Lion, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy,
incredulously.

"Dat she did--dat she did! Yit 't ain't make 'er proud, 'kaze atter de
Lion done good en dead, she tuck en call up de Guinnies, she did, en she
'low, dey bin so quick fer ter he'p 'er out, dat she wanter pay um back.
De Guinnies, dey say, sezee:--

"'Don't bodder 'long er we all, Sis Cow,' sezee. 'You had yo' fun en we
all had ourn, en 'ceppin' dat ar blood en ha'r on yo' hawn,' sezee, 'dey
ain't none un us any de wuss off,' sezee.

"But ole Sis Cow, she stan' um down, she did, dat she got ter pay um
back, en den atter w'ile she ax um w'at dey lak bes'.

"One un um up en make answer dat w'at dey lak bes', Sis Cow, she can't
gi' um. Sis Cow, she up en 'low dat she dunno 'bout dat, en she ax um
w'at is it.

"Den de Guinnies, dey tuck'n huddle up, dey did, en hol' er confab wid
one er 'n'er, en w'iles dey er doin' dis, ole Sis Cow, she tuck'n fetch
a long breff, en den she call up 'er cud, en stood dar chawin' on it des
lak she ain't had no tribalation dat day.

"Bimeby one er de Guinnies step out fum de huddlement en make a bow en
'low dat dey all 'ud be mighty proud ef Sis Cow kin fix it some way so
dey can't be seed so fur thoo de woods, 'kaze dey look blue in de sun,
en dey look blue in de shade, en dey can't hide deyse'f nohow. Sis Cow,
she chaw on 'er cud, en shet 'er eyes, en study. She chaw en chaw, en
study en study. Bimeby she 'low:--

"'Go fetch me a pail!' Guinny-hin laff!

"'Law, Sis Cow! w'at de name er goodness you gwine do wid a pail?'

"'Go fetch me a pail!'

