saved one of the passengers, and her name was stricken from the list of
the dead, and added to that of the living.

I learned that the body of Mrs. Goodridge had been recovered, and that
friends on board of the steamer would take charge of it. There was
nothing more for me to do, and I fled, sick at heart, from the awful
spectacle. I went to a small hotel near the landing, and though I slept
heavily, awake or in my slumber, the scenes of death and woe I had
beheld still haunted my mind. I took an early breakfast, and then
endeavored to find a boat bound down the river. There was none in Cairo
that would start that day, and it might be several days before I could
obtain a passage. I could not think of prolonging the agonizing suspense
of our passenger on the raft, or of leaving the two females to the care
of so heavy a thinker as Sim Gwynn. If a squall or a sudden rise of the
river occurred, my assistant would be helpless; and if the raft broke
loose, he would not have wit enough to bring it up to the shore again.

I walked up and down the levee, thinking what I should do. I could not
charter a steamer, and there was no conveyance on the other side of the
Mississippi. While I was thus fretting at the delay, I came to a yard
where boats were kept for sale. Most of them were for the use of
steamers, and were far beyond my means; but I found a second-hand skiff,
which I purchased for ten dollars, including in the price a pair of good
oars. It would be a handy thing to have on the raft, and if I had had it
when I first saw poor Emily Goodridge in the water, I could have saved
her without any difficulty.

In this light boat I embarked at nine o'clock. The raft was ten or
twelve miles below Cairo; but the swift current would speed me on my way
with little labor at the oars. I pulled steadily, and with just power
enough to give me steerage-way; and when I reached the raft, I found I
had made the passage in little more than two hours.

"Hookie!" ejaculated Sim, with a stupid stare, as I ran the skiff up to
the raft.

"Catch the painter!" I called, throwing him the rope.

"I hain't seen no painter," he replied, staring around him, and letting
the rope run off the raft, and the skiff go adrift.

I pulled up to the raft again, and succeeded in making my deck hand
understand that he was to hold on to the rope attached to the boat.

"Where did you get that boat?"

"Catch hold, and haul it up," I replied; for I seldom found it
practicable to answer Sim's questions.

"Did you find this boat?" he asked when he had pulled it up on the
platform.

"No; how is the girl we saved?"

"Did you make this boat?"

"No; I bought it; gave ten dollars for it. How is the girl?"

"O, she's sick! Leastwise, she ain't very well, and didn't sleep much."

I did not suppose she had slept very well; for one with such a fearful
anxiety on her mind must have suffered intensely during the long night.
I hastened into the house, and found dear Flora making some tea for her
patient. I surmised that the poor child had also spent a sleepless
night, for she looked pale and ill herself, and I trembled for her
welfare, devoted and self-sacrificing as she was in the presence of the
heavy woe of her charge.

"How is Emily?" I asked.

"She is very sick, I fear," replied poor Flora, sadly, for she seemed to
make her patient's sufferings her own. "She has hardly closed her eyes
during the night."

"And you have not slept yourself, Flora."

"No, I have not. The poor girl has talked about her mother all night
long. What news do you bring, Buckland?"

"I hardly dare to speak it," I replied, in a whisper.

"It can be no worse that her fears. She is already reconciled to the
worst," added my sister, with a sympathetic tear.

"Flora," moaned Emily.

The devoted little nurse hastened to her patient. I had not the courage
to follow her, and face the torrent of woe which my news must carry to
her aching heart. Perhaps it was cowardly in me, but I could not help
it. I stood at the door and listened.

"Your brother has come. I heard his voice," said Emily, in a tone
convulsed with emotion.

"He has come, dear," replied Flora; and I heard her kiss the
grief-stricken maiden.

"You have no good news to tell me. I know you haven't," wailed the
sufferer. "I did not expect any. I knew she was--"

And then I heard her sob. She was calmer than I had anticipated, and I
ventured to go into the room. My heart was in my throat as I gazed upon
her pale face and hollow eyes. She wept bitterly, as I confirmed her
worst fears; and Flora, with her arm twined around the poor girl's neck,
wept with her, and frequently kissed her. As gently and tenderly as I
could I told her the sad truth, and assured her that kind friends had
taken charge of her mother's remains.

I left her with Flora then, for she was the best comforter. As I put on
my working clothes in the adjoining room, I heard my sweet sister
speaking to her the tenderest of pious consolations. She breathed the
name of Jesus in her ear, and pointed her to the Rock of Ages for hope,
for the joy which this world cannot give and cannot take away. Great
rough fellow as I was, I wept with them; for never had my heart been so
deeply touched before.

On the platform I found Sim, still employed in examining the skiff I had
purchased, apparently filled with astonishment that a little thing like
that had borne me safely down the river for ten miles. He wanted to ask
more questions about it; but I told him to cast off the fasts, and in a
few moments we were again borne on by the current of the Father of
Waters. The day was bright and pleasant, and a fresh wind from the
north-west was blowing. I hoisted the sail and trimmed it, and taking
my place at the steering oar, I brooded over the bitter lot of my
passenger. I pitied her, and loved her for her misfortunes.

As the raft continued on its way, I began to consider what should be
done with her. She was quite sick, and the rough house on the raft was
not a suitable place for her. But she had no friends nearer than New
Orleans. I asked myself whether I ought not to abandon the raft, and
take passage in a steamboat; but I had not money enough to pay the
passages of the party, and I was obliged to answer the question in the
negative. But I could pay Emily's fare, and place her in charge of the
officers of some boat. I concluded to adopt this course at the first
large town we reached, where a steamer would be likely to make a
landing.

The poor girl was unable to sit up during the day; indeed, she was so
ill that I began to be alarmed about her. After dinner, I insisted that
Flora should lie down on my bed, and obtain the rest she so much needed,
while I sat with the patient. My poor sister was all worn out, and she
slept till dark. Thanks to the gentle ministrations of Flora, Emily was
quite calm, but she could not sleep. She talked to me of her mother all
the time, and I became almost a woman myself in my efforts to console
her.

I told her that I proposed to send her to New Orleans by the first
steamer I could find which was bound there. To my surprise, she strongly
objected, declaring that Flora was an angel, and she would not leave
her. She said she was very comfortable on the raft, and that she was
much happier there than she should be in a steamboat; and she trembled
when she uttered the word. I told her that her father would be very
anxious about her, and she finally decided to write a letter to him,
informing him that she was in the hands of good friends, on her way
home.

Flora was much refreshed by the sleep she had obtained, and sat up till
midnight with Emily. I made a bed for her on the floor by the side of
her patient, and in the morning I found that both of them had rested
well during the latter part of the night. Sim and I kept the raft going
all night, as usual. The next day I mailed Emily's letter to her
father. The physical condition of the poor sufferer did not yet begin
to improve, and Flora was unremitting in her efforts to help her. I was
very much surprised to find that the devoted nurse did not sink under
her exertions. But the patient slept tolerably well at night, and I
relieved my sister during part of the day.

On the third day after the disaster, we passed Memphis; and I again
urged Emily to take a steamer for her destination. She consented; but I
found that she did so in order to save us the trouble she gave. When I
assured her that we had no desire to get rid of her, she insisted upon
completing the voyage on the raft. She could not bear to part with
Flora, who had been both nurse and comforter to her in her affliction.

I made a landing at Memphis, and procured everything I could think of
that would add to the comfort of Emily. She was very grateful to me, as
well as to Flora, and I am free to say that I found my greatest
happiness in caring for her and my sister; and all the more because they
were so devoted to each other.

Day after day went by; and our course continued past Vicksburg, Natchez,
Grand Gulf, Baton Rouge, till, on the thirteenth day from Cairo, and on
the twenty-third from Torrentville, we came in sight of the spires of
New Orleans.

The sun was just setting as we came abreast of the dense piles of
houses. When we reached a place favorable for landing, I ran the raft up
to the levee, and made it fast to a post.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE END OF THE VOYAGE.


For the week preceding the arrival of the raft, Emily Goodridge had been
improving in health, though she was still quite feeble. She sat up part
of the day, and spent an hour or two in the forenoon in the open air. As
we approached the city, the excitement of being so near home buoyed her
up, and seemed to give her an unnatural strength.

For my own part, I was in a whirl of excitement. The end of the voyage
was a tremendous event in itself; but, as I thought of the astonishment
of my brother when he should see Flora and me, and of the meeting
between Mr. Goodridge and his daughter, I could hardly contain myself.
The sights along the river, too, were sufficiently wonderful to keep my
eyes wide open, and my heart leaping. For the first time in my life I
saw a ship--hundreds of them, whose forest of masts and spars was as
strange to me as though I had been transported to the centre of the
Celestial Empire.

It seemed to me an age since I had left Torrentville; since, with
bounding bosom, I had guided the raft down the creek to the Wisconsin.
The events which had preceded our departure appeared to have occurred
years ago, and to be dwarfed into littleness by the lapse of time.
Captain Fishley, his wife, and Ham seemed almost like myths, so far
removed were they from me by distance and time. I had almost forgotten
that I had been charged with a base crime, and that I had fled to escape
unpleasant consequences.

There was the great city of New Orleans spread out before me; and there,
somewhere in the midst of its vast mass of heaving life, was my brother,
and Flora's brother. I knew not where to look for him. But my first duty
was to the poor girl, sick in body and sick at heart, who had voyaged
down the river with us; who had made us feel enough of Christ's spirit
to know that "it is more blessed to give than to receive."

Emily was in the chamber with Flora when Sim and I fastened the raft to
the post. My fellow-laborer had already indulged in unnumbered
"Hookies," and his eyes were set wide open by the wonders that
surrounded us. I left him to stare, and to be stared at by the idlers on
shore, and went into the house.

"Our journey is ended!" I exclaimed.

"And I am close to my father's house," added Emily, with convulsive
emotion.

As I looked into her pale face, I could not help fearing that she was
close to her Father's house in a higher sense than she meant the
words--close to that "house of many mansions, eternal in the heavens;"
for she seemed to have, in her weakness, but little hold upon this life.

"Where does your father live, Emily?" I asked.

"In Claiborne Street," she replied. "If you could get a carriage, I
would like to go there at once."

"Do you feel able to ride in the carriage?"

"O, yes--to go home."

I went ashore, and soon found a carriage. I need hardly say that Emily's
clothing was in very bad condition, though Flora had done what she
could to improve it. Fortunately, it was nearly dark, and her appearance
did not excite much attention. I could not permit her to go alone, and
she insisted that Flora should accompany her. I left Sim in charge of
the raft, with the promise to return soon. The carriage conveyed us to
the number in Claiborne Street indicated by Emily. It was an elegant
mansion, and I was abashed by the splendors that were presented to my
view as I entered.

The coming of Emily created a sensation among the servants; but her
father was not at home, though he was momentarily expected. Flora and I
were conducted to a magnificent parlor, whose splendors exceeded
anything of which I had ever dreamed. Emily went up stairs, to clothe
herself properly before her father came. The poor girl wept bitterly as
she entered the house which she had left three weeks before with her
mother. The torrent of grief was renewed as she gazed again upon the
familiar scenes which had always been so closely associated with the
dear one who was gone.

A mulatto servant-man came into the room where Flora and I were. He had
just greeted his young mistress, and his eyes were still filled with
tears.

"We have been expecting Miss Emily for several days," said he. "Her
father has suffered everything on her account."

"I am sorry she was delayed, but she would not leave my sister," I
replied.

"But how did she come? It was a very slow steamer," he added.

"It was not a steamer. Didn't she write to her father?"

"Yes; but she didn't say what she was coming in; only that she was with
very good friends, and should be home in a week or ten days."

"She came on a raft."

"On a raft!" exclaimed the man. "Miss Emily?"

"It was her own choice. I tried to have her take a steamer; but she
would not. But there was a house on the raft, and she had a good bed."

"Of course her father has felt very bad, and since the funeral he has
fretted a great deal about her."

"Since what funeral?" I asked.

"Her mother's. Poor Mrs. Goodridge was brought down from Cairo, packed
in ice, and the funeral was a week ago yesterday."

One of the many steamers which passed us on our way down the river had
brought the remains of Emily's mother, and they had already been
committed to their last resting-place.

The ringing of the door-bell called the servant from us. We heard the
heavy step of a man, as he went up stairs; but we did not witness the
first interview between Emily and her father. They had much to say, and
we did not see them for half an hour. When they entered the parlor
together, both of them were tolerably calm; but the traces of tears were
still visible in their eyes.

"Young man," said Mr. Goodridge, taking me by the hand, after Emily had
introduced Flora and me by name, "I am indebted to you for the life of
my child."

He wept, and could not utter what he evidently intended to say. My cheek
burned, for in my sympathy for the poor girl and her father I had quite
forgotten my hard swim after the disaster. I stammered some reply, and
did not even then know what I was saying.

"Under God, you saved her; and I shall bless you as long as I live for
the noble deed. It was hard to lose her who is gone; it would have been
doubly hard to lose both of them."

"O, I don't think anything of what I did," I replied. "My poor little
sister here has done a good deal more than I have for her."

Mr. Goodridge took the hand of Flora, and thanked her as he had thanked
me. I told him the story of our voyage down the river after Emily joined
us, as briefly as I could, giving my poor sister the credit for all her
careful and devoted nursing of the invalid.

"I must go now, sir," I added, when the narrative was finished.

"Indeed, you must not," said the grateful father, decidedly.

"I left Sim Gwynn on the raft. He is rather simple, and I am afraid
something will happen to him."

"Can't he leave the raft?"

"Not yet; my sister's clothes and other things are in the house."

He called the servant and ordered a carriage, saying he would go with me
himself to the raft, and employ a man to take charge of it. We drove to
the levee, where Mr. Goodridge sent for one of the porters in his
warehouse, who was ordered to sleep on board, and see that nothing was
stolen. Sim was directed to get into the carriage with us, and we went
back to the house of the merchant.

"Hookie!" almost screamed Sim, as we entered the elegant mansion.

"Shut up, Sim! Don't open your mouth again!" I whispered to him.

"Hookie!" replied he, in a suppressed tone.

"Well, Buckland," said our host, when we were seated in the parlor,--Sim
with his mouth open almost as wide as his eyes,--"I should like to know
something more about you. You have only told me what occurred after you
saved Emily. How happened you to be floating down the river on a raft?"

I told my story, from the day my father died, keeping back nothing
except the matter relating to Squire Fishley's infirmity.

"And your brother is here in New Orleans?" said he.

"Yes, sir. He has gone into business here."

"What is his name?"

"Clarence Bradford."

"Bradford! I thought your name was Buckland."

"John Buckland Bradford, sir."

"I know your brother very well. He is the junior partner in the firm of
Bent, La Motte, & Co. Their house is doing a fine business, too. I don't
think we can find your brother to-night, but we will in the morning."

"He will be very much astonished to see us here."

"No doubt of it; but your coming was a blessing to me. I have three
sons, but Emily is my only daughter, and the youngest child. She is my
pet. She is in delicate health, and I tremble at the thought of losing
her. You cannot understand what a service you have rendered me."

He was silent for several minutes, and I saw the tears starting in his
