"But my sons are neither boot-blacks nor newsboys, and I object to
hearing them use such words as 'screamer,' 'bully,' and 'buster.' In
fact, I fail to see the advantage of writing books about such people
unless it is done in a very different way. I cannot think they will help
to refine the ragamuffins if they read them, and I'm sure they can do no
good to the better class of boys, who through these books are introduced
to police courts, counterfeiters' dens, gambling houses, drinking
saloons, and all sorts of low life."

"Some of them are about first-rate boys, mother; and they go to sea and
study, and sail round the world, having great larks all the way."

"I have read about them, Geordie, and though they are better than the
others, I am not satisfied with these optical delusions, as I call
them. Now, I put it to you, boys, is it natural for lads from fifteen
to eighteen to command ships, defeat pirates, outwit smugglers, and
so cover themselves with glory, that Admiral Farragut invites them to
dinner, saying, 'Noble boy, you are an honour to your country!' Or,
if the hero is in the army, he has hair-breadth escapes and adventures
enough in one small volume to turn his hair white, and in the end
he goes to Washington at the express desire of the President or
Commander-in-chief to be promoted to no end of stars and bars. Even if
the hero is merely an honest boy trying to get his living, he is not
permitted to do so in a natural way, by hard work and years of patient
effort, but is suddenly adopted by a millionaire whose pocket-book he
has returned; or a rich uncle appears from sea just in the nick of time;
or the remarkable boy earns a few dollars, speculates in pea-nuts or
neckties, and grows rich so rapidly that Sinbad in the diamond valley is
a pauper compared to him. Isn't it so, boys?"

"Well, the fellows in these books are mighty lucky, and very smart, I
must say," answered Will, surveying an illustration on the open page
before him, where a small but virtuous youth is upsetting a tipsy giant
in a bar-room, and under it the elegant inscription, "Dick Dauntless
punches the head of Sam Soaker."

"It gives boys such wrong ideas of life and business; shows them so
much evil and vulgarity that they need not know about, and makes the
one success worth having a fortune, a lord's daughter, or some worldly
honour, often not worth the time it takes to win. It does seem to me
that some one might write stories that should be lively, natural and
helpful tales in which the English should be good, the morals pure, and
the characters such as we can love in spite of the faults that all may
have. I can't bear to see such crowds of eager little fellows at the
libraries reading such trash; weak, when it is not wicked, and totally
unfit to feed the hungry minds that feast on it for want of something
better. There! my lecture is done; now I should like to hear what you
gentlemen have to say," and Aunt Jessie subsided with a pretty flush on
the face that was full of motherly anxiety for her boys.

"Tom Brown just suits mother, and me too, so I wish Mr. Hughes would
write another story as good," said Archie.

"You don't find things of this sort in Tom Brown; yet these books are
all in the Sunday-school libraries" and Mrs. Jessie read the following
paragraph from the book she had taken from Will's hand,

"'In this place we saw a tooth of John the Baptist. Ben said he could
see locust and wild honey sticking to it. I couldn't. Perhaps John used
a piece of the true cross for a tooth-pick.'"

"A larky sort of a boy says that, Mum, and we skip the parts where they
describe what they saw in the different countries," cried Will.

"And those descriptions, taken mostly from guidebooks, I fancy, are the
only parts of any real worth. The scrapes of the bad boys make up the
rest of the story, and it is for those you read these books, I think,"
answered his mother, stroking back the hair off the honest little face
that looked rather abashed at this true statement of the case.

"Anyway, mother, the ship part is useful, for we learn how to sail
her, and by and by that will all come handy when we go to sea," put in
Geordie.

"Indeed, then you can explain this manoeuvre to me, of course," and Mrs.
Jessie read from another page the following nautical paragraph,

"The wind is south-south-west, and we can have her up four points closer
to the wind, and still be six points off the wind. As she luffs up we
shall man the fore and main sheets, slack on the weather, and haul on
the lee braces."

"I guess I could, if I wasn't afraid of uncle. He knows so much
more than I do, he'd laugh," began Geordie, evidently puzzled by the
question.

"Ho, you know you can't, so why make believe? We don't understand half
of the sea lingo, Mum, and I dare say it's all wrong," cried Will,
suddenly going over to the enemy, to Geordie's great disgust.

"I do wish the boys wouldn't talk to me as if I was a ship," said Rose,
bringing forward a private grievance. "Coming home from church this
morning, the wind blew me about, and Will called out, right in the
street, 'Brail up the foresail, and take in the flying-jib, that will
ease her.'"

The boys shouted at the plaintive tone in which Rose repeated the words
that offended her, and Will vainly endeavoured to explain that he only
meant to tell her to wrap her cloak closer, and tie a veil over the
tempest-tossed feathers in her hat.

"To tell the truth, if the boys must have slang, I can bear the 'sea
lingo,' as Will calls it, better than the other. It afflicts me less to
hear my sons talk about 'brailing up the foresail' than doing as they
'darn please,' and 'cut your cable' is decidedly preferable to 'let her
rip.' I once made a rule that I would have no slang in the house. I give
it up now, for I cannot keep it; but I will not have rubbishy books; so,
Archie, please send these two after your cigars."

Mrs. Jessie held both the small boys fast with an arm round each neck,
and when she took this base advantage of them they could only
squirm with dismay. "Yes, right behind the back log," she continued,
energetically. "There, my hearties (you like sea slang, so I'll give
you a bit) now, I want you to promise not to read any more stuff for a
month, and I'll agree to supply you with wholesome fare."

"Oh, mother, not a single one?" cried Will.

"Couldn't we just finish those?" pleaded Geordie.

"The boys threw away half-smoked cigars; and your books must go after
them. Surely you would not be outdone by the 'old fellows,' as you call
them, or be less obedient to little Mum than they were to Rose."

"Course not! Come on, Geordie," and Will took the vow like a hero. His
brother sighed and obeyed, but privately resolved to finish his story
the minute the month was over.

"You have laid out a hard task for yourself, Jessie, in trying to
provide good reading for boys who have been living on sensation stories.
It will be like going from raspberry tarts to plain bread and butter;
but you will probably save them from a bilious fever," said Dr. Alec,
much amused at the proceedings.

"I remember hearing grandpa say that a love for good books was one
of the best safeguards a man could have," began Archie, staring
thoughtfully at the fine library before him.

"Yes, but there's no time to read nowadays; a fellow has to keep
scratching round to make money or he's nobody," cut in Charlie, trying
to look worldly-wise.

"This love of money is the curse of America, and for the sake of it men
will sell honour and honesty, till we don't know whom to trust, and it
is only a genius like Agassiz who dares to say, 'I cannot waste my time
in getting rich,'" said Mrs. Jessie sadly.

"Do you want us to be poor, mother?" asked Archie, wondering.

"No, dear, and you never need be, while you can use your hands; but I am
afraid of this thirst for wealth, and the temptations it brings. O, my
boys! I tremble for the time when I must let you go, because I think it
would break my heart to have you fail as so many fail. It would be far
easier to see you dead if it could be said of you as of Sumner 'No man
dared offer him a bribe.'"

Mrs. Jessie was so earnest in her motherly anxiety that her voice
faltered over the last words, and she hugged the yellow heads closer in
her arms, as if she feared to let them leave that safe harbour for the
great sea where so many little boats go down. The younger lads nestled
closer to her, and Archie said, in his quiet, resolute way,

"I cannot promise to be an Agassiz or a Sumner, mother; but I do promise
to be an honest man, please God."

"Then I'm satisfied!" and holding fast the hand he gave her, she sealed
his promise with a kiss that had all a mother's hope and faith in it.

"I don't see how they ever can be bad, she is so fond and proud of
them," whispered Rose, quite touched by the little scene.

"You must help her make them what they should be. You have begun
already, and when I see those rings where they are, my girl is prettier
in my sight than if the biggest diamonds that ever twinkled shone in her
ears," answered Dr. Alec, looking at her with approving eyes.

"I'm so glad you think I can do anything, for I perfectly ache to be
useful; everyone is so good to me, especially Aunt Jessie."

"I think you are in a fair way to pay your debts, Rosy, for when girls
give up their little vanities, and boys their small vices, and try to
strengthen each other in well-doing, matters are going as they ought.
Work away, my dear, and help their mother keep these sons fit friends
for an innocent creature like yourself; they will be the manlier men for
it, I can assure you."



Chapter 18--Fashion and Physiology

"Please, sir, I guess you'd better step up right away, or it will be too
late, for I heard Miss Rose say she knew you wouldn't like it, and she'd
never dare to let you see her."

Phebe said this as she popped her head into the study, where Dr. Alec
sat reading a new book.

"They are at it, are they?" he said, looking up quickly, and giving
himself a shake, as if ready for a battle of some sort.

"Yes, sir, as hard as they can talk, and Miss Rose don't seem to know
what to do, for the things are ever so stylish, and she looks elegant in
'em; though I like her best in the old ones," answered Phebe.

"You are a girl of sense. I'll settle matters for Rosy, and you'll lend
a hand. Is everything ready in her room, and are you sure you understand
how they go?"

"Oh, yes, sir; but they are so funny! I know Miss Rose will think it's a
joke," and Phebe laughed as if something tickled her immensely.

"Never mind what she thinks so long as she obeys. Tell her to do it for
my sake, and she will find it the best joke she ever saw. I expect to
have a tough time of it, but we'll win yet," said the Doctor, as he
marched upstairs with the book in his hand, and an odd smile on his
face.

There was such a clatter of tongues in the sewing-room that no one heard
his tap at the door, so he pushed it open and took an observation. Aunt
Plenty, Aunt Clara, and Aunt Jessie were all absorbed in gazing at Rose,
who slowly revolved between them and the great mirror, in a full winter
costume of the latest fashion.

"Bless my heart! worse even than I expected," thought the Doctor, with
an inward groan, for, to his benighted eyes, the girl looked like a
trussed fowl, and the fine new dress had neither grace, beauty, nor
fitness to recommend it.

The suit was of two peculiar shades of blue, so arranged that patches of
light and dark distracted the eye. The upper skirt was tied so lightly
back that it was impossible to take a long step, and the under one
was so loaded with plaited frills that it "wobbled" no other word
will express it ungracefully, both fore and aft. A bunch of folds was
gathered up just below the waist behind, and a great bow rode a-top. A
small jacket of the same material was adorned with a high ruff at the
back, and laid well open over the breast, to display some lace and a
locket. Heavy fringes, bows, puffs, ruffles, and revers finished off the
dress, making one's head ache to think of the amount of work wasted,
for not a single graceful line struck the eye, and the beauty of the
material was quite lost in the profusion of ornament.

A high velvet hat, audaciously turned up in front, with a bunch of pink
roses and a sweeping plume, was cocked over one ear, and, with her curls
braided into a club at the back of her neck, Rose's head looked more
like that of a dashing young cavalier than a modest little girl's.
High-heeled boots tilted her well forward, a tiny muff pinioned her
arms, and a spotted veil, tied so closely over her face that her
eyelashes were rumpled by it, gave the last touch of absurdity to her
appearance.

"Now she looks like other girls, and as I like to see her," Mrs. Clara
was saying, with an air of great satisfaction.

"She does look like a fashionable young lady, but somehow I miss my
little Rose, for children dressed like children in my day," answered
Aunt Plenty, peering through her glasses with a troubled look, for
she could not imagine the creature before her ever sitting in her lap,
running to wait upon her, or making the house gay with a child's blithe
presence.

"Things have changed since your day, Aunt, and it takes time to get used
to new ways. But you, Jessie, surely like this costume better than the
dowdy things Rose has been wearing all summer. Now, be honest, and own
you do," said Mrs. Clara, bent on being praised for her work.

"Well, dear to be quite honest, then, I think it is frightful," answered
Mrs. Jessie, with a candour that caused revolving Rose to stop in
dismay.

"Hear, hear," cried a deep voice, and with a general start the ladies
became aware that the enemy was among them.

Rose blushed up to her hat brim, and stood, looking, as she felt, like a
fool, while Mrs. Clara hastened to explain.

"Of course, I don't expect you to like it, Alec, but I don't consider
you a judge of what is proper and becoming for a young lady. Therefore,
I have taken the liberty of providing a pretty street suit for Rose.
She need not wear it if you object, for I know we promised to let you do
what you liked with the poor dear for a year."

"It is a street costume, is it?" asked the Doctor, mildly. "Do you know,
I never should have guessed that it was meant for winter weather and
brisk locomotion. Take a turn, Rosy, and let me see all its beauties and
advantages."

Rose tried to walk off with her usual free tread, but the under-skirt
got in her way, the over-skirt was so tight she could not take a long
step, and her boots made it impossible to carry herself perfectly erect.

"I haven't got used to it yet," she said, petulantly, kicking at her
train, as she turned to toddle back again.

"Suppose a mad dog or a runaway horse was after you, could you get out
of the way without upsetting, Colonel," asked the Doctor, with a twinkle
in the eyes that were fixed on the rakish hat.

"Don't think I could, but I'll try," and Rose made a rush across the
room. Her boot-heels caught on a rug, several strings broke, her hat
tipped over her eyes, and she plunged promiscuously into a chair, where
she sat laughing so infectiously that all but Mrs. Clara joined in her
mirth.

"I should say that a walking suit in which one could not walk, and a
winter suit which exposes the throat, head, and feet to cold and damp,
was rather a failure, Clara, especially as it has no beauty to reconcile
one to its utter unfitness," said Dr. Alec, as he helped Rose undo her
veil, adding, in a low tone, "Nice thing for the eyes; you'll soon see
spots when it's off as well as when it's on, and, by and by, be a case
for an oculist."

"No beauty!" cried Mrs. Clara, warmly, "Now, that is just a man's
blindness. This is the best of silk and camel's hair, real ostrich
feathers, and an expensive ermine muff. What could be in better taste,
or more proper for a young girl?"

"I'll shew you, if Rose will go to her room and oblige me by putting on
what she finds there," answered the Doctor, with unexpected readiness.

"Alec, if it is a Bloomer, I shall protest. I've been expecting it, but
I know I cannot bear to see that pretty child sacrificed to your wild
ideas of health. Tell me it isn't a Bloomer!" and Mrs. Clara clasped her
hands imploringly.

"It is not."

"Thank Heaven!" and she resigned herself with a sigh of relief, adding
plaintively, "I did hope you'd accept my suit, for poor Rose has been
afflicted with frightful clothes long enough to spoil the taste of any
girl."

"You talk of my afflicting the child, and then make a helpless guy like
that of her!" answered the Doctor, pointing to the little fashion plate
that was scuttling out of sight as fast as it could go.

He closed the door with a shrug, but before anyone could speak, his
quick eye fell upon an object which caused him to frown, and demand in
an indignant tone,

"After all I have said, were you really going to tempt my girl with
those abominable things?"

"I thought we put them away when she wouldn't wear them," murmured Mrs.
Clara, whisking a little pair of corsets out of sight with guilty haste.
"I only brought them to try, for Rose is growing stout, and will have
no figure if it is not attended to soon," she added, with an air of calm
conviction that roused the Doctor still more, for this was one of his
especial abominations.

"Growing stout! Yes, thank Heaven, she is, and shall continue to do it,
for Nature knows how to mould a woman better than any corset-maker,
and I won't have her interfered with. My dear Clara, have you lost your
senses that you can for a moment dream of putting a growing girl into an
instrument of torture like this?" and with a sudden gesture he plucked
forth the offending corsets from under the sofa cushion, and held them
out with the expression one would wear on beholding the thumbscrews or
the rack of ancient times.

"Don't be absurd, Alec. There is no torture about it, for tight lacing
is out of fashion, and we have nice, sensible things nowadays. Everyone
wears them; even babies have stiffened waists to support their weak
little backs," began Mrs. Clara, rushing to the defence of the pet
delusion of most women.

"I know it, and so the poor little souls have weak backs all their days,
as their mothers had before them. It is vain to argue the matter, and I
won't try, but I wish to state, once for all, that if I ever see a pair
of corsets near Rose, I'll put them in the fire, and you may send the
bill to me."

As he spoke the corsets were on their way to destruction, but Mrs.
Jessie caught his arm, exclaiming merrily, "Don't burn them, for mercy
sake, Alec; they are full of whalebones, and will make a dreadful odour.
Give them to me. I'll see that they do no harm."

"Whalebones, indeed! A regular fence of them, and metal gate-posts in
front. As if our own bones were not enough, if we'd give them a
chance to do their duty," growled the Doctor, yielding up the bone
of contention with a last shake of contempt. Then his face cleared
suddenly, and he held up his finger, saying, with a smile, "Hear those
girls laugh; cramped lungs could not make hearty music like that."

Peals of laughter issued from Rose's room, and smiles involuntarily
touched the lips of those who listened to the happy sound.

"Some new prank of yours, Alec?" asked Aunt Plenty, indulgently, for she
had come to believe in most of her nephew's odd notions, because they
seemed to work so well.

"Yes, ma'am, my last, and I hope you will like it. I discovered what
Clara was at, and got my rival suit ready for to-day. I'm not going to
'afflict' Rose, but let her choose, and if I'm not entirely mistaken,
she will like my rig best. While we wait I'll explain, and then you will
appreciate the general effect better. I got hold of this little book,
and was struck with its good sense and good taste, for it suggests a
way to clothe women both healthfully and handsomely, and that is a great
point. It begins at the foundations, as you will see if you will look
at these pictures, and I should think women would rejoice at this
lightening of their burdens."

As he spoke, the Doctor laid the book before Aunt Plenty, who obediently
brought her spectacles to bear upon the illustrations, and after a long
look exclaimed, with a scandalised face,

"Mercy on us, these things are like the night-drawers Jamie wears! You
don't mean to say you want Rose to come out in this costume? It's not
proper, and I won't consent to it!"

"I do mean it, and I'm sure my sensible aunt will consent when she
understands that these well I'll call them by an Indian name, and say
pajamas are for underwear, and Rose can have as pretty frocks as she
likes outside. These two suits of flannel, each in one piece from head
to foot, with a skirt or so hung on this easily-fitting waist, will
keep the child warm without burdening her with belts, and gathers, and
buckles, and bunches round the waist, and leave free the muscles that
need plenty of room to work in. She shall never have the back-ache if I
can help it, nor the long list of ills you dear women think you cannot
escape."

"I don't consider it modest, and I'm sure Rose will be shocked at it,"
began Mrs. Clara, but stopped suddenly, as Rose appeared in the doorway,
not looking shocked a bit.

"Come on, my hygienic model, and let us see you," said her uncle, with
an approving glance, as she walked in, looking so mischievously merry,
that it was evident she enjoyed the joke.

"Well, I don't see anything remarkable. That is a neat, plain suit; the
materials are good, and it's not unbecoming, if you want her to look
like a little school-girl; but it has not a particle of style, and no
one would ever give it a second glance," said Mrs. Clara, feeling that
her last remark condemned the whole thing.

