and imagining the gay girls inside, going to party, opera, or play, till
Mrs. Dodd's hop pillow might as well have been stuffed with nettles, for
any sleep it brought, or any use it was, except to catch and hide the
tears that dropped on it when Polly's heart was very full.

Another thorn that wounded our Polly in her first attempt to make her
way through the thicket that always bars a woman's progress, was the
discovery that working for a living shuts a good many doors in one's
face even in democratic America. As Fanny's guest she had been, in spite
of poverty, kindly received wherever her friend took her, both as child
and woman. Now, things were changed; the kindly people patronized, the
careless forgot all about her, and even Fanny, with all her affection,
felt that Polly the music teacher would not be welcome in many places
where Polly the young lady had been accepted as "Miss Shaw's friend."

Some of the girls still nodded amiably, but never invited her to visit
them; others merely dropped their eyelids, and went by without speaking,
while a good many ignored her as entirely as if she had been invisible.
These things hurt Polly more than she would confess, for at home every
one worked, and every one was respected for it. She tried not to care,
but girls feel little slights keenly, and more than once Polly was
severely tempted to give up her plan, and run away to the safe shelter
at home.

Fanny never failed to ask her to every sort of festivity in the Shaw
mansion; but after a few trials, Polly firmly declined everything but
informal visits when the family were alone. She soon found that even
the new black silk was n't fine enough for Fanny's smallest party, and,
after receiving a few of the expressive glances by which women convey
their opinion of their neighbor's toilet, and overhearing a joke or two
"about that inevitable dress," and "the little blackbird," Polly folded
away the once treasured frock, saying, with a choke in her voice: "I
'll wear it for Will, he likes it, and clothes can't change his love for
me."

I am afraid the wholesome sweetness of Polly's nature was getting a
little soured by these troubles; but before lasting harm was done, she
received, from an unexpected source, some of the real help which teaches
young people how to bear these small crosses, by showing them the
heavier ones they have escaped, and by giving them an idea of the higher
pleasures one may earn in the good, old-fashioned ways that keep hearts
sweet, heads sane, hands busy.

Everybody has their days of misfortune like little Rosamond, and Polly
was beginning to think she had more than her share. One of these ended
in a way which influenced her whole life, and so we will record it. It
began early; for the hard-hearted little grate would n't behave itself
till she had used up a ruinous quantity of kindlings. Then she scalded
poor Puttel by upsetting her coffee-pot; and instead of a leisurely,
cosy meal, had to hurry away uncomfortably, for everything went wrong
even to the coming off of both bonnet strings in the last dreadful
scramble. Being late, she of course forgot her music, and hurrying back
for it, fell into a puddle, which capped the climax of her despair.

Such a trying morning as that was! Polly felt out of tune herself, and
all the pianos seemed to need a tuner as much as she did. The pupils
were unusually stupid, and two of them announced that their mamma was
going to take them to the South, whither she was suddenly called. This
was a blow, for they had just begun, and Polly had n't the face to send
in a bill for a whole quarter, though her plans and calculations were
sadly disturbed by the failure of that sum.

Trudging home to dinner, tired and disappointed, poor Polly received
another blow, which hurt her more than the loss of all her pupils. As
she went hurrying along with a big music book in one hand and a paper
bag of rolls for tea in the other, she saw Tom and Trix coming. As she
watched them while they slowly approached, looking so gay and handsome
and happy, it seemed to Polly as if all the sunshine and good walking
was on their side of the street, all the wintry wind and mud on hers.
Longing to see a friendly face and receive a kind word, she crossed
over, meaning to nod and smile at least. Trix saw her first, and
suddenly became absorbed in the distant horizon. Tom apparently did not
see her, for his eyes were fixed on a fine horse just prancing by.
Polly thought that he had seen her, and approached with a curious little
flutter at her heart, for if Tom cut her she felt that her cup would be
full.

On they came, Trix intent on the view, Tom staring at the handsome
horse, and Polly, with red checks, expectant eyes, and the brown bundle,
in full sight. One dreadful minute as they came parallel, and no one
spoke or bowed, then it was all over, and Polly went on, feeling as if
some one had slapped her in the face. "She would n't have believed it
of Tom; it was all the doings of that horrid Trix; well, she would n't
trouble him any more, if he was such a snob as to be ashamed of her just
because she carried bundles and worked for her bread." She clutched the
paper bag fiercely as she said this to herself, then her eyes filled,
and her lips trembled, as she added, "How could he do it, before her,
too?"

Now Tom was quite guiltless of this offence, and had always nodded to
Polly when they met; but it so happened he had always been alone till
now, and that was why it cut so deeply, especially as Polly never had
approved of Trix. Before she could clear her eyes or steady her face,
a gentleman met her, lifted his hat, smiled, and said pleasantly, "Good
morning, Miss Polly, I'm glad to meet you." Then, with a sudden change
of voice and manner, he added, "I beg pardon is anything the matter can
I be of service?"

It was very awkward, but it could n't be helped, and all Polly could do
was to tell the truth and make the best of it.

"It's very silly, but it hurts me to be cut by my old friends. I shall
get used to it presently, I dare say."

Mr. Sydney glanced back, recognized the couple behind them, and
turned round with a disgusted expression. Polly was fumbling for her
handkerchief, and without a word he took both book and bundle from her,
a little bit of kindness that meant a good deal just then. Polly felt
it, and it did her good; hastily wiping the traitorous eyes, she laughed
and said cheerfully, "There, I'm all right again; thank you, don't
trouble yourself with my parcels."

"No trouble, I assure you, and this book reminds me of what I was about
to say. Have you an hour to spare for my little niece? Her mother wants
her to begin, and desired me to make the inquiry."

"Did she, really?" and Polly looked up at him, as if she suspected him
of inventing the whole thing, out of kindness.

Mr. Sydney smiled, and taking a note from his pocket, presented it,
saying, with a reproachful look, "Behold the proof of my truth, and
never doubt again."

Polly begged pardon, read the note from the little girl's mother, which
was to have been left at her room if she was absent, and gave the
bearer a very grateful look as she accepted this welcome addition to her
pupils. Well pleased at the success of his mission, Sydney artfully led
the conversation to music, and for a time Polly forgot her woes, talking
enthusiastically on her favorite theme. As she reclaimed her book and
bag, at her own door, she said, in her honest way, "Thank you very much
for trying to make me forget my foolish little troubles."

"Then let me say one thing more; though appearances are against him,
I don't believe Tom Shaw saw you. Miss Trix is equal to that sort of
thing, but it is n't like Tom, for with all his foppery he is a good
fellow at heart."

As Mr. Sydney said this, Polly held out her hand with a hearty "Thank
you for that." The young man shook the little hand in the gray woollen
glove, gave her exactly the same bow which he did the Honorable Mrs.
Davenport, and went away, leaving Polly to walk up stairs and address
Puttel with the peculiar remark, "You are a true gentleman! so kind
to say that about Tom. I'll think it's so, anyway; and won't I teach
Minnie in my very best style!"

Puttel purred, Nick chirped approvingly, and Polly ate her dinner with
a better appetite than she had expected. But at the bottom of her heart
there was a sore spot still, and the afternoon lessons dragged dismally.
It was dusk when she got home, and as she sat in the firelight eating
her bread and milk, several tears bedewed the little rolls, and even the
home honey had a bitter taste.

"Now this won't do," she broke out all at once; "this is silly and
wicked, and can't be allowed. I'll try the old plan and put myself
right by doing some little kindness to somebody. Now what shall it be?
O, I know! Fan is going to a party to-night; I'll run up and help her
dress; she likes to have me, and I enjoy seeing the pretty things. Yes,
and I'll take her two or three clusters of my daphne, it's so sweet."

Up got Polly, and taking her little posy, trotted away to the Shaws',
determined to be happy and contented in spite of Trix and hard work.

She found Fanny enduring torment under the hands of the hair-dresser,
who was doing his best to spoil her hair, and distort her head with
a mass of curls, braids, frizzles, and puffs; for though I discreetly
refrain from any particular description, still, judging from the present
fashions, I think one may venture to predict that six years hence they
would be something frightful.

"How kind of you, Polly; I was just wishing you were here to arrange my
flowers. These lovely daphnes will give odor to my camellias, and you
were a dear to bring them. There's my dress; how do you like it?" said
Fanny, hardly daring to lift her eyes from under the yellow tower on her
head.

"It's regularly splendid; but how do you ever get into it?" answered
Polly, surveying with girlish interest the cloud of pink and white lace
that lay upon the bed.

"It's fearfully and wonderfully made, but distractingly becoming, as
you shall see. Trix thinks I'm going to wear blue, so she has got a
green one, and told Belle it would spoil the effect of mine, as we are
much together, of course. Was n't that sweet of her? Belle came and told
me in, time, and I just got pink, so my amiable sister, that is to be,
won't succeed in her pretty little plot."

"I guess she has been reading the life of Josephine. You know she made
a pretty lady, of whom she was jealous, sit beside her on a green sofa,
which set off her own white dress and spoilt the blue one of her guest,"
answered Polly, busy with the flowers.

"Trix never reads anything; you are the one to pick up clever little
stories. I'll remember and use this one. Am I done? Yes, that is
charming, is n't it, Polly?" and Fan rose to inspect the success of
Monsieur's long labor.

"You know I don't appreciate a stylish coiffure as I ought, so I like
your hair in the old way best. But this is'the thing,' I suppose, and
not a word must be said."

"Of course it is. Why, child, I have frizzed and burnt my hair so that I
look like an old maniac with it in its natural state, and have to repair
damages as well as I can. Now put the flowers just here," and Fanny laid
a pink camellia in a nest of fuzz, and stuck a spray of daphne straight
up at the back of her head.

"O, Fan, don't, it looks horridly so!" cried Polly, longing to add a
little beauty to her friend's sallow face by a graceful adjustment of
the flowers.

"Can't help it, that's the way, and so it must be," answered Fan,
planting another sprig half-way up the tower.

Polly groaned and offered no more suggestions as the work went on; but
when Fan was finished from top to toe, she admired all she honestly
could, and tried to keep her thoughts to herself. But her frank face
betrayed her, for Fanny turned on her suddenly, saying, "You may as
well free your mind, Polly, for I see by your eyes that something don't
suit."

"I was only thinking of what grandma once said, that modesty had gone
out of fashion," answered Polly, glancing at the waist of her friend's
dress, which consisted of a belt, a bit of lace, and a pair of shoulder
straps.

Fanny laughed good-naturedly, saying, as she clasped her necklace, "If I
had such shoulders as yours, I should n't care what the fashion was. Now
don't preach, but put my cloak on nicely, and come along, for I'm to
meet Tom and Trix, and promised to be there early."

Polly was to be left at home after depositing Fan at Belle's.

"I feel as if I was going myself," she said, as they rolled along.

"I wish you were, and you would be, Polly, if you weren't such a
resolute thing. I've teased, and begged, and offered anything I have if
you'll only break your absurd vow, and come and enjoy yourself."

"Thank you; but I won't, so don't trouble your kind heart about me; I'm
all right," said Polly, stoutly.

But when they drew up before the lighted house, and she found herself
in the midst of the pleasant stir of festivity, the coming and going of
carriages, the glimpses of bright colors, forms, and faces, the bursts
of music, and a general atmosphere of gayety, Polly felt that she was
n't all right, and as she drove away for a dull evening in her lonely
little room, she just cried as heartily as any child denied a stick of
candy.

"It's dreadful wicked of me, but I can't help it," she sobbed to
herself, in the corner of the carriage. "That music sets me all in a
twitter, and I should have looked nice in Fan's blue tarlatan, and
I know I could behave as well as any one, and have lots of partners,
though I'm not in that set. Oh, just one good gallop with Mr. Sydney or
Tom! No, Tom would n't ask me there, and I would n't accept if he did.
Oh, me! oh, me! I wish I was as old and homely, and good and happy, as
Miss Mills!"

So Polly made her moan, and by the time she got home, was just in the
mood to go to bed and cry herself to sleep, as girls have a way of doing
when their small affliction becomes unbearable.

But Polly did n't get a chance to be miserable very long, for as she
went up stairs feeling like the most injured girl in the world, she
caught a glimpse of Miss Mills, sewing away with such a bright face that
she could n't resist stopping for a word or two.

"Sit down, my dear, I'm glad to see you, but excuse me if I go on with
my work, as I'm in a driving hurry to get these things done to-night,"
said the brisk little lady, with a smile and a nod, as she took a new
needleful of thread, and ran up a seam as if for a wager.

"Let me help you, then; I'm lazy and cross, and it will do me good,"
said Polly, sitting down with the resigned feeling. "Well, if I can't be
happy, I can be useful, perhaps."

"Thank you, my dear; yes, you can just hem the skirt while I put in the
sleeves, and that will be a great lift."

Polly put on her thimble in silence, but as Miss Mills spread the white
flannel over her lap, she exclaimed, "Why, it looks like a shroud! Is it
one?"

"No, dear, thank God, it is n't, but it might have been, if we had n't
saved the poor little soul," cried Miss Mills, with a sudden brightening
of the face, which made it beautiful in spite of the stiff gray curl
that bobbed on each temple, the want of teeth, and a crooked nose.

"Will you tell me about it? I like to hear your adventures and good
works so much," said Polly, ready to be amused by anything that made her
forget herself.

"Ah, my dear, it's a very common story, and that's the saddest part of
it. I'll tell you all about it, for I think you may be able to help me.
Last night I watched with poor Mary Floyd. She's dying of consumption,
you know," began Miss Mills, as her nimble fingers flew, and her kind
old face beamed over the work, as if she put a blessing in with every
stitch. "Mary was very low, but about midnight fell asleep, and I was
trying to keep things quiet, when Mrs. Finn she's the woman of the
house came and beckoned me out, with a scared face. 'Little Jane has
killed herself, and I don't know what to do,' she said, leading me up to
the attic."

"Who was little Jane?" broke in Polly, dropping her work.

"I only knew her as a pale, shy young girl who went in and out, and
seldom spoke to any one. Mrs. Finn told me she was poor, but a busy,
honest, little thing, who did n't mix with the other folks, but lived
and worked alone. 'She has looked so down-hearted and pale for a week,
that I thought she was sick, and asked her about it,' said Mrs. Finn,
'but she thanked me in her bashful way, and said she was pretty well, so
I let her alone. But to-night, as I went up late to bed, I was kind of
impressed to look in and see how the poor thing did, for she had n't
left her room all day. I did look in, and here's what I found.' As Mrs.
Finn ended she opened the door of the back attic, and I saw about as sad
a sight as these old eyes ever looked at."

"O, what?" cried Polly, pale now with interest.

"A bare room, cold as a barn, and on the bed a little dead, white face
that almost broke my heart, it was so thin, so patient, and so young. On
the table was a bottle half full of laudanum, an old pocket-book, and a
letter. Read that, my dear and don't think hard of little Jane."

Polly took the bit of paper Miss Mills gave her, and read these words:

DEAR MRS. FINN, Please forgive me for the trouble I make you, but I
don't see any other way. I can't get work that pays enough to keep me;
the Dr. says I can't be well unless I rest. I hate to be a burden, so
I'm going away not to trouble anybody anymore. I've sold my things to
pay what I owe you. Please let me be as I am, and don't let people come
and look at me. I hope it is n't very wicked, but there don't seem
any room for me in the world, and I'm not afraid to die now, though
I should be if I stayed and got bad because I had n't strength to keep
right. Give my love to the baby, and so good-by, good-by.

JANE BRYANT.

"O, Miss Mills, how dreadful!" cried Polly, with her eyes so full she
could hardly read the little letter.

"Not so dreadful as it might have been, but a bitter, sad thing to
see that child, only seventeen, lying there in her little clean, old
night-gown, waiting for death to come and take her, because'there did
n't seem to be any room for her in the world.' Ah, well, we saved her,
for it was n't too late, thank heaven, and the first thing she said was,
'Oh, why did you bring me back?' I've been nursing her all day, hearing
her story, and trying to show her that there is room and a welcome for
her. Her mother died a year ago, and since then she has been struggling
along alone. She is one of the timid, innocent, humble creatures who
can't push their way, and so get put aside and forgotten. She has
tried all sorts of poorly paid work, could n't live on it decently, got
discouraged, sick, frightened, and could see no refuge from the big, bad
world but to get out of it while she was n't afraid to die. A very old
story, my dear, new and dreadful as it seems to you, and I think it
won't do you any harm to see and help this little girl, who has gone
through dark places that you are never like to know."

"I will; indeed, I will do all I can! Where is she now?" asked Polly,
touched to the heart by the story, so simple yet so sad.

"There," and Miss Mills pointed to the door of her own little bedroom.
"She was well enough to be moved to-night, so I brought her home and
laid her safely in my bed. Poor little soul! she looked about her for
a minute, then the lost look went away, and she gave a great sigh, and
took my hand in both her thin bits of ones, and said, 'O, ma'am, I feel
as if I'd been born into a new world. Help me to begin again, and I
'll do better.' So I told her she was my child now, and might rest here,
sure of a home as long as I had one."

As Miss Mills spoke in her motherly tone, and cast a proud and happy
look toward the warm and quiet nest in which she had sheltered this
friendless little sparrow, feeling sure that God meant her to keep it
from falling to the ground, Polly put both arms about her neck, and
kissed her withered cheek with as much loving reverence as if she had
been a splendid saint, for in the likeness of this plain old maid she
saw the lovely charity that blesses and saves the world.

"How good you are! Dear Miss Mills, tell me what to do, let me help you,
I'm ready for anything," said Polly, very humbly, for her own troubles
looked so small and foolish beside the stern hardships which had nearly
had so tragical an end, that she felt heartily ashamed of herself, and
quite burned to atone for them.

Miss, Mills stopped to stroke the fresh cheek opposite, to smile, and
say, "Then, Polly, I think I'll ask you to go in and say a friendly
