
"Heart's-ease do you think I need it?" she asked, looking up with sudden
sobriety.

"We all do. Could I give you anything better on a day like this?"

"No thank you very much." And a sudden dew came to Rose's eyes, for,
though often blunt in speech, when Mac did do a tender thing, it always
touched her because he seemed to understand her moods so well.

"Has Archie been here? He said he shouldn't go anywhere else, but I hope
you talked that nonsense out of his head," said Steve, settling his tie
before the mirror.

"Yes, dear, he came but looked so out of spirits I really felt
reproached. Rose cheered him up a little, but I don't believe he will
feel equal to making calls and I hope he won't, for his face tells the
whole story much too plainly," answered Aunty Plenty, rustling about her
bountiful table in her richest black silk with all her old lace on.

"Oh, he'll get over it in a month or two, and Phebe will soon find
another lover, so don't be worried about him, Aunty," said Steve, with
the air of a man who knew all about that sort of thing.

"If Archie does forget, I shall despise him, and I know Phebe won't try
to find another lover, though she'll probably have them she is so sweet
and good!" cried Rose indignantly, for, having taken the pair under her
protection, she defended them valiantly.

"Then you'd have Arch hope against hope and never give up, would you?"
asked Mac, putting on his glasses to survey the thin boots which were
his especial abomination.

"Yes, I would, for a lover is not worth having if he's not in earnest!"

"Exactly. So you'd like them to wait and work and keep on loving till
they made you relent or plainly proved that it was no use."

"If they were good as well as constant, I think I should relent in
time."

"I'll mention that to Pemberton, for he seemed to be hit the hardest,
and a ray of hope will do him good, whether he is equal to the ten
years' wait or not," put in Steve, who liked to rally Rose about her
lovers.

"I'll never forgive you if you say a word to anyone. It is only Mac's
odd way of asking questions, and I ought not to answer them. You will
talk about such things and I can't stop you, but I don't like it," said
Rose, much annoyed.

"Poor little Penelope! She shall not be teased about her suitors but
left in peace till her Ulysses comes home," said Mac, sitting down to
read the mottoes sticking out of certain fanciful bonbons on the table.

"It is this fuss about Archie which has demoralized us all. Even the owl
waked up and hasn't got over the excitement yet, you see. He's had no
experience, poor fellow, so he doesn't know how to behave," observed
Steve, regarding his bouquet with tender interest.

"That's true, and I asked for information because I may be in love
myself someday and all this will be useful, don't you see?"

"You in love!" And Steve could not restrain a laugh at the idea of the
bookworm a slave to the tender passion.

Quite unruffled, Mac leaned his chin in both hands, regarding them with
a meditative eye as he answered in his whimsical way: "Why not? I intend
to study love as well as medicine, for it is one of the most mysterious
and remarkable diseases that afflict mankind, and the best way to
understand it is to have it. I may catch it someday, and then I should
like to know how to treat and cure it."

"If you take it as badly as you did measles and whooping cough, it will
go hard with you, old fellow," said Steve, much amused with the fancy.

"I want it to. No great experience comes or goes easily, and this is the
greatest we can know, I believe, except death."

Something in Mac's quiet tone and thoughtful eyes made Rose look at him
in surprise, for she had never heard him speak in that way before. Steve
also stared for an instant, equally amazed, then said below his breath,
with an air of mock anxiety: "He's been catching something at the
hospital, typhoid probably, and is beginning to wander. I'll take him
quietly away before he gets any wilder. Come, old lunatic, we must be
off."

"Don't be alarmed. I'm all right and much obliged for your advice, for I
fancy I shall be a desperate lover when my time comes, if it ever does.
You don't think it impossible, do you?" And Mac put the question so
soberly that there was a general smile.

"Certainly not you'll be a regular Douglas, tender and true," answered
Rose, wondering what queer question would come next.

"Thank you. The fact is, I've been with Archie so much in his trouble
lately that I've gotten interested in this matter and very naturally
want to investigate the subject as every rational man must, sooner or
later, that's all. Now, Steve, I'm ready." And Mac got up as if the
lesson was over.

"My dear, that boy is either a fool or a genius, and I'm sure I should
be glad to know which," said Aunt Plenty, putting her bonbons to rights
with a puzzled shake of her best cap.

"Time will show, but I incline to think that he is not a fool by any
means," answered the girl, pulling a cluster of white roses out of her
bosom to make room for the pansies, though they did not suit the blue
gown half so well.

Just then Aunt Jessie came in to help them receive, with Jamie to make
himself generally useful, which he proceeded to do by hovering around
the table like a fly about a honey pot when not flattening his nose
against the windowpanes to announce excitedly, "Here's another man
coming up the drive!"

Charlie arrived next in his most sunshiny humor, for anything social
and festive was his delight, and when in this mood the Prince was quite
irresistible. He brought a pretty bracelet for Rose and was graciously
allowed to put it on while she chid him gently for his extravagance.

"I am only following your example, for you know 'nothing is too good
for those we love, and giving away is the best thing one can do,'" he
retorted, quoting words of her own.

"I wish you would follow my example in some other things as well as you
do in this," said Rose soberly as Aunt Plenty called him to come and see
if the punch was right.

"Must conform to the customs of society. Aunty's heart would be broken
if we did not drink her health in the good old fashion. But don't be
alarmed I've a strong head of my own, and that's lucky, for I shall need
it before I get through," laughed Charlie, showing a long list as
he turned away to gratify the old lady with all sorts of merry and
affectionate compliments as the glasses touched.

Rose did feel rather alarmed, for if he drank the health of all the
owners of those names, she felt sure that Charlie would need a very
strong head indeed. It was hard to say anything then and there without
seeming disrespect to Aunt Plenty, yet she longed to remind her cousin
of the example she tried to set him in this respect, for Rose never
touched wine, and the boys knew it. She was thoughtfully turning the
bracelet, with its pretty device of turquoise forget-me-nots, when the
giver came back to her, still bubbling over with good spirits.

"Dear little saint, you look as if you'd like to smash all the punch
bowls in the city, and save us jolly young fellows from tomorrow's
headache."

"I should, for such headaches sometimes end in heartaches, I'm afraid.
Dear Charlie, don't be angry, but you know better than I that this is a
dangerous day for such as you so do be careful for my sake," she added,
with an unwonted touch of tenderness in her voice, for, looking at the
gallant figure before her, it was impossible to repress the womanly
longing to keep it always as brave and blithe as now.

Charlie saw that new softness in the eyes that never looked unkindly on
him, fancied that it meant more than it did, and, with a sudden fervor
in his own voice, answered quickly: "My darling, I will!"

The glow which had risen to his face was reflected in hers, for at that
moment it seemed as if it would be possible to love this cousin who was
so willing to be led by her and so much needed some helpful influence
to make a noble man of him. The thought came and went like a flash, but
gave her a quick heartthrob, as if the old affection was trembling
on the verge of some warmer sentiment, and left her with a sense of
responsibility never felt before. Obeying the impulse, she said, with a
pretty blending of earnestness and playfulness, "If I wear the bracelet
to remember you by, you must wear this to remind you of your promise."

"And you," whispered Charlie, bending his head to kiss the hands that
put a little white rose in his buttonhole.

Just at that most interesting moment they became aware of an arrival in
the front drawing room, whither Aunt Plenty had discreetly retired. Rose
felt grateful for the interruption, because, not being at all sure
of the state of her heart as yet, she was afraid of letting a sudden
impulse lead her too far. But Charlie, conscious that a very propitious
instant had been spoiled, regarded the newcomer with anything but a
benignant expression of countenance and, whispering, "Good-bye, my Rose,
I shall look in this evening to see how you are after the fatigues of
the day," he went away, with such a cool nod to poor Fun See that the
amiable Asiatic thought he must have mortally offended him.

Rose had little leisure to analyze the new emotions of which she was
conscious, for Mr. Tokio came up at once to make his compliments with
a comical mingling of Chinese courtesy and American awkwardness, and
before he had got his hat on Jamie shouted with admiring energy: "Here's
another! Oh, such a swell!"

They now came thick and fast for many hours, and the ladies stood
bravely at their posts till late into the evening. Then Aunt Jessie went
home, escorted by a very sleepy little son, and Aunt Plenty retired to
bed, used up. Dr. Alec had returned in good season, for his friends were
not fashionable ones, but Aunt Myra had sent up for him in hot haste and
he had good-naturedly obeyed the summons. In fact, he was quite used to
them now, for Mrs. Myra, having tried a variety of dangerous diseases,
had finally decided upon heart complaint as the one most likely to keep
her friends in a chronic state of anxiety and was continually sending
word that she was dying. One gets used to palpitations as well as
everything else, so the doctor felt no alarm but always went and
prescribed some harmless remedy with the most amiable sobriety and
patience.

Rose was tired but not sleepy and wanted to think over several things,
so instead of going to bed she sat down before the open fire in the
study to wait for her uncle and perhaps Charlie, though she did not
expect him so late.

Aunt Myra's palpitations must have been unusually severe, for the clock
struck twelve before Dr. Alec came, and Rose was preparing to end her
reverie when the sound of someone fumbling at the hall door made her
jump up, saying to herself: "Poor man! His hands are so cold he can't
get his latchkey in. Is that you, Uncle?" she added, running to admit
him, for Jane was slow and the night as bitter as it was brilliant.

A voice answered, "Yes." And as the door swung open, in walked, not Dr.
Alec, but Charlie, who immediately took one of the hall chairs and sat
there with his hat on, rubbing his gloveless hands and blinking as if
the light dazzled him, as he said in a rapid, abrupt sort of tone, "I
told you I'd come left the fellows keeping it up gloriously going to see
the old year out, you know. But I promised never break my word and here
I am. Angel in blue, did you slay your thousands?"

"Hush! The waiters are still about. Come to the study fire and warm
yourself, you must be frozen," said Rose, going before to roll up the
easy chair.

"Not at all never warmer looks very comfortable, though. Where's
Uncle?" asked Charlie, following with his hat still on, his hands in his
pockets, and his eye fixed steadily on the bright head in front of him.

"Aunt Myra sent for him, and I was waiting up to see how she was,"
answered Rose, busily mending the fire.

Charlie laughed and sat down upon a corner of the library table. "Poor
old soul! What a pity she doesn't die before he is quite worn out.
A little too much ether some of these times would send her off quite
comfortably, you know."

"Don't speak in that way. Uncle says imaginary troubles are often as
hard to bear as real ones," said Rose, turning around displeased.

Till now she had not fairly looked at him, for recollections of the
morning made her a little shy. His attitude and appearance surprised her
as much as his words, and the quick change in her face seemed to remind
him of his manners. Getting up, he hastily took off his hat and stood
looking at her with a curiously fixed yet absent look as he said in the
same rapid, abrupt way, as if, when once started, he found it hard to
stop, "I beg pardon only joking very bad taste I know, and won't do it
again. The heat of the room makes me a little dizzy, and I think I got a
chill coming out. It is cold I am frozen, I daresay though I drove like
the devil."

"Not that bad horse of yours, I hope? I know it is dangerous, so
late and alone," said Rose, shrinking behind the big chair as Charlie
approached the fire, carefully avoiding a footstool in his way.

"Danger is exciting that's why I like it. No man ever called me a coward
let him try it once. I never give in and that horse shall not conquer
me. I'll break his neck, if he breaks my spirit doing it. No I don't
mean that never mind it's all right," and Charlie laughed in a way that
troubled her, because there was no mirth in it.

"Have you had a pleasant day?" asked Rose, looking at him intently as he
stood pondering over the cigar and match which he held, as if doubtful
which to strike and which to smoke.

"Day? Oh, yes, capital. About two thousand calls, and a nice little
supper at the Club. Randal can't sing any more than a crow, but I left
him with a glass of champagne upside down, trying to give them my old
favorite:

"'Tis better to laugh than be sighing,"

and Charlie burst forth in that bacchanalian melody at the top of his
voice, waving an allumette holder over his head to represent Randal's
inverted wineglass.

"Hush! You'll wake Aunty," cried Rose in a tone so commanding that he
broke off in the middle of a roulade to stare at her with a blank look
as he said apologetically, "I was merely showing how it should be done.
Don't be angry, dearest look at me as you did this morning, and I'll
swear never to sing another note if you say so. I'm only a little gay we
drank your health handsomely, and they all congratulated me. Told 'em
it wasn't out yet. Stop, though I didn't mean to mention that. No matter
I'm always in a scrape, but you always forgive me in the sweetest way.
Do it now, and don't be angry, little darling." And, dropping the vase,
he went toward her with a sudden excitement that made her shrink behind
the chair.

She was not angry, but shocked and frightened, for she knew now what the
matter was and grew so pale, he saw it and asked pardon before she could
utter a rebuke.

"We'll talk of that tomorrow. It is very late. Go home now, please,
before Uncle comes," she said, trying to speak naturally yet betraying
her distress by the tremor of her voice and the sad anxiety in her eyes.

"Yes, yes, I will go you are tired I'll make it all right tomorrow." And
as if the sound of his uncle's name steadied him for an instant, Charlie
made for the door with an unevenness of gait which would have told the
shameful truth if his words had not already done so. Before he reached
it, however, the sound of wheels arrested him and, leaning against the
wall, he listened with a look of dismay mingled with amusement creeping
over his face. "Brutus has bolted now I am in a fix. Can't walk home
with this horrid dizziness in my head. It's the cold, Rose, nothing
else, I do assure you, and a chill yes, a chill. See here! Let one of
those fellows there lend me an arm no use to go after that brute. Won't
Mother be frightened though when he gets home?" And with that empty
laugh again, he fumbled for the door handle.

"No, no don't let them see you! Don't let anyone know! Stay here till
Uncle comes, and he'll take care of you. Oh, Charlie! How could you do
it! How could you when you promised?" And, forgetting fear in the sudden
sense of shame and anguish that came over her, Rose ran to him, caught
his hand from the lock, and turned the key; then, as if she could not
bear to see him standing there with that vacant smile on his lips, she
dropped into a chair and covered up her face.

The cry, the act, and, more than all, the sight of the bowed head would
have sobered poor Charlie if it had not been too late. He looked about
the room with a vague, despairing look, as if to find reason fast
slipping from his control, but heat and cold, excitement and reckless
pledging of many healths had done their work too well to make instant
sobriety possible, and owning his defeat with a groan, he turned away
and threw himself face-downward on the sofa, one of the saddest sights
the new year looked upon as it came in.

As she sat there with hidden eyes, Rose felt that something dear to her
was dead forever. The ideal, which all women cherish, look for, and too
often think they have found when love glorifies a mortal man, is hard to
give up, especially when it comes in the likeness of the first lover who
touches a young girl's heart. Rose had just begun to feel that perhaps
this cousin, despite his faults, might yet become the hero that he
sometimes looked, and the thought that she might be his inspiration was
growing sweet to her, although she had not entertained it until
very lately. Alas, how short the tender dream had been, how rude the
awakening! How impossible it would be ever again to surround that fallen
figure with all the romance of an innocent fancy or gift it with the
high attributes beloved by a noble nature!

Breathing heavily in the sudden sleep that kindly brought a brief
oblivion of himself, he lay with flushed cheeks, disordered hair, and
at his feet the little rose that never would be fresh and fair again a
pitiful contrast now to the brave, blithe young man who went so gaily
out that morning to be so ignominiously overthrown at night.

