
Mr. Carter eyed his niece with a half-smile.

"So I do you injustice, do I, Lavinia?" he returned.

"Yes, great injustice."

"I am glad to hear it. I feel less objection now to telling you what are
my future plans."

"What are they?" asked Mrs. Pitkin apprehensively.

"I have lived for ten years under your roof, and have had no
communication, as you say, with Rebecca. I think it is only fair now
that I should show her some attention. I have accordingly installed her
as mistress of my house in Madison Avenue, and shall henceforth make my
home with her."

Mrs. Pitkin felt as if the earth was sinking under her feet. The hopes
and schemes of so many years had come to naught, and her hated and
dreaded cousin was to be constantly in the society of the rich uncle.

"Rebecca has played her cards well," she said bitterly.

"She has not played them at all. She did not seek me. I sought her."

"How did you know she was in the city?"

"I learned it from--Philip!"

There was fresh dismay.

"So that boy has wormed his way into your confidence!" said Mrs.
Pitkin bitterly. "After acting so badly that Mr. Pitkin was obliged to
discharge him, he ran to you to do us a mischief."

"Why was he discharged?" demanded Mr. Carter sternly. "Why did your
husband seize the opportunity to get rid of a boy in whom he knew me to
be interested as soon as he thought I was out of the way? Why, moreover,
did he refuse the boy a reference, without which Philip could scarcely
hope to get employment?"

"You will have to ask Mr. Pitkin. I am sure he had good reason for the
course he took. He's an impudent, low upstart in my opinion."

"So he is, ma!" chimed in Alonzo, with heartiness.

"Ah! I have something to say to you, Alonzo," said Mr. Carter, turning
his keen glances upon the boy. "What became of that letter I gave to you
to post just before I went away?"

"I put it in the letter-box," said Alonzo nervously.

"Do you know what was in it?"

"No," answered Alonzo, but he looked frightened.

"There were ten dollars in it. That letter never reached Phil, to whom
it was addressed."

"I--don't know anything about it," faltered Alonzo.

"There are ways of finding out whether letters have been posted," said
Mr. Carter. "I might put a detective on the case."

Alonzo turned pale, and looked much discomposed.

"Of what are you accusing my boy?" asked Mrs. Pitkin, ready to contend
for her favorite. "So that boy has been telling lies about him, has he?
and you believe scandalous stories about your own flesh and blood?"

"Not exactly that, Lavinia."

"Well, your near relation, and that on the testimony of a boy you know
nothing about. When Lonny is so devoted to you, too!"

"I never noticed any special devotion," said Mr. Carter, amused. "You
are mistaken, however, about Philip trying to injure him. I simply asked
Philip whether he had received such a letter, and he said no."

"I dare say he did receive it," said Mrs. Pitkin spitefully.

"We won't argue the matter now," said the old gentleman. "I will only
say that you and Alonzo, and Mr. Pitkin also, have gone the wrong way
to work to secure my favor. You have done what you could to injure two
persons, one your own cousin, because you were jealous."

"You judge me very hardly, uncle," said Mrs. Pitkin, seeing that she
must adopt a different course. "I have no bad feeling against Rebecca,
and as to the boy, I will ask my husband to take him back into the
store. I am sure he will do it, because you wish it."

"I don't wish it," answered Mr. Carter, rather unexpectedly.

"Oh, well," answered Mrs. Pitkin, looking relieved, "that is as you
say."

"I have other views for Philip," said Mr. Carter. "He is with me as my
private secretary."

"Is he living with you?" asked his niece, in alarm.

"Yes."

"There was no need of taking a stranger, Uncle Oliver. We should be glad
to have Alonzo act as your secretary, though of course we should want
him to stay at home."

"I shall not deprive you of Alonzo," said Mr. Carter, with a tinge of
sarcasm in his tone. "Philip will suit me better."

Mr. Carter turned and resumed his packing.

"Are you quite determined to leave us?" asked Mrs. Pitkin, in a subdued
tone.

"Yes; it will be better."

"But you will come back--say after a few weeks?"

"No, I think not," he answered dryly.

"And shall we not see you at all?"

"Oh, I shall call from time to time, and besides, you will know where I
am, and can call whenever you desire."

"People will talk about your leaving us," complained Mrs. Pitkin.

"Let them talk. I never agreed to have my movements controlled by
people's gossip. And now, Lavinia, I shall have to neglect you and
resume my packing. To-morrow I shall bring Philip here to help me."

"Would you like to have Alonzo help you, Uncle Oliver?"

This offer, much to Alonzo's relief, was declined. He feared that he
should be examined more closely by the old gentleman about the missing
money, which at that very moment he had in his pocket.

Mrs. Pitkin went down stairs feeling angry and baffled. All that she
had done to retain her ascendency over Uncle Oliver had failed, and Mrs.
Forbush and Philip seemed to have superseded herself and Alonzo in his
regard. She conferred with Mr. Pitkin on his return from the store,
but the more they considered the matter the worse it looked for their
prospects.

Could anything be done?



CHAPTER XXIX.

A TRUCE.

No more distasteful news could have come to the Pitkins than to learn
that Philip and their poor cousin had secured a firm place in the good
graces of Uncle Oliver. Yet they did not dare to show their resentment.
They had found that Uncle Oliver had a will of his own, and meant to
exercise it. Had they been more forbearing he would still be an inmate
of their house instead of going over to the camp of their enemies, for
so they regarded Mrs. Forbush and Phil.

"I hate that woman, Mr. Pitkin!" said his wife fiercely. "I scorn such
underhanded work. How she has sneaked into the good graces of poor,
deluded Uncle Oliver!"

"You have played your cards wrong, Lavinia," said her husband peevishly.

"I? That is a strange accusation, Mr. Pitkin. It was you, to my
thinking. You sent off that errand boy, and that is how the whole thing
came about. If he had been in your store he wouldn't have met Uncle
Oliver down at the pier."

"You and Alonzo persuaded me to discharge him."

"Oh, of course it's Alonzo and me! When you see Rebecca Forbush and that
errand boy making ducks and drakes out of Uncle Oliver's money you may
wish you had acted more wisely."

"Really, Lavinia, you are a most unreasonable woman. It's no use
criminating and recriminating. We must do what we can to mend matters."

"What can we do?"

"They haven't got the money yet--remember that! We must try to
re-establish friendly relations with Mr. Carter."

"Perhaps you'll tell me how?"

"Certainly! Call as soon as possible at the house on Madison Avenue."

"Call on that woman?"

"Yes; and try to smooth matters over as well as you can. Take Alonzo
with you, and instruct him to be polite to Philip."

"I don't believe Lonny will be willing to demean himself so far."

"He'll have to," answered Mr. Pitkin firmly.

"We've all made a mistake, and the sooner we remedy it the better."

Mrs. Pitkin thought it over. The advice was unpalatable, but it was
evidently sound. Uncle Oliver was rich, and they must not let his money
slip through their fingers. So, after duly instructing Alonzo in his
part, Mrs. Pitkin, a day or two later, ordered her carriage and drove in
state to the house of her once poor relative.

"Is Mrs. Forbush at home?" she asked of the servant.

"I believe so, madam," answered a dignified man-servant.

"Take this card to her."

Mrs. Pitkin and Alonzo were ushered into a drawing-room more elegant
than their own. She sat on a sofa with Alonzo.

"Who would think that Rebecca Forbush would come to live like this?" she
said, half to herself.

"And that boy," supplemented Alonzo.

"To be sure! Your uncle is fairly infatuated."

Just then Mrs. Forbush entered, followed by her daughter. She was no
longer clad in a shabby dress, but wore an elegant toilet, handsome
beyond her own wishes, but insisted upon by Uncle Oliver.

"I am glad to see you, Lavinia," she said simply. "This is my daughter."

Julia, too, was stylishly dressed, and Alonzo, in spite of his
prejudices, could not help regarding this handsome cousin with favor.

I do not propose to detail the interview. Mrs. Pitkin was on her good
behavior, and appeared very gracious.

Mrs. Forbush could not help recalling the difference between her
demeanor now and on the recent occasion, when in her shabby dress she
called at the house in Twelfth Street, but she was too generous to
recall it.

As they were about to leave, Mr. Carter and Philip entered the room,
sent for by Mrs. Forbush.

"How do you do, Philip?" said Mrs. Pitkin, graciously. "Alonzo, this is
Philip."

"How do?" growled Alonzo, staring enviously at Phil's handsome new suit,
which was considerably handsomer than his own.

"Very well, Alonzo."

"You must come and see Lonny," said Mrs. Pitkin pleasantly.

"Thank you!" answered Phil politely.

He did not say it was a pleasure, for he was a boy of truth, and he did
not feel that it would be.

Uncle Oliver was partially deceived by his niece's new manner. He was
glad that there seemed to be a reconciliation, and he grew more cordial
than he had been since his return.

After awhile Mrs. Pitkin rose to go.

When she was fairly in the carriage once more, she said passionately:

"How I hate them!"

"You were awful sweet on them, ma!" said Alonzo, opening his eyes.

"I had to be. But the time will come when I will open the eyes of Uncle
Oliver to the designs of that scheming woman and that artful errand
boy."

It was Mrs. Pitkin's true self that spoke.



CHAPTER XXX.

PHIL'S TRUST.

Among the duties which devolved upon Phil was Mr. Carter's bank
business. He generally made deposits for Uncle Oliver, and drew money on
his personal checks whenever he needed it.

It has already been said that Mr. Carter was a silent partner in the
firm of which Mr. Pitkin was the active manager. The arrangement between
the partners was, that each should draw out two hundred dollars a week
toward current expenses, and that the surplus, if any, at the end of the
year, should be divided according to the terms of the partnership.

When Phil first presented himself with a note from Mr. Carter, he was an
object of attention to the clerks, who knew that he had been discharged
by Mr. Pitkin. Yet here he was, dressed in a new suit provided with a
watch, and wearing every mark of prosperity. One of the most surprised
was Mr. G. Washington Wilbur, with whom, as an old friend, Phil stopped
to chat.

"Is old Pitkin going to take you back?" he inquired.

"No," answered Phil promptly. "He couldn't have me if he wanted me."

"Have you got another place?"

"Yes."

"What's the firm?"

"It isn't in business. I am private secretary to Mr. Carter."

Mr. Wilbur regarded him with surprise and respect.

"Is it a soft place?" he inquired.

"It's a very pleasant place."

"What wages do you get?"

"Twelve dollars a week and board."

"You don't mean it?"

"Yes, I do."

"Say, doesn't he want another secretary?" asked Mr. Wilbur.

"No, I think not."

"I'd like a place of that sort. You're a lucky fellow, Phil."

"I begin to think I am."

"Of course you don't live at the old place."

"No; I live on Madison Avenue. By the way, Wilbur, how is your
lady-love?"

Mr. Wilbur looked radiant.

"I think I'm getting on," he said. "I met her the other evening, and she
smiled."

"That is encouraging," said Phil, as soberly as possible. "All things
come to him who waits! That's what I had to write in my copy-book once."

Phil was received by Mr. Pitkin with more graciousness than he expected.
He felt that he must do what he could to placate Uncle Oliver, but he
was more dangerous when friendly in his manner than when he was rude
and impolite. He was even now plotting to get Phil into a scrape which
should lose him the confidence of Uncle Oliver.

Generally Phil was paid in a check payable to the order of Mr. Carter.
But one Saturday two hundred dollars in bills were placed in his hands
instead.

"You see how much confidence I place in your honesty," said Mr. Pitkin.
"You couldn't use the check. This money you could make off with."

"It would be very foolish, to say the least," responded Phil.

"Of course, of course. I know you are trustworthy, or I would have given
you a check instead."

When Phil left the building he was followed, though he did not know it,
by a man looking like a clerk.

Ah, Phil, you are in danger, though you don't suspect it.



CHAPTER XXXI.

PHIL IS SHADOWED.

Phil felt that he must be more than usually careful, because the money
he had received was in the form of bills, which, unlike the check, would
be of use to any thief appropriating it. That he was in any unusual
danger, however, he was far from suspecting.

He reached Broadway, and instead of taking an omnibus, started to
walk up-town. He knew there was no haste, and a walk up the great busy
thoroughfare had its attractions for him, as it has for many others.

Behind him, preserving a distance of from fifteen to twenty feet, walked
a dark-complexioned man of not far from forty years of age. Of course
Phil was not likely to notice him.

Whatever the man's designs might be, he satisfied himself at first
with simply keeping our hero in view. But as they both reached Bleecker
Street, he suddenly increased his pace and caught up with Phil. He
touched the boy on the shoulder, breathing quickly, as if he had been
running.

Phil turned quickly.

"Do you want me, sir?" he asked, eying the stranger in surprise.

"I don't know. Perhaps I am mistaken. Are you in the employ of Mr.
Oliver Carter?"

"Yes, sir."

"Ah I then you are the boy I want. I have bad news for you."

"Bad news!" repeated Phil, alarmed. "What is it?"

"Mr. Carter was seized with a fit in the street half an hour since."

"Is he--dead?" asked Phil, in dismay.

"No, no! I think he will come out all right."

"Where is he?"

"In my house. I didn't of course know who he was, but I found in his
pocket a letter directed to Oliver Carter, Madison Avenue. There was
also a business card. He is connected in business with Mr. Pitkin, is he
not?"

"Yes, sir," answered Phil; "where is your house?"

"In Bleecker Street, near by. Mr. Carter is lying on the bed. He is
unconscious, but my wife heard him say: 'Call Philip.' I suppose that is
you?"

"Yes, sir; my name is Philip."

"I went around to his place of business, and was told that you had just
left there. I was given a description of you and hurried to find you.
Will you come to the house and see Mr. Carter?"

"Yes, sir," answered Phil, forgetting everything except that his kind
and generous employer was sick, perhaps dangerously.

"Thank you; I shall feel relieved. Of course you can communicate with
his friends and arrange to have him carried home."
