sort of consolation to me that luck had a little--just a little--to do
with it."

"In my opinion luck had everything to do with it," Gervaise said
heartily, "and I feel downright ashamed at there being such a fuss made
over it. It was bad enough before, merely because I had hit on a
plan for our escape from those pirates, but this is worse, and I feel
horribly nervous at the thought of having to appear before the grand
master and the council."

"Well, that brown dye will hide your blushes, Gervaise. I can only say
I wish that I was in your place. By-the-bye, have you heard that they
caught that rascal Greek last night?"

"No, I have not heard anything about it."

"Yes. The knights hid themselves behind a pile of goods on the wharf.
There was no one about, so far as they could see, but soon after twelve
they saw a figure come up on to the deck of a fishing boat moored by the
quay. It was the Greek; he stood there for a minute or two listening,
and then went down again; he did this five or six times, and at one
o'clock they saw him throw up his arms, as if in despair; he stepped
ashore, and was about to make his way up into the town when they rushed
out and seized him. There is no doubt as to what his fate will be. I am
sorry to say that I hear my friend Vrados has been arrested; but there
can be no doubt about his loyalty, and he will assuredly be able
to explain to the satisfaction of the council how this man became a
resident at his house."

"I am sorry I met him there, Ralph. It is a very unpleasant thing to
have gone to a house, to have been received kindly, and then to be the
means of bringing trouble upon it."

"Yes. I feel that a little myself, because I took you there; and yet I
cannot regret it, for if you had not seen him and taken an objection to
him, you might not have noticed him particularly when he spoke to one of
the galley slaves. It is certainly curious that you should have doubted
the man, for I have met him there several times, and even after your
visit with me I could see nothing in him to justify your dislike."

Gervaise went up to the palace, and while waiting in the great hall
until summoned before the council he was warmly accosted by several
knights,--some of whom were quite strangers to him,--who all joined in
congratulating him on the immense service he had done to the Order. It
was upwards of an hour before he was called in.

"The council have received, Sir Gervaise Tresham," the grand master
said, "full details from Sir John Kendall of the manner in which you
first discovered, and have since followed up the daring plot by which
the slaves at St. Pelagius were to have risen, slain the guards who were
faithful, spiked the cannon in the three water forts, burnt the merchant
shipping, carried off six galleys and burnt the rest, and in their
name I thank you for having saved the Order from a great calamity. The
members of the council agree with me that you have shown an amount of
discernment of the highest kind, and that you are worthy of exceptional
favour and reward for your conduct. I therefore in my own name appoint
you to the commandery of our manor of Maltby in Lincolnshire, which,
having fallen vacant, is in my gift; and I release it from the usual
payment of the first year's revenue. Knowing that you desire to
establish yourself here, the council have, at my request, decided to
make an exception to the general rule that a knight, on promotion to a
commandery, must return and take charge of it in two years from the time
the grant is made to him. The commandery will therefore be administered
by the senior of the knights attached to it.

"The council, on their part, have requested the bailiff of Auvergne, as
grand master of the Fleet, to appoint you to the command of the galley
now building, and approaching completion. This he has consented to
do, feeling, as we all feel, that although such an appointment is
unprecedented for a young knight, yet in the present case such an
exception may well be made. I may add that the Admiral has--in
order that no knight greatly your senior should be placed under your
command--determined that he will appoint to it only young knights, who
will, we are assured, gladly serve under one who has so distinguished
himself, feeling certain that, under his command, they will have ample
opportunities against the infidels to prove themselves worthy of the
Order. I may add, also, that the bailiffs of all the langues promise
that they will select from among the young knights such as may seem best
fitted for such service, by their skill in warlike exercises, by their
ready obedience to orders, and good conduct. And I foresee that the
spirit of emulation, and the desire to show that, though still but
professed knights, they are capable of performing as valiant deeds as
their elders, will make the galley under your command one of the most
successful in the Order.

"As you are aware, it is a stringent rule, which even in so exceptional
a case we should not be justified in breaking, that a knight must reside
in the Island for five years previous to being promoted to a commandery.
It is now two months more than that time since you were received as page
to the late grand master, and in promoting you to a commandery I have
not, therefore, broken the rule. You may retire, Sir Gervaise."

Gervaise, overwhelmed by the unlooked for honours thus bestowed upon
him, bowed deeply to the grand master and the members of the council,
and then retired from the chamber. He passed out of the palace by a side
door, so as to avoid being accosted by the knights in the great hall,
and took his way out on to the ramparts, where he walked up and down for
a considerable time before returning to the auberge. He felt no hilarity
at his promotion. He had never entertained any ambition for rising to
high office in the Order, but had hoped only to perform his duty as a
true knight, to fight against the infidels, and some day, if need be, to
die for the Order. The commandery was, he knew, a rich one, and as
its chief he would draw a considerable revenue from the estate. This
afforded him no pleasure whatever, except inasmuch as it would enable
him, in his new command of the galley, to keep a handsome table, and to
entertain well the knights who served under him.

It seemed to him, however, that the reward and honours were so far
beyond his deserts that he felt almost humiliated by their bestowal. The
responsibility, too, was great. Would these young knights, the youngest
of whom could be but a year his junior, serve willingly under his
orders? And, above all, would they be able to emulate the deeds of
experienced warriors, and would the galley worthily maintain the fame of
the Order?

At the end of two hours he was joined by Ralph Harcourt.

"I have been looking for you everywhere, Gervaise. You seemed to have
disappeared mysteriously. None had marked you leave the council chamber,
or knew where you had gone; and after searching everywhere I remembered
your fondness for walks upon the walls, so I climbed to the top of
St. John's tower and thence espied you. Well, I congratulate you most
heartily on the honours that have fallen to your share, especially that
of the command of a new galley."

"It is too much altogether, Ralph. I feel ashamed at being thus thrust
into a post that ought to be given to a knight of age and experience.
How can I expect a number of young knights, of whom well nigh all must
be my seniors in age, to obey me as they would an older man?"

"What has age to do with it?" Ralph said. "You have shown that you have
a head to think, and, as you before proved, you have an arm to strike.
Why, every young knight in the Order must feel proud that one of their
own age has gained such honour. It raises them all in their own esteem,
and you will see that you will get the pick among all the professed
knights, and of a good many who have finished their profession, and are
serving here in the hope of some day getting promotion to a commandery.
Not such an one as you have got; that, in the ordinary course of things,
does not fall to a knight until he is well on in years, and has served
in many commanderies of smaller value. I can tell you, directly Sir John
Kendall came back and told us that you had been appointed commander of
the new galley, and that it was to be manned wholly by young knights,
there was not one of those serving their profession in the auberge who
did not beg Sir John to put down his name for it; and ten or twelve
others, myself among them, who have obtained full knighthood also."

"You don't mean to say that you have put down your name to serve under
me, Ralph? It would be monstrous."

"I see nothing monstrous in it, Gervaise. As I said just now, years have
nothing to do with it, and, putting aside our friendship, I would rather
serve under you than under many knights old enough to be your father. I
don't know whether I shall have the luck to be one of the chosen, as Sir
John said that there were to be only seven from each langue, which will
make forty-nine--with yourself fifty. If I am chosen--and, knowing
our friendship, I hope that the bailiff will let me go with you--it is
likely enough I may be named your lieutenant, as I shall be the only one
beside yourself who is a secular knight, and am, therefore, superior in
rank to the rest."

"That would be pleasant indeed, Ralph, though I would rather that you
had been made commander and I lieutenant; but at any rate, with you
to support me, I shall feel less oppressed by the thought of my
responsibility."

As Ralph had declared would be the case, the young knights in the other
auberges were as anxious as those of England to be enrolled among the
crew of the new galley, and the bailiffs had some trouble in choosing
among the aspirants. Very few were selected outside the rank of
professed knights, and as great pains were taken to comply with the
grand master's wishes that only young knights of good conduct and
disposition, and distinguished by their proficiency in warlike
exercises, should be chosen, the crew was in every way a picked one.
Most of them had made one or two of the three months' voyages in
the galleys, though comparatively few had had the good fortune to be
absolutely engaged with the Moslem pirates.

To the great satisfaction of himself and Gervaise, Ralph Harcourt
was nominated lieutenant of the galley. The fact that so many had
volunteered impressed all those who were chosen with the sense that it
was at once an honour and a piece of good fortune to be selected, and
all were determined that the boy galley, as the elder knights laughingly
termed it, should do honour to the Order.

It was a fortnight before she was launched. Gervaise had heard, with
great satisfaction, that it had been decided by the council that no
punishment should be inflicted upon the slaves for their share in the
intended rising at St. Pelagius. All were guilty, and there was no means
of saying who had taken prominent parts in the plot. The council felt
that it was but natural that they should grasp at the prospect of
freedom, for they themselves would have done the same had they been
captives of the infidels. Even the warders and guards were allowed to
go unpunished, although their offence was a much more serious one. Those
who could have named the men who had accepted bribes were dead, and the
lesson had been so severe a one that there was no probability of any
again turning traitors. The author of the rising had been publicly
executed. Seeing the hopelessness of denial, he had boldly avowed his
share in the matter, and had acknowledged that he was acting as agent
for the sultan, and had been supplied with ample funds before leaving
Constantinople.

He declared that he was absolutely unable to give any names whatever of
those concerned in the plot, save those of the two overseers, as these
had undertaken the work of suborning the warders and guards, though he
admitted that he had on several occasions spoken to slaves as the gangs
were on their way back to the prison, and had told them to be prepared
to take part in a plan that was on foot for their rescue from slavery.
The torture had not been, as was then the usual custom, applied to
extort information; partly because his story was probable, still more
because the grand master and council did not wish that more publicity
should be given to the affair, and were glad that it should be allowed
to drop without any further trial of the delinquents. In the city
generally it was only known that a plot had been discovered for the
liberation and escape of some of the slaves; and, outside the members of
the Order, none were aware of its extent and dangerous character. To the
satisfaction of Gervaise and Ralph, Vrados was able to produce letters
and documents that satisfied the council that he had been deceived as to
the character of the Greek, and was wholly innocent in the matter.



CHAPTER XII THE BOY GALLEY


Among those most pleased at the appointment of Gervaise to the command
of the galley was Sir John Boswell. Ever since the adventure with the
pirates, the knight had exhibited an almost fatherly interest in him;
had encouraged him in his studies, ridden with him on such occasions as
he had permitted himself a short holiday, and had, whenever they were
together, related to him stories of war, sieges, battles, and escapes,
from which he thought the young knight might gain lessons for his future
guidance.

"I doubt, Gervaise," he said one day, as they were riding quietly along
the road, "whether our plan of life is altogether the best. We were
founded, you know, simply as a body of monks, bound to devote ourselves
solely to the care of the sick, and to give hospitality to pilgrims in
Palestine. Now this was monkish work, and men who devoted themselves
solely to such a life of charity as that in our Hospital at Jerusalem,
might well renounce all human pleasures; but when the great change
was made by Master Raymond du Puy, and from a nursing body we became a
brotherhood in arms, it seems to me that the vows of celibacy were no
longer needful or desirable. The crusaders were, many of them, married
men, but they fought no worse for that. It would have been far better,
methinks, had we been converted into an Order pledged to resist the
infidel, but without the vows of poverty and of celibacy, which have
never been seriously regarded.

"The garrison here might be composed, as indeed it is now, principally
of young knights, of those who have not cared to marry, and of the
officers of the Order whose wives and families might dwell here with
them. This would have many advantages. Among others, the presence of so
many ladies of rank would have the excellent effect of discountenancing
and repressing extravagances and dissolute habits, which are but too
common, and are a shame to the Order. Knights possessing commanderies
throughout Europe would be no worse stewards for being married men, and
scandals, such as contributed largely to the downfall of the Templars,
would be avoided.

"The sole vow necessary, so far as I can see, would be that knights
should remain unmarried and disposable at all times for service until
ten years after making their profession, and that afterwards they should
ever be ready to obey the summons to arms, on occasions when the safety
of Rhodes, or the invasion of any Christian country by the Moslems,
rendered their services needful, when they would come out just as the
knights of Richard the Lion Heart went out as crusaders. I have spent
half my life since I joined the Order in commanderies at home, and a
dull life it was, and I was glad enough to resign my last command and
come out here. Had I been able to marry, I might now have had a son of
your age, whose career I could watch and feel a pride in. My life would
have been far happier in England, and in all respects I should be a
better man than I am now. Methinks it would strengthen rather than
weaken the Order. As a fighting body we should be in no way inferior
to what we are now, and we should be more liked and more respected
throughout Europe, for naturally the sight of so many men leading a
luxurious life in commanderies causes a feeling against them."

"But I suppose, Sir John, that there is no great difficulty in obtaining
a dispensation from our vows?"

"In this, as in all other matters, everything depends upon interest or
money. Of course, dispensations are not common; but doubtless any knight
when he had served his term of active service could, especially if
his request were backed by the grand master, obtain from the Pope
a dispensation of his vows. If he had a commandery it would make a
vacancy, and give the grand prior, or the grand master, or the council,
in whosoever's gift it might be, an opportunity of rewarding services or
of gratifying some powerful family."

"I agree with you that it would have been much better, Sir John. I can
understand that monks, ever living a quiet life apart from the world,
should be content so to continue; but among a body of warlike knights
there must be many who, in time, must come to regret the vows they took
when boys. The cadet of a noble family might, by the death of elder
brothers, come to be the head of a great family, the ruler over wide
domains. Surely it would be desirable that such a man should be able to
marry and have heirs."

"Doubtless it could be managed in such cases, Gervaise, but it is a pity
that it should have to be managed. I can see no reason in the world why
a knight, after doing ten years of service here, should not be free
to marry, providing he takes a vow to render full service to the Order
whenever called upon to do so. Already the vow of poverty is everywhere
broken. Already, in defiance of their oaths, too many knights lead idle
and dissolute lives. Already, knights, when in their own countries,
disregard the rule that they shall draw sword in no cause save that of
the Holy Sepulchre, and, like other knights and nobles, take part in
civil strife or foreign wars. All this is a scandal, and it were better
by far to do away with all oaths, save that of obedience and willingness
to war with the infidel, than to make vows that all men know are
constantly and shamelessly broken.

"I am fond of you, Gervaise. I am proud of you, as one who has brought
honour to our langue, and who, in time, will bring more honour. I am
glad that, so far as there can be between a young knight and one of
middle age, there is a friendship between us. But see what greater
pleasure it would give to my life were you my son, for whom I could
lay by such funds as I could well spare, instead of spending all my
appointments on myself, and having neither kith nor kin to give a sigh
of regret when the news comes that I have fallen in some engagement with
the infidels. I often think of all these things, and sometimes talk them
over with comrades, and there are few who do not hold, with me, that it
would be far better that we should become a purely military Order, like
some of the military Orders in the courts of the European sovereigns,
than remain as we are, half monk, half soldier--a mixture that, so far
as I can see, accords but badly with either morality or public repute.

"However, I see no chance of such a change coming, and we must be
content to observe our vows as well as may be, so long as we are willing
to remain monks and try to obtain dispensation from our vows should we
desire to alter our mode of life. We ought either to have remained monks
pure and simple, spending our lives in deeds of charity, a life which
suits many men, and against which I should be the last to say anything,
or else soldiers pure and simple, as were the crusaders, who wrested
the Holy Sepulchre from the hands of the infidels. At present, Gervaise,
your vocation lies wholly in the way of fighting, but it may be that the
time will come when you may have other aims and ambitions, and when the
vows of the Order will gall you."

"I hope not, Sir John," Gervaise said earnestly.

"You are young yet," the knight replied, with an indulgent smile. "Some
day you may think differently. Now," he went on, changing the subject
abruptly, "when will your galley be ready?"

"This is my last ride, Sir John. The shipwrights will have finished
tomorrow, and the next day we shall take possession of her, and begin to
practise, so that each man shall know his duties, and the galley slaves
learn to row well, before we have orders to sail. I wish you were going
with us, Sir John."

"I should like it, lad, in many respects. It does one good to see the
enthusiasm of young men, and doubtless you will be a merry party.
But, on the other hand, unless I mistake, you will be undertaking wild
adventures, and my time for these is well nigh passed. When the Turk
comes here, if he ever comes--and of that I have little doubt--I
shall be ready to take my full share of the fighting; but I shall seek
adventures no longer, and shall go no more to sea. Next only to the
bailiff, I am the senior of our auberge, and--but this is between
ourselves, lad--am like to succeed to the grand priory of England when
it becomes vacant, and if not I shall, as the grand master has told me,
have the offer of the next high office vacant in the palace."

Two days later Gervaise and his company of young knights went down to
the port to take part in the launch of the new galley. This was the
occasion of a solemn ceremony, the grand master and a large number of
knights being present. A religious service first took place on her
poop, and she was named by the grand master the Santa Barbara. When the
ceremony was over, Gervaise was solemnly invested with the command of
the galley by the grand marshal of the navy; then the shores were struck
away, and the galley glided into the water, amid the firing of guns, the
blowing of trumpets, and the cheers of the spectators who had gathered
at the port to witness the ceremony.

The next morning a gang of galley slaves were marched down. A third of
these had been drawn from the crews of other galleys, their places being
supplied by new hands. The remainder were taken from the men employed
on the fortifications. Three weeks were occupied in teaching the rowers
their work, and getting them well together. They were a fine crew, for
the governor of St. Pelagius, grateful to Gervaise for the discovery of
the plot, had ordered the overseers to pick out from the various gangs
men specially suited by age and strength for the work.

The dye by this time had entirely worn off his face, and although his
hair was still several shades darker than of old, it differed even more
widely from the ebon hue that it had been when he was in prison. Thus,
although he recognised three or four men upon the benches who had been
fellow occupants of his cell, he had no fear whatever of their detecting
in the commander of the galley their late companion in misfortune.

Only a portion of the knights had been out each day while the crew were
learning to row, as there was but little for them to learn. The galley
carried no sails, and the knights were soldiers rather than sailors, and
fought on the deck of their ship, as if defending a breach, or storming
one held by the enemy. Moreover, as all of them had already made one or
more voyages, they were accustomed to such duties as they would have to
discharge on board.

All were glad when an order was published for the galley to sail. On the
eve of departure Gervaise was sent for by the grand master. The general
of the galleys was with him when Gervaise entered the room. The bailiff
of Auvergne always held the position of grand marshal, and the bailiff
of Italy that of second in command, with the title of grand admiral.
These officials, however, as heads of their respective langues, had many
other duties to perform, and it was only on great occasions that they
took any practical share in the work of which they were nominally heads.
The real control in all naval questions rested with the general of the
galleys, who was elected by the council, but on the nomination of the
grand master.

His power when at sea with the fleet was absolute. He could suspend any
officer from duty, and had unquestioned power of life and death over
the crews. He had been frequently on board the galley since she had been
launched, and had been pleased with the attention paid by Gervaise to
his duties, and with the ready manner in which the young knights carried
out his orders.

"Sir Gervaise Tresham," he said, "it is usual, as you know, to appoint
each galley to a certain cruising ground, to which it is confined during
its three months' absence. At present there is a galley on each of these
stations, and as the last relief took place but a month since, it is
better that they should remain at the stations allotted to them. I
have therefore, after consultation with his Highness the grand master,
decided to give you a free hand. You are as likely to meet with pirates
in one quarter as in another, and you will pick up from vessels you
may overhaul news of their doings, which will enable you to direct your
course to the point where you will be most useful."

"In the first place, however, you will proceed to the coast of Tunis.
Visconti's galley is already there, but the coast swarms with corsairs,
and we have had many complaints as to their depredations. The Court of
Spain has twice represented to us lately that the pirates have grown
so bold that vessels have been carried off, even when coasting from one
Spanish port to another. Visconti is specially watching the coast near
Tunis, and you will therefore perhaps do better to proceed farther west,
for every village from Tunis to Tangier is little better than a nest
of pirates. I should imagine that you will find ample employment there
during your three months' cruise. When I say that you are free to
choose your own cruising ground, I do not mean that you should go up the
Levant, or to the east of the Mediterranean, but that you are not bound
to keep close along the African coast, but may, should you obtain any
information to warrant your doing so, seek the pirates along the shores
of Spain, Sardinia, Corsica, or Sicily.

"I need not warn you to act with prudence as well as courage, for you
have proved that you possess both qualities. Do not allow yourself to
be carried away by the impetuosity of your knights; it is more often
the duty of a commander to restrain than to encourage his crew, and with
such young blood as you have under your command the necessity will be
greater than usual. Be kind to your slaves, but be ever watchful;
yet this I need not tell you. Maintain a strict but not over severe
discipline. You are all knights and comrades of the Order, and equals
when on shore, but on board you are the captain and they are your
soldiers. I have this afternoon had a meeting of your knights, and have
urged upon them very strongly that, having volunteered to serve under
you, they must obey your orders as promptly and willingly as if you were
the senior knight of the Order, and that it behooves them specially
upon the present occasion, when the crew is composed entirely of young
knights, to show themselves worthy of the honour that has been done to
them by entrusting a galley of the Order to their charge. I told them
I should regard your report of their individual conduct with the same
attention and respect with which I should that of any other commander,
and that they might greatly make or mar their future prospects in the
Order by their conduct during the cruise. I am convinced, from what I
