and when she met him last week she asked him to come to her house
to-day. She told me she was dying to have him, of course, but when she
asked him she could see by his face and manner that he was searching
his brains for an excuse to get out of it. All of a sudden it flashed
into her head to say, 'Some of our friends from St. Benet's will be
present.' The moment she said this he changed and got very polite and
said he would certainly look in for a little while. Poor Meta was so
delighted! You can fancy her chagrin when he devoted himself all the
time to Prissie."

"He thought he'd meet Maggie Oliphant," said Annie Day; "it was a
shame to lure him on with a falsehood. I don't wonder at people not
respecting the Elliot-Smiths."

"My dear," responded Rosalind, "Meta did not tell a lie. I never could
have guessed that you were straight-laced, Annie."

"Nor am I," responded Annie with a sigh, which she quickly suppressed.

"The whole thing fitted in admirably with our wishes," continued Rose,
"and now we need not do anything further in the matter. Rumor, in the
shape of Hetty Jones' tongue and Polly Singleton's hints, will do the
rest for us."

"Do you really think that Maggie Oliphant cares for Mr. Hammond?"
asked Lucy Marsh.

"Cares for him!" said Rosalind. "Does a duck swim? Does a baby like
sweet things? Maggie is so much in love with Mr. Hammond that she's
almost ill about it-- there!"

"Nonsense!" exclaimed the other two girls.

"She is, I know she is. She treats him shamefully, because of some
whim of hers. I only wish she may never get him."

"He'd do nicely for you, wouldn't he, Rose?" said Annie Day.

A delicate pink came into Rosalind's cheeks. She rose to leave the
room.

"Mr. Hammond is not in my style," she said. "Much too severe and too
learned. Good night, girls. I must look over the notes of that
wretched French lecture before I go to bed."

Rosalind sought her own room, which was in another corridor. It was
late now-- past eleven o'clock. The electric light had been put out.
She was well supplied with candles, however, and lighting two on the
mantel-piece and two on her bureau, she proceeded to stir up her fire
and to make her room warm and cozy.

Rosalind still wore the pretty light silk which had given her such an
elegant appearance at the Elliot-Smiths' that afternoon. Securing the
bolt of her door, she pushed aside a heavy curtain, which concealed
the part of her room devoted to her wardrobe, washing apparatus, etc.
Rosalind's wardrobe had a glass door, and she could see her petite
figure in it from head to foot. It was a very small figure, but
exquisitely proportioned. Its owner admired it much. She turned
herself round, took up a hand-glass and surveyed herself in profile
and many other positions. Then, taking off her pretty dress, she
arrayed herself in a long white muslin dressing-robe, and letting down
her golden hair, combed out the glittering masses. They fell in
showers below her waist. Her face looked more babyish and innocent
than ever as it smiled to its own fair image in the glass.

"How he did scowl at me!" said Rosalind, suddenly speaking aloud. "But
I had to say it. I was determined to find out for myself how much or
how little he cares for Maggie Oliphant, and, alas! there's nothing of
the 'little' in his affection. Well, well! I did not do badly to-day.
I enjoyed myself and I took a nice rise out of that disagreeable Miss
Peel. Now must I look through those horrid French notes? Need I?" She
pirouetted on one toe in front of the glass. The motion exhilarated
her, and, raising her white wrapper so as to get a peep at her small,
pretty feet, she waltzed slowly and gracefully in front of the mirror.

"I can't and won't study to-night," she said again.

"I hate study, and I will not spoil my looks by burning the midnight
oil."

Suddenly she clasped her hands and the color rushed into her cheeks.

"How fortunate that I remembered! I must write to mother this very
night. This is Thursday. The auction is on Monday. I have not a post
to lose."

Hastily seating herself in front of her bureau, Rosalind scribbled a
few lines:

  DEAREST, PRECIOUS MAMSIE: Whatever happens, please send me a postal
  order for £10 by return. One of the richest girls in the place is
  going to have an auction, and I shall pick up some treasures. If
  you could spare £15, or even £20, the money would be well spent,
  but ten at least I must have. There is a sealskin jacket, which
  cost at least eighty pounds, and such coral ornaments-- you know,
  that lovely pink shade. Send me all you can, precious mamsie, and
  make your Baby happy.

  "Your own little ROSE.

  "P. S.-- Oh, mamsie, such a sealskin! and such coral!"

This artless epistle was quickly enclosed in an envelope, addressed
and deposited in the post-box. Afterward pretty little Rosalind spent
a night of dreamless slumber and awoke in the morning as fresh and
innocent-looking as the fairest of the babies she compared herself to.

  CHAPTER XVII

 SEALSKIN AND PINK CORAL

MONDAY arrived. It wanted now less than three weeks to the end of the
term. A good many of the girls were talking about home and Christmas,
and already the hard-worked, the studious, the industrious were owning
to the first symptoms of that pleasant fatigue which would entitle
them to the full enjoyment of their merited holiday.

Priscilla was now a happy girl. She had found her niche in the
college; her work was delightful. Under Maggie's advice she became a
member of the Debating Society and rather reluctantly allowed her name
to be entered in the Dramatic Club. She felt very shy about this, but
that was because she did not know her own power. To her astonishment,
Priscilla found that she could act. If the part suited her she could
throw herself into it so that she ceased to be awkward, ungainly
Priscilla Peel. Out of herself she was no longer awkward, no longer
ungainly. She could only personate certain characters; light and airy
parts she could not attempt, but where much depended on passion and
emotion Priscilla could do splendidly. Every day her friends found
fresh points of interest in this queer girl. Nancy Banister was really
attached to her, Maggie was most faithful in her declared friendship
and Miss Heath took more notice of Priscilla than of any other girl in
the hall. The different lecturers spoke highly of Miss Peel's
comprehension, knowledge and ability. In short, things were going well
with her, and she owned to her own heart that she had never felt
happier in her life.

Prissie, too, was looking forward to the Christmas holidays. She was
to return home then, and her letters to her three little sisters, to
Aunt Raby and to Mr. Hayes were full of the delights of her college
life.

No one could have been more angry than poor Prissie during that
miserable time at the Elliot-Smiths'. Many complaints did she resolve
to make, and dire was the vengeance which she hoped would fall on
Rose's devoted head. But, during her talk with Mr. Hammond, some of
her anger had cooled down. He had touched on great subjects, and
Prissie's soul had responded like a musical instrument to the light
and skilled finger of the musician. All her intellectual powers were
aroused to their utmost, keenest life during this brief little talk.
She found that Hammond could say better and more comprehensive things
than even her dear old tutor, Mr. Hayes. Hammond was abreast of the
present-day aspect of those things in which Prissie delighted. Her
short talk with him made up for all the tedium of the rest of that
wretched afternoon.

On her walk home Priscilla made up her mind to have nothing further to
say to Rose, but also not to make a complaint about her. She would
pass the matter over in silence. If questioned, she would tell her own
friends where she had been; if not questioned, she would volunteer no
information.

Maggie and Nancy did ask her casually what had kept her out so long.

"I was at the Elliot-Smiths' with Miss Merton," replied Priscilla.

They both started when she said this and looked at her hard. They were
too well-bred, however, to give utterance to the many comments which
crowded to their lips. Prissie read their thoughts like a book.

"I did not like it at all," she said; "but I'd rather say nothing
about it, please. After Mr. Hammond came I was happy."

"Mr. Hammond was there?" said Nancy in an eager voice. "Geoffrey
Hammond was at the Elliot-Smiths'? Impossible!"

"He was there," repeated Prissie. She glanced nervously at Maggie, who
had taken up a book and was pretending to read. "He came and he spoke
to me. He was very, very kind, and he made me so happy."

"Dear Prissie," said Maggie suddenly. She got up, went over to the
young girl, tapped her affectionately on the shoulder and left the
room.

Prissie sat, looking thoughtfully before her. After a time she bade
Nancy Banister "good night" and went off to her own room to study the
notes she had taken that morning at the French lecture.

The next few days passed without anything special occurring. If a
little rumor were already beginning to swell in the air, it scarcely
reached the ears of those principally concerned. Maggie Oliphant
continued to make a special favorite of Miss Peel. She sat near her at
breakfast and at the meetings of the Dramatic Society was particularly
anxious to secure a good part for Prissie. The members of the society
intended to act The Princess before the end of the term, and as there
was a great deal to work up and many rehearsals were necessary, they
met in the little theater on most evenings.

Maggie Oliphant had been unanimously selected to take the part of the
Princess. She electrified every one by drawing Miss Peel toward her
and saying in an emphatic voice:

"You must be the Prince, Priscilla."

A look of dismay crept over several faces. One or two made different
proposals.

"Would not Nancy Banister take the part better, Maggie?" said Miss
Claydon, a tall, graceful girl, who was to be Psyche.

"No; Nancy is to be Cyril. She sings well and can do the part
admirably. Miss Peel must be the Prince: I will have no other lover.
What do you say, Miss Peel?"

"I cannot; it is impossible," almost whispered Prissie.

"'Cannot' is a word which must not be listened to in our Dramatic
Society," responded Maggie. "I promise to turn you out a most
accomplished Prince, my friend; no one shall be disappointed in you.
Girls, do you leave this matter in my hands? Do you leave the Prince
to me?"

"We cannot refuse you the privilege of choosing your own Prince,
Princess," said Miss Claydon with a graceful curtsy.

The others assented, but unwillingly. Miss Oliphant was known to be
more full of whims than any one else in the college. Her extraordinary
and sudden friendship for Prissie was regarded as her latest caprice.

Rosalind Merton was not a particularly good actress, but her face was
too pretty not to be called into requisition. She was to take the part
of Melissa.

The society had a grand meeting on the day of Polly Singleton's
auction. Matters were still very much in a state of chaos, but the
rehearsal of some of the parts was got through with credit under the
directions of the clever stage-manager, one of the nicest and best
girls in the college, Constance Field. She had a knack of putting each
girl at her ease-- of discovering the faintest sparks of genius and
fanning them into flame.

Priscilla had learned her speeches accurately: her turn came; she
stood up trembling and began. Gradually the stony (or was it
yearning?) look in Maggie's face moved her. She fancied herself
Hammond, not the Prince. When she spoke to Maggie she felt no longer
like a feeble schoolgirl acting a part. She thought she was pleading
for Hammond, and enthusiasm got into her voice, and a light filled her
eyes. There was a little cheer when Priscilla got through her first
rehearsal. Nancy Banister came up to Rosalind.

"I do believe Maggie is right," she said, "and that Miss Peel will
take the part capitally."

"Miss Oliphant is well known for her magnanimity," retorted Rosalind,
an ugly look spoiling the expression of her face.

"Her magnanimity? What do you mean, Rose?"

"To choose that girl for her Prince!" retorted Rosalind. "Ask Mr.
Hammond what I mean. Ask the Elliot-Smiths."

"I don't know the Elliot-Smiths," said Nancy in a cold voice. She
turned away; she felt displeased and annoyed.

Rose glanced after her. Then she ran up to Maggie Oliphant, who was
preparing to leave the little theater.

"Don't you want to see the auction?" she said in a gay voice. "It's
going to be the best fun we have had for many a long day."

Maggie turned and looked at her.

"The auction? What auction do you mean?" she asked.

"Why, Polly Singleton's, of course. You've not heard of it? It's the
event of the term!"

Maggie laughed.

"You must be talking nonsense, Rose," she said. "An auction at St.
Benet's! A real auction? Impossible!"

"No, it's not impossible. It's true. Polly owes for a lot of things,
and she's going to pay for them in that way. Did you not get a notice?
Polly declared she would send one without fail to every girl in the
college."

"Now I remember," said Miss Oliphant, laughing. "I got an
extraordinary type-written production. I regarded it as a hoax and
consigned it to the wastepaper basket."

"But it wasn't a hoax; it was true. Come away, Miss Oliphant, do.
Polly has got some lovely things."

"I don't think I even know who Polly is," said Maggie. "She surely is
not an inmate of Heath Hall?"

"No, no-- of Katharine Hall. You must know her by sight, at least. A
great big, fat girl, with red hair and freckles."

"Yes, now I remember. I think she has rather a pleasant face."

"Oh, do you really? Isn't she awfully common and vulgar-looking?"

"Common and vulgar-looking people are often pleasant, nevertheless,"
retorted Maggie.

"You'll come to her auction?" insisted Rose.

"I don't know. She has no right to have an auction. Such a proceeding
would give great displeasure to our principals."

"How can you tell that? There never was an auction at the college
before."
