grace and litheness; not by virtue of the glossy masses of dark
brown hair heaped high on her head and held there in wonderful
shining coils; not by virtue of added softness of curve and
daintiness of outline; not because of all these, but because of
the dream and wonder and seeking in her eyes.  She was a woman,
looking, all unconscious of her quest, for love.

The understanding of the change in her came home to me with a
shock that must have left me, I think, something white about the
lips.  I was glad.  She was what I had wished her to become.  But
I wanted the child Betty back; this womanly Betty seemed far away
from me.

I stepped out into the path and she saw me, with a brightening of
her whole face.  She did not rush forward and fling herself into
my arms as she would have done a year ago; but she came towards
me swiftly, holding out her hand.  I had thought her slightly
pale when I had first seen her; but now I concluded I had been
mistaken, for there was a wonderful sunrise of color in her face.
I took her hand--there were no kisses this time.

"Welcome home, Betty," I said.

"Oh, Stephen, it is so good to be back," she breathed, her eyes
shining.

She did not say it was good to see me again, as I had hoped she
would do.  Indeed, after the first minute of greeting, she seemed
a trifle cool and distant.  We walked for an hour in the pine
wood and talked.  Betty was brilliant, witty, self-possessed,
altogether charming.  I thought her perfect and yet my heart
ached.  What a glorious young thing she was, in that splendid
youth of hers!  What a prize for some lucky man--confound the
obtrusive thought!  No doubt we should soon be overrun at Glenby
with lovers.  I should stumble over some forlorn youth at every
step!  Well, what of it?  Betty would marry, of course.  It would
be my duty to see that she got a good husband, worthy of her as
men go.  I thought I preferred the old duty of superintending her
studies.  But there, it was all the same thing--merely a
post-graduate course in applied knowledge.  When she began to
learn life's greatest lesson of love, I, the tried and true old
family friend and mentor, must be on hand to see that the teacher
was what I would have him be, even as I had formerly selected her
instructor in French and botany.  Then, and not until then, would
Betty's education be complete.

I rode home very soberly.  When I reached The Maples I did what I
had not done for years...looked critically at myself in the
mirror.  The realization that I had grown older came home to me
with a new and unpleasant force.  There were marked lines on my
lean face, and silver glints in the dark hair over my temples.
When Betty was ten she had thought me "an old person."  Now, at
eighteen, she probably thought me a veritable ancient of days.
Pshaw, what did it matter?  And yet...I thought of her as I had
seen her, standing under the pines, and something cold and
painful laid its hand on my heart.

My premonitions as to lovers proved correct.  Glenby was soon
infested with them.  Heaven knows where they all came from.  I
had not supposed there was a quarter as many young men in the
whole county; but there they were.  Sara was in the seventh
heaven of delight.  Was not Betty at last a belle?  As for the
proposals...well, Betty never counted her scalps in public; but
every once in a while a visiting youth dropped out and was seen
no more at Glenby.  One could guess what that meant.

Betty apparently enjoyed all this.  I grieve to say that she was
a bit of a coquette.  I tried to cure her of this serious defect,
but for once I found that I had undertaken something I could not
accomplish.  In vain I lectured, Betty only laughed; in vain I
gravely rebuked, Betty only flirted more vivaciously than before.
Men might come and men might go, but Betty went on forever.  I
endured this sort of thing for a year and then I decided that it
was time to interfere seriously.  I must find a husband for
Betty...my fatherly duty would not be fulfilled until I
had...nor, indeed, my duty to society.  She was not a safe person
to have running at large.

None of the men who haunted Glenby was good enough for her.  I
decided that my nephew, Frank, would do very well.  He was a
capital young fellow, handsome, clean-souled, and whole-hearted.
From a worldly point of view he was what Sara would have termed
an excellent match; he had money, social standing and a rising
reputation as a clever young lawyer.  Yes, he should have Betty,
confound him!

They had never met.  I set the wheels going at once.  The sooner
all the fuss was over the better.  I hated fuss and there was
bound to be a good deal of it.  But I went about the business
like an accomplished matchmaker.  I invited Frank to visit The
Maples and, before he came, I talked much...but not too much...of
him to Betty, mingling judicious praise and still more judicious
blame together.  Women never like a paragon.  Betty heard me with
more gravity than she usually accorded to my dissertations on
young men.  She even condescended to ask several questions about
him.  This I thought a good sign.

To Frank I had said not a word about Betty; when he came to The
Maples I took him over to Glenby and, coming upon Betty wandering
about among the beeches in the sunset, I introduced him without
any warning.

He would have been more than mortal if he had not fallen in love
with her upon the spot.  It was not in the heart of man to resist
her...that dainty, alluring bit of womanhood.  She was all in
white, with flowers in her hair, and, for a moment, I could have
murdered Frank or any other man who dared to commit the sacrilege
of loving her.

Then I pulled myself together and left them alone.  I might have
gone in and talked to Sara...two old folks gently reviewing
their youth while the young folks courted outside...but I did
not.  I prowled about the pine wood, and tried to forget how
blithe and handsome that curly-headed boy, Frank, was, and what a
flash had sprung into his eyes when he had seen Betty.  Well,
what of it?  Was not that what I had brought him there for?  And
was I not pleased at the success of my scheme?  Certainly I was!
Delighted!

Next day Frank went to Glenby without even making the poor
pretense of asking me to accompany him.  I spent the time of his
absence overseeing the construction of a new greenhouse I was
having built.  I was conscientious in my supervision; but I felt
no interest in it.  The place was intended for roses, and roses
made me think of the pale yellow ones Betty had worn at her
breast one evening the week before, when, all lovers being
unaccountably absent, we had wandered together under the pines
and talked as in the old days before her young womanhood and my
gray hairs had risen up to divide us.  She had dropped a rose on
the brown floor, and I had sneaked back, after I had left her the
house, to get it, before I went home.  I had it now in my
pocket-book.  Confound it, mightn't a future uncle cherish a
family affection for his prospective niece?

Frank's wooing seemed to prosper.  The other young sparks, who
had haunted Glenby, faded away after his advent.  Betty treated
him with most encouraging sweetness; Sara smiled on him; I stood
in the background, like a benevolent god of the machine, and
flattered myself that I pulled the strings.

At the end of a month something went wrong.  Frank came home from
Glenby one day in the dumps, and moped for two whole days.  I
rode down myself on the third.  I had not gone much to Glenby
that month; but, if there were trouble Bettyward, it was my duty
to make smooth the rough places.

As usual, I found Betty in the pineland.  I thought she looked
rather pale and dull...fretting about Frank no doubt.  She
brightened up when she saw me, evidently expecting that I had
come to straighten matters out; but she pretended to be haughty
and indifferent.

"I am glad you haven't forgotten us altogether, Stephen," she
said coolly.  "You haven't been down for a week."

"I'm flattered that you noticed it," I said, sitting down on a
fallen tree and looking up at her as she stood, tall and lithe,
against an old pine, with her eyes averted.  "I shouldn't have
supposed you'd want an old fogy like myself poking about and
spoiling the idyllic moments of love's young dream."

"Why do you always speak of yourself as old?" said Betty,
crossly, ignoring my reference to Frank.

"Because I am old, my dear.  Witness these gray hairs."

I pushed up my hat to show them the more recklessly.

Betty barely glanced at them.

"You have just enough to give you a distinguished look," she
said, "and you are only forty.  A man is in his prime at forty.
He never has any sense until he is forty--and sometimes he
doesn't seem to have any even then," she concluded impertinently.

My heart beat.  Did Betty suspect?  Was that last sentence meant
to inform me that she was aware of my secret folly, and laughed
at it?

"I came over to see what has gone wrong between you and Frank," I
said gravely.

Betty bit her lips.

"Nothing," she said.

"Betty," I said reproachfully, "I brought you up...or endeavored
to bring you up...to speak the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth.  Don't tell me I have failed.  I'll give
you another chance.  Have you quarreled with Frank?"

"No," said the maddening Betty, "HE quarreled with me.  He went
away in a temper and I do not care if he never comes back!"

I shook my head.

"This won't do, Betty.  As your old family friend I still claim
the right to scold you until you have a husband to do the
scolding.  You mustn't torment Frank.  He is too fine a fellow.
You must marry him, Betty."

"Must I?" said Betty, a dusky red flaming out on her cheek.  She
turned her eyes on me in a most disconcerting fashion.  "Do YOU
wish me to marry Frank, Stephen?"

Betty had a wretched habit of emphasizing pronouns in a fashion
calculated to rattle anybody.

"Yes, I do wish it, because I think it will be best for you," I
replied, without looking at her.  "You must marry some time,
Betty, and Frank is the only man I know to whom I could trust
you.  As your guardian, I have an interest in seeing you well and
wisely settled for life.  You have always taken my advice and
obeyed my wishes; and you've always found my way the best, in
the long run, haven't you, Betty?  You won't prove rebellious
now, I'm sure.  You know quite well that I am advising you for
your own good.  Frank is a splendid young fellow, who loves you
with all his heart.  Marry him, Betty.  Mind, I don't COMMAND.  I
have no right to do that, and you are too old to be ordered
about, if I had.  But I wish and advise it.  Isn't that enough,
Betty?"

I had been looking away from her all the time I was talking,
gazing determinedly down a sunlit vista of pines.  Every word I
said seemed to tear my heart, and come from my lips stained with
life-blood.  Yes, Betty should marry Frank!  But, good God, what
would become of me!

Betty left her station under the pine tree, and walked around me
until she got right in front of my face.  I couldn't help looking
at her, for if I moved my eyes she moved too.  There was nothing
meek or submissive about her; her head was held high, her eyes
were blazing, and her cheeks were crimson.  But her words were
meek enough.

"I will marry Frank if you wish it, Stephen," she said.  "You are
my friend.  I have never crossed your wishes, and, as you say, I
have never regretted being guided by them.  I will do exactly as
you wish in this case also, I promise you that.  But, in so
solemn a question, I must be very certain what you DO wish.
There must be no doubt in my mind or heart.  Look me squarely in
the eyes, Stephen--as you haven't done once to-day, no, nor once
since I came home from school--and, so looking, tell me that you
wish me to marry Frank Douglas and I will do it!  DO you,
Stephen?"

I had to look her in the eyes, since nothing else would do her;
and, as I did so, all the might of manhood in me rose up in hot
revolt against the lie I would have told her.  That unfaltering,
impelling gaze of hers drew the truth from my lips in spite of
myself.

"No, I don't wish you to marry Frank Douglas, a thousand times
no!" I said passionately.  "I don't wish you to marry any man on
earth but myself.  I love you--I love you, Betty.  You are dearer
to me than life--dearer to me than my own happiness.  It was your
happiness I thought of--and so I asked you to marry Frank because
I believed he would make you a happy woman.  That is all!"

Betty's defiance went from her like a flame blown out.  She
turned away and drooped her proud head.

"It could not have made me a happy woman to marry one man, loving
another," she said, in a whisper.

I got up and went over to her.

"Betty, whom do you love?" I asked, also in a whisper.

"You," she murmured meekly--oh, so meekly, my proud little girl!

"Betty," I said brokenly, "I'm old--too old for you--I'm more
than twenty years your senior--I'm--"

"Oh!" Betty wheeled around on me and stamped her foot.  "Don't
mention your age to me again.  I don't care if you're as old as
Methuselah.  But I'm not going to coax you to marry me, sir!  If
you won't, I'll never marry anybody--I'll live and die an old
maid.  You can please yourself, of course!"

She turned away, half-laughing, half-crying; but I caught her in
my arms and crushed her sweet lips against mine.

"Betty, I'm the happiest man in the world--and I was the most
miserable when I came here."

"You deserved to be," said Betty cruelly.  "I'm glad you were.
Any man as stupid as you deserves to be unhappy.  What do you
think I felt like, loving you with all my heart, and seeing you
simply throwing me at another man's head.  Why, I've always loved
you, Stephen; but I didn't know it until I went to that
detestable school.  Then I found out--and I thought that was why
you had sent me.  But, when I came home, you almost broke my
heart.  That was why I flirted so with all those poor, nice boys--I
wanted to hurt you but I never thought I succeeded.  You just
went on being FATHERLY.  Then, when you brought Frank here, I
almost gave up hope; and I tried to make up my mind to marry him;
I should have done it if you had insisted.  But I had to have one
more try for happiness first.  I had just one little hope to
inspire me with sufficient boldness.  I saw you, that night, when
you came back here and picked up my rose!  I had come back,
myself, to be alone and unhappy."

"It is the most wonderful thing that ever happened--that you
should love me," I said.

"It's not--I couldn't help it," said Betty, nestling her brown
head on my shoulder.  "You taught me everything else, Stephen, so
nobody but you could teach me how to love.  You've made a
thorough thing of educating me."

"When will you marry me, Betty?" I asked.

"As soon as I can fully forgive you for trying to make me marry
somebody else," said Betty.

It was rather hard lines on Frank, when you come to think of it.
But, such is the selfishness of human nature that we didn't think
much about Frank.  The young fellow behaved like the Douglas he
was.  Went a little white about the lips when I told him, wished
me all happiness, and went quietly away, "gentleman unafraid."

He has since married and is, I understand, very happy.  Not as
happy as I am, of course; that is impossible, because there is
only one Betty in the world, and she is my wife.



XII. IN HER SELFLESS MOOD

The raw wind of an early May evening was puffing in and out the
curtains of the room where Naomi Holland lay dying.  The air was
moist and chill, but the sick woman would not have the window
closed.

"I can't get my breath if you shut everything up so tight," she
said.  "Whatever comes, I ain't going to be smothered to death,
Car'line Holland."

Outside of the window grew a cherry tree, powdered with moist
buds with the promise of blossoms she would not live to see.
Between its boughs she saw a crystal cup of sky over hills that
were growing dim and purple.  The outside air was full of sweet,
wholesome springtime sounds that drifted in fitfully.  There were
voices and whistles in the barnyard, and now and then faint
laughter.  A bird alighted for a moment on a cherry bough, and
twittered restlessly.  Naomi knew that white mists were hovering
in the silent hollows, that the maple at the gate wore a misty
blossom red, and that violet stars were shining bluely on the
brooklands.

The room was a small, plain one.  The floor was bare, save for a
couple of braided rugs, the plaster discolored, the walls dingy
and glaring.  There had never been much beauty in Naomi Holland's
environment, and, now that she was dying, there was even less.

At the open window a boy of about ten years was leaning out over
the sill and whistling.  He was tall for his age, and
beautiful--the hair a rich auburn with a glistening curl in it,
skin very white and warm-tinted, eyes small and of a greenish
blue, with dilated pupils and long lashes.  He had a weak chin,
and a full, sullen mouth.

The bed was in the corner farthest from the window; on it the
sick woman, in spite of the pain that was her portion
continually, was lying as quiet and motionless as she had done
ever since she had lain down upon it for the last time.  Naomi
Holland never complained; when the agony was at its worst, she
shut her teeth more firmly over her bloodless lip, and her great
black eyes glared at the blank wall before in a way that gave her
attendants what they called "the creeps," but no word or moan
escaped her.

Between the paroxysms she kept up her keen interest in the life
that went on about her.  Nothing escaped her sharp, alert eyes
and ears.  This evening she lay spent on the crumpled pillows;
she had had a bad spell in the afternoon and it had left her very
weak.  In the dim light her extremely long face looked
corpse-like already.  Her black hair lay in a heavy braid over
the pillow and down the counterpane.  It was all that was left of
her beauty, and she took a fierce joy in it.  Those long,
glistening, sinuous tresses must be combed and braided every day,
no matter what came.

A girl of fourteen was curled up on a chair at the head of the
bed, with her head resting on the pillow.  The boy at the window
was her half-brother; but, between Christopher Holland and Eunice
Carr, not the slightest resemblance existed.

Presently the sibilant silence was broken by a low,
half-strangled sob.  The sick woman, who had been watching a
white evening star through the cherry boughs, turned impatiently
at the sound.

"I wish you'd get over that, Eunice," she said sharply.  "I don't
want any one crying over me until I'm dead; and then you'll have
plenty else to do, most likely.  If it wasn't for Christopher I
wouldn't be anyways unwilling to die.  When one has had such a
life as I've had, there isn't much in death to be afraid of.
Only, a body would like to go right off, and not die by inches,
like this.  'Tain't fair!"

She snapped out the last sentence as if addressing some unseen,
tyrannical presence; her voice, at least, had not weakened, but
was as clear and incisive as ever.  The boy at the window stopped
whistling, and the girl silently wiped her eyes on her faded
gingham apron.

Naomi drew her own hair over her lips, and kissed it.

"You'll never have hair like that, Eunice," she said.  "It does
seem most too pretty to bury, doesn't it?  Mind you see that it
is fixed nice when I'm laid out.  Comb it right up on my head and
braid it there."

A sound, such as might be wrung from a suffering animal, came
from the girl, but at the same moment the door opened and a woman
entered.

"Chris," she said sharply, "you get right off for the cows, you
lazy little scamp!  You knew right well you had to go for them,
and here you've been idling, and me looking high and low for you.
Make haste now; it's ridiculous late."

The boy pulled in his head and scowled at his aunt, but he dared
not disobey, and went out slowly with a sulky mutter.

His aunt subdued a movement, that might have developed into a
sound box on his ears, with a rather frightened glance at the
bed.  Naomi Holland was spent and dying, but her temper was still
a thing to hold in dread, and her sister-in-law did not choose to
rouse it by slapping Christopher.  To her and her co-nurse the
spasms of rage, which the sick woman sometimes had, seemed to
partake of the nature of devil possession.  The last one, only
