notion that Leslie don't like you.  If she didn't she wouldn't have
anything to do with you, much less chumming with you as she does.  I
know Leslie Moore too well not to be sure of that."

"The first time I ever saw her, driving her geese down the hill on the
day I came to Four Winds, she looked at me with the same expression,"
persisted Anne.  "I felt it, even in the midst of my admiration of her
beauty.  She looked at me resentfully--she did, indeed, Captain Jim."

"The resentment must have been about something else, Mistress Blythe,
and you jest come in for a share of it because you happened past.
Leslie DOES take sullen spells now and again, poor girl.  I can't blame
her, when I know what she has to put up with.  I don't know why it's
permitted.  The doctor and I have talked a lot abut the origin of evil,
but we haven't quite found out all about it yet.  There's a vast of
onunderstandable things in life, ain't there, Mistress Blythe?
Sometimes things seem to work out real proper-like, same as with you
and the doctor.  And then again they all seem to go catawampus.
There's Leslie, so clever and beautiful you'd think she was meant for a
queen, and instead she's cooped up over there, robbed of almost
everything a woman'd value, with no prospect except waiting on Dick
Moore all her life.  Though, mind you, Mistress Blythe, I daresay she'd
choose her life now, such as it is, rather than the life she lived with
Dick before he went away.  THAT'S something a clumsy old sailor's
tongue mustn't meddle with.  But you've helped Leslie a lot--she's a
different creature since you come to Four Winds.  Us old friends see
the difference in her, as you can't.  Miss Cornelia and me was talking
it over the other day, and it's one of the mighty few p'ints that we
see eye to eye on.  So jest you throw overboard any idea of her not
liking you."

Anne could hardly discard it completely, for there were undoubtedly
times when she felt, with an instinct that was not to be combated by
reason, that Leslie harbored a queer, indefinable resentment towards
her.  At times, this secret consciousness marred the delight of their
comradeship; at others it was almost forgotten; but Anne always felt
the hidden thorn was there, and might prick her at any moment.  She
felt a cruel sting from it on the day when she told Leslie of what she
hoped the spring would bring to the little house of dreams.  Leslie
looked at her with hard, bitter, unfriendly eyes.

"So you are to have THAT, too," she said in a choked voice.  And
without another word she had turned and gone across the fields
homeward.  Anne was deeply hurt; for the moment she felt as if she
could never like Leslie again.  But when Leslie came over a few
evenings later she was so pleasant, so friendly, so frank, and witty,
and winsome, that Anne was charmed into forgiveness and forgetfulness.
Only, she never mentioned her darling hope to Leslie again; nor did
Leslie ever refer to it.  But one evening, when late winter was
listening for the word of spring, she came over to the little house for
a twilight chat; and when she went away she left a small, white box on
the table.  Anne found it after she was gone and opened it wonderingly.
In it was a tiny white dress of exquisite workmanship--delicate
embroidery, wonderful tucking, sheer loveliness.  Every stitch in it
was handwork; and the little frills of lace at neck and sleeves were of
real Valenciennes.  Lying on it was a card--"with Leslie's love."

"What hours of work she must have put on it," said Anne.  "And the
material must have cost more than she could really afford.  It is very
sweet of her."

But Leslie was brusque and curt when Anne thanked her, and again the
latter felt thrown back upon herself.

Leslie's gift was not alone in the little house.  Miss Cornelia had,
for the time being, given up sewing for unwanted, unwelcome eighth
babies, and fallen to sewing for a very much wanted first one, whose
welcome would leave nothing to be desired.  Philippa Blake and Diana
Wright each sent a marvellous garment; and Mrs. Rachel Lynde sent
several, in which good material and honest stitches took the place of
embroidery and frills.  Anne herself made many, desecrated by no touch
of machinery, spending over them the happiest hours of the happy winter.

Captain Jim was the most frequent guest of the little house, and none
was more welcome.  Every day Anne loved the simple-souled, true-hearted
old sailor more and more.  He was as refreshing as a sea breeze, as
interesting as some ancient chronicle.  She was never tired of
listening to his stories, and his quaint remarks and comments were a
continual delight to her.  Captain Jim was one of those rare and
interesting people who "never speak but they say something."  The milk
of human kindness and the wisdom of the serpent were mingled in his
composition in delightful proportions.

Nothing ever seemed to put Captain Jim out or depress him in any way.

"I've kind of contracted a habit of enj'ying things," he remarked once,
when Anne had commented on his invariable cheerfulness.  "It's got so
chronic that I believe I even enj'y the disagreeable things.  It's
great fun thinking they can't last.  'Old rheumatiz,' says I, when it
grips me hard, 'you've GOT to stop aching sometime.  The worse you are
the sooner you'll stop, mebbe.  I'm bound to get the better of you in
the long run, whether in the body or out of the body.'"

One night, by the fireside at the light Anne saw Captain Jim's
"life-book."  He needed no coaxing to show it and proudly gave it to
her to read.

"I writ it to leave to little Joe," he said.  "I don't like the idea of
everything I've done and seen being clean forgot after I've shipped for
my last v'yage.  Joe, he'll remember it, and tell the yarns to his
children."

It was an old leather-bound book filled with the record of his voyages
and adventures.  Anne thought what a treasure trove it would be to a
writer.  Every sentence was a nugget.  In itself the book had no
literary merit; Captain Jim's charm of storytelling failed him when he
came to pen and ink; he could only jot roughly down the outline of his
famous tales, and both spelling and grammar were sadly askew.  But Anne
felt that if anyone possessed of the gift could take that simple record
of a brave, adventurous life, reading between the bald lines the tales
of dangers staunchly faced and duty manfully done, a wonderful story
might be made from it.  Rich comedy and thrilling tragedy were both
lying hidden in Captain Jim's "life-book," waiting for the touch of the
master hand to waken the laughter and grief and horror of thousands.

Anne said something of this to Gilbert as they walked home.

"Why don't you try your hand at it yourself, Anne?"

Anne shook her head.

"No.  I only wish I could.  But it's not in the power of my gift.  You
know what my forte is, Gilbert--the fanciful, the fairylike, the
pretty.  To write Captain Jim's life-book as it should be written one
should be a master of vigorous yet subtle style, a keen psychologist, a
born humorist and a born tragedian.  A rare combination of gifts is
needed.  Paul might do it if he were older.  Anyhow, I'm going to ask
him to come down next summer and meet Captain Jim."

"Come to this shore," wrote Anne to Paul.  "I am afraid you cannot find
here Nora or the Golden Lady or the Twin Sailors; but you will find one
old sailor who can tell you wonderful stories."

Paul, however wrote back, saying regretfully that he could not come
that year.  He was going abroad for two year's study.

"When I return I'll come to Four Winds, dear Teacher," he wrote.

"But meanwhile, Captain Jim is growing old," said Anne, sorrowfully,
"and there is nobody to write his life-book."



CHAPTER 18

SPRING DAYS

The ice in the harbor grew black and rotten in the March suns; in April
there were blue waters and a windy, white-capped gulf again; and again
the Four Winds light begemmed the twilights.

"I'm so glad to see it once more," said Anne, on the first evening of
its reappearance.  "I've missed it so all winter.  The northwestern sky
has seemed blank and lonely without it."

The land was tender with brand-new, golden-green, baby leaves.  There
was an emerald mist on the woods beyond the Glen.  The seaward valleys
were full of fairy mists at dawn.

Vibrant winds came and went with salt foam in their breath.  The sea
laughed and flashed and preened and allured, like a beautiful,
coquettish woman.  The herring schooled and the fishing village woke to
life.  The harbor was alive with white sails making for the channel.
The ships began to sail outward and inward again.

"On a spring day like this," said Anne, "I know exactly what my soul
will feel like on the resurrection morning."

"There are times in spring when I sorter feel that I might have been a
poet if I'd been caught young," remarked Captain Jim.  "I catch myself
conning over old lines and verses I heard the schoolmaster reciting
sixty years ago.  They don't trouble me at other times.  Now I feel as
if I had to get out on the rocks or the fields or the water and spout
them."

Captain Jim had come up that afternoon to bring Anne a load of shells
for her garden, and a little bunch of sweet-grass which he had found in
a ramble over the sand dunes.

"It's getting real scarce along this shore now," he said.  "When I was
a boy there was a-plenty of it.  But now it's only once in a while
you'll find a plot--and never when you're looking for it.  You jest
have to stumble on it--you're walking along on the sand hills, never
thinking of sweet-grass--and all at once the air is full of
sweetness--and there's the grass under your feet.  I favor the smell of
sweet-grass.  It always makes me think of my mother."

"She was fond of it?" asked Anne.

"Not that I knows on.  Dunno's she ever saw any sweet-grass.  No, it's
because it has a kind of motherly perfume--not too young, you
understand--something kind of seasoned and wholesome and
dependable--jest like a mother.  The schoolmaster's bride always kept
it among her handkerchiefs.  You might put that little bunch among
yours, Mistress Blythe.  I don't like these boughten scents--but a
whiff of sweet-grass belongs anywhere a lady does."

Anne had not been especially enthusiastic over the idea of surrounding
her flower beds with quahog shells; as a decoration they did not appeal
to her on first thought.  But she would not have hurt Captain Jim's
feelings for anything; so she assumed a virtue she did not at first
feel, and thanked him heartily.  And when Captain Jim had proudly
encircled every bed with a rim of the big, milk-white shells, Anne
found to her surprise that she liked the effect.  On a town lawn, or
even up at the Glen, they would not have been in keeping, but here, in
the old-fashioned, sea-bound garden of the little house of dreams, they
BELONGED.

"They DO look nice," she said sincerely.

"The schoolmaster's bride always had cowhawks round her beds," said
Captain Jim.  "She was a master hand with flowers.  She LOOKED at
'em--and touched 'em--SO--and they grew like mad.  Some folks have that
knack--I reckon you have it, too, Mistress Blythe."

"Oh, I don't know--but I love my garden, and I love working in it.  To
potter with green, growing things, watching each day to see the dear,
new sprouts come up, is like taking a hand in creation, I think.  Just
now my garden is like faith--the substance of things hoped for.  But
bide a wee."

"It always amazes me to look at the little, wrinkled brown seeds and
think of the rainbows in 'em," said Captain Jim.  "When I ponder on
them seeds I don't find it nowise hard to believe that we've got souls
that'll live in other worlds.  You couldn't hardly believe there was
life in them tiny things, some no bigger than grains of dust, let alone
color and scent, if you hadn't seen the miracle, could you?"

Anne, who was counting her days like silver beads on a rosary, could
not now take the long walk to the lighthouse or up the Glen road.  But
Miss Cornelia and Captain Jim came very often to the little house.
Miss Cornelia was the joy of Anne's and Gilbert's existence.  They
laughed side-splittingly over her speeches after every visit.  When
Captain Jim and she happened to visit the little house at the same time
there was much sport for the listening.  They waged wordy warfare, she
attacking, he defending.  Anne once reproached the Captain for his
baiting of Miss Cornelia.

"Oh, I do love to set her going, Mistress Blythe," chuckled the
unrepentant sinner.  "It's the greatest amusement I have in life.  That
tongue of hers would blister a stone.  And you and that young dog of a
doctor enj'y listening to her as much as I do."

Captain Jim came along another evening to bring Anne some mayflowers.
The garden was full of the moist, scented air of a maritime spring
evening.  There was a milk-white mist on the edge of the sea, with a
young moon kissing it, and a silver gladness of stars over the Glen.
The bell of the church across the harbor was ringing dreamily sweet.
The mellow chime drifted through the dusk to mingle with the soft
spring-moan of the sea.  Captain Jim's mayflowers added the last
completing touch to the charm of the night.

"I haven't seen any this spring, and I've missed them," said Anne,
burying her face in them.

"They ain't to be found around Four Winds, only in the barrens away
behind the Glen up yander.  I took a little trip today to the
Land-of-nothing-to-do, and hunted these up for you.  I reckon they're
the last you'll see this spring, for they're nearly done."

"How kind and thoughtful you are, Captain Jim.  Nobody else--not even
Gilbert"--with a shake of her head at him--"remembered that I always
long for mayflowers in spring."

"Well, I had another errand, too--I wanted to take Mr. Howard back
yander a mess of trout.  He likes one occasional, and it's all I can do
for a kindness he did me once.  I stayed all the afternoon and talked
to him.  He likes to talk to me, though he's a highly eddicated man and
I'm only an ignorant old sailor, because he's one of the folks that's
GOT to talk or they're miserable, and he finds listeners scarce around
here.  The Glen folks fight shy of him because they think he's an
infidel.  He ain't that far gone exactly--few men is, I reckon--but
he's what you might call a heretic.  Heretics are wicked, but they're
mighty int'resting.  It's jest that they've got sorter lost looking for
God, being under the impression that He's hard to find--which He ain't
never.  Most of 'em blunder to Him after awhile, I guess.  I don't
think listening to Mr. Howard's arguments is likely to do me much harm.
Mind you, I believe what I was brought up to believe.  It saves a vast
of bother--and back of it all, God is good.  The trouble with Mr.
Howard is that he's a leetle TOO clever.  He thinks that he's bound to
live up to his cleverness, and that it's smarter to thrash out some new
way of getting to heaven than to go by the old track the common,
ignorant folks is travelling.  But he'll get there sometime all right,
and then he'll laugh at himself."

"Mr. Howard was a Methodist to begin with," said Miss Cornelia, as if
she thought he had not far to go from that to heresy.

"Do you know, Cornelia," said Captain Jim gravely, "I've often thought
that if I wasn't a Presbyterian I'd be a Methodist."

"Oh, well," conceded Miss Cornelia, "if you weren't a Presbyterian it
wouldn't matter much what you were.  Speaking of heresy, reminds me,
doctor--I've brought back that book you lent me--that Natural Law in
the Spiritual World--I didn't read more'n a third of it.  I can read
sense, and I can read nonsense, but that book is neither the one nor
the other."

"It IS considered rather heretical in some quarters," admitted Gilbert,
"but I told you that before you took it, Miss Cornelia."

"Oh, I wouldn't have minded its being heretical.  I can stand
wickedness, but I can't stand foolishness," said Miss Cornelia calmly,
and with the air of having said the last thing there was to say about
Natural Law.

"Speaking of books, A Mad Love come to an end at last two weeks ago,"
remarked Captain Jim musingly.  "It run to one hundred and three
chapters.  When they got married the book stopped right off, so I
