
"We've lost him!" murmured Tom, when he could get back his breath.
"Now who in the name of Old Nick can he be?"

"Evidently a friend to Baxter.  Perhaps he  is Baxter's father?"
suggested Sam.

"Baxter's father--Gracious!  He is!"

"How do you know?"

"I'm not positive, but when I met him and the thief in the woods,
the thief, who was called Buddy, started to call that fellow
Baxter, but the tall man wouldn't have it, and made him call him
Nolly.  His right name, I feel certain, is Arnold Baxter."

"Then, if he isn't Baxter's father, he must be some close
relative, otherwise he wouldn't give Baxter that money.  Now it is
easy to see where the bully gets all of his cash.  That tall man
must be rich."

"Yes, but who knows how he comes by his money?  He is the chum of
a thief, that's certain."

A search was made for Dan Baxter, but he could not be found.  As a
matter of fact, he had been in the buggy, hiding under the seat.
The boys hung around for quarter of an hour longer, and then
resolved to return to Putnam Hall.

"No use of making a row about it," said Tom.  "I remember that
policeman at the steamboat landing.  He is a terribly fat fellow
and evidently a hard drinker.  He couldn't help us enough.  We had
better try to work this out on our own account.  I'll tackle
Baxter the first chance I get."

When the Hall was reached they looked around for the bully, but
found he had not returned.  They had now to go in for their
studies, and for the time being the affair was dropped.

That afternoon found them on the lake, and while enjoying the
skating Dick was informed of what had occurred.  "A bad crowd,"
said the elder Rover.  "Yes, tackle Baxter, by all means.  But be
cautious what you say, for you can't prove much, remember."

A race had been arranged between the boys, and Dick was one of the
contestants.  The distance was from one end of the cove to the
other was a little over three-quarters of a mile.  There were ten
starters, including Fred, Frank, Larry, and Mumps.  Mumps had a
reputation as a skater, gained at his home on the Hudson River.

"All ready?" shouted the starter.

There was a dead silence.

"Go!" came the word, and away went the ten, their skates flashing
brightly in the setting sun.  Soon Larry Colby was in advance,
with Mumps just over his shoulder.

"It is Larry's race!"

"Mumps is a close second!"

"Shake 'em up, Fred!  What are you lagging about, Frank?  Go it,
Leo!"

Skirk skirk skirk went the skate runners, and now a crowd of lads
started in pursuit of the racers.  Soon the turning point was
gained.  Larry was in advance still, but now Mumps overtook him,
and suddenly the boy from the Hudson who had such a reputation as
a racer shot fifteen feet in advance.  It looked as if the race
was certainly his, and Larry and the others felt much downcast.




CHAPTER XIX

THE SKATING RACE--DAN BAXTER IS CORNERED


The wind had been with the racers thus far, but as one after
another of the skaters turned the mark they found the wind now
full in their faces, and it was blowing freshly.

"Mumps will win beyond a doubt!" was the cry, as the lad from the
Hudson River forged still further ahead.

"My skate is loose!" cried Larry, and a second later the skate came
off and flew fifty feet away.

By this time Dick and Fred were coming up, slowly but surely.  It
seemed to be nip-and-tuck between them, and the friends of each
cheered wildly.

"Go it, Dick; you can come in second anyway!"

"Make him follow you, Fred!  You can do it if you try!"

On and on went the racers, Mumps still ten feet ahead, Fred and
Dick side by side, and the others in a bunch just back of them.

But the strain was now beginning to tell upon Mumps, who had
pushed himself too much from the start.  Halfway to the finish
from the turning point Dick and Fred began to crawl up, until they
were less than a yard behind him, one at either hand.

"Go it, Mumps!  They are catching you!"

Mumps did try to increase his speed, but his wind was gone and he
could hardly strike out.  The finish was now in sight, and the
boys began to shout on every side:

"Go it, every one of you!"

"Hurrah! Mumps, Dick, and Fred are a tie!"

It was true the three boys were side by side.  But presently both
Dick and Fred made extra efforts and forged ahead.

"It's your race, Fred!"

"It's yours, Dick!"

But it was neither's race--for with a shout both whizzed over
the line at the same instant.

"A tie!"

"And Mumps ain't in it!"

"Three cheers for Dick and Fred!" shouted Frank Harrington, and
the cheers were given with a will.  By this time the play hour was
over, and all of the skaters rushed back to the Hall, to get ready
for the drill previous to supper.  It is needless to add that each
lad brought an extra big appetite with him.

All of the Royer boys noticed that Dan Baxter did not turn up at
roll call, nor did the bully put in an appearance that night.
"Got a day off," said Mumps, but that was all he could tell.

Late on the following day Tom was walking toward the gymnasium
when he caught sight of Baxter just entering the school grounds.
He at once ran toward the bully.

"Baxter, I want to have a talk with you," he said sharply, as he
looked the bully squarely in the face.

"Do you?" was the uneasy answer.  "All right, fire ahead."

"Hadn't you better come up to the dormitory?  We can have it all
to ourselves, for the others are either in the gymnasium or on the
lake."

"Well, I was going up to our dormitory anyway," answered Baxter,
and stalked off, leaving Tom to follow him.  Once they were in the
dormitory occupied by the bully and his set, Baxter locked the
door.

"Now out with what you have got to say, and be quick about it," he
growled.

"I want to know who that man was, you met in the tavern in
Cedarville."

"Didn't meet any man in particular.  Met half a dozen in general."

"You know the man I mean--the tall fellow, with a scar on his
chin."

"Oh, that fellow?  I think his name is Nolly.  He's a book agent,
and I promised to buy some histories from him," and Baxter
pretended to yawn, as if he was not especially interested.

"You are not telling the truth, Baxter," answered Tom, undaunted
by this show of nerve.

"Do you mean to say I lie, Rover?  Take care, or you may be sorry
for what you say!"

"You can't pull the wool over my eyes, Baxter.  That man's name is
no more Nolly than mine is George Washington or yours William
McKinley."

"Isn't it?  Then perhaps you know his real name."

"I do.  His name is Arnold Baxter."

Had a bomb exploded at Baxter's ear he would not have appeared
more astonished.

"Say, who told you that?" he demanded fiercely and caught Tom by
the arm.

"Let go of me, Dan Baxter."

"I say, who told you that?"

"I heard his name in the woods.  He was with the man who robbed my
brother Dick of his watch, when we were at home."

"Stuff and nonsense!" growled the bully, but he was very pale, and
his voice shook with emotion.  "That man's name is William Nolly.
He used to know my father.  That is why I helped him along by
giving him an order for the histories.  I don't really want the
books."

"If you was helping him, how is it that Sam and I saw you taking a
roll of bills from him down at the tavern?"

Again Baxter started.  "You didn't see no such thing!" he roared,
regardless of his grammar.  "I--that is--he gave me some
change, that is all.  Here are the books I bought," and he pointed
to a package he had been carrying.

"It's a made-up story," retorted Tom.  "He gave you money, and my
opinion is that that man is your father, and that he is no better
than the man with whom he associates."

The words had scarcely left Tom's lips than Baxter leaped upon
him--like an enraged animal and hurled him to the floor. "I've a good
mind to--to kill you for that, Rover!" he hissed. "Take it back, or
I'll choke you to death!" and his strong hand sought Tom's throat.

"Will you!" came in a gasp, and now Tom turned over and threw the
bully to one side.  "I guess two can play at this game.  Take
that!" and he struck Baxter a heavy blow on the side of the face.
In a moment they had clinched and were trying their best to throw
each other.

Suddenly came a rattle of the door knob.  "Boys! Boys!  What does
this mean?" It was George Strong's voice.  "Open the door
instantly."

"Keep your mouth shut!" whispered Baxter, as he again shook his
fist in Tom's face.  "Not one word--on your life!"

Then he disengaged himself, adjusted his collar and tie, which had
become rumpled, and unlocked the door.  At once the head assistant
strode into the dormitory.

"Have you two been fighting?" he demanded.

"We were only boxing a bit, sir," answered Baxter, before Tom
could speak.  "No harm intended, sir."

"You were making a good deal of noise," answered George Strong
dryly.  "What have you to say, Rover?"

"I have this to say, Mr. Strong," answered Tom boldly.  "I would
like to interview Captain Putnam without delay."

"Don't you dare--" began Baxter, when a wave of the teacher's
hand cut him, short.

"About what, Rover?"

"About this affair, and about Baxter, sir.  I am not a telltale,
but certain things have happened which I think Captain Putnam
should know for his own sake and for the reputation of his
school."

"You--you imp!" hissed Baxter.  He wanted to spring at Tom, but
now George Strong caught him and held him fast.

"Baxter, you had best come with me--and you too, Rover."

"To see Captain Putnam?" queried Tom.

"Yes."

"I don't want to go," blustered the bully.  "Let Rover tell his
yarn--I don't care.  It will be only another of his lies."

"Then you shall go to the guardroom," said the teacher.  "Rover,
you may go to see the captain alone."

"I will sir--at once," and Tom made away.  He had no sooner
departed than George Strong marched Baxter off to the guardroom
previously described.  As the pair passed down the stairs they
encountered Mumps coming up.

"Hullo, Dan, what does this mean?" asked Mumps in wonder.

"I'm under arrest," laughed Baxter bitterly.  "And for nothing,
too."

"Silence!" commanded George Strong.  "If you have done nothing
wrong, you will soon be released."

"You bet I will," rejoined Baxter insolently, and then, watching
his chance, he made a sign which Mumps well understood.  The sign
meant "Come and help me if you can."

Mumps nodded to show that he understood.  Then he pretended to go
up to the dormitory, while the head teacher conducted Baxter to
the guardroom, locked the impudent one in, and walked away with
the key.




CHAPTER XX

THE BULLY LEAVES PUTNAM HALL


"So you wish to see me, Rover?  Very well, come right in and sit
down," said Captain Putnam, who sat in front of his desk, making
up some of his accounts for the month just past.

Tom came in and sat down.  It must be confessed he was a trifle
nervous, but this soon wore away.

"I came to tell you something and to ask your advice," he began.
"You remember what happened to me when I ran away into the woods
just after arriving at the Hall?"

"Very well, Thomas," and the captain smiled.

"Well, when Sam and I went to Cedarville to buy our skates we saw
Dan Baxter in the tavern there, in company with the man with a
scar on his chin.  This man gave Baxter some bank bills."

"What!  At the tavern?"

"Yes, Sir."

"Please tell your story in detail, Rover," and now Captain Putnam
swung around so that he might get a full view of his pupil's face.

And Tom told his story from beginning to end just as I have set it
down in the foregoing pages.

"I am certain this man is some relative of Baxter," he concluded.
"And I am equally certain he is not an honest fellow."

"Humph!" Captain Putnam arose and began to pace the heavily
carpeted floor.  "Rover, this is a serious charge."

"I understand that, Sir.  But you can't blame us boys for trying
to get back Dick's watch and trying to--to--"

"Bring the guilty party to justice?  Certainly not!  But it would
seem the man with a scar is not the thief."

"No, but he is the boon companion of the thief."

"That is true--unless there is some grave mistake.  But you are
right about one thing, the man is really Baxter's father, and his
name is Arnold Baxter."

"And why does he travel around under the name of Nolly?"

"That is the mystery.  I met Mr. Baxter only once--when he
placed his son in my care.  At that time I was certain he was
wearing a wig and a false mustache.  The scar was on his chin,
although he tried to hide it.  I have never seen him since.  When
any money is due from him he sends it to me by mail and does not
ask for any receipt.  I once asked Baxter about his parents, and
he said his mother was dead and he didn't know exactly where his
father was, as the latter was a great traveler and went
everywhere."

"I see."

"If you are right, and the man is a rascal, it is to his credit
that he is trying to bring his son up as a gentleman.  Perhaps he
doesn't want Daniel to know anything of the past.  Do you follow
me?"

"I do, sir.  But if this is so, would he take his son into the
tavern?"

"Perhaps--everybody is not so opposed to drinking as I am."

"Well, if Mr. Baxter is a bad man, I rather think Dan is a chip of
the old block," rejoined Tom bluntly.  "But be that as it may, all
I want to get hold of is that thief and Dick's timepiece."

"I will question Baxter closely," answered Captain Putnam.  "But I
do not wish to hold him guilty of something of which most likely
he knows nothing."

George Strong had by this time come in, and he was sent to bring
Baxter.  He was gone but a few minutes when he came back in high
excitement.

"Baxter has broken out of the guardroom!" he, exclaimed.  "I
cannot find him anywhere!"

"Did you look in the dormitory?"

"Yes, sir; and his valise is gone, and his trunk is empty of all
