
CHAPTER XXVII -- THE RIDE TO BARTON'S



Willis Ford went to the station master, who stood at the door with a
cheap cigar in his mouth.

"Is there a man named Joel Barton living hereabouts?" he asked.

The station master took his cigar from his mouth and surveyed his
questioner with some curiosity.

"Does he owe you money?" he inquired.

"No," answered Ford, impatiently. "Will you answer my question?"

"You needn't be in such a pesky hurry," drawled the station master.
"Yes, he lives up the road a piece."

"How far is a piece?"

"Well, maybe a mile."

"Straighten?"

"Yes."

"Is there any way of riding?"

"Well, stranger, I've got a team myself. Is that boy with you?"

"Yes."

"I'll take you over for half a dollar."

"Can you go at once?"

"Yes."

"Then it's a bargain."

The station master, whose house was only three minutes' walk away,
appeared in a reasonable time with a farm wagon, drawn by an old
horse that had seen better days, it is to be hoped, for she was a
miserable-looking mare.

"Jump in, Herbert," said Ford.

The boy obeyed, and sat on the front seat, between the driver and
his abductor.

"I suppose the horse is warranted not to run away?" said Ford,
regarding the animal with a smile.

"He ran away with me once," was the unexpected answer.

"When was that?"

"'Bout fifteen years ago," replied the driver, with grim humor. "I
reckon he's steadied down by this time."

"It looks like it," said Ford.

"Know Joel Barton?" asked the station master, after a pause.

"I saw him once when I was a boy."

"Any relation?"

"He married a cousin of my stepmother. What sort of a man is he?"

"He's a no-account man--shif'less, lazy--drinks."

"That agrees with what I have heard. How about his wife?"

"She's smart enough. If he was like her they'd live comfortably. She
has a hard time with him and Abner--Abner's her son, and just like
his father, only doesn't drink yet. Like as not he will when he gets
older."

Willis Ford was not the only listener to this colloquy. Herbert paid
attention to every word, and in the poor boy's mind there was the
uncomfortable query, "Why are we going to these people?" He would
know soon, probably, but he had a presentiment of trouble.

"Yes," continued the station master, "Mrs. Barton has a hard row to
hoe; but she's a match for Joel."

"What do you mean by that?"

"She's got a temper of her own, and she can talk a man deaf, dumb,
and blind. She gives Barton a piece of her mind whenever he comes
home full."

"She ought to have that satisfaction. From what you tell me, I don't
feel very proud of my unknown relatives."

"Goin' to stay there any length of time?"

"I don't know my own plans yet," answered Willis Ford, with a glance
at the boy. He foresaw a scene when he announced his purpose to
leave Herbert in this unpromising place, but he did not wish to
anticipate it.

"I suppose Barton is a farmer?" he suggested.

"He pretends to be, but his farm doesn't pay much."

"What supports them?"

"His wife takes in work from the tailors in the the village. Then
they've got a cow, and she makes butter. As for Joel, he brings in
precious little money. He might pick up a few dollars hirin' out by
the day, if he wasn't so lazy. I had a job for him myself one day,
but he knocked off at noon--said he was tuckered out, and wanted me
to pay him for that half day. I knew well enough where the money
would go, so I told him I wouldn't pay him unless he worked until
sunset."

"Did he do it?"

"Yes, he did; but he grumbled a good deal. When he got his pay he
went over to Thompson's saloon, and he didn't leave it until all the
money was spent. When his wife heard of it she was mad, and I expect
she gave Joel a taste of the broom handle."

"I wouldn't blame her much."

"Nor I. But here we are. Yonder's Barton's house. Will you get out?"

"Yes."

Abner, who was sitting on a stump, no sooner saw the team stop than
he ran into the house, in some excitement, to tell the news.

"Marm," he said, "there's a team stopped, and there's a man and boy
gettin' out; 'spect they're coming here."

"Lord's sake! Who be they?"

"Dunno."

"Well, go out and tell 'em I'll see' em in a minute."

Abner met them in front of the house.

"Are you Joel Barton's son?" asked Ford.

"That's what the old man says," returned Abner, with a grin.

"Is your mother at home?"

"Marm will be right out. She's slickin' up. Who be you?"

"You'll know in good time, my boy." "Who's he? Is he your son?"

"No," answered Herbert promptly.

Willis Ford turned upon his young ward with a frown. He understood
the boy's tone.

"It will be time to speak when you are spoken to," he said sharply.

"Here's marm'" said Abner, as his mother's tall figure appeared in
the doorway.



CHAPTER XXVIII -- HERBERT IS PROVIDED WITH A NEW HOME



Mrs. Barton regarded the newcomers with a wondering stare.

"Did you want to see Joel?" she asked.

"I shall be glad to see him in due time, Mrs. Barton," returned
Willis Ford, with unwonted politeness; "but I came principally to
see you."

"Who be you?" inquired Mrs. Barton, unceremoniously; "I don't know
you no more'n the dead."

"There is a slight connection between us, however. I am the stepson
of Pauline Estabrook, of New York, who is a cousin of yours."

"You don't say Pauline is your mother?" ejaculated the lady of the
house. "Well, I never expected to see kith or kin of hers out here.
Is that your son?"

"No, Mrs. Barton; but he is under my charge."

Herbert was about to disclaim this, but an ominous frown from Willis
Ford intimidated him.

"My name is Willis Ford; his is Sam Green."

Herbert's eyes opened wide with astonishment at this statement.

"My name is--" he commenced.

"Silence!" hissed Ford, with a menacing look. "You must not
contradict me."

"I s'pose I ought to invite you to stay here," said Mrs. Barton,
awkwardly; "but he's so shif'less, and such a poor provider, that I
ain't got anything in the house fit for dinner."

"Thank you," returned Ford, with an inward shudder. "I shall dine at
the hotel; but I have a little business matter to speak of, Mrs.
Barton, and I would wish to speak in private. I will come into the
house, with your permission, and we will leave the two boys
together."

"Come right in," said Mrs. Barton, whose curiosity was aroused.
"Here, you Abner, just take care of the little boy."

Abner proceeded to do this, first thinking it necessary to ask a few
questions.

"Where do you live when you're at home, Sam?" he asked.

"In New York; but my name isn't Sam," replied Herbert.

"What is it, then?"

"Herbert."

"What makes him call you Sam, then?" asked Abner, with a jerk of the
finger toward the house.

"I don't know, except he is afraid I will be found."

Abner looked puzzled.

"Is he your guardeen?" he asked.

"No; he was my father's clerk."

"Ho! Did your father have clerks?"

"Yes; he is a rich man and does business in New York."

"What made him send you out here?"

"He didn't."

"Then why did you come?"

"Mr. Ford was mad with papa, and stole me away."

"He wouldn't steal me away easy!" said Abner, defiantly; "but, then,
I ain't a little kid like you."

"I'm not a kid," said Herbert, who was not used to slang.

"Oh, you don't know what I mean--you're a little boy and couldn't do
nothin'. If he tried to take me, he'd find his hands full."

Herbert, who was not very much prepossessed by Abner's appearance,
thought it very doubtful whether any one would ever attempt to
kidnap him.

"What's he goin' to do with you?" continued Abner.

"I don't know. I expect he'll make papa pay a good sum to get me
back."

"Humph!" remarked Abner, surveying with some contempt the small
proportions of the boy before him. "You ain't much good. I don't
believe he'll pay much for you."

Tears sprang to the eyes of the little boy, but he forced them back.

"My papa would think differently," he said.

"Papa!" mimicked Abner. "Oh, how nice we are! Why don't you say dad,
like I do?"

"Because it isn't a nice name. Papa wouldn't like to have me call
him so."

"Where did you get them clothes? I don't think much of 'em."

"Nor I," answered Herbert. "They're not my own clothes. Mr. Ford
bought them for me in Chicago."

"He must like you, to buy you new clothes."

"No, he doesn't. My own clothes were much nicer. He sold them. He
was afraid some one would know me in the others."

"I wonder what he and marm are talking about so long?"

This question Herbert was unable to answer. He did not guess how
nearly this conversation affected him.

No sooner had the two entered the house than Willis Ford began.

"Mrs. Barton," he said, "I'll tell you now what brought me here."

"Go ahead," said the lady, encouragingly.

"I want you to take the boy I have brought with me to board."

"Land sakes! I don't keep a boardin' house!"

"No; but if I will make it worth your while you will take him, won't
you?"

"How much will you give?" asked Mrs. Barton, shrewdly.

"Four dollars a week."

"He'll be a sight of trouble," said the lady; but there was
something in her tone that satisfied Ford that she was favorably
inclined to the proposal.

"Oh, no, he won't. He's so small that you can twist him round your
finger. Besides, Abner will be company for him. He will be with him
most of the time."

"Say five dollars and it's a bargain," said Mrs. Barton.

Ford hesitated. He did not care to spend more than he was obliged
to, but it was of importance to obtain at least a temporary refuge
for the boy, of whose care he was heartily tired. It seemed to him
that five dollars would be enough to support the whole family in the
style in which they were apparently accustomed to live. However, it
was politic to make the sum sufficient to interest these people in
retaining charge of the boy.

"Well," he said, after a pause, "it's more than I expected to pay,
but I suppose I shall have to accept your terms. I conclude Mr.
Barton will not object to your taking a boarder?"

"Oh, Joel is of no account," returned Mrs. Barton, contemptuously.
"I run this house!"

Willis Ford suppressed a smile. He could easily believe from Mrs.
Barton's appearance that she was the head of the establishment.

"There's one thing more," added Mrs. Barton; "you're to pay the
money to me. Jest as sure as it goes into Joel's hands, it'll go for
drink. The way that man carries on is a disgrace."

"I should prefer to pay the money to you," said Ford.

"You'll have to pay somethin' in advance, if you want the boy to
have anythin' to eat. I've got to send to the village, and I haven't
got a cent in the house."

Willis Ford took out a pocketbook. Extracting therefrom four
five-dollar bills, he handed them to Mrs. Barton.

"There's money for four weeks," he said. "When that time is up I'll
send you more."

Mrs. Barton's eyes sparkled, and she eagerly clutched the money.

"I ain't seen so much money for years," she said. "I'll jest look
out Joel don't get hold of it. Don't you tell Joel or Abner how much
you've paid me."

"I'll take care of that, Mrs. Barton. By the way, I must caution you
not to believe any of the boy's stories. He's the son of a friend of
mine, who's put him under my care. The boy's weak-minded, and has
strange fancies. He thinks his name isn't Sam Green, and that his
father is rich. Why, only the other day he insisted his name was
George Washington."

"Land's sake! How cur'us!" "Of course; you won't pay any attention
to what he says. He may take it into his head to run away. If he
does, you must get him back."

"You can trust me to do that!" said Mrs. Barton, with emphasis. "I
ain't goin' to let no five-dollar boarder slip through my fingers!"

"That's well! Now I must be going. You will hear from me from time
to time."

He passed through the front door into the yard.

"Good-by!" he said.

Herbert was about to follow him, but he waived him back.

"You are not to come with me, Sam," he said. "I shall leave you for
a few weeks with this good lady."

Herbert stared at him in dismay. This was something he had never
dreamed of.



CHAPTER XXIX -- INTRODUCES MR. BARTON



When Herbert realized that he was to be left behind he ran after
Willis Ford, and pleaded for the privilege of accompanying him.
"Don't leave me here, Mr. Ford!" he said. "I should die of
homesickness!"

"So you would rather go with me?" Ford said, with an amused smile.

"Oh, yes, much rather!"

"I had not supposed you valued my company so highly. I ought to feel
complimented. I am sorry to disappoint you, but I shall have to
