
He reconnoitered it for several minutes, but finally ventured upon a
closer acquaintance. There certainly was no wild animal there, and he
stooped down and began crawling toward the centre.

He was near the middle when he was alarmed at finding the ground giving
way beneath him. It was sinking rapidly downward, and he clutched
desperately at the bushes to save himself, but those that he grasped
yielded and went, too.

In his terror and despair he cried out, and fought like a madman to save
himself; but there was nothing firm or substantial upon which he could
lay hold, and he was helpless to check his descent.

Down, down, down he went in the pulseless darkness, lower and lower,
until he found himself going through the dizzying air--to where?



CHAPTER XXV. WITHIN THE EARTH

It was like a terrible dream, and, for an instant or more, during which
Fred Munson was descending through the gloom and darkness, he believed
it was such indeed; but he was quickly recalled from his error by
his arrival at the end of his journey. The truth was that the boy, in
crawling beneath the clump of bushes for shelter, would have crawled
head first into the mouth of the cave, but for the fact that the ground
immediately surrounding the opening gave way beneath his weight before
he reached it.

His fall was not very far, and when he struck the ground, it was so soft
and yielding that he was scarcely conscious of a jar; but the nervous
shock was so great that, for a few minutes, he believed that he was
fatally injured.

When he was able to recall his scattered senses, he looked around him in
the hope of gaining some idea of where he was; but he quickly saw that
he was in a place where his eyes were of no service. The darkness was as
impenetrable as that which plagued Pharoah and his Egyptians. Only
when he looked upward was the blackness of darkness relieved. Enough
straggling rays worked their way through the bushes to give the opening
a dim, misty appearance, such as is sometimes observed when that orb
is rising in a cloud of fog and vapor; but in every other direction he
might as well have been blind, for all the good his eyes did him.

One of the first things that struck the lad was the sound of the
waterfall which he had heard so distinctly when stretched upon the
earth. It was somewhere near him--so close, even, that he fancied he
could feel the dampness from it, but the soft, rippling character showed
that it did not amount to much. It was a mere cascade, the water of
which entered and passed out the cavern by some means which the boy
could only surmise.

How extensive was this cave?

Had it any outlet other than that by which Fred had entered? Was the
flow even or irregular? Were there pitfalls and abysses about him,
making it too perilous to attempt to grope about in the gloom?

Having entered, how was he to make his way out again?

Such questions as these presented themselves to the boy, as he stood
alone in a world of night, and endeavored to consider the situation
calmly. Stooping down, he felt of the soil. It was of a cold, sandy
nature, and so yielding that, when he struck it, he went below his
ankles.

He stood for some time, debating whether he should remain where he was
until the coming of day, in the hope of gaining additional light, or
whether he should venture upon a little cautious exploration. He finally
decided upon the latter.

"When the elephant goes on a bridge, he feels of it with his trunk to
see whether it is strong enough to bear him, and I'll use my gun to do
the same thing."

This was no more than a simple precaution, and doubtless saved his life.
Grasping the stock firmly, he reached the muzzle forward, and "punched"
the ground pretty thoroughly before venturing upon it, making sure that
it was capable of bearing him safely forward into the darkness beyond.

Generally speaking, the ground of the cavern was tolerably even. There
were little irregularities here and there, but none of them were of a
nature to interfere with walking, provided one could have enough light
to see where he was going.

"If I only had a lantern, I could get round this neighborhood a good
deal faster than this," he said. "It wouldn't be anything more than
fun to explore this cave, which may be as big as the mammoth one of
Kentucky."

Up to this time Fred had been moving almost directly away from the
cascade which he had noticed. The misty light over his head served
somewhat as a guide, and he determined not to wander away from that,
which would prevent his getting lost in the bowels of the earth. The boy
was quite confident that there was some easy way of getting out of the
cave; for if there was none, except by the opening above, then he was in
a Bastile, most surely.

It was undoubtedly the cascade which added to this conviction, for it
seemed to him more than likely that if the water entered and left the
cave, the volume which did so must be of a varying quantity, so that
at certain seasons it was capable of carrying a boy with it. This,
of course, was extremely problematical, but it was hopeful enough to
prevent anything like despair taking possession of the lad as he felt
his way around the cavern.

"Every stream finds its way to the daylight after a time, and so must
this, and why can't it take a fellow along with it? That's what I should
like to know---"

He paused, with a gasp of amazement, for at that moment the gun went out
of his hand as suddenly as if some one in waiting had grasped the muzzle
and jerked it away.

But there was no human agency in the matter. While punching the surface,
he had approached a vast abyss, and the thrust over the edge was so
unexpected that the impulse carried it out of his hand.

As the boy stood amazed and frightened, he heard the weapon going
downward, Heaven could only tell where. First it struck one side, and
then another, the sound growing fainter and fainter, until at last the
strained and listening ear failed to hear it at all. The depth of the
opening was therefore enormous, and Fred shuddered to think how nearly
he had approached, and by what a hair's breadth he had escaped a
terrible death.

At this juncture, the boy suddenly recalled that he had some friction
matches in his possession. He was not in the habit of carrying them, but
several days before he had carefully wrapped up a half-dozen, with the
intention of kindling a fire in the wood near New Boston. From that time
until the present he had failed to remember the circumstance, although
he had so frequently felt the need of a light.

He found a half-dozen securely wrapped about with a piece of newspaper,
and he carefully struck one.

The moment the point flickered into a flame he held it forward and
looked downward.

There was the chasm, which came so nigh swallowing him, in the shape of
a seam or rent some three or four feet in width. It had the appearance
of having been caused by some convulsion of nature, and it extended
at right angles to the course he was pursuing, beyond the limit of his
vision. If necessary, it could be leaped over, but the explorer deemed
it unwise to do so just then.

Now that he had the means at command, Fred decided to look after the
cascade, the sound of which was a guide. His gun was irrevocably gone,
and his progress, therefore, became the more tedious. Disliking to
creep, he adopted the plan of advancing one step, and then groping
around awhile with the other foot, before trusting his weight upon it.
This consumed considerable time, but it was the only safe course, after
what had taken place, and he kept it up until the musical murmur of the
waterfall showed that he had approached about as close as possible.

He then struck another match and held it over his head. It told the
whole story.

A stream, not more than three or four feet in width, issued from the
darkness, and, flowing some distance, went over a ledge of rock. After
falling three or four yards, upon some black and jagged rocks, it
gathered itself together and resumed its journey into and through the
gloom. The tiny flame was unequal to the task of showing where the water
entered and left the cave, and, as the boy was straining his eyesight in
the hope of discovering something more, the blaze scorched his fingers,
he snapped it out.

"That leaves only four," he mused, as he felt of the lucifers, "and I
haven't got enough to spare. I can't gain much by using them that way,
and so I guess I'll hold on to these, and see whether the daylight is
going to help me."

He picked his way carefully along until he was nearly beneath the
opening which had admitted him, where he sat down upon the dry, sandy
ground to await the light of the sun.

"I don't suppose it will help much, for the bushes up there will keep
out pretty much of the sunlight that might have come through; but I
guess I'll have plenty time to wait, and that's what I'll do."

He fell into a sort of doze, lulled by the music of the cascade, which
lasted until the night was over. As soon as he awoke, he looked upward
to see how matters stood.

The additional light showed that the day had come, but it produced no
perceptible effect upon the interior of the cave. All was as dark--that
is, upon the bottom--as ever. It was only in the upper portion that
there was a faint lighting-up.

Fred could see the jagged edges of the opening, with some of the bushes
bent over, and seemingly ready to drop down, with the dirt and gravel
clinging to their roots. The opening was irregular, and some four or
five feet in extent, and, as near as he could estimate, was some thirty
feet above his head.

"If I happened to come down on a rock, I might have got hurt; but things
down here were fixed to catch me, and it begins to look as though they
were fixed to hold me, too."

His situation was certainly very serious. He had no gun or weapons of
any kind other than a common jack-knife, and it looked very much as
if there was no way for him to get out the cave again without outside
assistance, of which the prospect was exceedingly remote.

He was hungry, and without the means of obtaining food.

The berries, which had acted so queerly with him the day before, were
beyond his reach.

Vegetation needs the sunlight, as do all of us, and it is useless to
expect anything edible below.

"Unless it's fish," thought Fred, aloud. "I've heard that they find them
in the Mammoth Cave without eyes, and there may be some of the same kind
here; but then I'm just the same as a boy without eyes, and how am I
going to find them?"

The more he reflected upon his situation, the more disheartened did he
become. He had been given many remarkable deliverances in the past few
days, and although his faith was strong that Providence would bring him
out of this last predicament, his heart misgave him as he considered it
in all its bearings.

"The best thing I can do is to try and gather some wood together, and
start a fire. If there is enough fuel, I may kindle a lantern that will
show me something in the way of a new door--Halloa! what is the matter?"

His attention was attracted by the rattling of gravel and dirt at
his side, and looking up, he saw that something was struggling in the
opening above, having been caught apparently in precisely the same
manner as he had been.

His first supposition was that it was a wild animal, but the next moment
he observed that it was a person, most probably an Apache warrior. And
by the time Fred had learned that much, down came his visitor.



CHAPTER XXVI. A WELCOME VISITOR

Lonely as Fred Munson felt in that dismal cavern, he preferred the
solitude to the companionship of an Apache Indian, and, fearful of
discovery, he crouched down to wait until he should move away. His
involuntary visitor dropped within a few feet of where he was hiding,
and Fred tried to hold his breath for fear he might be detected; but the
fellow quietly rose and gave expression to his sentiments.

"Begorrah, if I haven't fell through into the cellar, as me grandmither
did when she danced down the whole party, and landed on the bottom, and
kept up the jig without a break, keep ing time with the one-eyed fiddler
above."

Fred could scarcely believe the evidence of his own senses. That was the
voice of his old friend, Mickey O'Rooney, or else he was more mistaken
than he had ever been in his life. But whatever doubts might have
lingered with him were removed by the words that immediately followed.

"It beats the blazes where that young spalpeen can be kaping himself. Me
and Misther Simpson have been on the hunt for two days and more, and now
when I got on his trail, and found where he'd crawled into the bushes,
and I tried to do the same, I crawled into the biggest cellar in the
whole world, and I can't find the stairs to walk out again---"

"Helloa, Mickey! Is that you, my old friend?" called out the overjoyed
lad, springing forward, throwing his arms about him, and breaking in
most effectually upon his meditations.

The Irishman was mystified for a moment, but he recognized the voice,
reached down, and placed his arms in turn about the lad.

"Begorrah, if this ain't the greatest surprise of me life, as Mr.
O'Spangarkoghomagh remarked when I called and paid him a little balance
that I owed him. I've had a hard hunt for you, and had about guv you
up when I came down on you in this shtyle. Freddy, me boy, I crave the
privilege of axing ye a question."

"Ask me a thousand, if you want," replied the boy, dancing about with
delight.

"Are ye sure that it's yoursilf and nobody else? I don't want to make a
mistake that'll cause me mortification, and ye must answer carefully.''

"I'm sure it is I, Fred Munson."

"Whoop! hurrah!" shouted Mickey, leaping several feet in the air, and,
as he came down, striking at once into the Tipperary jig.

The overjoyed fellow kept it up for several minutes, making the cold,
moist sand fly in every direction. He terminated the performance by a
higher leap than ever, and a regular Comanche war-whoop. Having vented
his overflowing spirits in this fashion, the Irishman was ready to come
down to something like more sober common sense. Reaching out, he took
the hand of Fred, saying as he did so:

"Let me kaap hold of your flipper, so that I can prevint your drifting
away. Now tell me, my laddy, how did you get here?"

"I come down the same way that you did."

"Through the skylight up there? It's a handy way of going down-stairs,
the only trouble being that it's sometimes inconvanient to stop so
suddint like. Did n't you obsarve the opening till you stepped into it?"

"I didn't see it then. I was near it, asleep, and when I woke up in
the night I crawled in under the bushes to shelter myself, when I went
through into the cave. How was it you followed?"

"I was sarching for ye, as I've been doing for the last two days and
more. I obsarved the hole, for I had the daylight to help me, and I
crawled up to take a paap down to see who lived there, when I must have
gone too fur, as me uncle obsarved after he had been hung in a joke, and
the ground crumbled beneath me, and I slid in. But let me ax you again,
are ye much acquainted in these parts? You know I'm a stranger."

"I never was here before. I've looked around all I can, but haven't been
able to find how big the cave is. There's a small waterfall, and the
stream comes in and goes out somewhere, and there is _one_ rent, at
least, so deep that I don't believe it has any bottom. I've learned that
much, and that's all."

"That's considerable for a laddy like you. Are you hungry?"
