"All right."

An easy walk brought them to the edge of the pond. Herbert naturally
looked for James Leech's boat. He thought something was the matter with
his eyes, for where there should be but one boat there were now two.

"Why, there's another boat!" he exclaimed.

"Is there?" asked Cameron, indifferently.

"Yes, don't you see it?"

"Well, it does look like a boat, I admit. I should say it was nicer than
the other."

"I should say it was. Isn't she a regular beauty?" exclaimed Herbert,
enthusiastically. "I wonder whose it is? James wouldn't want two."

There was a smile on Cameron's face that attracted Herbert's attention.

"Is it yours?" he asked.

"No; I know who owns it, though."

"It isn't the landlord, is it?"

"No."

"Then I can't imagine whose it is," said Herbert.

"Can't you?"

"No," said Herbert. "Will you tell me?"

"It is yours!"

"Mine!" exclaimed our hero, in the utmost surprise,

"Yes; I intended at first not to give it to you till I went away; but
I may as well give it now, on one condition--that you let me use it
whenever I please."

"How kind you are!" said Herbert, gratefully. "I never received such a
splendid present in my life. I have done nothing to deserve it."

"Let me be the judge of that. Now, with your consent, we will try her."

With the utmost alacrity Herbert followed Cameron aboard the new craft,
and took the oars. Smoothly and easily the boat glided off on the
surface of the pond.

"I like it much better than James'," said Herbert.

"It's a better model. His is rather clumsy. Besides, this is new and he
must have had his for some time."

"He has had it three years."

"It needs painting."

"Even if it were painted it wouldn't come up to this."

"I agree with you," said Cameron. "I am afraid James will be stirred
with envy when he sees your boat."

"I am afraid so, too. He won't believe it is mine."

"It may be your duty, out of a delicate regard to his feelings, to give
it up, or exchange," suggested Cameron.

"That's a little further than I carry my delicate regard to his
feelings," responded Herbert.

After half an hour's rowing, Cameron said, suddenly: "I must go back
to the hotel. I came near forgetting an important letter, which must be
sent off by this afternoon's mail."

Herbert was a little disappointed, still he said, cheerfully: "All
right, Mr. Cameron."

"Don't you cease your rowing," said the collegian.

"I thought you might not like to walk back alone."

"I don't mind that. I shall hurry back, and should be poor company. We
will meet to-morrow morning."

Cameron set out on his return home. He had gone less than quarter of a
mile when he met James Leech.

"Good afternoon, Mr. Cameron," said James, who was always polite to the
rich manufacturer's son.

"Good afternoon, James."

"Won't you go out in my boat, Mr. Cameron?"

"Thank you, I have just returned from the pond. I am obliged to go back
to the hotel to write a letter."

"I should have been glad of your company."

"You won't be alone," said Cameron, mischievously. "I left Herbert
Carter at the pond."

"Was he out in the boat?" asked James, hastily.

"Yes."

Without a word James walked abruptly away. He was very angry with
Herbert, who, he naturally concluded, was out in his boat.

"He's the most impudent and cheeky boy I ever met!" he said to himself.
"Last evening, I positively forbade his getting into my boat and he
don't take the slightest notice of it. He needn't think he can take such
liberties."

Cameron smiled, as he read James' feelings in his face.

Just before reaching the pond there was rising ground, from which James
could take a general survey of the lake. Herbert was cruising about and
had not yet seen James.

"He don't think I'm so near," thought James. "He thinks I won't know
anything about his impudence. I'll soon make him draw in his horns."

In his excitement, James did not notice the boat particularly. If he
had he would have seen that it was not his boat. But, so far as he knew,
there was no other boat on the pond. Indeed, there was no boy whose
father could afford to buy him one, and James had come to think himself
sole proprietor of the pond, as well as of the only craft that plied on
its surface.

"I wonder," he thought, "whether I couldn't have Herbert fined for
taking my property without leave, especially after I have expressly
forbidden him to do it. I must ask my father this evening. It would
bring down his pride a little to be taken before a justice."

Herbert had got tired of cruising, and made a vigorous stroke, as if to
cross the pond. James put up his hand to his mouth and shouted at the
top of his voice: "Come right back, Herbert Carter!"




CHAPTER XXVI

THE RIVAL BOATMEN


Herbert, bending over his oars, heard the peremptory order of James to
come back and smiled to himself as he instantly comprehended the mistake
which the latter had made. From James' standpoint his own boat was not
visible and it was not surprising that he should suspect our hero of
having appropriated his boat.

"I won't undeceive him," he thought.

"What do you want?" he asked, resting on his oars, and looking back at
James.

"You know what I want," said James, provoked.

"How should I know?"

"I want you to come right back, at once."

"What's happened? What am I wanted for?"

"You'll be wanted by the constable."

"I don't understand you," said Herbert, shrugging his shoulders. "You
appear to be mad about something."

"So I am, and I have a right to be."

"Well, I'm sure I have no objection, if you like it."

James was pale with rage.

"Bring that boat right back here," he said.

"If you'll give me a good reason, perhaps I will; but I don't think it
necessary to obey you without."

"You are a thief."

"Say that again," said Herbert, sternly, "and I will come ashore and
give you a whipping."

"You can't do it."

"I can try."

"Don't you know I can have you arrested for stealing my boat, you
loafer?"

"Who's been stealing your boat, you loafer?"

"You have."

"Are you sure of it?"

"Why, you are in my boat this very minute."

"I think you are mistaken," said Herbert, quietly.

"Don't you call that a boat you are in?"

"Yes, I do; but there's more than one boat in the world, and this isn't
your boat."

He rowed near the shore as he spoke, and James, his attention drawn to
the boat, saw that it wasn't his. At the same time, walking nearer the
edge of the pond, he caught sight of his own boat moored at its usual
place.

"I guess I made a mistake," said James.

"I think you have," returned Herbert, quietly.

"Where did that boat come from?" demanded James.

"I don't know."

"You don't? Then you've taken it without leave."

"Oh, the owner won't object to my using it," said Herbert, with a queer
smile.

"How do you know?"

"He's an intimate friend of mine."

"The owner?"

"Yes."

"I suppose it belongs to Mr. Cameron, then?"

"He bought it."

"Do you call him your intimate friend? He'd be proud if he heard it,"
said James, with a sneer.

"Would he?" said Herbert.

"I should think he would, considering your high position in society."

"I think he's a pretty good friend of mine but I have never called him
an intimate friend."

"Yes, you have. You said the owner of that boat was an intimate friend
of yours."

"So he is. I'm with him all the time."

"Then why do you deny that you called Mr. Cameron your intimate friend?"

"Because Mr. Cameron doesn't own the boat."

"Just now you said he bought it."

"So he did, but he doesn't own it."

"Then who does?"

"I do," was the unexpected reply.

"You--own--that--boat?" ejaculated James.

"Yes."

"Did Mr. Cameron give it to you?"

"Yes."

"I don't believe it. That boat must have cost sixty or seventy dollars.
I don't believe he would give you such a present as that."

"I don't know as it makes much difference."

"When did he give it to you?"

"This afternoon. I'll row in. Perhaps you would like to examine it."
James surveyed with envious eyes the neat, graceful boat, for he saw at
a glance that his own boat, even when new, was by no means its equal.

"Isn't it a beauty?" asked Herbert, not without pride.

"Very fair," answered James, condescendingly. "Did you ask Mr. Cameron
to give it to you?"

"I never ask for gifts," said Herbert, with emphasis. "What makes you
ask such a question as that?"

"I thought it queer that he should have given you such a handsome
present."

"It was certainly very generous in him," said Herbert.

"I shouldn't think you'd want to accept it, though."

"Why not?"

"Because you are a poor boy and it don't correspond with your position."

"Perhaps not; but that don't trouble me."

"A less expensive boat would have been more appropriate."

"Perhaps it would; but you wouldn't have me refuse it on that account?"

James did not answer and Herbert asked: "Are you going out in your boat
this afternoon?"

"I should like to try yours," said James.

"I shall be glad to have you," said Herbert, politely.

"And you may take mine," said James, with unwonted politeness.

"All right."

The two boys got into the boats and pulled out. James was charmed with
the new boat. In every way it was superior to his own boat, apart from
its being newer. It was certainly very provoking to think that a boy
like Herbert Carter, poor almost to beggary, should own such a beautiful
little boat, while he, a rich man's son, had to put up with an inferior
one.

"I say, Herbert," he began, when they returned, "don't you want to
exchange your boat for mine?"

"Not much; I should be a fool to do that."

"I don't mean even, for I know your boat is better. I'll give you five
dollars to boot."

"No, thank you; there's a good deal more than five dollars' difference
between your boat and mine."

"Five dollars would come handy to a poor boy like you," said James, in
his usual tone of insolent condescension.

"I don't want it enough to exchange boats."

"Well, I'll give you ten dollars," said James. "That's an offer worth
thinking about."

"I shan't need to think about it. I say no."

"You've got an extravagant idea of your boat. Mine is nearly as good but
I've taken a fancy to yours. How will you trade, anyway?"

"I don't feel at liberty to trade at all. Mr. Cameron gave me the boat,
but he is to have the use of it while he is here. He wouldn't be willing
to have me exchange."

"He can have the use of it all the same if it is mine."

"It won't do, James," said Herbert, shaking his head.

"You are very foolish, then," said James, disappointed.

"I may be, but that is my answer."

James walked away. He made up his mind, since he could not have
Herbert's boat, to tease his father to buy him a new one. As to rowing
in an inferior one, his pride would not permit it.




CHAPTER XXVII

THE RACE


James broached the subject which was uppermost in his mind as soon as he
got home.

"I wish you'd buy me a new boat, father," he said.

"What's the matter with the boat you have now?"

"I don't want to be outdone by Herbert Carter."

"I don't see how that can be."

"He's got a beautiful new boat, twice as handsome as mine ever was."

"He has!" exclaimed the squire, in amazement. "How can he have, without
any money?"

"Mr. Cameron gave it to him."

"I don't believe it. Probably the boat belongs to Mr. Cameron and he has
only let Herbert use it."

"No, Mr. Cameron gave it to him. Herbert told me."
