splendid saddle, and a splendid bridle, all ready for the splendid young
prince!

'Jump on the back of the brown horse,' said the old woman, and she
turned round and went into the house.

The moment Petru was seated on the horse he felt his arm three times as
strong as before, and even his heart felt braver.

'Sit firmly in the saddle, my lord, for we have a long way to go and no
time to waste,' said the brown horse, and Petru soon saw that they were
riding as no man and horse had ever ridden before.

On the bridge stood a dragon, but not the same one as he had tried to
fight with, for this dragon had twelve heads, each more hideous and
shooting forth more terrible flames than the other. But, horrible though
he was, he had met his match. Petru showed no fear, but rolled up his
sleeves, that his arms might be free.

'Get out of the way!' he said when he had done, but the dragon's heads
only breathed forth more flames and smoke. Petru wasted no more words,
but drew his sword and prepared to throw himself on the bridge.

'Stop a moment; be careful, my lord,' put in the horse, 'and be sure you
do what I tell you. Dig your spurs in my body up to the rowel, draw
your sword, and keep yourself ready, for we shall have to leap over both
bridge and dragon. When you see that we are right above the dragon cut
off his biggest head, wipe the blood off the sword, and put it back
clean in the sheath before we touch earth again.'

So Petru dug in his spurs, drew his sword, cut of the head, wiped the
blood, and put the sword back in the sheath before the horse's hoofs
touched the ground again.

And in this fashion they passed the bridge.

'But we have got to go further still,' said Petru, after he had taken a
farewell glance at his native land.

'Yes, forwards,' answered the horse; 'but you must tell me, my lord, at
what speed you wish to go. Like the wind? Like thought? Like desire? or
like a curse?'

Petru looked about him, up at the heavens and down again to the earth.
A desert lay spread out before him, whose aspect made his hair stand on
end.

'We will ride at different speeds,' said he, 'not so fast as to grow
tired nor so slow as to waste time.'

And so they rode, one day like the wind, the next like thought, the
third and fourth like desire and like a curse, till they reached the
borders of the desert.

'Now walk, so that I may look about, and see what I have never seen
before,' said Petru, rubbing his eyes like one who wakes from sleep, or
like him who beholds something so strange that it seems as if... Before
Petru lay a wood made of copper, with copper trees and copper leaves,
with bushes and flowers of copper also.

Petru stood and stared as a man does when he sees something that he has
never seen, and of which he has never heard.

Then he rode right into the wood. On each side of the way the rows of
flowers began to praise Petru, and to try and persuade him to pick some
of them and make himself a wreath.

'Take me, for I am lovely, and can give strength to whoever plucks me,'
said one.

'No, take me, for whoever wears me in his hat will be loved by the most
beautiful woman in the world,' pleaded the second; and then one
after another bestirred itself, each more charming than the last, all
promising, in soft sweet voices, wonderful things to Petru, if only he
would pick them.

Petru was not deaf to their persuasion, and was just stooping to pick
one when the horse sprang to one side.

'Why don't you stay still?' asked Petru roughly.

'Do not pick the flowers; it will bring you bad luck; answered the
horse.

'Why should it do that?'

'These flowers are under a curse. Whoever plucks them must fight the
Welwa(1) of the woods.'

(1) A goblin.

'What kind of a goblin is the Welwa?'

'Oh, do leave me in peace! But listen. Look at the flowers as much as
you like, but pick none,' and the horse walked on slowly.

Petru knew by experience that he would do well to attend to the horse's
advice, so he made a great effort and tore his mind away from the
flowers.

But in vain! If a man is fated to be unlucky, unlucky he will be,
whatever he may do!

The flowers went on beseeching him, and his heart grew ever weaker and
weaker.

'What must come will come,' said Petru at length; 'at any rate I shall
see the Welwa of the woods, what she is like, and which way I had best
fight her. If she is ordained to be the cause of my death, well, then
it will be so; but if not I shall conquer her though she were twelve
hundred Welwas,' and once more he stooped down to gather the flowers.

'You have done very wrong,' said the horse sadly. 'But it can't be
helped now. Get yourself ready for battle, for here is the Welwa!'

Hardly had he done speaking, scarcely had Petru twisted his wreath, when
a soft breeze arose on all sides at once. Out of the breeze came a storm
wind, and the storm wind swelled and swelled till everything around
was blotted out in darkness, and darkness covered them as with a thick
cloak, while the earth swayed and shook under their feet.

'Are you afraid?' asked the horse, shaking his mane.

'Not yet,' replied Petru stoutly, though cold shivers were running down
his back. 'What must come will come, whatever it is.'

'Don't be afraid,' said the horse. 'I will help you. Take the bridle
from my neck, and try to catch the Welwa with it.'

The words were hardly spoken, and Petru had no time even to unbuckle
the bridle, when the Welwa herself stood before him; and Petru could not
bear to look at her, so horrible was she.

She had not exactly a head, yet neither was she without one. She did not
fly through the air, but neither did she walk upon the earth. She had
a mane like a horse, horns like a deer, a face like a bear, eyes like a
polecat; while her body had something of each. And that was the Welwa.

Petru planted himself firmly in his stirrups, and began to lay about him
with his sword, but could feel nothing.

A day and a night went by, and the fight was still undecided, but at
last the Welwa began to pant for breath.

'Let us wait a little and rest,' gasped she.

Petru stopped and lowered his sword.

'You must not stop an instant,' said the horse, and Petru gathered up
all his strength, and laid about him harder than ever.

The Welwa gave a neigh like a horse and a howl like a wolf, and threw
herself afresh on Petru. For another day and night the battle raged more
furiously than before. And Petru grew so exhausted he could scarcely
move his arm.

'Let us wait a little and rest,' cried the Welwa for the second time,
'for I see you are as weary as I am.'

'You must not stop an instant,' said the horse.

And Petru went on fighting, though he barely had strength to move his
arm. But the Welwa had ceased to throw herself upon him, and began to
deliver her blows cautiously, as if she had no longer power to strike.

And on the third day they were still fighting, but as the morning sky
began to redden Petru somehow managed--how I cannot tell--to throw the
bridle over the head of the tired Welwa. In a moment, from the Welwa
sprang a horse--the most beautiful horse in the world.

'Sweet be your life, for you have delivered me from my enchantment,'
said he, and began to rub his nose against his brother's. And he told
Petru all his story, and how he had been bewitched for many years.

So Petru tied the Welwa to his own horse and rode on. Where did he
ride? That I cannot tell you, but he rode on fast till he got out of the
copper wood.

'Stay still, and let me look about, and see what I never have seen
before,' said Petru again to his horse. For in front of him stretched a
forest that was far more wonderful, as it was made of glistening trees
and shining flowers. It was the silver wood.

As before, the flowers began to beg the young man to gather them.

'Do not pluck them,' warned the Welwa, trotting beside him, 'for my
brother is seven times stronger than I'; but though Petru knew by
experience what this meant, it was no use, and after a moment's
hesitation he began to gather the flowers, and to twist himself a
wreath.

Then the storm wind howled louder, the earth trembled more violently,
and the night grew darker, than the first time, and the Welwa of the
silver wood came rushing on with seven times the speed of the other.
For three days and three nights they fought, but at last Petru cast the
bridle over the head of the second Welwa.

'Sweet be your life, for you have delivered me from enchantment,' said
the second Welwa, and they all journeyed on as before.

But soon they came to a gold wood more lovely far than the other
two, and again Petru's companions pleaded with him to ride through it
quickly, and to leave the flowers alone. But Petru turned a deaf ear
to all they said, and before he had woven his golden crown he felt that
something terrible, that he could not see, was coming near him right out
of the earth. He drew his sword and made himself ready for the fight. 'I
will die!' cried he, 'or he shall have my bridle over his head.'

He had hardly said the words when a thick fog wrapped itself around
him, and so thick was it that he could not see his own hand, or hear
the sound of his voice. For a day and a night he fought with his sword,
without ever once seeing his enemy, then suddenly the fog began to
lighten. By dawn of the second day it had vanished altogether, and the
sun shone brightly in the heavens. It seemed to Petru that he had been
born again.

And the Welwa? She had vanished.

'You had better take breath now you can, for the fight will have to
begin all over again,' said the horse.

'What was it?' asked Petru.

'It was the Welwa,' replied the horse, 'changed into a fog 'Listen! She
is coming!'

And Petru had hardly drawn a long breath when he felt something
approaching from the side, though what he could not tell. A river, yet
not a river, for it seemed not to flow over the earth, but to go where
it liked, and to leave no trace of its passage.

'Woe be to me!' cried Petru, frightened at last.

'Beware, and never stand still,' called the brown horse, and more he
could not say, for the water was choking him.

The battle began anew. For a day and a night Petru fought on, without
knowing at whom or what he struck. At dawn on the second, he felt that
both his feet were lame.

'Now I am done for,' thought he, and his blows fell thicker and harder
in his desperation. And the sun came out and the water disappeared,
without his knowing how or when.

'Take breath,' said the horse, 'for you have no time to lose. The Welwa
will return in a moment.'

Petru made no reply, only wondered how, exhausted as he was, he should
ever be able to carry on the fight. But he settled himself in his
saddle, grasped his sword, and waited.

And then something came to him--WHAT I cannot tell you. Perhaps, in his
dreams, a man may see a creature which has what it has not got, and has
not got what it has. At least, that was what the Welwa seemed like to
Petru. She flew with her feet, and walked with her wings; her head was
in her back, and her tail was on top of her body; her eyes were in her
neck, and her neck in her forehead, and how to describe her further I do
not know.

Petru felt for a moment as if he was wrapped in a garment of fear; then
he shook himself and took heart, and fought as he had never yet fought
before.

As the day wore on, his strength began to fail, and when darkness fell
he could hardly keep his eyes open. By midnight he knew he was no longer
on his horse, but standing on the ground, though he could not have
told how he got there. When the grey light of morning came, he was past
standing on his feet, but fought now upon his knees.

'Make one more struggle; it is nearly over now,' said the horse, seeing
that Petru's strength was waning fast.

Petru wiped the sweat from his brow with his gauntlet, and with a
desperate effort rose to his feet.

'Strike the Welwa on the mouth with the bridle,' said the horse, and
Petru did it.

The Welwa uttered a neigh so loud that Petru thought he would be deaf
for life, and then, though she too was nearly spent, flung herself upon
her enemy; but Petru was on the watch and threw the bridle over her
head, as she rushed on, so that when the day broke there were three
horses trotting beside him.

'May your wife be the most beautiful of women,' said the Welwa, 'for
you have delivered me from my enchantment.' So the four horses galloped
fast, and by nightfall they were at the borders of the golden forest.

Then Petru began to think of the crowns that he wore, and what they had
cost him.

'After all, what do I want with so many? I will keep the best,' he said
to himself; and taking off first the copper crown and then the silver,
he threw them away.

'Stay!' cried the horse, 'do not throw them away! Perhaps we shall find
them of use. Get down and pick them up.' So Petru got down and picked
them up, and they all went on.

In the evening, when the sun is getting low, and all the midges are
beginning to bite, Peter saw a wide heath stretching before him.

At the same instant the horse stood still of itself.

'What is the matter?' asked Petru.

'I am afraid that something evil will happen to us,' answered the horse.

'But why should it?'

'We are going to enter the kingdom of the goddess Mittwoch,(2) and the
further we ride into it the colder we shall get. But all along the road
there are huge fires, and I dread lest you should stop and warm yourself
at them.'

(2) In German 'Mittwoch,' the feminine form of Mercury.

'And why should I not warm myself?'

'Something fearful will happen to you if you do,' replied the horse
sadly.

'Well, forward!' cried Petru lightly, 'and if I have to bear cold, I
must bear it!'

With every step they went into the kingdom of Mittwoch, the air grew
colder and more icy, till even the marrow in their bones was frozen. But
Petru was no coward; the fight he had gone through had strengthened his
powers of endurance, and he stood the test bravely.

Along the road on each side were great fires, with men standing by them,
who spoke pleasantly to Petru as he went by, and invited him to join
them. The breath froze in his mouth, but he took no notice, only bade
his horse ride on the faster.

How long Petru may have waged battle silently with the cold one cannot
tell, for everybody knows that the kingdom of Mittwoch is not to be
crossed in a day, but he struggled on, though the frozen rocks burst
around, and though his teeth chattered, and even his eyelids were
frozen.

At length they reached the dwelling of Mittwoch herself, and, jumping
from his horse, Petru threw the reins over his horse's neck and entered
the hut.

'Good-day, little mother!' said he.

'Very well, thank you, my frozen friend!'

Petru laughed, and waited for her to speak.

'You have borne yourself bravely,' went on the goddess, tapping him on
the shoulder. 'Now you shall have your reward,' and she opened an iron
chest, out of which she took a little box.

'Look!' said she; 'this little box has been lying here for ages, waiting
for the man who could win his way through the Ice Kingdom. Take it, and
treasure it, for some day it may help you.

If you open it, it will tell you anything you want, and give you news of
your fatherland.'

Petru thanked her gratefully for her gift, mounted his horse, and rode
away.

When he was some distance from the hut, he opened the casket.

'What are your commands?' asked a voice inside.

'Give me news of my father,' he replied, rather nervously.

'He is sitting in council with his nobles,' answered the casket.

'Is he well?'

'Not particularly, for he is furiously angry.'

'What has angered him?'

'Your brothers Costan and Florea,' replied the casket. 'It seems to me
they are trying to rule him and the kingdom as well, and the old man
says they are not fit to do it.'

