
'I wish you to kill him,' she answered, 'or if not I will leave.'

'Oh, all right, then,' said he; 'to-morrow I will change myself into a
serpent, and hide myself in the date barrel; and when he comes to fetch
dates I will sting him in the hand.'

'That will do very well,' said she.

When the sun was up next day, she called to her brother, 'Go and mind
the goats.'

'Yes, of course,' he replied; but the little boy called out: 'Uncle, I
want to come with you.'

'Delighted,' said the uncle, and they started together.

After they had got out of sight of the house the boy said to him, 'Dear
uncle, my father is going to kill you. He has changed himself into a
serpent, and has hidden himself in the date barrel. My mother has told
him to do it.'

'And what am I to do?' asked the uncle.

'I will tell you. When we bring the goats back to the house, and my
mother says to you, "I am sure you must be hungry: get a few dates out
of the cask," just say to me, "I am not feeling very well, Mohammed, you
go and get them for me."'

So, when they reached the house the sister came out to meet them,
saying, 'Dear brother, you must certainly be hungry: go and get a few
dates.'

But he answered, 'I am not feeling very well. Mohammed, you go and get
them for me.'

'Of course I will,' replied the little boy, and ran at once to the cask.

'No, no,' his mother called after him; 'come here directly! Let your
uncle fetch them himself!'

But the boy would not listen, and crying out to her 'I would rather get
them,' thrust his hand into the date cask.

Instead of the fruit, it struck against something cold and slimy, and he
whispered softly, 'Keep still; it is I, your son!'

Then he picked up his dates and went away to his uncle.

'Here they are, dear uncle; eat as many as you want.'

And his uncle ate them.

When he saw that the uncle did not mean to come near the cask, the
serpent crawled out and regained his proper shape.

'I am thankful I did not kill him,' he said to his wife; 'for, after
all, he is my brother-in-law, and it would have been a great sin!'

'Either you kill him or I leave you,' said she.

'Well, well!' sighed the man, 'to-morrow I will do it.'

The woman let that night go by without doing anything further, but at
daybreak she said to her brother, 'Get up, brother; it is time to take
the goats to pasture!'

'All right,' cried he.

'I will come with you, uncle,' called out the little boy.

'Yes, come along,' replied he.

But the mother ran up, saying, 'The child must not go out in this cold
or he will be ill;' to which he only answered, 'Nonsense! I am going, so
it is no use your talking! I am going! I am! I am!'

'Then go!' she said.

And so they started, driving the goats in front of them.

When they reached the pasture the boy said to his uncle: 'Dear uncle,
this night my father means to kill you. While we are away he will creep
into your room and hide in the straw. Directly we get home my mother
will say to you, "Take that straw and give it to the sheep," and, if you
do, he will bite you.'

'Then what am I to do?' asked the man.

'Oh, do not be afraid, dear uncle! I will kill my father myself.'

'All right,' replied the uncle.

As they drove back the goats towards the house, the sister cried: 'Be
quick, dear brother, go and get me some straw for the sheep.'

'Let me go,' said the boy.

'You are not big enough; your uncle will get it,' replied she.

'We will both get it,' answered the boy; 'come, uncle, let us go and
fetch that straw!'

'All right,' replied the uncle, and they went to the door of the room.

'It seems very dark,' said the boy; 'I must go and get a light;' and
when he came back with one, he set fire to the straw, and the serpent
was burnt.

Then the mother broke into sobs and tears. 'Oh, you wretched boy! What
have you done? Your father was in that straw, and you have killed him!'

'Now, how was I to know that my father was lying in that straw, instead
of in the kitchen?' said the boy.

But his mother only wept the more, and sobbed out, 'From this day you
have no father. You must do without him as best you can!'

'Why did you marry a serpent?' asked the boy. 'I thought he was a man!
How did he learn those odd tricks?'

As the sun rose, she woke her brother, and said, 'Go and take the goats
to pasture!'

'I will come too,' said the little boy.

'Go then!' said his mother, and they went together.

On the way the boy began: 'Dear uncle, this night my mother means to
kill both of us, by poisoning us with the bones of the serpent, which
she will grind to powder and sprinkle in our food.'

'And what are we to do?' asked the uncle.

'I will kill her, dear uncle. I do not want either a father or a mother
like that!'

When they came home in the evening they saw the woman preparing supper,
and secretly scattering the powdered bones of the serpent on one side
of the dish. On the other, where she meant to eat herself, there was no
poison.

And the boy whispered to his uncle, 'Dear uncle, be sure you eat from
the same side of the dish as I do!'

'All right,' said the uncle.

So they all three sat down to the table, but before they helped
themselves the boy said, 'I am thirsty, mother; will you get me some
milk?'

'Very well,' said she, 'but you had better begin your supper.'

And when she came back with the milk they were both eating busily.

'Sit down and have something too,' said the boy, and she sat down and
helped herself from the dish, but at the very first moment she sank dead
upon the ground.

'She has got what she meant for us,' observed the boy; 'and now we will
sell all the sheep and cattle.'

So the sheep and cattle were sold, and the uncle and nephew took the
money and went to see the world.

For ten days they travelled through the desert, and then they came to a
place where the road parted in two.

'Uncle!' said the boy.

'Well, what is it?' replied he.

'You see these two roads? You must take one, and I the other; for the
time has come when we must part.'

But the uncle cried, 'No, no, my boy, we will keep together always.'

'Alas! that cannot be,' said the boy; 'so tell me which way you will
go.'

'I will go to the west,' said the uncle.

'One word before I leave you,' continued the boy. 'Beware of any man who
has red hair and blue eyes. Take no service under him.'

'All right,' replied the uncle, and they parted.

For three days the man wandered on without any food, till he was very
hungry. Then, when he was almost fainting, a stranger met him and said,
'Will you work for me?'

'By contract?' asked the man.

'Yes, by contract,' replied the stranger, 'and whichever of us breaks
it, shall have a strip of skin taken from his body.'

'All right,' replied the man; 'what shall I have to do?'

'Every day you must take the sheep out to pasture, and carry my old
mother on your shoulders, taking great care her feet shall never touch
the ground. And, besides that, you must catch, every evening, seven
singing birds for my seven sons.'

'That is easily done,' said the man.

Then they went back together, and the stranger said, 'Here are your
sheep; and now stoop down, and let my mother climb on your back.'

'Very good,' answered Mohammed's uncle.

The new shepherd did as he was told, and returned in the evening with
the old woman on his back, and the seven singing birds in his pocket,
which he gave to the seven boys, when they came to meet him. So the days
passed, each one exactly like the other.

At last, one night, he began to weep, and cried: 'Oh, what have I done,
that I should have to perform such hateful tasks?'

And his nephew Mohammed saw him from afar, and thought to himself, 'My
uncle is in trouble--I must go and help him;' and the next morning he
went to his master and said: 'Dear master, I must go to my uncle, and I
wish to send him here instead of myself, while I serve under his master.
And that you may know it is he and no other man, I will give him my
staff, and put my mantle on him.'

'All right,' said the master.

Mohammed set out on his journey, and in two days he arrived at the place
where his uncle was standing with the old woman on his back trying to
catch the birds as they flew past. And Mohammed touched him on the arm,
and spoke: 'Dear uncle, did I not warn you never to take service under
any blue-eyed red-haired man!

'But what could I do?' asked the uncle. 'I was hungry, and he passed,
and we signed a contract.'

'Give the contract to me!' said the young man.

'Here it is,' replied the uncle, holding it out.

'Now,' continued Mohammed, 'let the old woman get down from your back.'

'Oh no, I mustn't do that!' cried he.

But the nephew paid no attention, and went on talking: 'Do not worry
yourself about the future. I see my way out of it all. And, first, you
must take my stick and my mantle, and leave this place. After two days'
journey, straight before you, you will come to some tents which are
inhabited by shepherds. Go in there, and wait.'

'All right!' answered the uncle.

Then Mohammed with the Magic Finger picked up a stick and struck the old
woman with it, saying, 'Get down, and look after the sheep; I want to go
to sleep.'

'Oh, certainly!' replied she.

So Mohammed lay down comfortably under a tree and slept till evening.
Towards sunset he woke up and said to the old woman: 'Where are the
singing birds which you have got to catch?'

'You never told me anything about that,' replied she.

'Oh, didn't I?' he answered. 'Well, it is part of your business, and if
you don't do it, I shall just kill you.'

'Of course I will catch them!' cried she in a hurry, and ran about the
bushes after the birds, till thorns pierced her foot, and she shrieked
from pain and exclaimed, 'Oh dear, how unlucky I am! and how abominably
this man is treating me!' However, at last she managed to catch the
seven birds, and brought them to Mohammed, saying, 'Here they are!'

'Then now we will go back to the house,' said he.

When they had gone some way he turned to her sharply:

'Be quick and drive the sheep home, for I do not know where their fold
is.' And she drove them before her. By-and-by the young man spoke:

'Look here, old hag; if you say anything to your son about my having
struck you, or about my not being the old shepherd, I'll kill you!'

'Oh, no, of course I won't say anything!'

When they got back, the son said to his mother: 'That is a good shepherd
I've got, isn't he?'

'Oh, a splendid shepherd!' answered she. 'Why, look how fat the sheep
are, and how much milk they give!'

'Yes, indeed!' replied the son, as he rose to get supper for his mother
and the shepherd.

In the time of Mohammed's uncle, the shepherd had had nothing to eat but
the scraps left by the old woman; but the new shepherd was not going to
be content with that.

'You will not touch the food till I have had as much as I want,'
whispered he.

'Very good!' replied she. And when he had had enough, he said:

'Now, eat!' But she wept, and cried: 'That was not written in your
contract. You were only to have what I left!'

'If you say a word more, I will kill you!' said he.

The next day he took the old woman on his back, and drove the sheep in
front of him till he was some distance from the house, when he let her
fall, and said: 'Quick! go and mind the sheep!'

Then he took a ram, and killed it. He lit a fire and broiled some of its
flesh, and called to the old woman:

'Come and eat with me!' and she came. But instead of letting her eat
quietly, he took a large lump of the meat and rammed it down her throat
with his crook, so that she died. And when he saw she was dead, he said:
'That is what you have got for tormenting my uncle!' and left her lying
where she was, while he went after the singing birds. It took him a long
time to catch them; but at length he had the whole seven hidden in the
pockets of his tunic, and then he threw the old woman's body into some
bushes, and drove the sheep before him, back to their fold. And when
they drew near the house the seven boys came to meet him, and he gave a
bird to each.

'Why are you weeping?' asked the boys, as they took their birds.

'Because your grandmother is dead!' And they ran and told their father.
Then the man came up and said to Mohammed: 'What was the matter? How did
she die?'

And Mohammed answered: 'I was tending the sheep when she said to me,
"Kill me that ram; I am hungry!" So I killed it, and gave her the meat.
But she had no teeth, and it choked her.'

'But why did you kill the ram, instead of one of the sheep?' asked the
man.

'What was I to do?' said Mohammed. 'I had to obey orders!'

'Well, I must see to her burial!' said the man; and the next morning
Mohammed drove out the sheep as usual, thinking to himself, 'Thank
goodness I've got rid of the old woman! Now for the boys!'

All day long he looked after the sheep, and towards evening he began to
dig some little holes in the ground, out of which he took six scorpions.
These he put in his pockets, together with one bird which he caught.
After this he drove his flock home.

When he approached the house the boys came out to meet him as before,
saying: 'Give me my bird!' and he put a scorpion into the hand of each,
and it stung him, and he died. But to the youngest only he gave a bird.

As soon as he saw the boys lying dead on the ground, Mohammed lifted up
his voice and cried loudly: 'Help, help! the children are dead!'

And the people came running fast, saying: 'What has happened? How have
they died?'

And Mohammed answered: 'It was your own fault! The boys had been
accustomed to birds, and in this bitter cold their fingers grew stiff,
and could hold nothing, so that the birds flew away, and their spirits
flew with them. Only the youngest, who managed to keep tight hold of his
bird, is still alive.'

And the father groaned, and said, 'I have borne enough! Bring no more
birds, lest I lose the youngest also!'

'All right,' said Mohammed.
