Each night the star rose nearer to the cleft. "There is no doubt we
shall see it in the proper position to-morrow night," Harry said on the
20th of the month. "That certainly is strong proof that the tradition
handed down to you, Dias, is correct."

They employed the next day in again searching for some indication that
might assist them, but in vain. Dias and Jose both asserted that the
tiny rift in the rocky peak looked wider from the middle of the valley
than at any other point, and even Harry and his brother admitted that
it could scarcely be seen from the foot of the hills on either side,
and therefore it was agreed that Dias, Harry, and Jose should take
their places only some forty yards apart across the centre; Maria and
Bertie going farther, near the sides of the hills. When midnight
approached they took their stations. Suddenly Harry, who was standing
by the side of the rivulet, exclaimed, "I see it!" It was more than a
minute later before Dias saw it, while it was three or four minutes
before Jose spoke, by which time Harry had crossed the streamlet and
fixed his second rod some distance on the other side. Dias and Jose did
the same. Bertie did not catch sight of it for some time after Jose,
and Maria did not see it at all. Then they went back to their camping
place.

"It is curious that I should have seen it before either of you, when
you were standing so close to me," Harry said. "It was lower than I
expected, and it is evident that the cleft must continue much farther
down than we thought, and that it must be extremely narrow at the
bottom. It is certainly a splendid guide, and there can be no mistaking
it. Unless I had been standing on the exact line, I should not have
noticed the star till later, and the crack is so much wider towards the
top that it could probably be seen on a line half a mile across. It
will be strange if we cannot find the place in the morning. Certainly
we searched in the stream just where I was standing, and found nothing.
But, of course, it is possible that in all this time it may have
changed its course considerably."

Dias shook his head. "It can hardly be that, senor, because, in that
case, anyone who had examined the valley could have found it. I begin
to think that it must have been a mistake about its being merely a rich
place in the river, and that it must be some vast treasure, perhaps
hidden by the people before the Incas, and kept by them as a certain
resource when needed. We shall have to search, I think, for some
walled-up cave in the rocks. We have already looked for it, but not
seriously; and besides, there are many boulders that have fallen, and
formed a bank at the foot of the cliff."

"Well, we shall know in a few hours. I feel absolutely certain that the
line between those two sticks will lead us to it."

None attempted to sleep, and as soon as it became light they took picks
and shovels and started up the valley. Harry gave an exclamation of
surprise as, standing behind the first stick, he looked towards the
second. "The line goes to the middle of that waterfall," he said.

This was so; for the stream made two or three sharp bends between the
spot where he had crossed it and the foot of the falls.

"'Tis strange!" Dias said; "we have examined that spot more than once.
There are great stones and boulders at the foot of the fall, and a
large deep pool. Can a treasure be buried in that? If so, it will be
hard indeed to get it."

Harry did not reply; his face was white with excitement. He walked
forward slowly till he reached the edge of the pool. It was some
fifteen yards across, and the colour of the water showed that it was
very deep.

"I will dive, Harry," Bertie said; "I have gone down more than once in
five fathoms of water to pick up an egg that has been thrown
overboard." He stripped and swam out to the middle of the pool and
dived. He was down about a minute, and on coming up swam to the shore.
"I could find no bottom, Harry," he panted. "I am sure I must have gone
down seven fathoms."

"Thank you, Bertie," Harry said quietly; "we will make up our minds
that if it is there, we sha'n't get it at present. The foot of the
valley is so flat that it would need a cut at least a mile long to let
the water off, and we should therefore require either an army of men or
a regular diving apparatus, which there would be no getting this side
of England. However, it may not be there. Let us search now behind the
fall."

There were some four or five feet clear between the sheet of water and
the rock. At times, as Harry pointed out, there would be an even wider
space, for the weather had been dry for the past two months, and the
quantity of water coming down was but small, while in the wet season a
mighty flood would shoot far out from the rock. The width of the stream
in the wet season was shown by the broad bed of what was now but a
rivulet. Looking upwards as they stood, the wall actually overhung
them, and they could see the edge where the water poured over unbroken.

"There may be a cave here," Harry went on, "and it may be covered by
these rocks piled up for the purpose. On the other hand, they may have
fallen. I think that is the most likely explanation, for as the top
projects beyond the bottom it is possible that some time or other there
was a big fall."

They searched every foot of the rock within reach, but there were no
signs of any man's handiwork. The rock was solid, thickly covered with
dripping moss and ferns which had flourished in the mist and spray that
rose from the foot of the fall. This they had ruthlessly scraped off
with their picks. Silently they went out again at the end, and stood
hopelessly looking at the fall. It was some time before Harry said, "We
must move some of those stones now. Let us go at once and cut down some
young trees, for we can do nothing with our hands alone, but must use
levers. For that purpose we shall want straight wood, and strong. We
had better get half a dozen, in case some of them break; make them
about ten feet long, and from four to six inches thick, and sharpened
slightly at the lower end."

In an hour the levers were ready.

"We had better breakfast before we begin, Dias. Your wife went off to
prepare it when we came out from the waterfall. I dare say it is ready
by this time."

In half an hour they were back again. They chose the central spot
behind the fall, and then set to work. Some of the rocks were dislodged
without much difficulty, but to move others, it was necessary to first
get out the smaller ones, on which they rested. So they toiled on,
stopping for half an hour in the middle of the day for food, and then
renewing their work. By evening they had made an opening four or five
feet wide at the top, and six feet deep, close to the wall. It was now
getting dark, and all were fagged and weary with their work, the light
was fading, and they were glad to return to camp. Maria came out to
meet them. She asked no questions, but said cheerfully, "I have a good
olla ready, I am sure you must want it."

"I feel almost too tired to eat," Bertie said.

"You will feel better when you have had some coffee. I have fed the
mules, Jose, and taken them down to water."

"I think," Bertie said, when they had finished their meal, "that we
might splice the main brace."

"I do think we might," Harry laughed. "We have not opened a bottle
since we started, and certainly we have worked like niggers since seven
o'clock this morning. I will open the case; it is screwed down, and I
have a screwdriver in the handle of my knife;" and he rose to his feet.

"What does Don Bertie want?" Dias said. "I will get it, senor. I do not
understand what he said."

"It is a sea expression, Dias. After a hard day's work the captain
orders that the main brace shall be spliced, which means that the crew
shall have a glass of grog--that is, a glass of spirits and water--to
cheer and warm them after their exertions. Jose, will you bring a
blazing brand with you? I shall want it to see the screws."

In a few minutes he returned.

"This is brandy, Dias. I don't suppose you have ever tasted a glass of
good brandy. Is your kettle boiling still, senora? We shall want hot
water, sugar, and five of the tin mugs. Have you any of those limes we
picked the other day?"

"Yes, senor."

"That is good. Just a slice each will be an improvement." Harry mixed
four mugs, and a half one for Maria. "There, Dias!" he said. "You will
allow that that is a considerable improvement on pulque."

He and his brother had already lighted their pipes. The other three had
made cigarettes. Dias and Jose were loud in their commendations of the
new beverage. Donna Maria had at first protested that she never touched
pulque, and this must be the same sort of thing. However, after sipping
daintily, she finished her portion with evident satisfaction. They did
not sit up long, and as soon as they had finished their first smoke all
retired to bed, leaving for once the llamas and mules to act as
sentries. As soon as it was fairly daylight, they drank a cup of coffee
and started again to work. Harry went first into the hole they had
made, and, kneeling down, struck a match to enable him to see the rock
more thoroughly. He gave a slight exclamation, then said: "Open your
knife, Bertie, and come in here and strike another match. I want both
my hands."

"I have a torch here, senor,"

"That is best; then light it, Bertie."

There was just room at the bottom for Bertie to stand by the side of
his brother, who was lying down.

"Hold the torches as low as you can, Bertie."

Harry picked away with the point of his knife for a minute or two and
then sat up.

"That is the top of a cave," he said. "Do you see, this crack along
here is a straight one. That, I fancy, was the top of the entrance to
the cave. That stone under it has a rough face, but on the top and
sides it is straight. It is fitted in with cement, or something of that
sort, and is soft for some distance in, and then becomes quite hard. I
can just see that there are two stones underneath, also regularly cut."

He made room for Bertie to lie down, and held the torch for him. "I
think you are right, Harry. Those three stones would never fit together
so closely if they had not been cut by hand, though, looking at the
face, no one could tell them from the rock above them."

Dias next examined the stones.

"There is no doubt that that is the entrance to a cave, senor," he said
as he joined them; and the three went out beyond the fall, for the
noise of the water was too great for them to converse without
difficulty behind the veil of water. Jose stayed behind to examine.

"Well, Dias, we have found the place where the treasure is hidden, but
I don't think that we are much nearer. Certainly we have not strength
sufficient to clear away those fallen stones, and probably the cave is
blocked by a wall several feet thick. We should want tools and
blasting-powder to get through it. No doubt it is a natural cave, and
it seems to me probable that they altered the course of the stream
above, so that it should fall directly over the entrance. I think
before we talk further about it we will go up there and take a look at
it. If we find that the course has been changed that will settle the
matter."

It took them an hour to climb the hill and make their way down to the
gorge through which the river ran. They examined it carefully.

"It must always have come along here," Dias said. "There is no other
possible channel; but there are marks of tools on the rocks on each
side of the fall, and the water goes over so regularly that I think the
rock must have been cut away at the bottom."

"It certainly looks like it, Dias. The rocks widen out too, so that
however strong the rush of water may be it will always go over in a
regular sheet. Let us follow it along a little way."

Fifty yards farther on, the gorge widened out suddenly, and they paused
with an exclamation of astonishment. Before them was a wide valley,
filled to the spot where they were standing with a placid sheet of
water four or five hundred yards wide, and extending to another gorge
fully a mile away. Bertie was the first to find his voice.

"Here's a go! Who would have thought of finding a lake up in the hills
here?"

"I did not know there was one," Dias said. "I have never heard of it.
But that is not strange, for no one who came up the valley would dream
that there was anything beyond that fall."

Harry had sat down and thought for some minutes, looking over the lake
without speaking.

"I am afraid, Dias," he said at last, "that your tradition was a true
one after all, and that the gold lay in the bed of a stream in the
valley we now see filled up."

"But it must always have been a lake, senor," Dias said after thinking
for a minute, "and could not have been shallower, for there is no other
escape than the waterfall; and however heavy the rains it could not
have risen higher, except a few feet, as one can see by the face of the
rock."

"It may have had some other way out," Harry said.

Dias looked carefully round the side of the valley. "There is no break
in the hills that I can see, senor."

"No; but my firm conviction is that the top of that cave that we found
behind the fall is really the top of a natural tunnel through which the
stream originally flowed. There are two or three reasons for this. In
the first place, it is certainly remarkable that there should be a cave
immediately behind that fall. I thought at first that the stream above
might have been diverted to hide it, but the ravine is so narrow that
that could not be possible. In the next place, your tradition has
proved absolutely true in the matter of the star, and in the hour of
its appearance in the exact line to the mouth of that cave. How
correctly the details have been handed down from generation to
generation! If they are right on that point it is hardly likely that
they can be inaccurate on other points, and that the tale of an
extraordinarily rich treasure could have been converted into one of an
exceptional deposit of gold in the bed of a river.

"I think that the passage was probably closed by the old people when
they were first threatened by the invasion of the Incas. No doubt they
would choose a season when the stream was almost dry. They had, as the
remains of their vast buildings will show, an unlimited supply of
labour. They would first partially block up the tunnel, perhaps for the
first fifty yards in, leaving only a small passage for the water to run
through. They might then close the farther end with sacks of sand, and
having the other stones all cut, and any number of hands, build it up
behind the sacks, and then go on with the work till it was solid; then
no doubt they would heap stones and boulders against the face of the
wall. By the time the Incas had conquered the country the valley would
be a lake many feet deep. The Incas, having gained an abundant supply
of treasure elsewhere, would take no steps towards opening the tunnel,
which in any case would have been a terrible business, for the pressure
of water would drive everything before it. Having plenty of slave
labour at their disposal, they knew that it could be done at any time
in case of great necessity, when the loss of the lives of those
concerned in it would be nothing to them. When the valley became full
the water began to pour out through this gap, which perhaps happened to
be immediately over the mouth of the tunnel, or it may have been
altered by a few yards to suit, for they were, as we know from some of
their buildings, such good workmen that they could fit slabs of the
hardest stone so perfectly together that it is hardly possible to see
the joints. Therefore they would only have to widen the mouth of the
gorge a little, and fit rocks in on either side so that they would seem
to have been there for all time; and indeed the natural growth of ferns
and mosses would soon hide the joints, even if they had been roughly
done."

"And that all means, Harry--?" Bertie asked.

"That all means that we have no more chance of getting at the gold than
if it were lying in the deepest soundings in the Pacific."

Bertie sat down with a gasp.

"There is no way of getting that water out," Harry went on quietly,
"except by either cutting a channel here as deep as the bottom of the
lake, or by blasting the stone in the tunnel. The one would require
years of work, with two or three hundred experienced miners, and ten
times as many labourers. The other would need twenty or thirty miners,
and a hundred or two labourers. There is possibly another way; but as
that would require an immense iron siphon going down to the bottom of
the lake, along one side of this ravine, and down into the bottom of
the pool, with a powerful engine to exhaust the air in the first place
and set it going, it is as impracticable, as far as we are concerned,
as the other two.

"In the same way I have no doubt that, with a thousand-horse-power
engine, the lake could be pumped dry in time; but to transport the
plant for such an engine and its boiler across the mountains would be
an enormous undertaking; and even were it here, and put up and going,
the difficulty of supplying it with fuel would be enormous. Certainly
one could not get up a company with capital enough to carry out any one
of the schemes merely on the strength of an Indian tradition; and with
the uncertainty, even if they believed the tradition, whether the
amount of gold recovered would be sufficient to repay the cost incurred.

"Well, we may as well go down to dinner."

He shouldered his pick and led the way back. Scarce a word was spoken
on the way. Bertie tried to follow the example of his brother, and take
the matter coolly. Dias walked with his head down and the air of a
criminal going to execution. The disappointment to him was terrible. He
had all along felt so confident that they should be successful, and
that he should be enabled to enrich those he considered as the
preservers of his life, that he was utterly broken down with the total
failure of his hopes.




CHAPTER X

A FRESH START


Not until he got to the camp did Harry look round. When he caught a
glimpse of the guide's face he went up to him and held out his hand.

"You must not take it to heart, Dias; it has been unfortunate, but that
cannot be helped. You have done everything you could in the matter, and
brought us to the right spot, and no one could tell that when we got
within half a mile of the gold river we should find the valley turned
into a deep lake. We can only say, 'Better luck next time'. We would
say in England, 'There are as good fish in the sea as ever came out of
it'. I have never felt very sanguine myself about this; it has all
along seemed too good to be true. Of course we are disappointed, but we
may have better luck next time."

"But I don't know, senor, with certainty of any other place. No one was
ever entrusted with more than one secret, so that if the Spanish
tortures wrung it out of him two treasures would not be lost."

"We need not talk any more about this place, Dias. I see your wife has
got some of the fish that we caught yesterday fizzling on the fire. Now
I think of it, I am very hungry, for it is six hours since we had our
coffee this morning. After we have had our meal we can discuss what our
next move had better be."

While they were speaking, Jose had been rapidly telling Maria the
misfortune which had befallen them, and the tears were running down the
woman's cheeks.

"You must not feel so badly about it, Maria," Harry said cheerfully;
"you see my brother and I are quite cheerful. At any rate, no one is to
blame. It would have been an enormous piece of luck if we had
succeeded, but we never looked on it as a certainty. Anything might
have happened between the time the gold was shut up and now, though we
certainly never expected to find what we did. We only thought it
possible that we might have the luck to find the treasure. Now you had
better look to those fish, or we shall lose our breakfast as we have
lost our gold, and this time by our own fault. We are as hungry as
hunters all of us; and in fact we are hunters, although we have not
brought any game with us this time."

The woman wiped away her tears hastily, and, taking off the fish which
she had put on when they were coming down the hill, she laid them on
plates with some freshly-baked cakes. The fish were excellent, and
Bertie, as they ate, made several jokes which set them all laughing, so
that the meal passed off cheerfully.

"Now for the great consoler," Harry said, as he took out his pipe.
"When we have all lighted up, the council shall begin. Never mind
clearing away the plates now, Maria; just sit down with us, there is
wisdom in many counsellors. Now, Dias, what do you think is the best
course for us to adopt at present?"

"Unless you wish to stay here and make further search?"

"By no means, Dias," Harry said; "for the present, I have seen enough
of this side of the mountains. We will get back to Cuzco and make a
fresh start from there."

"In that case, senor, there is no doubt as to the best route. There is
a pass over the mountains just on the other side of Mount Tinta; it
leads to the town of Ayapata, which lies somewhere at the foot of that
peak. I have never been there, but I know its situation. It is a very
steep pass, but as it is used for mule traffic it cannot be very bad.
Once we have passed over it on to the plateau we shall not be more than
seventy or eighty miles from Cuzco."

"That is quite satisfactory. We will set off to-morrow."

"We had better catch some more fish, for we have had no time for
hunting lately," Maria said. "The meat we ate yesterday was the last we
had with us. If we cut the fish open and lay them flat on the rocks,
which are so hot one can scarcely hold one's hand on them, they will be
sufficiently dry by sunset to keep for two or three days, and before
that you are sure to shoot something."

The river was full of fish, and in half an hour they had caught an
abundance, having fifteen averaging eight pounds apiece. These were at
once cut open, cleaned, and laid down to dry.

"The fishing on this river would let for a handsome sum in England,"
Harry laughed; "and I think the fish are quite as good as trout of the
same size. The only objection is that they are so tame, and take the
bait so greedily, that, good as the stream is, they would soon be
exterminated."

That evening there was a slight stir among the animals which had just
lain down. Jose leapt up and walked towards them.

