off its hinges and held it over his head, and then went straight at the
goblins, whom he crushed beneath it. After that he took the shoes and
stockings out of the closet and brought them to Ludovine, who, directly
she had put them on, became a woman all over.

When she was quite dressed in her white silk stockings and little blue
slippers dotted over with carbuncles, she said to her deliverer, 'Now
you must go away, and never come back here, whatever happens. Here is a
purse with two hundred ducats. Sleep to-night at the inn which is at the
edge of the wood, and awake early in the morning: for at nine o'clock
I shall pass the door, and shall take you up in my carriage.' 'Why
shouldn't we go now?' asked the little soldier. 'Because the time has
not yet come,' said the Princess. 'But first you may drink my health in
this glass of wine,' and as she spoke she filled a crystal goblet with a
liquid that looked like melted gold.

John drank, then lit his pipe and went out.


II

When he arrived at the inn he ordered supper, but no sooner had he sat
down to eat it than he felt that he was going sound asleep.

'I must be more tired than I thought,' he said to himself, and, after
telling them to be sure to wake him next morning at eight o'clock, he
went to bed.

All night long he slept like a dead man. At eight o'clock they came to
wake him, and at half-past, and a quarter of an hour later, but it was
no use; and at last they decided to leave him in peace.

The clocks were striking twelve when John awoke. He sprang out of bed,
and, scarcely waiting to dress himself, hastened to ask if anyone had
been to inquire for him.

'There came a lovely princess,' replied the landlady, 'in a coach of
gold. She left you this bouquet, and a message to say that she would
pass this way to-morrow morning at eight o'clock.'

The little soldier cursed his sleep, but tried to console himself by
looking at his bouquet, which was of immortelles.

'It is the flower of remembrance,' thought he, forgetting that it is
also the flower of the dead.

When the night came, he slept with one eye open, and jumped up twenty
times an hour. When the birds began to sing he could lie still no
longer, and climbed out of his window into the branches of one of the
great lime-trees that stood before the door. There he sat, dreamily
gazing at his bouquet till he ended by going fast asleep.

Once asleep, nothing was able to wake him; neither the brightness of
the sun, nor the songs of the birds, nor the noise of Ludovine's golden
coach, nor the cries of the landlady who sought him in every place she
could think of.

As the clock struck twelve he woke, and his heart sank as he came down
out of his tree and saw them laying the table for dinner.

'Did the Princess come?' he asked.

'Yes, indeed, she did. She left this flower-coloured scarf for you; said
she would pass by to-morrow at seven o'clock, but it would be the last
time.'

'I must have been bewitched,' thought the little soldier. Then he took
the scarf, which had a strange kind of scent, and tied it round his left
arm, thinking all the while that the best way to keep awake was not to
go to bed at all. So he paid his bill, and bought a horse with the money
that remained, and when the evening came he mounted his horse and stood
in front of the inn door, determined to stay there all night.

Every now and then he stooped to smell the sweet perfume of the scarf
round his arm; and gradually he smelt it so often that at last his head
sank on to the horse's neck, and he and his horse snored in company.

When the Princess arrived, they shook him, and beat him, and screamed at
him, but it was all no good. Neither man nor horse woke till the coach
was seen vanishing away in the distance.

Then John put spurs to his horse, calling with all his might 'Stop!
stop!' But the coach drove on as before, and though the little soldier
rode after it for a day and a night, he never got one step nearer.

Thus they left many villages and towns behind them, till they came to
the sea itself. Here John thought that at last the coach must stop, but,
wonder of wonders! it went straight on, and rolled over the water as
easily as it had done over the land. John's horse, which had carried him
so well, sank down from fatigue, and the little soldier sat sadly on the
shore, watching the coach which was fast disappearing on the horizon.


III

However, he soon plucked up his spirits again, and walked along the
beach to try and find a boat in which he could sail after the Princess.
But no boat was there, and at last, tired and hungry, he sat down to
rest on the steps of a fisherman's hut.

In the hut was a young girl who was mending a net. She invited John to
come in, and set before him some wine and fried fish, and John ate
and drank and felt comforted, and he told his adventures to the little
fisher-girl. But though she was very pretty, with a skin as white as
a gull's breast, for which her neighbours gave her the name of the
Seagull, he did not think about her at all, for he was dreaming of the
green eyes of the Princess.

When he had finished his tale, she was filled with pity and said:

'Last week, when I was fishing, my net suddenly grew very heavy, and
when I drew it in I found a great copper vase, fastened with lead. I
brought it home and placed it on the fire. When the lead had melted a
little, I opened the vase with my knife and drew out a mantle of red
cloth and a purse containing fifty crowns. That is the mantle, covering
my bed, and I have kept the money for my marriage-portion. But take it
and go to the nearest seaport, where you will find a ship sailing for
the Low Countries, and when you become King you will bring me back my
fifty crowns.'

And the Kinglet answered: 'When I am King of the Low Countries, I will
make you lady-in-waiting to the Queen, for you are as good as you are
beautiful. So farewell,' said he, and as the Seagull went back to her
fishing he rolled himself in the mantle and threw himself down on a heap
of dried grass, thinking of the strange things that had befallen him,
till he suddenly exclaimed:

'Oh, how I wish I was in the capital of the Low Countries!'


IV

In one moment the little soldier found himself standing before a
splendid palace. He rubbed his eyes and pinched himself, and when he was
quite sure he was not dreaming he said to a man who was smoking his pipe
before the door, 'Where am I?'

'Where are you? Can't you see? Before the King's palace, of course.'

'What King?'

'Why the King of the Low Countries!' replied the man, laughing and
supposing that he was mad.

Was there ever anything so strange? But as John was an honest fellow, he
was troubled at the thought that the Seagull would think he had stolen
her mantle and purse. And he began to wonder how he could restore them
to her the soonest. Then he remembered that the mantle had some hidden
charm that enabled the bearer to transport himself at will from place to
place, and in order to make sure of this he wished himself in the best
inn of the town. In an instant he was there.

Enchanted with this discovery, he ordered supper, and as it was too late
to visit the King that night he went to bed.

The next day, when he got up, he saw that all the houses were wreathed
with flowers and covered with flags, and all the church bells were
ringing. The little soldier inquired the meaning of all this noise, and
was told that the Princess Ludovine, the King's beautiful daughter, had
been found, and was about to make her triumphal entry. 'That will just
suit me,' thought the Kinglet; 'I will stand at the door and see if she
knows me.'

He had scarcely time to dress himself when the golden coach of Ludovine
went by. She had a crown of gold upon her head, and the King and Queen
sat by her side. By accident her eyes fell upon the little soldier, and
she grew pale and turned away her head.

'Didn't she know me?' the little soldier asked himself, 'or was she
angry because I missed our meetings?' and he followed the crowd till he
got to the palace. When the royal party entered he told the guards that
it was he who had delivered the Princess, and wished to speak to the
King. But the more he talked the more they believed him mad and refused
to let him pass.

The little soldier was furious. He felt that he needed his pipe to calm
him, and he entered a tavern and ordered a pint of beer. 'It is this
miserable soldier's helmet,' said he to himself 'If I had only money
enough I could look as splendid as the lords of the Court; but what
is the good of thinking of that when I have only the remains of the
Seagull's fifty crowns?'

He took out his purse to see what was left, and he found that there were
still fifty crowns.

'The Seagull must have miscounted,' thought he, and he paid for his
beer. Then he counted his money again, and there were still fifty
crowns. He took away five and counted a third time, but there were still
fifty. He emptied the purse altogether and then shut it; when he opened
it the fifty crowns were still there!

Then a plan came into his head, and he determined to go at once to the
Court tailor and coachbuilder.

He ordered the tailor to make him a mantle and vest of blue velvet
embroidered with pearls, and the coachbuilder to make him a golden
coach like the coach of the Princess Ludovine. If the tailor and the
coachbuilder were quick he promised to pay them double.

A few days later the little soldier was driven through the city in his
coach drawn by six white horses, and with four lacqueys richly dressed
standing behind. Inside sat John, clad in blue velvet, with a bouquet of
immortelles in his hand and a scarf bound round his arm. He drove twice
round the city, throwing money to the right and left, and the third
time, as he passed under the palace windows, he saw Ludovine lift a
corner of the curtain and peep out.


V

The next day no one talked of anything but the rich lord who had
distributed money as he drove along. The talk even reached the Court,
and the Queen, who was very curious, had a great desire to see the
wonderful Prince.

'Very well,' said the King; 'let him be asked to come and play cards
with me.'

This time the Kinglet was not late for his appointment.

The King sent for the cards and they sat down to play. They had six
games, and John always lost. The stake was fifty crowns, and each time
he emptied his purse, which was full the next instant.

The sixth time the King exclaimed, 'It is amazing!'

The Queen cried, 'It is astonishing!'

The Princess said, 'It is bewildering!'

'Not so bewildering,' replied the little soldier, 'as your change into a
serpent.'

'Hush!' interrupted the King, who did not like the subject.

'I only spoke of it,' said John, 'because you see in me the man who
delivered the Princess from the goblins and whom she promised to marry.'

'Is that true?' asked the King of the Princess.

'Quite true,' answered Ludovine. 'But I told my deliverer to be ready to
go with me when I passed by with my coach. I passed three times, but he
slept so soundly that no one could wake him.'

'What is your name?' said the King, 'and who are you?'

'My name is John. I am a soldier, and my father is a boatman.'

'You are not a fit husband for my daughter. Still, if you will give us
your purse, you shall have her for your wife.'

'My purse does not belong to me, and I cannot give it away.'

'But you can lend it to me till our wedding-day,' said the Princess with
one of those glances the little soldier never could resist.

'And when will that be?'

'At Easter,' said the monarch.

'Or in a blue moon!' murmured the Princess; but the Kinglet did not hear
her and let her take his purse.

Next evening he presented himself at the palace to play picquet with
the King and to make his court to the Princess. But he was told that
the King had gone into the country to receive his rents. He returned the
following day, and had the same answer. Then he asked to see the Queen,
but she had a headache. When this had happened five or six times, he
began to understand that they were making fun of him.

'That is not the way for a King to behave,' thought John. 'Old
scoundrel!' and then suddenly he remembered his red cloak.

'Ah, what an idiot I am!' said he. 'Of course I can get in whenever I
like with the help of this.'

That evening he was in front of the palace, wrapped in his red cloak.

On the first story one window was lighted, and John saw on the curtains
the shadow of the Princess.

'I wish myself in the room of the Princess Ludovine,' said he, and in a
second he was there.

The King's daughter was sitting before a table counting the money that
she emptied from the inexhaustible purse.

'Eight hundred and fifty, nine hundred, nine hundred and fifty--'

'A thousand,' finished John. 'Good evening everybody!'

The Princess jumped and gave a little cry. 'You here! What business have
you to do it? Leave at once, or I shall call--'

'I have come,' said the Kinglet, 'to remind you of your promise. The
day after to-morrow is Easter Day, and it is high time to think of our
marriage.'

Ludovine burst out into a fit of laughter. 'Our marriage! Have you
really been foolish enough to believe that the daughter of the King of
the Low Countries would ever marry the son of a boatman?'

'Then give me back the purse,' said John.

'Never,' said the Princess, and put it calmly in her pocket.

'As you like,' said the little soldier. 'He laughs best who laughs the
last;' and he took the Princess in his arms. 'I wish,' he cried, 'that
we were at the ends of the earth;' and in one second he was there, still
clasping the Princess tightly in his arms.

'Ouf,' said John, laying her gently at the foot of a tree. 'I never
took such a long journey before. What do you say, madam?' The Princess
understood that it was no time for jesting, and did not answer. Besides
she was still feeling giddy from her rapid flight, and had not yet
collected her senses.


VI

The King of the Low Countries was not a very scrupulous person, and
his daughter took after him. This was why she had been changed into a
serpent. It had been prophesied that she should be delivered by a little
soldier, and that she must marry him, unless he failed to appear at the
meeting-place three times running. The cunning Princess then laid her
plans accordingly.

The wine that she had given to John in the castle of the goblins, the
bouquet of immortelles, and the scarf, all had the power of producing
sleep like death. And we know how they had acted on John.

However, even in this critical moment, Ludovine did not lose her head.

'I thought you were simply a street vagabond,' said she, in her most
coaxing voice; 'and I find you are more powerful than any king. Here is
your purse. Have you got my scarf and my bouquet?'

'Here they are,' said the Kinglet, delighted with this change of tone,
and he drew them from his bosom. Ludovine fastened one in his buttonhole
and the other round his arm. 'Now,' she said, 'you are my lord and
master, and I will marry you at your good pleasure.'

'You are kinder than I thought,' said John; 'and you shall never be
unhappy, for I love you.'

'Then, my little husband, tell me how you managed to carry me so quickly
to the ends of the world.'

The little soldier scratched his head. 'Does she really mean to marry
me,' he thought to himself, 'or is she only trying to deceive me again?'

But Ludovine repeated, 'Won't you tell me?' in such a tender voice he
did not know how to resist her.

'After all,' he said to himself, 'what does it matter telling her the
secret, as long as I don't give her the cloak.'

And he told her the virtue of the red mantle.

'Oh dear, how tired I am!' sighed Ludovine. 'Don't you think we had
better take a nap? And then we can talk over our plans.'

She stretched herself on the grass, and the Kinglet did the same. He
laid his head on his left arm, round which the scarf was tied, and was
soon fast asleep.

Ludovine was watching him out of one eye, and no sooner did she hear him
snore than she unfastened the mantle, drew it gently from under him
and wrapped it round her, took the purse from his pocket, and put it in
hers, and said: 'I wish I was back in my own room.' In another moment
she was there.


VII

Who felt foolish but John, when he awoke, twenty-four hours after, and
found himself without purse, without mantle, and without Princess? He
tore his hair, he beat his breast, he trampled on the bouquet, and tore
the scarf of the traitress to atoms.

Besides this he was very hungry, and he had nothing to eat.

He thought of all the wonderful things his grandmother had told him when
he was a child, but none of them helped him now. He was in despair,
when suddenly he looked up and saw that the tree under which he had been
sleeping was a superb plum, covered with fruit as yellow as gold.

'Here goes for the plums,' he said to himself, 'all is fair in war.'

He climbed the tree and began to eat steadily. But he had hardly
swallowed two plums when, to his horror, he felt as if something was
growing on his forehead. He put up his hand and found that he had two
horns!

He leapt down from the tree and rushed to a stream that flowed close
by. Alas! there was no escape: two charming little horns, that would not
have disgraced the head of a goat.

Then his courage failed him.

'As if it was not enough,' said he, 'that a woman should trick me, but
the devil must mix himself up in it and lend me his horns. What a pretty
figure I should cut if I went back into the world!'

But as he was still hungry, and the mischief was done, he climbed boldly
up another tree, and plucked two plums of a lovely green colour. No
sooner had he swallowed two than the horns disappeared. The little
soldier was enchanted, though greatly surprised, and came to the
conclusion that it was no good to despair too quickly. When he had done
eating an idea suddenly occurred to him.

'Perhaps,' thought he, 'these pretty little plums may help me to recover
my purse, my cloak, and my heart from the hands of this wicked Princess.
She has the eyes of a deer already; let her have the horns of one. If I
can manage to set her up with a pair, I will bet any money that I shall
cease to want her for my wife. A horned maiden is by no means lovely to
look at.' So he plaited a basket out of the long willows, and placed
