
And now the drawbridge rang and echoed hollowly to the hoofs of
horses and the tramp of armed men.
'Up - quick!' cried Robert.  'Let's drop things on them.'

Even the girls were feeling almost brave now.  They followed Robert
quickly, and under his directions began to drop stones out through
the long narrow windows.  There was a confused noise below, and
some groans.

'Oh dear!' said Anthea, putting down the stone she was just going
to drop out.  'I'm afraid we've hurt somebody!'

Robert caught up the stone in a fury.

'I should just hope we HAD!' he said; 'I'd give something for a
jolly good boiling kettle of lead.  Surrender, indeed!'

And now came more tramping, and a pause, and then the thundering
thump of the battering-ram.  And the little room was almost quite
dark.

'We've held it,' cried Robert, 'we won't surrender!  The sun MUST
set in a minute.  Here - they're all jawing underneath again.  Pity
there's no time to get more stones!  Here, pour that water down on
them.  It's no good, of course, but they'll hate it.'

'Oh dear!' said Jane; 'don't you think we'd better surrender?'

'Never!' said Robert; 'we'll have a parley if you like, but we'll
never surrender.  Oh, I'll be a soldier when I grow up - you just
see if I don't.  I won't go into the Civil Service, whatever anyone
says.'

'Let's wave a handkerchief and ask for a parley,' Jane pleaded.  'I
don't believe the sun's going to set to-night at all.'

'Give them the water first - the brutes!' said the bloodthirsty
Robert.  So Anthea tilted the pot over the nearest lead-hole, and
poured.  They heard a splash below, but no one below seemed to have
felt it.  And again the ram battered the great door.  Anthea
paused.

'How idiotic,' said Robert, lying flat on the floor and putting one
eye to the lead hole.  'Of course the holes go straight down into
the gate-house - that's for when the enemy has got past the door
and the portcullis, and almost all is lost.  Here, hand me the
pot.'  He crawled on to the three-cornered window-ledge in the
middle of the wall, and, taking the pot from Anthea, poured the
water out through the arrow-slit.

And as he began to pour, the noise of the battering-ram and the
trampling of the foe and the shouts of 'Surrender!' and 'De Talbot
for ever!' all suddenly stopped and went out like the snuff of a
candle; the little dark room seemed to whirl round and turn
topsy-turvy, and when the children came to themselves there they
were safe and sound, in the big front bedroom of their own house -
the house with the ornamental nightmare iron-top to the roof.

They all crowded to the window and looked out.  The moat and the
tents and the besieging force were all gone - and there was the
garden with its tangle of dahlias and marigolds and asters and late
roses, and the spiky iron railings and the quiet white road.

Everyone drew a deep breath.

'And that's all right!' said Robert.  'I told you so!  And, I say,
we didn't surrender, did we?'

'Aren't you glad now I wished for a castle?' asked Cyril.

'I think I am NOW,' said Anthea slowly.  'But I wouldn't wish for
it again, I think, Squirrel dear!'

'Oh, it was simply splendid!' said Jane unexpectedly.  'I wasn't
frightened a bit.'

'Oh, I say!' Cyril was beginning, but Anthea stopped him.

'Look here,' she said, 'it's just come into my head.  This is the
very first thing we've wished for that hasn't got us into a row.
And there hasn't been the least little scrap of a row about this.
Nobody's raging downstairs, we're safe and sound, we've had an
awfully jolly day - at least, not jolly exactly, but you know what
I mean.  And we know now how brave Robert is - and Cyril too, of
course,' she added hastily, 'and Jane as well.  And we haven't got
into a row with a single grown-up.'

The door was opened suddenly and fiercely.

'You ought to be ashamed of yourselves,' said the voice of Martha,
and they could tell by her voice that she was very angry indeed.
'I thought you couldn't last through the day without getting up to
some doggery!  A person can't take a breath of air on the front
doorstep but you must be emptying the wash-hand jug on to their
heads!  Off you go to bed, the lot of you, and try to get up better
children in the morning.  Now then - don't let me have to tell you
twice.  If I find any of you not in bed in ten minutes I'll let you
know it, that's all!  A new cap, and everything!'

She flounced out amid a disregarded chorus of regrets and
apologies.  The children were very sorry, but really it was not
their faults.  You can't help it if you are pouring water on a
besieging foe, and your castle suddenly changes into your house -
and everything changes with it except the water, and that happens
to fall on somebody else's clean cap.

'I don't know why the water didn't change into nothing, though,'
said Cyril.

'Why should it?' asked Robert.  'Water's water all the world over.'
'I expect the castle well was the same as ours in the stable-yard,'
said Jane.  And that was really the case.

'I thought we couldn't get through a wish-day without a row,' said
Cyril; 'it was much too good to be true.  Come on, Bobs, my
military hero.  If we lick into bed sharp she won't be so frumious,
and perhaps she'll bong us up some supper.  I'm jolly hungry!
Good-night, kids.'

'Good-night.  I hope the castle won't come creeping back in the
night,' said Jane.

'Of course it won't,' said Anthea briskly, 'but Martha will - not
in the night, but in a minute.  Here, turn round, I'll get that
knot out of your pinafore strings.'

'Wouldn't it have been degrading for Sir Wulfric de Talbot,' said
Jane dreamily, 'if he could have known that half the besieged
garrison wore pinafores?'

'And the other half knickerbockers.  Yes - frightfully.  Do stand
still - you're only tightening the knot,' said Anthea.



CHAPTER 8
BIGGER THAN THE BAKER'S BOY


'Look here,' said Cyril.  'I've got an idea.'

'Does it hurt much?' said Robert sympathetically.

'Don't be a jackape!  I'm not humbugging.'

'Shut up, Bobs!' said Anthea.

'Silence for the Squirrel's oration,' said Robert.

Cyril balanced himself on the edge of the water-butt in the
backyard, where they all happened to be, and spoke.

'Friends, Romans, countrymen - and women - we found a Sammyadd.  We
have had wishes.  We've had wings, and being beautiful as the day
- ugh! - that was pretty jolly beastly if you like - and wealth and
castles, and that rotten gipsy business with the Lamb.  But we're
no forrader.  We haven't really got anything worth having for our
wishes.'

'We've had things happening,' said Robert; 'that's always
something.'

'It's not enough, unless they're the right things,' said Cyril
firmly.  'Now I've been thinking -'
'Not really?' whispered Robert.

'In the silent what's-its-names of the night.  It's like suddenly
being asked something out of history - the date of the Conquest or
something; you know it all right all the time, but when you're
asked it all goes out of your head.  Ladies and gentlemen, you know
jolly well that when we're all rotting about in the usual way heaps
of things keep cropping up, and then real earnest wishes come into
the heads of the beholder -'

'Hear, hear!' said Robert.

'- of the beholder, however stupid he is,' Cyril went on.  'Why,
even Robert might happen to think of a really useful wish if he
didn't injure his poor little brains trying so hard to think.  -
Shut up, Bobs, I tell you! - You'll have the whole show over.'

A struggle on the edge of a water-butt is exciting, but damp.  When
it was over, and the boys were partially dried, Anthea said:

'It really was you began it, Bobs.  Now honour is satisfied) do let
Squirrel go on.  We're wasting the whole morning.'

'Well then,' said Cyril, still wringing the water out of the tails
of his jacket, 'I'll call it pax if Bobs will.'

'Pax then,' said Robert sulkily.  'But I've got a lump as big as a
cricket ball over my eye.'

Anthea patiently offered a dust-coloured handkerchief, and Robert
bathed his wounds in silence.  'Now, Squirrel,' she said.

'Well then - let's just play bandits, or forts, or soldiers, or any
of the old games.  We're dead sure to think of something if we try
not to.  You always do.'

The others consented.  Bandits was hastily chosen for the game.
'It's as good as anything else,' said Jane gloomily.  It must be
owned that Robert was at first but a half-hearted bandit, but when
Anthea had borrowed from Martha the red-spotted handkerchief in
which the keeper had brought her mushrooms that morning, and had
tied up Robert's head with it so that he could be the wounded hero
who had saved the bandit captain's life the day before, he cheered
up wonderfully.  All were soon armed.  Bows and arrows slung on the
back look well; and umbrellas and cricket stumps stuck through the
belt give a fine impression of the wearer's being armed to the
teeth.  The white cotton hats that men wear in the country nowadays
have a very brigandish effect when a few turkey's feathers are
stuck in them.  The Lamb's mail-cart was covered with a
red-and-blue checked tablecloth, and made an admirable
baggage-wagon.  The Lamb asleep inside it was not at all in the
way.  So the banditti set out along the road that led to the
sand-pit.

'We ought to be near the Sammyadd,' said Cyril, 'in case we think
of anything suddenly.'

It is all very well to make up your minds to play bandits - or
chess, or ping-pong, or any other agreeable game - but it is not
easy to do it with spirit when all the wonderful wishes you can
think of, or can't think of, are waiting for you round the corner.
The game was dragging a little, and some of the bandits were
beginning to feel that the others were disagreeable things, and
were saying so candidly, when the baker's boy came along the road
with loaves in a basket.  The opportunity was not one to be lost.

'Stand and deliver!' cried Cyril.

'Your money or your life!' said Robert.

And they stood on each side of the baker's boy.  Unfortunately, he
did not seem to enter into the spirit of the thing at all.  He was
a baker's boy of an unusually large size.  He merely said:

'Chuck it now, d'ye hear!' and pushed the bandits aside most
disrespectfully.

Then Robert lassoed him with jane's skipping-rope, and instead of
going round his shoulders, as Robert intended, it went round his
feet and tripped him up.  The basket was upset, the beautiful new
loaves went bumping and bouncing all over the dusty chalky road.
The girls ran to pick them up, and all in a moment Robert and the
baker's boy were fighting it out, man to man, with Cyril to see
fair play, and the skipping-rope twisting round their legs like an
interested snake that wished to be a peacemaker.  It did not
succeed; indeed the way the boxwood handles sprang up and hit the
fighters on the shins and ankles was not at all peace-making.  I
know this is the second fight - or contest - in this chapter, but
I can't help it.  It was that sort of day.  You know yourself there
are days when rows seem to keep on happening, quite without your
meaning them to.  If I were a writer of tales of adventure such as
those which used to appear in The Boys of England when I was young,
of course I should be able to describe the fight, but I cannot do
it.  I never can see what happens during a fight, even when it is
only dogs.  Also, if I had been one of these Boys of England
writers, Robert would have got the best of it.  But I am like
George Washington - I cannot tell a lie, even about a cherry-tree,
much less about a fight, and I cannot conceal from you that Robert
was badly beaten, for the second time that day.  The baker's boy
blacked his other eye, and, being ignorant of the first rules of
fair play and gentlemanly behaviour, he also pulled Robert's hair,
and kicked him on the knee.  Robert always used to say he could
have licked the butcher if it hadn't been for the girls.  But I am
not sure.  Anyway, what happened was this, and very painful it was
to self-respecting boys.

Cyril was just tearing off his coat so as to help his brother in
proper style, when Jane threw her arms round his legs and began to
cry and ask him not to go and be beaten too.  That 'too' was very
nice for Robert, as you can imagine - but it was nothing to what he
felt when Anthea rushed in between him and the baker's boy, and
caught that unfair and degraded fighter round the waist, imploring
him not to fight any more.

'Oh, don't hurt my brother any more!' she said in floods of tears.
'He didn't mean it - it's only play.  And I'm sure he's very
sorry.'

You see how unfair this was to Robert.  Because, if the baker's boy
had had any right and chivalrous instincts, and had yielded to
Anthea's pleading and accepted her despicable apology, Robert could
not, in honour, have done anything to him at a future time.  But
Robert's fears, if he had any, were soon dispelled.  Chivalry was
a stranger to the breast of the baker's boy.  He pushed Anthea away
very roughly, and he chased Robert with kicks and unpleasant
conversation right down the road to the sand-pit, and there, with
one last kick, he landed him in a heap of sand.

'I'D larn you, you young varmint!' he said, and went off to pick up
his loaves and go about his business.  Cyril, impeded by Jane,
could do nothing without hurting her, for she clung round his legs
with the strength of despair.  The baker's boy went off red and
damp about the face; abusive to the last, he called them a pack of
silly idiots, and disappeared round the corner.  Then jane's grasp
loosened.  Cyril turned away in silent dignity to follow Robert,
and the girls followed him, weeping without restraint.

It was not a happy party that flung itself down in the sand beside
the sobbing Robert.  For Robert was sobbing - mostly with rage.
Though of course I know that a really heroic boy is always dry-eyed
after a fight.  But then he always wins, which had not been the
case with Robert.

Cyril was angry with Jane; Robert was furious with Anthea; the
girls were miserable; and not one of the four was pleased with the
baker's boy.  There was, as French writers say, 'a silence full of
emotion'.

Then Robert dug his toes and his hands into the sand and wriggled
in his rage.  'He'd better wait till I'm grown up - the cowardly
brute!  Beast! - I hate him!  But I'll pay him out.  just because
he's bigger than me.'

'You began,' said Jane incautiously.

'I know I did, silly - but I was only rotting - and he kicked me -
look here -'

Robert tore down a stocking and showed a purple bruise touched up
with red.  'I only wish I was bigger than him, that's all.'

He dug his fingers in the sand, and sprang up, for his hand had
touched something furry.  It was the Psammead, of course - 'On the
look-out to make sillies of them as usual,' as Cyril remarked
later.  And of course the next moment Robert's wish was granted,
and he was bigger than the baker's boy.  Oh, but much, much bigger.
He was bigger than the big policeman who used to be at the crossing
at the Mansion House years ago - the one who was so kind in helping
old ladies over the crossing - and he was the biggest man I have
ever seen, as well as the kindest.  No one had a foot-rule in its
pocket, so Robert could not be measured - but he was taller than
your father would be if he stood on your mother's head, which I am
sure he would never be unkind enough to do.  He must have been ten
or eleven feet high, and as broad as a boy of that height ought to
be.  his Norfolk suit had fortunately grown too, and now he stood
