
'I believe this is clay: did you ever make huge platters and bowls out
of clay and dry them in the sun? Some people did in a book called Foul
Play, and I believe they baked turtles, or oysters, or something, at the
same time.'

He took up a bit of clay and began to mess it about, like you do putty
when you get hold of a bit. And at once the heavy gloom that had hung
over the explorers became expelled, and we all got under the shadow of
the bridge and messed about with clay.

'It will be jolly!' Alice said, 'and we can give the huge platters to
poor cottagers who are short of the usual sorts of crockery. That would
really be a very golden deed.'

It is harder than you would think when you read about it, to make huge
platters with clay. It flops about as soon as you get it any size,
unless you keep it much too thick, and then when you turn up the edges
they crack. Yet we did not mind the trouble. And we had all got our
shoes and stockings off. It is impossible to go on being cross when your
feet are in cold water; and there is something in the smooth messiness
of clay, and not minding how dirty you get, that would soothe the
savagest breast that ever beat.

After a bit, though, we gave up the idea of the huge platter and tried
little things. We made some platters--they were like flower-pot saucers;
and Alice made a bowl by doubling up her fists and getting Noel to slab
the clay on outside. Then they smoothed the thing inside and out with
wet fingers, and it was a bowl--at least they said it was. When we'd
made a lot of things we set them in the sun to dry, and then it seemed
a pity not to do the thing thoroughly. So we made a bonfire, and when it
had burnt down we put our pots on the soft, white, hot ashes among the
little red sparks, and kicked the ashes over them and heaped more fuel
over the top. It was a fine fire.

Then tea-time seemed as if it ought to be near, and we decided to come
back next day and get our pots.

As we went home across the fields Dicky looked back and said--

'The bonfire's going pretty strong.'

We looked. It was. Great flames were rising to heaven against the
evening sky. And we had left it,a smouldering flat heap.

'The clay must have caught alight,' H. O. said. 'Perhaps it's the kind
that burns. I know I've heard of fireclay. And there's another sort you
can eat.'

'Oh, shut up!' Dicky said with anxious scorn.

With one accord we turned back. We all felt THE feeling--the one that
means something fatal being up and it being your fault.

'Perhaps, Alice said, 'a beautiful young lady in a muslin dress was
passing by, and a spark flew on to her, and now she is rolling in agony
enveloped in flames.'

We could not see the fire now, because of the corner of the wood, but we
hoped Alice was mistaken.

But when we got in sight of the scene of our pottering industry we saw
it was as bad nearly as Alice's wild dream. For the wooden fence leading
up to the bridge had caught fire, and it was burning like billy oh.

Oswald started to run; so did the others. As he ran he said to himself,
'This is no time to think about your clothes. Oswald, be bold!'

And he was.

Arrived at the site of the conflagration, he saw that caps or straw hats
full of water, however quickly and perseveringly given, would never put
the bridge out, and his eventful past life made him know exactly the
sort of wigging you get for an accident like this.

So he said, 'Dicky, soak your jacket and mine in the stream and chuck
them along. Alice, stand clear, or your silly girl's clothes'll catch as
sure as fate.'

Dicky and Oswald tore off their jackets, so did Denny, but we would not
let him and H. O. wet theirs. Then the brave Oswald advanced warily to
the end of the burning rails and put his wet jacket over the end bit,
like a linseed poultice on the throat of a suffering invalid who has
got bronchitis. The burning wood hissed and smouldered, and Oswald fell
back, almost choked with the smoke. But at once he caught up the other
wet jacket and put it on another place, and of course it did the trick
as he had known it would do. But it was a long job, and the smoke in his
eyes made the young hero obliged to let Dicky and Denny take a turn
as they had bothered to do from the first. At last all was safe; the
devouring element was conquered. We covered up the beastly bonfire with
clay to keep it from getting into mischief again, and then Alice said--

'Now we must go and tell.'

'Of course,' Oswald said shortly. He had meant to tell all the time.

So we went to the farmer who has the Moat House Farm, and we went at
once, because if you have any news like that to tell it only makes it
worse if you wait about. When we had told him he said--

'You little ---.' I shall not say what he said besides that, because
I am sure he must have been sorry for it next Sunday when he went to
church, if not before.

We did not take any notice of what he said, but just kept on saying how
sorry we were; and he did not take our apology like a man, but only
said he daresayed, just like a woman does. Then he went to look at his
bridge, and we went in to our tea. The jackets were never quite the same
again.

Really great explorers would never be discouraged by the daresaying of
a farmer, still less by his calling them names he ought not to. Albert's
uncle was away so we got no double slating; and next day we started
again to discover the source of the river of cataracts (or the region of
mountain-like icebergs).

We set out, heavily provisioned with a large cake Daisy and Dora had
made themselves, and six bottles of ginger-beer. I think real explorers
most likely have their ginger-beer in something lighter to carry than
stone bottles. Perhaps they have it by the cask, which would come
cheaper; and you could make the girls carry it on their back, like in
pictures of the daughters of regiments.

We passed the scene of the devouring conflagration, and the thought
of the fire made us so thirsty we decided to drink the ginger-beer and
leave the bottles in a place of concealment. Then we went on, determined
to reach our destination, Tropic or Polar, that day.

Denny and H. O. wanted to stop and try to make a fashionable
watering-place at that part where the stream spreads out like a
small-sized sea, but Noel said, 'No.' We did not like fashionableness.

'YOU ought to, at any rate,' Denny said. 'A Mr Collins wrote an Ode to
the Fashions, and he was a great poet.'

'The poet Milton wrote a long book about Satan,' Noel said, 'but I'm not
bound to like HIM.' I think it was smart of Noel.

'People aren't obliged to like everything they write about even, let
alone read,' Alice said. 'Look at "Ruin seize thee, ruthless king!"
and all the pieces of poetry about war, and tyrants, and slaughtered
saints--and the one you made yourself about the black beetle, Noel.'

By this time we had got by the pondy place and the danger of delay was
past; but the others went on talking about poetry for quite a field and
a half, as we walked along by the banks of the stream. The stream was
broad and shallow at this part, and you could see the stones and
gravel at the bottom, and millions of baby fishes, and a sort of
skating-spiders walking about on the top of the water. Denny said the
water must be ice for them to be able to walk on it, and this showed we
were getting near the North Pole. But Oswald had seen a kingfisher by
the wood, and he said it was an ibis, so this was even.

When Oswald had had as much poetry as he could bear he said, 'Let's be
beavers and make a dam.' And everybody was so hot they agreed joyously,
and soon our clothes were tucked up as far as they could go and our legs
looked green through the water, though they were pink out of it.

Making a dam is jolly good fun, though laborious, as books about beavers
take care to let you know.

Dicky said it must be Canada if we were beavers, and so it was on the
way to the Polar system, but Oswald pointed to his heated brow, and
Dicky owned it was warm for Polar regions. He had brought the ice-axe
(it is called the wood chopper sometimes), and Oswald, ever ready and
able to command, set him and Denny to cut turfs from the bank while we
heaped stones across the stream. It was clayey here, or of course dam
making would have been vain, even for the best-trained beaver.

When we had made a ridge of stones we laid turfs against them--nearly
across the stream, leaving about two feet for the water to go
through--then more stones, and then lumps of clay stamped down as hard
as we could. The industrious beavers spent hours over it, with only one
easy to eat cake in. And at last the dam rose to the level of the bank.
Then the beavers collected a great heap of clay, and four of them lifted
it and dumped it down in the opening where the water was running. It did
splash a little, but a true-hearted beaver knows better than to mind a
bit of a wetting, as Oswald told Alice at the time. Then with more clay
the work was completed. We must have used tons of clay; there was quite
a big long hole in the bank above the dam where we had taken it out.

When our beaver task was performed we went on, and Dicky was so hot he
had to take his jacket off and shut up about icebergs.

I cannot tell you about all the windings of the stream; it went through
fields and woods and meadows, and at last the banks got steeper and
higher, and the trees overhead darkly arched their mysterious branches,
and we felt like the princes in a fairy tale who go out to seek their
fortunes.

And then we saw a thing that was well worth coming all that way for; the
stream suddenly disappeared under a dark stone archway, and however much
you stood in the water and stuck your head down between your knees you
could not see any light at the other end.

The stream was much smaller than where we had been beavers.

Gentle reader, you will guess in a moment who it was that said--

'Alice, you've got a candle. Let's explore.' This gallant proposal met
but a cold response. The others said they didn't care much about it, and
what about tea?

I often think the way people try to hide their cowardliness behind their
teas is simply beastly.

Oswald took no notice. He just said, with that dignified manner, not at
all like sulking, which he knows so well how to put on--

'All right. I'M going. If you funk it you'd better cut along home and
ask your nurses to put you to bed.' So then, of course, they agreed
to go. Oswald went first with the candle. It was not comfortable; the
architect of that dark subterranean passage had not imagined anyone
would ever be brave enough to lead a band of beavers into its inky
recesses, or he would have built it high enough to stand upright in. As
it was, we were bent almost at a right angle, and this is very awkward
if for long.

But the leader pressed dauntlessly on, and paid no attention to the
groans of his faithful followers, nor to what they said about their
backs.

It really was a very long tunnel, though, and even Oswald was not sorry
to say, 'I see daylight.' The followers cheered as well as they could as
they splashed after him. The floor was stone as well as the roof, so it
was easy to walk on. I think the followers would have turned back if it
had been sharp stones or gravel.

And now the spot of daylight at the end of the tunnel grew larger and
larger, and presently the intrepid leader found himself blinking in the
full sun, and the candle he carried looked simply silly. He emerged,
and the others too, and they stretched their backs and the word 'krikey'
fell from more than one lip. It had indeed been a cramping adventure.
Bushes grew close to the mouth of the tunnel, so we could not see much
landscape, and when we had stretched our backs we went on upstream and
nobody said they'd had jolly well enough of it, though in more than one
young heart this was thought.

It was jolly to be in the sunshine again. I never knew before how cold
it was underground. The stream was getting smaller and smaller.

Dicky said, 'This can't be the way. I expect there was a turning to
the North Pole inside the tunnel, only we missed it. It was cold enough
there.'

But here a twist in the stream brought us out from the bushes, and
Oswald said--

'Here is strange, wild, tropical vegetation in the richest profusion.
Such blossoms as these never opened in a frigid what's-its-name.'

It was indeed true. We had come out into a sort of marshy, swampy place
like I think, a jungle is, that the stream ran through, and it was
simply crammed with queer plants, and flowers we never saw before or
since. And the stream was quite thin. It was torridly hot, and softish
to walk on. There were rushes and reeds and small willows, and it was
all tangled over with different sorts of grasses--and pools here and
there. We saw no wild beasts, but there were more different kinds of
wild flies and beetles than you could believe anybody could bear, and
dragon-flies and gnats. The girls picked a lot of flowers. I know the
names of some of them, but I will not tell you them because this is
not meant to be instructing. So I will only name meadow-sweet, yarrow,
loose-strife, lady's bed-straw and willow herb--both the larger and the
lesser.

Everyone now wished to go home. It was much hotter there than in natural
fields. It made you want to tear all your clothes off and play at
savages, instead of keeping respectable in your boots.

But we had to bear the boots because it was so brambly.

It was Oswald who showed the others how flat it would be to go home the
same way we came; and he pointed out the telegraph wires in the distance
and said--

'There must be a road there, let's make for it,' which was quite a
simple and ordinary thing to say, and he does not ask for any credit for
it. So we sloshed along, scratching our legs with the brambles, and the
water squelched in our boots, and Alice's blue muslin frock was torn all
over in those crisscross tears which are considered so hard to darn.

We did not follow the stream any more. It was only a trickle now, so we
knew we had tracked it to its source. And we got hotter and hotter and
hotter, and the dews of agony stood in beads on our brows and rolled
down our noses and off our chins. And the flies buzzed, and the gnats
stung, and Oswald bravely sought to keep up Dicky's courage, when he
tripped on a snag and came down on a bramble bush, by saying--

'You see it IS the source of the Nile we've discovered. What price North
Poles now?'

Alice said, 'Ah, but think of ices! I expect Oswald wishes it HAD been
the Pole, anyway.'

Oswald is naturally the leader, especially when following up what is
his own idea, but he knows that leaders have other duties besides just
leading. One is to assist weak or wounded members of the expedition,
whether Polar or Equatorish.

So the others had got a bit ahead through Oswald lending the tottering
Denny a hand over the rough places. Denny's feet hurt him, because when
he was a beaver his stockings had dropped out of his pocket, and boots
without stockings are not a bed of luxuriousness. And he is often
unlucky with his feet.

Presently we came to a pond, and Denny said--

'Let's paddle.'

Oswald likes Denny to have ideas; he knows it is healthy for the boy,
and generally he backs him up, but just now it was getting late and the
others were ahead, so he said--

