So they took it in turns, two and two, to go out and to stay in.

The stay-at-homes would have been much duller than they were but for the
new interest taken in them by the learned gentleman.

He called Anthea in one day to show her a beautiful necklace of purple
and gold beads.

'I saw one like that,' she said, 'in--'

'In the British Museum, perhaps?'

'I like to call the place where I saw it Babylon,' said Anthea
cautiously.

'A pretty fancy,' said the learned gentleman, 'and quite correct too,
because, as a matter of fact, these beads did come from Babylon.' The
other three were all out that day. The boys had been going to the Zoo,
and Jane had said so plaintively, 'I'm sure I am fonder of rhinoceroses
than either of you are,' that Anthea had told her to run along then.
And she had run, catching the boys before that part of the road where
Fitzroy Street suddenly becomes Fitzroy Square.

'I think Babylon is most frightfully interesting,' said Anthea. 'I do
have such interesting dreams about it--at least, not dreams exactly, but
quite as wonderful.'

'Do sit down and tell me,' said he. So she sat down and told. And he
asked her a lot of questions, and she answered them as well as she
could.

'Wonderful--wonderful!' he said at last. 'One's heard of
thought-transference, but I never thought _I_ had any power of that
sort. Yet it must be that, and very bad for YOU, I should think. Doesn't
your head ache very much?'

He suddenly put a cold, thin hand on her forehead.

'No thank you, not at all,' said she.

'I assure you it is not done intentionally,' he went on. 'Of course I
know a good deal about Babylon, and I unconsciously communicate it to
you; you've heard of thought-reading, but some of the things you say,
I don't understand; they never enter my head, and yet they're so
astoundingly probable.'

'It's all right,' said Anthea reassuringly. '_I_ understand. And don't
worry. It's all quite simple really.'

It was not quite so simple when Anthea, having heard the others come
in, went down, and before she had had time to ask how they had liked the
Zoo, heard a noise outside, compared to which the wild beasts' noises
were gentle as singing birds.

'Good gracious!' cried Anthea, 'what's that?'

The loud hum of many voices came through the open window. Words could be
distinguished.

''Ere's a guy!'

'This ain't November. That ain't no guy. It's a ballet lady, that's what
it is.'

'Not it--it's a bloomin' looney, I tell you.'

Then came a clear voice that they knew.

'Retire, slaves!' it said.

'What's she a saying of?' cried a dozen voices. 'Some blamed foreign
lingo,' one voice replied.

The children rushed to the door. A crowd was on the road and pavement.

In the middle of the crowd, plainly to be seen from the top of the
steps, were the beautiful face and bright veil of the Babylonian Queen.

'Jimminy!' cried Robert, and ran down the steps, 'here she is!'

'Here!' he cried, 'look out--let the lady pass. She's a friend of ours,
coming to see us.'

'Nice friend for a respectable house,' snorted a fat woman with marrows
on a handcart.

All the same the crowd made way a little. The Queen met Robert on the
pavement, and Cyril joined them, the Psammead bag still on his arm.

'Here,' he whispered; 'here's the Psammead; you can get wishes.'

'_I_ wish you'd come in a different dress, if you HAD to come,' said
Robert; 'but it's no use my wishing anything.'

'No,' said the Queen. 'I wish I was dressed--no, I don't--I wish THEY
were dressed properly, then they wouldn't be so silly.'

The Psammead blew itself out till the bag was a very tight fit for it;
and suddenly every man, woman, and child in that crowd felt that it had
not enough clothes on. For, of course, the Queen's idea of proper dress
was the dress that had been proper for the working-classes 3,000 years
ago in Babylon--and there was not much of it.

'Lawky me!' said the marrow-selling woman, 'whatever could a-took me
to come out this figure?' and she wheeled her cart away very quickly
indeed.

'Someone's made a pretty guy of you--talk of guys,' said a man who sold
bootlaces.

'Well, don't you talk,' said the man next to him. 'Look at your own
silly legs; and where's your boots?'

'I never come out like this, I'll take my sacred,' said the
bootlace-seller. 'I wasn't quite myself last night, I'll own, but not to
dress up like a circus.'

The crowd was all talking at once, and getting rather angry. But no one
seemed to think of blaming the Queen.

Anthea bounded down the steps and pulled her up; the others followed,
and the door was shut. 'Blowed if I can make it out!' they heard. 'I'm
off home, I am.'

And the crowd, coming slowly to the same mind, dispersed, followed by
another crowd of persons who were not dressed in what the Queen thought
was the proper way.

'We shall have the police here directly,' said Anthea in the tones of
despair. 'Oh, why did you come dressed like that?'

The Queen leaned against the arm of the horse-hair sofa.

'How else can a queen dress I should like to know?' she questioned.

'Our Queen wears things like other people,' said Cyril.

'Well, I don't. And I must say,' she remarked in an injured tone, 'that
you don't seem very glad to see me now I HAVE come. But perhaps it's the
surprise that makes you behave like this. Yet you ought to be used to
surprises. The way you vanished! I shall never forget it. The best magic
I've ever seen. How did you do it?'

'Oh, never mind about that now,' said Robert. 'You see you've gone and
upset all those people, and I expect they'll fetch the police. And we
don't want to see you collared and put in prison.'

'You can't put queens in prison,' she said loftily. 'Oh, can't you?'
said Cyril. 'We cut off a king's head here once.'

'In this miserable room? How frightfully interesting.'

'No, no, not in this room; in history.'

'Oh, in THAT,' said the Queen disparagingly. 'I thought you'd done it
with your own hands.'

The girls shuddered.

'What a hideous city yours is,' the Queen went on pleasantly, 'and what
horrid, ignorant people. Do you know they actually can't understand a
single word I say.'

'Can you understand them?' asked Jane.

'Of course not; they speak some vulgar, Northern dialect. I can
understand YOU quite well.'

I really am not going to explain AGAIN how it was that the children
could understand other languages than their own so thoroughly, and talk
them, too, so that it felt and sounded (to them) just as though they
were talking English.

'Well,' said Cyril bluntly, 'now you've seen just how horrid it is,
don't you think you might as well go home again?' 'Why, I've seen simply
nothing yet,' said the Queen, arranging her starry veil. 'I wished to be
at your door, and I was. Now I must go and see your King and Queen.'

'Nobody's allowed to,' said Anthea in haste; 'but look here, we'll take
you and show you anything you'd like to see--anything you CAN see,' she
added kindly, because she remembered how nice the Queen had been to them
in Babylon, even if she had been a little deceitful in the matter of
Jane and Psammead.

'There's the Museum,' said Cyril hopefully; 'there are lots of things
from your country there. If only we could disguise you a little.'

'I know,' said Anthea suddenly. 'Mother's old theatre cloak, and there
are a lot of her old hats in the big box.'

The blue silk, lace-trimmed cloak did indeed hide some of the Queen's
startling splendours, but the hat fitted very badly. It had pink roses
in it; and there was something about the coat or the hat or the Queen,
that made her look somehow not very respectable.

'Oh, never mind,' said Anthea, when Cyril whispered this. 'The thing is
to get her out before Nurse has finished her forty winks. I should think
she's about got to the thirty-ninth wink by now.'

'Come on then,' said Robert. 'You know how dangerous it is. Let's make
haste into the Museum. If any of those people you made guys of do fetch
the police, they won't think of looking for you there.'

The blue silk coat and the pink-rosed hat attracted almost as much
attention as the royal costume had done; and the children were
uncommonly glad to get out of the noisy streets into the grey quiet of
the Museum.

'Parcels and umbrellas to be left here,' said a man at the counter.

The party had no umbrellas, and the only parcel was the bag containing
the Psammead, which the Queen had insisted should be brought.

'I'M not going to be left,' said the Psammead softly, 'so don't you
think it.'

'I'll wait outside with you,' said Anthea hastily, and went to sit on
the seat near the drinking fountain.

'Don't sit so near that nasty fountain,' said the creature crossly; 'I
might get splashed.'

Anthea obediently moved to another seat and waited. Indeed she waited,
and waited, and waited, and waited, and waited. The Psammead dropped
into an uneasy slumber. Anthea had long ceased to watch the swing-door
that always let out the wrong person, and she was herself almost asleep,
and still the others did not come back.

It was quite a start when Anthea suddenly realized that they HAD come
back, and that they were not alone. Behind them was quite a crowd of
men in uniform, and several gentlemen were there. Everyone seemed very
angry.

'Now go,' said the nicest of the angry gentlemen. 'Take the poor,
demented thing home and tell your parents she ought to be properly
looked after.'

'If you can't get her to go we must send for the police,' said the
nastiest gentleman.

'But we don't wish to use harsh measures,' added the nice one, who was
really very nice indeed, and seemed to be over all the others.

'May I speak to my sister a moment first?' asked Robert.

The nicest gentleman nodded, and the officials stood round the Queen,
the others forming a sort of guard while Robert crossed over to Anthea.

'Everything you can think of,' he replied to Anthea's glance of inquiry.
'Kicked up the most frightful shine in there. Said those necklaces and
earrings and things in the glass cases were all hers--would have them
out of the cases. Tried to break the glass--she did break one bit!
Everybody in the place has been at her. No good. I only got her out by
telling her that was the place where they cut queens' heads off.'

'Oh, Bobs, what a whacker!'

'You'd have told a whackinger one to get her out. Besides, it wasn't. I
meant MUMMY queens. How do you know they don't cut off mummies' heads to
see how the embalming is done? What I want to say is, can't you get her
to go with you quietly?'

'I'll try,' said Anthea, and went up to the Queen.

'Do come home,' she said; 'the learned gentleman in our house has a much
nicer necklace than anything they've got here. Come and see it.'

The Queen nodded.

'You see,' said the nastiest gentleman, 'she does understand English.'

'I was talking Babylonian, I think,' said Anthea bashfully.

'My good child,' said the nice gentleman, 'what you're talking is
not Babylonian, but nonsense. You just go home at once, and tell your
parents exactly what has happened.'

Anthea took the Queen's hand and gently pulled her away. The other
children followed, and the black crowd of angry gentlemen stood on the
steps watching them. It was when the little party of disgraced children,
with the Queen who had disgraced them, had reached the middle of the
courtyard that her eyes fell on the bag where the Psammead was. She
stopped short.

'I wish,' she said, very loud and clear, 'that all those Babylonian
things would come out to me here--slowly, so that those dogs and slaves
can see the working of the great Queen's magic.'

'Oh, you ARE a tiresome woman,' said the Psammead in its bag, but it
puffed itself out.

Next moment there was a crash. The glass swing doors and all their
framework were smashed suddenly and completely. The crowd of angry
gentlemen sprang aside when they saw what had done this.

But the nastiest of them was not quick enough, and he was roughly pushed
out of the way by an enormous stone bull that was floating steadily
through the door. It came and stood beside the Queen in the middle of
the courtyard.

It was followed by more stone images, by great slabs of carved stone,
bricks, helmets, tools, weapons, fetters, wine-jars, bowls, bottles,
vases, jugs, saucers, seals, and the round long things, something like
rolling pins with marks on them like the print of little bird-feet,
necklaces, collars, rings, armlets, earrings--heaps and heaps and
heaps of things, far more than anyone had time to count, or even to see
distinctly.

All the angry gentlemen had abruptly sat down on the Museum steps except
