so now you knows it."

At the bottom of this was signed the words "Captain Lud."

"Oh! William," Mrs. Mulready cried, "you will never do it! You will
never risk your life at the hands of these terrible people!"

All the thin veneer of politeness was cracked by this blow, and Mr.
Mulready said sullenly:

"Nice thing indeed; after I have married to get this money, and then not
to be able to use it!"

His wife gave a little cry.

"It's a shame to say so," Charlie burst out sturdily.

Mr. Mulready's passion found a vent. He leaped up and seized the boy by
the collar and boxed his ears with all his force.

In an instant the fury which had been smoldering in Ned's breast for
months found a vent. He leaped to his feet and struck Mr. Mulready a
blow between the eyes which sent him staggering back against the wall;
then he caught up the poker. The manufacturer with a snarl like that of
an angry wild beast was about to rush at him, but Ned's attitude as he
stood, poker in hand, checked him.

"Stand back," Ned said threateningly, "or I will strike you. You coward
and bully; for months I have put up with your tyrannizing over Charlie
and Lucy, but touch either of them again if you dare. You think that you
are stronger than I am--so you are ever so much; but you lay a finger
on them or on me, and I warn you, if I wait a month for an opportunity I
will pay you for it, if you kill me afterward."

Mrs. Mulready's screams had by this time brought the servants into the
room, and they stood astonished at the spectacle.

Lucy crying bitterly had run to Ned and thrown her arms round him,
begging him to be quiet. Charlie, hardly recovered from the heavy blows
he had received, was crying too. Mr. Mulready as pale as death was
glaring at Ned, while his wife had thrown herself between them. Mr.
Mulready was the first to recover himself.

"This is a nice spectacle," he said to the servants. "You see that boy
has attacked me with the poker and might have murdered me. However, you
can go now, and mind, no chattering about what you have seen.

"And now," he continued to Ned as the door closed behind the servants,
"out of this house you go this day."

"You don't suppose I want to stay in your house," Ned said passionately.
"You don't suppose that it's any pleasure to me to stop here, seeing you
play the tyrant over my mother."

"Oh, Ned, Ned," Mrs. Mulready broke in, "how can you talk so!"

"It is true, mother, he is a tyrant to you as well as to every one
else; but I don't mean to go, I mean to stop here to protect you and the
children. He daren't turn me out; if he did, I would go and work in one
of the mills, and what would the people of Marsden say then? What would
they think of this popular, pleasant gentleman then, who has told his
wife before her children that he married her for her money? They shall
all know it, never fear, if I leave this house. I would have gone to Mr.
Simmonds and asked him to apply for a commission for me before now, for
other fellows get it as young as I am; but I have made up my mind that
it's my duty not to do so.

"I know he has been looking forward to my being out of the way, and his
being able to do just what he likes with the others, but I ain't going
to gratify him. It's plain to me that my duty at present is to take care
of you all, and though God knows how I set my mind upon going into the
army and being a soldier like my father, I will give it up if it means
leaving Charlie here under him."

"And do you suppose, sir," Mr. Mulready asked with intense bitterness,
"that I am going to keep you here doing nothing all your life, while you
are pleased to watch me?"

"No, I don't," Ned replied. "I shall get a clerkship or something in one
of the mills, and I shall have Charlie to live with me until he is old
enough to leave school, and then I will go away with him to America or
somewhere. As to mother, I can do nothing for her. I think my being here
makes it worse for her, for I believe you tyrannize over her all the
more because you think it hurts me. I know you hated me from the first
just as I hated you. As for Lucy, mother must do the best she can for
her. Even you daren't hit a girl."

"Oh, Ned, how can you go on so?" Mrs. Mulready wailed. "You are a wicked
boy to talk so."

"All right, mother," Ned replied recklessly; "if I am, I suppose I am. I
know in your eyes he can do no wrong. And I believe if he beat you, you
would think that you deserved it."

So he flung himself down in his chair and continued his breakfast.

Mr. Mulready drank off his tea without sitting down, and then left the
room without another word; in fact, as yet he did not know what to say.

Almost speechless with passion as he was, he restrained himself from
carrying out his threat and turning Ned at once from the house. Above
all things he prized his position and popularity, and he felt that, as
Ned had said, he would indeed incur a heavy odium by turning his wife's
son from his doors. Captain Sankey's death had thrown almost a halo over
his children. Mr. Mulready knew that he was already intensely unpopular
among the operative class, but he despised this so long as he stood well
with the rest of the townsmen; but he dared not risk Ned's going to work
as an ordinary hand in one of the factories; public opinion is always
against stepfathers, and assuredly this would be no exception. Hating
him as he did, he dared not get rid of this insolent boy, who had struck
and defied him. He cursed himself now with his rashness in letting
his temper get the best of him and telling his wife openly that he had
married her for her money; for this in Ned's hands would be a serious
weapon against him.

That his wife's feelings were hurt he cared not a jot, but it would be
an awkward thing to have it repeated in the town. Then there was this
threatening letter; what was he to do about that? Other men had had
similar warnings. Some had defied Captain Lud, and fortified their mills
and held them. Many had had their property burned to the ground; some
had been murdered. It wouldn't be a pleasant thing to drive about in the
country knowing that at any moment he might be shot dead. His mill was
some little distance out of the town; the road was dark and lonely. He
dared not risk it.

Mr. Mulready was, like all tyrants, a coward at heart, and his face grew
white again as he thought of the letter in his pocket. In the meantime
Mrs. Mulready was alternately sobbing and upbraiding Ned as he quietly
finished his breakfast. The boy did not answer, but continued his meal
in dogged silence, and when it was over collected his books and without
a word went off to school.

Weeks went on, and no outward change took place. Ned continued to live
at home. Mr. Mulready never addressed him, and beyond helping him to
food entirely ignored his presence. At mealtimes when he opened his lips
it was either to snap at Charlie or Lucy, or to snarl at his wife, whose
patience astonished Ned, and who never answered except by a smile or
murmured excuse. The lad was almost as far separated from her now as
from his stepfather. She treated him as if he only were to blame for
the quarrel which had arisen. They had never understood each other, and
while she was never weary of making excuses for her husband, she could
make none for her son. In the knowledge that the former had much to vex
him she made excuses for him even in his worst moods. His new machinery
was standing idle, his business was getting worse and worse, he was
greatly pressed and worried, and it was monstrous, she told herself,
that at such a time he should be troubled with Ned's defiant behavior.

A short time before the school Christmas holidays Ned knocked at the
door of Mr. Porson's study. Since the conversation which they had had
when first Ned heard of his mother's engagement Mr. Porson had seen in
the lad's altered manner, his gloomy looks, and a hardness of expression
which became more and more marked every week, that things were going
on badly. Ned no longer evinced the same interest in his work, and
frequently neglected it altogether; the master, however, had kept
silence, preferring to wait until Ned should himself broach the subject.

"Well, Sankey, what is it?" he asked kindly as the boy entered.

"I don't think it's any use my going on any longer, Mr. Porson."

"Well, Sankey, you have not been doing yourself much good this half,
certainly. I have not said much to you about it, for it is entirely your
own business: you know more than nineteen out of twenty of the young
fellows who get commissions, so that if you choose to give up work it is
your own affair."

"I have made up my mind not to go into the army," Ned said quietly.

Mr. Porson was silent a minute.

"I hope, my dear lad," he said, "you will do nothing hastily about this.
Here is a profession open to you which is your own choice and that of
your father, and it should need some very strong and good reason for you
to abandon it. Come let us talk the matter over together, my boy, not as
a master and his pupil, but as two friends.

"You know, my boy, how thoroughly I have your interest at heart. If you
had other friends whom you could consult I would rather have given you
no advice, for there is no more serious matter than to say anything
which might influence the career of a young fellow just starting in
life. Terrible harm often results from well intentioned advice or
opinions carelessly expressed to young men by their elders; it is a
matter which few men are sufficiently careful about; but as I know that
you have no friends to consult, Ned, and as I regard you with more than
interest, I may say with affection, I think it would be well for you to
tell me all that there is in your mind before you take a step which may
wreck your whole life.

"I have been waiting for some months in hopes that you would open your
mind to me, for I have seen that you were unhappy; but it was not for me
to force your confidence."

"I don't know that there's much to tell," Ned said wearily. "Everything
has happened just as it was certain it would do. Mulready is a brute; he
ill treats my mother, he ill treats Charlie and Lucy, and he would ill
treat me if he dared."

"All this is bad, Ned," Mr. Porson said gravely; "but of course much
depends upon the amount of his ill treatment. I assume that he does not
actively ill treat your mother."

"No," Ned said with an angry look in his face; "and he'd better not."

"Yes, Ned, he had better not, no doubt," Mr. Porson said soothingly;
"but what I want to know, what it is essential I should know if I am to
give you any advice worth having, is what you mean by ill treatment--is
he rough and violent in his way with her? does he threaten her with
violence? is he coarse and brutal?"

"No," Ned said somewhat reluctantly; "he is not that, sir; he is always
snapping and snarling and finding fault."

"That is bad, Ned, but it does not amount to ill treatment. When a man
is put out in business and things go wrong with him it is unhappily too
often his custom to vent his ill temper upon innocent persons; and I
fancy from what I hear--you know in a little place like this every one's
business is more or less known--Mr. Mulready has a good deal to put him
out. He has erected new machinery and dare not put it to work, owing as
I hear--for he has lain the documents before the magistrates--for his
having received threatening letters warning him against doing so. This
is very trying to the man. Then, Ned, you will excuse my saying that
perhaps he is somewhat tried at home. It is no pleasant thing for a man
to have a young fellow like yourself in the house taking up an attitude
of constant hostility. I do not say that his conduct may or may not
justify it; but you will not deny that from the first you were prepared
to receive him as an enemy rather than as a friend. I heard a story some
weeks ago in the town, which emanated no doubt from the servants, that
you had actually struck him."

"He hit Charlie, sir," Ned exclaimed.

"That may be," Mr. Porson went on gravely; "and I have no doubt, Ned,
that you considered then, and that you consider now, that you were
acting rightly in interfering on behalf of your brother. But I should
question much whether in such a matter you are the best judge. You
unfortunately began with a very strong prejudice against this man; you
took up the strongest attitude of hostility to him; you were prepared
to find fault with everything he said and did; you put yourself in the
position of the champion of your mother, brother, and sister against
him. Under such circumstances it was hardly possible that things could
go on well. Now I suppose, Ned, that the idea which you have in your
mind in deciding to give up the profession you have chosen, is that you
may remain as their champion and protector here."

"Yes, sir," Ned said. "Father told me to be kind to mother, whatever
happened."

"Quite so, my boy; but the question is, Are you being kind?"

Ned looked surprised.

"That you intend to be so, Ned, I am sure. The question is, Are you
going the right way to work? Is this championship that you have taken
upon yourself increasing her happiness, or is it not?"

Ned was silent.

"I do not think that it is, Ned. Your mother must be really fond of this
man or she would not have married him. Do you think that it conduces to
the comfort of her home to see the constant antagonism which prevails
between you and him? Is it not the fact that this ill temper under
which she suffers is the result of the irritation caused to him by your
attitude? Do you not add to her burden rather than relieve it?"

Ned was still silent. He had so thoroughly persuaded himself that he was
protecting his mother, his brother, and sister from Mr. Mulready that he
had never considered the matter in this light.

"Does your mother take his part or yours in these quarrels, Ned?"

"She takes his part, sir," said Ned indignantly.

"Very well, Ned; that shows in itself that she does not wish for your
championship, that in her eyes the trouble in the house is in fact
caused by you. You must remember that when a woman loves a man she
makes excuses for his faults of temper; his irritable moods, sharp
expressions, and what you call snapping and snarling do not seem half
so bad to her as they do to a third person, especially when that third
person is her partisan. Instead of your adding to her happiness by
renouncing your idea of going into the army, and of deciding to remain
here in some position or other to take care of her, as, I suppose, is
your intention, the result will be just the contrary. As to your sister,
I think the same thing would happen.

"Your mother is certainly greatly attached to her and owing to her
changed habits--for I understand that she is now a far more active, and
I may say, Ned, a more sensible woman than before her marriage--I see no
reason why Lucy should not be happy with her, especially if the element
of discord--I mean yourself--were out of the way. As to Charlie, at
the worst I don't think that he would suffer from your absence. His
stepfather's temper will be less irritable; and as Charlie is away at
school all day, and has to prepare his lessons in the evening, there is
really but slight opportunity for his stepfather treating him with any
active unkindness, even should he be disposed to do so.

"Did I think, my boy, that your presence here would be likely to benefit
your family I should be the last person to advise you to avoid making
a sacrifice of your private wishes to what you consider your duty; but
upon the contrary I am convinced that the line which you have, with the
best intention, taken up has been altogether a mistake, that your stay
at home does vastly more harm than good, and that things would go on
very much better in your absence."

This was a bitter mortification for Ned, who had hitherto nursed the
idea that he was performing rather a heroic part, and was sacrificing
himself for the sake of his mother.

"You don't know the fellow as I do," he said sullenly at last.

"I do not, Ned; but I know human nature, and I know that any man would
show himself at his worst under such circumstances as those in which you
hare placed him. It is painful to have to say, but I am sure that you
have done harm rather than good, and that things will get on much better
in your absence."

"I believe he is quite capable of killing her," Ned said passionately,
"if he wanted her out of the way."

"That is a hard thing to say, Ned; but even were it so, we have no
reason for supposing that he does want her out of the way. Come, Sankey,
I am sure you have plenty of good sense. Hitherto you have been acting
rather blindly in this matter. You have viewed it from one side only,
and with the very best intentions in the world have done harm rather
than good.

"I am convinced that when you come to think it over you will see that,
in following out your own and your father's intentions and wishes as to
your future career, you will really best fulfil his last injunctions and
will show the truest kindness to your mother. Don't give me your answer
now, but take time to think it over. Try and see the case from every
point of view, and I think you will come to the conclusion that what I
have been saying, although it may seem rather hard to you at first, is
true, and that you had best go into the army, as you had intended. I am
sure in any case you will know that what I have said, even if it seems
unkind, has been for your good."

"Thank you, Mr. Porson," Ned replied; "I am quite sure of that. Perhaps
you are right, and I have been making a fool of myself all along. But
anyhow I will think it over."




CHAPTER XI: THE NEW MACHINERY


It is rather hard for a lad who thinks that he has been behaving
somewhat as a hero to come to the conclusion that he has been making a
fool of himself; but this was the result of Ned Sankey's cogitation over
what Mr. Porson had said to him. Perhaps he arrived more easily at that
conclusion because he was not altogether unwilling to do so. It was very
mortifying to allow that he had been altogether wrong; but, on the other
hand, there was a feeling of deep pleasure at the thought that he could,
in Mr. Porson's deliberate opinion, go into the army and carry out all
his original hopes and plans. His heart had been set upon this as long
as he could remember, and it had been a bitter disappointment to him
when he had arrived at the conclusion that it was his duty to abandon
the idea. He did not now come to the conclusion hastily that Mr.
Porson's view of the case was the correct one; but after a fortnight's
