the strings!

Everything was exactly right.

"There wasn't any Sky-Scraper," said Aunt Izzie, "so I got
'Snow-Skimmer' instead."

"It's beautiful, and I like it just as well," said Katy contentedly.

"Oh, hide them, hide them!" she cried with sudden terror, "somebody's
coming." But the somebody was only Papa, who put his head into the room
as Aunt Izzie, laden with bundles, scuttled across the hall.

Katy was glad to catch him alone. She had a little private secret to
talk over with him. It was about Aunt Izzie, for whom she, as yet, had
no present.

"I thought perhaps you'd get me a book like that one of Cousin Helen's,
which Aunt Izzie liked so much," she said. "I don't recollect the name
exactly. It was something about a Shadow. But I've spent all my money."

"Never mind about that," said Dr. Carr. "We'll make that right. 'The
Shadow of the Cross'--was that it? I'll buy it this afternoon."

"Oh, thank you, Papa! And please get a brown cover, if you can, because
Cousin Helen's was brown. And you won't let Aunt Izzie know, will you?
Be careful, Papa!"

"I'll swallow the book first, brown cover and all," said Papa,
making a funny face. He was pleased to see Katy so interested about
anything again.

These delightful secrets took up so much of her thoughts, that Katy
scarcely found time to wonder at the absence of the children, who
generally haunted her room, but who for three days back had hardly been
seen. However, after supper they all came up in a body, looking very
merry, and as if they had been having a good time somewhere.

"You don't know what we've been doing," began Philly.

"Hush, Phil!" said Clover, in a warning voice. Then she divided the
stockings which she held in her hand. And everybody proceeded to
hang them up.

Dorry hung his on one side of the fireplace, and John hers exactly
opposite. Clover and Phil suspended theirs side by side, on two handles
of the bureau.

"I'm going to put mine here, close to Katy, so that she can see it the
first fing in the mornin'," said Elsie, pinning hers to the bed-post.

Then they all sat down round the fire to write their wishes on bits of
paper, and see whether they would burn, or fly up the chimney. If they
did the latter, it was a sign that Santa Claus had them safe, and would
bring the things wished for.

John wished for a sled and a doll's tea-set, and the continuation of the
Swiss Family Robinson. Dorry's list ran thus:

  "A plum-cake,
  A new Bibel,
  Harry and Lucy,
  A Kellidescope,
  Everything else Santa Claus likes."

When they had written these lists they threw them into the fire. The
fire gave a flicker just then, and the papers vanished. Nobody saw
exactly how. John thought they flew up chimney, but Dorry said they
didn't. Phil dropped his piece in very solemnly. It flamed for a minute,
then sank into ashes.

"There, you won't get it, whatever it was!" said Dorry. "What did you
write, Phil?"

"Nofing," said Phil, "only just Philly Carr."

The children shouted.

"I wrote 'a writing-desk' on mine," remarked Elsie, sorrowfully, "but it
all burned up."

Katy chuckled when she heard this.

And now Clover produced her list. She read aloud:

  "'Strive and Thrive,'
  A pair of kid gloves,
  A muff,
  A good temper!"

Then she dropped it into the fire. Behold, it flew straight up chimney.

"How queer!" said Katy; "none of the rest of them did that."

The truth was, that Clover, who was a canny little mortal, had slipped
across the room and opened the door just before putting her wishes in.
This, of course, made a draft, and sent the paper right upward.

Pretty soon Aunt Izzie came in and swept them all off to bed.

"I know how it will be in the morning," she said, "you'll all be up
and racing about as soon as it is light. So you must get your sleep
now, if ever."

After they had gone, Katy recollected that nobody had offered to hang a
stocking up for her. She felt a little hurt when she thought of it. "But
I suppose they forgot," she said to herself.

A little later Papa and Aunt Izzie came in, and they filled the
stockings. It was great fun. Each was brought to Katy, as she lay in
bed, that she might arrange it as she liked.

The toes were stuffed with candy and oranges. Then came the parcels, all
shapes and sizes, tied in white paper, with ribbons, and labelled.

"What's that?" asked Dr. Carr, as Aunt Izzie rammed a long, narrow
package into Clover's stocking.

"A nail-brush," answered Aunt Izzie. "Clover needed a new one."

How Papa and Katy laughed! "I don't believe Santa Claus ever had such a
thing before," said Dr. Carr.

"He's a very dirty old gentleman, then," observed Aunt Izzie, grimly.

The desk and sled were too big to go into any stocking, so they were
wrapped in paper and hung beneath the other things. It was ten o'clock
before all was done, and Papa and Aunt Izzie went away. Katy lay a long
time watching the queer shapes of the stocking-legs as they dangled in
the firelight. Then she fell asleep.

It seemed only a minute, before something touched her and woke her up.
Behold, it was day-time, and there was Philly in his nightgown, climbing
up on the bed to kiss her! The rest of the children, half dressed, were
dancing about with their stockings in their hands.

"Merry Christmas! Merry Christmas!" they cried. "Oh, Katy, such
beautiful, beautiful things!"

"Oh!" shrieked Elsie, who at that moment spied her desk, "Santa Claus
_did_ bring it, after all! Why, it's got 'from Katy' written on it! Oh,
Katy, it's so sweet, and I'm _so_ happy!" and Elsie hugged Katy, and
sobbed for pleasure.

But what was that strange thing beside the bed! Katy stared, and rubbed
her eyes. It certainly had not been there when she went to sleep. How
had it come?

It was a little evergreen tree planted in a red flower-pot. The pot had
stripes of gilt paper stuck on it, and gilt stars and crosses, which
made it look very gay. The boughs of the tree were hung with oranges,
and nuts, and shiny red apples, and pop-corn balls, and strings of
bright berries. There were also a number of little packages tied with
blue and crimson ribbon, and altogether the tree looked so pretty, that
Katy gave a cry of delighted surprise.

"It's a Christmas-tree for you, because you're sick, you know!" said the
children, all trying to hug her at once.

"We made it ourselves," said Dorry, hopping about on one foot; "I pasted
the black stars on the pot."

"And I popped the corn!" cried Philly.

"Do you like it?" asked Elsie, cuddling close to Katy. "That's my
present--that one tied with a green ribbon. I wish it was nicer! Don't
you want to open 'em right away?"

Of course Katy wanted to. All sorts of things came out of the little
bundles. The children had arranged every parcel themselves. No grown
person had been allowed to help in the least.

Elsie's present was a pen-wiper, with a gray flannel kitten on it.
Johnnie's, a doll's tea-tray of scarlet tin.

"Isn't it beau-ti-ful?" she said, admiringly.

Dorry's gift, I regret to say, was a huge red-and-yellow spider, which
whirred wildly when waved at the end of its string.

"They didn't want me to buy it," said he, "but I did! I thought it would
amoose you. Does it amoose you, Katy?"

"Yes, indeed," said Katy, laughing and blinking as Dorry waved the
spider to and fro before her eyes.

"You can play with it when we ain't here and you're all alone, you
know," remarked Dorry, highly gratified.

"But you don't notice what the tree's standing upon," said Clover.

It was a chair, a very large and curious one, with a long-cushioned
back, which ended in a footstool.

"That's Papa's present," said Clover; "see, it tips back so as to be
just like a bed. And Papa says he thinks pretty soon you can lie on it,
in the window, where you can see us play."

"Does he really?" said Katy, doubtfully. It still hurt her very much to
be touched or moved.

"And see what's tied to the arm of the chair," said Elsie.

It was a little silver bell, with "Katy" engraved on the handle.

"Cousin Helen sent it. It's for you to ring when you want anybody to
come," explained Elsie.

More surprises. To the other arm of the chair was fastened a beautiful
book. It was "The Wide Wide World"--and there Was Katy's name written on
it, 'from her affectionate Cecy.' On it stood a great parcel of dried
cherries from Mrs. Hall. Mrs. Hall had the most _delicious_ dried
cherries, the children thought.

"How perfectly lovely everybody is!" said Katy, with grateful tears
in her eyes.

That was a pleasant Christmas. The children declared it to be the nicest
they had ever had. And though Katy couldn't quite say that, she enjoyed
it too, and was very happy.

It was several weeks before she was able to use the chair, but when once
she became accustomed to it, it proved very comfortable. Aunt Izzie
would dress her in the morning, tip the chair back till it was on a
level with the bed, and then, very gently and gradually, draw her over
on to it. Wheeling across the room was always painful, but sitting in
the window and looking out at the clouds, the people going by, and the
children playing in the snow, was delightful. How delightful nobody
knows, excepting those who, like Katy, have lain for six months in bed,
without a peep at the outside world. Every day she grew brighter and
more cheerful.

"How jolly Santa Claus was this year!" She happened to say one day, when
she was talking with Cecy. "I wish another Saint would come and pay us a
visit. But I don't know any more, except Cousin Helen, and she can't."

"There's St. Valentine," suggested Cecy.

"Sure enough. What a bright thought!" cried Katy, clapping her hands.
"Oh, Cecy, let's do something funny on Valentine's-Day! Such a good idea
has just popped into my mind."

So the two girls put their heads together and held a long, mysterious
confabulation. What it was about, we shall see farther on.

Valentine's-Day was the next Friday. When the children came home from
school on Thursday afternoon, Aunt Izzie met them, and, to their great
surprise, told them that Cecy was come to drink tea, and they must all
go up stairs and be made nice.

"But Cecy comes most every day," remarked Dorry, who didn't see the
connection between this fact and having his face washed.

"Yes--but to-night you are to take tea in Katy's room," said Aunt Izzie;
"here are the invitations: one for each of you."

Sure enough, there was a neat little note for each, requesting the
pleasure of their company at "Queen Katharine's Palace," that afternoon,
at six o'clock.

This put quite a different aspect on the affair. The children scampered
up stairs, and pretty soon, all nicely brushed and washed, they were
knocking formally at the door of the "Palace." How fine it sounded!

The room looked bright and inviting. Katy, in her chair, sat close to
the fire, Cecy was beside her, and there was a round table all set out
with a white cloth and mugs of milk and biscuit, and strawberry-Jam and
doughnuts. In the middle was a loaf of frosted cake. There was something
on the icing which looked like pink letters, and Clover, leaning
forward, read aloud, "St. Valentine."

"What's that for?" asked Dorry.

"Why, you know this is St. Valentine's-Eve," replied Katy. "Debbie
remembered it, I guess, so she put that on."

Nothing more was said about St. Valentine just then. But when the last
pink letter of his name had been eaten, and the supper had been cleared
away, suddenly, as the children sat by the fire, there was a loud rap
at the door.

"Who can that be?" said Katy; "please see, Clover!"

So Clover opened the door. There stood Bridget, trying very hard not to
laugh, and holding a letter in her hand.

"It's a note as has come for you, Miss Clover," she said.

"For _me_!" cried Clover, much amazed. Then she shut the door, and
brought the note to the table.

"How very funny!" she exclaimed, as she looked at the envelope, which
was a green and white one. There was something hard inside. Clover broke
the seal. Out tumbled a small green velvet pincushion made in the shape
of a clover-leaf, with a tiny stem of wire wound with green silk. Pinned
to the cushion was a paper, with these verses:

  "Some people love roses well,
    Tulips, gayly dressed,
  Some love violets blue and sweet,--
    I love Clover best.

  "Though she has a modest air,
