"Would you like to?" returned Ozma.

"Yes. I know Oz pretty well, but Ojo doesn't know it at all. I'm sorry
for his uncle and poor Margolotte and I'd like to help save them. May I
go?"

"If you wish to," replied Ozma.

"If Dorothy goes, then I must go to take care of her," said the
Scarecrow, decidedly. "A dark well can only be discovered in some
out-of-the-way place, and there may be dangers there."

"You have my permission to accompany Dorothy," said Ozma. "And while
you are gone I will take care of the Patchwork Girl."

"I'll take care of myself," announced Scraps, "for I'm going with the
Scarecrow and Dorothy. I promised Ojo to help him find the things he
wants and I'll stick to my promise."

"Very well," replied Ozma. "But I see no need for Ojo to take the Glass
Cat and the Woozy."

"I prefer to remain here," said the cat. "I've nearly been nicked half
a dozen times, already, and if they're going into dangers it's best for
me to keep away from them."

"Let Jellia Jamb keep her till Ojo returns," suggested Dorothy. "We
won't need to take the Woozy, either, but he ought to be saved because
of the three hairs in his tail."

"Better take me along," said the Woozy. "My eyes can flash fire, you
know, and I can growl--a little."

"I'm sure you'll be safer here," Ozma decided, and the Woozy made no
further objection to the plan.

After consulting together they decided that Ojo and his party should
leave the very next day to search for the gill of water from a dark
well, so they now separated to make preparations for the journey.

Ozma gave the Munchkin boy a room in the palace for that night and the
afternoon he passed with Dorothy--getting acquainted, as she said--and
receiving advice from the Shaggy Man as to where they must go. The
Shaggy Man had wandered in many parts of Oz, and so had Dorothy, for
that matter, yet neither of them knew where a dark well was to be found.

"If such a thing is anywhere in the settled parts of Oz," said Dorothy,
"we'd prob'ly have heard of it long ago. If it's in the wild parts of
the country, no one there would need a dark well. P'raps there isn't
such a thing."

"Oh, there must be!" returned Ojo, positively; "or else the recipe of
Dr. Pipt wouldn't call for it."

"That's true," agreed Dorothy; "and, if it's anywhere in the Land of
Oz, we're bound to find it."

"Well, we're bound to search for it, anyhow," said the Scarecrow. "As
for finding it, we must trust to luck."

"Don't do that," begged Ojo, earnestly. "I'm called Ojo the Unlucky,
you know."




Chapter Nineteen

Trouble with the Tottenhots


A day's journey from the Emerald City brought the little band of
adventurers to the home of Jack Pumpkinhead, which was a house formed
from the shell of an immense pumpkin. Jack had made it himself and was
very proud of it. There was a door, and several windows, and through
the top was stuck a stovepipe that led from a small stove inside. The
door was reached by a flight of three steps and there was a good floor
on which was arranged some furniture that was quite comfortable.

It is certain that Jack Pumpkinhead might have had a much finer house
to live in had he wanted it, for Ozma loved the stupid fellow, who had
been her earliest companion; but Jack preferred his pumpkin house, as
it matched himself very well, and in this he was not so stupid, after
all.

The body of this remarkable person was made of wood, branches of trees
of various sizes having been used for the purpose. This wooden
framework was covered by a red shirt--with white spots in it--blue
trousers, a yellow vest, a jacket of green-and-gold and stout leather
shoes. The neck was a sharpened stick on which the pumpkin head was
set, and the eyes, ears, nose and mouth were carved on the skin of the
pumpkin, very like a child's jack-o'-lantern.

The house of this interesting creation stood in the center of a vast
pumpkin-field, where the vines grew in profusion and bore pumpkins of
extraordinary size as well as those which were smaller. Some of the
pumpkins now ripening on the vines were almost as large as Jack's
house, and he told Dorothy he intended to add another pumpkin to his
mansion.

The travelers were cordially welcomed to this quaint domicile and
invited to pass the night there, which they had planned to do. The
Patchwork Girl was greatly interested in Jack and examined him
admiringly.

"You are quite handsome," she said; "but not as really beautiful as the
Scarecrow."

Jack turned, at this, to examine the Scarecrow critically, and his old
friend slyly winked one painted eye at him.

"There is no accounting for tastes," remarked the Pumpkinhead, with a
sigh. "An old crow once told me I was very fascinating, but of course
the bird might have been mistaken. Yet I have noticed that the crows
usually avoid the Scarecrow, who is a very honest fellow, in his way,
but stuffed. I am not stuffed, you will observe; my body is good solid
hickory."

"I adore stuffing," said the Patchwork Girl.

"Well, as for that, my head is stuffed with pumpkin-seeds," declared
Jack. "I use them for brains, and when they are fresh I am
intellectual. Just now, I regret to say, my seeds are rattling a bit,
so I must soon get another head."

"Oh; do you change your head?" asked Ojo.

"To be sure. Pumpkins are not permanent, more's the pity, and in time
they spoil. That is why I grow such a great field of pumpkins--that I
may select a new head whenever necessary."

"Who carves the faces on them?" inquired the boy.

"I do that myself. I lift off my old head, place it on a table before
me, and use the face for a pattern to go by. Sometimes the faces I
carve are better than others--more expressive and cheerful, you
know--but I think they average very well."

Before she had started on the journey Dorothy had packed a knapsack
with the things she might need, and this knapsack the Scarecrow carried
strapped to his back. The little girl wore a plain gingham dress and a
checked sunbonnet, as she knew they were best fitted for travel. Ojo
also had brought along his basket, to which Ozma had added a bottle of
"Square Meal Tablets" and some fruit. But Jack Pumpkinhead grew a lot
of things in his garden besides pumpkins, so he cooked for them a fine
vegetable soup and gave Dorothy, Ojo and Toto, the only ones who found
it necessary to eat, a pumpkin pie and some green cheese. For beds they
must use the sweet dried grasses which Jack had strewn along one side
of the room, but that satisfied Dorothy and Ojo very well. Toto, of
course, slept beside his little mistress.

The Scarecrow, Scraps and the Pumpkinhead were tireless and had no need
to sleep, so they sat up and talked together all night; but they stayed
outside the house, under the bright stars, and talked in low tones so
as not to disturb the sleepers. During the conversation the Scarecrow
explained their quest for a dark well, and asked Jack's advice where to
find it.

The Pumpkinhead considered the matter gravely.

"That is going to be a difficult task," said he, "and if I were you I'd
take any ordinary well and enclose it, so as to make it dark."

"I fear that wouldn't do," replied the Scarecrow. "The well must be
naturally dark, and the water must never have seen the light of day,
for otherwise the magic charm might not work at all."

"How much of the water do you need?" asked Jack.

"A gill."

"How much is a gill?"

"Why--a gill is a gill, of course," answered the Scarecrow, who did not
wish to display his ignorance.

"I know!" cried Scraps. "Jack and Jill went up the hill to fetch--"

"No, no; that's wrong," interrupted the Scarecrow. "There are two kinds
of gills, I think; one is a girl, and the other is--"

"A gillyflower," said Jack.

"No; a measure."

"How big a measure?"

"Well, I'll ask Dorothy."

So next morning they asked Dorothy, and she said:

"I don't just know how much a gill is, but I've brought along a gold
flask that holds a pint. That's more than a gill, I'm sure, and the
Crooked Magician may measure it to suit himself. But the thing that's
bothering us most, Jack, is to find the well."

Jack gazed around the landscape, for he was standing in the doorway of
his house.

"This is a flat country, so you won't find any dark wells here," said
he. "You must go into the mountains, where rocks and caverns are."

"And where is that?" asked Ojo.

"In the Quadling Country, which lies south of here," replied the
Scarecrow. "I've known all along that we must go to the mountains."

"So have I," said Dorothy.

"But--goodness me!--the Quadling Country is full of dangers," declared
Jack. "I've never been there myself, but--"

"I have," said the Scarecrow. "I've faced the dreadful Hammerheads,
which have no arms and butt you like a goat; and I've faced the
Fighting Trees, which bend down their branches to pound and whip you,
and had many other adventures there."

"It's a wild country," remarked Dorothy, soberly, "and if we go there
we're sure to have troubles of our own. But I guess we'll have to go,
if we want that gill of water from the dark well."

So they said good-bye to the Pumpkinhead and resumed their travels,
heading now directly toward the South Country, where mountains and
rocks and caverns and forests of great trees abounded. This part of the
Land of Oz, while it belonged to Ozma and owed her allegiance, was so
wild and secluded that many queer peoples hid in its jungles and lived
in their own way, without even a knowledge that they had a Ruler in the
Emerald City. If they were left alone, these creatures never troubled
the inhabitants of the rest of Oz, but those who invaded their domains
encountered many dangers from them.

It was a two days journey from Jack Pumkinhead's house to the edge of
the Quadling Country, for neither Dorothy nor Ojo could walk very fast
and they often stopped by the wayside to rest. The first night they
slept on the broad fields, among the buttercups and daisies, and the
Scarecrow covered the children with a gauze blanket taken from his
knapsack, so they would not be chilled by the night air. Toward evening
of the second day they reached a sandy plain where walking was
difficult; but some distance before them they saw a group of palm
trees, with many curious black dots under them; so they trudged bravely
on to reach that place by dark and spend the night under the shelter of
the trees.

The black dots grew larger as they advanced and although the light was
dim Dorothy thought they looked like big kettles turned upside down.
Just beyond this place a jumble of huge, jagged rocks lay scattered,
rising to the mountains behind them.

Our travelers preferred to attempt to climb these rocks by daylight,
and they realized that for a time this would be their last night on the
plains.

Twilight had fallen by the time they came to the trees, beneath which
were the black, circular objects they had marked from a distance.
Dozens of them were scattered around and Dorothy bent near to one,
which was about as tall as she was, to examine it more closely. As she
did so the top flew open and out popped a dusky creature, rising its
length into the air and then plumping down upon the ground just beside
the little girl. Another and another popped out of the circular,
pot-like dwelling, while from all the other black objects came popping
more creatures--very like jumping-jacks when their boxes are
unhooked--until fully a hundred stood gathered around our little group
of travelers.

By this time Dorothy had discovered they were people, tiny and
curiously formed, but still people. Their skins were dusky and their
hair stood straight up, like wires, and was brilliant scarlet in color.
Their bodies were bare except for skins fastened around their waists
and they wore bracelets on their ankles and wrists, and necklaces, and
great pendant earrings.

Toto crouched beside his mistress and wailed as if he did not like
these strange creatures a bit. Scraps began to mutter something about
"hoppity, poppity, jumpity, dump!" but no one paid any attention to
her. Ojo kept close to the Scarecrow and the Scarecrow kept close to
Dorothy; but the little girl turned to the queer creatures and asked:

"Who are you?"

They answered this question all together, in a sort of chanting chorus,
the words being as follows:

    "We're the jolly Tottenhots;
    We do not like the day,
    But in the night 'tis our delight
    To gambol, skip and play.

    "We hate the sun and from it run,
    The moon is cool and clear,
    So on this spot each Tottenhot
    Waits for it to appear.

    "We're ev'ry one chock full of fun,
    And full of mischief, too;
    But if you're gay and with us play
    We'll do no harm to you.


"Glad to meet you, Tottenhots," said the Scarecrow solemnly. "But you
mustn't expect us to play with you all night, for we've traveled all
day and some of us are tired."

"And we never gamble," added the Patchwork Girl. "It's against the Law."

These remarks were greeted with shouts of laughter by the impish
creatures and one seized the Scarecrow's arm and was astonished to find
the straw man whirl around so easily. So the Tottenhot raised the
Scarecrow high in the air and tossed him over the heads of the crowd.
Some one caught him and tossed him back, and so with shouts of glee
they continued throwing the Scarecrow here and there, as if he had been
a basket-ball.

Presently another imp seized Scraps and began to throw her about, in
the same way. They found her a little heavier than the Scarecrow but
still light enough to be tossed like a sofa-cushion, and they were
enjoying the sport immensely when Dorothy, angry and indignant at the
treatment her friends were receiving, rushed among the Tottenhots and
began slapping and pushing them until she had rescued the Scarecrow and
the Patchwork Girl and held them close on either side of her. Perhaps
she would not have accomplished this victory so easily had not Toto
helped her, barking and snapping at the bare legs of the imps until
they were glad to flee from his attack. As for Ojo, some of the
creatures had attempted to toss him, also, but finding his body too
heavy they threw him to the ground and a row of the imps sat on him and
held him from assisting Dorothy in her battle.

The little brown folks were much surprised at being attacked by the
girl and the dog, and one or two who had been slapped hardest began to
cry. Then suddenly they gave a shout, all together, and disappeared in
a flash into their various houses, the tops of which closed with a
series of pops that sounded like a bunch of firecrackers being exploded.

The adventurers now found themselves alone, and Dorothy asked anxiously:

"Is anybody hurt?"

"Not me," answered the Scarecrow. "They have given my straw a good
shaking up and taken all the lumps out of it. I am now in splendid
condition and am really obliged to the Tottenhots for their kind
treatment."

"I feel much the same way," said Scraps. "My cotton stuffing had sagged
a good deal with the day's walking and they've loosened it up until I
feel as plump as a sausage. But the play was a little rough and I'd had
quite enough of it when you interfered."

"Six of them sat on me," said Ojo, "but as they are so little they
didn't hurt me much."

Just then the roof of the house in front of them opened and a Tottenhot
stuck his head out, very cautiously, and looked at the strangers.

"Can't you take a joke?" he asked, reproachfully; "haven't you any fun
in you at all?"

"If I had such a quality," replied the Scarecrow, "your people would
have knocked it out of me. But I don't bear grudges. I forgive you."

"So do I," added Scraps. "That is, if you behave yourselves after this."

"It was just a little rough-house, that's all," said the Tottenhot.
"But the question is not if we will behave, but if you will behave? We
can't be shut up here all night, because this is our time to play; nor
do we care to come out and be chewed up by a savage beast or slapped by
an angry girl. That slapping hurts like sixty; some of my folks are
crying about it. So here's the proposition: you let us alone and we'll
let you alone."

"You began it," declared Dorothy.

"Well, you ended it, so we won't argue the matter. May we come out
again? Or are you still cruel and slappy?"

"Tell you what we'll do," said Dorothy. "We're all tired and want to
sleep until morning. If you'll let us get into your house, and stay
there until daylight, you can play outside all you want to."

"That's a bargain!" cried the Tottenhot eagerly, and he gave a queer
whistle that brought his people popping out of their houses on all
sides. When the house before them was vacant, Dorothy and Ojo leaned
over the hole and looked in, but could see nothing because it was so
dark. But if the Tottenhots slept there all day the children thought
they could sleep there at night, so Ojo lowered himself down and found
it was not very deep.

"There's a soft cushion all over," said he. "Come on in."

Dorothy handed Toto to the boy and then climbed in herself. After her
came Scraps and the Scarecrow, who did not wish to sleep but preferred
