
Apparently Bruno was of the same opinion, too. In all his free hours he
used to sit in a corner of the room with his books, paying no attention
to anything else, but since Leonore had come he always joined the merry
group and generally had something to relate or to show for Leonore's
entertainment. This he did in a quiet, gentler manner, such that it
seemed as if he would hardly have behaved otherwise.

Lippo felt so comfortable in Leonore's presence that he always kept as
close to her as possible. Even when he told his experiences at great
length, she never became impatient, but encouraged him to go on when his
brothers and sisters made sarcastic remarks about him.

From time to time he would confidentially say to her: "Just stay with us
always, Leonore. You are at home here now, even if you have no home
anywhere else." This was uttered in a spirit of utter conviction, as the
little boy had heard it from her own lips and was sure that this would be
the best for them all.

Leonore blushed a deep scarlet at these words, as if Lippo had pronounced
a thought she did not dare to foster in her own heart. Once his mother
had noticed this, so she told Lippo one evening, not to say this again.
As it was impossible to keep Leonore, it was much better not to speak of
it, as it only gave her pain. As this was a firm command, Lippo obeyed
faithfully. He kept on, however, showing Leonore that he loved to be
with her.

Maezli's love for Leonore showed itself more than anything in a wish to
lend her a helping; hand in many things which the little girl felt her
lovely friend stood in need of. She had seen quite plainly that Leonore
often became very sad when everyone else about her was laughing and she
herself had been quite bright a moment before. But Maezli knew how she
was going to help. She meant to tell Apollonie how to fit up her cottage
for Leonore and Salo, who, she hoped, would spend his holidays there,
too. She meant to superintend these preparations herself and to have it
all fixed as daintily as possible.

By this time Mea's new friend was adored by the whole family, and they
showed it by doing all in their power for her. They had agreed that she
differed absolutely from Mea's former friends. They could not analyze
wherein lay the charm which pervaded her whole personality. The children
had never known anybody who was so polite towards everyone, including
Kathy, who only spoke affectionate, tender words, and always seemed so
grateful when others were kind to her. This spirit was something new and
extremely delightful. They had to admit to themselves that they wished
everybody would act in such a way, as this would do away forever with the
fights and altercations that had always arisen between them, and for
which they were afterwards always sorry. The only thing they would have
been glad to change in Leonore were her sudden fits of gloom, which
affected them all. Leonore tried very hard to fight these depressing
thoughts, but they went so deep that she seldom succeeded. Their mother
consoled them by saying that Leonore would get stronger as soon as she
could take walks with them in the woods and meadows, and that feelings
which now weighed on her would then seem lighter.

A few days later the children, including Leonore, came back with rosy
cheeks and glowing eyes from their first walk to the surrounding hills.
The fresh mountain breeze had exhilarated them so much that the feeling
of well-being was laughing from their young faces. Even Leonore's
cheeks, that were usually so pale, were faintly tinged with a rosy hue.
The mother stepped out of the garden into the road in order to welcome
the children.

"Oh," she cried out joyfully. "This first walk has been splendid.
Leonore looks like a fresh apple-blossom."

Taking her hand with great tenderness between her own, she gazed at her
very closely in order to rejoice over the rosy color on the child's
delicate face. That moment a beggar-woman approached, holding by each
hand a little girl. The children's clothes were so ragged that their
little bodies were scarcely covered.

Looking at Mrs. Maxa, the beggar-woman said, "Yes, yes, children can
make one happy enough when one has a home. You are a fortunate lady to
have a good roof for your own. It would be better for two such homeless
ones as these not to exist! They are sure to remain homeless all their
lives, and that is the saddest thing of all."

With that she stretched out her hand, for Mrs. Maxa was looking at her
intently. Leonore had quickly taken off her shawl and jacket.

"May I give it to them?" she asked Mrs. Maxa in a low voice.

The beggar-woman had already noticed the girl's gesture and stretched out
her hands in her direction.

"I am glad, young lady, that you have pity for these homeless ones, even
if you do not know what that means. God bless you!"

Leonore looked imploringly into Mrs. Maxa's face. The latter nodded, as
it was too late now to explain to Leonore what action would have been
better. She made up her mind to do it afterwards for similar occasions.
With many words the poor woman thanked her for the gift. She was very
anxious to kiss the young lady's hand for the two garments, but Leonore
had immediately run away. Mea followed and found Leonore, who had been
so merry on the walk, sitting in her sofa-corner, crying bitterly with
her head between her hands.

"What is the matter, Leonore? Why do you cry so terribly?" Mea, asked,
quite frightened.

She could not answer at once. The mother and the other children had come
in, too, and now they all surrounded the sobbing girl in great amazement
and sympathy.

"That is the way I am," she said at last, sobbing aloud, "I am homeless
like them. Anyone who is homeless has to remain so always, and it is
terrible. That is what the woman said, and I believe her. How should
one find a home if one can't look for one?"

Leonore had never before broken out into such passionate grief. Mrs.
Maxa looked at her very sorrowfully.

"She is a real Wallerstaetten at the bottom of her heart," she said to
herself. "That will mean more struggles for her than I thought."

At a sign from her the children plainly understood that she asked them to
go into the garden for a little while. Sitting down beside Leonore, she
took her hand between her own and waited till the violent outbreak had
ceased.

Then she said tenderly: "Oh, Leonore, don't you remember what you told me
once when you were ill and I was sitting on your bed? You told me that
you found a song among your mother's music which always comforted you
when you seemed to lose courage and confidence in God. You said that it
always made you feel that He was not forgetting you and your brother, and
that he is looking after you in whatever way is best for you, even if you
can't recognize it now. Have you forgotten this? Can you tell me your
favorite verse in it?"

"Oh, yes, I can," said Leonore, "it is the verse:

   God, who disposest all things well,
   I want but what thou givest me,
   Oh how can we thine acts foretell,
   When Thou art far more wise than we?

"Yes, I always feel better when I think of that," Leonore added after a
time in a totally changed voice. "It makes me happy because I know that
God can do for us what Salo and I can't do for ourselves. But when
everything stays the same for so long and there is no prospect of any
change, it is so hard to keep this faith. If we can't do anything for
ourselves, it seems as if everything would have to be that way. The
woman said that if anybody is homeless once, he has to remain that way
for the rest of his life."

"No, no, Leonore," Mrs. Maxa answered, "you must not take a chance word
seriously. The poor woman only said it because she saw no immediate help
for her children. It is not true at all. Of course you can't look ahead
into your future, but you can ask God to give you full confidence in Him.
Then you can leave it all to Him, and the sense of His protection will
make you calmer. It will also keep you from making uncertain plans,
which might only bring fresh disappointments."

Leonore had attentively followed every word Mrs. Maxa had uttered.
Looking thoughtfully in front of her for a moment, she said, "Aunt
Maxa"--this was the mode of address she had long ago been granted--"don't
you want me to think of Apollonie's cottage either? Shall we have a
disappointment, if I hope that we can find a home there?"

"Yes, my dear child. It is entirely out of the question for you and your
brother to live there. I should not tell you this if I were not
absolutely certain, and you can imagine that I should not shatter such a
hope if I did not have to."

It hurt Mrs. Maxa very much to say this, but she found it necessary.
She knew that Apollonie in her measureless love and admiration would
never be able to refuse a single one of Leonore's wishes, even if it
meant the impossible.

"I shall not think about it any more then," said Leonore, embracing Mrs.
Maxa with utter confidence, "and I shall be glad now that I can still
remain with you."

Later that evening when the children were all together and Leonore had
conquered her grief for that day, a letter came for their mother from
Hanover. She had informed the ladies of Leonore's complete recovery and
had added that the doctor thought it necessary for the child to enjoy the
strengthening mountain air for a while longer. She herself had no other
wish than to keep Leonore in her house as long as possible. The ladies'
answer was full of warm thanks for her great help in their embarrassing
situation. They were very glad to accept her great kindness for two more
weeks, after which one of them would come to fetch Leonore home.

Mrs. Maxa glanced with a heavy heart at the child to whom she had grown
as devoted as to her own. She felt dreadfully sad at the thought of
letting her go away so soon. The worst of it was that she knew the
ladies' abode had never really meant a home for poor Leonore. It only
doubled her grief to know how hard it would be for the child to leave
her, but as she had no right over her, she could do nothing. The only
thing she could plan was to ask the ladies to let her have Leonore
sometimes during the summer holidays. She decided not to dampen the
children's good spirits that evening with the discouraging news in the
letter.



CHAPTER VIII

MAeZLI PAYS VISITS

Whenever Maezli found the time heavy on her hands, she would suddenly
remember people who might want to see her. She had been extremely
occupied all these days entertaining Leonore, as during school hours she
had been the older girl's sole companion. Her brothers and sisters were
now home for a holiday and constantly surrounded Leonore. Finding
herself without her usual employment, Maezli ran after her mother on the
morning of the holiday and kept on saying, "I must go to see Apollonie.
I am sure Loneli is sad that I have not been to see her so long," until
her mother finally gave her permission to go that afternoon.

On her way to Apollonie Maezli had been struck by an idea which occupied
her very much. She arrived at the cottage of her old friend and sat down
beside Loneli, who was not in the least sad, but looked about her with
the merriest eyes. "I must go see the Castle-Steward to-day," she said
quickly. "I promised it but I forgot about it."

"No, no, Maezli," Apollonie said evasively, "we have lots of other things
to do. We have to see if the plums are getting ripe on the tree in the
corner of the garden, and after that you must see the chickens. Just
think, Maezli, they have little chicks, and you will have to see them. I
am sure you won't ever want to leave them."

"Oh, yes, when I have seen them I must go to the Castle-Steward because I
promised to," Maezli replied.

"I am sure he has forgotten all about it and does not remember you any
more," Apollonie said, trying to ward Maezli off from her design. "Does
your mama know that you mean to go to the castle?"

"No, because I only thought of it on my way here," Maezli assured her old
friend. "But one must always keep a promise; Kurt told me that."

"Mr. Trius won't even let you in," Apollonie protested.

"Certainly! He has to. I know the Castle-Steward well, and he is not in
the least afraid of Mr. Trius; I have noticed that," said Maezli, firmly
holding to her resolution.

Apollonie realized that words would do no good and resolved to entertain
Maezli so well with the little chickens and other things that it would
finally be too late for her to go to the castle. Maezli inspected the
tiny chickens and the ripening plums with great enjoyment, but as this
had barely taken any time at all, she soon said resolutely, "I have to go
now because it is late. If you would like to stay home, Loneli can come
with me. I am sure we can easily find the way."

"What are you dreaming of, Maezli?" Apollonie cried out. "How do you
think Mr. Trius would receive you if you ask him to let you in, I should
like to know? You'll find out something you won't like, I am afraid. No,
no, this can't be. If you insist on going, I had better go along."

Apollonie went indoors to get ready for the walk, as she always put on
better clothes whenever she mounted to the castle, despite the fact that
she might not see anyone. Loneli was extremely eager to have a chance to
find out who was the Castle-Steward whom Maezli had promised to visit.
She had tried to persuade her grandmother to let her go with Maezli, in
which case her mother would not need to change her clothes, But the
latter would not even hear of it, remarking, "You can sit on the bench
under the pear tree with your knitting in the meantime, and you can sing
a song. We are sure to be back again in a little while."

Soon they started off, Apollonie firmly holding Maezli's hand. Mr. Trius
appeared at the door before they even had time to ring; it seemed as if
the man really had his eyes on everything. Throwing a furious glance at
Maezli, he opened the door before Apollonie had said a word. But he had
taken great care to leave a crack which would only allow a little person
like Maezli to slip through without sticking fast in the opening. Maezli
wriggled through and started to run away. The next moment the door was
closed again. "Do you think I intend to squeeze myself through, too? You
do not need to bolt it, Mr. Trius," Apollonie said, much offended. "It
is not necessary to cut off the child from me like that, so that I don't
even know where she is going. I am taking care of her, remember. Won't
you please let me in, for I want to watch her, that is all."

"Forbidden," said Mr. Trius.

"Why did you let the child in?"

"I was ordered to."

"What? You were ordered to? By the master?" cried out Apollonie. "Oh,
Mr. Trius, how could he let the child go in and walk about the garden
while his old servant is kept out? She ought to be in there looking after
things. I am sure you have never told him how I have come to you, come
again and again and have begged you to admit me. I want to put things
into their old order and you don't want me to. You don't even know,
apparently, which bed he has and if his pillows are properly covered.
You said so yourself. I am sure that the good old Baroness would have no
peace in her grave if she knew all this. And this is all your fault. I
can clearly see that. I can tell you one thing, though! If you refuse to
give my messages to the master as I have begged and begged you to so
often, I'll find another way. I'll write a letter."

"Won't help."

"What won't help? How can you know that? You won't know what's in the
letter. I suppose the Baron still reads his own letters," Apollonie
eagerly went on.

"He receives no letters from these parts."

This was a terrible blow for Apollonie, to whom this new thought had
given great confidence. She therefore decided to say nothing more and
quietly watched Mr. Trius as he walked up and down inside the garden.

Maezli in the meantime had eagerly pursued her way and was soon up on the
terrace. Glancing about from there, she saw the gentleman again,
stretched out in the shadow of the pine tree, as she had seen him first,
and the glinting cover was lying again on his knees. Maezli ran over to
him.

"How do you do, Mr. Castle-Steward? Are you angry with me because I have
not come for so long?" she called out to him from a distance, and a
moment later she was by his side. "It was only on account of Leonore,"
Maezli continued. "I should otherwise have come ages ago. But when the
others are all in school she can't be left alone. So I stay with her and
I like to do it because she is so nice. Everybody likes Leonore,
everybody likes her terribly; Kurt and Bruno, too. They stay home all
the time now because Leonore is with us. You ought to know how nice she
is. You would like her dreadfully right away."

"Do you think so?" said the gentleman, while something like a smile
played about his lips. "Is it your sister?"

"My sister? No, indeed," Maezli said, quite astonished at his error. "She
is Salo's sister, the boy who was with us and who had to go back to
Hanover. She has to go back to Hanover, too, as soon as she is well, and
mama always gets very sad when she talks about it. But Mea gets sadder
still and even cries. Leonore hates to leave us, but she has to. She
cried dreadfully once because she can never, never have a home. As long
as she lives she'll have to be homeless. The beggar-woman who came with
the two ragged children said that. They were homeless, and Leonore said
afterwards, 'I am that way, too,' and then she cried terribly, and we
were sent out into the garden. She might have cried still more if she
had thought about our having a home with a mama while she has none. She
has no papa or anybody. But you must not think that she is a homeless
child with a torn dress; she looks quite different. Maybe she can find a
home in Apollonie's little house under the hill. Then Salo can come home
to her in the holidays. But mama does not think that this can be. But
Leonore wants it ever so much. I must bring her to you one day."

"Who are you, child? What is your name," asked the gentleman abruptly.

Maezli looked at him in astonishment.

"I am Maezli," she said, "and mama has the same name as I have. But they
don't call her that. Some people call her Mrs. Rector, some mama, and
Uncle Philip says Maxa to her and Leonore calls her Aunt Maxa."

"Is your father the rector of Nolla?" the gentleman asked.

"He has been in heaven a long while, and he was in heaven before we came
here, but mama wanted to come back to Nolla because this was her home.
We don't live in the rectory now, but where there is a garden with lots
of paths, and where the big currant-bushes are in the corners, here and
here and here." Maezli traced the position of the bushes exactly on the
lionskin. The castle-steward, leaning back in his chair, said nothing
more. "Do you find it very tiresome here?" Maezli asked sympathetically.

"Yes, I do," was the answer.

"Have you no picture-book"

"No."

"Oh, I'll bring you one, as soon as I come again. And then--but perhaps
