

ab'bot
clois'ter
min'ster
li'brary
chron' i cle



A STORY OF A MONK.


Many hundreds of years ago there dwelt in a cloister a monk named Urban,
who was remarkable for his earnest and fervent piety. He was a studious
reader of the learned and sacred volumes in the convent library. One day
he read in the Epistles of St. Peter the words, "One day is with the
Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day;" and this
saying seemed impossible in his eyes, so that he spent many an hour in
meditating upon it.

Then one morning it happened that the monk descended from the library
into the cloister garden, and there he saw a little bird perched on the
bough of a tree, singing sweetly, like a nightingale. The bird did not
move as the monk approached her, till he came quite close, and then she
flew to another bough, and again another, as the monk pursued her. Still
singing the same sweet song, the nightingale flew on; and the monk,
entranced by the sound, followed her out of the garden into the wide
world.

At last he stopped, and turned back to the cloister; but every thing
seemed changed to him. Every thing had become larger, more beautiful,
and older,--the buildings, the garden; and in the place of the low,
humble cloister church, a lofty minster with three towers reared its
head to the sky. This seemed very strange to the monk, indeed marvelous;
but he walked on to the cloister gate and timidly rang the bell. A
porter entirely unknown to him answered his summons, and drew back in
amazement when he saw the monk.

The latter went in, and wandered through the church, gazing with
astonishment on memorial stones which he never remembered to have seen
before. Presently the brethren of the cloister entered the church; but
all retreated when they saw the strange figure of the monk. The abbot
only (but not his abbot) stopped, and stretching a crucifix before him,
exclaimed, "In the name of Christ, who art thou, spirit or mortal? And
what dost thou seek here, coming from the dead among us, the living?"

The monk, trembling and tottering like an old man, cast his eyes to the
ground, and for the first time became aware that a long silvery beard
descended from his chin over his girdle, to which was still suspended
the key of the library. To the monks around, the stranger seemed some
marvelous appearance; and, with a mixture of awe and admiration, they
led him to the chair of the abbot. There he gave the key to a young
monk, who opened the library, and brought out a chronicle wherein it was
written that three hundred years ago the monk Urban had disappeared; and
no one knew whither he had gone.

"Ah, bird of the forest, was it then thy song?" said the monk Urban,
with a sigh. "I followed thee for scarce three minutes, listening to thy
notes, and yet three hundred years have passed away! Thou hast sung to
me the song of eternity which I could never before learn. Now I know it;
and, dust myself, I pray to God kneeling in the dust." With these words
he sank to the ground, and his spirit ascended to heaven.


       *       *       *       *       *


Copy the last paragraph, omitting all marks of punctuation.

Close the book, and punctuate what you have written. Compare your work
with the printed page.


Memory Gems:


If thou wouldst live long, live well; for folly and wickedness shorten
life.

_From "Poor Richard's Proverbs"_


The older I grow--and I now stand upon the brink of eternity--the more
comes back to me the sentence in the catechism which I learned when a
child, and the fuller and deeper becomes its meaning: "What is the chief
end of man? To glorify God, and to enjoy Him forever."

_Thomas Carlyle._


       *       *       *       *       *




_43_


dole
man' na
em' blem
re leased'
plumes
breathe
crim' son
feath' ered
soared
dou' bly
hom' i ly
ser'a phim



THE SERMON OF ST. FRANCIS.


       Up soared the lark into the air,
       A shaft of song, a winged prayer,
       As if a soul, released from pain,
       Were flying back to heaven again.

       St. Francis heard; it was to him
       An emblem of the Seraphim;
       The upward motion of the fire,
       The light, the heat, the heart's desire.

       Around Assisi's convent gate
       The birds, God's poor who cannot wait,
       From moor and mere and darksome wood
       Came flocking for their dole of food.

       "O brother birds," St. Francis said,
       "Ye come to me and ask for bread,
       But not with bread alone to-day
       Shall ye be fed and sent away.

       "Ye shall be fed, ye happy birds
       With manna of celestial words;
       Not mine, though mine they seem to be,
       Not mine, though they be spoken through me.

       "O, doubly are ye bound to praise
       The great Creator in your lays;
       He giveth you your plumes of down,
       Your crimson hoods, your cloaks of brown.

       "He giveth you your wings to fly
       And breathe a purer air on high,
       And careth for you everywhere,
       Who for yourselves so little care!"

       With flutter of swift wings and songs
       Together rose the feathered throngs,
       And singing scattered far apart;
       Deep peace was in St. Francis' heart.

       He knew not if the brotherhood
       His homily had understood;
       He only knew that to one ear
       The meaning of his words was clear.


_Longfellow._

From "Children's Hour and Other Poems." Houghton, Mifflin & Co.,
Publishers.


[Illustration: ST. FRANCIS PREACHING]


       *       *       *       *       *


LAYS, songs.

ASSISI ([:a]s s[=e]' ze), a town of Italy, where St. Francis was
born in 1182.

What does "manna of celestial words" mean?

What is the singular form of seraphim?


Memory Gem:


       Every word has its own spirit,
         True or false, that never dies;
       Every word man's lips have uttered
         Echoes in God's skies.


_Adelaide A. Procter._


       *       *       *       *       *




_44_


GLORIA IN EXCELSIS.


       Gloria in excelsis!
         Sound the thrilling song;
       In excelsis Deo!
         Roll the hymn along.

       Gloria in excelsis!
         Let the heavens ring;
       In excelsis Deo!
         Welcome, new-born King.

       Gloria in excelsis!
         Over the sea and land,
       In excelsis Deo!
         Chant the anthem grand.

       Gloria in excelsis!
         Let us all rejoice;
       In excelsis Deo!
         Lift each heart and voice.

       Gloria in excelsis!
         Swell the hymn on high;
       In excelsis Deo!
         Sound it to the sky.

       Gloria in excelsis!
         Sing it, sinful earth,
       In excelsis Deo!
         For the Savior's birth.


_Father Ryan._

"Father Ryan's Poems." Published by P.J. Kenedy & Sons, New York.


[Illustration: Artist _Hofmann_.--Caption: "Glory to God in the
highest; and on earth peace to men of good will."]


       *       *       *       *       *




_45_


plied
won' drous
ex cite' ment
com mo' tion
vig' or
fo' li age
mar' vel ous
com pas' sion



THE FIRST CHRISTMAS TREE.[004]


Once upon a time the Forest was in a great commotion. Early in the
evening the wise old Cedars had shaken their heads and told of strange
things that were to happen. They had lived in the Forest many, many
years; but never had they seen such marvelous sights as were to be seen
now in the sky, and upon the hills, and in the distant village.

"Pray tell us what you see," pleaded a little Vine; "we who are not so
tall as you can behold none of these wonderful things."

"The whole sky seems to be aflame," said one of the Cedars, "and the
Stars appear to be dancing among the clouds; angels walk down from
heaven to the earth and talk with the shepherds upon the hills."

The Vine trembled with excitement. Its nearest neighbor was a tiny tree,
so small it was scarcely ever noticed; yet it was a very beautiful
little tree, and the Vines and Ferns and Mosses loved it very dearly.

"How I should like to see the Angels!" sighed the little Tree; "and how
I should like to see the Stars dancing among the clouds! It must be very
beautiful. Oh, listen to the music! I wonder whence it comes."

"The Angels are singing," said a Cedar; "for none but angels could make
such sweet music."

"And the Stars are singing, too," said another Cedar; "yes, and the
shepherds on the hills join in the song."

The trees listened to the singing. It was a strange song about a Child
that had been born. But further than this they did not understand. The
strange and glorious song continued all the night.

In the early morning the Angels came to the Forest singing the same song
about the Child, and the Stars sang in chorus with them, until every
part of the woods rang with echoes of that wondrous song. They were clad
all in white, and there were crowns upon their fair heads, and golden
harps in their hands. Love, hope, joy and compassion beamed from their
beautiful faces. The Angels came through the Forest to where the little
Tree stood, and gathering around it, they touched it with their hands,
kissed its little branches, and sang even more sweetly than before. And
their song was about the Child, the Child, the Child, that had been
born. Then the Stars came down from the skies and danced and hung upon
the branches of the little Tree, and they, too, sang the song of the
Child.

When they left the Forest, one Angel remained to guard the little Tree.
Night and day he watched so that no harm should come to it. Day by day
it grew in strength and beauty. The sun sent it his choicest rays,
heaven dropped its sweetest dew upon it, and the winds sang to it their
prettiest songs.

So the years passed, and the little Tree grew until it became the pride
and glory of the Forest.

One day the Tree heard some one coming through the Forest. "Have no
fear," said the Angel, "for He who comes is the Master."

And the Master came to the Tree and placed His Hands upon its smooth
trunk and branches. He stooped and kissed the Tree, and then turned and
went away.

[Illustration: _A. Bida._]

Many times after that the Master came to the Forest, rested beneath the
Tree and enjoyed the shade of its foliage. Many times He slept there and
the Tree watched over Him. Many times men came with the Master to the
Forest, sat with Him in the shade of the Tree, and talked with Him of
things which the Tree never could understand. It heard them tell how the
Master healed the sick and raised the dead and bestowed blessings
wherever He walked.
