late. He and young Brant, the great Thayendanegea that was to be, had
already formed a great friendship, the beginning of which was made
easier by Robert's knowledge of Indian nature and sympathy with
it. The two wrapped in fur cloaks had gone a little distance from the
house, because Brant said that a bear driven by hunger had come to the
edge of the village, and they were looking for its tracks. But Robert
was more interested in observing the Indian boy than in finding the
foot prints of the bear.

"Joseph," he said, "you expect, of course, to be a great warrior and
chief some day."

The boy's eyes glittered.

"There is nothing else for which I would care," he replied. "Hark,
Dagaeoga, did you hear the cry of a night bird?"

"I did, Joseph, but like you I don't think it's the voice of a real
bird. It's a signal."

"So it is, and unless I reckon ill it's the signal of my cousin
Daganoweda, returning from the great war trail that he has trod
against the wild Ojibway, Tandakora."

The song of a bird trilled from his own throat in reply, and then from
the forest came Daganoweda and his warriors in a dusky file. Robert
and young Brant fell in with them and walked toward the house. Not a
word was spoken, but the eyes of the Mohawk chieftain were gleaming,
and his bearing expressed the very concentrated essence of haughty
pride. At the house they stopped, and, young Brant going in, brought
forth Colonel Johnson.

"Well, Daganoweda," said the white man.

"I met Tandakora two days' journey north of Mount Johnson," replied
the Mohawk. "His numbers were equal to our own, but his warriors were
not the warriors of the Hodenosaunee. Six of the Ganeagaono are gone,
Waraiyageh, and sixteen more have wounds, from which they will
recover, but when Tandakora began his flight toward Canada eighteen of
his men lay dead, eight more fell in the pursuit, which was so fast
that we bring back with us forty muskets and rifles."

"Well done, Daganoweda," said Colonel Johnson. "You have proved
yourself anew a great warrior and chief, but you did not have to prove
it to me. I knew it long ago. Fine new rifles, and blankets of blue or
red or green have just come from Albany, half of which shall be
distributed among your men in the morning."

"Waraiyageh never forgets his friends," said the appreciative Mohawk.

He withdrew with his warriors, knowing that the promise would be kept.

"Why was I not allowed to go with them?"  mourned young Brant.

Colonel Johnson laughed and patted his shiny black head.

"Never mind, young fire-eater," he said. "We'll all of us soon have
our fill of war--and more."

Robert was present at the distribution of rifles and blankets the next
morning, and he knew that Colonel Johnson had bound the Mohawks to him
and the English and American cause with another tie. Daganoweda and
his warriors, gratified beyond expression, took the war path again.

"They'll remain a barrier between us and the French and their allies,"
said Colonel Johnson, "and faith we'll need 'em. The other nations of
the Hodenosaunee wish to keep out of the war, but the Mohawks will be
with us to the last. Their great chief, King Hendrick, is our devoted
friend, and so is his brother, Abraham. This, too, in spite of the bad
treatment of the Ganeagaono by the Dutch at Albany. O, I have nothing
to say against the Dutch, a brave and tenacious people, but they have
their faults, like other races, and sometimes they let avarice
overcome them!  I wish they could understand the nations of the
Hodenosaunee better. Do what you can at Albany, Mr. Lennox, with that
facile tongue of yours, to persuade the Dutch--and the others
too--that the danger from the French and Indians is great, and that we
must keep the friendship of the Six Nations."

"I will do my best, sir," promised Robert modestly. "I at least ought
to know the power and loyalty of the Hodenosaunee, since I have been
adopted into the great League and Tayoga, an Onondaga, is my brother,
in all but blood."

"And I stand in the same position," said Willet firmly. "We
understand, sir, your great attachment for the Six Nations, and the
vast service you have done for the English among them. If we can
supplement it even in some small degree we shall spare no effort to do
so."

"I know it, Mr. Willet, and yet my heart is heavy to see the land I
love devastated by fire and sword."

Colonel Johnson loaned them horses, and an escort of two of his own
soldiers who would bring back the horses, and they started for Albany
amid many hospitable farewells.

"You and I shall meet again," said young Brant to Robert.

"I hope so," said Robert.

"It will be as allies and comrades on the battle field."

"But you are too young, Joseph, yet to take part in war."

"I shall not be next year, and the war will not be over then, so my
brother, Colonel William Johnson says, and he knows."

Robert looked at the sturdy young figure and the eager eyes, and he
knew that the Indian lad would not be denied.

Then the little party rode into the woods, and proceeded without event
to Albany.




CHAPTER IX

THE WATCHER


It was with emotion that Robert came to Albany, an emotion that was
shared by his Onondaga comrade, Tayoga, who had spent a long time in a
white school there. The staid Dutch town was the great outpost of the
Province of New York in the wilderness, and although his temperament
was unlike that of the Dutch burghers he had innumerable pleasant
memories of it, and many friends there. It was, in his esteem, too, a
fine town, on its hills over-looking that noble river, the Hudson, and
as the little group rode on he noted that despite the war its
appearance was still peaceful and safe.

Their way led along the main street which was broad and with grass on
either side. The solid Dutch houses, with their gable ends to the
street, stood every one on its own lawn, with a garden behind
it. Every house also had a portico in front of it, on which the people
sat in summer evenings, or where they visited with one another. Except
that it was hills where the old country was flat, it was much like
Holland, and the people, keen and thrifty, had preserved their
national customs even unto the third and fourth generations. Robert
understood them as he understood the Hodenosaunce, and, with his
adaptable temperament, and with his mind that could understand so
readily the minds of others, he was able to meet them on common
ground. As they rode into the city he looked questioningly at Willet,
and the hunter, understanding the voiceless query, smiled.

"We couldn't think of going to any other place," he said. "If we did
we could never secure his forgiveness."

"I shall be more than glad to see him. A right good friend of ours,
isn't he, Tayoga?"

"Though his tongue lashes us his heart is with us," replied the
Onondaga. "He is a great white chief, three hundred pounds of
greatness."

They stopped before one of the largest of the brick houses, standing
on one of the widest and neatest of the lawns, and Robert and Tayoga,
entering the portico, knocked upon the door with a heavy brass
knocker. They heard presently the rattle of chains inside, and the
rumble of a deep, grumbling voice. Then the two lads looked at each
other and laughed, laughed in the careless, joyous way in which youth
alone can laugh.

"It is he, Mynheer Jacobus himself, come to let us in," said Robert.

"And he has not changed at all," said Tayoga. "We can tell that by
the character of his voice on the other side of the door."

"And I would not have him changed."

"Nor would I."

The door was thrown open, but as all the windows were closed there was
yet gloom inside. Presently something large, red and shining emerged
from the dusk and two beams of light in the center of the redness
played upon them. Then the outlines of a gigantic human figure, a man
tall and immensely stout, were disclosed. He wore a black suit with
knee breeches, thick stockings and buckled shoes, and his powdered
hair was tied in a queue. His eyes, dazzled at first by the light from
without, began to twinkle as he looked. Then a great blaze of joy
swept over his face, and he held out two fat hands, one to the white
youth and one to the red.

"Ah, it iss you, Robert, you scapegrace, and it iss you, Tayoga, you
wild Onondaga! It iss a glad day for me that you haf come, but I
thought you both dead, und well you might be, reckless, thoughtless
lads who haf not the thought uf the future in your minds."

Robert shook the fat hand in both of his and laughed.

"You are the same as of old, Mynheer Jacobus," he said, "and before
Tayoga and I saw you, but while we heard you, we agreed that there had
been no change, and that we did not want any."

"And why should I change, you two young rascals?  Am I not goot enough
as I am? Haf I not in the past given the punishment to both uf you und
am I not able to do it again, tall and strong as the two uf you haf
grown? Ah, such foolish lads! Perhaps you haf been spared because pity
wass taken on your foolishness. But iss it Mynheer Willet beyond you?
That iss a man of sense."

"It's none other than Dave, Mynheer Jacobus," said Robert.

"Then why doesn't he come in?" exclaimed Mynheer Jacobus Huysman. "He
iss welcome here, doubly, triply welcome, und he knows it."

"Dave! Dave! Hurry!" called Robert, "or Mynheer Jacobus will chastise
you. He's so anxious to fall on your neck and welcome you that he
can't wait!"

Willet came swiftly up the brick walk, and the hands of the two big
men met in a warm clasp.

"You see I've brought the boys back to you again, Jacob," said the
hunter.

"But what reckless lads they've become," grumbled Mynheer Huysman. "I
can see the mischief in their eyes now. They wass bad enough when they
went to school here und lived with me, but since they've run wild in
the forests this house iss not able to hold them."

"Don't you worry, Jacob, old friend. These arms and shoulders of mine
are still strong, and if they make you trouble I will deal with
them. But we just stopped a minute to inquire into the state of your
health. Can you tell us which is now the best inn in Albany?"

The face of Mynheer Jacobus Huysman flamed, and his eyes blazed in the
center of it, two great red lights.

"Inn! Inn!" he roared in his queer mixture of English, Dutch and
German accent "Iss it that your head hass been struck by lightning und
you haf gone crazy? If there wass a thousand inns at Albany you und
Robert und Tayoga could not stop at one uf them. Iss not the house uf
Jacobus Huysman good enough for you?"

Robert, Tayoga and the hunter laughed aloud.

"He did but make game of you, Mynheer Jacobus," said Robert. "We will
alter your statement and say if there were a thousand inns in Albany
you could not make us stay at any one of them. Despite your commands
we would come directly to your house."

Mynheer Jacobus Huysman permitted himself to smile. But his voice
renewed its grumbling tone.

"Ever the same," he said. "You must stay here, although only the good
Lord himself knows in what condition my house will be when you
leave. You are two wild lads. It iss not so strange uf you, Robert
Lennox, who are white, but I would expect better uf Tayoga, who is to
be a great Onondaga chief some day."

"You make a great mistake, Mynheer Jacobus," said Robert. "Tayoga is
far worse than I am. All the mischief that I have ever done was due to
his example and persuasion. It is my misfortune that I have a weak
nature, and I am easily led into evil by my associates."

"It iss not so. You are equally bad. Bring in your baggage und I will
see if Caterina, der cook, cannot find enough for you three, who
always eat like raging lions."

The soldiers, who were to return immediately to Colonel William
Johnson, rode away with their horses, and Robert, Tayoga and Willet
took their packs into the house of Mynheer Huysman, who grumbled
incessantly while he and a manservant and a maidservant made them as
comfortable as possible.

"Would you und Tayoga like to haf your old room on the second floor?"
he said to Robert.

"Nothing would please us better," replied the lad.

"Then you shall haf it," said Mynheer, as he led the way up the stair
and into the room. "Do you remember, Tayoga, how wild you wass when
you came here to learn the good ways und bad ways uf the white
people?"

"I do," replied Tayoga, "and the walls and the roof felt oppressive to
me, although we have stout log houses of our own in our villages. But
they were not our own walls and our own roof, and there was the great
young warrior, Lennox, whom we now call Dagaeoga, who was to stay in
the same room and even in the same bed with me. Do you wonder that I
felt like climbing out of a window at night, and escaping into the
woods?"

"You were eleven then," said Robert, "and I was just a shade
younger. You were as strange to me as I was to you, and I thought, in
truth, that you were going to run away into the wilderness. But you
didn't, and you began to learn from books faster than I thought was
possible for one whose mind before then had been turned in another
direction."

"But you helped me, Dagaeoga. After our first and only battle in the
garden, which I think was a draw, we became allies."

"Und you united against me," said Mynheer Huysman.

"And you helped me with the books," continued Tayoga. "Ah, those first
months were hard, very hard!"

"And you taught me the use of the bow and arrow," continued Robert,
"and new skill in both fishing and hunting."

"Und the two uf you together learned new tricks und new ways uf making
my life miserable," grumbled Mynheer Huysman.

"But you must admit, Jacob," said Willet, "that they were not the
worst boys in the world."

"Well, not the worst, perhaps, David, because I don't know all the
boys uf all the countries in the world, but when you put an Onondaga
lad und an American lad together in alliance it iss hard to find any
one who can excel them, because they haf the mischief uf two nations."

"But you are tremendously glad to see them again, Jacob. Don't deny
it. I read it over and over again in your eyes."

Willet's own eyes twinkled as he spoke, and he saw also that there was
a light in those of the big Dutchman. But Huysman would admit
nothing.

"Here iss your room," he said to Robert and Tayoga.

Robert saw that it was not changed. All the old, familiar objects were
there, and they brought to him a rush of emotion, as inanimate things
often do. On a heavy mahogany dresser lay two worn volumes that he
touched affectionately. One was his Caesar and the other his
algebra. Once he had hated both, but now he thought of them tenderly
as links with, the peaceful boyhood that was slipping away. Hanging
from a hook on the wall was an unstrung bow, the first weapon of the
kind with which he had practiced under the teaching of Tayoga. He
passed his hand over it gently and felt a thrill at the touch of the
wood.

Tayoga, also was moving about the room. On a small shelf lay an
English dictionary and several readers. They too were worn. He had
spent many a grieving hour over them when he had come from the
Iroquois forests to learn the white man's lore. He recalled how he had
hated them for a time, and how he had looked out of his school windows
at the freedom for which he had longed. But he was made of wrought
steel, both mind and body, and always the white youth, Lennox, his
comrade, was at his elbow in those days of his scholastic infancy to
help him. It had been a great episode in the life of Tayoga, who had
the intellect of a mighty chief, the mind of Pontiac or Thayendanegea,
or Tecumseh, or Sequoia. He had forced himself to learn and in
learning his books he had learned also to like the people of another
race around him who were good to him and who helped him in the first
hard days on the new road. So the young Onondaga felt an emotion much
like that of Robert as he walked about the room and touched the old
familiar things. Then he turned to Huysman.

"Mynheer Jacobus," he said, "you have a mighty body, and you have in
it a great heart. If all the men at Albany were like you there would
never be any trouble between them and the Hodenosaunee."

"Tayoga," said Huysman, "you haf borrowed Robert's tongue to cozen und
flatter. I haf not a great heart at all. I haf a very bad heart. I
could not get on in this world if I didn't."

Tayoga laughed musically, and Mynheer Jacobus gruffly bidding them not
to destroy anything, while he was gone, departed to see that Caterina,
the Dutch cook, fat like her master, should have ready a dinner,
drawing upon every resource of his ample larder. It is but truth to
say that the heart of Mynheer Jacobus was very full. A fat old
bachelor, with no near kin, his heart yearned over the two lads who
had spent so long a period in his home, and he knew them, too, for
what they were, each a fine flower of his own racial stock.

They were to remain several days in Albany, and after dinner they
visited Alexander McLean, the crusty teacher who had given them such a
severe drilling in their books. Master McLean allowed himself a few
brief expressions of pleasure when they came into his house, and then
questioned them sharply:

"Do you remember any of your ancient history, Tayoga?" he asked. "Are
the great deeds of the Greeks and Romans still in your mind?"

