fortune."

"Indeed!" said Mrs. Gordon, with curiosity.

Briefly, Mr. Percival rehearsed the story which Frank had told him.

"What a shame!" exclaimed Mrs. Gordon, indignantly. "His stepfather
ought to be punished:"

"That may come in time. Wickedness does not always prosper. But as
regards our young friend, I have a plan in view."

"What is it, father?"

"I find he has an excellent education, having been nearly ready for
college when the crisis in his fortunes came. I have been thinking
whether we could not find a place for him in this house. My eyes, you
know, are so weak that they are often strained by attention to my
correspondence and reading. I have an idea of engaging Frank Courtney as
a sort of private secretary, upon whom I can at any time call. Of
course, he would have his home in the house."

"There will be no difficulty about that. Our family is small, and we
have plenty of vacant rooms. But, father, will he be qualified to
undertake the duties you have designed for him? He is very young."

"That is true, my dear; but he is remarkably well educated. I have
tested his capacity by dictating a letter for him to copy."

"Did he do the work satisfactorily?" asked Mrs. Gordon.

"Without a single mistake."

"Then, father, I would not hesitate to engage him. Freddie likes him,
and will be delighted to have him in the house."

"Another idea, Helen. It is time Freddie began to study. Suppose we make
him Freddie's private tutor--say for an hour daily?"

"That is really an excellent idea, father," said Mrs. Gordon, in a tone
of satisfaction. "It will please and benefit Freddie, and be a relief to
me. Do you think Frank will have patience enough?"

"I watched him with the little fellow, and I could see that he liked
children. I am sure he will succeed in this as well as in the duties
which he will undertake for me."

"I suppose he will have no objection to the plan?"

"I think he will accept gladly. He has had a hard struggle thus far in
maintaining himself, and I can relieve him from all anxiety on that
score. I am indebted to him for helping me to recover my bonds, and
this will be an excuse for offering him a larger salary than the
services of so young a secretary could be expected to command."

"Very well, father. Your plan pleases me very much, and I shall be glad
to have Frank commence to-morrow, if he chooses. Now let us return to
the library."

While father and daughter were absent Frank had taken from the table a
volume of "Macaulay's History," and had become interested in it.

He laid it down upon their return.

Mr. Percival resumed his easy-chair, and said, with a smile.

"My daughter and I have been consulting about you."

Frank bowed, and his hopes rose.

"I suppose you are open to an offer of employment?"

"I am not only open to it, Mr. Percival, but I shall be grateful for
it."

He could not help wondering what sort of employment Mr. Percival was
about to offer him. He concluded that it might be a place in some
business house.

"The fact is," said the old gentleman, "I have a great mind to offer you
the situation of my private secretary."

Frank was astonished. This was something he had not thought of.

"Do you think I am qualified to fill such a position, Mr. Percival?" he
asked, hesitatingly.

"The duties would not be difficult," returned the old gentleman. "Though
not in active business, the care of my property, and looking after my
scattered investments, involves me in considerable correspondence. My
eyes are not as strong as they once were, and I find them at times taxed
by letter-writing, not to mention reading. You can relieve me very
materially."

"I shall be very glad to do so, sir. The duties will be very agreeable
to me."

"But that is not all. My daughter proposes to employ you as private
tutor for Freddie."

Frank smiled.

"I think my scholarship will be sufficient for that," he said.

Frank was to receive $50 a month and board. This was wonderful news to
him. Mr. Percival with great forethought paid him a month's salary in
advance. Frank went home happy.




CHAPTER XXX

FRANK AS PRIVATE SECRETARY


The next day Frank transferred his residence to Madison Avenue. He was
assigned to a pleasant room, decidedly superior, it need hardly be said,
to his room at Clinton Place. It seemed agreeable to him once more to
enjoy the comforts of a liberal home.

Frank had had some doubts as to how he would satisfy Mr. Percival in his
capacity of private secretary.

He was determined to do his best, but thought it possible that the old
gentleman might require more than he could do well. He looked forward,
therefore, with some apprehension to his first morning's work.

Mr. Percival, though not engaged in active business, was a wealthy man,
and his capital was invested in a great variety of enterprises.
Naturally, therefore, he received a large number of business letters,
which required to be answered.

The first day he dictated several replies, which Frank put upon paper.
He wished, however, to put Frank's ability to a severe test.

"Here are two letters," he said, "which you may answer. I have noted on
each instructions which you will follow. The wording of the letters I
leave to you."

"I will try to satisfy you sir," said Frank.

Our hero was a good writer for his age. Moreover, he had been well
trained at school and did not shrink from the task assigned him.

He read carefully the instruction of his employer, and composed the
letters in strict accordance with them.

Mr. Percival awaited with some interest the result of his experiment. If
Frank proved competent to the task assigned him, his own daily labor
would be considerably abridged.

"Here are the letters, sir," said our hero, passing the drafts to Mr.
Percival.

The old gentleman examined them carefully. As he did so, his face
expressed his satisfaction.

"Upon my word, Frank," he said, familiarly, "you have done your work
exceedingly well. They are brief, concise and yet comprehensive. I
feared that you would use too many words."

"I am glad you are pleased, sir. Dr. Brush trained us to write letters,
and he cut down our essays when they were too diffuse."

"Then I feel indebted to Dr. Brush for providing me with so competent a
young secretary. You will be able to assist me even more than I
anticipated. I shall, of course, read over your letters before they are
sent, to make sure that you have fully comprehended and carried out my
instructions, but I don't expect they will need much correction."

Frank was much gratified by these words. This was the only point on
which he had felt at all doubtful as to his ability to please his
employer.

Sometimes, when his eyes pained him more than usual, Mr. Percival also
employed him to read to him from the daily papers, or from some book in
which he was interested, but this did not occur regularly.

Every day, however, Frank was occupied with Freddie. The little boy knew
his alphabet, but nothing more, so that his young teacher had to begin
with him at the beginning of the primer.

He succeeded in interesting his little pupil, and did not protract his
term of study so as to weary him.

Finding that the little fellow was fond of hearing stories, he read to
him every day a story or two from Hans Christian Andersen, or from a
collection of German fairy stories, and sometimes went out to walk with
him.

Freddie was delighted with his teacher, and freely expressed his
approval to his mother and grandfather.

"Really, Frank," said Mrs. Gordon, "I shall begin to be jealous of your
hold upon Freddie. I am not sure but he likes your company better than
mine."

"I don't think Freddie will prefer anyone to his mother," said Frank;
"but I am glad he likes to be with me."

"You have certainly proved very successful as a private tutor, Frank,"
said Mrs. Gordon, "and my father tells me you succeeded equally well as
a secretary."

"It is partly because you both treat me so indulgently," answered Frank,
gracefully.

This answer pleased Mr. Percival and Mrs. Gordon, who more than ever
congratulated themselves upon the lucky chance that had thrown Frank in
their way.

Assuredly he made himself very useful in the small household,
contributing to the comfort and pleasure of Freddie, his mother and
grandfather in nearly equal measure.

While Frank's monthly salary was of great value and importance to him,
it was nothing to Mr. Percival in comparison with the pleasure and
relief afforded by his presence in the house.

It must not be supposed, however, that Frank's time was wholly occupied
by the duties of his two positions. Usually he had several hours daily
at his disposal, and these he was allowed to spend as he pleased.

Part of this he occupied in visiting different localities of the city
and points of interest in the neighborhood, and part in reading and
study.

Mr. Percival had a large and well-selected library, which, to a boy of
Frank's studious tastes, was a great attraction.

He entered upon a course of solid reading, embracing some of the
standard histories, and devoted some hours every week to keeping up his
acquaintance with the Greek and Latin authors which he had read at
school.

In this way his time was well and usefully employed, and the weeks
slipped by till almost before he was aware six months had passed.

One afternoon Frank walked down Broadway enjoying the bright sunshine.
Just in front of the St. Nicholas Hotel he heard his name called and
looking up he recognized with some surprise, Pliny Tarbox, his cousin
from Newark.

Pliny asked many questions as to what Frank was doing and how much money
he was making. Frank told him of his good fortune in obtaining the
position he held with Mr. Percival and the two parted--Frank the much
happier of the two.

Pliny urgently invited Frank to visit them but Frank would rather remain
in New York.

"I hope I shall never think so much of money as Pliny and his father,"
thought Frank. "Money is a good thing to have but there are some things
that are better."




CHAPTER XXXI

A LETTER FROM MR. TARBOX


Frank did not speak to Mr. Percival's family of his meeting with Pliny.
It was not pleasant to him to think that he was valued only for his good
fortune. He had seen but little of the Tarbox family, but he understood
very well what their professions of friendship amounted to, and that
they were not to be relied upon in an emergency.

He was not much surprised on Monday afternoon to receive the following
letter from Erastus Tarbox:

"My Dear Young Cousin:--We have been wondering what has become of you,
and Mrs. T. and myself have often wished to invite you to pass a Sabbath
at our humble home. Not knowing your address, I could not write to you,
or I should have done so. You can imagine, therefore, the pleasure we
felt when Pliny told us that he had met you, and gave us tidings of your
remarkable success, which I am sure does you great credit.

"He tells me that you fill a very responsible position, and receive a
very liberal salary. I could wish that Pliny might be equally fortunate,
and shall esteem it a great favor if you will mention him to your
respected employer, and recommend him for any lucrative position which
he may bestow upon him. Pliny is a very capable boy, and has been
carefully trained to habits of frugality and industry.

"Can you not soon come out and pass a Sabbath with us? The esteem which
we have for your late lamented mother alone would secure you a cordial
welcome, not to speak of the friendship for yourself. Pliny often says
that you seem to him like a brother, and he would truly enjoy your
companionship.

  "Your sincere friend and cousin,
      Erastus Tarbox."

The time was when Frank would have put confidence in the friendly
expressions used by Mr. Tarbox, but his eyes had been opened, and he
understood that if misfortune should come to him, it would not do to
lean upon his cousins at Newark.

Frank wrote a civil reply to Mr. Tarbox, thanking him for his
invitation, but saying that at present it would not be convenient for
him to accept it. He added that should an opportunity offer he would be
glad to assist Pliny to a better position than he now held.

In spite of his wish to be cordial, his letter was felt by the Tarbox
family to be cold, and they regretted that they had not treated him
better during his brief visit to them.

But then how could they suppose he would be so successful? If the time
should ever come when he recovered his property, they would be prepared
to make a determined effort to convince him that they had always been
his affectionate friends.

About this time Frank received another letter, which afforded him
greater satisfaction than the one from Newark.

This letter was from Col. Vincent, who, it will be remembered, had
purchased Ajax when Mr. Manning persisted in selling him. It was as
follows:

"My Dear Frank: I learned incidentally from one of our townsmen, who
recently met you in New York, that you have been very successful in
obtaining employment, and that of an honorable and responsible
character. It relieved my mind, for, knowing how hard it is for a boy to
make his own way in a large city, I feared that you might be suffering
privation, or living poorly. I hope, however, you would in that case
have applied to me for such help as your father's old friend would have
been glad to offer.

"Your stepfather has not been heard from directly. I learn, however,
from some friends who have met him abroad that he is having trouble with
Mark, who is proving difficult to manage, and has contracted a dangerous
taste for gaming. Mr. Manning was obliged to leave Baden-Baden on
account of this unfortunate tendency, and is even thinking of returning
to the Cedars, where his son will be removed from temptation. To this,
however, Mark will be likely to make strenuous opposition. He will find
it dull to settle down here after having tasted the gayety of Europe."

Here followed a little local gossip, which the writer thought might
prove interesting to Frank, and the letter concluded with a cordial
invitation to our hero to spend a Sunday with him, or a longer time, if
he could be spared from his duties.

Frank was disposed to accept the invitation, but his acceptance was
postponed by an unusual service which he was called upon to render to
Mr. Percival.

Of this the reader will hear everything in the next chapter.




CHAPTER XXXII

MR. PERCIVAL'S PROPOSAL


One morning, after writing several letters for his employer, the young
secretary asked Mr. Percival if he had any further commands.

The old gentleman answered thoughtfully:

"I have been thinking of asking you to do me an unusual service."

"I shall be very glad to serve you in any way, Mr. Percival," said
Frank, promptly.

