sick boy yielded.  The dose made him sicker yet, and nature came to his
relief, and in a little while he felt better.

Tom behaved like a good nurse; he staid by his friend till he went to
sleep, and then "turned in" upon a settee beneath his berth.  The boat
pitched and tumbled about so in the heavy sea that Bobby did not sleep
long, and when he woke he found Tom ready to assist him.  But our hero
felt better, and entreated Tom to go to sleep again.  He made the best
of his unpleasant situation.  Sleep was not to be wooed, and he tried
to pass away the dreary hours in thinking of Riverdale and the dear
ones there.  His mother was asleep, and Annie was asleep; and that was
about all the excitement he could get up even on the home question.  He
could not build castles in the air, for seasickness and castle building
do not agree.  The gold and purple clouds would be black in spite of
him, and the aerial structure he essayed to build would pitch and
tumble about, for all the world, just like a steamboat in a heavy sea.
As often as he got fairly into it, he was violently rolled out, and in
a twinkling found himself in his narrow berth, awfully seasick.

He went to sleep again at last, and the long night passed away.  When
he woke in the morning, he felt tolerably well, and was thankful that
he had got out of that scrape.  But before he could dress himself, he
heard a terrible racket on deck.  The steam whistle was shrieking, the
bell was banging, and he heard the hoarse bellowing of the captain.  It
was certain that something had happened, or was about to happen.

Then the boat stopped, rolling heavily in the sea.  Tom was  not there;
he had gone on deck.  Bobby was beginning to consider what a dreadful
thing a wreck was, when Tom appeared.

"What's the matter?" asked Bobby, with some appearance of alarm.

"Fog," replied Tom.  "It is so thick you can cut it with a hatchet."

"Is that all?"

"That's enough.'

"Where are we?"

"That is just what the pilot would like to know.  They can't see ahead
a bit, and don't know where we are."

Bobby went on deck.  The ocean rolled beneath them, but there was
nothing but fog to be seen above and around them.  The lead was heaved
every few moments, and the steamer crept slowly along till it was found
the water shoaled rapidly, when the captain ordered the men to let go
the anchor.

There they were; the fog was as obstinate as a mule, and would not
"lift."  Hour after hour they waited, for the captain was a prudent
man, and would not risk the life of those on board to save a few hours'
time.  After breakfast, the passengers began to display their
uneasiness, and some of them called the captain very hard names,
because he would not go on.  Almost every body grumbled, and made
themselves miserable.

"Nothing to do and nothing to read," growled a nicely-dressed
gentleman, as he yawned and stretched himself to manifest his sensation
of ennui.

"Nothing to read, eh?" thought Bobby.  "We will soon supply that want."

Calling Tom, they went down to the main deck, where the baggage had
been placed.

"Now's our time," said he, as he proceeded to unlock one of the trunks
that contained his books.  "Now or never."

"I am with you," replied Tom, catching the idea.

The books of the latter were in a box, and he was obliged to get a
hammer to open it; but with Bobby's assistance he soon got at them.

"Buy 'The Wayfarer,'" said Bobby, when he returned to the saloon, and
placed a volume in the hands of the yawning gentleman.  "Best book of
the season; only one dollar."

"That I will, and glad of the chance," replied the gentleman.  "I would
give five dollars for any thing, if it were only the 'Comic Almanac.'"

Others were of the same mind.  There was no present prospect that the
fog would lift, and before dinner time our merchant had sold fifty
copies of "The Wayfarer."  Tom, whose books were of an inferior
description, and who was inexperienced as a salesman, disposed of
twenty, which was more than half of his stock.  The fog was a godsend
to both of them, and they reaped a rich harvest from the occasion, for
almost all the passengers seemed willing to spend their money freely
for the means of occupying the heavy hours, and driving away that
dreadful ennui which reigns supreme in a fog-bound steamer.

About the middle of the afternoon, the fog blew over, and the boat
proceeded on her voyage, and before sunset our young merchants were
safely landed at Bath.




CHAPTER XVII.

IN WHICH TOM HAS A GOOD TIME, AND BOBBY MEETS WITH A TERRIBLE
MISFORTUNE.

Bath afforded our young merchants an excellent market for their wares,
and they remained there the rest of the week.  They then proceeded to
Brunswick, where their success was equally flattering.

Thus far Tom had done very well, though Bobby had frequent occasion to
remind him of the pledges he had given to conduct himself in a proper
manner.  He would swear now and then, from the force of habit; but
invariably, when Bobby checked him, he promised to do better.

At Brunswick Tom sold the last of his books, and was in possession of
about thirty dollars, twelve of which he owed the publisher who had
furnished his stock.  This money seemed to burn in his pocket.  He had
the means of having a good time, and it went hard with him to plod
along as Bobby did, careful to save every penny he could.

"Come, Bob, let's get a horse and chaise and have a ride--what do you
say?" proposed Tom, on the day he finished selling his books.

"I can't spare the time or the money," replied Bobby, decidedly.

"What is the use of having money if we can't spend it?  It is a first
rate day, and we should have a good time."

"I can't afford it.  I have a great many books to sell."

"About a hundred; you can sell them fast enough."

"I don't spend my money foolishly."

"It wouldn't be foolishly.  I have sold out, and am bound to have a
little fun now."

"You never will succeed if you do business in that way."

"Why not?"

"You will spend your money as fast as you get it."

"Pooh! we can get a horse and chaise for the afternoon for two dollars.
That is not much."

"Considerable, I should say.  But if you begin, there is no knowing
where to leave off.  I make it a rule not to spend a single cent
foolishly, and if I don't begin, I shall never do it."

"I don't mean to spend all I get; only a little now and then,"
persisted Tom.

"Don't spend the first dollar for nonsense, and then you won't spend
the second.  Besides, when I have any money to spare, I mean to buy
books with it for my library."

"Humbug!  Your library!"

"Yes, my library; I mean to have a library one of these days."

"I don't want any library, and I mean to spend some of my money in
having a good time; and if you won't go with me, I shall go
alone--that's all."

"You can do as you please, of course; but I advise you to keep your
money.  You will want it to buy another stock of books."

"I shall have enough for that.  What do you say?  Will you go with me
or not?"

"No, I will not."

"Enough said; then.  I shall go alone, or get some fellow to go with
me."

"Consider well before you go," pleaded Bobby, who had sense enough to
see that Tom's proposed "good time" would put back, if not entirely
prevent, the reform he was working out.

He then proceeded to reason with him in a very earnest and feeling
manner, telling him he would not only spend all his money, but
completely unfit himself for business.  What he proposed to do was
nothing more nor less than extravagance, and it would lead him to
dissipation and ruin.

"To-day I am going to send one hundred dollars to Mr. Bayard,"
continued Bobby; "for I am afraid to have so much money with me.  I
advise you to send your money to your employer."

"Humph!  Catch me doing that!  I am bound to have a good time, any how."

"At least, send the money you owe him."

"I'll bet I won't."

"Well, do as you please; I have said all I have to say."

"You are a fool, Bob!" exclaimed Tom, who had evidently used Bobby as
much as he wished, and no longer cared to speak soft words to him.

"Perhaps I am; but I know better than to spend my money upon fast
horses.  If you will go, I can't help it.  I am sorry you are going
astray."

"What do you mean by that, you young monkey?" said Tom, angrily.

This was Tom Spicer, the bully.  It sounded like him; and with a
feeling of sorrow Bobby resigned the hopes he had cherished of making a
good boy of him.

"We had better part now," added our hero, sadly.

"I'm willing."

"I shall leave Brunswick this afternoon for the towns up the river.  I
hope no harm will befall you.  Good by, Tom,"

"Go it!  I have heard your preaching about long enough, and I am more
glad to get rid of you than you are to get rid of me."

Bobby walked away towards the house where he had left the trunk
containing his books, while Tom made his way towards a livery stable.
The boys had been in the place for several days, and had made some
acquaintances; so Tom had no difficulty in procuring a companion for
his proposed ride.

Our hero wrote a letter that afternoon to Mr. Bayard, in which he
narrated all the particulars of his journey, his relations with Tom
Spicer, and the success that had attended his labors.  At the bank he
procured a hundred dollar note for his small bills, and enclosed it in
the letter.

He felt sad about Tom.  The runaway had done so well, had been so
industrious, and shown such a tractable spirit, that he had been very
much encouraged about him.  But if he meant to be wild again,--for it
was plain that the ride was only "the beginning of sorrows,"--it was
well that they should part.

By the afternoon stage our hero proceeded to Gardiner, passing through
several smaller towns, which did not promise a very abundant harvest.
His usual success attended him; for wherever he went, people seemed to
be pleased with him, as Squire Lee had declared they would be.  His
pleasant, honest face was a capital recommendation, and his eloquence
seldom failed to achieve the result which eloquence has ever achieved
from Demosthenes down to the present day.

Our limits do not permit us to follow him in all his peregrinations
from town to town, and from house to house; so we pass over the next
fortnight, at the end of which time we find him at Augusta.  He had
sold all his books but twenty, and had that day remitted eighty dollars
more to Mr. Bayard.  It was Wednesday, and he hoped to sell out so as
to be able to take the next steamer for Boston, which was advertised to
sail on the following day.

He had heard nothing from Tom since their parting, and had given up all
expectation of meeting him again; but that bad penny maxim proved true
once more, for, as he was walking through one of the streets of
Augusta, he had the misfortune to meet him--and this time it was indeed
a misfortune.

"Hallo, Bobby!" shouted the runaway, as familiarly as though nothing
had happened to disturb the harmony of their relations.

"Ah, Tom, I didn't expect to see you again," replied Bobby, not very
much rejoiced to meet his late companion.

"I suppose not; but here I am, as good as new.  Have you sold out?"

"No, not quite."

"How many have you left?"

"About twenty; but I thought, Tom, you would have returned to Boston
before this time."

"No;" and Tom did not seem to be in very good spirits.

"Where are you going now?"

"I don't know.  I ought to have taken your advice, Bobby."

This was a concession, and our hero began to feel some sympathy for his
companion--as who does not when the erring confess their faults?

"I am sorry you did not."

"I got in with some pretty hard fellows down there to Brunswick,"
continued Tom, rather sheepishly.

"And spent all your money," added Bobby, who could readily understand
the reason why Tom had put on his humility again.

"Not all."

"How much have you left?"

"Not much," replied he, evasively.  "I don't know what I shall do.  I
am in a strange place, and have no friends."

Bobby's sympathies were aroused, and without reflection, he promised to
be a friend in his extremity.

"I will stick by you this time, Bob, come what will.  I will do just as
you say, now."

Our merchant was a little flattered by this unreserved display of
confidence.  He did not give weight enough to the fact that it was
adversity alone which made Tom so humble.  He was in trouble, and gave
him all the guarantee he could ask for his future good behavior.  He
could not desert him now he was in difficulty.

"You shall help me sell my books, and then we will return to Boston
together.  Have you money enough left to pay your employer?"

Tom hesitated; something evidently hung heavily upon his mind.

"I don't know how it will be after I have paid my expenses to Boston,"
he replied, averting his face.

Bobby was perplexed by this evasive answer; but as Tom seemed so
reluctant to go into details, he reserved his inquiries for a more
convenient season.
