was shot away, and the lances fell clattering on the plain.

"At 'em, boys, with your pistols!" shouted Bowie. "Don't give 'em a
second chance!"

The Texans rushed forward, firing their pistols. Ned in the smoke became
separated from his comrades, and when he could see more clearly he
beheld but a single horseman. The man was Urrea.

The two recognized each other instantly. The Mexican had the advantage.
He was on horseback and the smoke was in Ned's eyes, not his own. With a
shout of triumph, he rode straight at the boy and made a fierce sweep
with his cavalry saber. It was fortunate for Ned that he was agile of
both body and mind. He ducked and leaped to one side. He felt the swish
of the heavy steel over his head, but as he came up again he fired.

Urrea was protected largely by his horse's neck, and Ned fired at the
horse instead, although he would have greatly preferred Urrea as a
target. The bullet struck true and the horse fell, but the rider leaped
clear and, still holding the saber, sprang at his adversary. Ned
snatched up his rifle, which lay on the ground at his feet, and received
the slash of the sword upon its barrel. The blade broke in two, and
then, clubbing his rifle, Ned struck.

It was fortunate for Urrea, too, that he was agile of mind and body. He
sprang back quickly, but the butt of the rifle grazed his head and drew
blood. The next moment other combatants came between, and Urrea dashed
away in search of a fresh horse. Ned, his blood on fire, was rushing
after him, when Bowie seized his arm and pulled him back.

"No further, Ned!" he cried. "We've scattered their cavalry and we must
get back into the Alamo or the whole Mexican army will be upon us!"

Ned heard far away the beat of flying hoofs. It was made by the horses
of the Mexican cavalry fleeing for their lives. Bowie quickly gathered
together his men, and carrying with them two who had been slain in the
fight they retreated rapidly to the Alamo, the Texan cannon firing over
their heads at the advancing Mexican infantry. In three or four minutes
they were inside the walls again and with their comrades.

The Mexican cavalry did not reappear upon the eastern road, and the
Texans were exultant, yet they had lost two good men and their joy soon
gave way to more solemn feelings. It was decided to bury the slain at
once in the plaza, and a common grave was made for them. They were the
first of the Texans to fall in the defence, and their fate made a deep
impression upon everybody.

It took only a few minutes to dig the grave, and the men, laid side by
side, were covered with their cloaks. While the spades were yet at work
the Mexican cannon opened anew upon the Alamo. A ball and a bomb fell in
the plaza. The shell burst, but fortunately too far away to hurt
anybody. Neither the bursting of the shell nor any other part of the
cannonade interrupted the burial.

Crockett, a public man and an orator, said a few words. They were
sympathetic and well chosen. He spoke of the two men as dying for Texas.
Others, too, would fall in the defence of the Alamo, but their blood
would water the tree of freedom. Then they threw in the dirt. While
Crockett was speaking the cannon still thundered without, but every word
could be heard distinctly.

When Ned walked away he felt to the full the deep solemnity of the
moment. Hitherto they had fought without loss to themselves. The death
of the two men now cast an ominous light over the situation. The Mexican
lines were being drawn closer and closer about the Alamo, and he was
compelled to realize the slenderness of their chances.

The boy resumed his place on the wall, remaining throughout the
afternoon, and watched the coming of the night. Crockett joined him, and
together they saw troops of Mexicans marching away from the main body,
some to right and some to left.

"Stretchin' their lines," said Crockett. "Santa Anna means to close us
in entirely after a while. Now, by the blue blazes, that was a close
shave!"

A bullet sang by his head and flattened against the wall. He and Ned
dropped down just in time. Other bullets thudded against the stone.
Nevertheless, Ned lifted his head above the edge of the parapet and took
a look. His eyes swept a circle and he saw little puffs of smoke coming
from the roofs and windows of the jacals or Mexican huts on their side
of the river. He knew at once that the best of the Mexican sharpshooters
had hidden themselves there, and had opened fire not with muskets, but
with improved rifles. He called Crockett's attention to this point of
danger and the frontiersman grew very serious.

"We've got to get 'em out some way or other," he said. "As I said
before, the cannon balls make a big fuss, but they don't come so often
an' they come at random. It's the little bullets that have the sting of
the wasp, an' when a man looks down the sights, draws a bead on you, an'
sends one of them lead pellets at you, he gen'rally gets you. Ned, we've
got to drive them fellers out of there some way or other."

The bullets from the jacals now swept the walls and the truth of
Crockett's words became painfully evident. The Texan cannon fired upon
the huts, but the balls went through the soft adobe and seemed to do no
harm. It was like firing into a great sponge. Triumphant shouts came
from the Mexicans. Their own batteries resumed the cannonade, while
their sheltered riflemen sent in the bullets faster and faster.

Crockett tapped the barrel of Betsy significantly.

"The work has got to be done with this old lady an' others like her," he
said. "We must get rid of them jacals."

"How?" asked Ned.

"You come along with me an' I'll show you," said Crockett. "I'm goin' to
have a talk with Travis, an' if he agrees with me we'll soon wipe out
that wasps' nest."

Crockett briefly announced his plan, which was bold in the extreme.
Sixty picked riflemen, twenty of whom bore torches also, would rush out
at one of the side gates, storm the jacals, set fire to them, and then
rush back to the Alamo.

Travis hesitated. The plan seemed impossible of execution in face of the
great Mexican force. But Bowie warmly seconded Crockett, and at last the
commander gave his consent. Ned at once asked to go with the daring
troop, and secured permission. The band gathered in a close body by one
of the gates. The torches were long sticks lighted at the end and
burning strongly. The men had already cocked their rifles, but knowing
the immense risk they were about to take they were very quiet. Ned was
pale, and his heart beat painfully, but his hand did not shake.

The Texan cannon, to cover the movement, opened fire from the walls, and
the riflemen, posted at various points, helped also. The Mexican
cannonade increased. When the thunder and crash were at their height the
gate was suddenly thrown open and the sixty dashed out. Fortunately the
drifting smoke hid them partially, and they were almost upon the jacals
before they were discovered.

A great shout came from the Mexicans when they saw the daring Texans
outside, and bullets from the jacals began to knock up grass and dust
about them. But Crockett himself, waving a torch, led them on, shouting:

"It's only a step, boys! It's only a step! Now, let 'em have it!"

The Texans fired as they rushed, but they took care to secure good aim.
The Mexicans were driven from the roofs and the windows and then the
Texans carrying the torches dashed inside. Every house contained
something inflammable, which was quickly set on fire, and two or three
huts made of wood were lighted in a dozen places.

The dry materials blazed up fast. A light wind fanned the flames, which
joined together and leaped up, a roaring pyramid. The Mexicans, who had
lately occupied them, were scuttling like rabbits toward their main
force, and the Texan bullets made them jump higher and faster.

Crockett, with a shout of triumph, flung down his torch.

"Now, boys," he cried. "Here's the end of them jacals. Nothin' on earth
can put out that fire, but if we don't make a foot race back to the
Alamo the end of us will be here, too, in a minute."

The little band wheeled for its homeward rush. Ned heard a great shout
of rage from the Mexicans, and then the hissing and singing of shells
and cannon balls over his head. He saw Mexicans running across the plain
to cut them off, but his comrades and he had reloaded their rifles, and
as they ran they sent a shower of bullets that drove back their foe.

Ned's heart was pumping frightfully, and myriads of black specks danced
before his eyes, but he remembered afterward that he calculated how far
they were from the Alamo, and how far the Mexicans were from them. A
number of his comrades had been wounded, but nobody had fallen and they
still raced in a close group for the gate, which seemed to recede as
they rushed on.

"A few more steps, Ned," cried Crockett, "an' we're in! Ah, there go our
friends!"

The Texan cannon over their heads now fired into the pursuing Mexican
masses, and the sharpshooters on the walls also poured in a deadly hail.
The Mexicans recoiled once more and then Crockett's party made good the
gate.

"All here!" cried Crockett, as those inside held up torches. He ran over
the list rapidly himself and counted them all, but his face fell when he
saw his young friend the Bee-Hunter stagger. Crockett caught him in his
arms and bore him into the hospital. He and Ned watched by his side
until he died, which was very soon. Before he became unconscious he
murmured some lines from an old Scotch poem:

    "But hame came the saddle, all bluidy to see.
     And hame came the steed, but never hame came he."

They buried him that night beside the other two, and Ned was more solemn
than ever when he sought his usual place in the hospital by the wall. It
had been a day of victory for the Texans, but the omens, nevertheless,
seemed to him to be bad.

The next day he saw the Mexicans spreading further and further about the
Alamo, and they were in such strong force that the Texans could not now
afford to go out and attack any of these bands. A light cold rain fell,
and as he was not on duty he went back to the hospital, where he sat in
silence.

He was deeply depressed and the thunder of the Mexican cannon beat upon
his ears like the voice of doom. He felt a strange annoyance at the
reports of the guns. His nerves jumped, and he became angry with himself
at what he considered a childish weakness.

Now, and for the first time, he felt despair. He borrowed a pencil and a
sheet of paper torn from an old memorandum book and made his will. His
possessions were singularly few, and the most valuable at hand was his
fine long-barreled rifle, which he left to his faithful friend, Obed
White. He bequeathed his pistol and knife to the Panther, and his
clothes to Will Allen. He was compelled to smile at himself when he had
finished his page of writing. Was it likely that his friends would ever
find this paper, or, if finding it, was it likely that any one of them
could ever obtain his inheritance? But it was a relief to his feelings
and, folding the paper, he put it in the inside pocket of his hunting
shirt.

The bombardment was renewed in the afternoon, but Ned stayed in his
place in the hospital. After a while Davy Crockett and several others
joined him there. Crockett as usual was jocular, and told more stories
of his trips to the large eastern cities. He had just finished an
anecdote of Philadelphia, when he turned suddenly to Ned.

"Boy," he said, "you and I have fought together more than once now, an'
I like you. You are brave an' you've a head full of sense. When you grow
older you'll be worth a lot to Texas. They'll need you in the council.
No, don't protest. This is the time when we can say what is in us. The
Mexican circle around the Alamo is almost complete. Isn't that so,
boys?"

"It is."

"Then I'll say what we all know. Three or four days from now the chances
will be a hundred to one against any of us ever gettin' out of here. An'
you're the youngest of the defence, Ned, so I want you to slip out
to-night while there's yet time. Mebbe you can get up a big lot of men
to come to our help."

Ned looked straight at Crockett, and the veteran's eyes wavered.

"It's a little scheme you have," said Ned, "to get me out of the way.
You think because I'm the youngest I ought to go off alone at night and
save my own life. Well, I'm not going. I intend to stay here and fight
it out with the rest of you."

"I meant for the best, boy, I meant for the best," said Crockett. "I'm
an old fellow an' I've had a terrible lot of fun in my time. About as
much, I guess, as one man is entitled to, but you've got all your life
before you."

"Couldn't think of it," said Ned lightly; "besides, I've got a password
in case I'm taken by Santa Anna."

"What's that?" asked Crockett curiously.

"It's the single word 'Roylston.' Mr. Roylston told me if I were taken
by Santa Anna to mention his name to him."

"That's queer, an' then maybe it ain't," said Crockett musingly. "I've
heard a lot of John Roylston. He's about the biggest trader in the
southwest. I guess he must have some sort of a financial hold on Santa
Anna, who is always wantin' money. Ned, if the time should ever come,
don't you forget to use that password."

The next night was dark and chilly with gusts of rain. In the afternoon
the Mexican cannonade waned, and at night it ceased entirely. The Alamo
itself, except for a few small lights within the buildings, was kept
entirely dark in order that skulking sharpshooters without might not
find a target.

Ned was on watch near one of the lower walls about the plaza. He wrapped
his useful serape closely about his body and the lower part of his face
in order to protect himself from the cold and wet, and the broad brim of
his sombrero was drawn down to meet it. The other Texans on guard were
protected in similar fashion, and in the flitting glimpses that Ned
caught of them they looked to him like men in disguise.

The time went on very slowly. In the look backward every hour in the
Alamo seemed to him as ten. He walked back and forth a long time,
occasionally meeting other sentinels, and exchanging a few words with
them. Once he glanced at their cattle, which were packed closely under a
rough shed, where they lay, groaning with content. Then he went back to
the wall and noticed the dim figure of one of the sentinels going toward
the convent yard and the church.

Ned took only a single glance at the man, but he rather envied him. The
man was going off duty early, and he would soon be asleep in a warm
place under a roof. He did not think of him again until a full hour
later, when he, too, going off duty, saw a figure hidden in serape and
sombrero passing along the inner edge of the plaza. The walk and figure
reminded him of the man whom he had seen an hour before, and he wondered
why any one who could have been asleep under shelter should have
returned to the cold and rain.

He decided to follow, but the figure flitted away before him down the
plaza and toward the lowest part of the wall. This was doubly curious.
Moreover, it was ground for great suspicion. Ned followed swiftly. He
saw the figure mounting the wall, as if to take position there as a
sentinel, and then the truth came to him in a flash. It was Urrea
playing the congenial role of spy.

Ned rushed forward, shouting. Urrea turned, snatched a pistol and fired.
The bullet whistled past Ned's head. The next moment Urrea dropped over
the wall and fled away in the darkness. The other sentinels were not
able to obtain a shot at him.




CHAPTER XI

THE DESPERATE DEFENCE


Ned's report created some alarm among the defenders of the Alamo, but it
passed quickly.

"I don't see just how it can help 'em," said Crockett. "He's found out
that we're few in number. They already knew that. He's learned that the
Alamo is made up of a church an' other buildings with walls 'roun' them.
They already knew that, too, an' so here we all are, Texans an'
Mexicans, just where we stood before."

Nevertheless, the bombardment rose to a fiercer pitch of intensity the
next day. The Mexicans seemed to have an unlimited supply of ammunition,
and they rained balls and shells on the Alamo. Many of the shells did
not burst, and the damage done was small. The Texans did not reply from
the shelter of their walls for a long time. At last the Mexicans came
closer, emboldened perhaps by the thought that resistance was crushed,
and then the Texan sharpshooters opened fire with their long-barreled
rifles.

The Texans had two or three rifles apiece, and they poured in a fast and
deadly fire. So many of the Mexicans fell that the remainder retreated
with speed, leaving the fallen behind them. But when the smoke lifted
others came forward under a white flag, and the Texans allowed them to
take away their dead.

The cannonade now became spasmodic. All the Mexican cannon would fire
continuously for a half hour or so, and then would ensue a silence of
perhaps an hour.

In the afternoon Bowie was taken very ill, owing to his great exertions,
and a bed was made for him in the hospital. Ned sat there with him a
while. The gentle mood that had distinguished the Georgian throughout
the siege was even more marked now.

"Ned," he said, "you ought to have gone out the other night when we
wanted you to go. Fannin may come to our help or he may not, but even if
he should come I don't think his force is sufficient. It would merely
increase the number of Texans in the trap."

"I've quite made up my mind that I won't go," said Ned.

"I'm sorry," said Bowie. "As for me, it's different. I'm a man of
violence, Ned. I don't deny it. There's human blood on my hands, and
some of it is that of my own countrymen. I've done things that I'd like
to call back, and so I'm glad to be here, one of a forlorn hope,
fighting for Texas. It's a sort of atonement, and if I fall I think it
will be remembered in my favor."

Ned was singularly impressed. Crockett had talked in much the same way.
Could these men, heroes of a thousand dangers, have really given up? Not
to give up in the sense of surrender, but to expect death fighting? But
for himself he could not believe such a thing possible. Youth was too
strong in him.

He was on the watch again for part of the next night, and he and
Crockett were together. They heard sounds made by the besiegers on every
side of them. Mexicans were calling to Mexicans. Bridle bits rattled,
and metal clanked against metal.

"I suppose the circle is complete," said Ned.

"Looks like it," said Crockett, "but we've got our cattle to eat an'
water to drink an' only a direct attack in force can take us. They can
bang away with their cannon till next Christmas an' they won't shake our
grip on the Alamo."

The night was fairly dark, and an hour later Ned heard a whistle.
Crockett heard it, too, and stiffened instantly into attention.

"Did that sound to you like a Mexican whistling?" he asked.

"No, I'd say it came from American lips, and I'd take it also for a
signal."

"An' so it is. It's just such a whistle as hunters use when they want to
talk to one another without words. I've whistled to my pardners that way
in the woods hundreds of times. I think, Ned, that some Texans are at
hand waitin' a chance to slip in."

Crockett emitted a whistle, low but clear and penetrating, almost like
the song of a night bird, and in a half minute came the rejoinder. He
replied to it briefly, and then they waited. Others had gathered at the
low plaza wall with them. Hidden to the eyes, they peered over the
parapet.

They heard soft footsteps in the darkness, and then dim forms emerged.
Despite the darkness they knew them to be Texans, and Crockett spoke
low:

"Here we are, boys, waitin' for you! This way an' in a half minute
you're in the Alamo!"

