before, and looked as though she considered the whole school far beneath
her. She refused to even nod to Grace, Nora, Anne or Jessica, while Julia
Crosby remarked with a cheerful grin that she guessed Miriam had forgotten
that they had ever been introduced.

During the Easter holidays, Tom Gray came down and his aunt gave a dinner
to her "adopted children" in honor of her nephew. Nora gave a fancy dress
party to about twenty of her friends, while Grace invited the seven young
people to a straw ride and a moonlight picnic in Upton Wood.

The days sped swiftly by, and spring came with her wealth of bud and
bloom. During the long, balmy days Grace inwardly chafed at schoolbooks
and lessons. She wanted to be out of doors. As she sat trying to write a
theme for her advanced English class, one sunny afternoon during the
latter part of April, she glanced frequently out the window toward the
golf links that lay just beyond the High School campus. How she wished it
were Saturday instead of only Wednesday. That very day she had arranged to
play a game of golf with one of the senior class girls, who had made a
record the previous year on the links. Grace felt rather flattered at the
notice of the older girl, who was considered particularly exclusive, and
rarely if ever paid any attention to the lower class girls. She had
accidentally learned that Grace was an enthusiastic golfer, and therefore
lost no time in asking her to play.

"I was awfully surprised when she asked me to play," confided Grace to her
chums on the way home from school that afternoon.

"Oh, that's nothing," said Jessica. "She ought to feel honored to think
you consented. You are really an Oakdale celebrity, you know."

"Please remember when you are basking in the light of her senior
countenance that you once had friends among the sophomores," said Nora in
a mournful tone.

"I consider both those remarks verging on idiotic," laughed Grace. "Don't
you, Anne?"

"Certainly," replied Anne. "But let me add a word of caution. Don't allow
this mark of senior caprice to turn your head. Remember you are----"

"You're worse than the others," cried Grace, "Let's change the subject."

Saturday proved a beautiful day, and with a light heart Grace started for
the links with her golf bag strapped across her shoulder. The senior whose
name was Ethel Post, sat waiting for her on one of the rustic benches set
under a tree at one side of the starting place. She greeted Grace
cordially and the two girls set to work without delay to demonstrate their
prowess as golfers. The caddies, two small boys of Oakdale, who could be
hired at the links by anyone desiring their services, carried the girls'
clubs and hunted lost balls with alacrity.

Miss Post found that Grace was a foeman worthy of her steel. The young
girl's arm was steady, and she delivered her strokes with decision. Grace
came out two holes ahead.

Miss Post was delighted. "I hope you will golf with me often, Miss
Harlowe," she said cordially. "It is so seldom one finds a really good
player."

"I am fond of all games and outdoor sports," replied Grace, "but I like
basketball best of all. Did you attend any of our games during the winter,
Miss Post?"

"No," answered the senior. "I am not much interested in basketball. I
really paid no attention to it this year, and haven't attended a game
since I was a freshman. Speaking of basketball," continued Miss Post, "I
picked up a paper last fall with a whole lot of basketball plays written
on it. It was labeled 'Sophomore basketball signals,' and I turned it over
to one of the girls in your class. She happened to be on the team, too,
and seemed very glad to get it. I presume it was hers, although she didn't
say so."

At the mention of the word signals, Grace pricked up her ears. As Miss
Post innocently told of finding the list, Grace could hardly control
herself. She wanted to get up and dance a jig on the green. She was about
to learn the truth at last.

Trying to keep the excitement she felt out of her voice, Grace asked in a
low tone, "Whom did you return it to, Miss Post?"

"Why, Miss Nesbit," was the answer. "I was inside the campus when I found
it, and just then she passed me on the walk. I knew she was a sophomore,
and thought it best to get rid of it, as I would probably have forgotten
all about it, and it never would have been returned."

"Quite true," Grace replied, but she thought to herself that a great deal
of unhappiness might have been avoided if Miss Post had only forgotten.

The talk drifted into other channels. Miss Post told Grace that she
expected to sail for Europe as soon as school was over. In the fall she
would return and enter Wellesley. She had crossed the ocean once before,
and had done the continent. This time she intended to spend all of her
time in Germany. Grace decided her new acquaintance to be a remarkably
bright girl. At any other time she would have listened to her with
absorbed interest, but try as she might, Grace could not focus her
attention on what was being said. One thought was uppermost in her mind,
that Miriam was the real culprit.

What was to be done about it? She would gain nothing by exposing Miriam to
her classmates. There had been too much unpleasantness already. If there
was only some way that Miriam could be brought to see the folly of her
present course. Grace decided to tell Anne the news that night and ask her
advice.




CHAPTER XXI

ANNE AND GRACE COMPARE NOTES


During the walk home from the links, Grace kept continually thinking, "I
knew it was Miriam. She gave them to Julia." She replied rather
absent-mindedly to Miss Post's comments, and left the older girl with the
impression that Miss Harlowe was not as interesting as she had at first
seemed.

Grace escaped from the supper table at the earliest opportunity, and
seizing her hat, made for Anne's house as fast as her feet would take her.
Anne opened the door for her.

"Oh, Anne, Anne! You never can guess what I know!" cried Grace, before she
was fairly inside the house.

"Of course, I can't," replied Anne, "any more than you can guess what I
know."

"Why, do you know something special, too?" demanded Grace.

"I do, indeed. But tell me your news first, and then I'll tell you mine,"
said Anne, pushing Grace into a chair.

"Mine's about Miriam," said Grace soberly.

"So is mine," was the reply, "and it's nothing creditable, either."

"Well," began Grace, "you know I went over to the golf links to-day with
Ethel Post of the senior class."

Anne nodded.

"We were sitting on a bench resting after the game, and the subject of
basketball came up. Before I knew it, she was telling me all about finding
the list of signals you lost last fall. She gave them to one of our class,
you can guess who."

"Miriam," said Anne.

"Yes, it was Miriam. I always suspected that she had more to do with it
than anyone else. She gave Julia the signals, because she wanted to see me
humiliated, and fastened suspicion on you to shield herself. She knew that
I had boasted, openly, that my team would win. When Julia gave me the
statement that cleared you in the eyes of the girls, she told me that she
was under promise not to tell how she obtained the signals. But I'm sure
she knew that I suspected Miriam. What do you think we ought to do about
it?"

Grace looked anxiously at Anne.

"I don't know, yet," Anne replied. "Now listen to my news. I have felt
ever since the game that your getting locked up was not accidental. I
don't know why I felt so, but I did, nevertheless. So I set to work to
find out if any one else had been around there that day. I went to the
janitress and asked her if she had noticed any one in the corridors before
halfpast one. That was about the time that people began to come, you know.
She said she hadn't. She was down in the basement and didn't go near the
upstairs classrooms until after two o'clock. But when she did go up there
she found this."

Anne held up a curious scarab pin that Grace immediately recognized. It
was one that Miriam Nesbit often wore, and was extremely fond of.

"It's Miriam's," gasped Grace. "I wonder why----" She stopped. The reason
Miriam had not made her loss known was plain. She was afraid to tell where
and when she had lost her pin.

"I see," said Grace slowly. "It looks pretty bad, doesn't it? But why
didn't the janitress take it straight to Miss Thompson? That's what she
usually does with articles she finds."

"She missed seeing Miss Thompson that Saturday," said Anne. "When I hunted
her up early Monday morning, in order to question her, she asked me if I
had lost a pin. She said she had just returned one to Miss Thompson, and
told me where she found it. I asked her to describe the pin, and at once
recognized it. Every girl in school knows that scarab of Miriam's. There
is nothing like it in Oakdale.

"For a minute I didn't know what to do. Don't you remember when Miriam
first had it? She showed it to Miss Thompson, and Miss Thompson spoke of
how curious it was. I knew that Miss Thompson would not be apt to forget
it. I hurried up to her office and found her with the pin in her hand. She
had sent for Miriam, but the messenger came back with the report that
Miriam wasn't in school. She laid the pin down and said, 'What is it,
Anne?' So I just asked her if she would let me have the pin. Of course,
she looked surprised, and asked me if I knew to whom it belonged. I told
her I did. Then she looked at me very hard, and asked me to tell her
exactly why I wanted it. But, of course, I couldn't tell her, so I didn't
say anything. Then she said: 'Anne, I know without being told why you want
this pin. I am going to give it to you, and let you settle a delicate
matter in your own way. I am sure it will be the right one.'"

"Anne Pierson, you bad child!" exclaimed Grace. "To think that you've kept
this to yourself ever since the game. Why didn't you tell me?"

"I wanted to think what to do about it, before telling even you," Anne
replied. "Yesterday I had a long talk with David. He knows everything
that Miriam has done since the beginning of the freshman year. He feels
dreadfully about it all. I think you and I ought to go to her and tell her
that we are willing to forget the past and be her friends."

"It would do no good," said Grace dubiously. "She would simply laugh at
us. I used to have dreams about making Miriam see the evil of her ways,
but I have come to the conclusion that they were dreams, and nothing
more."

"Let's try, anyway," said Anne. "David says she seems sad and unhappy, and
is more gentle than she has been for a long time."

"All right, we'll beard the lion in her den, the Nesbit on her soil, if
you say so. But I expect to be routed with great slaughter," said Grace
with a shudder. "When do we go forth on our mission of reform?"

"We'll call on her to-morrow after school," Anne replied, "and don't
forget that you once made the remark that you thought Miriam had a better
self. You told me the day you read Julia Crosby's statement to the girls
that you wouldn't give her up."

"I suppose that I shall have to confess that I did say so," laughed Grace.
"But that was before she locked me up. She is so proud and stubborn that
she will probably take the olive branch we hold out and trample upon it.
After all, it really isn't our place to hold out olive branches anyway.
She is the one who ought to eat humble pie. I feel ashamed to think I have
to tell her what I know about her."

"So do I," responded Anne. "It's horrid to have to go to people and tell
them about their misdeeds. I wouldn't propose going now if it weren't for
David. He seems to think that she would be willing to behave if some one
showed her how."

"All right," said Grace, "we'll go, but if we encounter a human tornado
don't say I didn't warn you."

"That's one reason I want to go to her house," replied Anne. "If we
approach her at school she is liable to turn on us and make a scene, or
else walk off with her nose in the air. If we can catch her at home
perhaps she will be more amenable to reason. But, if, to-morrow, she
refuses to melt and be forgiven, then I wash my hands of her forever."




CHAPTER XXII

A RESCUE AND A REFORM


It was with considerable trepidation that Anne and Grace approached the
Nesbit gate the following afternoon.

"I feel my knees beginning to wobble," Grace observed, as they rang the
bell. "This business of being a reformer has its drawbacks. How had we
better begin?"

"I don't know, the inspiration to say the right thing will probably come,
when we see her," said Anne.

"If she behaves in her usual manner, I shall have a strong inspiration, to
give her a good shaking," said Grace bluntly.

To their relief, the maid who answered the bell informed them that Miriam
had gone out for a walk.

"Do you know which way she went?" Grace asked.

"I think, miss, that she went toward Upton Wood. She often walks there,"
replied the maid.

The girls thanked her and started down the walk.

"Miriam ought never to walk, alone, in Upton Wood, especially this time
of year," remarked Grace. "There are any amount of tramps lurking around.
If David knew it he would be awfully provoked."

"Let's walk over that way, and perhaps we'll meet her," suggested Anne.
"Now that we've started, I hate to turn back. If we don't see her to-day,
we'll keep on putting it off and end up by not seeing her at all."

"That's true," Grace agreed.

The two girls strolled along in the direction of Upton Wood, thoroughly
enjoying their walk. Occasionally, they stopped to gather a few wild
flowers, or listen to the joyous trill of a bird. They were at the edge of
the wood, when Grace suddenly put up her hand.

"Hush!" she said. "I hear voices."

Just then the cry Help! Help! rang out.

"That's Miriam's voice," cried Grace.

Glancing quickly about for a weapon, Grace picked up a good-sized stick
she found on the ground, and ran in the direction of the sound, Anne at
her heels.

Miriam was struggling desperately to free herself from the grasp of a
rough, unkempt fellow who had her by the arm and was trying to abstract
the little gold watch that she wore fastened to her shirtwaist with a
chatelaine pin.

The tramp stood with his back to the approaching girls. Before he was
aware of their presence, Grace brought her stick down on his head with all
the force she had in her strong, young arms.

With a howl of pain he released Miriam, whirling on his assailant. Grace
hit him again, the force of her second blow knocking him over.

Before the man could regain his feet the three girls were off through the
wood. They ran without looking back until fairly out in the open field.

"I don't see him," panted Grace, halting to get her breath. "I guess he's
gone."

Anne was pale and trembling. The run out of the woods had been almost too
much for her. As for Miriam, she was sobbing quite hysterically.

"Don't cry, Miriam," soothed Grace, putting her arm around the frightened
girl. "He can't hurt you now. I am so glad that we happened along. You
ought never to go into Upton Wood alone, you know."

Miriam gradually gained control of herself. Wiping her eyes, she asked,
"How did you ever happen to be out here just at the time I needed help?"

"To tell the truth, we were hunting for you," Grace replied. "Your maid
said that you had gone toward Upton Wood. We walked on, expecting every
minute to meet you. Then we heard you scream and that's all."

"It's not all," said Miriam quickly. "I know I have been a wretch. I have
made things unpleasant for you two girls ever since we started in at High
School. I made fun of Anne, and tried to make her lose the freshman prize.
I sent her that doll a year ago last Christmas, knowing that it would hurt
her feelings. But the things I did last year aren't half as bad as all
I've done this year, I gave----"

"That's just what we came to see you about, Miriam," interrupted Grace.
"We know that you gave the signals to Julia, and we know that you locked
me in the classroom the day of the big game."

Miriam flushed with shame and her lip quivered.

