
"Sure, it's owld men and women we're about to kill!" cried Captain Rigg,
lowering his formidable forehammer, with which, in default of a better
weapon, he had armed himself; "but, hooray, Gineral! there may be lots
o' the warrior reptiles in among the huts, and them poor craturs have
been sent out to deceive us."

"That's true. Forward my lads!" shouted Ole, and again the army charged;
nor did they stop short until they had taken possession of the village,
when they found that all the fighting men were gone.

This being happily accomplished without bloodshed, Ole Thorwald, like a
wise general, took the necessary steps to insure and complete his
conquest. He seized all the women and children, and shut them up in a
huge temple built of palm trees and roofed with broad leaves. This
edifice was devoted to the horrible practise of cutting up human bodies
that were intended to be eaten.

Ole had often heard of the cannibalism that is practised by most of the
South Sea Islanders, though some tribes are worse than others; but he
had never before this day come directly in contact with it. Here,
however, there could be no doubt whatever of the fact. Portions of human
bodies were strewn about this hideous temple,--some parts in a raw and
bloody condition, as if they had just been cut from a lately slain
victim; others in a baked state, as if ready to form part of some
terrible banquet.

Sick at heart, Ole Thorwald turned from this sight with loathing.
Concluding that the natives who practised such things could not be very
much distressed by being shut up for a time in a temple dedicated to the
gratification of their own disgusting tastes, he barricaded the entrance
securely, placed a guard over it, and hurried away to see that two other
buildings, in which the remainder of the women and children had been
imprisoned, were similarly secured and guarded. Meanwhile the stalwart
knight of the forehammer, to whom the duty had been assigned, placed
sentries at the various entrances to the village, and disposed his men
in such a way as to prevent the possibility of being taken by surprise.

These various arrangements were not made a moment too soon. The savages,
as we have said in a former chapter, rushed towards their village from
all quarters, on hearing the thunder of the great guns. They were now
arriving in scores, and came rushing over the brow of the neighboring
hill, and down the slopes that rose immediately in rear of their rude
homes.

On finding that the place was occupied by their enemies, they set up a
yell of despair, and retired to a neighboring height, where Ole could
see, by their wild gesticulations, that they were hotly debating what
should be done. It soon became evident that an attack would be made;
for, as their comrades came pouring in, the party from the settlement
was soon greatly outnumbered.

Seeing this, and knowing that the party under command of Henry Stuart
would naturally hasten to his aid as soon as possible, Ole sought to
cause delay by sending out a flag of truce.

The natives had been so long acquainted with the customs of the
Europeans that they understood the meaning of this, and the chief of the
tribe, at once throwing down his club, advanced fearlessly to meet the
Christian native sent out with the flag.

The message was to the effect that if they, the enemy, should dare to
make an attack, all the women and children then in the hands of the
settlers should have their heads chopped off on the spot!

This was a startling announcement, and one so directly in opposition to
the known principles of the Christians, that the heathen chief was
staggered, and turned pale. He returned to his comrades with the
horrifying message, which seemed to them all utterly unaccountable. It
was quite natural for themselves to do such a deed, because they held
that all sorts of cruelties were just in war. But their constant
experience had been that, when a native became a follower of the
Christian missionary, from that moment he became merciful, especially
towards the weak and helpless. Counting upon this, they were stunned as
well as astonished at Thorwald's message; for they believed implicitly
that he meant to do what he threatened. They did not know that Ole,
although a worthy man, was not so earnest a believer in all of Mr.
Mason's principles but that he could practise on their credulity in time
of need. Like the missionary, he would rather have died than have
sacrificed the life of a woman or child; but, unlike him, he had no
objection to deceive in order to gain time.

As it turned out, his threat was unnecessary, for Henry and his men were
close at hand; and before the natives could make up their minds what to
do, the whole band came pouring over the hill, with Jo Bumpus far ahead
of the rest, leaping and howling like a maniac with excitement.

This decided the natives. They were now outnumbered and surrounded. The
principal chief, therefore, advanced towards Bumpus with a piece of
native cloth tied to the end of his war-club, which he brandished
furiously by way of making it plain that his object was not war, but
peace!

Naturally enough, the seaman misinterpreted the signal, and there is no
doubt that he would have planted his knuckles on the bridge of the nose
of the swarthy cannibal had not Henry Stuart made use of his
extraordinary powers of speed. He darted forward, overtook Jo, and,
grasping him around the neck with both arms, shouted:

"It's a flag of truce, man!"

"You don't say so?--well, who'd ha' thought it? It don't look like one;
so it don't."

With this remark, Jo subsided into a peaceable man. Pulling a quid out
of his pocket, he thrust it into his cheek, and, crossing his arms on
his breast, listened patiently--though not profitably, seeing that he
did not understand a word--to the dialogue that followed.

It will be remembered that poor Mr. Mason, after being saved by Henry,
was taken into the gig of the Talisman and put ashore. After the two
vessels had disappeared, as has been already described, Henry at once
led his party towards the native village, knowing that Ole Thorwald
would require support, all the more that the ship had failed to fulfil
her part in the combined movement.

As the almost heartbroken father had no power to render further aid to
his lost child, he suffered himself to be led, in a half-bewildered
state, along with the attacking party under his young friend. He was now
brought forward to parley with the native chief.

The missionary's manner and aspect at once changed. In the hope of
advancing the cause of his Master, he forgot, or at least restrained,
his own grief for a time.

"What would the chief say to the Christians?" he began, on being
confronted with the savage and some of his warriors who crowded round
him.

"That he wishes to have done with war," replied the man.

"That is a good wish; but why did the chief begin war?"

"Keona began it!" said the savage, angrily. "We thought our wars with
the Christians were going to stop. But Keona is bad. He put the war
spirit into my people."

Mr. Mason knew this to be true.

"Then," said he, "Keona deserves punishment."

"Let him die," answered the chief; and an exclamation of assent broke
from the other natives. Keona himself, happening to be there, became
pale and looked anxious; but remained where he stood, nevertheless, with
his arms crossed on his dark breast. A bandage of native cloth was tied
round his wounded arm. Without saying a word he undid this, tore it off,
and allowed the blood to ooze from the reopened wound.

It was a silent appeal to the feelings and the sense of justice of his
comrades, and created a visible impression in his favor.

"That wound was received by one who would have been a murderer!" said
Mr. Mason, observing the effect of this action.

"He struck me!" cried Keona, fiercely.

"He struck you in defending his own home against a cowardly attack,"
answered the missionary.

At this point Ole Thorwald saw fit to interfere. Seeing that the natives
were beginning to argue the case, and knowing that no good could come
from such a course, he quietly observed:

"There will be neither wife nor child in this place if I do but hold up
my hand."

The missionary and his party did not, of course, understand this
allusion, but they understood the result; for the savages at once
dropped their tones, and the chief sued earnestly for peace.

"Chiefs and warriors," said Mr. Mason, raising his hand impressively, "I
am a man of peace, and I serve the Prince of peace. To stop this war is
what I desire most earnestly; and I desire above all things that you and
I might henceforth live in friendship, serving the same God and
Saviour, whose name is Jesus Christ. But your ways are not like our
ways. If I leave you now, I fear you will soon find another occasion to
renew the war, as you have often done before. I have you in my power
now. If you were to fight with us we could easily beat you, because we
are stronger in numbers and well armed. Yes, I have you in my power,
and, with the blessing of my God, I will keep you in my power
_forever_."

There was a visible fall in the countenances of the savages who regarded
this strange announcement as their death-warrant. Some of them even
grasped their clubs, and looked fiercely at their enemies: but a glance
from Ole Thorwald quieted these restive spirits.

"Now, chiefs and warrior, I have two intentions in regard to you,"
continued Mr. Mason. "The one is that you shall take your clubs, spears,
and other weapons, and lay them in a pile on this mound, after which I
will make you march unarmed before us halfway to our settlement. From
that point you shall return to your homes. Thus you shall be deprived of
the power of treacherously breaking that peace which you know in your
hearts you would break if you could.

"My second intention is that the whole of your tribe--men, women, and
children--shall now assemble at the foot of this mound and hear what I
have got to say to you. The first part of this plan I shall carry out by
force, if need be. But for the second part, _I must have your own
consent_. I may not force you to listen if you are not willing to hear."

At the mention of the women and children being required to assemble
along with them, the natives pricked up their ears, and, as a matter of
course, they willingly agreed to listen to all that the missionary had
to say to them.

This being settled, and the natives knowing, from former experience,
that the Christians never broke faith with them, they advanced to the
mound pointed out and threw down their arms. A strong guard was placed
over these; the troops of the settlement were disposed in such a manner
as to prevent the possibility of their being recovered, and then the
women and children were set free.

It was a noisy and remarkable meeting that which took place between the
men and women of the tribe on this occasion; but soon surprise and
expectation began to take the place of all other feelings as the strange
intentions of the missionary were spoken of, and in a very short time
Mr. Mason had a large and most attentive congregation.

Never before had the missionary secured such an opportunity. His
eccentric method of obtaining a hearing had succeeded beyond his
expectations. With a heart overflowing with gratitude to God, he stood
up and began to preach the gospel.

Mr. Mason was not only eccentric, but able and wise. He made the most of
his opportunity. He gave them a _very_ long sermon that day; but he knew
that the savages were not used to sermons, and that they would not think
it long. His text was a double one,--"The soul that sinneth it shall
die," and "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved."

He preached that day as a man might who speaks to his hearers for the
first and last time, and, in telling of the goodness, the mercy, and
the love of God, the bitter grief of his own heart was sensibly abated.

After his discourse was over and prayer had been offered up, the savage
warriors were silently formed into a band and marched off in front of
the Christians to the spot where Mr. Mason had promised to set them
free. They showed no disinclination to go. They believed in the good
faith of their captors. The missionary had, indeed, got them into his
power that day. Some of them he had secured _forever_.




CHAPTER XIX.

SORROW AND SYMPATHY--THE WIDOW BECOMES A PLEADER AND HER SON ENGAGES IN
A SINGLE COMBAT.


There are times in the life of every one when the heart seems unable to
bear the load of sorrow and suffering that is laid upon it,--times when
the anguish of the soul is such that the fair world around seems
enshrouded with gloom, when the bright sun itself appears to shine in
mockery, and when the smitten heart refuses to be comforted.

Such a time was it with poor Frederick Mason when, after his return to
Sandy Cove, he stood alone, amid the blackened ruins of his former home,
gazing at the spot which he knew, from the charred remnants as well as
its position, was the site of the room which had once been occupied by
his lost child.

It was night when he stood there. The silence was profound, for the
people of the settlement sympathized so deeply with their beloved
pastor's grief that even the ordinary hum of life appeared to be hushed,
except now and then when a low wail would break out and float away on
the night wind. These sounds of woe were full of meaning. They told that
there were other mourners there that night,--that the recent battle had
not been fought without producing some of the usual bitter fruits of
war. Beloved, but dead and mangled forms, lay in more than one hut in
Sandy Cove.

Motionless, hopeless, the missionary stood amid the charred beams and
ashes, until the words "Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will
deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me," descended on his soul like
sunshine upon ice. A suppressed cry burst from his lips, and, falling on
his knees, he poured forth his soul in prayer.

While he was yet on his knees, a cry of anguish arose from one of the
huts at the foot of the hill. It died away in a low, heart-broken wail.
Mr. Mason knew its meaning well. That cry had a special significance to
him. It spoke reproachfully. It said, "There is comfort for _you_, for
where life is there is hope; but here there is _death_."

Again the word of God came to his memory,--"Weep with them that weep."
Starting up hastily, the missionary sprang over the black beams, and
hurried down the hill, entered the village, and spent the greater part
of the remainder of that night in comforting the bereaved and the
wounded.

The cause of the pastor's grief was not removed thereby, but the sorrow
itself was lightened by sympathy; and when he returned, at a late hour,
to his temporary home, hope had begun to arise within his breast.

The widow's cottage afforded him shelter. When he entered it, Henry and
his mother were seated near a small table on which supper was spread for
their expected guest.

"Tom Armstrong will recover," said the missionary, seating himself
opposite the widow, and speaking in a hurried, excited tone. "His wound
is a bad one, given by a war-club, but I think it is not dangerous. I
wish I could say as much for poor Simon. If he had been attended to
sooner he might have lived; but so much blood has been already lost that
there is now no hope. Alas for his little boy! He will be an orphan
soon. Poor Hardy's wife is distracted with grief. Her young husband's
body is so disfigured with cuts and bruises that it is dreadful to look
upon; yet she will not leave the room in which it lies, nor cease to
embrace and cling to the mangled corpse. Poor, poor Lucy! she will have
to be comforted. At present she must be left with God. No human sympathy
can avail just now; but she must be comforted when she will permit any
one to speak to her. You will go to her to-morrow, Mrs. Stuart, won't
you?"

As this was Mr. Mason's first meeting with the widow since the Sunday
morning when the village was attacked, his words and manner showed that
he dreaded any allusion to his own loss. The widow saw and understood
this; but she had consolation for him as well as for others, and would
not allow him to have his way.

"But what of Alice?" she said, earnestly. "You do not mention her. Henry
has told me all. Have you nothing to say about yourself--about Alice?"

"Oh! what can I say?" cried the pastor, clasping his hands, while a deep
sob almost choked him.

"Can you not say that she is in the hands of God--of a loving _Father_?"
said Mrs. Stuart, tenderly.

"Yes, I can say that--I _have_ said that; but--but--"

"I know what you would say," interrupted the widow; "you would tell me
that she is in the hands of pirates,--ruthless villains who fear
neither God nor man, and that, unless a miracle is wrought in her
behalf, nothing can save her--"

"Oh! spare me, Mary; why do you harrow my broken heart with such a
picture?" cried Mr. Mason, rising and pacing the room with quick,
unsteady steps, while with both hands on his head he seemed to attempt
to crush down the thoughts that burned up his brain.

"I speak thus," said the widow, with an earnestness of tone and manner
that almost startled her hearers, "because I wish to comfort you. Alice,
you tell me, is on board the Foam--"

"On board the _pirate schooner_!" cried Henry, almost fiercely; for the
youth, although as much distressed as Mr. Mason, was not so resigned as
he, and his spirit chafed at the thought of having been deceived so
terribly by the pirate.

"She is on board the Foam," repeated the widow, in a tone so stern that
her hearers looked at her in surprise, "and is therefore in the hands of
Gascoyne, who will not injure a hair of her head. I tell you, Mr. Mason,
that she is _perfectly safe_ in the hands of Gascoyne."

"Of the pirate Durward!" said Henry, in a deep, angry voice.

"What ground have you for saying so?" asked the widow, quickly. "You
only know him as Gascoyne the sandal-wood trader,--the captain of the
Foam. He has been suspected, it is true; but suspicion is not proof. His
schooner has been fired into by a war-vessel; he has returned the fire:
any passionate man might be tempted to do that. His men have carried off
some of our dear ones. That was _their_ doing, not his. He knew nothing
of it."

"Mother, mother," cried Henry, entreatingly, "don't stand up in that way
for a pirate; I can't bear to hear it. Did he not himself describe the
pirate schooner's appearance in this room, and when he was attacked by
the Talisman did he not show out in his true colors, thereby proving
that he is Durward the pirate?"

The widow's face grew pale and her voice trembled as she replied, like
one who sought to convince herself rather than her hearer, "That is not
_positive_ proof, Henry, Gascoyne may have had some good reason for
deceiving you all in this way. His description of the pirate may have
been a false one. We cannot tell. You know he was anxious to prevent
Captain Montague from impressing his men."

"And would proclaiming himself a pirate be a good way of accomplishing
that end, mother?"

"Mary," said Mr. Mason, solemnly, as he seated himself at the table and
looked earnestly in the widow's face, "your knowledge of this man and
your manner of speaking about him surprise me. I have long thought that
you were not acting wisely in permitting Gascoyne to be so intimate;
for, whatever he may in reality be, he is a suspicious character, to say
the best of him; and although _I_ know that you think you are right in
encouraging his visits, other people do not know that; they may judge
you harshly. I do not wish to pry into secrets; but you have sought to
comfort me by bidding me have perfect confidence in this man? I _must_
ask what knowledge you have of him. How far are you aware of his
character and employment? How do you know that he is so trustworthy?"

An expression of deep grief rested on the widow's countenance as she
replied, in a sad voice;

"I _know_ that you may trust Gascoyne with your child. He is my oldest
friend. I have known him since we were children. He saved my father's
life long, long ago, and helped to support my mother in her last years.
Would you have me to forget all this because men say that he is a
pirate?"

"Why, mother," cried Henry, "if you know so much about him you _must_
know that, whatever he was in time past, he is the pirate Durward now."

"I do _not_ know that he is the pirate Durward!" said the widow, in a
voice and with a look so decided that Henry was silenced and sorely
perplexed; yet much relieved, for he knew that his mother would rather
die than tell a deliberate falsehood.

The missionary was also comforted; for although his judgment told him
that the grounds of hope thus held out to him were very insufficient, he
was impressed by the thoroughly confident tone of the widow, and felt
relieved in spite of himself.

