"And about the other things----" The head teacher paused suggestively.

"I know no more about the other things that have disappeared than you
do. Do you think I'd rob myself and my best friends?"

"In a case of this kind a person might rob himself just to throw the
public off the scent."

"Do you dare to accuse me of these mysterious thefts?" cried Pepper,
hotly.

"I think----"

"Mr. Crabtree, I beg of you to be careful," cried George Strong. "Why
not drop this whole matter until Captain Putnam returns? Because Ditmore
played a joke on you does not say that he is a--a criminal."

"Thank you for that, Mr. Strong," said the cadet, warmly. "I know I had
no right to play that joke--I have no right to play any of my jokes--but
I only did it for fun. I think it is--is horrible for Mr. Crabtree to
even think that I--that--that----" Pepper could not go on for his
emotion choked him.

"Oh? you can't deceive me!" sneered Josiah Crabtree. "I am sure
that----"

"Mr. Crabtree, I insist that you drop this matter until Captain Putnam
returns," interrupted George Strong.

"You insist?" roared the irate instructor.

"I do, sir."

"Who is in authority here, you or I?"

"You are the head teacher, but I feel bound to protect Captain Putnam's
interests during his absence. You have no right to accuse any cadet of a
crime unless you have proof against him. Have you any proof against
Ditmore?"

"You heard how he acknowledged taking the teeth."

"And he said it was a joke--and I believe it was that and nothing more.
There is a wide difference between an innocent joke and a premeditated
crime. Take my advice and say no more until you have consulted with
Captain Putnam."

"Ha! you are against me--just as the cadets are against me!" stormed
Josiah Crabtree. "I know I am right. But we can wait, since you insist."
He turned towards Pepper. "I'll corner you yet, you young rascal!" he
cried bitterly.

And the two teachers passed out of the cell-like room, the door was
again locked, and Pepper was left a prisoner as before.




CHAPTER XXII

THE MYSTERY GOES ON


When nightfall came and Pepper still remained a prisoner, both Jack and
Andy commenced to worry about their chum.

"It's a shame to keep him in that cold room," said the young major.

"Wonder if we can get him out on the sly?" returned the acrobatic youth.
"I'd be willing to run quite a risk to set him free, so he could sleep
in his own bed to-night."

"Let us sneak down after dark and see what we can do," suggested Jack.

Of course the fact that Pepper was a prisoner was known throughout the
whole school. Many who had laughed over the teeth affair thought it too
bad that The Imp should be locked up in a cold room. But others,
including Reff Ritter and Gus Coulter, said it served him right.

"He was too fresh," growled Coulter.

"Let him stay there a week; it will do him good," added Ritter.

"You leave things to old Crabtree," said Dan Baxter. "He knows how to
put the screws on a cadet."

"Right you are," came from Ritter.

The one boy who had little to say was Mumps. The sneak was scared almost
to death, feeling certain that Pepper would square up with him as soon
as liberated. The others did not know how Mumps had acted, or Jack and
Andy might have given the sneak a sound thrashing.

The young major and the acrobatic youth talked the affair over, and were
joined in the discussion by Bert Field, Dave Kearney, and one or two
others. They were on the point of going below, when Fred Century came
in.

"Crabtree is certainly going to make sure of keeping Pepper a prisoner,"
said he.

"How do you know that?" asked Jack, quickly.

"He has placed a guard in front of the door, so nobody can open it."

"A guard?"

"Yes."

"Who?"

"Two cadets--Crane and Barlow. They are to remain on guard three hours
and then some others are to relieve them."

"Then we can't do a thing!" groaned Andy. "We might bribe Crane, but
nobody could bribe Barlow. He's a sticker on everything he does."

Jack went below and found that the report about the guard was true. The
cadets were on duty, and he was not allowed to even speak to Pepper.

"It's too bad," he said, on returning to the dormitory. "I guess poor
Pepper will have to remain where he is."

"We might protest to Mr. Strong?" suggested Bart Conners.

"It wouldn't do any good. Crabtree is in charge during Captain Putnam's
absence."

One after another the cadets went to bed. Jack was the last to retire,
and it was a long while before he dropped off to sleep. Then he dreamed
about Pepper up in the far North, sitting on a cake of ice in a
bathing-suit, which showed how much he had the welfare of his chum at
heart.

In the morning Josiah Crabtree went below early. He expected Captain
Putnam back by noon and wished to be prepared to make a proper report to
the head of the school on his arrival.

He had just seated himself at the desk in the office when there came a
knock on the door.

"Come in!" he said shortly, thinking it might be a servant. The newcomer
was Bart Conners.

"Well, Conners, what is it?" demanded the head teacher.

"I want to report that I was robbed last night," answered the captain of
Company B.

"Robbed!" ejaculated Josiah Crabtree. "Did you say robbed?"

"Yes, sir."

"What of? Where? When?" Josiah Crabtree's manner showed his tremendous
excitement.

"Of a diamond stickpin. I left it in one of my scarfs last night and
this morning it was gone. I've looked all over, but I can't find it."

"How late was it when you retired?"

"About ten o'clock."

"And when did you get up?"

"At the first bell."

"And you noticed it was gone at once?"

"Yes, for I wanted to lock it away in my bureau, as Captain Putnam
warned us to do when the others' things were stolen."

"This is strange. Do you suspect anybody?"

At this question Bart Conners shook his head.

"Very well, I will look into the matter immediately after breakfast."

Scarcely had Josiah Crabtree spoken when Dan Baxter appeared at the
door.

"I want to tell you something!" he said sourly. "I want somebody locked
up."

"Locked up?" queried the startled teacher. "What is wrong?" And as he
asked the question Bart Conners looked on with interest.

"I'll tell you!" burst out Dan Baxter. "Last night I went to bed with
eleven dollars in my vest-pocket. This morning every cent of the money
is gone! I want it back! If I don't get it back Captain Putnam has got
to stand the loss, for I won't." And the bully looked more sour than
ever.

"You robbed, too!" cried Josiah Crabtree, faintly. "Will it ever stop?
What is the school coming to?"

"Have you any idea who took the money, Dan?" asked Bart Conners.

"No. I was dead tired and slept like a dog. But I know I had the eleven
dollars when I went to bed, and now it's gone."

"So is my diamond stickpin," and the captain of Company B gave the
particulars.

"Humph!" muttered the bully. "I heard of those other robberies, but I
didn't think I'd get touched as quick as this. If it keeps on the whole
school will be cleaned out."

"Yes, and Captain Putnam will be ruined," added Bart, gravely.

"I will see you two cadets later," said Josiah Crabtree, and shut the
office desk with a bang. He hurried away, leaving Bart and Dan Baxter
to console themselves as best they could.

Josiah Crabtree was thinking of Pepper. He had accused The Imp only the
day before of these crimes, and here the thefts were continuing while
Pepper was a close prisoner.

"Perhaps he got out during the night," he muttered. "I must make sure of
it." For, to be fair to the dictatorial teacher, he really thought
Pepper might be the guilty party.

He questioned the cadets who had been on guard during the night. One and
all declared that Pepper had remained a prisoner all night and was still
in the cell-like room. Then he spoke to The Imp himself.

"Did you go out last night?" he asked.

"How could I?" asked Pepper.

"Answer my question, Ditmore."

"No, I didn't go out. I have been here ever since you brought me in
yesterday."

Teacher and cadet looked sharply at each other, and there was a silence
that could be felt. From one of the guards Pepper had learned how Bart
and Dan Baxter had been robbed.

"You know I didn't go out," went on Pepper. "You know that I am not
guilty of the crimes that have been committed in this school. As soon
as Captain Putnam returns I want to see him, so he can hear my side of
the story."

At these words Josiah Crabtree winced. He felt that Captain Putnam might
not agree with him concerning the treatment given to Pepper, and that
Pepper might get him into "hot water." Even George Strong had intimated
this.

"Ditmore," he said, slowly and mildly, "I--er--I feel that perhaps I
have been a bit harsh with you. Your trick upset me very much; such a
trick would upset anybody. If I--er--accused you falsely I am sorry for
it. Supposing I let you go, and supposing we drop the whole matter?"

"I am willing to drop the matter, providing you will retract what you
said about my being connected with these--er--these other things,"
answered Pepper, slowly.

"Well, I--I must have been mistaken. I didn't say you were guilty. I
only said it looked suspicious--the way you prowled around, and the way
you got into my room. But if you are willing we'll drop the entire
matter, and you can go to your room and get ready for breakfast."

Pepper thought rapidly. He was angry over being accused of the crimes,
yet he knew he had gone too far in his joke at Josiah Crabtree's
expense.

"All right, sir; we'll drop the matter, Mr. Crabtree," he said.
"Good-morning," and a moment later he quitted his prison and was on his
way to his dormitory.

The cadets had much to talk about that day--the sudden liberation of
Pepper, and the losses Bart Conners and Dan Baxter had suffered. At noon
Captain Putnam came back, and he had the captain of Company B and Dan
Baxter in his office for the best part of an hour. But nothing came of
the conference, excepting that the owner of the Hall said he would pay
all losses and gave Baxter his eleven dollars on the spot. Then he had a
long conference with the new man of all work, who was really a detective
in disguise. But that individual was as much in the dark as anybody. He
had seen nobody prowling around during the night.

"We must get at the bottom of this affair," said Captain Putnam to
George Strong. "If we do not, the school will surely be ruined." He was
told about the affair of the teeth, but paid little attention, knowing
that Josiah Crabtree could be left to manage his own differences with
the students.

Pepper had dropped the matter so far as it concerned Josiah Crabtree,
but he did not drop it so far as it concerned Mumps. He watched the
sneak that day and the next, and managed at last to catch Mumps at the
boathouse.

"Now, I am going to give you the thrashing you deserve!" cried The Imp,
and caught the sneak by the collar.

"Lemme go!" shrieked Mumps. "Lemme go, or I'll tell Captain Putnam on
you!"

"No, you won't!" answered Pepper. "If you do, I'll promise you another
licking at the first chance I get!"

And then and there he boxed the sneak's ears and then threw him down in
the snow, washing his face and shoving a lot of the snow down inside the
lad's shirt. Mumps yelled like a wild Indian, but Pepper did not let up
until he felt that he had given the sneak all he deserved.

"You say a word and I'll give you a double dose the next time!" warned
Pepper. And this so scared Mumps he never once opened his mouth about
the affair.




CHAPTER XXIII

AN ELECTION OF OFFICERS


"Election of officers to-morrow!"

"As if every cadet at the school didn't know it, Pepper."

"Well, Andy, have you made up your mind how you are going to vote?"

"Sure I have," replied the acrobatic youth. "I am going to vote for Bart
Conners for major, since Jack don't want to run again."

"That's the way I am going to vote, too."

"How about the two captains?" asked Joe Nelson.

"Well, I think I'll vote for Dave Kearney for one," answered Pepper. "I
am not so sure about the other."

"What's the matter with Harry Blossom?" asked Bert Field. "He seems to
be a nice sort."

"He is."

"I understand Reff Ritter wants to be a captain," put in Stuffer.

"Sure, an' he'd be afther wantin' to be major, only he ain't popular
enough," came from Emerald.

"Coulter is out for a captaincy, too," said Jack, who had come up during
the talk.

"Do you think either of them will be elected?" asked Andy.

"Not if I can prevent it," replied the young major. "Neither of them
deserves any office."

"I understand Dan Baxter wants to be major," said Stuffer. "Talk about
gall! What has he ever done for the school? Nothing."

"He won't get the office," said Jack.

"Is Bart going to have a walkover?" asked Pepper.

"Hardly. Both Dave Kearney and Harry Blossom will run against him, and
so will Bob Grenwood, and they all have their friends."

"Well, let the best fellows win, say I!" cried Andy, and then he ran
off, to do some fancy "stunts" in the gymnasium.

The excitement attending the disappearance of Bart Conners's stickpin
and Dan Baxter's money had somewhat subsided, and now the cadets could
think of nothing but the coming election.

"How many cadets are there to vote?" asked Pepper, as he and Jack walked
away to the river to skate.

"Eighty-three."

"Then it will take forty-two votes to elect anybody."

"That's it."

"Well, I hope Bart gets the forty-two votes."

"I have been doing a little figuring, and I think he can count on at
least thirty-one votes. But I am not so sure of the other eleven."

The election of officers was made the occasion of a holiday at Putnam
Hall. Immediately after breakfast, the battalion was formed and marched
around the campus and then to the gymnasium. Here Captain Putnam made a
little speech, in which he announced that the balloting for a major
would be immediately followed by the balloting for one captain and then
the other, and then for the lieutenants.

"It is now nine-thirty," concluded Captain Putnam. "Balloting for a new
major will take place promptly at ten o'clock."

"Captain Putnam, may I say a word?" asked Major Jack, saluting with his
sword.

"Certainly, Major Ruddy."

"Fellow cadets," began Jack, in a clear, steady voice. "All I wish to
say is this: As major of the Putnam Hall Battalion I have enjoyed myself
very much, and I trust my successor, whoever he may be, will have as
good a time. I understand that some of you want to vote for me again.
Let me say that I am not a candidate, and will not accept the office
even if elected. I expect to leave this institution next June, and in
the meantime hope to devote my time mostly to my studies. I thank you
for your attention."

"Hurrah!" shouted a number of the cadets.

"Three cheers for Major Ruddy!" shouted Pepper, and they were given with
a will.

"We'll never get a better major!" called out one enthusiastic cadet.

After that there was a great canvassing for votes. Dan Baxter was
unusually active, and Jack and Pepper felt certain that he was trying
one of his old tricks, namely, that of buying votes. Some of the poorer
cadets had very little spending money, and it was a great temptation to
them to have money offered for their ballots. Of course, buying votes
was dishonorable, and Baxter had to work on the sly. Ritter also tried
to buy votes, but soon found out that very few of the cadets would even
listen to him, because of the way he had misled them in the past.

At last came the time to vote, and the ballot-box was placed on a table
in charge of two cadets and George Strong, who had consented to act as
judge of the election.

"This is for a new major only," announced George Strong. "You will step
up and vote as your names are called."

It took but a few minutes to cast the eighty-three ballots. Then the
