fasten the guilt upon you. It looks to me as though we had a common
enemy. Do you recognize either the paper or the writing?"

"No," replied Grace slowly, shaking her head. "Vertical writing all
looks alike. The paper is peculiar. It is note paper, but different from
any I ever saw before. It looks like----"

She stopped suddenly, a shocked look creeping into her eyes.

"What is it, Grace?" said Miss Thompson, who had been closely watching
her.

"I--just--had a queer idea," faltered Grace.

"If you suspect any one, Grace, it is your duty to tell me," said the
principal. "I cannot pass lightly over such a piece of wanton
destruction. To clear up this mystery, should be a matter of vital
interest to you, too, as this letter is really an insinuation against
you."

Grace was silent.

"I am waiting for you, Grace," said the principal. "Will you do as
I wish?"

The tears rushed to Grace's eyes. "Forgive me, Miss Thompson," she said
tremulously, "but I can tell you nothing."

"You are doing wrong, Grace, in withholding your knowledge," said the
older woman rather sternly, "and I am greatly displeased at your
stubbornness. Ordinarily I would not ask you to betray any of your
schoolmates, but in this instance I am justified, and you are making a
serious mistake in sacrificing your duty upon the altar of school-girl
honor."

"I am sorry, Miss Thompson," said Grace, striving to steady her voice.
"I value your good opinion above everything, but I can tell you nothing
you wish to know. Please, please don't ask me."

"Very well," responded the principal in a tone of cold dismissal,
turning to her desk.

With a half-stifled sob, Grace hurried from the room. For the first
time, since entering High School, she had incurred the displeasure of
her beloved principal, and all for the sake of a girl who was unworthy
of the sacrifice. For Grace had recognized the paper. It was precisely
the same style of paper on which Eleanor Savell had declined her
Thanksgiving invitation.




CHAPTER XXI

BREAKERS AHEAD


The dress rehearsal for "As You Like It" was over. It had been well nigh
perfect. The costumes had for the most part been on hand, as the senior
class of five years previous had given the same play and bequeathed
their paraphernalia to those who should come after. Rosalind's costumes
had to be altered to fit Anne, however, on account of her lack of
stature. Also the lines in the text where Rosalind refers to her height
underwent some changes. The final details having been attended to, Miss
Tebbs and Miss Kane found time to congratulate each other on the
smoothness of the production, which bade fair to surpass anything of the
kind ever before given. There was not a weak spot in the cast. Anne's
work had seemed to grow finer with every rehearsal.

She had won the repeated applause of the group of teachers who had been
invited to witness this trial performance. Grace, Nora, Eleanor and
Miriam had ably supported her and there had been tears of proud joy in
Miss Tebbs's eyes as she had watched the clever and spirited acting of
these girls.

"Be sure and put your costumes exactly where they belong," called Miss
Tebbs as the girls filed off the stage into the dressing room after the
final curtain. "Then you will have no trouble to-morrow night. We want
to avoid all eleventh-hour scrambling and exciting costume hunts."

Laughing merrily, the girls began choosing places to hang their costumes
in the big room off the stage where they were to dress. Anne, careful
little soul that she was, piled her paraphernalia neatly in one corner,
and taking a slip of paper from her bag wrote "Rosalind" upon it,
pinning it to her first-act costume.

"The eternal labeler," said Nora, with her ever-ready giggle, as she
watched Anne. "Are you afraid it will run away, little Miss Fussbudget!"

"No; of course not," said Anne, smiling. "I just marked it because----"

"You have the marking habit," finished Jessica. "Come on, girls. Don't
tease Anne. Let her put tags on herself if she wants to. Then a certain
young man who is waiting outside for her will be sure to recognize her.
Has anyone seen that Allison child? It's time she put in an appearance."

"Just listen to Grandmother Bright," teased Anne. "She is hunting her
lost chick, as usual."

With merry laugh and jest the girls prepared for the street. Grace and
her friends were among the first to leave, and hurried to the street,
where the boys awaited them.

"Hurrah for the only original ranters and barnstormers on exhibition in
this country," cried Hippy, waving his hat in the air.

"Cease, Hippopotamus," said Nora. "You are mistaken. We are stars, but
we shall refuse to twinkle in your sky unless you suddenly become more
respectful."

"He doesn't know the definition of the word," said David.

"How cruelly you misjudge me," said Hippy. "I meant no disrespect. It
was a sudden attack of enthusiasm. I get them spasmodically."

"So we have observed," said Nora dryly. "Let's not stand here discussing
you all night. Come on up to my house, and we'll make fudge and have
things to eat."

"I have my car here," said David. "Pile into it and we'll be up there in
a jiffy."

"It's awfully late," demurred Grace. "After ten o'clock."

"Never mind that," said Nora. "Your mother knows you can take care of
yourself. You can 'phone to her from my house."

In another minute the young people had seated themselves in the big car
and were off.

"Did you see Eleanor's runabout standing there?" Nora asked Grace.

"Yes," replied Grace. "I was rather surprised, too. She hasn't used it
much of late."

"How beautiful she looked to-night, didn't she?" interposed Jessica.

"Are you talking of the would-be murderess, who froze us all out
Thanksgiving Day?" asked Hippy. "What is her latest crime?"

Grace felt like saying "Destroying other people's property and getting
innocent folks disliked," but refrained. She had told no one of her
interview with Miss Thompson. Grace knew that the principal was still
displeased with her. She was no longer on the old terms of intimacy with
Miss Thompson. A barrier seemed to have sprung up between them, that
only one thing could remove, but Grace was resolved not to expose
Eleanor--not that she felt that Eleanor did not richly deserve it, but
she knew that it would mean instant expulsion from school. She believed
that Eleanor had acted on the impulse of the moment, and was without
doubt bitterly sorry for it, and she felt that as long as Eleanor had at
last begun to be interested in school, the thing to do was to keep her
there, particularly as Mrs. Gray had recently told her of Miss Nevin's
pleasure at the change that the school had apparently wrought in
Eleanor.

Could Grace have known what Eleanor was engaged in at the moment she
would have felt like exposing her without mercy.

During the first rehearsals Grace, secretly fearing an outbreak on
Eleanor's part, had been on the alert, but as rehearsals progressed and
Eleanor kept strictly to herself, Grace relaxed her vigilance.

Directly after the chums had hurried out of the hall to meet the boys,
Miss Tebbs had decided that opening the dressing room on the other side
of the stage would relieve the congestion and insure a better chance for
all to dress. Calling to the girls who still remained to move their
belongings to that side, Miss Tebbs hurried across the stage to find the
janitor and see that the door was at once unlocked. By the time the door
was opened and the lights turned on the remaining girls flocked in,
their arms piled high with costumes.

Foremost among them was Eleanor. Hastily depositing her own costumes in
one corner of the dressing room, she darted across the stage and into
the room from which she had just moved her effects.

It was empty. She glanced quickly about. Like a flash she gathered up a
pile of costumes marked "Rosalind," covered them with her long fur coat
and ran through the hall and down the steps to where her runabout was
stationed. Crowding them hastily into the bottom of the machine, she
slipped on her coat, made ready her runabout and drove down the street
like the wind, not lessening her speed until she reached the drive at
"Heartsease."

       *       *       *       *       *

The young people passed a merry hour at Nora's, indulging in one of
their old-time frolics, that only lacked Tom Gray's presence to make the
original octette complete.

"We'll be in the front row to-morrow night," said Hippy, as the young
folks trooped out to the car. "I have engaged a beautiful bunch of green
onions from the truck florist, Reddy has put all his money into carrots
of a nice lively color, the exact shade of his hair, while I have
advised Davy here to invest in turnips. They are nice and round and
hard, and will hit the stage with a resounding whack, providing he can
throw straight enough to hit anything. He can carry them in a paper bag
and----"

But before he could say more he was seized by David and Reddy and rushed
unceremoniously into the street, while the girls signified their
approbation by cries of "good enough for him" and "make him promise to
behave to-morrow night."

"I will. I swear it," panted Hippy. "Only don't rush me over the ground
so fast. I might lose my breath and never, never catch it again."

"Oh, let him go," said Nora, who had accompanied them down the walk.
"I'll have a private interview with him to-morrow and that will insure
his good behavior."

"Thank you, angel Nora," replied Hippy gratefully. "You will be spared
any obnoxious vegetables, even though the others may suffer."

"For that you walk," said David, who had dropped Hippy and was engaged
in helping the girls into the machine.

"Never," replied Hippy, making a dive for the automobile. "I shall sit
at the feet of the fair Jessica. Reddy will be so pleased."

"Every one ready?" sang out David, as he took his place at the wheel
after cranking up the machine.

"All ready, let her go," was the chorus, and the machine whizzed down
the street.




CHAPTER XXII

AS YOU LIKE IT


The big dressing rooms on each side of the stage at Assembly Hall were
ablaze with light. There was a hum of girlish voices and gay laughter,
and all the pleasant excitement attending an amateur production
prevailed. The dressing had been going on for the last hour, and now a
goodly company of courtiers and dames stood about waiting while Miss
Tebbs and Miss Kane rapidly "made up their faces" with rouge and powder.
This being done to prevent them from looking too pale when in the white
glare of the footlights.

Miriam Nesbit as the "Duke" looked particularly fine, and the girls
gathered around her with many exclamations of admiration. Nora's roguish
face looked out from her fool's cap in saucy fashion as she flitted
about jingling her bells. Grace made a handsome Orlando, while Jessica
looked an ideal shepherdess.

"Where's Anne?" said Grace as Nora paused in front of her. "I haven't
see her to-night. I suppose she's over in the other dressing room.
Miss Tebbs said that some of the costumes were moved over there after
we left last night. What time is it? I didn't wear my watch to-night
because I didn't want to risk losing it."

"It's almost half past seven," said Jessica. "I asked Miss Tebbs for the
time just a few minutes ago."

"Let's go and find Anne at once, then," said Nora. "It's getting late,
and she surely is dressed by this time. Then we'll look through the hole
in the curtain at the house. People are beginning to arrive."

"Wait a minute," said Jessica. "There's Mabel. Doesn't she look great as
Jaques? Come here, dear," called Jessica.

Mabel Allison joined the three girls, who hurried across the stage to
the other dressing room in search of Anne Pierson.

"Why, I don't see her here," cried Grace, making a quick survey of the
room. "She must be somewhere about, for----"

"There she goes now," exclaimed Nora, who stood in the door, looking out
on the stage, "and she has her hat and coat on. How strange. I wonder if
she knows how late it is?"

Sure enough, Anne was hurrying toward the opposite dressing room.

The three girls made a rush for her.

"Why, Anne," said Grace. "What is the matter? We thought you had dressed
over here and were looking for you."

"Girls," replied Anne, "I've been on a wild-goose chase. I can't stop to
tell you about it now, but you shall hear as soon as I have a chance.
Will you help me with my costume and make-up? I'm awfully late, and
haven't a minute to spare."

"Why of course we will," said Grace. "Give me your hat and coat, dear.
Where did you put your costumes? It won't take you long to dress, for
most of the girls are dressed and over on the other side, so you have
the place to yourself."

"Over in that corner," replied Anne, taking off her collar and
unfastening her white shirt waist. "Don't you remember, I labeled them
and you laughed at me for doing so?"

"Of course we do," said Nora, making a dive for the corner where Anne
had piled her costumes the previous night. "They're not here," she
announced after a brief but thorough search. "Miss Tebbs must have had
them moved to the other room. She opened it last night after we left.
Grace, you help Anne, and Jessica and Mabel and I will run across and
look for them." With these words, Nora was off, the other two girls at
her heels.

"Tell me what kept you, Anne," said Grace, as the latter began arranging
her hair for the first act.

"Grace," said Anne rather tremulously, "I won't wait until the others
come back to tell you why I came so late. Just after I had finished my
supper and was putting on my wraps a boy came to the door with this
note." Anne went over to where her coat hung and took out an envelope.
Drawing a note from it, she silently handed it to Grace, who read:

          "MY DEAR ANNE:

          "Will you come up to my house before going to the
          hall? I wish to give you something to wear in the
          play.

                             "Yours affectionately,
                                          "ROSE R. GRAY."

"Why, how unlike Mrs. Gray to send for you at the eleventh hour," said
Grace in a puzzled tone. "No wonder you were late. What did she give
you?"

"Nothing," replied Anne. "It was a trick. She never wrote the note,
although the writing looks like hers, and so does the paper. She was
very indignant over it and sent me back in the carriage, telling the
coachman to return for her, for of course she will be here to-night.
I would have arrived much later if I had been obliged to walk. I ran
almost all the way up there. You know Chapel Hill is quite a distance
from my house."

"I should say so," replied Grace. "Who could have been so mean? Anne,
why do you suppose----" Grace stopped suddenly and stared at Anne. "Anne
do you think that Eleanor could have written it?" she said slowly, as
though reluctant to give voice to her suspicion.

"I am afraid so," replied Anne. "She is the only one who could profit by
my being late. Yet if she did write the note, she should have realized
that going to Mrs. Gray's would scarcely keep me away long enough to
miss my first entrance. You know I don't come on until the second
scene."

"There is something more behind this," said Grace, "and I'm going to
find out, too." She darted to the door and opened it upon Nora and
Jessica, who were on the threshold.

"We can't find them," they cried in alarm, "but we told Miss Tebbs and
she'll be here in a minute."

"We didn't say a word to any one else," said Nora, "because they must be
somewhere about, and there is no use in stirring up a lot of unnecessary
excitement."

"Wise little Nora," said Grace, patting her on the shoulder. "Here comes
Miss Tebbs now." She stepped courteously aside to allow the teacher to
enter the dressing room, then, following her, closed the door.

