being put into requisition, the flame soon leaped up, amid a cry of
astonishment and awe from the women and children. Wood was now laid
on, and soon a great fire was blazing. The men gathered round and
sat down, and the women and children gradually approached, and took
their places behind them.

The evening was cold and, as the natives felt the grateful heat,
fresh exclamations of pleasure broke from them; and gradually a
complete babel of tongues broke out. Then the noise was hushed, and
a silence of expectation and attention reigned, as the lads cut off
slices of the meat and, spitting them on pieces of green wood, held
them over the fire. Tom made signs to the chief and those sitting
round to fetch meat, and follow their example. Some of the Indian
women brought meat, and the men, with sharp stone knives, cut off
pieces and stuck them on green sticks, as they had seen the boys
do. Then very cautiously they approached the fire, shrinking back
and exhibiting signs of alarm at the fierce heat it threw out, as
they approached near to it.

The boys, however, reassured them, and they presently set to work.
When the meat was roasted, it was cut up and distributed in little
bits to the crowd behind, all of whom were eager to taste this
wonderful preparation. It was evident, by the exclamations of
satisfaction, that the new viand was an immense success; and fresh
supplies of meat were soon over the fire.

An incident now occurred which threatened to mar the harmony of the
proceedings. A stick breaking, some of the red-hot embers scattered
round. One rolled close to Ned's leg, and the lad, with a quick
snatch, caught it up and threw it back upon the fire. Seeing this,
a native near grasped a glowing fragment which had fallen near him,
but dropped it with a shriek of astonishment and pain.

All leaped to their feet, as the man danced in his agony. Some ran
away in terror, others instinctively made for their weapons, all
gesticulated and yelled.

Ned at once went to the man and patted him assuringly. Then he got
him to open his hand, which was really severely burned. Then he got
a piece of soft fat and rubbed it gently upon the sore, and then
made signs that he wanted something to bandage it with. A woman
brought some large fresh leaves, which were evidently good for
hurts; and another a soft thong of deer hide. The hand was soon
bandaged up and, although the man must still have been in severe
pain, he again took his seat, this time at a certain distance from
the fire.

This incident greatly increased the awe with which the boys were
viewed, as not only had they the power of producing this new and
astonishing element, but they could, unhurt, take up pieces of wood
turned red by it, which inflicted terrible agony on others.

Before leaving the fire and retiring to their tent, the boys made
signs to the chief that it was necessary that someone should be
appointed to throw on fresh wood, from time to time, to keep the
fire alight. This was hardly needed, as the whole population were
far too excited to think of retiring to bed. After the lads had
left they gathered round the fire, and each took delight in
throwing on pieces of wood, and in watching them consume; and
several times, when they woke during the night, the boys saw, by
the bright light streaming in through the slits in the deerskin,
that the bonfire was never allowed to wane.

In the morning fresh meat was brought to the boys, together with
raw yams and other vegetables. There were now other marvels to be
shown. Ned had learned, when with the negroes, how to cook in
calabashes; and he now got a gourd from the natives, cut it in
half, scooped its contents out, and then filled it with water. From
the stream he then got a number of stones, and put them into the
fire until they became intensely hot. Then with two sticks he raked
them out, and dropped them into the water.

The natives yelled with astonishment as they saw the water fizz and
bubble, as the stones were thrown in. More were added until the
water boiled. Then the yams, cut into pieces, were dropped in, more
hot stones added to keep the water boiling, and when cooked, the
yams were taken out. When sufficiently cooled, the boys distributed
the pieces among the chiefs, and again the signs of satisfaction
showed that cooked vegetables were appreciated. Other yams were
then cut up, and laid among the hot embers to bake.

After this the boys took a few half-burned sticks, carried them to
another spot, added fresh fuel, and made another fire; and then
signed to the natives to do the same. In a short time a dozen fires
were blazing, and the whole population were engaged in grilling
venison, and in boiling and baking yams. The boys were both good
trenchermen, but they were astounded at the quantity of food which
the Patagonians disposed of.

By night time the entire stock of meat in the village was
exhausted, and the chief motioned to the boys that, in the morning,
he should go out with a party to lay in a great stock of venison.
To this they made signs that they would accompany the expedition.

While the feasting had been going on, the lads had wandered away
with two of the Indian bows and arrows. The bows were much shorter
than those to which they were accustomed, and required far less
strength to pull. The wood of which the bows were formed was tough
and good, and as the boys had both the handiness of sailors and,
like all lads of that period, had some knowledge of bow making,
they returned to the camp, and obtained two more of the strongest
bows in the possession of the natives. They then set to work with
their knives and, each taking two bows, cut them up, fitted, and
spliced them together.

The originals were but four feet long, the new ones six. The halves
of one bow formed the two ends, the middle being made of the other
bow, doubled. The pieces were spliced together with deer sinews;
and when, after some hours' work, they were completed, the boys
found that they were as strong and tough as the best of their
home-made bows, and required all their strength to draw them to the
ear.

The arrows were now too short, but upon making signs to the natives
that they wanted wood for arrows, a stock of dried wood, carefully
prepared, was at once given them, and of these they made some
arrows of the regulation cloth-yard length. The feathers, fastened
on with the sinews of some small animals, were stripped from the
Indian arrows and fastened on, as were the sharp-pointed stones
which formed their heads; and on making a trial, the lads found
that they could shoot as far and as straight as with their own
familiar weapons.

"We can reckon on killing a stag, if he will stand still, at a
hundred and fifty yards," Ned said, "or running, at a hundred.
Don't you think so?"

"Well, six times out of seven we ought to, at any rate," Tom
replied; "or our Devonshire archership has deserted us."

When they heard, therefore, that there was to be a hunt upon the
following day, they felt that they had another surprise for the
natives, whose short bows and arrows were of little use at a
greater distance than fifty yards, although up to that distance
deadly weapons in their hands.




Chapter 12: Across a Continent.



The work upon which the boys were engaged passed unnoticed by the
Indians, who were too much absorbed by the enjoyment of the new
discovery to pay any attention to other matters. The bows and
arrows had been given to them, as anything else in camp for which
they had a fancy would have been given; but beyond that, none had
observed what was being done.

There were, then, many exclamations of astonishment among them,
when Ned and Tom issued from their hut in the morning to join the
hunting party, carrying their new weapons. The bows were, of
course, unstrung; and Ned handed his to the chief, who viewed it
with great curiosity. It was passed from hand to hand, and then
returned to the chief. One or two of the Indians said something,
and the chief tried its strength. He shook his head. Ned signed to
him to string it, but the chief tried in vain, as did several of
the strongest of the Indians. Indeed, no man, however powerful,
could string an old English bow, unless trained to its use.

When the Indians had given up the attempt as hopeless, the two lads
strung their bows without the slightest difficulty, to the intense
surprise of the natives. These again took the bows, but failed to
bend them even to the length of their own little arrows. The lads
then took out their newly-made shafts, and took aim at a young
tree, of a foot diameter, standing at about two hundred yards
distance; and both sent their arrows quivering into the trunk.

The Indians gave a perfect yell of astonishment.

"It is not much of a mark," Tom said; "Hugh Willoughby, of our
village, could hit a white glove at that distance every time; and
the fingers of a glove five times out of six. It is the length of
the shots, not the accuracy, which astounds these fellows. However,
it is good enough to keep up our superiority."

The party now started on their hunt. There was but little
difficulty in finding game, for numerous herds could be seen
grazing. The task was to get within shot. The boys watched
anxiously, to see the course which the Indians would adopt.

First ascertaining which way the wind was blowing, the chief, with
ten others, accompanied by the boys, set off to make a circuit, so
as to approach one of the herds upwind. When they had reached the
point desired, all went down upon their bellies and crawled like
snakes, until they reached a clump of low bushes, a quarter of a
mile from the herd. Then they lay quiet, waiting for their
comrades, whose turn it now was to act.

These, also making a circuit, but in the opposite direction, placed
themselves half a mile to windward of the deer, in a long line.
Then they advanced toward the herd, making no effort to conceal
themselves.

Scarcely had they risen to their feet than the herd winded them.
For a minute or two they stood motionless, watching the distant
figures; and then, turning, bounded away. The chief uttered an
exclamation of disgust, for it was evident at once that, from the
direction that they were taking, the herd would not pass, as he
hoped, close by the bushes.

The lads, however, were well satisfied; for the line would take
them within a hundred and fifty yards. As, in a closely-packed
body, they came along, Ned and Tom rose suddenly to their feet,
drew their bows to their ears, and launched their arrows. Each had,
according to the custom of English archers, stuck two arrows into
the ground by the spot where they would stand up; and these they
also discharged, before the herd was out of shot. With fair
shooting it was impossible to miss so large a mark, and five of the
little deer rolled over, pierced through by the arrows; while
another, hit in a less vital spot, carried off the weapon.

The Indians raised a cry of joy and surprise, at shooting which to
them appeared marvellous, indeed; and when the others came up
showed them, with marks of astonishment, the distance at which the
animals had fallen from the bush from which the arrows had been
aimed.

Two more beats were made. These were more successful, the herds
passing close to the places of concealment, and upon each occasion
ten stags fell. This was considered sufficient.

The animals were not all of one kind. One herd was composed of deer
far larger than, and as heavy as good-sized sheep; while the others
were considerably smaller, and the party had as much as their
united efforts--except those of Ned and Tom, whose offer to assist
was peremptorily declined--could drag back to the village, where
the feasting was at once renewed.

The lads, when the natives had skinned the deer, took some of the
smaller and finer skins, intending to dry them; but the natives,
seeing their intention, brought them a number of the same kind,
which were already well cured and beautifully supple. Fashioning
needles from small pieces of bone, with sinews for thread, and
using their own tattered clothes as patterns, the two lads set to
work; and by the following evening had manufactured doublets and
trunks of deerskin, which were a vast improvement upon their late
ragged apparel; and had, at a short distance, the appearance of
being made of a bright brownish-yellow cloth.

By this time the Indians had become quite accustomed to them. The
men, and sometimes even the women, came to the hut and sat down and
tried to talk with them. The boys did their best to learn, asking
the name of every article, and repeating it until they had
thoroughly learned it, the Indians applauding like children when
they attained the right pronunciation.

The next morning they saw a young Indian starting alone, with his
bow and arrow. Anxious to see how he was going to proceed, by
himself, the boys asked if they might accompany him. He assented,
and together they started off.

After an hour's walking, they arrived at an eminence from which an
extensive view could be obtained. Here their companion motioned to
them to lie down and watch his proceedings. They did so, and saw
him make a wide circuit, and work up towards the herd of deer.

"They will be off long before he can get within bow shot," Tom
said. "Look, they are getting fidgety already. They scent danger,
and he is four hundred yards away. They will be off in a minute.

"Look, what on earth is he doing?"

The Indian was lying on his back, his body being almost concealed
by the grass, which was a foot high. In the air he waved his legs
to and fro, twisting and twining them. The boys could not help
laughing at the curious appearance of the two black objects waving
slowly about. The herd of deer stood staring stupidly at the
spectacle. Then, as if moved by a common impulse of curiosity, they
began slowly to approach, in order to investigate more closely this
singular phenomenon. Frequently they stopped, but only to continue
their advance, which was made with a sort of circling movement, as
if to see the object from all sides.

Nearer and nearer they approached, until the leaders were not more
than fifty yards away; when the native leaped to his feet, and
discharged his arrows with such rapidity, and accuracy, that two of
the animals fell before they could dart away out of range.

The lads soon joined the native, and expressed their approval of
his skill. Then, while he threw one carcass over his shoulder, they
divided the weight of the other between them, and so accompanied
him into camp.

The next day Ned and Tom, walking to an eminence near the camp, saw
in the distance some ostriches feeding. Returning to the huts, they
found the young hunter whom they had accompanied on the preceding
day, and beckoned to him to accompany them. When they reached the
spot from which the ostriches were visible, they motioned to him to
come out and shoot them. He at once nodded.

As they were about to follow him back to camp, for their bows and
arrows, he shook his head and signed to them to stay where they
were; and going off by himself, returned with his bow and arrow
and, to the surprise of the boys, the skin of an ostrich.

To show the lads what he intended to do, he put on the skin,
sticking one arm up the long neck, his black legs alone showing. He
now imitated the motions of the bird, now stalking along, now
picking up bits of grass, and this with such an admirable imitation
of nature that Ned and Tom shouted with laughter.

The three then set off together, taking a line which hid them from
the view of the ostriches. The Indian at last led them to a small
eminence, and signed to them to ascend this, and there to lie down
and watch the result. On arriving at their post, they found
themselves about a quarter of a mile from the group of great birds.

It seemed a long time before they could see any signs of the
native, who had to make a long detour so as to approach the birds
upwind. About a hundred and fifty yards from the spot where they
were feeding was a clump of bushes, and presently the lads suddenly
beheld an ostrich, feeding quietly beside this clump.

"There was no bird near those bushes two minutes ago," Tom said.
"It must be the Indian."

Very quietly, and by degrees, the ostrich approached the group.
When within four yards of them the ostrich, as if by magic,
vanished; and an Indian stood in his place. In another moment his
bow twanged, and the ostrich next to him fell over, pierced through
with an arrow; while the rest of the flock scattered over the
plain, at an immense speed.

Ned and Tom now rose to their feet and ran down the slope to the
Indian, who was standing by the dead bird. He pulled out the tail
feathers and handed them to them; cut off the head and legs; opened
and cleaned the body; and then, putting it on his shoulder, started
again for the camp.

For another week they remained in the Indian village, and in that
time picked up a good many native words. They then determined that
they must be starting on their westward journey. They therefore
called upon the chief and explained to him by signs, eked out with
a few words, that they must leave him and go towards the setting
sun.

The grief of the chief was great, as was that of the tribe, when he
communicated the tidings to them. There was great talking among the
groups round the fire that night, and Ned saw that some question
was being debated, at great length. The next morning the chief and
several of the leading men came into their hut, and the chief made
a speech, accompanied with great gesticulation. The lads gathered
that he was imploring them not to leave them, and pointing out that
there would be hostile Indians on the road, who would attack them.
Then the chief led them to the fires, and signed that if they went
out the tribe would be cold again, and would be unable to cook
their food.

Already, indeed, on one occasion after a great feast, the tribe had
slept so soundly that all the fires were out before morning, and
Ned had been obliged to have recourse to his flint and steel. After
this, two fires had been kept constantly burning, night and day.
Others were lighted for cooking, but these were tended constantly,
and Ned saw that there was little chance of their ever going out
together, so long as the tribe remained in the village.

Now, however, he proceeded to show them how to carry fire with
them. Taking one blazing stick, and starting out as for a journey,
he showed that the fire gradually went out. Then he returned to the
fire and took two large pieces, and started, keeping them so
crossed that the parts on fire were always in contact. In this way,
as he showed them, fire could be kept in for a very long time; and
that, if two brands were taken from each fire, there would be
little difficulty in keeping fire perpetually.

Finally he showed them how, in case of losing fire in spite of all
these precautions, it could be recovered by means of friction. He
took two pieces of dried wood; one being very hard grained, and the
other much softer. Of the former he cut a stick of about a foot
long and an inch round, and pointed at both ends. In the other he
made a small hole. Then he unstrung one end of a bowstring, twisted
it once round the stick, and strung it again. Then he put one point
of the stick in the hole in the other piece of wood, which he laid
upon the ground. Round the hole he crumbled into dust some dry
fungus. On the upper end of the short stick he placed a flat stone,
which he bade one of the natives press with moderate force.

Now, working the bow rapidly backwards and forwards, the stick was
spun round and round like a drill. The Indians, who were unable to
make out what Ned was doing, watched these proceedings with great
attention. When a little smoke began to curl up from the heated
wood they understood at once, and shouted with wonder. In a few
minutes sparks began to fly from the stick, and as these fell on
the dried fungus they rapidly spread. Tom knelt down and blew
gently upon them, adding a few dried leaves, and in another minute
a bright flame sprang up.

The natives were delighted. They had now means of making fire, and
could in future enjoy warmth and cooked food, and their gratitude
to the lads was unbounded. Hitherto they had feared that, when
these strange white beings departed, they would lose their fires,
and return to their former cheerless existence, when the long
winter evenings had to be spent in cold and darkness. That evening
the chief intimated to his visitors that he, and a portion of the
men of the tribe, would accompany them for some distance; the women
remaining behind, with the rest of the fighting men as their guard.
This decision pleased the young men much, for they could not hope
to go far without meeting other tribes; and although, as had been
found in the present instance, the gift of fire would be sure to
propitiate the Indians; it was probable that they might be attacked
