too had become a hunter of skill, and hence what he said might have some
merit.

"It seems strange that Henry Ware should come so suddenly when he might
have come before," he remarked with apparent carelessness to Lucy Upton.

She looked at him with sharp interest. The same thought had entered her
mind, but she did not like to hear Braxton Wyatt utter it.

"At all events he is about to save us from a great danger," she said.

Wyatt laughed and his thin long features contracted in an ugly manner.

"It is a tale to impress us and perhaps to cover up something else," he
replied. "There is not an Indian within two hundred miles of us. I know,
I have been through the woods and there is no sign."

She turned away, liking his words little and his manner less. She
stopped presently by a corner of one of the houses on a slight elevation
whence she could see a long distance beyond the palisade. So far as
seeming went Braxton Wyatt was certainly right. The spring day was full
of golden sunshine, the fresh new green of the forest was unsullied, and
it was hard to conjure up even the shadow of danger.

Wyatt might have ground for his suspicion, but why should Henry Ware
sound a false alarm? The words "perhaps to cover up something else"
returned to her mind, but she dismissed them angrily.

She went to the Ware house and rejoiced with Mrs. Ware, to whom a son
had come back from the dead, and in whose joy there was no flaw.
According to her mother's heart a wonder had been performed, and it had
been done for her special benefit.

The village was in full posture of defense, all were inside the walls
and every man had gone to his post. They now awaited the attack, and yet
there was some distrust of Henry Ware. Braxton Wyatt, a clever youth,
had insidiously sowed the seeds of suspicion, and already there was a
crop of unbelief. By indirection he had called attention to the strange
appearance of the returned wanderer, the Indianlike air that he had
acquired, his new ways unlike their own, and his indifference to many
things that he had formerly liked. He noticed the change in Henry Ware's
nature and he brought it also to the notice of others.

It seemed as the brilliant day passed peacefully that Wyatt was right
and Henry, for some hidden purpose of his own, perhaps to hide the
secret of his long absence, had brought to them this sounding alarm.
There was the sun beyond the zenith in the heavens, the shadows of
afternoon were falling, and the yellow light over the forest softened
into gray, but no sign of an enemy appeared.

If Henry Ware saw the discontent he did not show his knowledge; the
light of the expected conflict was still in his eyes and his thoughts
were chiefly of the great event to come; yet in an interval of waiting
he went back to the house and told his mother of much that had befallen
him during his long absence; he sought to persuade himself now that he
could not have escaped earlier, and perhaps without intending it he
created in her mind the impression that he sought to engrave upon his
own; so she was fully satisfied, thankful for the great mercy of his
return that had been given to her.

"Now mother!" he said at last, "I am going outside."

"Outside!" she cried aghast, "but you are safe here! Why not stay?"

He smiled and shook his head.

"I shall be safe out there, too," he said, "and it is best for us all
that I go. Oh, I know the wilderness, mother, as you know the rooms of
this house!"

He kissed her quickly and turned away. John Ware, who stood by, said
nothing. He felt a certain fear of his son and did not yet know how to
command him.

As Henry passed from the house into the little square Lucy Upton
overtook him.

"Where are you going?" she asked.

"I think I can be of more help out there than in here," he replied
pointing toward the forest.

"It would be better for you to stay," she said.

"I shall be in no danger."

"It is not that; do you know what some of them here are saying of
you--that you are estranged from us, that there is some purpose in this,
that no attack is coming! Your going now will confirm them in the
belief."

His dark eyes flashed with a fierceness that startled her, and his whole
frame seemed to draw up as if he were about to spring. But the emotion
passed in a moment, and his face was a brown mask, saying nothing. He
seemed indifferent to the public opinion of his little world.

"I am needed out there," he said, pointing again toward the dark line of
the forest, "and I shall go. Whether I tell the truth or not will soon
be known; they will have to wait only a little. But you believe me now,
don't you?"

She looked deep into his calm eyes, and she read there only truth. But
she knew even before she looked that Henry Ware was not one who would
ever be guilty of falsehood or treachery.

"Oh yes I know it," she replied, "but I wish others to know it as well."

"They will," he said, and then taking her hand in his for one brief
moment he was gone. His disappearance was so sudden and soundless that
he seemed to her to melt away from her sight like a mist before the
wind. She did not even know how he had passed through the palisade, but
he was certainly outside and away. There was something weird about it
and she felt a little fear, as if an event almost supernatural had
occurred.

The sudden departure of Henry Ware to the forest started the slanderous
tongues to wagging again, and they said it was a trap of some kind,
though no one could tell how. A sly report was started that he had
become that worst of all creatures in his time, a renegade, a white man
who allied himself with the red to make war upon his own people. It came
to the ears of Paul Cotter, and the heart of the loyal youth grew hot
within him. Paul was not fond of war and strife, but he had an abounding
courage, and he and Henry Ware had been through danger together.

"He is changed, I will admit," he said, "but if he says we are going to
be attacked, we shall be. I wish that all of us were as true as he."

He touched his gun lock in a threatening manner, and Braxton Wyatt and
the others who stood by said no more in his presence. Yet the course of
the day was against Henry's assertion. The afternoon waned, the sun, a
ball of copper, swung down into the west, long shadows fell and nothing
happened.

The people moved and talked impatiently inside their wooden walls. They
spoke of going about their regular pursuits, there was work that could
be done on the outside in the twilight, and enough time had been lost
already through a false alarm. But some of the older men, with cautious
blood, advised them to wait and their counsel was taken. Night came,
thick and black, and to the more timid full of omens and presages.

The forest sank away in the darkness, nothing was visible fifty yards
from the palisade and in the log houses few lights burned. The little
colony, but a pin point of light, was alone in the vast and circling
wilderness. One of the greatest tests of courage to which the human race
has ever been subjected was at hand. In all directions the forest curved
away, hundreds of miles. It would be a journey of days to find any other
of their own kind, they were hemmed in everywhere by silence and
loneliness, whatever happened they must depend upon themselves, because
there was none to bring help. They might perish, one and all, and the
rest of the world not hear of it until long afterwards.

A moaning wind came up and sighed over the log houses, the younger
children--and few were too young not to guess what was expected--fell
asleep at last, but the older, those who had reached their thinking
years could not find such solace. In this black darkness their fears
became real; there was no false alarm, the forest around them hid their
enemy, but only for the time.

There was little noise in the station. By the low fires in the houses
the women steadily molded bullets, and seldom spoke to each other, as
they poured the melted lead into the molds. By the walls the men too,
rifle in hand, were silent, as they sought with intent eyes to mark what
was passing in the forest.

Lucy Upton was molding bullets in her father's house and they were
melting the lead at a bed of coals in the wide fireplace. None was
steadier of hand or more expert than she. Her face was flushed as she
bent over the fire and her sleeves were rolled back, showing her strong
white arms. Her lips were compressed, but as the bullets shining like
silver dropped from the mold they would part now and then in a slight
smile. She too had in her the spirit of warlike ancestors and it was
aroused now. Girl, though she was, she felt in her own veins a little of
the thrill of coming conflict.

But her thoughts were not wholly of attack and defense; they followed as
well him who had come back so suddenly and who was now gone again into
the wilderness from which he had emerged. His appearance and manner had
impressed her deeply. She wished to hear more from him of the strange
wild life that he had led; she too felt, although in a more modified
form, the spell of the primeval.

Her task finished she went to the door, and then drawn by curiosity she
continued until her walk brought her near the palisade where she watched
the men on guard, their dusky figures touched by the wan light that came
from the slender crescent of a moon, and seeming altogether weird and
unreal. Paul Cotter in one of his errands found her there.

"You had better go back," he said. "We may be attacked at any time, and
a bullet or arrow could reach you here."

"So you believe with me that an attack will be made as he said!"

"Of course I do," replied Paul with emphasis. "Don't I know Henry Ware?
Weren't he and I lost together? Wasn't he the truest of comrades?"

Several men, talking in low tones, approached them. Braxton Wyatt was
with them and Lucy saw at once that it was a group of malcontents.

"It is nothing," said Seth Lowndes, a loud, arrogant man, the boaster of
the colony. "There are no Indians in these parts and I'm going out there
to prove it."

He stood in the center of a ray of moonlight, as he spoke, and it
lighted up his red sneering face. Lucy and Paul could see him plainly
and each felt a little shiver of aversion. But neither said anything
and, in truth, standing in the dark by themselves they were not noticed
by the others.

"I'm going outside," repeated Lowndes in a yet more noisy tone, "and if
I run across anything more than a deer I'll be mighty badly fooled!"

One or two uttered words of protest, but it seemed to Lucy that Braxton
Wyatt incited him to go on, joining him in words of contempt for the
alleged danger.

Lowndes reached the palisade and climbed upon it by means of the cross
pieces binding it together, and then he stood upon the topmost bar,
where his head and all his body, above the knees, rose clear of the
bulwark. He was outlined there sharply, a stout, puffy man, his face
redder than ever from the effect of climbing, and his eyes gleaming
triumphantly as, from his high perch, he looked toward the forest.

"I tell you there is not--" But the words were cut short, the gleam died
from his eyes, the red fled from his face, and he whitened suddenly with
terror. From the forest came a sharp report, echoing in the still night,
and the puffy man, throwing up his arms, fell from the palisade back
into the inclosure, dead before he touched the ground.

A fierce yell, the long ominous note of the war whoop burst from the
forest, and its sound, so full of menace and fury, was more terrible
than that of the rifle. Then came other shots, a rapid pattering volley,
and bullets struck with a low sighing sound against the upper walls of
the blockhouse. The long quavering cry, the Indian yell rose and died
again and in the black forest, still for aught else, it was weird and
unearthly.

Lucy stood like stone when the lifeless body of the boaster fell almost
at her feet, and all the color was gone from her face. The terrible cry
of the savages without was ringing in her ears, and it seemed to her,
for a few moments, that she could not move. But Paul grasped her by the
arm and drew her back.

"Go into your house!" he cried. "A bullet might reach you here!"

Obedient to his duty he hastened to the palisade to bear a valiant hand
in the defense, and she, retreating a little, remained in the shadow of
the houses that she might see how events would go. After the first shock
of horror and surprise she was not greatly afraid, and she was conscious
too of a certain feeling of relief. Henry Ware had told the truth, he
knew of what he spoke when he brought his warning, and he had greatly
served his own.




CHAPTER XV

THE SIEGE


It was not Lucy Upton alone who felt relief when the attack upon the
stockade came, hideous and terrifying though it might be; the suspense
so destructive of nerves and so hard to endure was at an end, and the
men rushed gladly to meet the attack, while the women with almost equal
joy reloaded empty rifles with the precious powder made from the cave
dust and passed them to the brave defenders. The children, too small to
take a part, cowered in the houses and listened to the sounds of battle,
the lashing of the rifle fire, the fierce cry of the savages in the
forest, and the answering defiance of the white men. Amid such scenes a
great state was founded and who can wonder that its defenders learned to
prize bravery first of all things?

The attack was in accordance with the savage nature, a dash, irregular
volleys, shots from ambush, an endeavor to pick off the settlers,
whenever a head was shown, but no direct attempt to storm the palisade,
for which the Indian is unfitted. A bullet would not reach from the
forest, but from little hillocks and slight ridges in the open where a
brown breast was pressed close to the earth came the flash of rifles,
some hidden by the dusk, but the flame showing in little points of fire
that quickly went out. The light of the moon failed somewhat, and the
savages in ambush were able to come nearer, but now and then a
sharpshooter behind the wall, firing at the flash of the concealed
rifle, would hear an answering death cry.

Lucy Upton behind the barricade with other girls and women was reloading
rifles and passing them to her father and Paul Cotter who stood in a
little wooden embrasure like a sally port. For a time the fire of battle
burned as fiercely in her veins as in those of any man, but after a
while she began to wonder what had become of Henry Ware, and presently
from some who passed she heard comments upon him again; they found fault
with his absence; he should have been there to take a part in the
defense, and while she admitted that their criticisms bore the color of
truth, she yet believed him to be away for some good purpose.

For two hours the wild battle in the dark went on, to the chorus of
shouts from white man and red, the savages often coming close to the
walls, and seeking to find a shelter under them in the dark, but always
driven back. Then it ceased so suddenly that the intense silence was
more pregnant with terror than all the noise that had gone before. Paul
Cotter, looking over the palisade, could see nothing. The forest rose up
like a solid dark wall, and in the opening not a blade of grass stirred;
the battle, the savage army, all seemed to have gone like smoke melting
into the air, and Paul was appalled, feeling that a magic hand had
abruptly swept everything out of existence.

"What do you see?" asked Lucy, upon whose ears the silence too was heavy
and painful.

"Nothing but darkness, and what it hides I cannot guess."

A report ran through the village that the savage army, beaten, had gone,
and the women, and the men with little experience, gave it currency, but
the veterans rebuked such premature rejoicing; it was their part, they
said, to watch with more vigilance than ever, and in nowise to relax
their readiness.

Then the long hours began and those who could, slept. Braxton Wyatt and
his friends again impeached the credit of Henry Ware, insinuating with
sly smiles that he must be a renegade, as he had taken no part in the
defense and must now be with his savage friends. To the slur Paul Cotter
fiercely replied that he had warned them of the attack; without him the
station would have been taken by surprise, and that surely proved him to
be no traitor.

The hours between midnight and day not only grew in length, but seemed
to increase in number as well, doubling and tripling, as if they would
never end for the watchers in the station. The men behind the wooden
walls and some of the women, too, intently searched the forest, seeking
to discover movements there, but nothing appeared upon its solid black
screen. Nor did any sound come from it, save the occasional gentle moan
of the wind; there was no crackling of branches, no noise of footsteps,
no rattle of arms, but always the heavy silence which seemed so deadly,
and which, by its monotony, was so painful to their ears.

Lucy Upton went into her father's house, ate a little and then spreading
over herself a buffalo robe tried to sleep. Slumber was long in coming,
for the disturbed nerves refused to settle into peace, and the excited
brain brought back to her eyes distorted and overcolored visions of the
night's events. But youth and weariness had their way and she slept at
last, to find when she awakened that the dawn was coming in at the
window, and the east was ablaze with the splendid red and yellow light
of the sun.

"Are they still there?" was her first question when she went forth from
her father's house, and the reply was uncertain; they might or might not
be there; the leaders had not allowed anyone to go out to see, but the
number who believed that the savages were gone was growing; and also
grew the number who believed that Henry Ware was gone with them.

Even in the brilliant daylight that sharpened and defined everything as
with the etcher's point, they could see nothing save what had been
before the savages came. Their eyes reached now into the forest, but as
far as they ranged it was empty, there was no encampment, not a single
warrior passed through the undergrowth. It seemed that the grumblers
were right when they said the besieging army was gone.

Lucy Upton was walking toward the palisade where she saw Paul Cotter,
when she heard a distant report and Paul's fur cap, pierced by a bullet,
flew from his head to the earth. Paul himself stood in amaze, as if he
did not know what had happened, and he did not move until Lucy shouted
to him to drop to the ground. Then he crawled quickly away from the
exposed spot, although two or three more bullets struck about him.

The station thrilled once more with excitement, but the new danger was
of a kind that they did not know how to meet. It was evident that the
firing came from a high point, one commanding a view inside the walls,
and from marksmen located in such a manner the palisade offered no
shelter. Bullets were pattering among the houses, and in the open spaces
inclosed by the walls, two men were wounded already, and the threat had
become formidable.

Ross and Shif'less Sol, the best of the woodsmen, soon decided that the
shots came from a large tree at the edge of the forest northeast from
the stockade, and they were sure that at least a half-dozen warriors
were lying sheltered among its giant boughs, while they sent searching
bullets into the inclosure. There had been some discussion about the
tree at the time the settlement was built, but expert opinion held that
the Indian weapons could not reach from so great a distance, and as the
task of cutting so huge a trunk when time was needed, seemed too much
they had left it, and now they saw their grievous and perhaps mortal
error.

The side of the palisade facing the tree was untenable so long as the
warriors held their position, and it was even dangerous to pass from one
house to another. The terrors of the night, weighty because unknown,
were gone, but the day had brought with it a more certain menace that
all could see.

The leaders held a conference on the sheltered side of one of the
houses, and their faces and their talk were full of gloom. The
schoolmaster, Ross and Sol were there, and so were John Ware and Lucy's
father. The schoolmaster, by nature and training a man of peace, was
perhaps the most courageous of them all.

"It is evident that those savages have procured in some manner a number
of our long-range Kentucky rifles," he said, "but they are no better
than ours. Nor is it any farther from us to that tree than it is from
that tree to us. Why can't our best marksmen pick them off?"

He looked with inquiry at Ross and Sol, who shook their heads and abated
not a whit of their gloomy looks.

"They are too well sheltered there," replied Ross, "while we would not
be if we should try to answer them. Our side would get killed while they
