Hudson's kind offer; although he had intended to ask Captain Wilson
to make an advance of pay, in order that he might get what was
necessary. He could not, however, have purchased such an outfit as
Mr. Hudson insisted on getting for him; the latter ordering not
only uniforms but suits of plain clothes, together with saddlery,
holsters, a sword, and a brace of excellent double-barrelled
pistols. He did not need to buy a horse, having in his stables one
in every way suitable, being at once quiet and fast--it was,
indeed, one of the most valuable animals in the colony.

"You will have to keep your eyes open, Reuben," he said, as he gave
him the horse, "or he will be stolen from you. These bush ranger
fellows are always well mounted, and anyone at an up-country
station, who has an animal at all out of the ordinary way, has to
keep his stable door locked and sleep with one eye open; and even
then, the chances are strongly in favour of his losing his horse,
before long. These fellows know that their lives often depend upon
the speed of their horse and, naturally, spare no pains to get hold
of a good one.

"Ah, I have a good idea.

"Jim," he shouted to one of the black boys, "come here."

The lad, who was about eighteen years of age, trotted up.

"Jim, this gentleman is going to be a police officer, and he's
going to take the bay with him; now he wants a good servant. Will
you go with him?"

The lad looked longingly at the horse, which he had groomed and was
very fond of; but he shook his head.

"I no leave Massa Hudson."

"Yes, but I wish you to go, Jim. This gentleman is a great friend
of mine, and when bad black man attacked young Missy, he saved her
life. So I want him to be taken good care of; and the horse, too,
and to see no one steals it. So someone I can trust must go with
him. If you don't like him for a master, after you have tried him,
Jim, you can come back to me again. You have been a good boy, and I
have no wish to get rid of you; but this gentleman don't know the
ways of the country, and I want to be sure he has someone with him
he can trust."

The lad looked at Reuben gravely, with his small eyes deeply sunken
under the projecting eyebrows.

"Jim will go," he said. "He look after white man and Tartar, to
please Massa Hudson and young Missy."

"That's right, Jim," his employer said.

"That's a good stroke of business," he went on, as he turned away
with Reuben; "if you treat these black fellows well, and they get
attached to you, they are faithful to death."

"You will see that fellow will never let your horse out of his
sight. If you ride twenty miles across country, there he will be by
your side as you dismount, ready to take it, and looking as fresh
as paint. At night he will sleep in the stable, and will be ready,
at all times and places, to make a fire, and cook a damper or a bit
of meat, if you are lucky enough to have one by you. All the people
about the place would do anything, I believe, for Frances; and the
fact that you have saved her life will bind this boy to you, at
first. Afterwards he will get to care for you, for yourself."

A fortnight later Reuben, in his uniform as an officer of the
constabulary, rode out of Sydney. His baggage had been sent on,
three days before, by a waggon returning up country. Jim trotted,
with an easy stride, behind him. Reuben at first was inclined to
ride slowly, in order to give his attendant time to keep up with
him; but he soon found that, whatever pace he went, the lad kept
the same distance behind, without any apparent exertion; and he
was, therefore, able to choose his own pace, without reference to
Jim's comfort.

Four years passed. Reuben Whitney gave every satisfaction to his
superiors, and was considered a zealous and effective young
officer. So far he had not been placed in a position of great
responsibility; for although for the last two years he had been in
charge of a district, it was not far from Sydney, and his duties
consisted principally in hunting for convicts who had made their
escape, in looking after refractory ticket-of-leave men, and in
ordinary constabulary work. He had learned in that time to become a
first-rate rider, and a good shot with a pistol, accomplishments
which would be of vital service when he was ordered to an
up-country station. For his pistols he had as yet, however, had no
actual use, as neither bush rangers nor natives penetrated so far
into the settlement.

At the end of the four years' service, he received a letter from
Captain Wilson, who had just succeeded to the chief command of the
constabulary, ordering him to hand over charge of the district to
the young officer who was the bearer of the letter, and to report
himself at headquarters.

Reuben was now nearly three-and-twenty, and had grown into a very
powerful young man. A life spent for the most part on horseback had
hardened his muscles, and filled out his frame. He stood about five
feet nine, but looked shorter, owing to his great width of
shoulders. He was still quiet in manner, but he had the same bright
and pleasant expression which had characterized him as a boy; and
his visits to Sydney, where he was introduced by Captain Wilson and
Mr. Hudson into the best society, had given him ease and self
possession.

The native, Jim, was still with him. He had become greatly attached
to his master, and his fidelity and devotion had been of the
greatest service to him and, go where he would, the black was
always at his heels.

On his presenting himself at Sydney, Captain Wilson said, after the
first greetings:

"I know you have been a little disappointed, Reuben, because
hitherto you have been at stations where you have had but little
opportunity of distinguishing yourself. However, I thought better
to keep you at quiet work, until you were thoroughly master of your
duties; and had, moreover, got your full strength. I don't know
whether you have quite arrived at that yet, but I think you will
do, anyhow," and he smiled as he looked at Reuben's shoulders.

"I think I am as strong as most of them," Reuben said, smiling too.
"Four years' mill-wright's work, and four years on horseback in
this bracing air, ought to make one strong, if there's anything in
one to begin with. I think I shall do, in that respect."

"I think so, Reuben. I don't think there are many men in the force
who could hold their own with you, in a grapple.

"And now to business. You have heard of that affair of Inspector
Thomas, in the Goora district--it was a bad business. He and two of
his men were out, after some natives who had driven off cattle; and
he was set upon by a party of bush rangers, and he and his men
killed."

"So I heard, sir," Reuben said quietly.

"Well, I have decided in sending you up in his place. It is a bad
district--the worst we have, at present--and it needs a man of
great resolution, and intelligence. I am sure that you have plenty
of both, and that I cannot make a better choice than in sending you
there. Your age is the only thing against you--not with me, you
know, but others may think that I have done wrong, in selecting so
young an officer--but you see, I know my man. I know, too, that
several of the inspectors are getting too old for this sort of
work. I do not mean too old, perhaps, in point of years, but they
are married men with families, and for desperate work I prefer men
without encumbrances.

"The post should be held by an inspector, but I cannot promote you,
at present. It would be putting you over the heads of too many. But
you will have a good chance of earning early promotion, and I know
that is what you like."

"Thank you very much, Captain Wilson. I will do my best to show
myself worthy of your confidence."

"You will have all your work cut out for you, Reuben. The district
has, all along, been a most troublesome one. The number of
settlers, at present, is small. There is a good deal of higher bush
than usual about it, which makes it very difficult to run these
fellows down; and the natives are specially troublesome. Besides
which, at present there are two or three of the worst gangs of bush
rangers in the colony, somewhere in that country. You will have to
be cautious as well as bold, Reuben. It is a dangerous service I am
sending you on; still, the more danger, the more credit to you."

"You could not have given me a station I should have liked better;
and I hope, ere long, I may be able to give you a good account of
the bush rangers."

"And now, Reuben, if you will call again in an hour, I shall be
free, and then I will drive you home. You need not start for a day
or two; and you will, of course, stay with me till you do."



Chapter 10: An Up-Country District.


Mrs. Wilson received Reuben, as usual, with the greatest
cordiality; but she exclaimed loudly, when she heard that he was
going to the Goora district.

"You don't mean it, George. You can't mean that you are going to
send Reuben to that dreadful place. Why, we are always hearing of
murders and robberies there; and you know the last inspector was
killed; and the one before recalled, because you said he had lost
his nerve; and now you are sending Reuben there!"

"But I look upon it as the greatest honour, Mrs. Wilson, being
chosen for such a station; and you see, there will be capital
chances of distinguishing myself, and getting promoted."

"And capital chances of being killed," Mrs. Wilson said, in a vexed
tone. "I do call it too bad, George."

"But, my dear, we want a man of pluck and energy. Besides, you
know, we have been getting into hot water over that district. The
press have been saying very severe things, about our incompetence
to protect the outlying settlements, and I was obliged to choose a
man who will give satisfaction; and you will agree with me that
Reuben will do that."

"Of course he will," Mrs. Wilson agreed. "I shouldn't be alive now,
if he hadn't had plenty of pluck and energy; but for that very
reason, you ought not to send him to such a dangerous post."

"But I wish to give him an opportunity for distinguishing himself.
He wants to get on, and I want to push him on; but you see, I can't
promote him over the heads of some eight or ten men, senior to him,
unless he does something a little out of the way."

"Well, I don't like it, George, I tell you frankly. I always
thought he was wrong, to go into the constabulary at all, instead
of accepting papa's offer. I can't think why you men are so fond of
fighting, when you could choose a quiet and comfortable life."

"But it is not always so quiet and comfortable, Frances, as a good
many have found, in the district he is going to; and after all, it
is less dangerous fighting bush rangers and natives when you are
prepared for it, than to be woke up of a night with a band of them
thundering at your door, and with no assistance within twenty
miles."

As Frances Wilson remembered how, in her childish days, her
father's place had been, for three days, beset with blacks, she had
no answer ready for the argument.

"Well, I do hope, Reuben," she said, "if you do go to this horrid
place, you will take care of yourself, and not be rash."

"He's going to take care of others, Frances. You know, if he had
taken care of himself and hadn't been rash, you would not have come
so well out of that Malay business. I am sure he looks as if he
could take care of himself, doesn't he?"

"Yes, he is big enough and strong enough," Mrs. Wilson agreed, "but
that's no good against spears or boomerangs, to say nothing of
rifles and pistols."

"Why, Frances, you are not generally a croaker," her husband said
lightly, "but for once, you seem to be determined to do your best
to frighten Reuben, before he starts."

Mrs. Wilson laughed.

"No, I don't want to frighten him, George. I only want to make him
careful."

"I will be as careful as I can, Mrs. Wilson. That boy Jim is a
treasure. I will warrant, if there are any black fellows about, he
will sniff them out somehow. That fellow has a nose like a hound.
He has always been most useful to me, but he will be invaluable at
Goora."

Two days afterwards, Reuben left for his new command. It took him
eight days to reach it. His headquarters were at Goora, a
settlement of some twenty houses; besides the barracks in which the
constabulary force, consisting of a sergeant, eighteen constables,
and two native trackers, were quartered. The sergeant, a
north-country Irishman named O'Connor, was somewhat surprised when
Reuben rode up to the station; for the officers previously in
command had been much older men.

Reuben's own quarters were in a cottage, close to the main
building, and he asked the sergeant to come, in the evening.

"Now, sergeant," he said, after a little preliminary talk, "I have
been sent up by Captain Wilson, with instructions to root out these
bands of bush rangers."

The sergeant smiled grimly.

"We have been doing our best for the last three years, sir, but we
have not made much of a hand at it."

"No," Reuben agreed, "and I don't suppose, of course, that I am
going to succeed all at once. In the first place, tell me frankly,
what sort of men have we got?"

"The men are good enough, sir, but they have certainly got
disheartened, lately. One way and another, we have lost something
like ten men in the last two years; and of course, that last affair
with poor Mr. Thomas was a bad one."

"I understand," Reuben said quietly, "some of them are not quite so
eager to meet the bush rangers as they used to be."

"Well, that is perhaps about it, sir; but I must say the men have
been tremendously hardly worked--pretty nigh night and day in the
saddle, often called out by false news to one end of the district;
and then to find, when they return, that those scoundrels have been
down playing their games at some station at the other end. It's
enough to dishearten a man."

"So it is, sergeant. I was speaking to Captain Wilson about it, and
saying that if we are to succeed we ought to have some fresh hands,
who will take up the work with new spirit. We are seven below our
force, at present; and he has promised to send me up fifteen new
hands, so there will be eight to be relieved. I will leave it to
you to pick out the men to go. Mind, put it to them that they are
to be relieved simply because Captain Wilson thinks they have had
their share of hard work, and should therefore be sent to a quiet
station, for a time. Just pick out the men whom you think would be
most pleased to go."

"Very well, sir. I am glad to hear the news, for to tell you the
truth, I do think we want a little fresh blood amongst us."

Three days later the new detachment arrived, and Reuben saw, at
once, that Captain Wilson had chosen a picked set of young men.
About half of them were freshly enlisted in the force. The others
had all been employed at up-country stations, and were well
acquainted with the nature of the work before them. The same
afternoon, the eight men picked out by Sergeant O'Connor as being
the least useful on the station started for Sydney, most of them
well pleased at being relieved from their arduous duties.

Reuben found that there were, in the office, a great many letters
from settlers, asking for protection. It was impossible to comply
with all these but, after consultation with O'Connor, he sent five
parties, of three men each, to as many exposed stations; keeping
ten in hand, to move as required.

Taking Jim, and two of the constables who had been longest on the
station, he spent two months in traversing his district, from end
to end, and making himself thoroughly acquainted with its
geographical features; for he felt that, until he had mastered
these, he should only be working in the dark. For a time the
outrages had ceased, the bush rangers having shifted their
quarters, and the natives withdrawn after the murder of the late
inspector. This was a great relief to Reuben, as it permitted him
to gain an insight into the country before setting to work in
earnest.

Upon his tour, he and his followers were everywhere most hospitably
received at the stations at which they halted. Everywhere he heard
the same tale of sheep killed, cattle and horses driven off, and
the insolent demeanour of the natives.

"I was thinking of giving it up, and moving back into the more
populated districts," one of the settlers said to Reuben; "but now
you have come, I will hold on for a bit longer, and see how it
turns out. You look to me the right sort of fellow for the post;
but the difficulty is, with such a large scattered district as
yours, to be everywhere at once. What I have often thought of, is
that it would be a good thing if the whole district were to turn
out, and go right into the heart of the black country, and give
them a lesson."

"From what I hear," Reuben said, "it will be next to impossible for
us to find them. The country is so vast, and covered with bush,
that there would be no searching it. They have no fixed villages,
and the want of water would render it impossible for us to go very
far. But the worst point would be that they all seem to be well
informed as to what is going on. I suppose they get warnings from
the native herdsmen and servants, and if we were all together to
enter their country, we must leave the stations unprotected, and we
should find them in ashes, on our return."

"Yes, that is true," the settler said. "I suppose it couldn't be
done. But it's anxious work sleeping here, night after night, with
one's rifle by one's bedside, never certain at what hour one may be
woke by the yelling of the blacks. But they are not as bad as the
bush rangers. If the blacks can but drive off your cattle, they are
contented. You have got nothing else that is much use to them. The
bush rangers don't want your cattle, beyond a head or two for
present use; but they want everything else you've got, and whether
you like it or not is quite immaterial to them. Thank God I have
got no money in the place, and I and my three men can make a pretty
good fight of it. But I pity the men with wives and daughters."

"Well, I hope we shall soon put a stop to it," Reuben said
cheerfully. "We will give them a lesson if we catch them, you may
be quite sure."

"I hope so," the settler said. "But you folks have been mighty
unlucky, lately. Never seem to have been at the right place at the
right time. Not that I am surprised at that, in such a district;
but somehow they never come up with the fellows, afterwards."

"No, they seem to have had bad luck," Reuben agreed. "I hope we
shall do better now."

Three days after his return from his last visit of inspection of
his district, a settler rode, at full speed, up to the station.

"Captain," he said--for although Reuben had no right to that title,
he was always so called by the settlers--"the blacks have been down
at my place. They have killed my two shepherds, and driven off the
sheep."

"Sergeant O'Connor, turn out the men at once," Reuben shouted. "See
