
"Several days, I suppose," answered Nora, "since they appeared to have
eaten several notches."

"Not at all," replied David. "Only three hours."

"I'd rather be in a vault, with the dead, than out here," observed
Hippy.

"Are we such poor company as all that, Fatty!" laughed Reddy.

"I've made a great find," announced Tom Gray in the midst of their
chatter. He was standing on a bench examining something on a shelf
suspended from the ceiling.

"What?" demanded the others in great excitement.

"A pair of snowshoes," he answered.

There was a disappointed silence.

"Well, don't all speak at once," said Tom at last. "Don't you agree with
me that it's a great find?"

"We are sorry we can't enthuse," answered David, "but we fail to see how
snow shoes can help us out of our present predicament."

"Nobody here knows how to use them," continued Reddy, "and even if he
did, he couldn't out-run a pack of wolves."

"I know how to use them," exclaimed Tom. "I learned it in Canada a few
winters ago, but I will admit I couldn't beat the wolves in a race.
However, the shoes may come in handy yet."

Just then one of the wolves threw his body against the door and the
small cabin shook with the force of the blow.

"By Jove!" exclaimed David, "I thought they had us then. Another blow
like that and the old latch might give way."

They looked about them for something to place against the door, but
there was not a stick of furniture in the room. Even the bed, in one
corner, was made of pine boughs and skins.

"I wonder how there happens to be only five wolves," said Anne. "I
thought they went about in large packs."

"They are probably mama and papa and the whole family," replied Hippy.
"The smallest, friskiest ones, I think, are young ladies, by the way
they switched along behind the others and hung back kind of shy-like."

"Now, Hippy Wingate, don't tell us such a romance as that," warned
Grace, "when you were so winded you could hardly look in front of you,
much less behind you."

At that moment there was another crash against the door while two gray
paws and the tip of a pointed muzzle could be seen on one of the window
sills.

"It's almost three o'clock," said Tom Gray, looking at his watch. "I
think we'll have to do something, or we shall be penned here all night.
Now, what shall it be? Suppose we have a friendly council and consider."

"All right," said David; "the meeting is open for suggestions. What do
you advise, Anne?"

Anne smiled thoughtfully.

"I have no advice to offer," she said, "unless you shoot one of the
wolves and let the others eat him up. Perhaps that would take the edge
off their appetites."

"No, that would only serve as an appetizer," answered David. "After they
had eaten one member of the family they would be still hungrier for
another."

"And yet that isn't a half bad idea," said Tom, "and for two reasons.
Did you notice a path which began at the hut and which was evidently
Jean's trail? I saw it from the corner of my eye as I ran."

No, the others had not noticed anything of the sort. But who would stop
to think of trails with a pack of hungry wolves at his heels?

Tom's training in the woods had taught him to take in such details, and
consequently he had noticed it particularly. Moreover, the trail led
straight to the left, presumably toward the west.

"Now, this is what I propose to do," he continued, taking down the
snowshoes and looking over their straps and fastenings carefully.
"Reddy, who, I hear, is a good shot, must climb up at one of the windows
and shoot the first wolf he sees. Eating the dead wolf would probably
occupy the attention of his brothers for some ten minutes or so--perhaps
longer. While they are busy I shall make off on the snowshoes. With that
much of a start, and with plenty of tasty human beings close at hand, I
doubt if they even follow me. If they do, why I'll just shin up a tree.
But I believe I can beat them. I'm pretty good on snowshoes."

"Tom Gray, you shan't do it!" cried Grace. "It may mean sure death. How
do you know the wolves won't seize you the moment you open the door?
Besides, you don't know the way. Suppose you should get lost?"

"No, no," insisted Tom. "None of these things will happen. I know
positively that a hungry wolf will stop chasing a human being and eat up
a dead wolf, or a shoe, or a rug, or anything that happens to be thrown
to him. I never was surer of anything in my life than that I can get
away from here before the beasts know it."

There was a storm of protestation from the others, but Tom Gray finally
overruled every objection and they reluctantly consented to let him go.

It was arranged that Reddy should stand on a bench by one of the small
windows and attract the attention of the wolves by throwing out a rabbit
skin that was nailed to one of the walls. While the beasts were tearing
this to pieces he was to shoot one of them. Furthermore, the instant the
live wolves had finished devouring the dead one, Reddy was to pitch out
another skin, of which there were many about the hut, of foxes, rabbits
and other small animals, which the trapper had collected.

This, they agreed, would probably keep the wolves occupied for awhile,
until Tom had got a good start down the trail.

Tom slipped his feet in the snowshoes and stood by the door waiting.
While the wolves howled and fought over the rabbit skin, bang went the
rifle.

"I got him!" cried Reddy.

In an instant Tom Gray had flung open the door and was off down the
trail.

As he had expected, the live wolves were hungrily eating the dead one
and had not apparently even noticed his departure.

The boys and girls in the hut sat breathlessly waiting, while Reddy
watched the famished animals gorge themselves with the blood and fresh
meat of their comrade.

Reddy had rolled up a fox skin into a small bundle, and was prepared to
pitch it out to them the moment they had finished.

Just as they had lapped the last drop of blood, he cast out the skin.
They sniffed at it a moment, gave a long, disapproving howl, that sent
the cold chills down the spines of the prisoners, and then made off down
the trail after Tom Gray.

Reddy gave a loud exclamation and jumped down from the bench.

"_They have followed Tom!_" he cried, in a high state of excitement.

There was a long pause.

"We'll have to go, then," said David finally. "Girls, you are safe as
long as you stay inside the hut, and some of us at least will be able to
bring help before long."

With that, all three of the boys, for Hippy was no coward, in spite of
his size and appetite, rushed out of the hut and disappeared in the
wood.

The afternoon shadows were beginning to lengthen when Grace fastened the
latch and returned to the fire where her three friends sat silent,
afraid to speak for fear of giving way to tears.




CHAPTER XX

THE GRAY BROTHERS


The four girls never knew how long they waited that afternoon in the
hunter's cabin. It might have been only minutes, but the minutes seemed
to drag themselves into hours. The uncertain fate of the boys, the
tragedy that surely awaited perhaps all of them made the situation
almost unbearable.

Grace piled the fireplace high with the remaining wood, but the blaze
could not keep away the chill that crept over them as the sun sank
behind the trees. They shivered and drew nearer together for comfort.

Should they ever see their four brave friends again?

And David?

Anne could endure it no longer. She rose and began to move about the
hut. There lay her coat and hat. Almost without knowing what she did she
put them on, pulled on her mittens and tied a broad, knitted muffler
around her ears.

"Girls," she said suddenly. She had gone about her preparations so
quietly the other three had not even turned to see what she was doing.
"I'm going. I don't want any of you to go with me, but I would rather
die than stay here all night without knowing what has happened to David
and the others."

"Wait a moment," cried Grace, "and I'll go, too. It would be unbearable
not to know--and if we meet the wolves, why, then, as Tom said, we can
climb a tree. Poor Tom!" she added sadly. "I wonder where he is now."

Nora and Jessica rose hastily.

"Do you think I'd stay?" cried Nora. "Not in a thousand years!"

"Anything is better than this," exclaimed Jessica, as she drew on her
wraps and prepared to follow her friends into the woods.

Grace opened the door, peering out into the gathering darkness.

"There is not a living thing in sight," she said. "We'd better hurry,
girls; it will soon be dark." Then the four young girls started down the
trail and were soon out of sight.

When Tom Gray left old Jean's hut, with nothing between him and the
ravenous wolves, except the angle of a wall, he took a long, gliding
step, his body swinging gracefully with the motion, and was off like the
wind, under a broad avenue of trees. But he had not gone far before one
of the straps loosened and his foot slipped. He fell headlong, but was
up instantly.

It took a few moments to tighten the strap, and it must have been then
that the wolves caught the scent, and after hurriedly finishing the meal
in hand, galloped off for another without taking the slightest notice of
the fox skin that Reddy had tossed to them. Tom made a fresh start,
feeling more confident on his feet than he had at first, and he was well
under way when he heard the howl of the wolves behind him. Gathering all
his energies together he managed to keep ahead of them until the woods
became less dense, and he saw through the interlacing branches the open
meadows and fields.

"They are too hungry to leave off now," he said to himself as he
hurriedly searched the valley below for the nearest farmhouse. In front
of him was a very high, steep hill, that same hill, in fact, where
Nora's coasting party had taken place. Glancing behind him, he caught a
glimpse of the gray brothers trotting through the forest.

"I'll take the hill," he thought. "It's quickest and there must be some
kind of a refuge below." With long, swift glides he reached the knob
which had hidden Miriam's sled from view as she bore down on Anne the
night of the coasting party.

The wolves were right behind him now, and unless something turned up he
hardly dared think what would happen.

But Tom Gray had always possessed an indomitable belief that things
would turn out all right. It seemed absurd to him that he was to be food
for wolves when he had still a long and delightful life before him.
Certainly he would not give up without a struggle.

Perhaps it was this fine confidence that his destiny was not yet
completed that gave him the strength which now promised to save him. As
he fled down the hill he saw below an old oak tree whose first branches
had been lopped off. Exerting every atom of strength in him, just as he
reached the bottom Tom gave a leap. He caught the lowest limb with one
hand, pulled himself up and calmly took his seat in the crotch of the
tree.

He was just in time. The wolves were at his heels, snarling and snapping
like angry dogs. The boy regarded them from his safe perch and burst out
laughing.

[Illustration: Tom Gray Escapes from the Wolves.]

"So I fooled you, did I, you gray rascals?" he said aloud. "You think
you'll keep me here all night, do you, old hounds? Well, we'll see who
wins out in the long run."

Meanwhile, the wolves ran about howling disconsolately while Tom sat in
the branches of the tree, rubbing his hands and arms to keep warm. He
had removed the snowshoes and was just contemplating climbing to the top
of the tree to keep his blood circulating, when three figures appeared
on the brow of the hill.

"As I live, it's the boys," he said to himself. "Go back!" he yelled,
waving a red silk muffler. "Climb a tree quickly!"

They had seen and heard him, and making for the nearest tree, each
shinned up as fast as he could.

"Here's a howdy-do," said Tom to himself. "Four boys treed by wolves and
night coming on."

Yet he swung his legs and whistled thoughtfully, while the others
shouted to him, but he could not hear what they said, for the wind was
blowing away from him. In the meantime the wolves did not all desert him
and he could only wait patiently, with the others, for something to turn
up.

What did turn up was a good deal of a shock to all of them.

Grace, Jessica, Nora and Anne suddenly emerged from the forest, standing
out in bold relief on the brow of the hill.

The three boys at the top of the hill all jumped to the ground at once.

"Run for the trees," cried David, for the wolves had caught the new
scent and had started toward them on a dead run.

"Crack, crack," went a rifle. Instantly the first wolf staggered and
fell backward.

How was it that the boys had not noticed before that the girls were not
alone?

Another shot and a second wolf ran almost into their midst, gave a leap
and fell dead. One more dropped; and the sole surviving wolf beat a
frenzied retreat.

"We found old Jean!" cried Grace. "Wasn't it the most fortunate thing in
the world? And now nobody is killed and we are all safe and I'm so
happy!" She gave the old hunter's arm a squeeze.

Old Jean, enveloped in skins from top to toe, smiled good-naturedly.

"It was the Bon Dieu, mademoiselle, who have preserve you. Do not t'ank
ole Jean. It was the Bon Dieu who put it in ole Jean's haid to set
rabbit trap to-night."

He would accept neither money nor thanks for shooting the wolves.

"I will skin them. It is sufficient."

It was not long before eight very tired and very happy young people were
seated around Mrs. Gray's dinner table. Grace was a little choky and
homesick for her mother, now that all the danger was over, but the week
of the house party was almost up, so she concealed her impatience to be
home again.

The softly shaded candles shed a warm glow over their faces, and the
logs crackled on the brass andirons. They looked into each others' eyes
and smiled sleepily.

Had it all been a dream, their winter picnic, or was old Jean at that
very moment really nailing wolf skins to his wall?




CHAPTER XXI

THE LOST LETTER


Spring was well advanced, full of soft airs and the sweet scents of
orchards in full bloom.

Through the open windows of the schoolroom Grace could hear the pleasant
sounds of the out of doors. The tinkle of a cow bell in a distant meadow
and the songs of the birds brought to her the nearness of the glorious
summer time.

She chewed the end of her pencil impatiently, endeavoring to withdraw
her attention from the things she liked so much better than Latin
grammar and algebra. Examinations were coming, those bugbears of the
young freshman, and then vacation. A vision of picnics crossed her mind,
of long days spent out of doors, with luncheon under the trees and
tramps through the woods. Yet, before all these joys, must come the
inevitable final test, the race for the freshman prize. Although, after
all, only two would really enter the race, Miriam and Anne. Nobody else
would think of competing with these two brilliant students.

How tired Anne looked! She had done nothing but study of late. No party
had been alluring enough to beguile her from her books. She had even
discontinued her work with Mrs. Gray, and early and late toiled at her
studies.

"She will tire herself out," Grace thought, and made a resolution to
take Anne with her on a visit to her grandmother's in the country just
as soon as the High School doors were closed for the summer.

Miriam was not studying so hard. But then she never did anything hard.
She simply seemed to absorb, without taking the trouble to plod. She had
been very defiant of late, Grace thought, and more insolent than ever
before. She and Miss Leece were "thicker" than was good for Miriam,
