have found their way back to the Red River Settlement without the aid of
the scholastic backwoodsman.  They were constrained, therefore, to rest
where they were, hoping from day to day that Ian would regain strength
sufficient to bear the fatigue of a journey.  Thus the winter slowly
slipped away, and wild-fowl--the harbingers of spring--were beginning to
awake the echoes of the northern woods before Ian felt himself strong
enough to commence the journey homewards.

That winter, with all its vicissitudes, hopes, fears, adventures, and
pleasures, we must pass over in absolute silence, and re-introduce our
three friends on the evening of a fine spring day, while riding over a
sweep of prairie land in the direction of a thick belt of forest.

"The river must be somewhere hereabouts," said Ian, reining up on an
eminence, and gazing earnestly round him.

"Vas you ever here before?" asked Rollin.

"Ay, once, but not at this precise spot.  I don't quite recognise it.  I
hope my long illness has not damaged my memory."

"If we don't reach the river soon," said Victor, with something of
weariness in his tone, "this poor brute will give in."

Victor referred to his horse, which had been reduced by some unknown
disease to skin and bone.

"However, I'm well able to walk," he continued, more cheerfully; "and it
can't be long before we shall fall in with the river, and some Indians,
who will sell or lend us a canoe."

"Ah! my cheval is not much more better dan your von," said Rollin; and
he spoke the truth, for his horse was afflicted with the same disease
that had attacked that of Victor.  Ian's steed, however, was in
excellent condition.

That night the invalid horses were freed from all their troubles by a
pack of wolves while their owners were asleep.  They had been "hobbled"
so carelessly that they had broken loose and strayed far from the
encampment.  Being weak they fell an easy prey to their sneaking
enemies.

Next day, however, the three friends reached the river of which they
were in search, found a family of Indians there who bartered with them a
canoe and some provisions for the remaining horse, and continued their
homeward journey by water.

For a time all went well.  The river was in high flood, for the
snow-fall there, as elsewhere, had been unusually heavy, but all three
were expert voyageurs, and succeeded in steering past difficulties of
all kinds, until one afternoon, when good fortune seemed to forsake them
utterly.  They began by running the canoe against a sunk tree, or snag,
and were obliged to put ashore to avoid sinking.  The damage was,
however, easily remedied; and while Ian was busy with the repairs his
comrades prepared a hot dinner, which meal they usually ate cold in the
canoe.  Next they broke a paddle.  This was also easily replaced.  After
that they ventured to run a rapid which almost proved too much for them;
it nearly overturned the canoe, and filled it so full of water that they
were compelled to land again, unload, and empty it.

"Dat is too bad," observed Rollin, with a growl of discontent.

"It might have been worse," said Ian.

"Bah!" returned Rollin.

"Pooh!" ejaculated Victor.

"Very good," said Ian; "I only hope the truth of my remark mayn't be
proved to both of you."

It has been asserted by the enemies of Ian Macdonald that the
catastrophe which followed was the result of a desire on his part to
prove the truth of his own remark, but we acquit him of such baseness.
Certain it is, however, that the very next rapid they came to they ran
straight down upon a big stone over which the water was curling in grand
fury.

"Hallo!" shouted Ian, in sudden alarm, dipping his paddle powerfully on
the right.

"Hi!" yelled Rollin, losing his head and dipping wildly on the same
side--which was wrong.

"Look out!" roared Victor.

He might as well have roared "Look in," for any good that could have
come of it.  There was a crash; the canoe burst up and doubled down, the
bow was hurled high in the air, the rest of it lay out limp, and
disappeared.  Rollin went clean over the rock, Victor went round it, and
Ian, after grasping it for a second, went under it apparently, for, like
the canoe, he disappeared.  That rapid treated these voyagers roughly.
Of the three, Michel Rollin appeared to suffer most.  After sending him
round the stone in a rush of foam that caused his arms and legs to go
round like a mad windmill, it sucked him down, rubbed his head on the
boulders at the bottom, shot him up feet foremost into the air, received
him on its raging breast again, spun him round like a teetotum, and, at
last, hurled him almost contemptuously upon a sandbank at its foot.

Ian and Victor also received a severe buffeting before gaining the same
sandbank, where they faced each other in a blaze of surprise and horror!

Unable to find words to express their feelings, they turned
simultaneously, and waded in silence from the sandbank to the shore.

Here a consultation of the most doleful character that can be imagined
was entered into.

"Everything lost," said Ian, sitting down on a bank, and wringing the
water out of his garments.

"Not even a gun saved," said Victor gravely.

"No, nor von mout'ful of pemmican," cried Rollin, wildly grasping his
hair and glaring.

The poor fellow seemed to his friends to have gone suddenly mad, for the
glare of despair turned to a grin of wild amusement, accompanied by a
strange laugh, as he pointed straight before him, and became, as it
were, transfixed.

Turning to look in the direction indicated, they beheld a small Indian
boy, absolutely naked, remarkably brown, and gazing at them with a look
of wonder that was never equalled by the most astonished owl known to
natural history.

Seeing that he was observed, the boy turned and fled like an antelope.
Rollin uttered a yell, and bounded away in pursuit.  The half-breed
could easily have caught him, but he did not wish to do so.  He merely
uttered an appalling shriek now and then to cause the urchin to increase
his speed.  The result was that the boy led his pursuer straight to the
wigwam of his father, which was just what Rollin wanted.  It stood but a
short distance from the scene of the wreck.

And now, when, to all appearance, they had reached the lowest turn in
the wheel of fortune, they were raised to the highest heights of joy,
for the Indian proved to be friendly, supplied them with provisions to
continue their journey, and gave them a good bow and quiver of arrows on
their simple promise to reward him if he should visit them at Red River
in the course of the summer.  He had not a canoe to lend them, however.
They were therefore constrained to complete their journey over the
prairies on foot.

"You see, I said that things might be worse," said Ian, as they lay on
their backs beside each other that night after supper, each rolled in
his blanket and gazing complacently at the stars.

"Yes, but you did not say that they might also be better.  Why did not
your prophetic soul enable you to see further and tell of our present
state of comparative good fortune, Mr Wiseman?" asked Victor with a
sigh of contentment.

"I did not prophesy, Vic; I only talked of what _might_ be."

"Vat is dat you say? vat _might_ be?" exclaimed Rollin.  "Ah! vat _is_
is vorse.  Here am me, go to bed vidout my smok.  Dat is most shockable
state I has yet arrive to."

"Poor fellows!" said Ian, in a tone of commiseration.

"You indeed lose everything when you lose that on which your happiness
depends."

"Bah!" ejaculated Rollin, as he turned his back on his comrades and went
to sleep.

A feeling of sadness as well as drowsiness came over Victor as he lay
there blinking at the stars.  The loss of their canoe and all its
contents was but a small matter compared with the failure of their
enterprise, for was he not now returning home, while Tony still remained
a captive with the red man?  Ian's thoughts were also tinged with
sadness and disappointment on the same account.  Nevertheless, he
experienced a slight gleam of comfort as the spirit of slumber stole
over him, for had he not, after all, succeeded in killing a grizzly
bear, and was not the magnificent claw collar round his neck at that
very moment, with one of the claw-points rendering him, so to speak,
pleasantly uncomfortable? and would he not soon see Elsie? and--.
Thought stopped short at this point, and remained there--or left him--we
know not which.

Again we venture to skip.  Passing over much of that long and toilsome
journey on foot, we resume the thread of our tale at the point when our
three travellers, emerging suddenly from a clump of wood one day, came
unexpectedly to the margin of an unknown sea!

"Lak Vinnipeg have busted hisself, an' cover all de vorld," exclaimed
Rollin, with a look of real alarm at his companions.

"The Red River has overflowed, and the land is flooded," said Ian, in a
low solemn voice.

"Surely, surely," said Victor, in sudden anxiety, "there must have been
many houses destroyed, since the water has come so far, but--but,
father's house stands high."

Ian's face wore a troubled look as he replied--

"Ay, boy, but the water has come more than twelve miles over the plains,
for I know this spot well.  It must be deep--very deep--at the Willow
Creek."

"Vat shall ye do vidout bot or canoe?"

Rollin's question was not heeded, for at that moment two canoes were
seen in the distance coming from the direction of Lake Winnipeg.  One
was paddled by an Indian, the other by a squaw and a boy.  They made
straight for the spot where our travellers were standing.  As they drew
near, Victor hailed them.  The boy in the bow of the foremost canoe was
observed to cease paddling.  As he drew nearer, his eyes were seen to
blaze, and eager astonishment was depicted on his painted face.  When
the canoe touched land he leaped of it, and, with a yell that would have
done credit to the wildest redskin in the prairie, rushed at Victor,
leaped into his arms, and, shouting "Vic!  Vic!" besmeared his face with
charcoal, ochre, vermilion, and kisses!

To say that Victor was taken by surprise would be feeble language.  Of
course he prepared for self-defence, at the first furious rush, but the
shout of "Vic!" opened his eyes; he not only submitted to be kissed, but
returned the embrace with tenfold interest, and mixed up the charcoal,
ochre, and vermilion with his mouth and pose and Tony's tears of joy.

Oh, it was an amazing sight, the meeting of these brothers.  It is hard
to say whether the eyes or the mouth of the onlookers opened widest.
Petawanaquat was the only one who retained his composure.  The eyes of
Meekeye were moistened despite her native stoicism, but her husband
stood erect with a grave sad countenance, and his blanket folded, with
his arms in classic fashion, on his breast.  As for Rollin, he became,
and remained for some time, a petrifaction of amazement.

When the first burst was over, Victor turned to Petawanaquat, and as he
looked at his stern visage a dark frown settled on his own, and he felt
a clenching of his fists, as he addressed the Indian in his native
tongue.

"What made you take him away?" he demanded indignantly.

"Revenge," answered the red man, with dignified calmness.

"And what induces you now to bring him back?" asked Victor, in some
surprise.

"Forgiveness," answered Petawanaquat.

For a few moments Victor gazed at the calm countenance of the Indian in
silent surprise.

"What do you mean?" he asked, with a puzzled look.

"Listen," replied the Indian slowly.  "Petawanaquat loves revenge.  He
has tasted revenge.  It is sweet, but the Indian has discovered a new
fountain.  The old white father thirsts for his child.  Does not the
white man's Book say, `If your enemy thirst, give him drink?'  The red
man brings Tonyquat back in order that he may heap coals of fire on the
old white father's head.  The Great Spirit has taught Petawanaquat that
forgiveness is sweeter than revenge."

He stopped abruptly.  Victor still looked at him with a puzzled
expression.

"Well," he said, smiling slightly, "I have no doubt that my father will
forgive you, now that you have brought back the child."

A gleam, which seemed to have a touch of scorn in it, shot from the
Indian's eye as he rejoined--

"When Petawanaquat brings back Tonyquat, it is a proof that _he_
forgives the old white father."

This was all that the Indian would condescend to say.  The motives which
had decided him to return good for evil were too hazy and complex for
him clearly to understand, much less explain.  He took refuge,
therefore, in dignified silence.

Victor was too happy in the recovery of his brother to push the
investigation further, or to cherish feelings of ill-will.  He therefore
went up to the Indian, and, with a smile of candour on his face, held
out his hand, which the latter grasped and shook, exclaiming "Wat-chee!"
under the belief that these words formed an essential part of every
white man's salutation.

This matter had barely been settled when a man came out of the woods and
approached them.  He was one of the Red River settlers, but personally
unknown to any of them.  From him they heard of the condition of the
settlement.  Of course they asked many eager questions about their own
kindred after he had mentioned the chief points of the disastrous flood.

"And what of my father, Samuel Ravenshaw?" asked Victor anxiously.

"What! the old man at Willow Creek, whose daughter is married to
Lambert?"

"Married to Lambert!" exclaimed Ian, turning deadly pale.

"Ay, or engaged to be, I'm not sure which," replied the man.  "Oh, he's
all right.  The Willow Creek house stands too high to be washed away.
The family still lives in it--in the upper rooms."

"And Angus Macdonald, what of him?" asked Ian.

"An' ma mere--my moder, ole Liz Rollin, an' ole Daddy, has you hear of
dem?" demanded Rollin.

At the mention of old Liz the man's face became grave.

"Angus Macdonald and his sister," he said, "are well, and with the
Ravenshaws, I believe, or at the Little Mountain, their house being
considered in danger; but old Liz Rollin," he added, turning to the
anxious half-breed, "has been carried away with her hut, nobody knows
where.  They say that her old father and the mother of Winklemann have
gone along with her."

Words cannot describe the state of mind into which this information
threw poor Michel Rollin.  He insisted on seizing one of the canoes and
setting off at once.  As his companions were equally anxious to reach
their flooded homes an arrangement was soon come to.  Petawanaquat put
Tony into the middle of his canoe with Victor, while Ian took the bow
paddle.  Michel took the steering paddle of the other canoe, and Meekeye
seated herself in the bow.

Thus they launched out upon the waters of the flood, and, bidding adieu
to the settler who had given them such startling information, were soon
paddling might and main in the direction of the settlement.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

RETURN OF THE LOST ONE.

It chanced that, on the morning of the arrival of Victor and his
comrades at the margin of the flood, Peegwish went a-fishing.

That astute Indian was fond of fishing.  It suited his tastes and
habits; it was an art which was admirably adapted to his tendencies.
Peegwish was, naturally as well as by training, lazy, and what could be
more congenial to a lazy man than a "gentle art" which involved nothing
more than sitting on a river bank smoking a pipe and awaiting a bite?
It had a spice of intellectuality about it too, for did it not foster a
spirit of meditation, contemplation, and even of philosophical
speculation--when he chanced to be awake?  Moreover, it saved him from
harder labour, and shut the mouths of those ill-natured people who
objected to drones, and had a tendency to reproach them, for was he not
assiduously procuring for men and women a portion of that nourishment
without which labour would be impossible?

The peculiar action of the flood had favoured Peegwish in regard to his
beloved art, for, whereas in former days he was obliged to get up from
his lair and go down to the river bank to fish, now he had nothing more
to do than open the window and cast out his line, and Wildcat was close
at hand to fetch him a light when his pipe chanced to go out, which it
frequently did, for the red old savage slept much.  When, therefore, we
say that Peegwish went a-fishing, it must be understood that he merely
left his seat by the stove in the upper room at Willow Creek and opened
the window.

Wildcat was as fond of fishing as her brother, but there were a few
difficulties in her way which did not exist in his.  Water had to be
drawn, wood to be chopped, moccasins and leggings and coats to be made,
as well as meals to be cooked.  She was, therefore, compelled to fish in
moderation.

"Bring a light," said Peegwish, in that tone of mild entreaty with which
he was wont to make his wants known.

There being no one else in the room at the moment, Wildcat obeyed.

Peegwish looked into the room for a moment, and extended his left hand
for the piece of lighted stick; with his right hand he held his line.
Suddenly that hand received an amazing tug.  Peegwish unintentionally
scattered the firebrand, dropped his pipe from his lips, and uttered a
shout, while with both hands he held on to the jerking line.

One of Mr Ravenshaw's largest pigs had been swept out of the outhouse
lofts.  Struggling with the stream, he passed under the window of the
storeroom, and came across the line of Peegwish with his tail.  Every
one must be familiar with the tendency of tails in general to shut down
when touched.  The unfortunate pig obeyed the natural law, and the line
continued to slip until the hook was reached, when, of course, the
natural result followed.  There could be no hope of escape, for the tail
was remarkably tough and the line strong.  Peegwish held on stoutly.
Wildcat lent her aid.  The jerking on the tail depressed the snout of
the pig, whose shrieks, being thus varied by intermittent gurgles,
rendered the noise more appalling, and quickly drew the whole household
to the windows.

Unfortunately there were none there but women--Mr Ravenshaw and the
other men being still absent with the boat.  The canoe had also been
sent off that morning for a load of firewood, so that the only way of
relieving the pig was to haul him in at the window.  But he was too
heavy to be thus treated, and as Peegwish did not wish to break his line
and lose his hook he could only hold on in despair, while Elsie and
Cora, with their mother and Wildcat, stood by helpless and horrified,
yet amused, by the novelty of the situation and the frightful noise.

While this scene was being enacted at Willow Greek, Victor, with the
recovered Tony and the rest of them, were drawing quickly near.

Deeply though the hearts of most of these wanderers were filled with
anxious fears, they could not help being impressed with the scenes of
desolation--deserted and submerged homesteads, wreck and ruin--through
which they passed.  At one moment the two canoes were skimming over the
waters of a boundless lake; at another they were winding out and in
among the trees of a submerged bit of woodland.  Presently they found
themselves among house tops, and had to proceed cautiously for fear of
sunken fences, and then out they swept again over the wide sheet of
water, where the once familiar prairie lay many feet below.

The maple-trees were by that time in full leaf, and the rich green
verdure of bush and tree was bursting out on all sides, when not
submerged.  Swallows skimmed about in hundreds, dipping the tips of
their blue wings in the flood, as though to test its reality, while
flocks of little yellow birds--like canaries, but rather larger, with
more black on their wings--flitted from bush to tree or from isle to
isle.  The month of May in those regions is styled the "flower month,"
and June the "heart-berry month," but flowers and heart-berries were
alike drowned out that year in Red River of the North, and none of the
wonted perfumes of the season regaled the noses of our voyagers as they
