"We must see what they are doing," the general said. "This is too
important a point for us to allow them to erect a strongly
fortified position, close at hand."

Accordingly, Tollemache was sent down with an order to the 18th
Madras Infantry--supported by a detachment of the 13th Regiment,
under Major Sale--to advance against the enemy in the jungle. The
movements of this force were eagerly watched from the terrace of
the pagoda. At a rapid pace they crossed the intervening ground,
and a rattle of musketry broke out from the jungle as they
approached. The British made no response; but charged, with a
cheer, and were soon lost to sight in the trees. Their regular
volleys could be heard, at short intervals, above the scattered
rattle of the Burmese musketeers; and their cheers frequently rose,
loud and triumphant. In half an hour the red line emerged again
from the jungle, having destroyed the stockades the Burmese had
erected; captured several guns, a quantity of muskets, and
entrenching tools thrown away by the Burmese; and killed a large
number of the enemy.

During the day the enemy made repeated efforts to send fire rafts
down the river from above Kemmendine. These rafts were constructed
of bamboos, upon which were placed great numbers of earthenware
pots, filled with petroleum. These rafts were skilfully
constructed, and made in sections so that, when they drifted
against an anchor chain, they would divide--those on each side
swinging round, so as to envelop the ship on both sides with fire.

The sailors from the sloops and gunboats rowed up to meet the rafts
and, although a heavy fire was kept up by the enemy, from the
jungles lining the banks, they succeeded in towing most of them
safely to shore; while the rest grounded on a projecting spit, off
Kemmendine.

So diligently did the Burmese work at all points throughout the day
that, by the afternoon, their whole line of circumvallation was
covered with earthworks; behind which they lay, entirely hidden
from sight.

"If they could fight as well as they dig, and build stockades," Sir
A. Campbell remarked, "they would be one of the most formidable
enemies in the world. No European army ever accomplished the work
of entrenching themselves so speedily as they have done. Their
arrangements have been admirable. Everything has been done without
confusion, and each body has taken up the position allotted to it;
as is evident by the fact that there is no gap in their lines.

"As to Bandoola's tactics, I cannot say so much for them. In the
first place, he has divided his force into two parts, separated by
a river, and incapable of helping each other. In the next place,
great as are his numbers, his lines are far too extended.

"Well, we will let them go on for a time; and then show them the
mistake that they have committed."

Major Sale's reports of the entrenchments were that they consisted
of a long line of holes, each capable of containing two men. The
earth was dug out on one side so as to form a sort of cave. In this
was a bed of straw or brushwood, on which one man could sleep,
while the other watched. Each hole contained a sufficient supply of
rice, water, and even fuel for its inmates. One line of these holes
had been completed, and another was being dug a short distance in
advance.

The Burmese do not relieve their men in the trenches. Those who
occupy the line first made remain there. Fresh men dig and occupy
the next line, and so the advance is continued, until close to the
work to be attacked. The system has the great advantage that a
shell falling into one of these holes only kills its two occupants;
instead of destroying many, as it might do if it fell in a
continuous trench.

In the afternoon the general returned to Rangoon, leaving Stanley
at the pagoda, with orders to ride down should there be any change
of importance. In the evening a considerable force of Burmese
issued from the jungle, and prepared to entrench themselves near
the northeast angle of the pagoda hill. Major Piper therefore took
two companies of the 38th and, descending the hill, drove the
Burmese, in confusion, back to the jungle.

In the morning it was found that the enemy had entrenched
themselves upon some high and open ground, within musket shot of
the north gate of the pagoda. It was separated from the gate by a
large tank; but as their jingals and musketry were able, from the
point they occupied, to sweep the plateau and the huts occupied by
the troops, a party of the 38th and the 28th Madras Infantry went
out, and drove them off. As soon, however, as our troops fell back
the Burmese reoccupied the position and, for the next few days, a
constant skirmishing went on at this point; while an artillery fire
was maintained, by the assailants and defenders, along the whole
line down to Rangoon, and the enemy's batteries at Dalla kept up an
incessant fire on the shipping. Kemmendine was attacked time after
time, and many attempts made to launch fire rafts down the river.

The work was very harassing for the troops. Night and day they were
expecting an attack in force; and there was a general feeling of
delight when, on the evening of the 4th, orders were issued for a
general movement against the enemy.

The latter had, by this time, brought the greater portion of their
guns up from the jungle, and placed them in their entrenchments;
and it was therefore in the power of the British to strike a heavy
blow. A division of the flotilla of gunboats was ordered up the
creek by the town. These opened a heavy fire upon the enemy's
flank, thus attracting their attention to that point and, after the
cannonade had continued for some little time, the two columns of
attack--the one eight hundred strong, under Major Sale; the other
five hundred, under Major Walker of the Madras army--issued out.
The latter was to attack the enemy facing the town, the former to
force his way through the centre of their position. He had with him
a troop of horse, that had landed only the previous day.

Major Walker's force was the first to encounter the enemy. Their
resistance was, for a time, obstinate. Major Walker and several
other officers fell, in the attack on the first line of
entrenchments; but the soldiers carried it at the point of the
bayonet and, as the enemy broke and retreated, followed them so
hotly that the works in the rear fell into their hands with but
slight opposition.

Major Sale's column now began its attack on the enemy's centre.
Here the resistance was more feeble and, bursting through the
enemy's lines, the British drove them before them in headlong
flight. Then, turning, they swept along the line of entrenchments;
carrying all before them until they effected a junction with the
other column, which was advancing to meet them. They then drove the
Burmese from every part of their works into the jungle, leaving the
ground behind them covered with dead and wounded.

Except at the point first attacked by Major Walker, the resistance
of the Burmese was very feeble, and the British loss inconsiderable;
and a large number of guns, entrenching tools, and muskets fell into
the hands of the victors. The next day Bandoola rallied the troops
that had been driven from the plain, and gathered the greatest part
of his force in the forest round the pagoda, where they continued to
push forward their works with unabated energy.

The British had a day of rest given them and, on the 7th, prepared
to attack the enemy at this point. Four columns of attack were
formed, composed of detachments drawn from all the corps of the
army. In the morning a heavy cannonade was opened upon the jungle;
the artillery being assisted by several heavy guns which had, with
great labour, been brought up by the sailors from the ships to the
pagoda. The enemy returned it with a steady fire of light
artillery, jingals, and musketry.

While the firing was still going on, the four columns were already
in motion. One had entered the jungle on the enemy's left, and
another on the right. One of the central columns advanced from the
foot of the pagoda hill, while the 38th Regiment descended the
stairs from the north gate and advanced, one wing on each side of
the tank, against the enemy's entrenchments on the high ground. As
the four columns approached the enemy, our artillery fire ceased.

The Burmese appeared, for a moment, bewildered at the sight of
their foes advancing against them from so many directions, but they
soon opened a very heavy fire upon the assailants; and kept it up
with undiminished steadiness until our troops, advancing at the
charge, dashed into their entrenchments and drove them headlong
before them into the thick forest behind--where pursuit, which
would at any time have been difficult, was now impossible; the
troops, exhausted by their seven days' and nights' watching, being
wholly incapable of following their active and lightly-armed
enemies.

There now remained but the force at Dalla to cope with and, in the
evening, a force composed of the 89th and 43rd Madras Infantry,
under Colonel Parlby, embarked in boats. The night was dark, and
the troops crossed unobserved. The alarm was not given until the
British actually entered the entrenchments, and opened fire upon
the enemy; who were sitting, unsuspicious of danger, round their
fires. Scarcely any opposition was encountered, and the whole of
the works, with the guns and the stores, were soon in our hands;
while the enemy were flying towards the forest.

In the actions during these three days, the Burmese lost some 5000
men, 240 pieces of artillery of every kind, and a great number of
muskets and vast supplies of ammunition; while the British had but
50 killed and 300 wounded. Great numbers of Bandoola's men never
rejoined the army, and the whole force was dispersed through the
country.

Bandoola himself was retiring towards Donabew, with but a remnant
of his army, when he met considerable reinforcements on their way
to join him. During his operations he had left a reserve corps at
the village of Kokein, four miles from the pagoda; and these had
been busily entrenching the position, which commanded the road
leading from Rangoon to Donabew. The ground was elevated and, on
his arrival there, Bandoola set his troops--now some 25,000 in
number--to aid in the work. In a marvellously short time the
heights were completely stockaded with trunks of trees; and with a
broad, deep ditch in front. Beyond this were lines of felled trees,
their heads pointing outwards and each branch sharpened--forming a
very formidable abattis--and, believing this to be impregnable,
Bandoola awaited the attack of the British.

As soon as his army had been dispersed, great numbers of deserters,
and of the inhabitants of the villages, poured into Rangoon. With
the deserters were mingled a good many of the troops sent in by
Bandoola, himself, with instructions to fire the town. In order to
lull the suspicions of the British, he caused a report to be spread
that an imperial commissioner from the court of Ava would arrive,
in the course of a few days, to treat for terms of peace.

The general, however, determined to attack Bandoola before the
commissioner could arrive; as it was evident that better terms
could be obtained, after the total dispersion of the Burmese, than
if their famous general remained, with 25,000 men, in a formidable
position close at hand. He was uneasy at the presence of so large a
number of natives in the town, and the precautions that had been
taken against fire, some time before, were now redoubled. Were one
to break out, not only might the whole of the stores collected for
the advance of the army be destroyed but, if Bandoola had his force
gathered in readiness at the edge of the jungle, he might take
advantage of the confusion that would be caused by the fire, and
rush forward to the attack of the town.

Numbers of troops, and of sailors from the fleet, patrolled the
streets in every direction at night but, in spite of their efforts,
a week after the retreat of Bandoola the dreaded cry of fire was
raised. At a dozen points, on the windward side of the town, fires
had been lighted by incendiaries and, as there was a brisk wind
blowing, the danger was extreme. The drums beat to arms along the
whole of the British lines. Orders had already been issued as to
what was to be done in such an emergency and, while a portion of
the troops lined the trenches, the rest were marched at once to the
town, and formed up between it and the jungle, to repel any attack
that might be made there; leaving the troops quartered in the town,
and the sailors of the fleet to battle with the flames.

For a time it seemed as if the whole place would be swept away but,
by levelling lines of huts, and beating out the flames at the
barrier so formed, their progress was at length checked; but not
until more than half the town had been destroyed. Fortunately this
was the half farthest from the river and--with the exception of the
commissariat stores for the supply of the troops of the Madras
Presidency--the buildings containing the food, ammunition, and
necessaries for the army escaped unharmed.

What had happened once might, however, happen again, in spite of
all precautions. The general therefore determined to attack
Bandoola at once as, were his force once scattered, the motive for
these incendiary fires would cease to operate.

The difficulties were formidable. One or two light field pieces
could, at the most, be taken with the column. They would have to
march by a narrow and winding footpath, through a thick forest,
exposed at any moment to a desperate attack by the enemy. Moreover,
it would be necessary to leave a strong force for the defence of
Rangoon, as Bandoola would be sure to learn, from his spies, of the
intended movement and, having with him men intimately acquainted
with every forest track, could make a rush down upon the town
during the absence of so many of its defenders.

The general felt it imperative, however, to attack without delay
and, early on the morning of the 15th, he moved out with a force of
1500 men against Kokein. They marched without molestation through
the forest and, on reaching its confines, could see the truly
formidable nature of the works that they were to attack. The moment
they issued from the forest, a dropping fire was opened upon them
by parties of the enemy, in flank and rear; and no time was lost in
preparing for the assault.

The 13th Light Infantry and the 18th Madras, with 60 cavalry, under
Brigadier General Cotton, were ordered to move round the stockade
and assault it on the left rear; while the rest of the troops, some
800 strong, with 100 cavalry under the general himself, were to
attack in front. The enemy's works consisted of a central
entrenchment, connected with two large entrenched stockades on its
flank, but somewhat advanced in front of it.

As soon as the force under General Cotton had gained its position
in the rear of the enemy, a gun was fired, and the whole force
moved forward to the assault.. The Burmans regarded the attack by
so insignificant a force upon their works with such contempt that
they did not, for some time, fire a shot; but continued chanting a
war song, swaying themselves to its cadence, stamping and beating
time with their hands on their breasts.

This delay proved fatal to them. When they opened fire, their
assailants were already close to the ditch and, leaping down into
this, were sheltered from the fire of the defenders. Scaling
ladders were speedily placed and the troops, running up them,
leaped down into the entrenchment. Astounded at this sudden entry
into the works they had deemed impregnable, the Burmese hesitated;
and the assailants, being joined by their comrades from behind,
rushed impetuously upon the enemy.

The column in the rear had greater difficulty--for they had several
strong stockades to carry before they reached the central work--and
lost four officers and eight men killed, and forty-nine officers
and men wounded, in the 13th Regiment alone. Fifteen minutes after
the first shot was fired, the whole of the works were in our
possession and the Burmese, who gathered in a confused mass, had
been decimated by our volleys. They were now in full flight, many
being cut down by the cavalry before they reached the shelter of
the woods. The British troops marched back to Rangoon; while the
Burmese retreated to Donabew, leaving strong posts on the two
rivers leading in that direction.

Their retirement left it free to the country people to return to
Rangoon, and very large numbers came in, including very many of the
villagers who had been forced to fight against us. All had alike
suffered from famine and hardship. Even the women had been
compelled to labour in the work of stockading, and the sufferings
of all had been terrible. The work of rebuilding the town began at
once, and the wooden huts sprang up with great rapidity; markets
were opened and, in a short time, supplies of fish, fruit, game,
and vegetables poured in; sufficient not only for the native
population, but to effect a most welcome change in the diet of the
troops.

As most of the natives were accustomed to the construction and
management of boats, the work of preparing the flotilla by which
the troops were to proceed up the rivers went on rapidly; and
numbers of men were hired as servants and drivers for the
commissariat--with which the force was very insufficiently
supplied, as the natives of India of that class for the most part
refused, on account of their caste prejudices, to engage themselves
for service across the sea. Reinforcements arrived; and Rangoon,
which but six weeks before presented a miserable and deserted
appearance was, towards the beginning of January, a cheerful and
bustling town.

Preparations were being made in other quarters to assume the
offensive. Some 3000 men were driving the Burmese out of Assam; and
a force 7000 strong was marching from Sylhet, to expel them from
Cachar and capture Manipur; while 11,000 men were assembled at
Chittagong, and were advancing into Aracan with the intention of
driving the Burmese from that province--and they meant, if
possible, to cross the mountains and effect a junction with Sir
Archibald Campbell's force. The first part of the operations were
conducted with complete success, and Aracan wrested from Burma; but
it was found impossible to perform the terrible journey across
mountain and swamp, or to afford any aid to the main expedition.



Chapter 10: The Advance.


But while the preparations for the advance were being made, the
general's aides-de-camp had been kept at work from morning until
night. There were constant communications between the military and
naval authorities, for the expedition was to be a mixed one.
Transports were daily arriving with troops and stores; innumerable
matters connected with the organization, both of the land and water
transport, required to be arranged; and the general himself was
indefatigable in superintending every detail of the work. It had
been settled that the advance could not take place until the second
week in February, as the roads would be impassable until that time,
and the 11th was fixed for the commencement of operations.

Upon the day after his arrival at Rangoon, Stanley had written a
letter to his uncle; giving him a brief account of his adventures,
and stating that he had been appointed one of the general's
aides-de-camp. He said that he should, of course, be guided by his
uncle's wishes; but that now that he had entered on the campaign as
an officer, he should certainly like to remain till the end, when
he would at once resign his commission and rejoin him.

He sent this to his uncle's agent at Calcutta, but received no
answer until the end of December. After expressing his delight at
hearing that Stanley had not, as he had supposed, been killed at
Ramoo, but was now safe and well in the British camp, he went on:

"I only received your letter this morning, for I have been moving
about from point to point and, owing to the falling off of trade,
had no occasion to go to Calcutta, until now; and was, indeed,
astounded at finding your letter lying for me here, as they had not
forwarded it, having no idea where I was, and knowing that the
chance of any letter sent on reaching me was extremely small.

"By all means, lad, stop where you are. Trade is improving again
for, now that Bandoola's army has marched away from Ramoo, the
scare among the natives has pretty well subsided. Still, I can
manage very well without you, and it will certainly be a great
advantage to you to serve for a year in the army; and to have been
one of Campbell's aides-de-camp will be a feather in your cap, and
will give you a good position at all the military stations.

"I am very glad, now, that I abstained from writing to your mother
after the battle at Ramoo. I thought it over and over, and
concluded that it was just as well to leave the matter alone for a
time; not that I had the slightest idea, or even a hope, that you
were alive, but because I thought that the cessation of letters
from you would, to some extent, prepare her mind for the blow, when
it came. It would be very improbable that she would see the
gazette, with the list of killed and wounded at Ramoo and, even if
she did so, she would not associate the death of Ensign Brooke in
any way with you. When we have been trading up country, there have
been, once or twice, no means of sending off a letter for a couple
of months and, therefore, she could not have begun to feel
seriously anxious about you before she received your letter from
Rangoon.
