still.

A happy thought occurred to the prince--justifying the remark of Solomon
that there is nothing new under the sun.  He opened his wallet, took out
a small piece of meat, and held it out.

"Here, Brownie, have a bit."  Another justification of Solomon, for the
natural abbreviation of names is not new!

The pup advanced with confidence, ate the morsel, and looked inquiringly
for more, at the same time wagging its tail with unqualified
satisfaction.

"Yes, Brownie, you shall have more."

The second morsel was bestowed; the tail wagged effusively; the name of
Brownie became irrevocably associated with food, and a loving look and
tone with favours to come.  Thus a title and a friendship were
established which endured through life and was terminated only by death.
So trivial sometimes are the incidents on which the great events of
life are hinged!

We pause here to deprecate the idea that this fine animal's affection
was gained through its stomach.  Many a time had its old master thrown
it savoury junks and bones of food; but a scowl and sometimes a growl,
had often been thrown into the mess, thereby robbing the gift of all
grace, and checking the outflow of affection.  Bladud's character
similarly, was as clearly perceived by the manner of his gifts.  Indeed,
it would have been a poor compliment to the intelligence of Brownie--or
of any dog, young or old--to suppose it capable of misunderstanding the
gentle tone, the kindly glance, and the patting hand of Bladud.  At all
events, the result was that Brownie, with an expressive wag and bark,
vowed fidelity from that date to the prince, and, in the same act,
renounced allegiance to the hunter of the Hot Swamp.

From that date, too, the master and the dog entered upon, and kept up at
frequent though brief intervals, a species of conversation or mental
intercourse which, if not profound, was equal to much that passes for
intercourse among men, and was, at all events, a source of eminent
satisfaction to both.

Removing the leash, Bladud descended the hill, with Brownie gambolling
delightedly round him.

That night they slept together under the spreading branches of a
magnificent oak.

There was no need to keep watch against wild beasts, for Brownie slept,
as it were, with one eye open, and the slightest symptom of curiosity
among the wild fraternity was met by a growl so significant that the
would-be intruder sheered off.

The sun was high when the prince awoke and arose from his bed of leaves.
The pup, although awake long before, had dutifully lain still, abiding
his master's time.  It now arose and shook itself, yawned, and looked up
with an expression of "what next?"

Having lighted a fire, Bladud set up the carcase of a wild duck to
roast.  He had shot it the day before on his way to the valley of the
Swamp.  As this was a proceeding in which the pup had a prospective
interest, he sat by attentively.

"Ah!  Brownie," said his master, sitting down to wait for the cooking of
the bird, "you little know what a sad life awaits you.  No companionship
but that of a doomed man, and I fear you will be a poor nurse when the
end comes, though assuredly you will not be an unsympathetic one.  But
it may be long before the end.  That's the worst of it.  Come, have a
bit."

He threw him a leg as he spoke, and the two breakfasted peacefully
together on the banks of the shining river, slaking their thirst, after
it was finished, at the same pure stream.

While doing so the prince observed with satisfaction that large trout
were rising freely, and that several flocks of wild ducks and other
aquatic birds passed both up and down the river.

"Now, Brownie," he said, when the meal was concluded, "you and I must
search for a convenient spot on which to build our hut."

Before starting off, however, he uncovered his shoulder and looked
anxiously at the white spot.  It was as obvious as ever, but did not
seem to him increased since he left home.  A very slight matter will
sometimes give hope to a despairing man.  Under the influence of this
negative comfort, Bladud took up his weapons and sallied forth, closely
followed by the pup.

In the haste of departure and the depressed state of his mind he had, as
has been said, forgotten his sword, or deliberately left it behind him.
The only weapon he now possessed, besides the bow and arrows given to
him by the Hebrew, was a small bronze hatchet, which was, however, of
little use for anything except cutting down small trees and branches for
firewood.  He carried a little knife, also, in his girdle, but it was
much too small to serve the purpose of an offensive weapon, though it
was well suited to skin wild animals and cut up his food.  As for his
staff, or club--it might be of use in a contest with men, but would be
of little service against bears or wolves.  Casting it aside, therefore,
he cut for himself a ponderous oaken staff about five feet long, at one
end of which there was a heavy knotted mass that gave it great weight.
The other end he sharpened to a fine point.  This formidable weapon he
purposed to wield with both hands when using it as a club, while, if
need should arise, he might also use it as a spear.

"I was foolish, Brownie," he remarked, while rounding off the head of
this club, "to leave my good sword behind me, for though I have no
desire to kill men, there may arise a need-be to kill bears.  However,
it cannot be helped, and, verily, this little thing will be a pretty
fair substitute."

He twirled the little thing round his head with one hand, in a way that
would have rejoiced the heart of a modern Irishman, had he been there to
see, and induced the pup to jump aside in surprise with his tail between
his legs.

A few minutes later, and he was striding over the beautiful land in all
directions, examining and taking possession, as it were, of his fair
domain.

In passing over a knoll which was crowned by several magnificent oaks,
they came suddenly on a family of black pigs, which were luxuriating on
the acorns that covered the ground.

"My future care!" muttered the prince, with a grim smile, for he hardly
believed in the truth of all he was going through, and almost expected
to awake and find it was a dream.

The pigs, headed by a huge old boar, caught sight of the intruders at
the same time, and stood for a moment or two grunting in stolid
astonishment.

With all the gaiety of inexperience, the pup went at them single-handed,
causing the whole herd to turn and fly with ear-splitting screams--the
old boar bringing up the rear, and looking round, out of the corner of
his little eyes, with wicked intent.

Bladud, knowing the danger, sprang after them, shouting to the pup to
come back.  But Brownie's war-spirit had been aroused, and his training
in obedience had only just begun.  In a moment he was alongside the
boar, which turned its head and gave him a savage rip with a gleaming
tusk.  Fortunately it just barely reached the pup's flank, which it cut
slightly, but quite enough to cause him to howl with anger and pain.

Before the boar could repeat the operation, Bladud sent his club
whizzing in advance of him.  It was well aimed.  The heavy head alighted
just above the root of the boar's curly tail.  Instantly, as if
anticipating the inventions of the future, fifty steam whistles seemed
to burst into full cry.  The other pigs, in sympathetic alarm, joined in
chorus, and thus, yelling inconceivably, they plunged into a thicket and
disappeared.

Bladud almost fell to the ground with laughing, while Brownie, in no
laughing mood, came humbly forward to claim and receive consolation.
But he received more than consolation, for, while the prince was engaged
in binding up the wound, he poured upon him such a flood of solemn
remonstrance, in a tone of such injured feeling, that the pup was
evidently cut to the heart--his self-condemned, appealing looks proving
beyond a doubt that the meaning of what was said was plain to him,
though the language might be obscure.

On continuing the march, Brownie limped behind his master--a sadder and
a wiser dog.  They had not gone far when they came on another family of
pigs, which fled as before.  A little further on, another herd was
discovered, wallowing in a marshy spot.  It seemed to Bladud that there
was no good feeding in that place, and that the creatures were dirtying
themselves with no obvious end in view, so, with the pup's rather
unwilling assistance, he drove them to more favourable ground, where the
acorns were abundant.

At this point he reached a secluded part of the valley, or, rather, an
off-shoot from it, where a low precipice rose on one side, and thick
flowering shrubs protected the other.  The spot was considerably
elevated above the level of the low ground, and from an opening in the
shrubbery at the further extremity could be seen the larger valley with
all its wealth of forest and meadow, its knolls, and slopes, and wooded
uplands, with the river winding like a silver thread throughout its
whole extent.

Here the prince resolved to fix his abode, and, not a little pleased
with the successful way in which he had commenced his amateur
pig-herding, he set vigorously and patiently to work with the little
bronze hatchet, to fell such trees as would be required in the
construction of his future home.

CHAPTER TWENTY.

A STRANGE ABODE AND A WILD VISITOR.

Bladud's idea of a palace worthy of a prince was not extravagant.  He
erected it in three days without assistance or tools, except the bronze
axe and knife--Brownie acting the part of superintendent of the works.
Until it was finished, he slept with the forest trees for a shelter and
the sky for a canopy.

The edifice was nothing better than a small hut, or booth, constructed
of long branches bent in the shape of semi-hoops, the ends of which were
thrust into the ground.  The whole was thatched with dried grass and
bound down with ropes made of the same material.  It was further secured
against the possible influence of high winds, by heavy branches being
laid across it and weighted with stones.  Dried grass also formed the
carpeting on the floor.

Of course it was not so high that its architect could stand up in it,
but he could sit in it erect, and could lie down at full length without
showing his heels outside.  There was no door, but one end was left
unfinished as a substitute.  Neither was there a fireplace, the space in
front sufficing for a kitchen.

While engaged in its erection, Bladud was too busy to indulge in gloomy
thoughts, but as soon as it was finished and he had lain down to rest
under its shade, the terrible, almost incredible, nature of his position
rushed upon him in full force.  The opening of the hut had been so
arranged as to present a view of the wide-spreading valley, and he gazed
upon scenes of surpassing loveliness, in which all the sights that met
the eye breathed of beauty and repose, while the sounds that broke upon
the ear were suggestive of bird and beast revelling in the enjoyment of
the gifts and sunshine of a bountiful Creator.  But such sights and
sounds only enhanced the misery of the poor man, and he started up,
after a few minutes' contemplation, and rushed outside in the vain hope
of escaping from his misery by energetic action.

"This will drive me mad," he thought, as he paused and stood for a few
minutes irresolute.  "Better far to return to the East where tyrants
reign and people dare not call body and soul their own, and die fighting
in the front rank for liberty--but--but--who would let me join them,
knowing my disease?  `Unclean!'  I may not even come within touch of my
kind--"

His head sank on his breast and he tried to banish thought altogether.
At the same moment his eyes met the meek, patient look of Brownie.

"Ah, pup," he exclaimed, stooping to fondle the soft brown head as he
muttered to himself, "you teach me a lesson and put me to shame, despite
your want of speech.  You are awaiting my commands, ready to give
unquestioning obedience--whether to go to the right, or left, or to lie
down.  And here am I, not only a prince, but supposed to be a reasoning
man, rebelling against the decree of my Maker--my Spirit-Father!  Surely
there must be One who called my spirit into being--else had I never
been, for I could not create myself, and it must be His will that I am
smitten--and for a _good_ end, else He were not good!"

For a few minutes longer he continued to meditate in silence.  Then he
turned quickly and picked up the axe which lay at the entrance of the
hut.

"Come, pup," he cried, cheerfully, "you and I must build another house.
You see, we shall have plenty of game and venison soon to guard from the
wolves, and it would be disagreeable to keep it in the palace along with
ourselves--wouldn't it?  So, come along, Brownie."

Thus appealed to, the pup gave its assent by some violent tail
activities, and, in a few minutes, had resumed its former post as
superintendent of the works, while its master toiled like a second
Samson in the hope of driving mental distress away through the pores of
his skin.

He was not indeed altogether unsuccessful, for so intimate is the
mysterious connection between spirit and matter that he felt comparative
relief--even to the extent of cheerfulness--when the muscles were in
violent action and the perspiration was streaming down his brow; but
when the second hut, or larder, was completed his depression returned in
greater power than before.

Then he took to hunting with tremendous energy, a plan which was highly
approved of by his canine companion.  He also devoted himself to his
specific duties as swine-herd; collected the animals from all quarters
into several large herds, counted them as well as he could, and drove
them to suitable feeding-grounds.  On retiring each day from this work,
into which he threw all his power, he felt so fatigued as to be quite
ready for supper and bed.

Gradually he became accustomed to the life, and at length, after a
considerable time of it, a feeling of resignation to his fate began to
tell upon him.

The effect of prolonged solitude also began even to numb the powers of
his mind.  He was fully aware of this, and tried to shake it off, for he
shuddered more at the thought of mental than of physical decay.  Among
other things, he took to talking more frequently to Brownie, but
although the pup was, in many respects, a most valuable and sympathetic
companion, he could not prevent the conversation from being rather
one-sided.

By degrees the summer merged into autumn; the foliage assumed the tints
of green and gold.  Then it became russet, and finally the cold bleak
winds of a northern winter shrieked through the valley and swept the
leaves away.

During all this time no human being had gone near that region, or paid
the forlorn prince a visit, except once when the hunter of the Hot Swamp
made his appearance.

The rebellious tribes retained too vivid a recollection of the slaughter
that had taken place during and after the fight with King Hudibras, to
risk a second encounter with that monarch, so that the place was at that
time absolutely deserted by human beings--though it was sufficiently
peopled by the lower animals.  On the occasion when the hunter
unexpectedly appeared, he demanded of Bladud an account of his
stewardship.  The report was so satisfactory that the hunter became, for
him, quite amiable; commended his swine-herd and drove off a number of
the pigs to market.  On his return, laden with the few household goods
for which he had bartered them, he paid the prince another visit, and
even condescended to accept an invitation to enter his hut and partake
of a roast of venison which was at the time being prepared for the
mid-day meal.  He was still, however, very brusque and taciturn.

"No one has been near me during the whole summer or autumn but
yourself," observed Bladud with an involuntary sigh.

"You must be pleased at that," returned the hunter, sharply; "you said
you came here for solitude."

"Truly I did; but I had not thought it would be so hard to bear."

"Why do you seek it, then, if you don't like it?" asked the hunter in
the same brusque, impatient manner which characterised all his words and
actions.

"I am forced to seek it by a Power which may not be resisted with
impunity."

"There is no such power!" exclaimed the hunter with a wild, demoniac
laugh.  "I can resist any power--all powers.  There is nothing that I
cannot resist and overcome."

The gigantic man, with his dishevelled locks and shaggy beard, looked so
fierce and powerful, as he sat on the opposite side of the fire glaring
at his host, that Bladud became impressed with a hope that the maniac--
for such he evidently was--would not attempt to prove his resistless
power there and then.  In order to avert such a catastrophe, he assumed
an air of the most perfect ease and indifference to the boast, and asked
him with a bland smile if he would have another slice of venison.

The hunter seemed to be disconcerted by the question, but, being a
hungry man and a ravenous eater, he accepted the offer and began to eat
the slice in moody silence.

"Your good pup has been a real blessing to me," resumed the prince a few
minutes later, during which time he had devoted himself to his own
portion of food, "not only in the way of helping me to hunt and drive
the pigs, but as a companion who can do all but speak."

"He could speak if you would let him," returned the hunter.  "I speak to
my dogs continually, and they always answer--not with their tongues, for
that is not dog-language, but with their eyes--and I know every word
they speak.  You would wonder how clever they are, and what droll things
they say sometimes."

He burst into a wild hilarious laugh at this point, as if the thought of
the canine pleasantries were too much for him; then suddenly became
