camels. The cold was bitter and, in places where water had crossed
the road, there were slippery surfaces of ice--which hindered the
camels considerably--and it was past eight o'clock before the rear
guard arrived at the top of the pass. From a commanding position,
overlooking the defile and surrounding waste of rugged and barren
mountains, not an enemy could be seen; and it was hoped that the
report of the intended attack was a false one.

The troops now began to descend the defile, which was known as the
Manjiar Pass. Troublesome as the ascent had been, the descent was
infinitely more so; and it was with difficulty that the camels
could be made to go down the deep and slippery roads. The gorge was
five miles in length. The track, for the first part, ran through a
deep ravine of perpendicular walls; which narrowed in places to a
few yards, overhanging the path until they seemed to meet, and form
a tunnel, through which it ran. Had an attack been made on the
column, as it struggled with its difficulties through this portion
of the pass, the result would have been disastrous; for it would
have been impossible to place troops on the heights, to cover the
advance. Here and there side ravines broke into the road, in any of
which ambushes might have been laid.

It was not, however, until the difficult part of the road had been
passed, and a comparatively open valley reached, that any of the
natives were seen. Then a few men were observed on the heights but,
as they were supposed to be shepherds, no notice was taken of them.
Believing that all danger of attack was now over, the general
ordered all the troops--with the exception of the baggage guard,
which was composed of the 3rd Ghoorkas, and a few of the 72nd
Highlanders and Norfolk Rangers--to march forward to the camp;
which was to be pitched at a village called Keraiah, in the open
valley.

This, as the result proved, was a very rash move. Before the head
of the column had extricated itself from the ravine, numbers of the
country people were seen collecting, in small detached parties. By
degrees they closed in, and were soon within fifty yards of the
convoy. Captain Goad--in charge of the baggage--was close to a
small guard of 72nd Highlanders when, suddenly, a volley was fired
by the Mongals.

Captain Goad fell, his thigh bone broken by a bullet. Sergeant
Green, with three privates of the 72nd, picked him up and, having
placed him under cover of a rock, turned to defend themselves. They
were but four men against a large number; but they stood steady
and, firing with careful aim, and picking off their man each time,
they kept the enemy at bay until help arrived.

Simultaneously, all along the line of the baggage column, the
Mongals attacked. From the heights on both sides a fire was kept
up, while the more daring swept down in parties upon the rear guard
of Ghoorkas, commanded by Captain Powell. The baggage guard all
behaved with great steadiness; defending the path on both sides,
while the baggage animals continued their way along it.

William Gale was on duty with the party; and was, like the rest,
busy with his rifle. A sergeant next to him was hit in the leg; and
Will--laying down his rifle--stopped one of the camels, and
assisted the wounded man to mount it. The attack of the Mongals
became more furious, as they saw their anticipated prey escaping
them, in spite of all their efforts; but their attempts to close
were in vain, and the convoy made its way down to the village; with
the loss of one killed, and two officers, and eight men wounded.
Captain Powell and Captain Goad both died, from the effects of
their injuries. The enemy's loss must have been considerable, as
the fire of the troop was steady and accurate, and the distance
small.

After a halt, for a day or two, the column marched to Khuram, where
it encamped. Captain Herbert had reported to the colonel the manner
in which Private Gale had defended him, when wounded and attacked
by three Afghans; the incident, too, had been observed by many of
his comrades and, as a reward, the young soldier was promoted to
the rank of corporal; and the colonel told him that, had not
similar acts of bravery been performed in the hand-to-hand action,
on the Spingawi-Khotal, he would have been mentioned for the
Victoria Cross.

The mountain tops were now deep in snow; but in the valley the
temperature was very agreeable, and the troops enjoyed their rest
much. This was not, however, to be of long duration. From the lower
end of the Khuram valley runs off another valley, known as the
"Khost." This was an entirely unknown country to the Europeans, but
it was said to be extremely hostile. Parties had come down and
carried off cattle and, at any time, a formidable raid might have
taken place, and our line of communication been entirely cut.

The country was ruled by an Afghan governor, who sent in to say
that he was willing to hand it over to us. There was, therefore, no
expectation that there would be any resistance; and the expedition
was designed rather to overawe the country, and to obtain
information as to its extent and capabilities, than with any idea
of permanent occupation. The column consisted of a squadron of the
10th Hussars, the 5th Bengal Cavalry, the 21st and 28th Punjaub
Infantry, two mountain batteries, a wing of the 72nd Highlanders,
and two companies of the Norfolk Rangers. This force marched from
Hazir-pir, and halted for the night at Jaji-Midan, at the head of
the valley leading to the Darwiza Pass, through which the track
runs into the Khost valley.

At eight o'clock next morning, the troops moved forward. The ground
was difficult, for the road ran between terraced fields on the side
of the ravine, and obliged men and animals to pass in single file.
It was not, therefore, until twelve o'clock that the rear guard
moved out of the camp. Beyond this point, the road up the pass was
not difficult. From the summit, a wide view was obtained. At the
end of the valley--six miles distant--the plain of the Khost
country was seen. It was seen that--owing to the slow progress the
troops were making--the baggage train, consisting of 1000 camels,
would not be able to reach the proposed camping ground, at the
lower end of the valley, before dark. The general, therefore,
ordered it to halt at the top of the pass, where the ground was
open. The 21st Punjaubees, and a mountain battery, were to stay
there for its protection; and bring it on, next day. The mules,
with the regimental baggage, went on with the troops.

The column met with no opposition. It halted near the village of
Bakh, half a mile from the foot of the hills; where the valley
widened into a plain, six miles long and four broad. The force
encamped here on the 4th, to allow the convoy to come up. The
following morning the column marched to the other end of the
valley; and the next day the Afghan governor of Matun--the chief
place of the Khost--rode in to welcome the general.

On the 6th of January the force marched to Matun. They found that
this fort was a square-walled enclosure, 100 yards each side, with
circular corner bastions. There was a central square enclosure,
with round towers at its angles. As the fort was approached, its
garrison--which consisted of 100 local militia--were formed up, in
two lines, at a mosque outside the fort. The general with his staff
rode in, and a long interview took place between him and the
governor. The troops encamped outside.

In the evening information came in, from the villages in the plain,
that large numbers of the Mongals--who inhabited the hills--were
meditating an attack. Strong pickets were posted, and the night
passed quietly. In the morning large numbers of tribesmen flocked
down into the villages, and gradually surrounded the camp.

At one o'clock the troops fell in. The cavalry were sent out
against the enemy in the northwest direction, followed by the 28th
Punjaubees and Number 2 mounted battery. The Mongals at once fell
back to the hills.

The squadron of the 10th Hussars were dismounted, and ordered to
skirmish up a small knoll to the west. From this they drove the
enemy, who gathered again on a spur opposite. Here they were
charged by the 5th Punjaub Cavalry, and fell back higher up the
ridge. The mountain guns and infantry now arrived, and speedily
drove them over the crest.

General Roberts, with his staff, rode out to watch the skirmish;
and soon after he had left the enemy, who occupied the village to
the northeast, showed in force. Two of the mountain guns opened
upon them.

On the south they now approached, under the cover of the old Afghan
cavalry lines, to within half a mile before being perceived; and
also occupied a walled village there. The other two guns in camp
shelled the village, and soon drove the enemy out.

When the general returned to camp, at half-past two, he found the
attack driven off in all directions; and ordered the 21st Punjaubees,
the 72nd Highlanders, and the Norfolk Rangers to follow up the enemy
to the east and southeast, with the mountain guns; and to burn the
villages which had sheltered the enemy. The first village was found
deserted. At another, a quarter of a mile behind, the enemy made a
stand; but were shelled out, and the plain beyond the Matun river was
soon covered with fugitives. Major Stewart--with forty men of the 5th
Punjaub Cavalry, who accompanied the column--charged 400 of them, and
cut down many; until checked by the heavy fire of matchlock men from
the high bank.

No more fighting took place. The combination of tribes which had
attacked the camp were estimated at 6000 men. Eighty prisoners were
taken. These, two nights afterwards, took advantage of a night
alarm to attempt to escape, and attacked the guard. The attempt,
however, was frustrated; but only after several of the prisoners
had been shot down.

Some days passed, quietly. Reconnaissances were made up the valley.
While waiting here, the news of the capture of Candahar, by General
Stewart, arrived. Parties of engineers surveyed the country, and
all passed off quietly.

On the 25th, a portion of the force marched back to Hazir-pir On
the 26th of January the general determined to withdraw this force
altogether; as no advantage was gained by its retention, and the
garrison would be constantly exposed to the attacks of the natives,
who were already threatening it. The fort was handed over to Sultan
Jan, a man of good family, who was appointed to govern the Khost,
temporarily. He had under him the guard of the former governor, and
some fresh natives; being, in all, 300 men. The headmen of the
villages were called together, and these promised to obey his rule.

Some of the chiefs of the Mongals, and other neighboring tribes,
came in. Sheep were given to them, and they were told that, so long
as they desisted from interference in the valley, no steps would be
taken against them. The troops, however, had only made one day's
march when a messenger arrived from Sultan Jan; saying that,
immediately the troops had marched, the Mongals had come down to
attack the fort. A strong party were therefore marched back at
once. After destroying the stores, and setting fire to the fort,
they drew off the governor and marched back to camp; the Mongals,
although in great force, not venturing to offer any resistance.

On the return of the force to the Khuram valley, a wing of the
Norfolk Rangers was sent up to reinforce the troops stationed on
the top of the Peiwar-Khotal; as the Jajis and Mongals had been
gathering in large numbers, and threatening an attack on that post.

William Gale was, with his company, stationed at Ali-Kheyl. The
enemy abstained from any open attack, but they often harassed the
sentries. One night, Will was corporal in charge of a picket of
eight men, posted at a hut half a mile from the village. The object
of the picket was to prevent any sudden attack being made upon the
company; who were in a small village, a quarter of a mile in the
rear, where a large quantity of grain was stored. Two men were
posted as sentries, some hundred yards in advance of the hut.

Will had visited the sentry to the right and, finding all was well,
here, moved across to the left.

"Is everything quiet?" he asked the sentry.

"I don't know, corporal. Two or three times I have thought that I
heard noises, and twice I have challenged."

"What sort of noise?"

"Once it seemed to be a crack, like a dried stick when some one
treads on it. The other time it was as if a stone had been
dislodged."

"I will wait with you," Will said. "Two pairs of ears are better
than one."

Again there was a slight sound heard.

"I don't like to fire," Will said. "The alarm would spread, and the
whole camp get under arms. There is something moving, I am
convinced; but it may be only a stray bullock. I will go forward,
and see if I can make it out; and do you stand ready to fire, if I
am attacked.

"After doing so, fall back on the picket, at once. If the enemy are
in force, hold the hut to the last. In ten minutes you will have
help from the village, behind."

Holding his rifle advanced, in readiness to fire, William Gale made
his way forward, cautiously, towards the spot whence the noise
seemed to proceed. When he was some forty yards in advance of the
sentry, a number of figures rose suddenly from some bushes, and
fired. Will fired, and saw the man at whom he aimed go down but, at
the same instant, three or four guns were discharged; and he fell
to the ground, shot through the leg. There was a rush of men
towards him. A tulwar was waved, and fell, with a crushing blow, on
his shoulder; and he became insensible.

When he recovered consciousness he was being carried along, a man
holding his arms and another his legs. The pain was excruciating,
and he fainted again; after hearing, during his brief period of
consciousness, a sharp fusilade of musketry, which told him that
his comrades were defending the hut against the enemy.

When again he came to his senses, it was daylight. He was lying in
a small room, and an old woman was applying bandages to the sword
cut on his shoulder. Although he did not know it, he was ten miles
from the spot where the attack had been made.

Among those who had taken part in it was the head of a small Jaji
village, lying behind the hills. This chief was a crafty old
savage, who had been desirous of remaining neutral in the strife.
The determination of his people to join in the attack, by the
tribes, had forced him to consent to their so doing. Before
starting he had, however, made them swear that any wounded men who
fell into their hands should not--in accordance with the Afghan
custom--be instantly despatched; but should be brought back to the
village.

His intention was to have some hostages. If the English repulsed
the attack and, in the spring, again advanced; he would be able to
prove his goodwill to the cause, by handing the soldiers whom he
had protected over to them. Upon the other hand, should the British
fall back and the Afghans advance in the spring, he could hand the
prisoners over to them, or send them down to Cabul, as a proof that
his people had fought against the British. He had himself
accompanied his men and, seeing after Will had fallen that he was
still living, had at once ordered two of his men to carry him off
to the village.

The attack upon the guard house proved unsuccessful. The six
soldiers defended themselves until the company from the village,
behind, came up to the rescue. Several other attacks, at various
points, took place. But the British were on the alert; and the
hillsmen, finding that their enemies were not to be taken by
surprise, scattered again to the village.

The ball had fortunately passed through William Gale's leg, without
either breaking a bone or cutting an artery; but the wound in the
shoulder was more serious, and the effect of the strain upon it, in
carrying him, brought on violent inflammation. Fever set in with
delirium and, for weeks, the lad lay between life and death.

The old woman who nursed him was, like most of her country people,
skilled in the treatment of wounds. The bandages were kept bathed
with water, snow was constantly applied to his head, and a
decoction of herbs given him to drink. His good constitution was in
his favor and, at last, he recovered his senses; to find himself
convalescent, but as weak as an infant.

In April the snow melted; and the chief, having by this time found
that the English were not likely to advance beyond Ali-Kheyl,
thought that it would best benefit his interest to send his
prisoner down to Cabul. The Ameer was reported to be about to
conclude peace with the British; and the chief thought that he was
more likely to receive a reward, from him, for the care he had
bestowed upon the prisoner, than from the English. Moreover, it
would have been difficult to send him into the English camp,
through the hostile villages; while no unfavorable comment would be
incited, by his sending his prisoner down to Cabul.

Will Gale was far too weak to perform the journey on foot. He was,
therefore, placed on a camel. The chief himself, and four of his
headmen, accompanied him as an escort and, a week after the pass
was open, they started up the valley to the Shatur-Gardan; and
thence descended into the Logan Valley, below, on the way to Cabul.



Chapter 12: The Advance Up The Khyber.
