a miscellaneous armoury much too extensive to be described.

It was interesting to observe the monkey-like countenance of old Meerta
as she watched the effect produced on her visitors, her little black
eyes sparkling in the lamp-light more brightly than the finest gems
there; and not less interesting was it to note the half-amused, more
than half-amazed, and partially imbecile gaze of the still silent
visitors.  Little Letta enjoyed their looks quite as much as Meerta.

"Haven't we got lots of pretty things here?" she said, looking up into
Robin's face.

"Yes, little one,--wonderful!"

Robin revived sufficiently to make this reply and to glance at Sam,
Slagg, and Stumps, who returned the glance.  Then he relapsed.

Snatching the lamp from his hand, old Meerta now led the party to a
remote corner of the cave, where a number of large casks were ranged at
one end, and covered with a sheet of leather.

"Ha! ha!" laughed their wild guide, in a sort of screech, "here be de
grandest jools, de finest dimunds of all, what buys all de rest!"

She lifted a corner of the skin, removed the loose head of a cask, and
holding the lamp close over the opening, bade them look in.  They did
so, and the effect was powerful as well as instantaneous, for there,
only a few inches below the flaring light, lay an open barrel of
gunpowder!

The senses of Sam Shipton returned like a flash of lightning--interest,
surprise, admiration vanished like smoke, as he uttered a shout, and,
with one hand seizing the wrist of the withered arm that held the lamp,
with the other he hastily drew the leathern cover over the exposed
powder and held it down.

"You old curmudgeon!" he cried; "here, Robin, take the lamp from her,
and away with it into the outer cave."

Our hero promptly obeyed, while the other two, under an instinct of
self-preservation, had already fled in the same direction, followed by a
shrill and half-fiendish laugh from the old woman.

"Well, I never had such a narrow escape," said Sam, as he issued from
the cave, still holding Meerta firmly, though not roughly, by the wrist.

"Why, there's enough powder there, I do believe," said Jim Slagg, "to
split the whole island in two."

"There, it's all safe now," said Sam, as he locked the heavy door and
thrust the key in his pocket; "and I will take care of your treasures
for you in future, old lady."

"Wass you frighted?" asked the old woman with a low laugh, in which even
Letta joined.

"Frighted, you reckless old thing," replied Sam, seizing a tankard of
water and draining it, "of course I was; if a spark had gone down into
that cask, you would have been considerably frighted too."

"I'm not so sure of that," said Stumps; "she wouldn't have had time to
get a fright."

"O no!" said Meerta; "I's niver frighted.  Many time me stan' by dat
keg, t'inkin', t'inkin', t'inkin' if me stuff de light in it, and blow
de pyrits vid all dere tings to 'warsl smash; but no--me tinks dat some
of dem wasn't all so bad as each oder."

This thought seemed to have the effect of quieting the roused spirit of
the poor old woman, for thereafter a softened expression overspread her
wrinkled face as she went silently about clearing away the debris of the
recent feast.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE PIRATE'S ISLAND--CONTINUED.

Next morning Sam Shipton awoke from a sound and dreamless slumber.
Raising himself on the soft ottoman, or Eastern couch, on which he had
spent the night, he looked round in a state of sleepy wonder, unable at
first to remember where he was.  Gradually he recalled the circumstances
and events of the preceding day.

The forms of his companions lay on couches similar to his own in
attitudes of repose, and the seaman still slept profoundly in the
position in which he had been laid down when brought in.

Through the mouth of the cavern Sam could see the little garden, glowing
like an emerald in the beams of the rising sun, and amongst the bushes
he observed the old couple stooping quietly over their labour of
gathering weeds.  The warm air, the bright sunshine, and the soft cries
of distant sea-birds, induced Sam to slip into such of his garments as
he had put off, and go out quietly without rousing his companions.

In a few minutes he stood on the summit of the islet and saw the wide
ocean surrounding him, like a vast sparkling plain, its myriad wavelets
reflecting now the dazzling sun, now the azure vault, the commingling
yellow and blue of which resulted in a lovely transparent green, save
where a few puffs of wind swept over the great expanse and streaked it
with lines of darkest blue.

"Truly," murmured Sam, as he gazed in admiration at the glorious expanse
of sea and sky, "Robin is right when he says that we are not half
sufficiently impressed with the goodness of the Almighty in placing us
in the midst of such a splendid world, with capacity to appreciate and
enjoy it to the full.  I begin to fear that I am a more ungrateful
fellow than I've been used to think."

For some time he continued to gaze in silence as if that thought were
working.

From his elevated position he could now see that the islet was not quite
so barren as at first he had been led to suppose.  Several little
valleys and cup-like hollows lay nestling among the otherwise barren
hills, like lovely gems in a rough setting.  Those, he now perceived,
must have been invisible from the sea, and the rugged, almost
perpendicular, cliffs in their neighbourhood had apparently prevented
men from landing and discovering their existence.  One of the valleys,
in particular, was not only larger than the others, but exceptionally
rich in vegetation, besides having a miniature lake, like a diamond, in
its bosom.

Descending the hill and returning to the cave, Sam found his comrades
still asleep.  Letta was assisting old Meerta in the preparation of a
substantial breakfast that would not have done discredit to a
first-class hotel.

"Oh, I'm so glad you've come!" said Letta, running up, to him and giving
him both hands to shake, and a ready little mouth to kiss, "for I didn't
like to awaken your friends, and the sailor one looks so still that I
fear he may be dying.  I saw one of the naughty men die here, and he
looked just like that."

Somewhat alarmed by this, Sam went at once to the sailor and looked
earnestly at him.

"No fear, Letta," he said, "the poor fellow is not dying; he is only in
a very profound sleep, having been much exhausted and nearly killed
yesterday.  Hallo, Robin! awake at last?"

Robin, who had been roused by the voices, rubbed his eyes, yawned
vociferously, and looked vacantly round.

"Well, now, that's most extraordinary; it isn't a dream after all!"

"It's an uncommon pleasant dream, if it is one," remarked Jim Slagg,
with a grave stare at Robin, as he sat up on his couch.  "I never in all
my born days dreamt such a sweet smell of coffee and fried sausages.
Why, the old 'ooman's a-bringin' of 'em in, I do declare.  Pinch me,
Stumps, to see if I'm awake!"

As Stumps was still asleep, Slagg himself resorted to the method
referred to, and roused his comrade.  In a few minutes they were all
seated at breakfast with the exception of the sailor, whom it was
thought best to leave to his repose until nature should whisper in his
ear.

"Well now," said Slagg, pausing to rest for a few seconds, "if we _had_
a submarine cable 'tween this and England, and we was to give 'em an
account of all we've seen an' bin doin', they'd never believe it."

"Cer'nly not.  They'd say it wos all a passel o' lies," remarked Stumps;
"but I say, Mr Sam--"

"Come now, Stumps, don't `Mister' me any more."

"Well, I won't do it any more, though 'tain't easy to change one's
'abits.  But how is it, sir, that that there electricity works?  That's
what I wants to know.  Does the words run along the cable,--or 'ow?"

"Of course they do, Stumpy," interrupted Slagg, "they run along the
cable like a lot o' little tightrope dancers, an' when they come to the
end o't they jumps off an' ranges 'temselves in a row.  Sometimes, in
coorse, they spells wrong, like bad schoolboys, and then they've to be
walloped an' set right."

"Hold your noise, Slagg, an' let your betters speak," returned Stumps.

"Well, if they don't exactly do that," said Sam Shipton, "there are
people who think they can do things even more difficult.  I remember
once, when I was clerk at a country railroad station and had to work the
telegraph, an old woman came into the ticket office in a state of wild
despair.  She was about the size and shape of Meerta there, but with
about an inch and a half more nose, and two or three ounces less brain.

"`What's wrong, madam?'  I asked, feeling quite sorry for the poor old
thing.

"`Oh! sir,' said she, clasping her hands, `I've bin an' left my
passel,--a brown paper one it was,--on the seat at the last station, an'
there was a babby's muffler in it--the sweetest thing as ever was--an'
f-fi' pun t-ten, on'y one sh-shillin' was b-bad--boo-hoo!'

"She broke down entirely at this point, so, said I, `Madam, make your
mind quite easy, sit down, and I'll telegraph at once,' so I
telegraphed, and got a reply back immediately that the parcel had been
found all right, and would be sent on as soon as possible.  I told this
to the old lady, who seemed quite pleased, and went on to the platform
to wait.

"I was pretty busy for the next quarter of an hour, for it was market
day at the next town, but I noticed through the window that the old lady
was standing on the platform, gazing steadily up at the sky.

"`Broxley--third class,' said a big farmer at that moment, with a head
like one of his own turnips.

"I gave him his ticket, and for five minutes more I was kept pretty
busy, when up came the train; in got the struggling crowd; whew! went
the whistle, and away went the whole affair, leaving no one on the
platform but the porter, and the old woman still staring up at the sky.

"`What's the matter, madam?'  I asked.

"`Matter!' she exclaimed, `a pretty telegraph _yours_ is to be sure!
wuss than the old carrier by a long way.  Here 'ave I bin standin' for
full 'alf-an-hour with my neck nigh broke, and there's no sign of it
yet.'

"`No sign of what, madam?'

"`Of my brown paper passel, to be sure.  Didn't you tell me, young man,
that they said they'd send it by telegraph as soon as possible?'

"`No, madam,' I replied, `I told you they had telegraphed to say they
would send it on as soon as possible--meaning, of course, by rail, for
we have not yet discovered the method of sending parcels by telegraph--
though, no doubt, we shall in course of time.  If you'll give me your
address I'll send the parcel to you.'

"`Thank you, young man.  Do,' she said, giving me an old envelope with
her name on it.  `Be sure you do.  I don't mind the money much, but I
couldn't a-bear to lose that muffler.  It was _such_ a sweet thing,
turned up with yaller, and a present too, which it isn't many of 'em
comes my way.'

"So you see, Stumps, some people have queer notions about the powers of
the telegraph."

"But did the old lady get the parcel all right?" asked Stumps, who was a
sympathetic soul.

"Of course she did, and came over to the station next day to thank me,
and offer me the bad shilling by way of reward.  Of course I declined it
with many expressions of gratitude."

While they were thus adding intellectual sauce to the material feast of
breakfast, the rescued sailor awoke from his prolonged sleep, and
stretched himself.

He was a huge, thick-set man, with a benign expression of countenance,
but that phase of his character was somewhat concealed at the time by
two black eyes, a swollen nose, a cut lip, and a torn cheek.  Poor
fellow, he had suffered severely at the hands of the pirates, and
suddenly checked the stretch in which he was indulging with a sharp
groan, or growl, as he sat up and pressed his hand to his side.

"Why, what's the matter with me, an' where am I?" he exclaimed, gazing
round the cave, while a look of wonder gradually displaced the
expression of pain.

"You're all right--rescued from the pirates at all events," answered Sam
Shipton, rising from table and sitting down beside the seaman's couch.

"Thank God for that!" said the man earnestly, though with a troubled
look; "but how did I escape--where are the rascals?--what--"

"There, now, don't excite yourself, my man; you're not quite yourself in
body.  Come, let me feel your pulse.  Ah, slightly feverish--no wonder--
I'll tell you all about it soon, but at present you must be content
merely to know that you are safe in the hands of friends, that you are
in the pirates' cave, and that the pirates and their vessel are now at
the bottom of the sea."

"That's hardly c'rect, Mr Shipton," murmured Slagg; "I would have said
they was blow'd to hatoms."

The seaman turned and looked at the speaker with what would have been a
twinkle if his swelled visage would have permitted, but the effort
produced another spasm of pain.

"I must examine you, friend," said Sam; "you have been severely handled.
Help me to strip him, Robin."

The poor man at once submitted.

"You're a doctor, sir, I suppose?" he asked.

"No," said Sam, "only an amateur; nevertheless I know what I'm about.
You see, I think that every man in the world, whatever his station or
profession, should be at least slightly acquainted with every subject
under the sun, in connection with which he may be called on to act.  In
other words, he should know at least a little about surgery, and physic,
and law, and carpentering, blacksmithing, building, cooking, riding,
swimming, and--hallo! why, two of your ribs are broken, my man!"

"Sorry to hear it, sir, but not surprised, for I feels as if two or
three o' my spines was broken also, and five or six o' my lungs bu'sted.
You won't be able to mend 'em, I fear."

"Oh, yes, I shall," said Sam cheerily.

"Ah! that's well.  I'd thowt that p'r'aps you wouldn't have the tools
'andy in these parts for splicin' of 'em."

"Fortunately no tools are required," returned Sam.  "I'll soon put you
right, but you'll have to lie still for some time.  Here, Robin, go into
the store-cave and fetch me a few yards of that white cotton, you
remember, near the door.  And, I say, mind you keep well clear of the
powder."

When the cotton was brought, Sam tore it up into long strips, which he
wound somewhat tightly round the sailor's huge chest.

"You see," he observed, as he applied the bandages, "broken ribs are not
necessarily displaced, but the action of breathing separates the ends of
them continually, so that they can't get a chance of re-uniting.  All we
have to do, therefore, is to prevent your taking a full breath, and this
is accomplished by tying you up tight--so.  Now, you can't breathe fully
even if you would, and I'd recommend you not to try.  By the way--what's
your name?"

"Johnson, sir,--John Johnson."

"Well, Johnson, I'll give you something to eat and drink now, after
which you'll have another sleep.  To-morrow we'll have a chat on things
in general."

"I say," asked Robin that night, as he and Sam stood star-gazing
together beside a small fire which had been kindled outside the
cavern-mouth for cooking purposes, "is it true that you have studied all
the subjects you mentioned to Johnson this morning?"

"Quite true.  I have not indeed studied them long or profoundly, but I
have acquired sufficient knowledge of each to enable me to take
intelligent action, as I did this morning, instead of standing
helplessly by, or, what might be worse, making a blind attempt to do
something on the chance that it might be the right thing, as once
happened to myself when a bungling ignoramus gave me a glass of brandy
to cure what he called mulligrumps, but what in truth turned out to be
inflammation."

"But what think you of the saying that `a little knowledge is a
dangerous thing,' Sam."

"I think that, like most of the world's maxims, it is only partially, or
relatively, true.  If Little Knowledge claims the position and attempts
to act the part of Great Knowledge, it becomes dangerous indeed; but if
Little Knowledge walks modestly, and only takes action when none but
Ignorance stands by, it is, in my opinion, neither dangerous nor liable
to be destructive."

While they were speaking, little Letta came out of the cavern and ran
towards them.
