likely to put his heart wrong than his head right with these wicked
black eyes of hers.  Have a care, Glumm: they pierce deeper than the
sword of the berserk."

Ada pretended not to hear this, but she appeared by no means displeased,
as she led Glumm to an inner chamber, whither they were followed by
Alric, whose pugnacious soul had been quite fascinated by the story of
the recent fight, and who was never tired of putting questions as to
minute points.

As Glumm sat down on a low stool to enable Ada to get at his head, she
said (for she was very proud of her lover's prowess, and her heart
chanced to be in a melting mood that night), "Thou hast done well
to-day, it would seem?"

"It is well thou thinkest so," replied Glumm curtly, remembering
Erling's advice.--"No, boy," he added, in reply to Alric, "I did not
kill the one with the black helmet; it was Erling who gave him his
deathblow."

"Did Hake the berserk look _dreadfully_ fierce?" asked Alric.

"He made a few strange faces," replied Glumm.

"The wound is but slight," observed Ada, in a tone that indicated a
little displeasure at the apparent indifference of her lover.

"It might have been worse," replied Glumm.

"Do tell me all about it again," entreated Alric.

"Not now," said Glumm; "I'll repeat it when Hilda is by; she has not
heard it yet--methinks she would like to hear it."

"Hilda like to hear it!" cried the lad, with a shout of laughter; "why,
she detests fighting almost as much as the hermit does, though, I must
say, for a man who hates it, he can do it wonderfully well himself!  But
do tell me, Glumm, what was the cut that Erling gave when he brought
down that second man, you know--the big one--"

"Which? the man whose head he chopped off, with half of the left
shoulder?"

"No; that was the fourth.  I mean the other one, with--"

"Oh, the one he split the nose of by accident before battering down
with--"

"No, no," cried Alric, "I mean the one with the black beard."

"Ha!" exclaimed Glumm, "that wasn't the second man; his fall was much
further on in the fight, just after Erling had got hold of the
battle-axe.  He whirled the axe round his head, brought it from over the
left down on Blackbeard's right shoulder, and split him to the waist."

"Now, that is finished," said Ada sharply, as she put away the things
that she had used in the dressing of the wound.  "I hope that every foe
thou hast to deal with in future may let thee off as well."

"I thank thee, Ada, both for the dressing and the good wish," said Glumm
gravely, as he rose and walked into the hall, followed by his
persevering and insatiable little friend.

Ada retired hastily to her own chamber, where she stood for a moment
motionless, then twice stamped her little foot, after which she sat down
on a stool, and, covering her face with both hands, burst into a
passionate flood of tears.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

IN WHICH ALRIC BOASTS A LITTLE, DISCOVERS SECRETS, CONFESSES A LITTLE,
AND DISTINGUISHES HIMSELF GREATLY.

Next day there was great bustle at Ulfstede, and along the shores of the
fiord, for the men of Horlingdal were busy launching their ships and
making preparations to go to the Springs to meet and hold council with
King Harald Haarfager.

It had been finally resolved, without a dissentient voice, that the
whole district should go forth to meet him in arms, and thus ensure fair
play at the deliberations of the Thing.  Even Haldor no longer objected;
but, on the contrary, when he heard his son's account of his meeting
with the King, and of the dastardly attempt that had been made to
assassinate him and his friend, there shot across his face a gleam of
that wild ferocity which had procured him his title.  It passed quickly
away, however, and gave place to a look of sad resignation, which
assured those who knew him that he regarded their chance of opposing the
King successfully to be very small indeed.

The fleet that left the fiord consisted of the longships of Ulf, Haldor,
Erling, Glumm, and Guttorm, besides an innumerable flotilla of smaller
crafts and boats.  Many of the men were well armed, not only with
first-rate weapons, but with complete suits of excellent mail of the
kinds peculiar to the period--such as shirts of leather, with steel
rings sewed thickly over them, and others covered with steel scales--
while of the poorer bonders and the thralls some wore portions of
defensive armour, and some trusted to the thick hides of the wolf, which
were more serviceable against a sword-cut than many people might
suppose.  All had shields, however, and carried either swords, bills,
spears, javelins, axes, or bows and arrows, so that, numbering as they
did, about a thousand men, they composed a formidable host.

While these rowed away over the fiord to the Springs to make war or
peace--as the case might be--with King Harald, a disappointed spirit was
left behind in Horlingdal.

"I'm sure I cannot see why I should not be allowed to go too," said
little Alric, on returning to Haldorstede, after seeing the fleet set
forth.  "Of course I cannot fight so well as Erling _yet_, but I can do
_something_ in that way; and can even face up to a full-grown man when
occasion serves, as that red-haired Dane knows full well, methinks, if
he has got any power of feeling in his neck!"

This was said to Herfrida, who was in the great hall spreading the board
for the midday meal, and surrounded by her maidens, some of whom were
engaged in spinning or carding wool, while others wove and sewed, or
busied themselves about household matters.

"Have patience, my son," said Herfrida.  "Thou art not yet strong enough
to go forth to battle.  Doubtless, in three or four years--"

"Three or four years!" exclaimed Alric, to whom such a space of time
appeared an age.  "Why, there will be no more fighting left to be done
at the end of three or four years.  Does not father say that if the King
succeeds in his illegal plans all the independence of the small kings
will be gone for ever, and--and--of course I am old enough to see that
if the small kings are not allowed to do as they please, there will be
no more occasion for war--nothing but a dull time of constant peace!"

Herfrida laughed lightly, while her warlike son strutted up and down the
ancestral hall like a bantam cock, frowning and grunting indignantly, as
he brooded over the dark prospects of peace that threatened his native
land, and thought of his own incapacity, on account of youth, to make
glorious hay while yet the sun of war was shining.

"Mother," he said, stopping suddenly, and crossing his arms, as he stood
with his feet planted pretty wide apart, after the fashion of those who
desire to be thought very resolute--"mother, I had a dream last night."

"Tell it me, my son," said Herfrida, sitting down on a low stool beside
the lad.

Now, it must be known that in those days the Northmen believed in dreams
and omens and warnings--indeed, they were altogether a very
superstitious people, having perfect faith in giants, good and bad;
elves, dark and bright; wraiths, and fetches, and guardian spirits--
insomuch that there was scarcely one among the grown-up people who had
not seen some of these fabulous creatures, or who had not seen some
other people who had either seen them themselves or had seen individuals
who _said_ they had seen them!  There were also many "clear-sighted" or
"fore-sighted" old men and women, who not only saw goblins and
supernatural appearances occasionally, and, as it were, accidentally,
like ordinary folk, but who also had the gift--so it is said--of seeing
such things when they pleased--enjoyed, as it were, an unenviable
privilege in that way.  It was therefore with unusual interest that
Herfrida asked about her son's dream.

"It must have been mara [nightmare], I think," he said, "for though I
never had it before, it seemed to me very like what Guttorm Stoutheart
says he always has after eating too hearty a meal."

"Relate it, my son."

"Well, you must know," said Alric, with much gravity and importance, for
he observed that the girls about the room were working softly that they
might hear him, "I dreamed that I was out on the fells, and there I met
a dreadful wolf, as big as a horse, with two heads and three tails, or
three heads and two tails, I mind not which, but it gave me little time
to notice it, for, before I was aware, it dashed at me, and I turned to
run, but my feet seemed to cleave to the earth, and my legs felt heavy
as lead, so that I could scarce drag myself along, yet, strange to say,
the wolf did not overtake me, although I heard it coming nearer and
nearer every moment, and I tried to shout, but my voice would not come
out."

"What hadst thou to supper last night?" asked Herfrida.

"Let me think," replied the boy meditatively; "I had four cuts of
salmon, three rolls of bread and butter, half a wild-duck, two small
bits of salt-fish, some eggs, a little milk, and a horn of ale."

"It must have been mara," said she, thoughtfully; "but go on with thy
dream."

"Well, just as I came to the brink of the river, I looked back and saw
the wolf close at my heels, so I dropped suddenly, and the wolf tumbled
right over me into the water, but next moment it came up in the shape of
another monster with a fish's tail, which made straight at me.  Then it
all at once came into my head that my guardian spirit was behind me, and
I turned quickly round, but did not see it."

"Art thou quite sure of that, my son?"

Herfrida asked this in a tone of great anxiety, for to see one's own
guardian spirit was thought unlucky, and a sign that the person seeing
it was "fey", or death-doomed.

"I'm quite sure that I did not," replied Alric, to the manifest relief
of his mother; "but I saw a long pole on the ground, which I seized, and
attacked the beast therewith, and a most notable fight we had.  I only
wish that it had been true, and that thou hadst been there to see it.
Mara fled away at once, for I felt no more fear, but laid about me in a
way that minded me of Erling.  Indeed, I don't think he could have done
it better himself.  Oh! how I do wish, sometimes, that my dreams would
come true!  However, I killed the monster at last, and hurled him into
the river, after which I felt tossed about in a strange way, and then my
senses left me, and then I awoke."

"What thinkest thou of the dream?" said Herfrida to a wrinkled old crone
who sat on a low stool beside the fire.

The witch-like old creature roused herself a little and said:

"Good luck is in store for the boy."

"Thanks for that, granny," said Alric; "canst say what sort o' good luck
it is?"

"No; my knowledge goes no further.  It may be good luck in great things,
it may be only in small matters; perhaps soon, perhaps a long time
hence: I know not."

Having ventured this very safe and indefinite prophecy, the old woman
let her chin drop on her bosom, and recommenced the rocking to and fro
which had been interrupted by the question; while Alric laughed, and,
taking up a three-pronged spear, said that, as he had been disappointed
in going to see the fun at the Springs, he would console himself by
going and sticking salmon at the foss [waterfall].

"Wilt thou not wait for midday meal?" said Herfrida.

"No, mother; this roll will suffice till night."

"And then thou wilt come home ravening, and have mara again."

"Be it so.  I'd run the risk of that for the sake of the chance of
another glorious battle such as I had last night!"

Saying this the reckless youth sallied forth with the spear or leister
on his shoulder, and took the narrow bridle path leading up the glen.

It was one of those calm bright days of early autumn in which men _feel_
that they draw in fresh life and vigour at each inhalation.  With the
fragrant odours that arose from innumerable wild flowers, including that
sweetest of plants, the lily of the valley, was mingled the pleasant
smell of the pines, which clothed the knolls, or hung here and there
like eyebrows on the cliffs.  The river was swollen considerably by
recent heat, which had caused the great glaciers on the mountain tops to
melt more rapidly than usual, and its rushing sound was mingled with the
deeper roar of the foss, or waterfall, which leaped over a cliff thirty
feet high about two miles up the valley.  Hundreds of rills of all sizes
fell and zigzagged down the mountains on either side, some of them
appearing like threads of silver on the precipices, and all, river and
rills, being as cold as the perpetual ice-fields above which gave them
birth.  Birds twittered in the bushes, adding sweetness to the wild
music, and bright greens and purples, lit up by gleams of sunshine,
threw a charm of softness over the somewhat rugged scene.

The Norse boy's nature was sensitive, and peculiarly susceptible of
outward influences.  As he walked briskly along, casting his eager gaze
now at the river which foamed below him, and anon at the distant
mountain ridges capped with perennial snows, he forgot his late
disappointment, or, which is the same thing, drowned it in present
enjoyment.  Giving vent to his delight, much as boys did a thousand
years later, by violent whistling or in uproarious bursts of song, he
descended to the river's edge, with the intention of darting his salmon
spear, when his eye caught sight of a woman's skirt fluttering on one of
the cliffs above.  He knew that Hilda and Ada had gone up the valley
together on a visit to a kinswoman, for Herfrida had spoken of expecting
them back to midday meal; guessing, therefore, that it must be them, he
drew back out of sight, and clambered hastily up the bank, intending to
give them a surprise.  He hid himself in the bushes at a jutting point
which they had to pass, and from which there was a magnificent view of
the valley, the fiord, and the distant sea.

He heard the voices of the two girls in animated conversation as they
drew near, and distinguished the name of Glumm more than once, but, not
being a gossip by nature, he thought nothing of this, and was intent
only on pouncing out on them when they should reach a certain stone in
the path.  Truth constrains us to admit that our young friend, like many
young folk of the present day, was a practical joker--yet it must also
be said that he was not a very bad one, and, to his honour be it
recorded, he never practised jokes on old people!

It chanced, however, that the two friends stopped short just before
reaching the stone, so that Alric had to exercise patience while the
girls contemplated the view--at least while Hilda did so, for on Ada's
face there was a frown, and her eyes were cast on the ground.

"How lovely Horlingdal looks on such a day!" observed Hilda.

"I have no eyes for beautiful things to-night," said Ada pettishly; "I
cannot get over it--such cool, thankless indifference when I took the
trouble to dress his--his--stupid head, and then, not satisfied with
telling the whole story over to thee, who cares no more for it than if
it were the slaying of half a dozen sheep, he must needs go and pay
frequent visits to Ingeborg and to Halgerda of the Foss--and--and--But I
know it is all out of spite, and that he does not care a bodkin for
either of them, yet I cannot bear it, and I _won't_ bear it, so he had
better look to himself.  And yet I would not for the best mantle in the
dale that he knew I had two thoughts about the matter."

"But why play fast and loose with him?" said Hilda, with a laugh at her
companion's vehemence.

"Because I like it and I choose to do so."

"But perchance he does not like it, and does not choose to be treated
so."

"I care not for that."

"Truly thy looks and tone belie thee," said Hilda, smiling.  "But in all
seriousness, Ada, let me advise thee again to be more considerate with
Glumm, for I sometimes think that the men who are most worth having are
the most easily turned aside."

"Hast thou found it so with Erling?" demanded Ada half-angrily.

Hilda blushed scarlet at this and said:

"I never thought of Erling in this light; at least I never--he never--
that is--"

Fortunately at this point Alric, in his retreat among the bushes, also
blushed scarlet, for it only then flashed upon him that he had been
acting the mean part of an eavesdropper, and had been listening to
converse which he should not have heard.  Instead, therefore, of
carrying out his original intention, he scrambled into the path with as
much noise as possible, and coughed, as he came awkwardly forward.

"Why, the wicked boy has been listening," cried Ada, laying her hand
upon the lad's shoulder, and looking sternly into his face.

"I have," said Alric bluntly.

"And art thou not ashamed?"

"I am," he replied, with a degree of candour in his self-condemnation
which caused Ada and Hilda to burst into a hearty fit of laughter.

"But," said Ada, becoming grave again, "thou hast heard too much for thy
good."

"I know it," he replied, "and I'm sorry, Ada, but cannot help it now.
This will I say, however: I had no wish or intention to hear when I hid
myself.  My desire was only to startle thee and Hilda, and before I
thought what thou wert talking of the thing was out, and now I have got
it I cannot unget it."

"True, but thou canst keep it," said Ada.

"I can, and ye may rest assured no word or look of mine shall betray
thee.  I'll even try to conceal it from myself, and think it was a
dream, unless, indeed, I see a good chance of helping thee in this
affair!"

Alric laughed as he said this, and the girls joined him, after which
they all went on towards Haldorstede together.

On reaching the place where Alric had intended to fish, Ada suggested
that he should go and try his fortune, so he ran down to the river, and
