meet them.

"Some more of this accursed race of rebels!" he exclaimed.

"We are quiet travelers," John said, "journeying from Capitolias to
Tarichea. We have harmed no one, my lord."

"You are all the same," the Roman said, scowling. "You speak us
fair one day, and stab us in the back the next.

"Pomponius," he said to a sergeant, "put these two lads with the
rest. They ought to fetch a good price, for they are strong and
active. As to the girl, I will make a present of her, to the
general, to send to his wife in Rome. She is the prettiest Jewess I
have seen, since I entered the country. The old woman can go. She
is of no use to anyone."

Illustration: Mary and the Hebrew Women in the Hands of the Romans.

Martha threw her arms round Mary; and would have striven to resist,
with her feeble strength, the carrying out of the order, when John
said in Hebrew:

"Mother, you will ruin us all, and lose your own life! Go home
quietly, and trust to me to save Mary."

The habit of submitting to her husband's will, which Martha had
practiced all her life, asserted itself. She embraced Mary
passionately, and drew aside as the Roman soldiers approached; and
then, tottering away a short distance, sank weeping on the ground.
Mary shed no tear but, pale as death, walked by the side of a
soldier, who led her to the rear of the cavalcade, where four or
five other young women were standing, in dejected attitudes.

John and Jonas were similarly placed, with some young men, in the
midst of the Roman soldiers. Their hands were tied behind them, and
the troop resumed its way. They were traveling by the road along
which the little party had just come. Whenever a house or small
village was seen, half of the troop galloped off. Flames were soon
seen to rise, and parties of wretched captives were driven in.

When about halfway to Capitolias, the troop halted. The horses were
turned into a field of ripe corn, to feed. Half the men sat down to
a meal, while the remainder stood on guard over the captives. John
had whispered to Jonas to work his hands so as to loosen his cords,
if possible; and the lad, whose bones were very small, soon said
that he could slip the ropes off without difficulty.

It was harder work for John and, indeed, while on the march he did
not venture to exert himself, fearing that the movements would be
noticed by his guards. But when they halted, he got into the middle
of the group of captives, and tried his best to loosen the cords.
Jonas was close beside him.

"It is of no use, Jonas," he said. "The cords are cutting into my
flesh, and they will not yield in the slightest."

"Let me try, John.

"Stand round close," Jonas said to the other captives, in Hebrew.
"I want to loosen my friend's knots. If he can get away, he will
bring rescue to you all."

The others moved so as to completely cover the movements of Jonas;
and the lad, stooping down, applied his teeth to the knot in John's
cords, and soon succeeded in loosening it.

"That will be enough, Jonas. I can draw my hand through, now."

Jonas again stood up.

"When I make an effort to escape, Jonas, do you dash between the
horsemen, and run for it. In the confusion you will get a start,
and they will not overtake you until you are across the river. Once
on the hill, you are safe. If you remain behind and I get away, as
likely as not one of the soldiers would send a javelin through you,
as being my companion."

After half an hour's halt, the Romans again mounted their horses
and turned to retrace their steps. Two Romans rode on either side
of the captives, who were about fifty in number; and John gradually
made his way to the front of the party, between the two leading
horsemen.

The officer, talking to his sergeant, rode a few paces ahead, in
the middle of the road. Since the cords had been loosened, John had
continued to work his fingers until the circulation was restored.
Suddenly he slipped his hands from their fastenings, gave three
bounds forward, and vaulted on to the back of the horse behind the
officer. He had drawn the knife which had been hidden in his
girdle; and he threw one arm round the officer, while he struck the
knife deep into the horse's flank. The animal reared in the air and
then, at a second application of the knife, sprang forward at the
top of his speed, before the astonished Roman knew what had
happened. John held him in his arms like a vice and, exerting all
his strength, lifted him from the saddle and hurled him headlong to
the ground; where he lay, bleeding and insensible.

John had now time to look round. Struck with astonishment at the
sudden incident which had passed under their eyes, the Romans had,
at first, instinctively reined in their horses. The sergeant had
been the first to recover himself and, shouting to the five leading
soldiers on each side to follow him, had spurred in pursuit, just
as his officer was hurled to the ground. But John was already some
fifty yards away, and felt sure that he could not be overtaken.

He had remarked the horse ridden by the officer, while they were
eating; and saw that it was of far higher blood and swifter pace
than any of those ridden by the soldiers. His own weight, too, was
far less than that of the heavy-armed men in pursuit of him and,
with a shout of scornful defiance, and a wave of his hand, he
continued his course. Before a mile had been passed he had left his
pursuers far in the rear and, seeing the hopelessness of the
pursuit, they presently reined up and returned to the main body.

Jonas had carried out John's instructions and, the instant the
latter sprang on the officer, he slipped under the belly of the
horse next to him and ran, at the top of his speed, for the river.
It was but a hundred yards away, and he had gone three quarters the
distance before any of the soldiers--confused at the attack upon
their officer, doubtful whether the whole of the captives were not
about to fall upon them, and without orders how to act, set out in
pursuit.

Jonas plunged into the stream, dived to the other side, and then
sprang forward again, just as three or four soldiers reached the
bank he had left. Their javelins were hurled after him, but without
effect and, with a shout of triumph, he sprang up the hillside, and
was soon safe from pursuit.

As soon as he saw that the Romans had turned back, John sprang from
his horse, unstrapped the heavy armor which covered its chest and
sides, and flung it away; and then, mounting, resumed his course.
At the first house he came to he borrowed a shepherd's horn and, as
he approached the first village, sounded his signal for the assembly.

Two or three young men ran out from their houses, as he dashed up;
for there was not a village in those parts from which some of the
young men had not gone up to the mountains to join him, after the
fall of Gamala, and all were ready to follow him anywhere. He
rapidly gave them orders to go to all the villages round; and
instruct the young men to assemble, with all speed possible, at
their old trysting place near Jabez Galaad; and to spread the news
as they went, some from each village being sent as messengers to
others. Then he pursued his way at full speed and, by sunset, had
issued his orders in some twenty villages.

Being convinced that, by night, a sufficient number of men would
have gathered in the mountain for his purpose, he rode back to the
river, swam his horse across; and then, leaving it to shift for
itself, made his way up the mountain. Some seventy or eighty men
had already arrived at the appointed place, and fresh parties were
coming in every minute. Jonas was already there, John having
arranged with him to watch the movements of the Romans until the
sun set, and then to bring word to the place of meeting as to their
movements.

"Well, Jonas, what is your news?"

"The Romans have halted, for the night, at a spot about a mile this
side of where we left them. They remained where they were, until
the party who had ridden after you returned; then they went slowly
back, after having made a litter with their spears, on which four
of them carried the officer you threw from his horse--what a crash
he made! I heard the clang of his arms, as I was running. They
stopped near one of the villages they burned as we went past; and
when I turned to make my way here their fires were burning, so
there's no doubt they mean to halt there for the night."

"That is good news, indeed!" John said. "Before morning we will
rouse them up in a way they little expect."

John's followers arrived eager for the fight, for the news of the
devastations committed by this party of Romans had roused the whole
district to fury. As a rule the Romans, except when actually on a
campaign, abstained from all ill treatment of the inhabitants--the
orders against plundering and injuring the people being here, as in
other countries held by the Roman arms, very stringent. In the
present case, there was no doubt that Roman soldiers had been
killed; but these had brought their fate upon themselves, by their
ill treatment and insult of the villagers, and no notice would have
been taken of the slaying of men while acting in disobedience of
orders, had it not been that they belonged to the company of
Servilius Maro.

He was a young noble, possessed of great influence in Rome, and of
a ferocious and cruel disposition; and he had urged the general so
strongly to allow him to go out, to inflict punishment upon the
country people, that consent had reluctantly been given. But even
at this time, although the Jews were not aware of it, a messenger
was on his way to Servilius with peremptory orders to him to return
at once to Scythopolis, as most serious reports as to his cruelty
to peaceful inhabitants had come to the general's ears.

But that message Servilius was never to receive. By midnight,
upwards of four hundred men had gathered at the rendezvous in the
mountains. John divided the force into four bodies, and gave each
their orders as to the part that they were to take; and then
marched down the hill, crossed the river, and advanced towards the
Roman bivouac.

When within a quarter of a mile of the fires, the band broke up
into sections and proceeded to surround the enemy. When each
company reached the position John had marked out for it, the men
began to crawl slowly forward towards the Romans. John sounded a
note on his horn and, with a shout, the whole band rushed to their
feet and charged down upon the enemy. Before the latter could
spring to their feet, and mount their horses, the Jews were among
them.

John, with a picked band of twenty men, at once made his way to the
center of the camp; where the captives, ignorant of the cause of
this sudden alarm, stood huddled together. Placing his men around
them, to prevent any Roman soldier injuring them, John joined in
the fray.

It was short. Taken by surprise, unable to get together and form in
order of defense, the Roman soldiers were surrounded and cut down,
each man fighting stubbornly to the last. One of the first to fall
was their leader who, springing to his feet at the alarm, had
rushed just as he was, without helmet or armor, among his soldiers,
and was stabbed in a dozen places before he had time to draw his
sword.

The moment the conflict was over, and the last Roman had fallen,
John ordered his men to disperse, at once.

"Regain your homes before morning," he said. "There may be other
parties of Romans out, and it is as well that none, even of your
friends, should see you return; and then the Romans will have no
clue as to those who have taken part in this night's business. Take
not any of their arms, or spoils. We have fought for vengeance, and
to relieve our friends, not for plunder. It is well that the Romans
should see that, when they hear of the disaster and march out to
bury the dead."

The men were already crowding round the captives, relieving them
from their bonds and, in many cases, embracing and weeping on their
necks, for among them were many friends and relations of the
rescuing party.

John soon found Mary.

"Is this a miracle you have performed, John?" the girl said. "Can
it be true that our captors have been slain, and that we are free?"

"Yes, dear, we can continue our journey."

"But how has it happened, John; how has it all come about?"

"Jonas and I escaped, as I suppose you know, Mary."

"There was a great confusion and stir upon the road," Mary said,
"but I did not know what had happened, until we got here. Then some
of the men said that two of the captives had escaped; and that one
of them jumped on to the horse of the officer and overthrew him,
and had ridden off. They said they were both young and, as I missed
you both from among the party, I thought it must have been you.

"But how did all these men come together?"

"I rode round the country, calling upon the young men in the
villages to take up arms, to rescue their friends who had been
carried away captive into slavery, and to revenge the destruction
which this band of ruffians had caused. There were plenty of brave
men ready to undertake the task and, as you see, we have carried it
out.

"And now, Mary, we had best be going. You see, the others are
dispersing fast; and it is as well to be as far from here, by
morning, as possible. A troop of Roman horse may come along,
journeying between Scythopolis and Capitolias; and if they came
upon this camp, they might scour all the country."

"I am ready, John. What a fate you have saved me from! I have
seemed in a dream, ever since the Romans met us this afternoon. I
have tried to think of what my life was going to be, but could not.
When we got here I tried to weep, but no tears would come. I have
been sitting there, as still and cold as if frozen, till I heard
the notes of a horn.

"Oh, John, do you know John of Gamala was there?"

"How do you know, Mary?" John asked, in surprise.

"One of the young men who was a captive was lying near, and he
leaped to his feet when the horn sounded, and shouted, 'There is
John of Gamala's horn; we are saved.' Did you know he was with
you?"

"Yes, I knew he was," John said.

"You won't say anything against him, again," Mary said. "Why did
you not bring him here to us, that we might thank him?"

"Certainly I will not say anything against him, in future, Mary.

"And now, let us be going. I am very anxious about my poor mother.
We will follow the road to the spot where we left her. By the time
we get there, morning will be breaking. We will inquire for her, at
every village we pass through; for I am sure she cannot have gone
far. The Romans did not take the asses but, even with them, she
could not have traveled far, and probably took shelter at the first
place which she came to."

This proved to be the case. At the first village they arrived at
after passing the spot at which they had been taken captives, they
heard that, late the evening before, a woman had arrived in sore
distress. She was leading two asses, which she seemed too feeble to
mount. She stated that her son and daughter had been carried away
by the Romans; and she had been received, for the night, in the
principal house in the village.

Martha's delight, when John and Mary entered the house where she
had been sheltered, was beyond words. She fell on their neck and
kissed them, with broken sentences of thankfulness to God at their
deliverance; and it was some time before she was sufficiently calm
to hear how their escape had been effected, by the night attack
upon the Romans by the country people. She was scarcely surprised
when she heard that John had effected his escape, and summoned the
people to rise to rescue them.

"You told me to trust to you to save Mary, John; and I have kept on
saying your words, over and over again, to myself. It seemed to me
as if I did not quite understand them, and yet there was comfort in
them. I could not even think what you could do to help Mary; and
yet it appeared as if you, yourself, must have some hope."

As soon as Martha was sufficiently recovered from her emotions to
resume their journey, the party again started. They made a detour
to avoid Hippos for, as John said, there might be inquiries as to
everyone who was noticed coming from the direction of the scene of
the struggle. They made many halts by the way, for Martha was
scarcely able to retain her seat on the donkey, and even Mary was
greatly shaken by the event of her captivity and rescue. During the
heat of the day they remained under the shade of some trees, and
the sun was setting when they approached the farm.

Simon and the men hurried out, when the sound of the asses' feet
was heard. Martha burst into tears, as he assisted her to alight.

"What ails you, wife? I trust that no evil has befallen you by the
way. Where are the maids?

"Why, Mary, my child, you look pale, too!"

"No wonder, uncle, that aunt is shaken, and that I look pale. For
John, and I, and Jonas were taken captives by the Romans, who
carried us off to sell as slaves, leaving poor mother behind."

"And how then have you escaped, child?"

"John and Jonas got away from them, and raised all the country; for
the Romans had done much harm, killing, and carrying away captives,
and burning. So when he called them the men took up arms, and fell
upon the Romans at night and slew them all, and rescued me, and
some fifty other captives who had fallen into their hands."

Simon asked no further questions, for the time, but helped Martha
into the house, and then handed her over to the care of Mary and,
half an hour later, she had recovered sufficiently to return to the
room; and sit there, holding Simon's hand in quiet happiness, and
watching Mary as she resumed her accustomed tasks, and assisted old
Isaac in preparing supper.

"Everything looks just as it was, mother. I could hardly have
believed things would have got on so well, without me to look after
them. And there are quantities of grapes on the vines, still. They
are too ripe for wine, but they will last us, for eating, for
months, and that is ever so much better than making them into
wine--"

She stopped, for Simon had taken his place at the head of the
table; and offered up thanks, in the name of the whole household,
for the mercies that had been vouchsafed to them; and especially
that they were all, once again, assembled together in their house,
without there being one vacant place.

Then the meal began. While it was eaten, many questions were asked,
on both sides; Simon inquiring about his brother-in-law, and his
family, and the life they had led at the farm; Martha asking after
their neighbors--who had suffered, and who had escaped without loss
or harm. When Isaac and the men retired, Jonas rose also to go, but
Simon stopped him.

"Remain with us, Jonas. Your life has been strangely cast in that
of John's, and I would that, henceforth, you take your place as one
of the family. You saved his life at Jotapata, and you will
henceforth be as an adopted son to me.

"Martha, I know that you will spare some of your affection for the
lad, who is as a younger brother to John; and who would, I
believe--nay I feel sure--if need be, give his life for his
friend."

"I would do so, indeed," Jonas said, simply. "He found me an
outcast, whom none cared for. He has treated me like a brother, and
I would gladly die for him."

Martha said a few kind words to Jonas, whose quiet and somewhat
subdued manner, and whose evident affection for John, had greatly
pleased her; and Mary gave him a little nod, which signified that
she gladly accepted him as one of the family.

"And now, Martha," Simon said, "you have not yet told me how proud
you must feel, in the doings of our son. Our friends here are never
weary of congratulating me; and truly I feel thankful that a son of
mine should have done such deeds, and that the Lord should have
chosen him, to use him as an instrument of his will."

"My dear father," John interrupted, "I have told you that there is
nothing at all out of the way in what we have done. Jonas and the
others did just as much as I did, and methinks that some of them
make much more than is needful of our skirmishes, and praise me
because in so doing they praise themselves, who did as much as I
did."

"But I do not understand you, Simon," Martha said. "I know that
John fought bravely at Jotapata, and that it was marvelous that he
and Jonas escaped, when so many fell. Is it this that you are
speaking of?"

"What! Has John said nothing about what he has been doing, since?"
Simon asked, in surprise.

"No, father, I said nothing about it," John said, before his mother
could speak. "I thought, in the first place, that you would like to
tell them; and in the next, the people there had heard such
magnified reports that I could not, for very shame, lay claim to be
the hero they had pictured to themselves."

"But what has he done?" Martha asked, more and more surprised;
while Mary, at his last words, sprang to her feet, and stood
looking at him with an intent and eager face.

"He should have told you, Martha," Simon said. "It is no light
thing that this son of ours has done. Young as he is, the eyes of
the people are upon them. For with a small band, which he gathered
here, he harassed the enemy several days and, boldly entering their
camp, destroyed it by fire."

"Oh, John!" Mary said, in a low voice; while Martha exclaimed:

"What! Is the John, of whom we have heard so much--the young man,
of whom the people speak as their future leader--our boy? You
