plain as words can put it, `Come unto me, all ye that labour and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.'  You tell me it is of no use to
go to Him, and you don't go, and then you complain that He has forsaken
you!  Where is my friend Hetty?"

"In hospital."

"Indeed!  I have been here several times lately to inquire, but have
always found your door locked.  Your husband--"

"He's in prison, and Bobby's gone to the bad," said Mrs Frog, still in
a tone of sulky defiance.

"I see no sign of food," said the Bible-nurse, glancing quickly round;
"are you hungry?"

"Hungry!" exclaimed the woman fiercely, "I've tasted nothin' at all
since yesterday."

"Poor thing!" said the Bible-nurse in a low tone; "come--come with me.
I don't say more.  You cannot speak while you are famishing.  Stay,
first one word--" She paused and looked up.  She did not kneel; she did
not clasp her hands or shut her eyes, but, with one hand on the
door-latch, and the other grasping the poor woman's wrist, she prayed--

"God bless and comfort poor Mrs Frog, for Jesus' sake."

Then she hurried, without uttering a word, to the Institution in George
Yard.  The door happened to be open, and the figure of a man with white
hair and a kind face was seen within.

Entering, the Bible-nurse whispered to this man.  Another moment and
Mrs Frog was seated at a long deal table with a comfortable fire at her
back, a basin of warm soup, and a lump of loaf bread before her.  The
Bible-nurse sat by and looked on.

"Somebody cares a little, don't _you_ think?" she whispered, when the
starving woman made a brief pause for breath.

"Yes, thank God," answered Mrs Frog, returning to the meal as though
she feared that some one might still snatch it from her thin lips before
she got it all down.

When it was finished the Bible-nurse led Mrs Frog into another room.

"You feel better--stronger?" she asked.

"Yes, much better--thank you, and quite able to go home."

"There is no occasion for you to go home to-night; you may sleep there,"
(pointing to a corner), "but I would like to pray with you now, and read
a verse or two."

Mrs Frog submitted, while her friend read to her words of comfort;
pleaded that pardon and deliverance might be extended, and gave her
loving words of counsel.  Then the poor creature lay down in her corner,
drew a warm blanket over her, and slept with a degree of comfort that
she had not enjoyed for many a day.

When it was said by Mrs Frog that her son Bobby had gone to the bad, it
must not be supposed that any very serious change had come over him.  As
that little waif had once said of himself, when in a penitent mood, he
was about as bad as he could be, so couldn't grow much badder.  But when
his sister lost her situation in the firm that paid her such splendid
wages, and fell ill, and went into hospital in consequence, he lost
heart, and had a relapse of wickedness.  He grew savage with regard to
life in general, and committed a petty theft, which, although not
discovered, necessitated his absence from home for a time.  It was while
he was away that the scene which we have just described took place.

On the very next day he returned, and it so happened that on the same
day Hetty was discharged from hospital "cured."  That is to say, she
left the place a thin, tottering, pallid shadow, but with no particular
form of organic disease about her.

She and her mother had received some food from one who cared for them,
through the Bible-nurse.

"Mother, you've been drinkin' again," said Hetty, looking earnestly at
her parent's eyes.

"Well, dear," pleaded Mrs Frog, "what could I do?  You had all forsaken
me, and I had nothin' else to comfort me."

"Oh! mother, darling mother," cried Hetty, "do promise me that you will
give it up.  I won't get ill or leave you again--God helping me; but it
will kill me if you go on.  _Do_ promise."

"It's of no use, Hetty.  Of course I can easily promise, but I can't
keep my promise.  I _know_ I can't."

Hetty knew this to be too true.  Without the grace of God in the heart,
she was well aware that human efforts _must_ fail, sooner or later.  She
was thinking what to reply, and praying in her heart for guidance, when
the door opened and her brother Bobby swaggered in with an air that did
not quite accord with his filthy fluttering rags, unwashed face and
hands, bare feet and unkempt hair.

"Vell, mother, 'ow are ye?  Hallo!  Hetty! w'y, wot a shadder you've
become!  Oh!  I say, them nusses at the hospital must 'ave stole all
your flesh an' blood from you, for they've left nothin' but the bones
and skin."

He went up to his sister, put an arm round her neck, and kissed her.
This was a very unusual display of affection.  It was the first time
Bobby had volunteered an embrace, though he had often submitted to one
with dignified complacency, and Hetty, being weak, burst into tears.

"Hallo!  I say, stop that now, young gal," he said, with a look of
alarm, "I'm always took bad ven I see that sort o' thing, I can't stand
it."

By way of mending matters the poor girl, endeavouring to be agreeable,
gave a hysterical laugh.

"Come, that's better, though it ain't much to boast of,"--and he kissed
her again.

Finding that, although for the present they were supplied with a small
amount of food, Hetty had no employment and his mother no money, our
city Arab said that he would undertake to sustain the family.

"But oh!  Bobby, dear, don't steal again."

"No, Hetty, I won't, I'll vork.  I didn't go for to do it a-purpose, but
I was overtook some'ow--I seed the umbrellar standin' handy, you know,
and--etceterer.  But I'm sorry I did it, an' I won't do it again."

Swelling with great intentions, Robert Frog thrust his dirty little
hands into his trouser pockets--at least into the holes that once
contained them--and went out whistling.

Soon he came to a large warehouse, where a portly gentleman stood at the
door.  Planting himself in front of this man, and ceasing to whistle in
order that he might speak, he said:--

"Was you in want of a 'and, sir?"

"No, I wasn't," replied the man, with a glance of contempt.

"Sorry for that," returned Bobby, "'cause I'm in want of a sitivation."

"What can you do?" asked the man.

"Oh! hanythink."

"Ah, I thought so; I don't want hands who can do anything, I prefer
those who can do something."

Bobby Frog resumed his whistling, at the exact bar where he had left
off, and went on his way.  He was used to rebuffs, and didn't mind them.
But when he had spent all the forenoon in receiving rebuffs, had made
no progress whatever in his efforts, and began to feel hungry, he ceased
the whistling and became grave.

"This looks serious," he said, pausing in front of a pastry-cook's shop
window.  "But for that there plate glass _wot_ a blow hout I might 'ave!
Beggin' might be tried with advantage.  It's agin the law, no doubt,
but it ain't a _sin_.  Yes, I'll try beggin'."

But our Arab was not a natural beggar, if we may say so.  He scorned to
whine, and did not even like to ask.  His spirit was much more like that
of a highwayman than a beggar.

Proceeding to a quiet neighbourhood which seemed to have been forgotten
by the police, he turned down a narrow lane and looked out for a
subject, as a privateer might search among "narrows" for a prize.  He
did not search long.  An old lady soon hove in sight.  She seemed a
suitable old lady, well-dressed, little, gentle, white-haired, a
tottering gait, and a benign aspect.

Bobby went straight up and planted himself in front of her.

"Please, ma'am, will you oblige me with a copper?"

The poor old lady grew pale.  Without a word she tremblingly, yet
quickly, pulled out her purse, took therefrom a shilling, and offered it
to the boy.

"Oh! marm," said Bobby, who was alarmed and conscience-smitten at the
result of his scheme, "I didn't mean for to frighten you.  Indeed I
didn't, an' I won't 'ave your money at no price."

Saying which he turned abruptly round and walked away.

"Boy, boy, _boy_!" called the old lady in a voice so entreating, though
tremulous, that Bobby felt constrained to return.

"You're a most remarkable boy," she said, putting the shilling back into
her purse.

"I'm sorry to say, marm, that you're not the on'y indiwidooal as 'olds
that opinion."

"What do you mean by your conduct, boy?"

"I mean, marm, that I'm wery 'ard up.  _Uncommon_ 'ard up; that I've
tried to git vork an' can't git it, so that I'm redooced to beggary.
But, I ain't a 'ighway robber, marm, by no means, an' don't want to
frighten you hout o' your money if you ain't willin' to give it."

The little tremulous old lady was so pleased with this reply that she
took half-a-crown out of her purse and put it into the boy's hand.  He
looked at her in silent surprise.

"It ain't a _copper_, marm!"

"I know that.  It is half-a-crown, and I willingly give it you because
you are an honest boy."

"But, marm," said Bobby, still holding out the piece of silver on his
palm, "I _ain't_ a honest boy.  I'm a thief!"

"Tut, tut, don't talk nonsense; I don't believe you."

"Vel now, this beats all that I ever did come across.  'Ere's a old
'ooman as I tells as plain as mud that I'm a thief, an' nobody's better
able to give a opinion on that pint than myself, yet she _won't_ believe
it!"

"No, I won't," said the old lady with a little nod and a smile, "so, put
the money in your pocket, for you're an honest boy."

"Vell, it's pleasant to 'ear that, any'ow," returned Bobby, placing the
silver coin in a vest pocket which was always kept in repair for coins
of smaller value.

"Where do you live, boy?  I should like to come and see you."

"My residence, marm, ain't a mansion in the vest-end.  No, nor yet a
willa in the subarbs.  I'm afear'd, marm, that I live in a district that
ain't quite suitable for the likes of you to wisit.  But--"

Here Bobby paused, for at the moment his little friend Tim Lumpy
recurred to his memory, and a bright thought struck him.

"Well, boy, why do you pause?"

"I was on'y thinkin', marm, that if you wants to befriend us poor boys--
they calls us waifs an' strays an' all sorts of unpurlite names--you've
on'y got to send a sov, or two to Miss Annie Macpherson, 'Ome of
Hindustry, Commercial Street, Spitalfields, an' you'll be the means o'
doin' a world o' good--as I 'eard a old gen'l'm with a white choker on
say the wery last time I was down there 'avin' a blow out o' bread an'
soup."

"I know the lady and the Institution well, my boy," said the old lady,
"and will act on your advice, but--"

Ere she finished the sentence Bobby Frog had turned and fled at the very
top of his speed.

"Stop! stop! stop!" exclaimed the old lady in a weakly shout.

But the "remarkable boy" would neither stop nor stay.  He had suddenly
caught sight of a policeman turning into the lane, and forthwith took to
his heels, under a vague and not unnatural impression that if that limb
of the law found him in possession of a half-crown he would refuse to
believe his innocence with as much obstinacy as the little old lady had
refused to believe his guilt.

On reaching home he found his mother alone in a state of amused
agitation which suggested to his mind the idea of Old Tom.

"Wot, bin at it again, mother?"

"No, no, Bobby, but somethin's happened which amuses me much, an' I
can't keep it to myself no longer, so I'll tell it to you, Bobby."

"Fire away, then, mother, an' remember that the law don't compel no one
to criminate hisself."

"You know, Bob, that a good while ago our Matty disappeared.  I saw that
the dear child was dyin' for want o' food an' warmth an' fresh air, so I
thinks to myself, `why shouldn't I put 'er out to board wi' rich people
for nothink?'"

"A wery correct notion, an' cleverer than I gave you credit for.  I'm
glad to ear it too, for I feared sometimes that you'd bin an' done it."

"Oh!  Bobby, how could you ever think that!  Well, I put the baby out to
board with a family of the name of Twitter.  Now it seems, all unbeknown
to me, Mrs Twitter is a great helper at the George Yard Ragged Schools,
where our Hetty has often seen her; but as we've bin used never to speak
about the work there, as your father didn't like it, of course I know'd
nothin' about Mrs Twitter bein' given to goin' there.  Well, it seems
she's very free with her money and gives a good deal away to poor
people."  (She's not the only one, thought the boy.) "So what does the
Bible-nurse do when she hears about poor Hetty's illness but goes off
and asks Mrs Twitter to try an' git her a situation."

"`Oh!  I know Hetty,' says Mrs Twitter at once, `That nice girl that
teaches one o' the Sunday-school classes.  Send her to me.  I want a
nurse for our baby,' that's for Matty, Bob--"

"What! _our_ baby!" exclaimed the boy with a sudden blaze of excitement.

"Yes--our baby.  She calls it _hers_!"

"Well, now," said Bobby, after recovering from the fit of laughter and
thigh-slapping into which this news had thrown him, "if this don't beat
cockfightin' all to nuffin'! why, mother, Hetty'll know baby the moment
she claps eyes on it."

"Of course she will," said Mrs Frog; "it is really very awkward, an' I
can't think what to do.  I'm half afraid to tell Hetty."

"Oh! don't tell her--don't tell her," cried the boy, whose eyes sparkled
with mischievous glee.  "It'll be sich fun!  If I 'ad on'y the chance to
stand be'ind a door an' see the meetin' I wouldn't exchange it--no not
for a feed of pork sassengers an' suet pud'n.  I must go an' tell this
to Tim Lumpy.  It'll bust 'im--that's my on'y fear, but I must tell 'im
wotever be the consikences."

With this stern resolve, to act regardless of results, Bob Frog went off
in search of his little friend, whose departure for Canada had been
delayed, from some unknown cause, much to Bob's satisfaction.  He found
Tim on his way to the Beehive, and was induced not only to go with him,
but to decide, finally, to enter the Institution as a candidate for
Canada.  Being well-known, both as to person and circumstances, he was
accepted at once; taken in, washed, cropped, and transformed as if by
magic.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

SIR RICHARD VISITS THE BEEHIVE, AND SEES MANY SURPRISING THINGS.

"My dear Mrs Loper," said Mrs Twitter over a cup of tea, "it is very
kind of you to say so, and I really do think you are right, we have done
full justice to our dear wee Mita.  Who would ever have thought,
remembering the thin starved sickly child she was the night that Sam
brought her in, that she would come to be such a plump, rosy, lovely
child?  I declare to you that I feel as if she were one of my own."

"She is indeed a very lovely infant," returned Mrs Loper.  "Don't you
think so, Mrs Larrabel?"

The smiling lady expanded her mouth, and said, "very."

"But," continued Mrs Twitter, "I really find that the entire care of
her is too much for me, for, although dear Mary assists me, her studies
require to be attended to, and, do you know, babies interfere with
studies dreadfully.  Not that I have time to do much in that way at
present.  I think the Bible is the only book I really study now, so, you
see, I've been thinking of adding to our establishment by getting a new
servant;--a sort of nursery governess, you know,--a cheap one, of
course.  Sam quite agrees with me, and, as it happens, I know a very
nice little girl just now--a very very poor girl--who helps us so nicely
on Sundays in George Yard, and has been recommended to me as a most
deserving creature.  I expect her to call to-night."

"Be cautious, Mrs Twitter," said Mrs Loper.  "These _very_ poor girls
from the slums of Whitechapel are sometimes dangerous, and, excuse me,
rather dirty.  Of course, if you know her, that is some security, but I
would advise you to be very cautious."

"Thank you, my dear," said Mrs Twitter, "I usually am very cautious,
and will try to be so on this occasion.  I mean her to be rather a sort
of nursery governess than a servant.--That is probably the girl."

She referred to a rather timid knock at the front door.  In another
second the domestic announced Hetty Frog, who entered with a somewhat
shy air, and seemed fluttered at meeting with unexpected company.

"Come in, Hetty, my dear; I'm glad to see you.  My friends here know
that you are a helper in our Sunday-schools.  Sit down, and have a cup
of tea.  You know why I have sent for you?"

"Yes, Mrs Twitter.  It--it is very kind.  Our Bible-nurse told me, and
I shall be so happy to come, because--but I fear I have interrupted you.
I--I can easily come back--"

"No interruption at all, my dear.  Here, take this cup of tea--"

