of blood-stained calico.

Lawrence at once examined the wound.

"A slight wound, indeed," he said, "but vigorously dealt.  I can see
that,--and you've had a narrow escape, too.  Half an inch higher up
would have been fatal."

"Yes, it was meant to kill," was Pedro's quiet rejoinder; "but, thank
God, I had a friend near who meant to save, and he turned the knife
aside in time.  Sit down now, I'll tell you how it happened.

"My business required me to visit a certain tribe of Indians at a
considerable distance from here, where the country is somewhat
disturbed, and the white inhabitants are threatening to cut each other's
throats by way of mending political affairs.  They took me for a spy.
It is not the first time that I have been taken for a spy, and I suppose
it won't be the last," continued Pedro, with a grave smile.  "Of course
I protested my innocence, explained my object, and showed that my visit
was one of peace.  They would have let me go if an enemy had not been in
the camp.  You see, Senhor Armstrong, I have many enemies as well as
friends everywhere."

"That is always the case with men who hold decided principles, and try
to act up to them with vigour," returned Lawrence.

"So I have found it," rejoined Pedro, looking earnestly at his young
friend.  "You have had a more varied experience of life than I.  Has
that been your experience too?"

"It has.  But I suspect that my experience of life has not been so much
varied as yours, Pedro, for it has been chiefly among civilised
communities until now.  Still, I have observed that it is only those who
swim with the current of public opinion, and jostle nobody, who manage
to keep friends with everybody.  When a man ventures to think for
himself,--as he ought to do,--and take action, he is sure to have
enemies as well as friends,--supposing, of course, that he is a man of
any power or influence."

"Well, I suppose it is because I _try_ to have influence," rejoined
Pedro, "that I manage to have plenty of friends and foes,--the last
being sometimes unreasonably bitter."

"That proves your influence to be powerful," said Lawrence.

"H'm! it may be so.  I know not.  Time will show.  At all events, this
enemy of mine stirred up a number of men like himself in the camp to
such an extent that they seized me, and carried me to the banks of their
river, with the purpose of throwing me to the alligators.  Some of those
who were in my favour ran along with them, and among them I observed one
man who I knew would be willing to risk his life for me.  This gave me
hope; but my enemy did not approve of the mode of my execution; he
thought--rightly--that a chance of escape was involved in it; so, to
make sure, I suppose, he came close up, and when they were on the point
of throwing me into the river, he drew his knife and made a plunge at my
heart.  My friend must have suspected something of the sort, for he had
also pushed close to me, and I saw him give the would-be murderer the
jostle that turned his knife aside.

"Next moment I was in the river.  I knew that it swarmed with
alligators, and felt an uncomfortable thrill as I went in head foremost;
but I knew also that I was a strong and swift swimmer, so I struck out
for my life to the opposite bank, which was not more than forty yards
off.  I splashed as much as I could, for you know, senhor, that
splashing tends to keep alligators off, though it is not always
successful.  Before I had made half a dozen strokes, however, I felt my
flesh creep.  Do you know what it feels like to have your flesh creep?"

"No, not exactly," replied Lawrence; "but I have a pretty good guess as
to what you mean."

"Well," resumed the guide, "I felt my flesh creep, for I heard a most
awful puffing and splashing close behind me.  At the same time I heard a
wild cheer on the bank, as if my foes were rejoicing at the prospect of
my being eaten up!  I looked back quickly, expecting to see the terrible
jaws and the long rows of teeth; but, to my great surprise, I saw only
my friend pursuing me with his knife in his teeth, as if he wanted to
finish me.  I understood the thing at once.  The good fellow knew that
two could make a better splashing than one, and he also hoped, no doubt,
that his comrades would give him credit for extreme bravery in thus
jumping into such danger for the sake--as they would suppose--of killing
an enemy!  The cheer they gave him showed what they thought on that
point.

"We both gained the opposite bank--I a few yards in advance.  You may be
sure I was not slow in bounding up the bank.  I could hear the howl of
rage with which the villains saw the failure of their plan.  What is
more, I could both hear and see the arrows that were sent after me, but,
through God's blessing, none of them touched me, and I was soon in the
shelter of the woods.  I could also hear my friend panting at my heels.

"I'm a pretty fair runner," continued Pedro, "but my friend is a better.
He passed me like a deer.  `Come on,' he cried, `you've no time to
lose.'  From which I knew he meant that the blackguards would cross the
river in canoes and pursue me.  He led me across a spit of jungle-land
where the river took a sudden bend, and came out on the bank at the head
of a long rapid.  On reaching the bank he pulled out a small canoe which
had been concealed there, and told me to jump in.  `You'll have to run
the rapid.  It's not much of a chance, but it's your only one.'  I
squeezed his hand, thanked him hastily, and was soon paddling quickly
with the current.  In a few moments I heard my friend shouting with rage
and brandishing his knife.  He was acting, I knew.  Looking back I saw
that a number of men had joined him, and again the arrows began to drop
around me, but I was soon beyond their reach and battling with the
rapid.

"Well was it for me that I have been much used to canoeing, for the
words of my friend, `It's not much of a chance,' were literally true.
For some minutes I was whirled about by eddies and shoots in such a way
that it seems to me now a miracle that I escaped being dashed to pieces
several times.  I forgot all about my pursuers, so great was the danger;
but when at last I ran out of the lowest shoot into the water below the
rapids, I saw, on looking back, that they were still following me along
the banks.  I was going faster, however, than they were, so I felt
easier in my mind, till I saw them jump into several canoes and push off
in chase.  By that time I had more than a mile of start, and the sun was
setting.  `Now, Pedro,' said I to myself, `it's a fair race for your
life; so bend your back to it, my boy.'  I went on till it grew so dark
that I could hardly see twenty yards ahead of me.  Then I put ashore,
hauled the canoe up among the reeds, climbed into a tree and went to
sleep, for well I knew that it would be death both to them and me if we
continued descending a stream like that in the dark.

"Well, I slept like a top, for I was dead beat; but two or three times I
awoke with a tremendous start under the impression that I was falling.
I've always found it so when obliged to spend the night in the branches
of a tree.  Did you ever sleep so, Senhor Armstrong?"

Lawrence confessed that he had never yet indulged in such bird-like
repose.

"Well, it's not so difficult as you might think," continued Pedro, with
a meditative gaze at the fire, "especially if you're very tired, hard
pressed for time, and in some danger.  Under these circumstances it's
wonderful what a fellow can do to make the best of his opportunities.
You find out, somehow, the securest way to twine your legs and arms in
among the branches, and twist your feet and fingers into the forks and
twigs--don't you know?"

Yes, Lawrence knew well; at least, if he did not know exactly, he had a
powerful imagination!

"Well, then, long before daylight I was up and off, feeling my way as
best I could in the first grey glimpses of dawn, so that I got a good
start--at least I thought so; but soon I found my pursuers had also
started early and were overhauling me; and no wonder, seeing that their
canoes were large and well manned.  I now felt that I had no chance of
escaping by water, but I had by that time got into a part of the country
with which I was well acquainted, and knew that if I could only reach a
certain point before being caught, I might take to the bush and cross
overland to my friend's hut here.  That was early this morning.  The
only trouble I had was that my wound was beginning to give me
considerable pain, and I felt losing strength for want of food.  I had
scarce time to cat, much less to search for food, they pressed me so
hard.  However, a man makes a hard struggle for life, so I tightened my
belt, and set to work with such good will, that I was soon a long way
ahead of them, and got out of sight at a place where the river takes a
number of bends and is full of small islands.  At last, about noon, I
reached the desired point, paddled carefully in among the reeds, so as
to prevent the savages seeing where I had landed, jumped ashore, hid the
canoe, stepped out as hard as I could, and--here I am."

"But," exclaimed Lawrence, with some excitement, "if you left the
Indians so recently, won't they be close on your heels?"

"No fear.  I came here in a straight line overland.  By the windings of
the river they cannot be here, even at the soonest, before the afternoon
of to-morrow.  But they will probably give up the chase long before
getting this length.  Besides, if they did arrive, they would find a
warm reception from four well-armed men, instead of catching one poor
unarmed fugitive.  But we won't give them the chance.  We will be up and
away by daybreak.  Tiger here has agreed to join us in our trip to
Buenos Ayres.  He will take his wife and family down stream to his
father-in-law's tribe, where they will be safe till his return.  Are you
all well, and ready for a start?"

"Yes, all well--and shall be ready as soon as you please."

"That's right.  Where's Quashy?"

"Close alongside.  Don't you hear him?"

Lawrence referred to a sound like the drone of a giant mosquito, which
proceeded from the negro's nose, for that worthy was a heavy sleeper--
when not in danger--and had not been disturbed by the arrival of the
guide.

Giving vent to a prolonged yawn, Pedro rose and stretched himself.  Then
he went up to the sleeping Quashy and took him by the nose, at the same
time putting his hand on his mouth to smother the inevitable yell in its
birth.  When sufficiently awake to be released with safety, the amiable
negro was permitted to raise himself, and when aware of who had grasped
him, he beamed with good-will, and gleamed with surprise.

"Get up, Quashy, and help them to pack," said Pedro, curtly, "we start
at daybreak."

Quashy was on his feet in a moment.  "Don't rouse me till it's time to
start," added Pedro, who thereupon rolled into the vacant hammock, and
was asleep--perchance in the land of dreams--almost as soon as his
wearied head reposed on the negro's pillow.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

TELLS OF ABSURD, AS WELL AS EVIL, DOINGS, AND WINDS UP WITH A HORRID
SURPRISE.

Whether Pedro's pursuers continued the chase as far as the Indian
hunter's hut we cannot tell, for long before noon of the following day
our travellers were far from the hunting-grounds of the gallant savage.

Soon after the usual midday siesta, the canoe, which contained the whole
of the hunter's worldly wealth, was run on the beach near to the spot
where dwelt his father-in-law with many members of his tribe.

That worthy old man, in a light evening costume consisting of a cotton
shirt and straw hat, came down to receive his children, who landed amid
much noise with their boys and girls and household gods, including the
red monkey, the parrot, the flamingo, the fat guinea-pig, the turtle,
and the infant tapir.  The old chief was quite willing to take care of
the family during the absence of his son-in-law, and was very pressing
in his offers of hospitality to the white travellers, but Pedro refused
to delay more than an hour at the village.

The old man also evinced a considerable amount of curiosity in regard to
Manuela, and made one or two attempts to engage her in conversation, but
on being informed by Pedro that she belonged to a tribe living half-way
between his hunting-grounds and the regions of Patagonia, and that she
did not understand his dialect at all, he forbore to question her, and
satisfied himself with simply gazing.

After a farewell which was wonderfully affectionate for savages, Spotted
Tiger embarked in Pedro's canoe, and, pushing off into the river, bade
the Indians adieu.

The canoe in which the party now travelled belonged to Tiger, and was
larger as well as more commodious than that in which they had hitherto
journeyed, having a gondola-like cabin constructed of grasses and
palm-leaves, underneath which Manuela found shelter from the sun.  In
the evenings Pedro could lie at full length on the top of it and smoke
his cigarette.  They were floating with the current, you see, and did
not require to labour much at the paddles at that time.

It would weary the reader were we to continue our description of the
daily proceedings of our adventurers in journalistic form.  To get on
with our tale requires that we should advance by bounds, and even
flights--not exactly of fancy, but over stretches of space and time,
though now and then we may find it desirable to creep or even to stand
still.

We request the reader to creep with us at present, and quietly listen
while Pedro and Tiger talk.

Pedro lies extended on his back on the roof of the gondola-like cabin,
his hands under his head, his knees elevated, and a cigarette in his
mouth.  Lawrence and Quashy are leaning in more or less lazy attitudes
on the gunwale of the canoe, indulging now and then in a few remarks,
which do not merit attention.  Manuela, also in a reclining attitude,
rests under the shade of the erection on which Pedro lies, listening to
their discourse.  Tiger is the only one on duty, but his labour is
light: it consists merely of holding the steering oar, and guiding the
light craft along the smooth current of the river.  Pedro lies with his
head to the stern, so that his talk with the Indian is conducted, so to
speak, upside-down.  But that does not seem to incommode them, for the
ideas probably turn right end foremost in passing to and fro.

Of course their language is in the Indian tongue.  We translate.

"Tiger," said Pedro, sending a long whiff of smoke straight up towards
the bright blue sky, where the sun was beginning to descend towards his
western couch, "we shan't make much, I fear, of the men of this part of
the country."

"I did not expect that you would," replied the Indian, giving a gentle
turn to his oar in order to clear a mudbank, on which a number of
alligators were basking comfortably.

"Why so, Tiger?  Surely peace and good government are as desirable to
them as to others."

"No doubt, but many of them do not love peace.  They are young.  Their
blood is hot, and they have nothing to do.  When that is so, war is
pleasant to them.  It is natural.  Man must work, or play, or fight.  He
cannot lie still.  Those who are killed cannot return to tell their
comrades what fools they have been, so those that remain are greater
fools than ever."

"I agree with you, Tiger; but you see it is not the young men who have
the making of war, though they generally get all the doing of it, and
the poor women and children take the consequences; it is the governors,
whom one would expect to show some sort of wisdom, and recognise the
fact that union is strength, and that respect for Law is the only hope
of the land."

"Governors," returned Tiger, in a deep voice, "are not only fools, but
villains--tyrants!"

The Indian spoke with such evidence of suppressed indignation that Pedro
tried to look at him.

The aspect of his frowning countenance upside-down was not conducive to
gravity.

"Come, Tiger," said Pedro, with a tendency to laugh, "they are not all
tyrants; I know one or two who are not bad fellows."

"_I_ know one who is a fool and a robber."

"Indeed.  What has he done to make you so bitter?" asked Pedro.

"Made us wear spectacles!" replied the Indian, sternly.

"What do you mean?"

"Have you not heard about it?"

"No; you know I have been away in Chili for some time, and am ignorant
of much that has been going on in these parts."

"There is in Spain a white man, I know not who," said Tiger, with an
expression of ineffable contempt, "but he must be the chief of the fools
among the white men, who seem to me to be all fools together."

"Thank you for the compliment," said Pedro, with a laugh.

"This white fool," continued Tiger, paying no regard to his friend's
interruption, "thought that he would send out here for sale some
spectacles--glass things, you know, that old white men look through when
they cannot see.  We Indians, as you know, never need such things.  We
can see well as long as we live.  It is supposed that a mistake was made
by some one, for something like a canoe-load of spectacles was sent
out--so many that in a hundred years the white men could not have used
them up.  The trader knew not what to do.  There was no sale for them.
He applied to the governor--that robber of whom I have spoken.  He said
to the trader, with a wink of his eye--that sort of wink which the white
fool gives when he means to pass from folly to knavery--`Wait,' he said,
`and you shall see.'  Then he issued an order that no Indian should dare
to appear in his district, or in church during festival-days, _without
spectacles_!  The consequence was that the spectacles were all sold.  I
know not the price of these foolish things, but some white men told me
they were sold at an enormous profit."

Although Pedro sympathised heartily with his brown friend in his
indignation, he could not quite repress a smile at the ridiculous ideas
called up.  Fortunately the Indian failed to interpret an upside-down
smile, particularly with the moustache, as it were, below instead of
above the mouth, and a cigarette in the lips.  It was too complicated.

"And were _you_ obliged to buy and wear a pair of these spectacles,
Tiger?" asked Pedro, after a few silent puffs.

"Yes--look! here they are," he replied, with inconceivable bitterness,
drawing forth the implements of vision from his pouch and fixing them on
his nose with intense disgust.  Then, suddenly plucking them off; he
hurled them into the river, and said savagely--"I was a Christian once,
but I am not a Christian _now_."

"How? what do you mean?" asked Pedro, raising himself on his elbow at
this, so as to look straightly as well as gravely at his friend.

"I mean that the religion of such men must be false," growled the
Indian, somewhat defiantly.

"Now, Tiger," returned his friend in a remonstrative tone, "that is not
spoken with your usual wisdom.  The religion which a man professes may
be true, though his profession of it may be false.  However, I am not
unwilling to admit that the view of our religion which is presented in
this land is false--very false.  Nevertheless, Christianity is true.  I
will have some talk with you at another time on this subject, my friend.
Meanwhile, let us return to the point from which we broke off--the
disturbed state of this unhappy country."
