
Beyond doubt the kite had become detached above; and, yielding to the
strain upon the rope, caused by Ossaroo's weighty was being pulled
towards the edge of the precipice!

Would the resistance be equal to the weight of the man's body?  Would it
let him down easily?  Or would the dragging anchor arrive at a place
where the surface was smooth, and then gliding rapidly over it, increase
the velocity of the descent?  In other words, was the shikaree about to
be projected through a fall of thirty feet to the bottom of the cliff?

The spectators were left but little time to speculate on probabilities.
Not a moment was allowed them to take measures for securing the safety
of their companion.  Before they could recover from the surprise, with
which his first shout had inspired them, they saw that his descent was
every moment becoming more accelerated: now in gradual declination, then
in quick, short jerks--until he had got within about twenty-feet of the
ground.  They were in hopes that he might continue to descend in this
fashion for a few yards further, and then the danger would be over; but,
just at that moment, the broad breast of the kite was seen poising
itself over the top of the cliff; and like a great living bird, it
sprang off from the rocks, and soared out over the valley!

Ossaroo, still clinging to the cord, was carried some distance from the
cliff; but, fortunately for him, the weight of his body overbalanced the
resistance which the atmosphere offered to the broad surface of the
kite; else he might have been carried much higher into the air.  Equally
fortunate was it, that the amount of overbalance was exceedingly
slight--otherwise he might have been dashed with violence to the earth!

As it was, he came down as gently as a dove, alighting upon his legs,
and remaining erect upon them, like Mercury upon the top of his
"sky-kissing mountain."

The moment that the shikaree felt his feet touching _terra firma_, he
sprang nimbly to one side, at the same instant letting go the rope, as
if it had been a rod of red-hot iron!

The great kite, no longer held in poise against the wind, commenced
darting hither and thither; at each turn descending lower and lower--
until by one last swoop, in which it seemed to concentrate all its
failing strength, it came down towards Ossaroo like a gigantic bird of
prey descending upon its victim!

It was just as much as the shikaree could do to get out of the way; and,
had he not ducked his head in the very nick of time, he would certainly
have received a blow upon his skull, that would have endangered its
entirety.



CHAPTER FORTY SEVEN.

THE ESCAPE OF THE KITE.

The joy, which all felt at the miraculous escape of Ossaroo, more than
compensated for their chagrin at the circumstance of the kite having
returned to them: more especially, as they believed that the accident
was not without remedy.  It might be attributed to the wind: which no
doubt had lifted the kite from where it lay, detaching it from the rock,
or whatever other object that had for the time entangled it.

They doubted not, but that they might again succeed in sending it up,
and getting it fast as before; and this confidence hindered them from
grieving over the unfortunate occurrence, as they might otherwise have
done.

As the wind on that day was in the wrong quarter for flying a kite
towards the cliff, they determined to postpone the attempt, till a more
favourable opportunity; and, in order that their kite should not be in
danger of getting spoiled by the rain, they once more shouldered, and
carried it back, rope and all, to the shelter of the hut.

Nearly a week elapsed, before there was a breeze that blew in their
favour; but during this interval, they had not been altogether
unemployed.  Still uncertain of the length of time they might be
detained in the valley, they had passed almost every hour of the
daylight in increasing their stock of provisions--so as not to encroach
upon the cured venison of the ibex, of which a considerable quantity was
still to the good.

Their guns were no longer used for procuring food.  The last loads still
remained in the barrels; and were not to be fired off--until every other
means of capturing game should fail them.

Indeed, they were now so confident of being able to get out of their
prison, that at times they almost fancied themselves already on their
way down the mountains; and talked of keeping their guns loaded, against
any danger from large animals they might encounter on their homeward
journey.  For procuring food they knew that firearms were not necessary.
Ossaroo's bow was sufficient weapon for that.  Often might it be heard
twanging among the trees; and as often did the shikaree's arrow pierce
the breast of some fine bird--a peacock, or argus pheasant, or one of
the beautiful Brahminy geese that frequented the waters of the lake.

Ossaroo's nets and lines, too, were not without their use.  Fish were
caught of various kinds, and excellent quality; and there was one sort
in particular, should all else fail, that promised to furnish them with
an inexhaustible supply.  This was a large species of eel, in which the
lake abounded, to such an extent, that it was only necessary to cast in
a hook, with a worm upon it, and an eel of nearly six feet in length
would be instantly landed.

As they did not always relish to dine upon eels, but little of their
time was spent in procuring them.  For all that, they were gratified on
discovering the abundance of these slippery creatures--knowing that,
should other resources fail, they would find in them a staple article of
wholesome food, that could never become scarce, no matter how much they
should eat of it.

A favourable wind at length came on to blow; and the kite was once more
shouldered, and carried to the same place as before.  Just in the same
way did they proceed to fly it; and in the same style it again rose
soaring above the cliff; and--the cord having been suddenly slacked--
sank to rest upon the slope of the mountain.

So far were they once more successful; but alas! it proved to be just so
far and no farther.

Pulling upon the rope, to ascertain whether their anchor had "bit," they
were chagrined to receive an answer in the negative.  The cord came back
to them with scarce any resistance; or only such, as was caused by
friction over the edge of the cliff, and by the drag of the kite itself
along the snowy surface.

Hand over hand, they drew it back: foot by foot, and yard by yard, it
came yieldingly towards them--until they saw the broad curving breast of
the pseudo-bird projecting over the parapet edge of the precipice!

Once more was it launched out into the air; once more was rope given it,
till it had ascended to the full length of its tether; and once more was
it allowed to alight.

Again the pull downward and inward--again the cord came freely to hand--
and again was the rounded bow seen upon the brow of the precipice, and
outlined against the blue sky above; not like the beautiful bow of the
iris--a thing of promise--but one of disappointment and chagrin.

Again the flight--again the failure--again and again; until the patience
of the operators--to say nothing of their strength--was well nigh
exhausted.

But it was no mere play for the sake of pastime.  They were not flying
that kite for their amusement; nor yet for the purpose of making some
scientific experiment.  They were flying it as a means of obtaining
their personal liberty; and they were all of them interested in the
success or failure of the attempt--almost as much as if their lives
rested on the issue.

However tried their strength, or worn out their patience, it would not
do to give up; and therefore--although at each unsuccessful effort, with
hopes constantly becoming diminished--they continued their exertions.

For more than a score of times they had sent up the kite, and as often
dragged it back to the brow of the cliff; not always at the same point:
for they had themselves changed their ground, and tried the flight in
different places.

In all cases, the result was the same.  The bird refused to take hold
with its claws--either on rocks, or blocks of ice, or banks of frozen
snow--all of which lay scatter over the slope of the mountain.

Considering that it had caught hold on the very first trial, so many
failures were regarded by our adventurers with some surprise.  Had it
never held, there would have been no cause for this; and after so many
attempts, they would have been the more inclined to yield up their plan,
deeming it impracticable.  But the fact of their first success sustained
them in the hope that success might again be obtained; and, in this
belief, they were encouraged to "keep on trying."

Half a dozen additional flights were made, but fortune still declining
to favour them, they desisted from their efforts, leaving the paper-bird
with its breast protruding over the cliff: as if perched there in
preparation for a further flight.

By this time the kite had become sadly damaged--its _plumage_ having
received rough usage by constant trailing over the rocks and sharp
angles of ice.  While up in the air, daylight could be seen shining
through it in several places; and it no longer exhibited that majesty of
flight that had originally characterised it.  It was evident that
repairs would soon be needed; and to discuss this question, as also to
consider the propriety of proceeding to make trial at some other place,
our adventurers, for a time, discontinued their efforts.

All three were standing together, but at several paces distant from the
end of the rope; which they had for the moment abandoned, and which lay
negligently along the ground.

They had not taken the slightest precaution to secure it: for it had not
occurred to them that there was any risk in leaving it loose.

It was only when too late, that they perceived the mistake they had
committed--only when they saw the cord suddenly jerked up from the
ground, as if some invisible hand was lifting it aloft into the sky!

All three rushed towards it at the same instant.  They were too late.
Already the end of the rope was dangling at such a height above their
heads, that even the tallest of them could not touch it with the tips of
his fingers.

Ossaroo leaped high into the air in an endeavour to clutch the string.
Caspar ran to procure a pole which lay near, in hopes of retaining it in
that way: while Karl ran up the ladder that was resting against the
cliff, near which the rope was yet trailing.

The efforts of all three were alike vain.  For a second or two, the end
of the cord hung oscillating above their heads--just sufficiently out of
reach to tantalise them; and then, as if the invisible hand above had
given it another gigantic jerk, it was drawn rapidly and vertically
upward, till it finally disappeared over the crest of the cliff!



CHAPTER FORTY EIGHT.

NO MORE PAPER-TREES!

There was nothing mysterious in the disappearance of the cord.  The kite
was no longer visible on the summit of the cliff.  The wind had carried
it away; and, of course, its rope along with it.

When the first moment of surprise had passed, our adventurers turned
towards each other with glances that spoke something more than
disappointment.  Notwithstanding the number of times that the kite had
failed to fix itself, still it had once taken a fast hold, and it was
but reasonable to suppose it would have done so again.  Besides, there
were other places where the precipice was as low, and even lower, than
where they had made the trials; and at some of these they might have
been more successful.  Indeed, there was every probability that, had
they not lost that kite, they would have been able in due time to have
climbed out of their rock-bound prison by a ladder of rope; but now all
chance of doing so was gone for ever--swept off by a single puff of
wind.

You may be fancying, that the misfortune was not irremediable.  Another
kite, you will be saying, might be constructed out of similar materials
as those used in making the one carried away.  But to say this, would be
to speak without a full knowledge of the circumstances.

The same thought had already passed through the minds of our
adventurers, when they perceived that the kite they were flying was
getting torn and otherwise damaged.

"We can easily make another," suggested Caspar at that crisis.

"No, brother," was the answer of Karl; "never another, I fear.  We have
paper enough left to patch this one; but not enough to make another."

"But we can make more paper, can we not?" urged Caspar, interrogatively.

"Ah!" again replied Karl, with a negative shake of the head, "no more--
not another sheet!"

"But why?  Do you think there are no more daphne trees?"

"I think there are not.  You remember we stripped all there were in the
thicket; and since then, thinking we might need more bark, I have gone
all through the valley, and explored it in every direction, without
meeting with a single shrub of the daphne.  I am almost certain there
are none."

This conversation between the brothers had occurred, long before the
losing of the kite.  When that event came to pass, it was not necessary
for them to repeat it; and, both being thus acquainted with the fact
that it was impossible for them to construct another, they felt that
they had sustained an irreparable loss.

In what direction had the kite been carried off?  Might it not be blown
along the line of cliffs, and tossed back again into the valley?

As there appeared some probability that such a chance might arise, all
three ran outward from the rocks--in order to command a better view of
the precipice, on each side.

For a long time they stood watching--in hopes that they might see the
great paper-bird returning to the scene of its nativity.  But it never
came back; and they became at length convinced, that it never would.
Indeed, the direction of the wind--when they paused to consider it--
rendered the thing not only improbable, but impossible.  It was blowing
_from_ the cliffs, and _towards_ the snowy ridge.  No doubt the kite had
been carried up the sloping acclivity; and had either passed clear over
the mountains, or become lodged in some deep defile, where the wind
could no longer reach it.  At all events, it was certain, that both kite
and cord were lost to them for ever.

"Ach! how very unfortunate!" exclaimed Caspar, in a vexed tone, when
they had finally arrived at this conviction.  "What ill-starred luck we
have, to be sure!"

"Nay! brother," remarked Karl, in a tone of reproval; "do not chide
Fortune for what has happened just now.  I acknowledge it is a great
misfortune; but it is one for which we may justly blame ourselves, and
only ourselves.  By sheer negligence we have lost the kite, and along
with it, perhaps, the last chance of regaining our liberty."

"Yes, you speak truly," rejoined Caspar, in a tone of mingled regret and
resignation.  "It _was_ our fault, and we must suffer for it."

"But are you quite sure, brother Karl," resumed he, after a pause, and
referring to the conversation that had already passed between them--"are
you quite sure there are no more of these paper-bearing trees?"

"Of course," replied the plant-hunter, "I am not positive--though I fear
it is as I have said--that there are no more.  It will be easy for us to
determine the point, by making a complete exploration of the valley.  It
may be that something else might turn up which would answer the purpose
equally as well.  There is a birch-tree indigenous to the Himalaya
mountains, found both in Nepaul and Thibet.  Its bark can be stripped
off in broad flakes and layers, to the number of eight or ten--each
almost as thin as common paper, and suitable for many purposes to which
paper is usually applied."

"Do you think it would do for a kite?" inquired Caspar, without waiting
for Karl to finish his explanation.

"I am sure of it," replied the botanist.  "It would serve even better
than the daphne paper; and had I believed there was a chance of finding
it here, I should have preferred it to that.  But I do not think we
shall find it.  I have observed no species of birch; and I know that
this one, like most of the _Betulaceae_, affects a much colder climate
than there is in this valley.  Likely enough, it grows on the mountains
above; but there it is out of our reach.  Could we reach it there, we
should not need to be robbing it of its manifold envelope.  But let us
not despair," added Karl, endeavouring to appear cheerful; "perhaps it
may be found growing down here; or, if not, we may still find another
grove of the daphne trees.  Let us proceed on and search!"

Karl was far from being sanguine in either conjecture; and it was as
well for him that he was not: for after a minute and careful exploration
of the valley--which occupied nearly three whole days--neither the
wished-for birch, nor the desired daphne trees--nor any other material
out of which a kite might be manufactured--rewarded their search.

It was of no use, therefore, to think any longer of a kite; and the
subject was at length dismissed from their minds.



CHAPTER FORTY NINE.

AEROSTATICS.

It is scarce possible to talk of a paper kite, without thinking of that
other and greater aerostatic contrivance--a balloon.

Karl had thought of it, long before this time; and so had Caspar, just
as long: for the kite had suggested it simultaneously to the minds of
both.

It may be asked why they had not entertained the thought, and
endeavoured to carry it into practical effect: since a balloon would
have been far more likely to have delivered them out of their "mountain
prison" than a paper kite?

But they _had_ entertained the thought--at least, Karl had done so--and
examined it in all its bearings.  Caspar had permitted it to pass out of
his mind, under the impression that _they could not make a balloon_; and
Karl had arrived at the same conclusion; but only from a belief that
they _had not the materials_ with which to make one.  Given the
materials, Karl felt quite equal to the construction of a balloon--a
rude one, it is true; but one which might have served the purpose for
which they required it.

During the days when they had been occupied in making the paper-bird, he
had given his thoughts a good deal to this subject; for, to say the
truth, he had never been very sanguine about the success of the kite
experiment.  He had pondered long and patiently on the subject of
balloons--endeavouring to recall to mind what little he had studied of
aerostatics--and had mentally examined all the material objects within
reach, in the hope of discovering some substance out of which one might
be constructed.

Unfortunately, he had not been able to think of anything that appeared
to be suitable.  The daphne paper--even had it been in abundance--would
not do: for paper of itself, however close in texture, is not strong
enough to withstand the pressure of the outside air--that is, in a
balloon of sufficient size to carry any considerable weight.  But it was
of no use to talk of paper: since there was not enough; and Karl had
given over thinking of a balloon: because there was nothing within reach
likely to serve for its construction.

He knew that that great sphere would require to be air-proof.  He had
thought of the skins of animals; but such of these as might have been
obtained in sufficient quantity, were entirely too thick and heavy to
make the covering of a balloon.  The hemp, of which there _was_ an
abundance, might be woven into a cloth, and then coated over by gum
obtained from some tree; for in the valley were several species of
gum-exuding trees.  But the question was, could they manufacture a cloth
out of hemp that would be light enough when thus coated over?  It was
very doubtful whether they could--at all events they would have to
practise the weaving trade for a long time, before they should arrive at
a sufficient expertness to accomplish such a feat.  The plan was too
unpromising to be seriously entertained; and Karl had dismissed it,
along with the whole subject of the balloon.

That had been previous to the experiment of the kite, and its
unfortunate ending.  But now that all hope from this quarter had been
brought to an end, the balloon once more began to shape itself in his
mind, as well as in that of Caspar; and for the first time they
proceeded to talk over the subject together.

"Cords we could have in plenty," remarked Caspar, "but they'd be of no
use, without the stuff to cover the great globe.  They make it of silk,
don't they?"

"Yes," replied Karl, "silk is the best material for the purpose."

"And why?" inquired Caspar.

"Because it combines the three properties of lightness, strength, and
closeness of texture, in a greater degree than any other known
substance."

"Would nothing else do?"

"Oh, yes; many things would answer to make a balloon, that might carry
up a certain amount of weight.  Even a paper balloon can be constructed
to take up a few pounds--a cat, or a small dog; and people in many
countries have been cruel enough to dispatch such creatures into the
air, not caring what became of them."

"Very cruel indeed!" assented Caspar, who, although a hunter, was far
from having an unfeeling heart.  "Such people should be sent up
themselves in paper balloons."

"Yes, if paper balloons would carry them; which, unfortunately for us,
they wouldn't.  Even if we had an unlimited supply of paper, it would be
of no use to us.  We require something stronger, and more tenacious."

