comrades were returning with plenty cattle and sheep, but that they were
pursued.

Instantly the chops and marrow-bones were flung aside, and the robbers,
hastily arming, mounted their horses and descended to the rescue.

The band of which Ruyter had become leader had existed some time before
he joined.  It was a detachment from a larger band who acknowledged as
their chief a desperado named Dragoener.  This Bushman had been in the
service of Diederik Muller, but, on being severely flogged by a
hot-tempered kinsman of his master, had fled to the mountains, vowing
vengeance against all white men.  It is thus that one white scoundrel
can sometimes not only turn a whole tribe of savages into bitter foes of
the white men in general, but can bring discredit on his fellows in the
eyes of Christian people at a distance, who have not the means of
knowing the true state of the case.  Be this as it may, however,
Dragoener with his banditti soon took ample revenge on the colonists for
the sjamboking he had received.

Not long previous to the period of which we write he had been reinforced
by Ruyter, Jemalee, Booby, and several other runaway slaves, besides
some "wild Bushmen,"--men who had never been in service, and were so
called to distinguish them from men who had been caught, like our friend
Booby, and "tamed."  A few deserters from the Cape Corps, who possessed
fire-arms, had also joined him.

Thus reinforced, Dragoener and his lieutenant had become bolder than
ever in their depredations.  One of his bands had recently carried off a
large number of cattle and horses from the Tarka boers, who had called
out a commando and gone in pursuit.  Driven into a forest ravine, and
finding it impossible to retain possession of their booty, the robbers
had cut the throats of all the animals, and, scattering into the jungle,
made their escape.  Another band had frequently annoyed the Scotsmen at
Baviaans River.

When therefore the band under Ruyter heard of the approach of their
comrades with booty, and of the pursuit by colonists, they went to the
rescue, somewhat emboldened by recent successes.  On meeting their
comrades, who were driving the cattle and horses before them in frantic
haste, they were told that the pursuers were in strong force, and
numbered among them several of the boldest men and best shots on the
frontier.

There was no time for holding a council of war.  Ruyter at once divided
his men into two bands.  With the larger, well armed, and having two or
three deserters with muskets, he crept into the woods to lay an ambush
for the enemy.  The other band was ordered to continue driving the
cattle with utmost speed, and, in the event of being overtaken, to cut
the animals' throats and each man look out for himself.

If Ruyter's men had been as bold and cool as himself they might have
checked the pursuit, but when the hunter Van Dyk, who knew their ways,
advanced in front of his comrades by a path known to himself, discovered
their ambush and sent a bullet through the head of one of their number,
they awaited no further orders but rose _en masse_, fled through the
jungle, and made for the mountains.

Van Dyk, reloading in hot haste, followed swiftly, but he had not taken
three steps when Charlie Considine was at his heels.  He had dismounted
and followed Van Dyk.  The other pursuers made a detour on horseback to
cut off the robbers as they passed over some open ground in advance.  In
attempting this they came on a spot where the ground was strewn with the
dead or dying cattle.  With a yell of rage they pushed on, but utterly
failed, for the bandits had headed in another direction and gained the
cliffs, where pursuit on horseback was impossible.  Knowing that it
would have been equally fruitless to continue the chase on foot, they
returned to the point where Van Dyk and Considine had entered the
jungle, fully expecting to find them there, as it would have been
madness, they thought, for two unsupported men to follow up the flying
band.  To their surprise they found no one there.

"We must follow their spoor, boys," said Conrad Marais, with an anxious
look; "they cannot be far off, but we must not leave them unsupported in
the jungle with such a lot of black villains flying about."

Action was at once taken.  The most experienced men dismounted and
traced the spoor, with the unerring certainty of bloodhounds.  But they
shouted and searched in vain till night compelled them to desist.

Meanwhile Van Dyk and Considine had been captured by the Bergenaars.

When Charlie overtook the hunter, as already described, his ardent
spirit and strong supple limbs enabled him to outrun his more massive
though not less enthusiastic companion.  A short run soon convinced the
hunter that there was no chance of a clothed white man overtaking a more
than half-naked native in a thorny jungle.  Indeed, he was already well
convinced by former experience of this fact, and had intended to engage
in pursuit for only a short time, in order if possible to obtain a
flying shot at one or two of the robbers, but his young comrade's
resolute continuance of the chase forced him to hold on longer than he
desired.

"Stop! stop, young fellow," he shouted with stentorian voice; "stop, I
say!  You'll only waste your breath for no good," he shouted.

But Considine heard him not.  He had caught sight of one of the bandits
who seemed to be losing strength, and, being himself sound in wind and
limb, he recklessly determined to push on.

"I'll leave you to your fate," roared Van Dyk, "if you don't stop."

He might as well have roared to a mad buffalo.  Considine heeded or
heard not.

"It won't do," growled the hunter in a stern soliloquy as he stopped a
moment to tighten his belt.  "Well, well, I little thought, Van Dyk,
that you'd be brought to such a miserable fix as this, in such a stupid
way too.  But he mustn't be left to the Bushmen's tender mercies."

The hunter's swart countenance grew darker as he spoke, for he well knew
the extremity of danger into which the reckless youth was compelling him
to run, but he did not hesitate.  Instead, however, of following in the
steps of one who was fleeter of foot than himself, he made a detour to
the right.  In an hour he reached a cliff under which, he knew, from the
form of the valley up which the pursuit had been conducted, his young
companion must needs pass.  The route he had taken was a short cut.  He
had headed Considine and saw him, a few minutes later, in the gorge
below, in full pursuit of the robber.

"H'm!" grunted Van Dyk, as he sat down on a rock and examined the
priming of his great elephant-gun, "I thought as much!  The black
scoundrel is just playing with him--decoying the young idiot on till he
gets him surrounded by his comrades; but I'll spoil his game, though
it's like to be the last shot I'll ever fire."

A low quiet sigh escaped from the hunter as he watched the two men and
awaited the proper moment.

He was evidently right in his conjecture, for, as they drew near the
cliff, the black man looked over his shoulder once or twice and
slackened his pace.  The next moment he gave a shout which proved to be
a signal, for two of the robbers sprang out from the bushes and seized
Considine, almost before he had seen them.  Vigorously he struggled, and
would perhaps have thrown off both, had not the man he had been chasing
turned and run to aid the others.

Quickly but steadily Van Dyk raised his gun and covered this man.  Next
moment the muzzle was struck aside, the ball flew harmlessly into the
jungle, and the hunter was pinioned, overthrown, and rendered helpless
by four of the robbers, who had been watching his motions all the time.

Van Dyk was not taken much by surprise.  He knew that such danger was
probable, and had done his best to avoid it.  With that self-command
which a life of constant danger in the woods had taught him, he bowed to
the inevitable, and quietly submitted to be bound and led away.

Mean while Ruyter, for it was he who had been chased, came up in time to
assist in securing his victim.

"What, Ruyter, is it you?" exclaimed Considine in amazement.

When the robber-chief became aware who he had captured, an expression of
deep annoyance or regret crossed his face, but it quickly passed into
one of stern almost sulky determination, as he ordered the two men, in
Dutch, to make the bonds secure.  He deigned no reply to the prisoner's
question.  He did not even appear to recognise him, but strode on in
front, while the two robbers drove the youth up into the rocky
fastnesses of the mountains.

That night our hero found himself seated in the deepest recesses of a
cavern by the side of his comrade Van Dyk.  The arms of both were firmly
bound behind their backs, but their legs were free, their captors
knowing well that a scramble among such giddy and rugged heights without
the use of the hands was impossible.  In the centre of the cavern sat
the robbers round a small fire on which some of them were cooking a few
scraps of meat.

"A pretty mess you've led yourself and me into, young fellow!" said the
hunter sternly.

"Indeed I have," replied Considine, with a very penitent air, "and I
would give or do anything to undo the mischief."

"Ja--always the same with wild-caps like you," returned the
other,--"ready to give anything when you've got nothing, and to do
anything when you're helpless.  How much easier it would have been to
have given a little heed and shown a little common sense when you had
the chance!"

There was a touch of bitterness, almost fierceness, in the hunter's
tone, which, knowing the man's kindly nature, Considine could not quite
understand.

"Do you know what them reptiles there are saying?" continued Van Dyk
after a brief pause.

"No, their language is mere gibberish to me."

"They're discussin' the best method of puttin' us out of existence,"
said the hunter, with a grim smile.  "Some of 'em want to cut our
throats at once and have done with it; some would like to torture us
first; others are in favour of hangin', but all agree that we must be
killed to prevent our tellin' the whereabouts of their hiding-place up
here,--all except one, the one you gave chase to this afternoon.  He
advises 'em to let us go, but he don't seem very earnest about it."

"I think I know the reason of his favouring us," said Considine, with a
look of hope.

"Indeed?"

"Yes; he once journeyed with me from Capetown to the karroo, and
probably he feels a touch of regard for his old travelling companion."

"H'm!  I wouldn't give much for his regard," growled Van Dyk.  "The reed
is slender, but it's the only one we have to lean on now.  However,
we've got a reprieve, for I heard 'em say just now that they'll delay
executing us till to-morrow, after reaching one of their other and safer
retreats in the mountains."

The prisoners were put into a smaller cave, close to the large one, that
night.  Their bonds were made more secure, and, as an additional
precaution, their legs were tied.  Two men were also appointed to guard
the entrance of their prison.

About midnight the camp was perfectly still, and the only sounds that
broke the silence were the tinkling of a neighbouring rill and the
footfall of the sentinels.  Van Dyk and Considine were lying uneasily on
the bare ground, and thinking of the tragic fate that awaited them on
the morrow, when they observed the dim figure of a man approaching from
the innermost end of the cavern with a drawn knife in his right hand.
Both started up and leant on their elbows; more than this they could not
do.  They felt some alarm, it is true, but both came to the same
conclusion--that it is foolish to cry out before you are hurt.

The figure bent over Van Dyk, and whispered in his ear.  Next moment the
hunter stood on his feet with his limbs free.

"You were right, young sir," he said to Considine as he stooped over him
and cut his bonds; "there _is_ a touch of humanity in the rascally
Hottentot after all.  Come; he bids us follow him.  Knows a secret
passage out o' the cave, no doubt."

The black-bearded huntsman turned as he spoke, and followed the dim
figure, which melted into the depths of the cavern as if it had been a
spirit.  A few minutes' gliding through darkness tangible, and they
found themselves in the open air among thick bushes.  Though the night
was very dark there was sufficient light to enable Considine to see the
glittering of white teeth close to his face, as a voice whispered in
broken English--"You's better tink twice when you try for to chases
Tottie next time!  Go; Van Dyk, him's old hand in de bush, will guide
you safe."

Before morning Considine was back in Conrad Marais' parlour, relating
his adventures among the Bergenaars with a half-belief that the whole
affair was nothing more than a romantic dream.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

TREATS OF THE ZUURVELD AGAIN, AND ONE OR TWO SURPRISING INCIDENTS.

Seated one evening at the door of their dug-out hut or cavern on the
banks of the river, the three brothers Skyd discussed the affairs of the
colony and smoked their pipes.

"Never knew such a country," said John Skyd, "never!"

"Abominable!" observed James.

"Detestable!" remarked Robert.

"Why don't you Skyd-addle then?" cried Frank Dobson.  "If I thought it
as bad as you do, I'd leave it at once.  But you are unjust."

"Unjust!" echoed John Skyd; "that were impossible.  What could be worse?
Here have we been for three years, digging and ploughing, raking and
hoeing, carting and milking, churning and--and--and what the better are
we now?  Barely able to keep body and soul together, with the rust
ruining our wheat, and an occasional Kafir raid depriving us of our
cattle, while we live in a hole on the river's bank like rabbits; with
this disadvantage over these facetious creatures, that we have more
numerous wants and fewer supplies."

"That's so," said Bob; "if we could only content ourselves with a few
bulbous roots and grass all would be well, but, Frank, we sometimes want
a little tea and sugar; occasionally we run short of tobacco; now and
then we long for literature; coffee sometimes recurs to memory; at rare
intervals, especially when domestic affairs go wrong, the thought of
woman, as of a long-forgotten being of angelic mould, _will_ come over
us.  Ah!  Frank, it is all very well for you to smile, you who have been
away enjoying yourself for months past hunting elephants and other small
game in the interior, but you have no notion how severely our failures
are telling on our spirits.  Why, Jim there tried to make a joke the
other day, and it was so bad that Jack immediately went to bed with a
sick-headache."

"True," said Jack solemnly, "quite true, and I couldn't cure that
headache for a whole day, though I took a good deal of Cape-smoke before
it came on, as well as afterwards."

"But, my dear chums," remonstrated Dobson, "is it not--"

"Now don't ask, `Is it not your own fault?' with that wiseacre look of
yours," said John Skyd, testily tapping the bowl of his pipe on a stone
preparatory to refilling it.  "We are quite aware that we are not
faultless; that we once or twice have planted things upside down, or a
yard too deep, besides other little eccentricities of ignorance; but
such errors are things of the past, and though we now drive our drills
as straight as once, heigho! we ruled our account-books, things don't
and won't improve."

"If you had not interrupted me, Jack, you might have spared much breath
and feeling.  I was about to say, Is it not a fact that many of the
other settlers are beginning to overcome their difficulties though you
are not?  True, it has now been found that the wheat crops, on which we
at first expected almost entirely to depend, have for three seasons
proved an entire failure, and sheep do not thrive on our sour grass
pasturage, though they seem to have done admirably with the Scotch at
Baviaans River; but have not many of those around us been successful in
raising rye, barley, oats, and Indian corn? have they not many herds of
healthy cattle? are not pumpkins and potatoes thriving pretty well, and
gardens beginning to flourish?  Our roasted barley makes very fair
coffee, and honey is not a bad substitute for sugar."

"You have made a successful bag this trip, I see, by your taking such a
healthy view of our circumstances," said Bob.

"Yes, I've done very well," returned Dobson; "and I find the hunter's
life so congenial, and withal so profitable, that I'm really thinking of
adopting it as a profession.  And that brings me to the object of my
visit here to-night.  The fact is, my dear fellows, that men of your
genius are not fit for farmers.  It takes quiet-going men of sense to
cultivate the soil.  If you three were to live and dig to the age of
Methuselah you'd never make a living out of it."

"That's plain speaking," said John, with a nod, "and I agree with you
entirely."

"I mean to speak plainly," rejoined Dobson, "and now what I propose is,
that you should give it up and join me in the ivory business.  It will
pay, I assure you."

Here their friend entered into a minute and elaborate account of his
recent hunting expedition, and imparted to John Skyd some of his own
enthusiasm, but James and Robert shook their heads.  Leaving them to
think over his proposal, their friend went to make a call on the Brooks
of Mount Hope.

"Drat that boy! he's escaped again, and after mischief I'll be bound!"
was the first sound that saluted him as he walked towards the house.  It
was Mrs Scholtz's voice, on the other side of the hedge with which the
garden was surrounded.  The remark was immediately followed by a
piercing shriek from the nurse, who repeated it again and again.  Dobson
could see her through an opening in the branches, standing helpless,
with her hands clasped and eyeballs glaring.  Thoroughly alarmed, he
dashed towards the gate.  At the same moment the voice of a child was
heard:--
