"Nothing of any importance.  Merely to say that I was coming back to New
Mexico, and hoped to find you in good health."

"Did it particularise the time you expected to reach Albuquerque?"

"Yes; as far as I could fix that, if I remember rightly, it did."

"And the route you were to take?"

"That too.  When I wrote the letter I intended to make trial of a new
trail lately discovered--up the Canadian, and touching the northern end
of the Staked Plain.  I did make trial of it, alas! with lamentable
result.  But why do you ask these questions, Colonel Miranda?"

The colonel does not make immediate answer.  He appears more meditative
than ever, as though some question has come before his mind calling for
deliberate examination.

While he is thus occupied the ex-Ranger enters the room and sits down
beside them.  Walt is welcome.  Indeed, Don Valerian had already
designed calling him into their counsel.  For an idea has occurred to
the Mexican Colonel requiring the joint consideration of all three.
Turning to the other two, he says,--

"I've been thinking a good deal about the attack on your caravan.  The
more I reflect on it the more I am led to believe that some of the
Indians who plundered you were painted."

"They were all painted," is the reply of the young prairie merchant.

"True, Don Francisco; but that isn't what I mean."

"I reckon I knows what ye mean," interposes the ex-Ranger, rising
excitedly from his chair on hearing the Mexican's remark.  "It's been my
own suspeeshun all along.  You know what I tolt ye, Frank?"

Hamersley looks interrogatively at his old comrade.

"Did I not say," continues Wilder, "that I seed two men 'mong the Injuns
wi' ha'r upon thar faces?  They wa'n't Injuns; they war whites.  A'n't
that what ye mean, Kurnel Meoranda?"

"_Precisamente_!" is the colonel's reply.

The other two wait for him to continue on with the explanation Wilder
has already surmised.  Even the young prairie merchant--less experienced
in Mexican ways and wickedness, in infamy so incredible--begins to have
a glimmering of the truth.

Seemingly weighing his words, Miranda proceeds,--

"No doubt it was a band of Comanche Indians that destroyed your caravan
and killed your comrades.  But I have as little doubt of there being
white men among them--one at least, and that one he who planned and
instigated the deed."

"Who, Colonel Miranda?" is the quick interrogatory of the Kentuckian,
while with flashing eyes and lips apart he breathlessly awaits the
answer.  For all, he does not much need it; the name to be pronounced is
on the tip of his own tongue.

It is again "Gil Uraga!"

"Yes," replies the Mexican, with added emphasis.  "He is, undoubtedly,
the robber who despoiled you.  Though done in the guise of an Indian
onslaught, with real Indians as his assistants, he has been their
instructor--their leader.  I see it all now clear as sunlight.  He got
your letter, which you say was addressed to me as colonel commanding at
Albuquerque.  As a matter of course, he opened it.  It told him when and
where to meet you; your strength, and the value of your cargo.  The last
has not been needed as an incentive for him to assail you, Don
Francisco.  The mark you made upon his cheek was sufficient.  Didn't I
tell you at the time he would move heaven and earth to have revenge on
you--on both of us?  He has succeeded; behold his success.  I a refugee,
robbed of everything; you plundered the same; both ruined men!"

"Not yet!" cries the Kentuckian, starting to his feet.  "Not ruined yet,
Colonel Miranda.  If the thing be as you say, I shall seek a second
interview with this scoundrel--this fiend; seek till I obtain it.  And
then--"

"Hyur's one," interrupts the ex-Ranger, unfolding his gigantic form with
unusual rapidity, "who'll take part in that sarch.  Yis, Frank, this
chile's willin' to go wi' ye to the heart o' Mexiko, plum centre; to the
halls o' the Montyzoomas; reddy to start this minnit."

"If," resumes Hamersley, his coolness contrasting with the excited air
of his comrade, now roused to a terrible indignation, "if, Colonel
Miranda, it turns out as you conjecture, that Gil Uraga has taken part
in the destruction of my waggon-train, or even been instrumental in
causing it, I shall leave no stone unturned to obtain justice."

"Justice!" exclaims the ex-Ranger, with a deprecatory toss of the head.
"In case o' this kind we want somethin' beside.  To think o' thirteen
innercent men attacked without word o' warnin', shot down, stabbed,
slaughtered, and sculped!  Think o' that; an' don't talk tamely o'
justice; let's shout loudly for revenge!"



CHAPTER THIRTY EIGHT.

THE LAND OF THE "LEX TALIONIS."

During the quarter of a century preceding the annexation of New Mexico
to the United States, that distant province of the Mexican Republic,
like all the rest of the country, was the scene of constantly recurring
revolutions.  Every discontented captain, colonel, or general who
chanced to be in command of a district, there held sway as a dictator;
so demeaning himself that martial and military rule had become
established as the living law of the land.  The civic authorities rarely
possessed more than the semblance of power; and where they did it was
wielded in the most flagitious manner.  Arbitrary arts were constantly
committed, under the pretext of patriotism or duty.  No man's life was
safe who fell under the displeasure of the ruling military chieftain;
and woman's honour was held in equally slight respect.

In the northern frontier provinces of the republic this irresponsible
power of the soldiery was peculiarly despotic and harassing.  There, two
causes contributed to establish and keep it in the ascendency.  One of
these was the revolutionary condition of the country, which, as
elsewhere, had become chronic.  The contest between the party of the
priests and that of the true patriots, begun in the first days of
Mexico's independence, has been continued ever since; now one, now the
other, in the ascendant.  The monstrous usurpation of Maximilian,
supported by Napoleon the Third, and backed by a soldier whom all
Mexicans term the "Bandit Bazaine," was solely due to the hierarchy;
while Mexico owes its existing Republican government to the patriot
party--happily, for the time, triumphant.

The province of New Mexico, notwithstanding its remoteness from the
nation's capital, was always affected by, and followed, its political
fortunes.  When the _parti pretre_ was in power at the capital, its
adherents became the rulers in the distant States for the time being;
and when the Patriots, or Liberals, gained the upper hand this _role_
was reversed.

It is but just to say that, whenever the latter were the "ins," things
for the time went well.  Corruption, though not cured, was to some
extent checked; and good government would begin to extend itself over
the land.  But such could only last for a brief period.  The
monarchical, dictatorial, or imperial party--by whatever name it may be
known--was always the party of the Church; and this, owning
three-fourths of the real estate, both in town and country, backed by
ancient ecclesiastical privileges, and armed with another powerful
engine--the gross superstition it had been instrumental in fostering--
was always able to control events; so that no Government, not despotic,
could stand against it for any great length of time.  For all, freedom
at intervals triumphed, and the priests became the "outs;" but ever
potent, and always active, they would soon get up a new "grito" to bring
about a revolutionary change in the Government.  Sanguinary scenes would
be enacted--hangings, shooting, garrottings--all the horrors of civil
war that accompany the bitterest of all spite, the ecclesiastical.

In such an uncertain state of things it was but natural that the
_militarios_ should feel themselves masters of the situation, and act
accordingly.

In the northern districts they had yet another pretext for their
unrestrained exercise of power--in none more than New Mexico.  This
remote province, lying like an oasis in the midst of uninhabited wilds,
was surrounded on all sides by tribes of hostile Indians.  There were
the Navajoes and Apaches on its west, the Comanche and other Apache
bands on the south and east, the Utahs on its north, and various smaller
tribes distributed around it.  They were all more or less hostile at one
time or another: now on terms of an intermittent peace, secured by a
"palaver" and treaty; this anon to be broken by some act of bad faith,
leaving their "braves" at liberty once more to betake themselves to the
war-path.

Of course this condition of things gave the soldiery a fine opportunity
to maintain their ascendency over the peaceful citizens.  Rabble as
these soldiers were, and poltroons as they generally proved themselves
in every encounter with the Indians, they were accustomed to boast of
being the country's protectors, for this "protection" assumed a sort of
right to despoil it at their pleasure.

Some few years preceding the American-Mexican war--which, as well known,
gave New Mexico to the United States--these belligerent swaggerers were
in the zenith of their arbitrary rule.  Their special pet and protector,
Santa Anna, was in for a new spell of power, making him absolute
dictator of Mexico and disposer of the destinies of its people.  At the
same time, one of his most servile tools and successful imitators was at
the head of the Provincial Government, having Santa Fe for its capital.
This man was Manuel Armijo, whose character may be ascertained, by those
curious to study it, from reading the chronicles of the times,
especially the records of the prairie merchants, known as the "Santa Fe
traders."  It will there be learnt that this provincial despot was
guilty of every act that could disgrace humanity; and that not only did
he oppress his fellow-citizens with the soldiery placed at his disposal
to protect them from Indian enemies, but was actually in secret league
with the savages themselves to aid him in his mulcts and murders!
Whatever his eye coveted he was sure to obtain, by fair means or foul--
by open pillage or secret theft--not unfrequently accompanied by
assassination.  And as with the despot himself, so with his
subordinates--each in his own town or district wielding irresponsible
power; all leading lives in imitation of the provincial chieftain, as he
of him--the great prototype and patron of all--who held dictatorial sway
in the capital of the country, Don Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna.

A knowledge of this abnormal and changeable condition of Mexican affairs
will, in some measure, explain why Colonel Miranda so suddenly ceased to
be commandant of Albuquerque.  Santa Anna's new accession to power
brought in the _Padres_, turning out the _Patriotas_, many of the latter
suffering death for their patriotism, while the adherents of the former
received promotion for their support.

Staunchest among these was the captain of Lancers, Gil Uraga, promoted
to be colonel as also commandant of the district from which its deposed
chief so narrowly escaped with his life.

And now this revolutionary usurper is in full authority, his acts
imitating his master, Armijo, like him in secret league with the
savages, even consorting with the red pirates of the plains, taking part
in their murderous marauds, and sharing their plunder.



CHAPTER THIRTY NINE.

PROSPEROUS, BUT NOT HAPPY.

Despite his rapid military promotion and the ill-gotten wealth he has
acquired, Colonel Gil Uraga is anything but a happy man.  Only at such
times as he is engaged in some stirring affair of duty or devilry, or
when under the influence of drink, is he otherwise than wretched.  To
drinking he has taken habitually, almost continually.  It is not to
drown conscience; he has none.  The canker-worm that consumes him is not
remorse, but disappointment in a love affair, coupled with a thirst for
vengeance.

There are moments when he is truly miserable, his misery reaching its
keenest whenever he either looks into his mirror or stands before a
portrait that hangs against the wall of the _sala_.  It is a likeness of
Adela Miranda; for he has taken possession of the house of his
predecessor, with all its furniture and pictures, left in their hasty
retreat, the young lady's portrait as the rest.

The Lancer colonel loves Adela Miranda; and though his love be of a
coarse, brutal nature, it is strong and intense as that the noblest man
may feel.

In earlier days he believed there was a chance of his obtaining her
hand.  Humble birth is no bar in Mexico--land of revolutions--where the
sergeant or common soldier of to-day may be a lieutenant, captain, or
colonel to-morrow.  His hopes had been a stimulant to his military
aspirations; perchance one of the causes that first led him into crime.
He believed that wealth might bridge over the social distinction between
himself and her, and in this belief he cared not how it should be
acquired.  For the rest he was not ill-looking, rather handsome, and
fairly accomplished.  Like most Mexican _militarios_, he could boast of
his _bonnes fortunes_, which he often did.

These have become more rare since receiving the sword-thrust from his
American adversary in the duel at Chihuahua, which not only cost him
three front teeth, but a hideous scar across the cheek.  The teeth have
been replaced, but the scar cannot be effaced; it remains a frightful
cicatrix.  Even his whiskers, let grow to their extremest outcrop, will
not all conceal it; it is too far forward upon the face.

It was after this unfortunate affair that he made proposal to Adela
Miranda.  And now he cannot help thinking it had something to do with
her abrupt and disdainful rejection of him, though the young lady's
little concealed disgust, coupled with her brother's indignation, had no
reference to the physical deformity.  But for his blind passion he might
have perceived this.  Fancying it so, however, it is not strange that he
goes half frantic, and can be heard giving utterance to fearful oaths
every time he glances in his looking-glass.

After returning from his secret expedition of murder and pillage, he can
gaze with more equanimity into the glass.  From the man who caused the
disfiguration of his visage he has exacted a terrible retribution.  His
adversary in the Chihuahua duel is now no more.  He has met with a fate
sufficient to satisfy the most implacable vengeance; and often, both
sober and in his cups, does Gil Uraga break out into peals of laughter,
like the glee of a demon, as he reflects on the torture, prolonged and
horrible, his hated enemy must have endured before life became extinct!

But even all this does not appease his malevolent spirit.  A portion of
his vengeance is yet unappeased--that due to him who was second in the
duel.  And if it could be satisfied by the death of Miranda himself,
then there would still be the other thought to torture him--his thwarted
love scheme.  The chagrin he suffers from this is stronger than his
thirst for vengeance.

He is seated in the sala of Miranda's house, which he occupies as his
official headquarters.  He is alone, his only companion being the bottle
that stands upon a table beside him--this and a cigar burning between
his lips.  It is not wine he is drinking, but the whisky of Tequila,
distilled from the wild maguey.  Wine is too weak to calm his perturbed
spirit, as he sits surveying the portrait upon the wall.

His eyes have been on it several times; each time, as he takes them off,
drinking a fresh glass of the mezcal and igniting another cigar.  What
signifies all his success in villainy?  What is life worth without her?
He would plunder a church to obtain possession of her--murder his
dearest friend to get from Adela Miranda one approving smile.

Such are his coarse thoughts as he sits soliloquising, shaping
conjectures about the banished commandant and his sister.

Where can they have gone to?  In all probability to the United States--
that asylum of rebels and refugees.  In the territory of New Mexico they
cannot have stayed.  His spies have searched every nook and corner of
it, their zeal secured by the promise of large rewards.  He has
dispatched secret emissaries to the Rio Abajo, and on to the _Provincias
Internas_.  But no word of Miranda anywhere--no trace can be found
either of him or his sister.  "_Chingara_!"

As if this exclamatory phrase, sent hissing through his teeth--too foul
to bear translation--were the name of a man, one at this moment appears
in the doorway, who, after a gesture of permission to enter, steps
inside the room.

He is an officer in full uniform--one whom we have met before, though
not in military costume.  It is Lieutenant Roblez, Uraga's adjutant, as
also his confederate in crime.

"I'm glad you've come, _ayudante_," says the Colonel, motioning the
new-comer to a seat.  "I'm feeling a little bit lonely, and I want some
one to cheer me.  You, Roblez, are just the man for that; you've got
such a faculty for conversation."

This is ironical; for Roblez is as silent as an owl.

"Sit down and give me your cheerful company," the Colonel adds.  "Have a
cigar and a _copita_ of this capital stuff; it's the best that Tequila
produces."

"I've brought other company that may be more cheerful than mine,"
returns the adjutant, still keeping his feet.

"Ah! some of our fellows from the cuartel?  Bring them in."

"It is not any of the officers, Colonel.  There's only one man, and he's
a civilian.

"Civilian or soldier, you're free to introduce him.  I hope," he adds,
in an undertone, "it's one of the _ricos_ of the neighbourhood, who
won't mind taking an _albur_ at _monte_ or a throw of the dice.  I'm
just in the vein for a bit of play."

"He I'm going to introduce don't look much like a _rico_.  From what I
can see of him in the darkness, I should say that the blanket upon his
shoulders and his sheepskin smallclothes--somewhat dilapidated by the
way--are about all the property he possesses."

"He's a stranger to you, then?"

"As much as to yourself, as you'll say after seeing him--perhaps more."

"What sort of man is he?"

"For that matter, he can hardly be described as a man.  At least, he's
not one of the _gent-de-razon_.  He's only an Indian."

"Ha!  Comanche?"

As he utters this interrogatory, Colonel Gil Uraga gives a slight start,
and looks a little uneasy.  His relations with men of the Indian race
are of a delicate nature; and, although keen to cultivate their
acquaintance whenever occasion requires it, he prefers keeping all
Indians at a distance--more especially Comanches, when he has no
particular need of their services.  The thought has flashed across his
mind that the man waiting to be ushered into his presence may be a
messenger from the Horned Lizard; and with the Tenawa chief he desires
no further dealings--at least for a time.  Therefore, the belief of its
being an emissary from his red-skinned confederate somewhat discomposes
him.

The reply of his subordinate, however, reassures him.

"No, colonel, he's not a Comanche; bears no resemblance to one, only in
the colour of his skin.  He appears to be a Pueblo; and from his
tattered costume, I take him to be some poor labourer."

"But what does he want with me?"

"That, colonel, I cannot say; only that he has expressed a very urgent
desire to speak with you.  I fancy he has something to communicate,
which might be important for you to hear; else I should not have taken
the liberty to bring him here."

"You have him at hand?"

"I have.  He is outside in the _patio_.  Shall I usher him in?"

"By all means; there can be no harm in hearing what the fellow has to
say.  It may be about some threatened invasion of the savages; and as
protectors of the people, you, ayudante, know it's our duty to do
whatever we can for warding off such a catastrophe."

The colonel laughs at his sorry jest; the adjutant expressing his
appreciation of it in a shrug of the shoulders, accompanied by a grim
smile.

"Bring the brute in!" is the command that followed, succeeded by the
injunction.

"Stay outside in the court till I send for or call you.  The fellow may
have something to say intended for only one pair of ears.  Take a glass
of the _mezcal_, light cigarrito, and amuse yourself as you best may."

The adjutant obeys the first two of these directions; then, stepping out
of the _sala_, leaves his superior officer alone.

Uraga glances around to assure himself that there are weapons within
reach.  With a conscience like his, a soul charged with crime, no
wonder.

His sabre rests against the wall close to his hand, while a pair of
dragoon pistols, both loaded, lie upon the table.

Satisfied with the proximity of these weapons, he sits upright in his
chair and tranquilly awaits the entrance of the Indian.



CHAPTER FORTY.

A CONFIDENCE WELL REWARDED.

Only a short interval, a score of seconds elapses, when the door, once
more opening, admits the expected visitor.  The adjutant, after ushering
him into the room, withdraws, and commences pacing to and fro in the
patio.

Colonel Gil Uraga feels very much inclined to laugh as he contemplates
the new-comer, and reflects on the precautions he has taken.  A poor
devil of an Indian _peon_, in coarse woollen _tilma_, tanned sheepskin
trousers reaching only to the knee, bare legs below, _guaraches_ upon
his feet, and a straw hat upon his head; his long black hail hanging
unkempt over his shoulders; his mien humble and looks downcast, like all
of his tribe.  Yet it might be seen that, on occasion, his eyes could
flash forth a light, indicative of danger--a fierce, fiery light, such
as may have shone in the orbs of his ancestors when they rallied around
Guatimozin, and with clubs and stakes beat back the spears and swords of
their Spanish invaders.

At the entrance of this humble personage, into the splendidly furnished
apartment, his first act is to pull off his tattered straw hat, and make
lowly obeisance to the gorgeously attired officer he sees sitting behind
the table.

Up to this time Uraga has presumed him to be a perfect stranger, but
when the broad brim of the sombrero no longer casts its shade over his
face, and his eyelids become elevated through increasing confidence, the
colonel starts to his feet with an exclamatory speech that tells of
recognition.

"_Carrambo_!  You are Manuel--mule driver for Don Valerian Miranda?"

"_Si, Senor; a servido de V_ (Yes, Sir; at your Excellency's service),"
is the reply meekly spoken, and accompanied with a second sweep of the
straw hat--as gracefully as if given by a Chesterfield.

At sight of this old acquaintance, a world of thought rushes crowding
through the brain of Gil Uraga--conjectures, mingled with pleasant
anticipations.

For it comes back to his memory, that at the time of Colonel Miranda's
escape, some of his domestics went off with him, and he remembers that
Manuel was one of them.  In the Indian bending so respectfully before
him he sees, or fancies, the first link of a chain that may enable him
to trace the fugitives.  Manuel should know something about their
whereabouts?  And the _ci devant_ mule driver is now in his power for
any purpose--be it life or death.

There is that in the air and attitude of the Indian which tells him
there will be no need to resort to compulsory measures.  The information
