was easily accounted for.  The three horses that had been shot that day
occupied the attention of these gentry, for their hideous voices could
be heard off in the direction where the carcasses lay.  Having enough to
give them a supper, they found no occasion to risk themselves in the
neighbourhood of the camp, where they had experienced such a hostile
reception on the previous night.  So reasoned Von Bloom, as he turned
over and fell asleep.

He did not reason correctly, however.  It was true that the hyenas were
just then making a meal upon the horses; but it was a mistake to suppose
that that would satisfy these ravenous brutes, who never seem to have
enough.  Long before morning, had Von Bloom been awake he would have
heard the maniac laugh closer to the camp, and might have seen the green
eyes of the hyena glancing under the expiring blaze of Swartboy's
camp-fire.

Indeed, he had heard the beasts once that he awoke; but, knowing that
the biltongue had been this night placed out of their reach, and
thinking that there was nothing to which they could do any harm, he gave
no heed to their noisy demonstrations, and went to sleep again.

He was awakened, however, by a shrill squeak, as of some animal in the
agonies of death; and then there was a second squeak, that seemed to be
suddenly interrupted by the stifling of the creature's utterance!

In these cries Von Bloom, as well as the others--who were now also
awake--recognised the bleat of the ourebi, for they had heard it several
times during the afternoon.

"The hyenas are killing it!" thought they.  But they had not time to say
so, before another and far different cry reached their ears, and caused
them all to start as if a bomb-shell had burst under the wagon.  That
cry was the voice of Jan, and sounded in the same direction whence came
the scream of the stifled antelope!

"O heaven! what could it mean?"

The child's voice first reached them in a sudden screech--then there was
a confused noise resembling a scuffle--and Jan was again heard crying
aloud for help, while at the same time his voice was interrupted, and
each call appeared to come from a greater distance!  _Something or
somebody was carrying him off_!

This idea occurred to Von Bloom, Hans, and Hendrik, at the same instant.
Of course it filled them with consternation; and, as they were scarce
yet awake, they knew not what to do.

The cries of Jan, however, soon brought them to their senses; and to run
towards the direction whence these came was the first thought of all.

To grope for their guns would waste time, and all three leaped out of
the wagon without them.

Totty was upon her feet and jabbering, but she knew no more than they
what had happened.

They did not stop long to question her.  The voice of Swartboy, uttered
in loud barks and clicks, summoned them elsewhere; and they now beheld a
red flaming brand rushing through the darkness, which no doubt was
carried in the hands of that worthy.

They started off in the direction of the blazing torch, and ran as fast
as they could.  They still heard the Bushman's voice, and to their
dismay _beyond it_ the screams of little Jan!

Of course they could not tell what was causing all this.  They only
pressed on with fearful apprehensions.

When they had got within some fifty paces of the torch, they perceived
it suddenly descend, then raised again, and again brought down, in a
rapid and violent manner!  They could hear the voice of the Bushman
barking and clicking louder than ever, as though he was engaged in
chastising some creature.

But Jan's voice they no longer heard--he was screaming no more--was he
dead?

With terrible forebodings they rushed on.

When they arrived upon the spot, a singular picture presented itself to
their eyes.  Jan lay upon the ground, close in by the roots of some
bushes which he was holding tightly in his grasp.  From one of his
wrists extended a stout thong, or _rheim_, which passed through among
the bushes to the distance of several feet; and, fast to its other end,
was the ourebi fawn, dead, and terribly mangled!  Over the spot stood
Swartboy with his burning tree, which blazed all the brighter that he
had just been using it over the back of a ravenous hyena.  The latter
was not in sight.  It had long since skulked off, but no one thought of
pursuit, as all were too anxious about Jan.

No time was lost in lifting the child to his feet.  The eyes of all ran
eagerly over him to see where he was wounded; and an exclamation of joy
soon broke forth when they saw that, except the scratches of the thorns,
and the deep track of a cord upon his wrist, nothing in the shape of a
wound could be discovered upon his diminutive body.  He had now come to
himself, and assured them all that he was not hurt a bit.  Hurrah!  Jan
was safe!

It now fell to Jan's lot to explain all this mysterious business.

He had been lying in the wagon along with the rest, but not like them
asleep.  No.  He could not sleep a wink for thinking on his new pet,
which, for want of room in the wagon, had been left below tied to one of
the wheels.

Jan had taken it into his head that he would like to have another look
at the ourebi before going to sleep.  So, without saying a word to any
one, he crept out of the cap-tent, and descended to where the antelope
was tied.  He unloosed it gently, and then led it forward to the light
of the fire, where he sat down to admire the creature.

After gazing upon it for some time with delight, he thought that
Swartboy could not do otherwise than share his feelings; and without
more ado, he shook the Bushman awake.

The latter had no great stomach for being roused out of sleep to look at
an animal, hundreds of which he had eaten in his time.  But Jan and
Swartboy were sworn friends, and the Bushman was not angry.  He,
therefore, indulged his young master in the fancy he had taken; and the
two sat for a while conversing about the pet.

At length Swartboy proposed sleep.  Jan would agree to this only upon
the terms that Swartboy would allow him to sleep alongside of him.  He
would bring his blanket from the wagon, and would not trouble Swartboy
by requiring part of the latter's kaross.

Swartboy objected at first; but Jan urged that he had felt cold in the
wagon, and that was partly why he had come down to the fire.  All this
was sheer cunning in the little imp.  But Swartboy could not refuse him
anything, and at length consented.  He could see no harm in it, as there
were no signs of rain.

Jan then returned to the wagon, climbed noiselessly up, drew out his own
blankets, and brought them to the fire.  He then wrapped himself up, and
lay down alongside of Swartboy, with the ourebi standing near, and in
such a situation that he could still have his eyes upon it, even when
lying.  To secure it from wandering, he had fastened a strong rheim
around its neck, the other end of which he had looped tightly upon his
own wrist.

He lay for some time contemplating his beautiful pet.  But sleep at
length overcame him, and the image of the ourebi melted before his eyes.

Beyond this Jan could tell little of what happened to him.  He was
awakened by a sudden jerking at his wrist, and hearing the antelope
scream.  But he had not quite opened his eyes, before he felt himself
dragged violently over the ground.

He thought at first it was Swartboy playing some trick upon him; but as
he passed the fire, he saw by its light that it was a huge black animal
that had seized the ourebi, and was dragging both him and it along.

Of course he then began to scream for help, and caught at everything he
could to keep himself from being carried away.  But he could lay hold of
nothing, until he found himself among thick bushes, and these he seized
and held with all his might.

He could not have held out long against the strength of the hyena; but
it was just at that moment that Swartboy came up with his firebrand, and
beat off the ravisher with a shower of blows.

When they got back to the light of the fire they found that Jan was all
right.  But the poor ourebi--it had been sadly mangled, and was now of
no more value than a dead rat.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

A CHAPTER UPON HYENAS.

Hyenas are wolves--only wolves of a particular kind.  They have the same
general habits as wolves, and much of their look.  They have heavier
heads, broader thicker muzzles, shorter and stouter necks, and
altogether a coarser and shaggier coat.  One of the most characteristic
marks of the hyena is the inequality in the development of its limbs.
The hind-legs appear weaker and shorter than the fore ones, so that the
rump is far lower than the shoulders; and the line of the back, instead
of being horizontal, as in most animals, droops obliquely towards the
tail.

The short thick neck and strong jaws are characteristics; the former so
much so, that in the days of fabulous natural history the hyena was said
to be without cervical vertebrae.  Its thick neck and powerful jaw-bones
have their uses.  It is by virtue of these that the hyena can make a
meal upon bones, which would be of no use whatever to the ordinary wolf
or other beast of prey.  It can break almost the largest and strongest
joints, and not only extract their marrow, but crush the bones
themselves, and swallow them as food.  Here, again, we have proof of
Nature's adaptation.  It is just where these large bones are found in
greatest plenty that we find the hyena.  Nature suffers nothing to be
wasted.

Hyenas are the wolves of Africa--that is, they are in Africa the
representatives of the large wolf, which does not exist there.  It is
true the jackal is a wolf in every respect, but only a small one; and
there is no true wolf in Africa of the large kind, such as the gaunt
robber of the Pyrenees, or his twin brother of America.  But the hyena
is the _wolf of Africa_.

And of all wolves he is the ugliest and most brute-like.  There is not a
graceful or beautiful bit about him.  In fact, I was about to pronounce
him the ugliest animal in creation, when the baboons came into my mind.
They of course exhibit the _ne plus ultra_ of ugliness; and, indeed, the
hyenas are not at all unlike them in general aspect, as well as in some
of their habits.  Some early writers even classed them together.

Now we have been speaking of the hyena, as if there was but one species.
For a long time but one was known--the common or "striped hyena"
(_Hyena vulgaris_), and it was about this one that so many false stories
have been told.  Perhaps no other animal has held so conspicuous a place
in the world of mystery and horror.  Neither vampire nor dragon have
surpassed him.  Our ancestors believed that he could fascinate any one
with his glance, lure them after him, and then devour them--that he
changed his sex every year--that he could transform himself into a
comely youth, and thus beguile young maidens off into the woods to be
eaten up--that he could imitate the human voice perfectly--that it was
his custom to conceal himself near a house, listen until the name of one
of the family should be mentioned, then call out as if for assistance,
pronouncing the name he had heard, and imitating the cries of one in
distress.  This would bring out the person called, who of course on
reaching the spot would find only a fierce hyena ready to devour him!

Strange as it may seem, all these absurd stories were once very
generally believed, and, strange as it may seem in me to say, not one of
them but has _some_ foundation.  Exaggerated as they are, they all owe
their origin to natural facts.  At present I shall refer to only two of
these.  There is a peculiarity about the glance of the hyena that has
given birth to the notion of his possessing the power to "charm" or
fascinate, although I never heard of his luring any one to destruction
by it; there is a peculiarity about the animal's voice that might well
gain him credit for imitating the human voice, for the simple reason
that the former bears a very near resemblance to the latter.  I do not
say that the voice of the hyena is like the ordinary human voice, but
there are some voices it does exactly resemble.  I am acquainted with
several people who have _hyena voices_.  In fact, one of the closest
imitations of a human laugh is that of the "spotted hyena."  No one can
hear it, hideous as it is, without being amused at its close
approximation to the utterance of a human being.  There is a dash of the
maniac in its tones, and it reminds me of the sharp metallic ring which
I have noticed in the voices of negroes.  I have already compared it to
what I should fancy would be the laugh of a _maniac negro_.

The striped hyena, although the best known, is in my opinion the least
interesting of his kind.  He is more widely distributed than any of his
congeners.  Found in most parts of Africa, he is also an Asiatic animal,
is common enough throughout all the southern countries of Asia, and is
even found as far north as the Caucasus and the Altai.  He is the only
species that exists in Asia.  All the others are natives of Africa,
which is the true home of the hyena.

Naturalists admit but _three_ species of hyena.  I have not the
slightest doubt that there are twice that number as distinct from each
other as these three are.  Five, at least, I know, without reckoning as
hyenas either the "wild hound" of the Cape, or the little burrowing
hyena (_Proteles_)--both of which we shall no doubt meet with in the
course of our hunting adventures.

First, then, we have the "striped" hyena already mentioned.  He is
usually of an ashy grey colour with a slight yellowish tinge, and a set
of irregular _striae_, or stripes of black or dark brown.  These are
placed transversely to the length of his body, or rather obliquely,
following nearly the direction of the ribs.  They are not equally well
defined or conspicuous in different individuals of the species.  The
hair--like that of all hyenas--is long, harsh, and shaggy, but longer
over the neck, shoulders, and back, where it forms a mane.  This becomes
erect when the animal is excited.  The same may be observed among dogs.

The common hyena is far from being either strong or brave, when compared
with the others of his kind.  He is, in fact, the weakest and least
ferocious of the family.  He is sufficiently voracious, but lives
chiefly on carrion, and will not dare attack living creatures of half
his own strength.  He preys only on the smallest quadrupeds, and with
all his voracity he is an arrant poltroon.  A child of ten years will
easily put him to flight.

A second species is the hyena which so much annoyed the celebrated Bruce
while travelling in Abyssinia, and may be appropriately named "Bruce's
hyena."  This is also a _striped_ hyena, and nearly all naturalists have
set him down as of the same species with the _Hyena vulgaris_.
Excepting the "stripes," there is no resemblance whatever between the
two species; and even these are differently arranged, while the ground
colour also differs.

Bruce's hyena is nearly twice the size of the common kind--with twice
his strength, courage, and ferocity.  The former will attack not only
large quadrupeds, but man himself,--will enter houses by night, even
villages, and carry off domestic animals and children.

Incredible as these statements may appear, about their truth there can
be no doubt; such occurrences are by no means rare.

This hyena has the reputation of entering graveyards, and disinterring
the dead bodies to feed upon them.  Some naturalists have denied this.
For what reason?  It is well-known that in many parts of Africa, the
dead are not interred, but thrown out on the plains.  It is equally
well-known that the hyenas devour the bodies so exposed.  It is known,
too, that the hyena is a "terrier"--a burrowing animal.  What is there
strange or improbable in supposing that it burrows to get at the bodies,
its natural food?  The wolf does so, the jackal, the coyote,--ay, even
the dog!  I have seen all of them at it on the battle-field.  Why not
the hyena?

A third species is very distinct from either of the two described--the
"spotted hyena" (_Hyena crocuta_).  This is also sometimes called the
"laughing" hyena, from the peculiarity we have had occasion to speak of.
This species, in general colour, is not unlike the common kind, except
that, instead of stripes, his sides are covered with spots.  He is
larger than the _Hyena vulgaris_, and in character resembles Bruce's, or
the Abyssinian hyena.  He is a native of the southern half of Africa,
where he is known among the Dutch colonists as the "tiger-wolf;" while
the common hyena is by them simply called "wolf."

A fourth species is the "brown hyena" (_Hyena villosa_).  The name
"brown" hyena is not a good one, as brown colour is by no means a
characteristic of this animal.  _Hyena villosa_, or "hairy hyena," is
better, as the long, straight hair falling down his sides gives him a
peculiar aspect, and at once distinguishes him from any of the others.
He is equally as large and fierce as any, being of the size of a Saint
Bernard mastiff, but it is difficult to imagine how any one could
mistake him for either a striped or spotted hyena.  His colour is dark
brown, or nearly black above, and dirty grey beneath.  In fact, in
general colour and the arrangement of his hair, he is not unlike a
badger or wolverine.

And yet many naturalists describe this as being of the same species as
the common hyena--the learned De Blainville among the rest.  The most
ignorant boor of South Africa--for he is a South African animal--knows
better than this.  Their very appellation of "straand-wolf" points out
his different habits and haunts--for he is a seashore animal, and not
even found in such places as are the favourite resorts of the common
