
"Yes, _uncommon_ select," echoed Pax.

"It would never do, you know," continued the other, "to let in every
shallow young snipe that wanted to have a lark, and make game of the
affair.  We will make our rules very stringent."

"Of course," murmured Pax, with a solemn look, "_tremendously_
stringent.  For first offences of any kind--a sousin' with dirty water.
For second offences--a woppin' and a fine.  For third--dismissal, with
ears and noses chopped off, or such other mutilation as a committee of
the house may invent.  But, Phil, who d'yee think would be suitable men
to make members of?"

"Well, let me see," said Phil, again laying down his tools, and looking
at the floor with a thoughtful air, "there's Long Poker, he's a
long-legged, good-hearted fellow--fond o' the newspapers."

"Yes," put in Pax, "Poker'll do for one.  He'd be a capital member.
Long and thin as a literary c'racter ought to be, and pliable too.  We
could make a'most anything of him, except a fire-screen or a tablecloth.
Then there's Big Jack--he's got strong sedate habits."

"Too fond of punning," objected Phil.

"A little punishment in the mutilation way would stop that," said Pax.

"And there's Jim Brown," rejoined Phil.  "He's a steady, enthusiastic
fellow; and little Grigs, he's about as impudent as yourself, Pax.
Strange, isn't it, that it's chiefly little fellows who are impudent?"

"Wouldn't it be strange if it were otherwise?" retorted Pax, with an
injured look.  "As we can't knock people down with our fists, aren't we
justified in knockin' 'em down with our tongues?"

"Then," continued Phil, "there's George Granger and Macnab--"

"Ah! ain't he the boy for argufyin' too?" interrupted Pax, "and he'll
meet his match in Sandy Tod.  And there's Tom Blunter--"

"And Jim Scroggins--"

"An' Limp Letherby--"

"An' Fat Collins--"

"An' Bobby Sprat.  Oh!" exclaimed Pax, with a glowing countenance,
"we've got lots o' first-rate men among the message-boys, though there
_are_ some uncommon bad 'uns.  But we'll have none except true-blues in
_our_ literary association."

The society thus planned was soon called into being, for Philip Maylands
was one of those determined characters who carry their plans into
execution with vigour and despatch.  His first move was to seek counsel
of Mr Sterling, a city missionary--the same who had directed George
Aspel to the abode of Abel Bones on the night of that youth's visit to
Archangel Court,--with whom he had become acquainted on one of his
visits to Miss Lillycrop.  That good lady was a staunch ally and able
assistant of many city missionaries, and did much service in the way of
bringing them into acquaintance with people who she thought might be
helpful to them, or get help from them.  A mutual liking had sprung up
between Mr Antony Sterling and Phil on that occasion, which had ripened
into friendship.

"You'll help us at our first meeting, won't you?" asked Phil, after they
had talked the matter over.

"Yes, if you wish it," replied Mr Sterling.  "But I won't come at the
beginning.  I'll drop in towards the close, and won't say much.  You'd
best begin the work by yourselves.  I'll come to your aid whenever you
seem to require it.  But have a care how you start, Phil.  Whatever the
other members may do, remember that you, as the originator of the
association, are bound to lay the foundations with the blessing of God."

Phil did not neglect this all-important point, and, having obtained
permission from Solomon Flint to use the shed, the society was soon
auspiciously commenced with a lively debate, in Pegaway Hall, as to the
best method of conducting its own affairs.  On this occasion Philip
Maylands proved himself to be an able organiser.  Long Poker showed that
he had not dabbled in newspapers without fishing up and retaining a vast
amount of miscellaneous knowledge.  Jim Brown roused the meeting to a
pitch of enthusiasm almost equal to his own.  Little Grigs made stinging
remarks all round, and chaffed little Pax with evident delight.  Macnab
disputed with everybody.  Sandy Tod argued and objected more or less to
everything, while Tom Blunter, Jim Scroggins, Limp Letherby, Fat
Collins, and Bobby Sprat, lent more or less effectual fire to the
debate.  Big Jack did not speak much.  He preferred, as he said, to form
a large audience, but, if he might be permitted to offer an opinion,
would suggest that less talk and more action might facilitate the
despatch of business, and that they ought to try to emulate the House of
Commons by allowing a little common sense to mingle with their
discussions.

As for Peter Pax, he assumed the _role_ of peacemaker-general.  When the
debaters seemed to be getting too warm, he rose to order; and, in a calm
dignified manner, commented on the conduct of the disputants with such
ineffable insolence as to draw down their wrath on his devoted head--to
the great delight of the other members.  Thus he threw oil on the
troubled waters, and, generally, kept the meeting lively.

Finally, the laws of the Pegaway Literary Association were fixed, the
plan of meetings was arranged, and the whole thing fairly started.

The society worked well for a time, but after the various members had
done their best, as Pax said, to keep the pot boiling, it was felt and
suggested that they should seek a little aid from without.  A reading or
a lecture was proposed, seconded, and carried.  Then came the question
who should be asked to read or lecture.  Macnab proposed that their
chairman should endeavour to procure a lecturer, and report to next
meeting.  Sandy Tod objected, and proposed a committee to consider the
subject.  Phil Maylands said he had anticipated the demand, and had
already secured the promise of a lecturer--if the members chose to
accept him.

"Name! name!" cried several voices.

"Our excellent landlord, Solomon Flint," said Phil.  "You all know his
admirable powers of memory, and his profound knowledge of men and things
(`At least if you don't, you ought to,' from Pax), and you may be sure
he'll give us something good."

"And proverbial," added little Grigs.

"Ay, Flint will certainly strike fire out of whatever he tackles," said
Big Jack.

("Order!" from Pax.)

"When is he to give it?" asked one.

"Won't fix the time just yet," said Phil.

"What's his subject?" asked another.

"Can't say; not yet decided."

With this uncertainty as to time and subject the association was obliged
to rest content, and thereafter the meeting was dissolved.

We are grieved to be obliged to state that the society thus hopefully
commenced came to a premature close at an early period of its career,
owing to circumstances over which its members had no control.

Some time before that sad event occurred, however, Solomon Flint
delivered his discourse, and as some of the events of that memorable
evening had special bearing on the issues of our tale, we shall recur to
it in a succeeding chapter.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

GEORGE ASPEL RECEIVES VARIOUS VISITORS AT THE ORNITHOLOGICAL SHOP, AND
IS CALLED TO VIGOROUS ACTION.

As long as a man retains a scrap of self-respect, and struggles, from
any motive whatever, against his evil tendencies, his journey to
destruction is comparatively slow; but when once he gives way to
despair, assumes that he has tried his best in vain, and throws the
reins on the neck of his passions, his descent into the dark abyss is
terribly rapid.

For a time George Aspel was buoyed up by hope.  He hoped that May
Maylands might yet come to regard him with favour, though she studiously
avoided giving him ground for such hope.  He also continued, though
faintly, to hope that Sir James Clubley might still think of fulfilling
his promises, and, in pursuance of that hope, frequently inquired
whether any letters had been left for him at the hotel where he first
put up on arriving in London.  But, when both of these hopes forsook
him, and he found himself in what he deemed the ridiculous position of
shopman to a bird-stuffer, without an influential friend in the great
city, or the slightest prospect of improving his condition, he gave way
to despair.

Before quite giving way, however, he made several attempts to obtain
work more suited to his tastes and acquirements, in which efforts he was
heartily seconded by Mr Enoch Blurt; but Enoch was about as unknown in
London as himself, so that their united efforts failed.

In these circumstances the ambitious youth began to regard himself as a
martyr to misfortune, and resolved to enjoy himself as he best might.
With a view to this he spent his evenings in places of amusement, with
companions whose example and influence helped to drag him down and
increase his tendency to drink.

This tendency was in part hereditary.  His father had been a confirmed
drinker.  Although well aware of this, he did not believe in his own
fallibility.  Few young men of his stamp do.  Other men might give way
to it, but there was no fear of him.  He admitted that he could, and
sometimes did, take a stiff glass of grog--but what then?  It did him no
harm.  He was not a slave to it.  He could give it up and do without it
if he chose--although, it is to be remarked, he had never made the
trial, and only assumed this power.  To be rather "screwed" now and then
was, he admitted, somewhat discreditable; but he wasn't worse than many
others, and it didn't occur often.  Thus he reasoned, half-justifying
himself in a thoroughly selfish, sinful course; growling at his "bad
luck," and charging the guilt of his sin, which he said he couldn't
help, on Fate--in other words, on God.

It never occurred to George Aspel that the true way to get out of his
troubles was to commit his way to his Maker; to accept the position
assigned him; to do the work of a faithful servant therein; to get
connected with good society through the medium of churches and young
men's Christian associations, and to spend a few years in establishing a
character for trustworthiness, capacity, vigour, and intelligence, which
would secure his advancement in life.  At least, if such thoughts did
occur to him, he refused to entertain them, and resolved to fling care
to the dogs and defy fortune.

Of course, it soon became apparent to his employer that there was a
great change for the worse in the youth, whom he not only admired for
his frank bearing and strapping appearance, but loved as his deliverer
from death.  Delicacy of feeling, however, prevented Mr Blurt from
alluding to dissipations at which he could only guess.

Poverty and distress bring about strange companionships.  When Aspel
first arrived in London he would have scouted the idea of his having
anything whatever to do with such a man as Abel Bones, but he had not
proceeded far in his downward course when that disreputable character
became, if not a companion, at least an acquaintance.

This state of things was brought about primarily by the patronage which
Aspel had extended to the "poor worthless fellow" whom he had so
unceremoniously knocked down.  But the poor worthless fellow, although
born in a lower rank of life, was quite equal to him in natural mental
power, and much superior in cunning and villainy.  Mr Bones had also a
bold, reckless air and nature, which were attractive to this descendant
of the sea-kings.  Moreover, he possessed a power of mingling flattery
with humbug in a way that made his victim fall rather easily into his
toils.

Revenge, as we have said, lay at the bottom of Abel Bones' desire to
become better acquainted with Aspel, but profit soon took the place of
revenge.  Mr Bones earned his livelihood chiefly by appropriating what
belonged to other people.  He was not particular as to what he took, or
how he took it, but on the whole preferred easy work (like most people)
and large profit.  Being a man of bold, ambitious views, he had often
thought of forgery, but a neglected education stood in the way of that.
Being also a man of resource, he did not doubt that this, like many
other difficulties, would ere long succumb to his perseverance.  While
in this frame of mind it occurred to him that he might make a tool of
his new acquaintance and would-be patron.  At the same time he had
penetration enough to perceive that his intended tool was a dangerous
instrument, highly-tempered and sharp-set, with a will of its own, not
yet quite demoralised, and not by any means to be played with.

It might be tedious to trace the steps and winding ways by which Abel
Bones led his victim from one piece of impropriety to another--always
concealing his real character, and playing the _role_ of an unfortunate
man, willing to work, but unable to find employment--until he almost had
him in his toils.

"It's of no use your dancing attendance on me any longer, Bones," said
Aspel one day, as the former appeared at the door of the ornithological
shop.  "I have all the will to help you, but I have not the power.  My
friends have failed me, and I can do no more than keep my own soul in my
body.  You must look to some one else with more influence than I
possess."

"That's a bad job, sir," returned Bones, with a downcast look.  "I've
bin down at the docks all day, an' earned only enough to get a plate of
bacon and beans.  Surely there's somethin' wrong when a cove that's
willin' to work must starve; and there's my wife and child starvin' too.
Seems to me that a cove is justified in stealin' in the circumstances."

He cast a sidelong glance at Aspel.  It was the first time he had
ventured to suggest dishonest intentions.  If they should be taken ill,
he could turn it off as a jest; if taken well, he could proceed.

"I'm very sorry for you, Bones," said Aspel, not noticing the hint,
"very sorry, but what can I do?  I have not a copper left beyond what I
absolutely require."

"Well, sir, I know that you can do nothing, but now that my wife and
child are actually starvin', I really don't see the sin of helpin'
myself to a loaf at the nearest baker's, and giving him leg-bail for
it."

"Nothing justifies stealing," said Aspel.

"D'ee think not, sir?" said Bones.  "If you saw your wife now, supposin'
you had one, at the pint of death with hunger, an' you saw a loaf lyin'
as didn't belong to you, would you let her die?"

Aspel thought of May Maylands.

"I don't know," he replied, "what I should _do_.  All that I say is,
that stealing is unjustifiable."

The argument was stopped at this point by the entrance of a small
telegraph message-boy.

Bones was startled by his sudden entrance.

"Well, good-night, sir, we'll talk that matter over some other time," he
said quickly, pulling his wideawake well over his face as he went out,
and giving the message-boy a prolonged stare.

The boy paid no regard to him, but, turning to Aspel, introduced himself
as Peter Pax.

"What! the comrade-in-arms of my friend Phil Maylands?" asked Aspel.

"The same, at your service," replied the small messenger; "an' if you
are the friend he talks to me so much about, as goes by the name of
George Aspel, an' is descended in a direct line from the old sea-kings,
I'm proud to make your acquaintance."

Aspel laughed at the consummate self-possession of the boy, and shaking
hands with him heartily as a comrade of their common friend Phil, bade
him take a seat, which he immediately did on the counter.

"You're surrounded by pleasant company here," observed Pax, gazing
intently at the pelican of the wilderness.

"Well, yes; but it's rather silent company," said Aspel.

"Did that fellow, now," continued Pax, pointing to the owl, "die of
surprise?"

"Perhaps he did, but I wasn't present at his death," returned the other.

"Well, now, I do like this sort o' thing."

Little Pax said this with such genuine feeling, and looked round him
with such obvious interest, that Aspel, with some surprise, asked him
why he liked it.

"Why? because from my earliest years I always was fond of animals.  No
matter what sort they wos, I liked 'em all--birds an' beasts an' fishes,
flyers and creepers, an' squeakers and flutterers," said the boy,
clasping both hands over one knee, and rocking himself to and fro on the
counter, while he gazed into the owl's face with the air of one whose
mind is rambling far away into the remote past.

"Once on a time," he continued, sadly, "I dwelt in the country.  I was
born in the country.  I'm a sort o' country gentleman by nature, so to
speak, and would have bin revellin' in the country to this day if a
perwerse fate hadn't driven me into the town--a very perwerse fate
indeed."

"Indeed?" said Aspel, unable to restrain a laugh at his visitor's
old-fashioned ways, "what sort of fate was it?"

"A perwerse one, didn't I tell you?"

"Yes, but wherein consisted its perversity?  How did it act, you know?"

"Ah, its perwersity consisted in drivin' me into town in a market-cart,"
said Pax.  "You must know that my perwerse fate was a uncle.  He was a
big brute.  I don't mean to speak of 'im disrespectfully.  I merely give
'im his proper name.  He was a market-gardener and kept cows--also a
pump.  He had a wife and child--a little girl.  Ah! a sweet child it
was."

"Indeed," said Aspel, as the boy relapsed into a silent contemplative
gaze at the pelican.

