For some minutes no sound was heard save the regular rattle of the oars
in the rowlocks, the swish of the foam as it flew from the cutwater, and
the occasional sob or gasp of the men as they exerted themselves to the
utmost limit of their powers in the hopeless pursuit.

Suddenly Teddy Malone cried eagerly, "Look out--astarn!"

All turned their gaze as directed, and observed a dark line on the
horizon.

"Thank God!" murmured the doctor, "a breeze!"

It was indeed true.  Just at this critical moment of profound, despair,
a gleam of hope was sent to sustain them!  Is it not often thus in the
dealings of God with man?

There was no relaxation of effort, however, on the part of the crew
until the breeze bore down on them.  Then the mate and Hugh Morrison,
drawing in their oars, set up the mast and hoisted the sails.  Instantly
the good craft bent over, as if bowing submissively to her rightful
lord, and the gurgling water rolled swiftly from her prow.  Still the
men plied the oars, but now with the strength of hope, until the breeze
freshened so much as to render their further use unnecessary.

"Now, indeed, the tables are turned," said Dominick with a great sigh of
relief, as he drew in his oar.

"Yes; if the wind holds," said the doctor, glancing back anxiously.

"It'll howld," said Malone firmly.

"Who made you so sure a judge of weather?" demanded Jenkins.

"Sure it isn't me as is judge.  It's the widdy.  She says to me this
mornin', says she, `The'll be a stiff breeze afore night, Teddy,' an' I
nivver found the widdy wrong in her forecasts o' the weather."

"The distance decreases rapidly!  Hurrah! boys, we'll catch them yet,"
cried Dominick.

This was obviously the case.  With her large sails filled by a stiff
breeze almost directly astern, the boat went through the water like "a
thing of life."  The savages, perceiving this, redoubled their efforts,
but in vain.  The pursuers gained on them rapidly.

An exclamation of surprise burst from those in the boat as they observed
two splashes, one on either side of the canoe, as if some one had fallen
or leaped overboard.  A great shout from the savages followed, and they
suddenly ceased to paddle.  The canoe was still too far off for the
pursuers to make out what had occurred; but in another minute they
observed that two round black objects emerged from the water some
distance astern of the canoe.  The savages also saw these, and uttered a
frightful yell as they backed their craft towards them.

"They've jumped overboard!" exclaimed Dominick.  "Now, boys--ready with
your guns!"

No need for this order.  All were ready in a second, but none dared to
fire for fear of hitting the swimmers.

Just then a savage rose in the stern of the canoe and poised a short
spear.

Instantly every gun in the boat was pointed.

"Not a shot!" shouted Dr Marsh, as he sprang forward with a
double-barrelled rifle in his hand.

"Keep her away two points!" he cried, as he knelt to take aim.  Every
one was well aware of the doctor's power of shooting, and waited the
result with bated breath.  The savage seemed to bend backward for the
cast of the spear.  At that moment the crack of the doctor's rifle was
heard, and the right arm of the savage fell.

Another savage caught up the spear, and urged his comrades, apparently,
to back the canoe still further; but they had got a fright, and were
evidently unwilling to do so.  Before they could make up their minds,
another shot from the doctor's rifle sent the second savage headlong
into the bottom of the canoe.

"Give them a volley now, lads," he said, turning round and resuming his
place at the helm; "but fire high."

The rattling volley which followed, and the whistle of the leaden hail
over their heads, quickly settled the savage minds.  One of their
paddles, which chanced to be held aloft at the moment, was shot into
splinters, and precipitated their decision.  With a howl of rage and
terror they dipped their paddles into the sea and flew ahead.

"Be ready there," cried the doctor, as he anxiously guided the boat.

Teddy Malone, Morris, Dominick, and Jabez leaned eagerly over the bows
with outstretched arms and clawlike fingers.  Another moment and Queen
Pina with Otto were rescued from the deep, as well as from several
sharks, which, doubtless, had been licking their lips at the prospect of
the royal feast in store for them.

"Ain't you goin' to carry on, an' sink the varmints?" exclaimed Jabez in
surprise, as the doctor put the helm hard down, and prepared to return
home.

"No," replied the doctor sharply.

During the voyage out the crew of the wrecked ship had become intimately
acquainted with the doctor's qualities, among others that there was a
certain quiet tone in his "no" which was final.  To put the belligerents
of the party more at rest, however, Dominick backed his friend up by
adding that he had no ill-will to the miserable savages; that they had
been punished enough already; that they had got all they wanted from
them; and that as their own party consisted chiefly of settlers, not
warriors, there was no occasion for fighting.

"Speak for yourself, Dom," cried Otto, as he wrung the water out of his
garments.  "If I was in that canoe with a good carving-knife, I'd be
warrior enough to give a settler to the baboon wi' the swelled nose who
crammed me into a--"

The remainder of the speech was drowned in laughter, for Otto spoke with
intense indignation, as he thought of the injuries and indignities he
had so recently suffered.

"Why, what did they do to you, Otto?" asked his brother.

"Oh!  I can't tell you," replied the other; "I'm too mad.  Tell 'em,
Pina."

Queen Pina, who had also been engaged for some minutes in wringing the
water from her skirts, sat down, and, in the sweetest of voices, told
how they had been surprised on the islet, how Otto had flattened a
chief's nose with an oar, and how they had afterwards been carried off.

"Then," she added, "when they saw that you were unable to overtake them,
the chief with the swelled nose began to beat poor Otto and pull his
hair savagely.  I do believe he would have killed him if a man, who
seemed to be the leader of them all, had not ordered him to desist.
When you put up the sail and began to overtake us, the chief with the
swelled nose got out a rough kind of sack and tried to thrust Otto into
it.  While he was struggling with this chief--"

"Fighting," interrupted Otto; "fighting with the baboon."

"Well, fighting, if you prefer it--he asked me if I was brave?"

"No, I didn't; I said game."

"Well--if I was game to jump overboard at the same moment that he did?
I quickly said yes.  He twisted himself out of the man's--"

"Baboon's! baboon's!"

"Well--baboon's grasp, and went over the side like an eel, and--"

"And she," interrupted Otto, "she went plump on the other side like a
sack of potatoes, and we met under the canoe and dived well astern
before coming up for breath.  You know what pains you took with our
swimming and diving, Dom; it helped us then, I can tell you; and so here
we are, all alive and hearty.  But I saw the black fellow goin' to send
a spear at Pina, and can't think why he didn't let fly.  P'r'aps he did,
and missed."

"No, he didn't; for Dr Marsh shot him in the arm," said Dominick, "and
thus saved Pauline's life."

"Three cheers for the Queen!" cried little Buxley, who had done good
service at the oar, and whose little bosom was filled with enthusiasm at
the recital of this adventure.

The invitation was heartily responded to.

"An' wan more for the doctor!" shouted Malone.

In this rejoicing frame of mind they returned to Big Island, where
Pauline was received with a warm embrace by the widow Lynch, who had
been dancing about the settlement in a more or less deranged state ever
since the boat left.

That same evening two meetings of considerable importance took place in
the palace.  The first was a cabinet council in the hall; the other a
meeting of conspirators in the back-kitchen.  Both were brief, for each
was interrupted.  We will take the cabinet council first.

The ministers present at it were the premier, Dominick and Dr Marsh,
both of whom Joe had called to his aid.

"Now, my dear queen," said the premier, "we have met to consider the
constitution; but before saying a word about it myself, I would like to
hear what your majesty has to say about it."

"I'm not sure," said the queen gravely, "that I have the faintest notion
as to how a constitution should begin or end.  But I will give you a
motto to set in the forefront of our constitution, which may also form
the foundation on which it is to be built--the pattern to which its
parts must conform.  It is this: `Whatsoever ye would that men should do
to you, do ye even so to them.'"

"I will set that down with pleasure," said Dominick, who acted as clerk,
but, before he could write a line, a knock at the door interrupted them.
Then the door opened, and Otto's head appeared with eagerness in the
eyes, and a beckoning hand in advance.

Dominick rose and went out.

"I've just overheard Morris and Jabez in the back-kitchen making an
appointment.  Shall I tell our squad to be ready?"

"Where is the appointed place?" asked Dominick.

"On the reef.  They start this very night, for the wind suits, and I
heard Hugh say that all was ready."

"Good!  I didn't think the game was so nearly played out.  Well for us
that we are prepared.  Yes, call up the squad.  We'll give them
checkmate to-night."

It must be explained here that ever since the night of the discovery of
the plot organised by Morris to seize and carry off the wrecked ship,
Otto and his brother had kept a close watch on the men, and were aware
of all their plans and intended movements.  They had also communicated
their knowledge to a select few, whom Otto styled the squad, who had
pledged themselves to be ready at a moment's notice to do their best to
circumvent the conspirators.  Among other things Otto had discovered
that Malines had agreed to join them, professing himself quite willing
to act as second in command under Morris.

It may also be explained that though we have hitherto spoken of the
vessel which had been cast on the reef as a wreck, it was in reality
very slightly injured about the hull, and much of the damage done to the
spars and rigging had been quietly repaired by the conspirators.

When darkness shrouded land and sea, two expeditions started from the
settlement that night--one following the other.  The conspirators in the
largest boat set off first.  As it was no unusual thing for a night
expedition to the reef in order to transport supplies from the wreck in
the morning, the departure of the large boat attracted little notice.

When it had got well away a smaller boat set off, containing the
"squad," which numbered among its members Dominick, the doctor, Otto,
Joe, and his brother David, Teddy Malone, little Buxley, John Nobbs the
blacksmith, and others, all of whom were armed with revolvers.

They steered for a different part of the reef, so as to avoid being seen
by the conspirators.  On landing they passed through the old
burial-ground and made for the Golden Cave.  This place had, since the
settlement on Big Island, been given over entirely to Pauline's use, and
being styled the Queen's seaside palace, no one ever thought of entering
it without permission.  Hence the party of observation knew that it
would be a secure place of ambush.

When safe inside, Dominick and Otto were deputed to go out as quietly as
possible, note what Morris and his men were doing, and bring back a
report.

"For," said the doctor, "if we interrupt them too soon they may pretend
that this is one of their ordinary visits to the ship for supplies, and
if we are too late they may get clear away in spite of us.  We must
strike when the iron is hot."

"Yes," said Otto, looking back as he followed his brother, "we'll look
well to the heating process and let you know when they're white hot, so
have your revolvers ready, my braves!"

"Och! shut your tatie-trap," cried Malone, but Otto, having shut the
door, lost the advice.

The night was neither decidedly light nor dark.  There might, indeed, to
have been moonlight, but clouds veiled the light though they could not
altogether obscure it; thus there was just enough to render objects
dimly visible.

"All the better," whispered Dominick, as they turned the point of rock
that hid the wreck from view.  "We'll go down by the thicket.  Keep
close to my heels, boy, and drop on your hands and knees when you see me
do so."

"All right, captain."

Gliding cautiously down in the direction indicated, they came at length
to the seaward edge of the thicket, where the bushes, being less dense,
permitted them to partially see the wreck.  Here Dominick went on
all-fours, appearing, as he crept slowly forward, like some sort of huge
bear with no tail, and its hind feet turned the wrong way.  Otto
followed like a little bear with similar undignified peculiarities.
Having advanced far enough to obtain a clear view of the wreck, the
spies sank into the grass and crept forward a little way.  Then they lay
still a few moments and listened.  They then raised their heads
cautiously and looked.  What they heard and saw puzzled them not a
little.

First, they noted that the wreck did not seem to lie in the position,
with which they had been so long familiar.  Then, as their eyes became
accustomed to the faint light, they observed that a small boat was
moving busily about the vessel's bow, and that a group of dark
scarce-distinguishable forms of men was standing on the shore.
Presently there was heard a low, yet not unfamiliar growl.  This was
followed by a high yet not unfamiliar shriek, accompanied by a grating
sound.

"Lions and cockatoos!" whispered Otto, who had crept up alongside of his
brother by that time, "what _can_ they be about?"

"Is that a line I see athwart the sky?" asked Dominick, "look--just
between the wreck and the big ledge there."

Said Otto, "It's more than a line.  _I_ see it.  Half a dozen lines at
least, and something like a round lump in the middle of 'em.  Don't you
see it?--against the sky like a black moon--"

"Hush! boy--the growl again!"

"Ay, man, also the cockatoo."

"Oh!  I have it now," whispered Dominick, with a low laugh; "they've
rove blocks and tackle from the ship to the rocks, and are working them
softly.  Evildoers fear to be overheard, even when there's no chance of
being so!  Your lion, Otto, is the subdued yo-heave-ho of the men."

"I see," said Otto, with a grin so broad that his white teeth glistened
even in the dark, "and my cockatoo is the unsubdued screeching of the
block-sheaves!  They must be trying to get the ship off the reef."

A heavy plunge at that moment told that the conspirators were not only
trying but had succeeded, for the plunge was followed by an irresistible
though powerfully suppressed cheer.

"We have not a moment to lose, Otto," whispered Dominick.  "The ship is
free, and they will only take time to carry the tackle aboard before
embarking.  Do you run back and bring the squad down at the double.  I
will keep our friends here in play till they come."

Not a word did Otto reply.  He had acquired that first of requisites in
a soldier or servant--the habit of prompt obedience.  Somewhat like a
North American savage, he sank into the grass and wriggled from the
scene.  A few moments later Dominick rose, and walked down towards the
conspirators with the easy off-hand manner of a man who saunters forth
to enjoy the night air.  So busy were they getting the tackle into the
boat that he was not observed until quite close to them.

"You seem busy to-night, friends," he said, in his usual pleasant tones,
as he took his stand close beside Hugh Morris, who was near the bow of
the boat.

"Mr Rigonda!" exclaimed Malines in great surprise, coming forward at
the moment.

"Why are you surprised?  It is not unusual for me to take a row on a
