
"Hullo! you are back quickly," exclaimed John Garwell.

"Yes, sir, and there's the document," answered Nat, and placed the paper
on the desk.

John Garwell stared in amazement.

"Why, how did this happen?" he queried.

"It was blind luck, I guess," said Nat, and sitting down, he told his
tale.

"You certainly were lucky. So that rascal wanted to bribe you?"

"Yes. I half felt like knocking him down for it." And Nat's eyes
flashed.

"It would have served him right." The real estate broker looked the
document over. "Yes, this is all right." He opened the sheet. "Hullo,
here is a memorandum of some kind."

The memorandum was on a sheet of plain white paper. It contained a name
and address and some figures.

"Eureka!" almost shouted the real estate broker. "This is luck, truly."

"What have you found, Mr. Garwell?"

"An address I have been hunting for for over a year. Now I can put that
real estate deal through without further trouble. I knew Shanley or this
Cameron had that address, but, of course, they wouldn't give it to me."

"I'm glad I got it for you."

"I imagine Rufus Cameron will be very angry when he learns that he has
lost this address."

"It's his own fault."

There was nothing more for Nat to do that day, so he went home, and in
the evening attended the night school where he had taken up shorthand
and typewriting. He was making rapid progress, and he applied himself
diligently.

On the following day, John Garwell was away from the office until the
middle of the afternoon, and he also went off the next morning. On his
return, his face wore a satisfied look.

"Well, that thing is settled," he said, on dropping into his chair. "And
what a row I did have with Mr. Andrew V. Shanley!"

"You mean about that property?" queried Nat, looking up from his work at
a side desk.

"Yes. I have sold the property and got my commissions, amounting to four
thousand dollars in all. Shanley was as mad as a hornet."

"Did he mention Rufus Cameron?"

"No, but I did, and told him just what a dirty sneak the fellow was.
After that Shanley shut up pretty quick."

"Do you suppose Rufus Cameron can do anything more in the matter?"

"No. But he will have it in for you, Nat, I am afraid."

"Oh, I guess I can take care of myself," answered our hero, calmly.

"This Shanley has tried to trip me up several times," went on John
Garwell, leaning back in his office chair. "He tries to find out what I
am doing, and then he does his best to steal the business away from me."

"Maybe this will teach him a lesson."

"Possibly; but I am afraid not, Nat."

Several days passed, and Nat kept at work steadily. During that time he
received a letter from his uncle, in which Abner Balberry stated that he
had arrived home once more, and found everything on the farm all right.

"Uncle Abner isn't such a bad sort after all," thought Nat, "Only he
ought to drop some of his miserly habits. Perhaps, now that he is
married again, he will."

One day our hero had to go up to One Hundred and Twenty-fifth Street on
an errand.

"Take an elevated train," said his employer, and handed him the
necessary carfare.

It did not take Nat long to reach the elevated station. Purchasing a
ticket, he dropped it in the box, and walked out on the platform.

Only a few people were present, for it was the quiet hour of the
morning. Among the number was a thick-set, trampish-looking fellow, who
was smoking a short clay pipe. The man was more than half intoxicated,
and lurched from side to side as he walked along the platform.

"That fellow had better look out for himself," thought our hero. "If he
isn't careful, he may fall out on the tracks and get hurt."

As our hero had some time to wait for a train, he passed the man several
times. The face of the fellow looked familiar, and Nat wondered where he
had seen him before.

"I've certainly met him somewhere," thought the boy. "But where? I don't
think it was in New York."

Presently the elevated train came into sight and those on the platform
prepared to get aboard when it should stop for them.

The man lurched forward as before, and of a sudden fell sprawling
directly in front of the train.




CHAPTER XXIII

TOM NOLAN'S CONFESSION


A cry of horror went up from those who saw the mishap, and some women
present turned their heads away, expecting that the semi-intoxicated
individual would be killed.

Nat's heart leaped into his throat, but he did not lose his presence of
mind. He was but a few feet from the man, and as quick as a flash he
jumped forward, caught the fellow up, and dragged him out of harm's way.

"Wha--what yer doin'?" stammered the fellow, gazing unsteadily at our
hero.

"Do you want to be killed?" asked Nat, sharply.

"They won't--won't dare to kill me," said the fellow. "I'm a--a--good
citizen."

"He ought to be locked up," said a man standing near.

"It was a brave deed," said one of the ladies.

"Who's goin' to lock me up?" demanded the tramp, for he was nothing
less. And he began to show fight, at which the majority of the crowd
turned away, and hurried to board the train. Nat hesitated for a second,
and then concluded to let the train go on and take the next one.

"Say, you pulled me from the track, didn't you?" said the man, after
another look at Nat.

"I did."

"Noble boy. I ought to reward you."

"I don't want any reward."

"Humph! Don't worry, my dear friend--Tom Nolan ain't got no money to
reward you with." And the semi-drunken man indulged in a senseless
chuckle.

"See here, haven't I met you before?" demanded Nat, looking at the man
more closely than ever.

"Maybe yer have, an' maybe yer haven't."

"Where do you come from?"

"Me? I'm an Ohio man, I am, and I ain't ashamed to own it. Ohio's best
State in the Union."

"So you are from Ohio. Were you ever in and around Brookville and
Caswell?" went on our hero, suddenly.

"Sure. I spent two months in that district not very long ago. But I had
to git out, I did." And the tramp chuckled again.

"What made you get out?" And now Nat was all attention.

"Folks didn't like me around."

"Didn't you treat them fairly?"

"Sure I did, but they thought their barns was too good for Tom Nolan to
sleep in."

"And that's why they chased you away, eh?"

"Thet's it, my young friend. It was this way--to tell the plain truth.
One night I went to sleep in a barn with my pipe in my mouth. Fust thing
I knowed some hay got afire. A man came runnin' to put the fire out, and
I had to leg it to git away."

"Was that up between Caswell and Brookville?"

"You've struck it, but--but--what's this to you, anyway?" and now Tom
Nolan began to look disturbed.

"It's a good deal to me. That was my uncle's barn, and I was accused of
setting it on fire."

"Gee shoo! Yer don't say! Say, I've put my foot into it, ain't I?"

"You certainly have."

"But, say, honest, I--I didn't mean to set the shebang afire--not on my
life, I didn't."

"You were smoking, and fell asleep."

"Thet's the honest truth o' the matter, my young friend. I'm a tramp,
an' down on my luck, but I ain't no barn burner, not me!"

"Well, you had better come with me," said Nat, decidedly.

"What are yer goin' to do?"

"I want a witness to what you just said."

"Goin' to have me--me locked up?"

"No, it's not worth it. I only want to prove to my uncle that I am not
guilty, that's all."

The tramp followed Nat down into the street and then over to John
Garwell's office.

"Why, what does this mean, Nat?" demanded his employer, in astonishment,
for visits from tramps were unusual.

Our hero lost no time in telling his story.

"I want my uncle Abner to know that I am innocent, that's all," he
continued. "It won't do any good to hold this chap, for the barn wasn't
hurt much, anyway."

"I'll settle this," said Mr. Garwell, and called in a stenographer, who
took down what the tramp had to say. Then the confession was
typewritten, and Tom Nolan signed it, and John Garwell added his
signature as a witness.

"There, Nat, that is all right now," said the real estate broker. "You
can send that to your uncle when you please, and we can keep a copy."

"This is all I want," said our hero to the tramp. "You may go now."

"Don't want no more o' me?" asked Tom Nolan.

"Nothing whatever."

"Say, ain't this confession good fer a quarter?"

"I'll give you a quarter if you'll promise not to spend it for drink."

"I'll promise," said the tramp, and Nat handed him twenty-five cents.
Tom Nolan thanked him, and shuffled off; and that was the last our hero
saw or heard of him.

"I'm sorry I lost so much time," said Nat to his employer. "But I wanted
to square myself with Uncle Abner if I could."

"I don't blame you, Nat. I have no doubt it is a great worry off your
mind."

"It is. Now, Uncle Abner will know I told him the plain truth."

That night Nat wrote Abner Balberry a long letter, telling of his
meeting with the tramp. He enclosed the signed confession, and he had
the letter registered, so that it might not get lost in the mails. A few
days later came a reply, in which Nat's uncle said he remembered seeing
the tramp around on the day of the fire, and stating that he was very
sorry that he had ever thought his nephew guilty.

Nat's work frequently took him out of town, and on one occasion he had
to go to Albany, a trip which he enjoyed thoroughly, as it gave him a
chance to visit the State Capitol.

"Nat," said John Garwell one day, "didn't you once tell me, that your
father and grandfather had come from New York and Brooklyn?"

"Yes, sir."

"Was your grandfather ever interested in some property around Central
Park?"

"I don't know but what he was. But he got rid of his belongings, so I
was told, when he moved away."

"Did you ever see any of the papers?"

"Yes, sir, some years ago. They were in a trunk up in my uncle Abner's
garret."

"What was your grandfather's full name?"

"Chester Stout Nason. His mother was a Stout."

"And your father's full name?"

"William Henry Nason."

"Did he have any brothers?"

"No, sir--only a sister, who was Uncle Abner's first wife."

"I see. Are those papers still in the trunk you just mentioned?"

"They ought to be. They were packed away with some old account
books--bad debts, I once heard father call them. Father had an idea he
could collect some of the debts some day. But I guess they are
outlawed."

"More than likely. I'd like to see those papers regarding that land near
Central Park."

"Why, Mr. Garwell? Do you think there is anything in it for me?" cried
our hero, quickly.

"I'm not prepared to say that until I see the papers. I am looking up
six parcels of land, which a certain company want for the purpose of
putting up a big hotel. Some of the old deeds mention a Chester S. Nason
as holding a half-interest in one of the plots of ground--the interest
being assigned to him in payment of a claim he had on one Maurice LeRoy.
Did you ever hear of such a man?"

"No, sir."

"Well, supposing you get those papers for me, and let me examine them."

"Shall I send to Uncle Abner for them?"

"I think it might be better for you to go home and sort out the papers
yourself. I'll explain just what I am after. Besides, if the papers are
valuable, you had better not trust them to the mails. I'll pay your
railroad fares."

"All right, I'll go home for them whenever you say, Mr. Garwell. I hope
the papers do prove valuable," and Nat smiled broadly.

"Don't raise false hopes, Nat. There may be nothing in it. But there is
nothing like being sure."

"Is the tract of land valuable?"

"Very. It is located in the most fashionable territory around Central
Park."

"When do you want me to go home?"

"You can start to-morrow if you wish. There is no rush of business on
just at present. I presume you will be back within four or five days?"

"I'll come back as soon as possible."

"Take your time. A couple of days on the farm will do you good. It will
be like a touch of old times."

"That is true," answered Nat.

The opportunity to go back to the farm pleased him. He packed his
dress-suit case that night, and left on the ten-o'clock train in the
morning. He was dressed in his best and had quite a city air about him.
Certainly he could no longer be called a "greeny."

Nat spent the night at Cleveland, and took the train to Brookville in
the morning. Almost the first person he met in the town was Sam Price.

"Hullo, are you back?" cried the country boy, shaking hands.

"Back for a few days, Sam."

"You look fine, Nat."

"I feel fine. How are you getting along?"

"Pretty good. Life on the farm is rather slow. Somebody told me you were
tired of the city."

"It isn't true, Sam."

"Fred Guff says he wants to go to the city, too, but his mother won't
let him."

"I suppose Fred helps my uncle Abner?"

"Yes, but your uncle don't get along with him very well. Fred's too slow
for him."

Sam had driven to town with his buckboard, and he readily agreed to give
Nat a ride over to Abner Balberry's farm. They were soon on the way, and
less than an hour brought them in sight of the place.

"Some young man is coming, ma!" cried Fred, who was sitting on the
doorstep, munching an apple. "Sam Price is driving him."
