"Oh, I have to be," answered Theodore Roosevelt, jokingly. "A
Vice-President needs exercise to keep him alive. You see, when he is in
the Senate, all of his work is done sitting down."

The words had scarcely been uttered when one of the party pointed to a
man climbing up the mountain side toward them. The newcomer held some
yellow telegram-slips in his hand, and Theodore Roosevelt quickly arose
to receive them.

He had soon mastered the contents of the messages. President McKinley
was much worse; it was likely that he would not live. For fully a minute
Mr. Roosevelt did not speak. He realized the great responsibility which
rested upon his shoulders. Then, in a voice filled with emotion, he read
the messages aloud.

"Gentlemen," he continued, "I must return to the club-house at once."
And without waiting, he turned and started down the mountain side along
the trail by which he had come.

It was a long, hard walk, but it is doubtful if Theodore Roosevelt took
note of it. A thousand thoughts must have flashed through his mind. If
William McKinley should indeed breathe his last, the nation would look
to him as their Chief Magistrate. He could not make himself believe that
his President was to die.

It was not long before Theodore Roosevelt reached the club-house at the
lake. He asked for further news, but none was forthcoming.

"We will send to the lower club-house at once," said his friends. "You
had better take a short rest, in case you have a sudden call to make the
trip to Buffalo."

A misty rain was falling, and the atmosphere of the mountains was raw
and penetrating. Messengers were quickly despatched to the lower
club-house, and by eleven o'clock that evening news came back that left
no doubt of the true condition of affairs. President McKinley was
sinking rapidly, and his death was now only a question of a few hours.

"I must go, and at once," said Theodore Roosevelt. And soon a light
wagon drove up to the club-house, and he leaped in. There was a short
good-by to his family and his friends, the whip cracked, and the drive
of thirty-five miles to the nearest railroad station was begun.

It was a never-to-be-forgotten journey. For ten miles or more the road
was fearfully rough and ran around the edges of overhanging cliffs,
where a false turn might mean death. Then at times the road went down
into deep hollows and over rocky hills. All was pitch black, save for
the tiny yellow light hanging over the dashboard of the turnout.
Crouched on the seat, Mr. Roosevelt urged the driver to go on, and go on
they did, making better time during that rain and darkness than had
before been made in broad daylight.

At last a place called Hunter's was reached, and Theodore Roosevelt
alighted.

"What news have you for me?" he asked of a waiting messenger, and the
latest message was handed to him. There was no new hope,--President
McKinley was sinking faster than ever. New horses were obtained, and the
second part of the journey, from Hunter's to Aiden Lair, was begun.

And during that wild, swift ride of nine miles, when it seemed to
Theodore Roosevelt as if he were racing against death, the angel of Life
Everlasting claimed William McKinley, and the man crouched in the wagon,
wet from the rain, hurrying to reach him, became the next President of
the United States.

It was a little after three in the morning when Aiden Lair was reached.
The sufferer at Buffalo had breathed his last, but Theodore Roosevelt
did not know it, and he still hoped for the best. More fresh horses,
and now the last sixteen miles of the rough journey were made on a
buckboard. In spots the road was worse than it had previously been, and
the driver was tempted to go slow.

"Go on!" cried Mr. Roosevelt, and held his watch in hand. "Go on!" And
the driver obeyed, the buckboard dancing up and down over the rocks and
swinging dangerously from side to side around the curves of ravines. But
Theodore Roosevelt's mind was not on the road nor on the peril of that
ride, but in that room in Buffalo where the great tragedy had just seen
its completion.

At last, a little after five in the morning, the turnout came in sight
of the railroad station at North Creek. A special train was in waiting
for him. He gazed anxiously at the little knot of people assembled.
Their very faces told him the sorrowful truth. President McKinley was
dead.

With bowed head he entered a private car of the special train, and
without delay the train started on its journey southward for Albany. No
time was lost on this portion of the trip, and at seven o'clock
Theodore Roosevelt reached the city in which but a short time before he
had presided as Governor of the State.

At Albany he was met by Secretary of State Hay, who informed him
officially that President McKinley was no more. He likewise informed the
Vice-President that, considering the excitement, it might be best that
Mr. Roosevelt be sworn in as President without delay.

Another special train was in waiting at Albany, and this was rushed
westward with all possible speed, arriving in Buffalo at half-past one
in the afternoon. In order to avoid the tremendous crowd at the Union
railroad station, Mr. Roosevelt alighted at the Terrace station. Here he
was met by several friends with a carriage and also a detachment of the
Fourth Signal Corps and a squad of mounted police.

Without loss of time Theodore Roosevelt was driven to the Millburn
house. Here he found a great many friends and relatives of the dead
President assembled. All were too shocked over what had occurred to say
much, and shook the hand of the coming President in silence.

Thousands of eyes were upon Theodore Roosevelt, but he noticed them not.
Entering the Millburn house, he thought only of the one who had
surrendered his life while doing his duty, and of that kind and patient
woman now left to fight the battles of this world alone. He offered what
consolation he could to Mrs. McKinley, heard the little that had not yet
been told of that final struggle to fight off death, and then took his
departure, to assume the high office thus suddenly and unexpectedly
thrust upon him.




CHAPTER XXV

TAKES THE OATH AS PRESIDENT--THE NEW CHIEF MAGISTRATE AT THE FUNERAL OF
PRESIDENT MCKINLEY--AT THE WHITE HOUSE--HOW THE FIRST REAL WORKING DAY
WAS SPENT


The new President took the oath of office at the residence of Mr. Ansley
Wilcox in Buffalo. It is a fine, substantial mansion and has ever since
been of historic interest to sight-seers.

When he arrived at the Wilcox home, he found a number of members of the
McKinley Cabinet awaiting him, as well as Judge John R. Hazel, of the
United States District Court, who administered the oath; and ten or a
dozen others.

The scene was truly an affecting one. Secretary Root could scarcely
control himself, for, twenty years before, he had been at a similar
scene, when Vice-President Arthur became Chief Magistrate, after the
assassination of President Garfield. In a voice filled with emotion he
requested Vice-President Roosevelt, on behalf of the Cabinet as a
whole, to take the prescribed oath.

It is recorded by an eye-witness that Theodore Roosevelt was pale, and
that his eyes were dim with tears, as he stepped forward to do as
bidden. His hand was uplifted, and then in a solemn voice the judge
began the oath:--

"I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully execute the office of
President of the United States, and will, to the best of my ability,
preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States."

The words were repeated in a low but distinct voice by Theodore
Roosevelt, and a moment of utter silence followed.

"Mr. President, please attach your signature," went on the judge. And in
a firm hand the new Chief Executive wrote "Theodore Roosevelt" at the
bottom of the all-important document which made him the President of our
beloved country.

Standing in that room, the President felt the great responsibility which
now rested on his shoulders, and turning to those before him, he spoke
as follows:--

"In this hour of deep and terrible bereavement, I wish to state that it
shall be my aim to continue absolutely unbroken the policy of President
McKinley for the peace and prosperity and honor of our country."

These were no mere words, as his actions immediately afterward prove. On
reaching Washington he assembled the Cabinet at the home of Commander
Cowles, his brother-in-law, and there spoke to them somewhat in this
strain:--

"I wish to make it clear to you, gentlemen, that what I said at Buffalo
I meant. I want each of you to remain as a member of my Cabinet. I need
your advice and counsel. I tender you the office in the same manner that
I would tender it if I were entering upon the discharge of my duties as
the result of an election by the people." Having thus declared himself,
the newly made President asked each member personally to stay with him.
It was a sincere request, and the Cabinet members all agreed to remain
by Mr. Roosevelt and aid him exactly as they had been aiding Mr.
McKinley. Thus was it shown to the world at large, and especially to the
anarchists, of which the assassin of McKinley had been one, that though
the President might be slain, the government still lived.

The entire country was prostrate over the sudden death of President
McKinley, and one of the first acts of Theodore Roosevelt, after
assuming the responsibilities of his office, was to issue the following
proclamation:--

"A terrible bereavement has befallen our people. The President of the
United States has been struck down; a crime committed not only against
the Chief Magistrate, but against every law-abiding and liberty-loving
citizen.

"President McKinley crowned a life of largest love for his fellow-men,
of most earnest endeavor for their welfare, by a death of Christian
fortitude; and both the way in which he lived his life and the way in
which, in the supreme hour of trial, he met his death, will remain
forever a precious heritage of our people.

"It is meet that we, as a nation, express our abiding love and reverence
for his life, our deep sorrow for his untimely death.

"Now, therefore, I, Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States,
do appoint Thursday next, September 19, the day in which the body of the
dead President will be laid in its last earthly resting-place, a day of
mourning and prayer throughout the United States.

"I earnestly recommend all the people to assemble on that day in their
respective places of divine worship, there to bow down in submission to
the will of Almighty God, and to pay out of full hearts their homage of
love and reverence to the great and good President whose death has
smitten the nation with bitter grief."

The funeral of President McKinley was a most imposing one. The body was
at first laid in state in the City Hall at Buffalo, where President
Roosevelt and fully a hundred and fifty thousand men, women, and
children went to view the remains. From Buffalo the remains were taken
by special funeral train to Washington, and there placed in the Rotunda
of the Capitol. Here the crowd was equally great, and here the services
were attended by representatives from almost every civilized nation on
the globe. Outside a marine band was stationed, playing the dead
President's favorite hymns, "Lead, Kindly Light" and "Nearer, my God, to
Thee," and in the singing of these thousands of mourners joined, while
the tears of sorrow streamed down their faces.

From Washington the body of the martyred President was taken to Canton,
Ohio, where had been his private home. Here his friends and neighbors
assembled to do him final honor, and great arches of green branches and
flowers were erected, under which the funeral cortege passed. As the
body was placed in the receiving vault, business throughout the entire
United States was suspended. In spirit, eighty millions of people were
surrounding the mortal clay left by the passing of a soul to the place
whence it had come. It was truly a funeral of which the greatest of
kings might well be proud.

The taking-off of President McKinley undoubtedly had a great effect upon
President Roosevelt. During the Presidential campaign the
Vice-Presidential nominee had made many speeches in behalf of his fellow
candidate, showing the high personal character of McKinley, and what
might be expected from the man in case he was elected once more to the
office of Chief Magistrate. More than this, when Assistant Secretary of
the Navy, Mr. Roosevelt had done his best to carry out the plans
formulated by the President. The two were close friends, and in the one
brief session of the Senate when he was Vice-President, Mr. Roosevelt
gave to President McKinley many evidences of his high regard.

On returning to Washington, President Roosevelt did not at once take up
his residence at the White House, preferring that the place should be
left to Mrs. McKinley until she had sufficiently recovered from her
terrible shock to arrange for the removal of the family's personal
effects.

As it may interest some of my young readers to know how President
Roosevelt's first day as an active President was spent, I append the
following, taken down at the time by a reporter for a press
association:--

"Reached the White House from Canton, on September 20, 1901, at 9.40
A.M. Went at once to the private office formerly occupied by President
McKinley, and, as speedily as possible, settled down for the business
of the day.

"Met Secretary Long of the navy in the cabinet room and held a
discussion concerning naval matters; received Colonel Sanger to talk
over some army appointments; signed appointments of General J. M. Bell
and others; met Senators Cullom and Proctor.

"At 11 A.M. called for the first time formal meeting of the Cabinet and
transacted business of that body until 12.30 P.M.

"Received his old friend, General Wood, and held conference with him and
with Secretary Root in regard to Cuban election laws.

"President Roosevelt left the White House at 1.20 P.M. to take lunch
with Secretary Hay at the latter's residence. He was alone, disregarding
the services of a body-guard.

"Returned to the White House at 3.30 P.M. and transacted business with
some officials and received a few personal friends.

"Engaged with Secretary Cortelyou from 4 P.M. to 6.30 P.M. in the
transaction of public business, disposal of mail, etc.

"Left the White House unattended at 6.30 P.M. and walked through the
semi-dark streets of Washington to 1733 N Street, N.W., the residence of
his brother-in-law, Commander Cowles. Dined in private with the family.

"Late in the evening received a few close friends. Retired at 11 P.M."

It will be observed that special mention is made of the fact that
President Roosevelt travelled around alone. Immediately after the
terrible tragedy at Buffalo many citizens were of the opinion that the
Chief Magistrate of our nation ought to be strongly protected, for fear
of further violence, but to this Theodore Roosevelt would not listen.

"I am not afraid," he said calmly. "We are living in a peaceful country,
and the great mass of our people are orderly, law-abiding citizens. I
can trust them, and take care of myself." And to this he held, despite
the protestations of his closest friends. Of course he is scarcely ever
without some guard or secret service detective close at hand, but no
outward display of such protection is permitted. And let it be added to
the credit of our people that, though a few cranks and crazy persons
have caused him a little annoyance, he has never, up to the present
time, been molested in any way.




CHAPTER XXVI

CONTINUING THE WORK BEGUN BY PRESIDENT MCKINLEY--THE PANAMA CANAL
AGITATION--VISIT OF PRINCE HENRY OF PRUSSIA--THE PRESIDENT AT THE
CHARLESTON EXPOSITION


President Roosevelt had said he would continue the policy inaugurated by
President McKinley, and one of the important steps in this direction was
to appoint many to office who had been expecting appointment at the
hands of the martyred President. This gained him many friends, and soon
some who had kept themselves at a distance flocked around, to aid him in
every possible manner.

Late in September the last of the McKinley effects were taken from the
White House, and some days later the newly made President moved in, with
his family, who had come down from the Adirondacks some time previous.
In Washington the family were joined by Mr. Roosevelt's two
brothers-in-law, Commander Wm. Sheffield Cowles and Mr. Douglas
Robinson, and their wives, and the relatives remained together for some
days.

It was at first feared by some politicians that President Roosevelt
would be what is termed a "sectional President,"--that is, that he would
favor one section of our country to the exclusion of the others, but he
soon proved that he was altogether too noble for such baseness.

"I am going to be President of the whole United States," he said. "I
don't care for sections or sectional lines. I was born in the North, but
my mother was from the South, and I have spent much of my time in the
West, so I think I can fairly represent the whole country."

President Roosevelt sympathized deeply with the condition of the negroes
in the South, and for the purpose of learning the true state of affairs
sent for Mr. Booker T. Washington, one of the foremost colored men of
this country and founder of the Tuskegee Industrial School for Colored
People. They had a long conference at the White House, which Mr.
Washington enjoyed very much. For this action many criticised the
President severely, but to this he paid no attention, satisfied that he
had done his duty as his conscience dictated.

[Illustration: PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT AT HIS DESK.]

President Roosevelt's first message to Congress was awaited with
considerable interest. It was remembered that he was the youngest
Executive our White House had ever known, and many were curious to know
what he would say and what he proposed to do.

The Fifty-seventh Congress of the United States assembled at Washington,
December 2, 1901, and on the day following, President Roosevelt's first
annual message was read in both Senate and House of Representatives.

It proved to be a surprisingly long and strong state paper, and by many
