"Have you no relatives to whom your life is of value?"

"Yes," answered the young man. "I have a mother and sister."

"Would not your death affect them more than the loss of money?"

"Yes."

"It seems to me that to take your life would be to treat them cruelly."

The young man was evidently agitated by contending thoughts.

"I suppose you are right," he said, slowly; "but let me tell you all,
and you can judge me better: I arrived in California six months since.
My home is in Ohio, not far from Cincinnati. I was fortunate enough to
commence mining at a point on the western slope of the Sierra Nevada
Mountains where I was almost alone. I 'struck it rich,' and two days
since arrived in San Francisco with over two thousand dollars in
gold-dust."

"You were certainly in luck," said Ferguson, surprised.

"I turned it into money, and, in strolling about the city, was lured
into that accursed den. I looked on and was fascinated. I thought I
would try my luck. I began with a small stake, and kept on till I had
lost every dollar. In one hour the fruits of six months' labor are gone.
Do you wonder that I am reduced to despair?"




CHAPTER XXIII.

A NEW SCHEME.


"I see no cause for despair," replied Ferguson, in the same calm tone.

"I have not a penny left out of the two thousand dollars I had only an
hour since."

"I understand all that."

"I am a ruined man," said the young man, despondently.

"I don't admit that. How old are you?"

"Twenty-one."

"You are well and strong, are you not?"

"Oh, yes, I have nothing to complain of on that score."

"Then it appears to me that your loss is not serious. Your capital still
remains."

"My capital?" repeated the young man.

"Yes; your strong arms, your education, your capacity to labor."

"But I shall have to begin over again."

"Beginning over again at your age, when, possibly, fifty years of life
lie before you, is not such a serious matter. Were I in your
situation,--and I am twice as old as you,--I should not thing of
despairing. Don't you think it would be rather foolish for two thousand
dollars, which you have been only six months in accumulating, to throw
away fifty years, and all that you can make in that time, thereby
bringing a life-long grief to your mother and sister?"

The calm, logical tone of the Scotchman had its effect.

"I see that I was about to add to one piece of folly another far
greater," said the young man. "I don't know who you are, sir, but I
heartily thank you and your son for saving my life."

"This is not my son, but my young friend, Thomas Nelson," said Ferguson.
"I am not so fortunate as to have a son."

"Well, God bless you both, and good-night!"

"Excuse my persistency, but may I ask where you are going?"

"I am not going to repeat my folly of just now, if that is what you
mean."

"I did not suspect you of that; but are you sure of a bed anywhere?"

"No; I have no money to pay for one. I shall walk the streets, or
possibly lie down in some quiet place. I was accustomed to roughing it
at the mines, and can do it again if necessary."

"Tom and I have a room in which you are welcome to find a shelter. I am
sorry that our bed is too narrow to hold another."

"Thank you. That will be better than to sleep in the streets. But are
you not afraid to make me this offer?"

"Why should I be?"

"I might rob you during the night."

"You might, but you don't look like one who would so reward confidence."

"You are right. If you had fifty thousand dollars I would not touch a
dollar of it. I will accept your offer. How can I repay you for your
kindness?"

"There may be a way. We will talk of that this evening."

Nine o'clock found the three collected in the small room which had been
hired by Ferguson for himself and Tom.

"My friend," said Ferguson, "you told us that you found a favorable
place for mining up in the Sierras."

"Yes, I 'struck it rich.'"

"I take it for granted that you did not exhaust the wealth of the
place?"

"Far from it. I only dipped into it. There is abundance left."

"Is this place known to many?"

"To only one, so far as I know. He and I worked independently, but were
company for each other."

"But what induced you to leave so rich a claim?"

"I was tired of working, and wanted to come to the city for a change.
You know what a change I have experienced here."

"Why don't you go back and start anew in the place where you met with
your former good fortune?" asked Ferguson.

"Because I am penniless. I must find something to do here for a while.
When I have got together a little fund, sufficient for the purpose, I
will go back."

"Would you go back now, if you had the chance?"

"Would I? Certainly I would, for I could make money faster there than
here."

"Would you have any objection to let Tom and myself accompany you?"

"Not the least. I should be glad of your company. There is gold enough
for us all."

"Then we will start to-morrow, that is, if you and Tom are willing."

"I am ready," said Tom, promptly.

"But I have nothing. I don't like to be an expense to you," objected the
young man.

"We will pay your expenses. We shall be more than recompensed by the
richness of the mines. We might find something to do here, but both Tom
and myself prefer the freedom of the mining camp, and, if the spot is
as rich as you have led us to suspect, we shall make more money there."

"Agreed!" said the young man, promptly. "Name the hour of starting, and
rely upon me to be ready."

Ferguson was evidently well pleased with this response. He felt that his
new acquaintance would be so far away from the city, and would sooner
retrieve his fortunes at the mines. He hoped, too, to find opportunity
to strengthen his principles, and guard him against the temptations of
the city when he should again visit it. Again, he had reason to think
that the arrangement would benefit Tom and himself in a pecuniary way,
and the Scotchman was by no means indifferent to that consideration;
though, as we have seen, he did not unduly exalt the power or value of
money.

Tom, too, was pleased with the prospect. He was grateful and attached to
Ferguson, whom he felt to be a true friend, but he was glad to have
another companion nearer his own age. The young man was of a
prepossessing exterior, and when he had shaken off his present
disquietude looked as if he might be a cheerful and agreeable companion.

"Since we are to live together, for a time at least, and become
fellow-workers," said Ferguson, "we ought to know each other better. I
will introduce myself first."

Hereupon Ferguson gave a brief account of himself, which need not be
repeated, and then called upon Tom, who followed his example.

"Now it is my turn," said their new acquaintance. "You don't even know
my name yet, though you have done me such an important service. I have
already told you that I am from Ohio. My name is Richard Russell, though
my friends generally call me Dick. My father, whom I had the misfortune
to lose several years since, was at one time a member of Congress. He
left a small property, the income of which is barely sufficient to
provide my mother and sister with the comforts of life. I had a fair
education, including enough Latin and Greek to fit me for entering
college. My mother desired me to enter; but I knew that she could not
keep me there without practicing pinching economy, and I secured a place
with a small salary in a business house in Cincinnati. A year since,
when the papers were full of the gold discoveries on this coast, I was
seized, like so many others, with the golden fever, and arranged to
start overland. It would have proved a wise step had I not been so rash
a fool as to squander my earnings; for two thousand dollars in six
months compare very favorably with twelve dollars a week, which I was
earning at home. I might have gone home by the next steamer, and had
money enough to carry me through a course of legal study, had I desired.
I am out of patience with myself when I think of how I have thrown away
my good fortune."

"Don't think too much of the past, which cannot be recalled. Resolve not
to repeat your folly, and all may yet be well."

"I have fully resolved upon that," said Russell, earnestly.

"Do you think you shall study law, if you are again fortunate, Mr.
Russell?" asked Tom.

"If you please don't call me Mr. Russell, unless you want me to call you
Mr. Nelson. Call me Dick."

"I will," said Tom, smiling, "for I am not ready to be called Mr. Nelson
yet."

"Now, to answer your question: if I can get two thousand dollars
together again, I shall probably study law. Of course I don't mean to be
a miner all my life any more than you. Now, Tom, what are your plans?"

"I think I should like to be a lawyer, too, but I must earn more than
two thousand dollars first."

"Two thousand ought to be sufficient to educate you if you are
economical."

"It would be, but I want to pay off a mortgage on my father's farm
before I begin to lay up money for myself."

"You are a good fellow, Tom, and I wish you success."

"Thank you, Dick. I will succeed if hard work can bring success."

"Good-night to you both," said Ferguson. "I want to sleep well to
prepare myself for starting to-morrow."

In half an hour all three were sleeping soundly.




CHAPTER XXIV.

PREPARING FOR A NEW START.


When Tom opened his eyes he did not at first remember where he was, but
a glance at Dick Russell, his new acquaintance, stretched out on the
floor and still sleeping, quickly recalled the important events of the
day previous. Mr. Ferguson was already dressed.

"Well, Tom, are you rested?" he asked.

"Yes, Mr. Ferguson; I slept like a top. What time is it?"

"It is seven o'clock. Our new friend is still asleep."

"I suppose he was on his feet all day yesterday."

"I don't know whether I ought to hurry you away from San Francisco so
soon, Tom," said his Scotch friend. "We only arrived yesterday, and you
have not had time to see the place, and enjoy yourself after your hard
work at the mines."

"I don't care for that, Mr. Ferguson. I am anxious to be at work again.
I didn't come out here to enjoy myself, but to make money for my
father."

"You have succeeded pretty well thus far, Tom."

"Yes; but I have made more by the sale of the team than by work at the
mines."

"True; but that is a legitimate transaction. If our friend here has
reported correctly, we shall find mining more profitable in the place he
mentions than at River Bend."

"I have no objection to that, though I was satisfied with River Bend.
Wouldn't it be splendid, Mr. Ferguson, if we could do as well in the
next six months as he did?"

"Making two thousand dollars each?"

"Yes."

"We may accomplish it; but it is best not to calculate upon it."

"If I could only free the farm from that troublesome mortgage I should
be proud and happy. It has worn upon father, as I could see, and he has
been compelled to toil early and late to pay the interest, besides
supporting us all."

"How much is the mortgage, Tom?"

"Twenty-two hundred dollars."

"You have made a good beginning towards it already, Tom. You have seven
hundred dollars invested in business."

"But out of that I owe you a hundred and fifty, Mr. Ferguson."

"Don't trouble yourself about that, Tom. Unless I should stand in great
need of it, I will wait till you have paid off the mortgage before
asking to have it repaid."

"You are very kind, Mr. Ferguson," said Tom, gratefully. "A part of my
seven hundred dollars rightfully belongs to you, for you owned
two-thirds of the horse and wagon."

"I couldn't have bought them without your help, Tom. So you see that you
enabled me to make money. I am quite satisfied with an equal
partnership."

"And I am very well satisfied with my partner," said Tom, smiling.
"Shall we wake up Russell?"

"Yes, for we have much to do to-day."

"John Miles will be surprised at my leaving the city so quick."

"By the way, Tom, as he is to remain here, while you are out of the
reach of post-offices, it may be well to ask your father to direct
future letters to his care, and he can forward them as he has
opportunity."

"That is a good idea. I will write to-day so as to catch the next
steamer, and I will also speak to John."

Tom had to shake Dick Russell energetically before that young man opened
