"I saw him."

"Did you know him?"

"No; though I thought I had seen him before," replied Donald, as they
walked along in the rear of the party.

"He is the man who was beaten within an inch of his life over to
Lincolnville, a while ago."

"Hasbrook?"

"Yes, his name is Jacob Hasbrook."

"He was with us in the library of Captain Patterdale the day we were
there, when the man had a sun-stroke."

"Was he? Well, I don't remember that. Folks say he is a big rascal, and
the licking he got was no more than he deserved. He was laid up for a
month after it; but now he and the sheriff are trying to find out who
did it."

Donald was interested, in spite of himself, and for the time even forgot
the pleasant smile of Nellie, which was a great deal for him to forget.

"Has he any idea who it was that beat him?"

"I don't know whether he has or not. He only asks questions, and don't
answer any. You know I met you over to Turtle Head the morning after the
affair in Lincolnville."

"I remember all about it," answered Donald.

"I saw you in the Juno afterwards. By the way, Don John, you didn't
tell me how you happened to be in the Juno at that time. I don't
recollect whether you had her at Turtle Head, or not. I don't think I
saw her there, at any rate."

"No matter whether you did or not. Go on with your story, for we are
almost to Mr. Rodman's house," replied Donald, impatiently.

"Well, after I left you, I ran over towards Saturday Cove," continued
Laud. "You know where that is."

"Of course I do."

This was the place towards which Captain Shivernock had gone in the
sail-boat, and where Laud had probably seen him, when he gave him the
money paid for the Juno. Laud did not say that this was the time and
place he had met the captain, but Donald was entirely satisfied on this
point.

"From Saturday Cove I ran on the other tack over to Gilky's Harbor,"
added Laud.

"Did you see anybody near the cove?"

"I didn't say whether I did or not," replied Laud, after some
hesitation, which confirmed Donald's belief that he had met the captain
on this occasion. "Never mind that. Off Gilky's Harbor I hailed Tom
Reed, who had been a-fishing. It seems that Tom told Hasbrook he saw me
that forenoon, and Hasbrook has been to see me half a dozen times about
it. I don't know whether he thinks I am the fellow that thrashed him, or
not. He has pumped me dry about it. I happened to let on that I saw you,
and Hasbrook wants to talk with you."

By this time they reached Mr. Rodman's house, and to the surprise of
Donald, Laud Cavendish coolly walked into the grounds with him.




CHAPTER XI.

THE WHITE CROSS OF DENMARK.


Laud Cavendish was at Donald's side when they entered the grounds of Mr.
Rodman, where the tables were spread under the trees in the garden. As
the collation was in honor of the launch of the Maud, of course the
young boat-builder was a person of no little consequence, and being with
him, Laud was permitted to enter the grounds unchallenged; but they soon
separated.

Donald was disturbed by what Laud had told him, and he did not wish to
answer any questions which might be put to him by Hasbrook, who was
evidently working his own case, trying to ascertain who had committed
the outrage upon him. He did not wish to tell whom he had seen on that
Saturday forenoon, and thus violate the confidence of Captain
Shivernock. But he was entirely satisfied that the captain had nothing
to do with it, for he had not left his house until after the deed was
done, according to the testimony of Sykes and his wife, whom he had
separately interviewed. To decline to answer Hasbrook's questions, on
the other hand, was to excite suspicion. He could not tell any lies
about the case. If he could, it would have been easily managed; as it
was, the situation was very awkward. But he had not time to think much
of the matter, for one and another began to congratulate him upon the
success of the launch, the fine proportions and the workmanship of the
Maud. The praise of Captain Patterdale was particularly agreeable to
him; but the best news he heard was that Major Norwood intended to have
a yacht built for his son, and would probably give the job to Ramsay &
Son.

"Well, Don John, you are a real lion," laughed Nellie Patterdale, when,
at last, the young boat-builder obtained a place at her side, which had
been the objective point with him since he entered the grounds.

"Better be a lion than a bear," replied Donald.

"Everybody says you have built a splendid yacht, and Maud is delighted
to have it named after her."

"I think the Sea Foam ought to have been called the Nellie," added
Donald.

"Pooh! I asked Ned to call her the Sea Foam."

"If I ever build a yacht on my own account, I shall certainly name her
the Nellie Patterdale," continued Donald, though the remark cost him a
terrible struggle.

"I thank you, Don John; but I hope you will never build one on your own
account, then," answered she, with a slight blush.

"Why, wouldn't you like to have a boat named after you?" asked he,
rather taken aback at her reply.

"I shouldn't like to have my whole name given to a boat. It is too
long."

"O, well! Then I shall call her the Nellie."

"You are too late, Don John," laughed Laud Cavendish, who was standing
within hearing distance, and who now stepped forward, raised his hat,
bowed, and smirked. "I have already ordered the painter to inscribe that
word on the bows and stern of the Juno, for I never liked her present
name."

Nellie blushed deeper than before, but it was with anger this time,
though she made no reply to Laud's impudent remark. At this moment Mr.
Rodman invited the party to gather around the tables and partake of the
collation.

"Will Miss Patterdale allow me to offer her my arm?" added Laud, as he
thrust his elbow up before her.

"No, I thank you," she replied, walking towards the tables, but keeping
at Donald's side.

The boat-builder had not the courage to offer her his arm, though some
of the sons of the nabobs had done so to the ladies; but he kept at her
side. Laud was desperate, for Nellie seemed to be the key of destiny to
him. If he could win her heart and hand, or even her hand without the
heart, his fortune would be made, and the wealth and social position of
which cruel fate had thus far robbed him would be obtained. Though she
snubbed him, he could not see it, and would not accept the situation. If
Donald had not been there, she would not have declined his offered arm;
and he regarded the boat-builder as the only obstacle in his path.

"I wish you had not invited that puppy, Don John," said Nellie, as they
moved towards the tables; and there was a snap in her tones which
emphasized the remark.

"I didn't invite him," replied Donald, warmly.

"He came in with you, and Mr. Rodman said you must have asked him."

"Indeed, I did not; I had no right to invite him," protested Donald.

Nellie immediately told this to the host of the occasion, and in doing
so she left Donald for a moment.

"Why don't you get out of the way, Don John, when you see what I am up
to?" said Laud, in a low tone, but earnestly and indignantly, as though
Donald had stepped between him and the cheerful destiny in which his
imagination revelled.

"What are you up to?"

"I told you before that I liked Nellie, and you are all the time coming
between me and her. She would have taken my arm if you had stepped
aside."

"I don't choose to step aside," added Donald.

"I want to get in there, Don John," added Laud, in a milder tone.

"Paddle your own canoe."

"You don't care anything about her."

"How do you know I don't?"

"Do you?"

"That's my affair."

"She don't care for you."

"Nor you, either."

"Perhaps not now, but I can make it all right with her," said Laud, as
he twirled his colored mustache, which he probably regarded as a
lady-killer. "Besides, you are not old enough to think of such things
yet, Don John."

"Well, I don't think of such things yet," replied Donald, who really
spoke only the truth, so far as he was consciously concerned.

"But you ought not to stick by her to-day. You are the boat-builder, and
you should bestow your attentions upon Maud Rodman, after whom the yacht
was named. She is the daughter of the man who gave you the job. If you
will just keep away from Nellie, I can paddle my own canoe, as you say."

"Mr. Cavendish," interposed Mr. Rodman, "I believe you are not a member
of the Belfast Yacht Club."

"I am not yet, but I intend to join," replied Laud.

"In the mean time, this occasion is for the members of the club and
their friends; and I wish to suggest the propriety of your withdrawing,
as I believe you are here without an invitation," added Mr. Rodman.

"I came with Don John," said Laud, rather startled by the plain speech
of the host.

"If Don John invited you--"

"I didn't invite him, or any one else. I did not consider that I had any
right to do so," protested Donald, as he walked forward and joined
Nellie.

Laud could not gainsay this honest avowal; but there was no limit to his
wrath at that moment, and he determined to punish the boat-builder for
"going back" on him, as he regarded it.

The collation was a sumptuous one, for when Belfast nabobs do anything,
they do it. The guests had good appetites, and did abundant justice to
the feast. The incident of which Laud Cavendish had been the central
figure caused some talk and some laughter.

"He had the impudence to say he was going to name his boat after me,"
said Nellie Patterdale. "He don't like the name of Juno."

"Does he own the Juno?" asked Captain Patterdale, quietly.

"I suppose he does."

"How is that, Don John?" added the captain.

"Yes, sir, he owns her; Captain Shivernock got tired of the Juno, and
Laud bought her."

Captain Patterdale made a note of that piece of information, and
regarded it as a clew to assist in the discovery of the tin box, which
had not yet been found, though the owner and the deputy sheriff had been
looking diligently for it ever since its disappearance.

"What did he pay for her?" inquired Captain Patterdale.

"Three hundred and fifty dollars," answered Donald, who hoped he would
not be asked of whom Laud had bought the Juno.

The captain did not ask the question, for it seemed to be self-evident
that he had purchased her of Captain Shivernock. Indeed, nothing more
was said about the matter. A dance on the shaven lawn followed the
collation, and the guests remained until the dews of evening began to
fall. Donald walked home with Nellie, and then went to the shop. He
expected to find Hasbrook there, but he had returned to Lincolnville. He
saw that the sails for the Maud had been sent down during his absence,
and on the desk lay the bill for them, enclosed in an envelope, directed
to "Messrs. Ramsay & Son." While he was looking at it, Mr. Leach, the
sail-maker, entered the shop. He had come to look after his money, for
possibly he had not entire confidence in the financial stability of the
firm.

"Have you looked over those sails, Don John?" asked Leach.

"Not yet; it is rather too dark to examine them to-night," replied
Donald.

"That's the best suit of sails I ever made," added the sail-maker. "You
said you wanted the best that could be had."

"I did." And Donald unrolled them. "They look like a good job."

"If they are not as good as anything that ever went on a boat, I'll make
you another suit for nothing. I was in hopes you would look them over
to-night. I don't want to trouble you, Don John, but I'm a little short
of money. Captain Patterdale has a mortgage on my house, and I like to
pay the interest on it the day it is due. You said you would let me have
the money when the sails were delivered."

"And so I will."

"If they are not all right, I will make them so," added Leach. "I should
like to pay the captain my interest money to-night, if I can."

"You can. I will go into the house and get the money."

Donald went to his room in the cottage, and took from their hiding-place
the bills which had been paid to him by Laud Cavendish for the Juno.
Without this he had not enough to pay the sail-maker. He did not like to
use this money, for he was not fully satisfied that Laud would not get
into trouble on account of it, or that he might not himself have some
