"Don't come in too often," replied Mullins, with a cautioning look at
Chester. "It might----"

Chester lost the rest of the sentence.

"Send him out!" suggested Dick, in a still lower tone, but Chester
caught the words.

"Chester," said the bookkeeper, "you may go up to the Fifth Avenue
Hotel and ask at the office if Mr. Paul Perkins, of Minneapolis, has
arrived?"

"Yes, sir."

After Chester went out, Ralston inquired, "Is there a man named Paul
Perkins?"

"Not that I know of," answered Mullins, with a laugh.

"I see. You're a sharp fellow. You only wanted to get rid of the kid."

"Exactly. Now we can talk freely."

"That's what I came about. Do you know, Mullins, you are owing me seven
hundred and fifty dollars?"

"Is it so much as that?" asked the bookkeeper, anxiously.

"Yes; I can show you the account. Now, to tell you the truth, Mullins,
I'm in a tight fix, and my bank account needs replenishing."

"So does mine," returned Mullins, with a sickly smile.

Dick Ralston frowned slightly.

"No joking, please!" he said, roughly. "I'm in earnest."

"I don't see what I am going to do about it," muttered Mullins,
defiantly.

"Don't you. Then perhaps I can help you by a suggestion."

"I wish you would."

"You are left in charge here during Mr. Fairchild's absence?"

"Well, suppose I am."

"And you handle the funds?"

"Yes."

"Then," and Dick Ralston bent over and whispered something in the
bookkeeper's ear.

Mullins started, and looked agitated.

"What would you have me do?" he inquired.

"Borrow a little money from the office," answered Dick, coolly.

"But, good heavens, man, it would ruin me. Must you have me risk
prison?"

"Don't be alarmed! I only want you to borrow two or three hundred
dollars. You can return it before Fairchild gets back."

"How am I to return it?"

"You can win it back in one evening at the gaming table."

"Or lose more."

There was considerable further conversation, Dick Ralston urging, and
Mullins feebly opposing something which the gambler proposed. Then a
customer came in, who had to receive attention. Inside of an hour
Chester re-entered the office, accompanied by a sandy-complexioned
stranger, his head covered with a broad, flapping, Western sombrero,
and wearing a long, brown beard descending at least eighteen inches.

"I hear you want to see me," he said to Mullins.

"Who are you?" asked the astonished bookkeeper.

"I am Paul Perkins, of Minneapolis," was the surprising reply.




CHAPTER XX.

PAUL PERKINS, OF MINNEAPOLIS.


If a bomb had exploded in the office David Mullins and his friend
Ralston could not have been more astonished than by the appearance of
Paul Perkins, whose name was invented without the slightest idea that
any such person existed.

Before relating what followed, a word of explanation is necessary.

Chester went to the Fifth Avenue Hotel without the slightest suspicion
that he had been sent on a fool's errand. He imagined, indeed, that Mr.
Mullins wanted to get rid of him, but did not doubt that there was such
a man as Paul Perkins, and that he was expected to arrive at the Fifth
Avenue Hotel.

He walked up Broadway in a leisurely manner, feeling that his hasty
return was not desired. He reached the Fifth Avenue, and entering--it
was the first time he had ever visited the hotel--went up to the desk.

The clerk was giving instructions to a bell boy, who was directed to
carry a visitor's card to No. 221. When at leisure, Chester asked:

"Has Mr. Paul Perkins, of Minneapolis, arrived at the hotel?"

The clerk looked over the list of arrivals. Finally his forefinger
stopped at an entry on the book.

"Yes," he answered, "he arrived last evening. Did you wish to see him?"

About this Chester was in doubt. He had only been asked to inquire if
Mr. Perkins had arrived. He assumed, however, that the bookkeeper
wished to see Mr. Perkins at the office. Accordingly he answered, "Yes,
sir. I should like to see him."

The clerk rang a bell and another bell boy made his appearance.

"Write your name on a card," said the clerk, "and I will send it up."

"The gentleman won't know my name," said Chester.

"Then give the name of your firm."

So Chester, after slight hesitation, wrote:

"Chester Rand. From Clement Fairchild, Real Estate Broker."

"Take that up to 169," said the clerk to the bell boy.

In five minutes the boy returned.

"Mr. Perkins says you are to come upstairs to his room," he reported.

Chester followed the bell boy to the elevator.

He had never before ridden in such a conveyance and the sensation was a
novel one. They got off at one of the upper floors, and Chester
followed his guide to the door of a room near by.

The bell boy knocked.

"Come in," was heard from the inside.

Chester entered and found himself in the presence of a man of fifty,
with a sandy complexion and thick, brown beard. He held the card in his
hand, and was looking at it.

"Are you Chester Rand?" he asked, in a high-pitched voice.

"Yes, sir."

"And you come from Clement Fairchild?"

"Yes, sir."

"This is very curious. I never heard the name before."

Chester looked surprised.

"I can't explain it, sir," he said. "I was asked to come to the hotel
and ask if you had arrived."

"Where is Mr. Fairchild's office?"

"On West Fourteenth Street."

"And he is a real estate broker?"

"Yes, sir."

"I don't understand what he wants of me, or how in the name of all that
is curious he ever heard of me. I don't own any real estate, except a
three-story house in which I live."

"Perhaps, sir, if you will go to the office with me you will get an
explanation."

"Precisely. That is a very practical and sensible suggestion. Is it far
off? I ask because I have never been in New York before."

"It is only about ten minutes' walk."

"Then I'll go with you, that is, if you can wait fifteen minutes while
I finish writing a letter to my wife, apprising her of my safe
arrival."

"Yes, sir, I am in no especial hurry."

"Then sit down, and--you may look at this," handing him the last copy
of _Puck_.

Chester opened the paper eagerly, for _Puck_ had accepted two of his
sketches. He opened it at random, and his eye lighted up, for there was
one of the two sketches handsomely reproduced. He uttered a little
exclamation.

"What have you found?" asked Paul Perkins, looking up from his letter.

"This picture--is one of mine."

"You don't mean it!" exclaimed the man from Minneapolis, dropping his
pen in surprise. "I thought you were an office boy."

"So I am, sir, but--sometimes I sell sketches to the illustrated
papers."

"What did you get for this?"

"Seven dollars and a half. That is, I sold this and another for fifteen
dollars."

"By the great horn spoon! but this is wonderful."

Chester did not feel called upon to say anything.

"How long did it take you to draw this picture?"

"A little over half an hour."

"Jerusalem! that is at the rate of ten dollars an hour. I am contented
to make ten dollars a day."

"So should I be, sir. I don't draw all the time," said Chester, with a
smile.

"I was going to ask if you wouldn't give me lessons in drawing and
sketching."

"I should be afraid to, sir," laughed Chester. "You might prove a
dangerous rival."

"You needn't be afraid. I can play as well as I can sing."

"I suppose you sing well, sir," said Chester, roguishly.

"You can judge. When I was a young man I thought I would practice
singing a little in my room one night. The next morning my landlady
said, in a tone of sympathy, 'I heard you groaning last night, Mr.
Perkins. Did you have the toothache?'"

Chester burst into a hearty laugh.

"If that is the case," he said, "I won't be afraid of you as a rival in
drawing."

Mr. Perkins set himself to finishing his letter, and in twenty minutes
it was done.

"Now, I am ready," he said.

As they went downstairs, Chester observed, "I will ask you as a favor,
Mr. Perkins, not to refer to my work in _Puck_, as it is not known at
the office that I do any work outside."

"All right, my boy. By the way, how much do they pay you at the
office?"

"Five dollars a week."

"Evidently it isn't as good a business as drawing."

"No, sir; but it is more reliable. I can't always satisfy the comic
papers, and I am likely to have sketches left on my hands."

"Yes; that is a practical way of looking at it, and shows that you are
a boy of sense. What sort of a man is Mr. Fairchild?"

"A very kind, considerate man, but I forgot to say that you won't see
him."

"But I thought he sent you to call on me?"

"No, sir; Mr. Fairchild started for the West this morning. It was Mr.
Mullins, the bookkeeper, who sent me."

"That complicates the mystery. Is he a good friend of yours?"

"No, sir; he dislikes me."

Mr. Perkins looked curious, and Chester, considerably to his own
surprise, confided to him the story of his relations with the
bookkeeper.

"He's a scamp!" commented the man from Minneapolis. "Why does Mr.
Fairchild keep him. I wouldn't! I'd bounce him very quick."

"He has been with Mr. Fairchild five years and understands his business
thoroughly."

"Well, there is something in that; but I wouldn't like to have in my
employ a man whom I couldn't trust. Have you ever been out West?"

"No, sir."

"You ought to come out there. The city I represent is a smart one and
no mistake. Of course you've heard of the rivalry between Minneapolis
and St. Paul."

"Yes, sir."

"I don't take sides, for I live in both, but I think business
facilities in Minneapolis are greater. I think you are a boy who would
succeed at the West."

"I should like to go there some day. I own some property in Washington
Territory."

"You do?" exclaimed Paul Perkins, in great surprise. "Whereabouts?"

"In Tacoma. I own some lots there."

"Then let me tell you, my boy, that you will be a rich man."

"But I thought prices of land in Tacoma were small."

"So they are--at present; but it is the future terminus of the Northern
Pacific Railroad. When it is completed there will be a boom. How many
lots do you own?"

"Five."
