
"My father's note! I don't want my governor to know anything about this
business, you see. I want this money for my private purse, so that I can
give a champagne supper when I please."

"I am afraid we shall not be able to manage the business, Mr. Redmond.
You know I was to _consider_ your claim, when I found there were no
heirs."

"O, you mean to cheat me out of it."

"I promised to _consider_ your claim. But in the mean time I don't want
anything said about this money in Rockhaven. It would make too much
talk."

"O, you want me to keep the secret--do you?" demanded Mr. Redmond, with
a new gleam of hope.

"I do." And Leopold explained some of the reasons which induced him to
desire that the hidden treasure should still remain a secret.

"If you mean to do the fair thing, of course I shall keep still, you
know. Give me my share, and I will keep as still as the man that has
gone to the happy hunting-ground."

"I can't promise anything."

"Neither can I," said the fop, angrily; for by this time he had come to
the conclusion that Leopold did not intend to do "the fair thing."

The money-digger was appalled to think of having the story of the buried
treasure told all over Rockhaven, and perhaps being compelled to hand it
over to his father before he had made any effort to find the heirs of
the lost passenger. On the other hand, he could neither divide the money
at the present time, nor promise to do so in the future, with the
troublesome visitor; and the former was the less of the two evils. The
appearance of the young ladies on the beach, as they emerged from the
Hole in the Wall, put an end to the argument; but Leopold hoped yet that
he should be able to prevail upon Mr. Redmond to be silent in regard to
the treasure.

"I am very glad to see you again, ladies," said the fop, running toward
them as they approached. "I hope you will pardon me for leaving you, and
for not returning, for a matter of some little importance prevented me
from joining you again."

"You are very excusable, Mr. Redmond," replied Rosabel. "We contrived to
pass away the time in your absence."

"Thank you for your kind consideration."

"We didn't suffer much for the want of you, Charley Redmond," added
Belle.

The party immediately embarked in the Rosabel, which was soon under way
on the return to Rockhaven. But the wind was dead ahead, and even
fresher than when they had come down to High Rock. Leopold stood
directly out to sea, making only one tack in reaching the river. It was
very rough, and Mr. Redmond soon lost all his elasticity of spirit, and
forgot all about the hidden treasure of High Rock, in his fears for his
own safety. But, in spite of the gale, the Rosabel went into the river
without accident, under the skillful management of the skipper, though
the entire party were thoroughly drenched by the spray.

As soon as Leopold had landed his passengers, and securely moored the
sloop, he hastened, before going to the hotel, to the shop of his uncle.
Without any explanation, he dropped upon the watch-maker's counter the
shot-bag, in which the gold chinked as it fell, to the intense
astonishment of Herr Schlager.

[Illustration: "DONNER UND BLITZ." Page 273.]




CHAPTER XV.

THE WALDO'S PASSENGER.


"Donner _und blitz_!" exclaimed Herr Schlager, when he realized that the
wet and sandy bag on the counter before him contained money, for he was
too familiar with the chink of gold to mistake the sound. _"Was haben
sie, hier, Leopold?"_

"Money, gold, specie, coin, _geld_," replied the boatman, hardly less
excited than his Teutonic uncle.

"So mooch golt! Der bag is wet mit der sand, and covered mit salt water!
Himmel! where so much money haf you found, Leopold?"

"Put it in the safe, uncle, and we will talk about it afterwards," added
the young man. "I haven't opened this bag, and I don't want it opened."

"No? What for you want him not to be open?"

"It is not mine."

"Not your money? Dat is bad!"

"I wish it were mine, certainly, uncle; but, as it is not, I mean to
take good care of it for the owner."

"Den I sall seal up der bag for you," replied the watch-maker, taking a
piece of red tape from one of his drawers, which he wound tightly over
the original string of the bag.

Then, lighting the spirit-lamp which he used with his blow-pipe, he
melted a large mass of sealing-wax upon the knot of the red tape, and
pressed upon it the great seal hanging from his watch-chain. Herr
Schlager was a simple-minded man, and doubtless he believed that the
seal was a perfect protection to the contents of the bag. Possibly he
thought that no mortal man would dare to "cut the red-tape." Leopold was
less superstitious in regard to the sanctity of a seal; and he relied
more upon the protective power of the iron safe than upon that of the
tape or seal. His uncle lodged in a little room in the rear of his shop
for the better security of his goods; and the young man felt that the
treasure would be safe in the watch-maker's strong-box. Herr Schlager
dropped the bag into one of the drawers of the safe.

"Now, where you was get him?" demanded the Teuton, as he closed the iron
door.

"I dug it out of the sand on the beach at High Rock, uncle," replied
Leopold.

"Den it pelongs to you, mine poy."

"Not at all, uncle; at least, not yet a while."

Leopold told the whole story, from Harvey Barth's diary down to date, as
briefly as he could.

"If I don't find any owner, I suppose the money belongs to me," he
added.

"Himmel! Yes!" answered the watch-maker.

"Now, uncle, don't you let anybody, not even my father, have the bag
without my consent."

"No, Leopold; nobody shall touch him," added Herr Schlager, as he locked
the door of the safe, and put the key in his pocket.

The money-digger was satisfied that his uncle would be faithful to the
letter of his promise; and he hastened back to the hotel, to attend to
his usual duties.

But the malignant little Mr. Redmond had already told the story of the
hidden treasure, so far as he new it, to an audience in the office of
the Sea Cliff House, which included the landlord. Of course the
narrative was full of interest; and in the course of half an hour it was
travelling from mouth to mouth up the main street of Rockhaven as
rapidly as though it had been written out, and sent by express. When the
finder of the treasure entered the hotel office, the subject was still
under discussion.

"Leopold wouldn't do the fair thing, and divy with Stumpy and me," said
the little fop, when he had finished his story. "If he had, I would have
kept the whole thing secret as he wished me to do."

"Why should he share the money with you, Charley?" demanded Mr.
Hamilton.

"Because I was in at the death, and that's the way to do the thing when
any money is found. Leopold was mean about it."

"Perhaps he was; but my boy hasn't the reputation of being mean," added
the landlord.

"I don't think Charley has any claim," said Mr. Redmond, senior, the
father of the _other_ Mr. Redmond, "however it may be with Stumpy."

"Here he is, to speak for himself," added Mr. Hamilton, as Leopold
entered the room. "They say you are mean because you would not divide
the money with Charley. How is that, my boy?"

"I certainly would not divide with him, or with anybody, for that
matter," replied the skipper of the Rosabel. "I found the money, all
alone by myself, on the night before the Orion arrived. I left it where
it was, because I did not know what to do with it," replied Leopold.

"Where is it now?" asked the landlord.

"In my uncle's safe. I have not opened the bag, and uncle Leopold sealed
it up. I told him not to let anybody touch it without my consent."

"I think that is the safest place for it," said Mr. Bennington. "Then it
appears that Miss Liverage was not crazy, after all."

"She was right in every respect. If she could have told me where to look
for the gold, I should have found it," replied Leopold.

"But how happened you to find it?" asked Mr. Hamilton.

"I didn't happen to find it, sir. I went right to the place where it
was, and dug it up, after I had read the directions in Harvey Barth's
diary."

"But where did you get the diary, Leopold?" inquired the landlord.

"I found it in the chimney, when the old house was pulled down."

"You didn't say anything about it," added Mr. Bennington, rather
reproachfully.

"You laughed at me, father, after Miss Liverage had gone, and I thought
I wouldn't say anything more until I found out whether Miss Liverage was
crazy or not. Then, when I read the diary, I didn't know but Harvey
Barth might have been crazy when he wrote it, for I couldn't find any
such rock as he mentioned till I went down to High Rock in a
thunder-storm. I am willing to tell all I know about it; but it's rather
a long story."

"And dinner is nearly ready," added the landlord, glancing at the clock.

"What is it? We want to know about it," said Belle Peterson, rushing
into the office, followed by Rosabel.

The story had been carried to the parlor by Mr. Redmond, junior, who had
so little confidence in the future intentions of Leopold, that he had
revealed the secret from motives of revenge.

"We will hear the story after dinner," said Mr. Hamilton.

"We want to hear it, too," interposed Miss Belle.

"Yes father," added Rosabel; "and all the ladies in the parlor want to
hear it."

"Then Leopold shall tell it in the parlor, if he is willing."

"I'm willing, sir," replied Leopold. "All I have to say about the money
now is, that I believe it belongs to somebody--to the heirs of the man
who buried it in the sand; and, as I told Stumpy and Mr. Redmond, I
intend to find those heirs, if I can."

"That's right, Leopold," exclaimed Mr. Hamilton, patting the boatman's
shoulder. "Be honest before you are generous."

Leopold and his father went to the dining-room, to prepare for their
duties there. The landlord did not think as much as usual at this time
about his chowder, chicken, and roast beef. The time was rapidly
approaching when the interest on the mortgage note would be due. His New
York guests had not paid their bills in whole or in part, and he was
still very short of funds. The vision of this twelve hundred dollars in
gold which his son had dug up from the sands of the sea, was intensely
exciting to him. The gold transmuted into currency, when a dollar of the
one was worth more than two of the other, would enable him to pay his
interest and discharge the mortgage upon his furniture. He wanted the
money, and he was not particularly pleased with Leopold's idea of
finding, at some remote period, the heirs of the man who had buried it.
However, Mr. Bennington was an honest man; and further consideration of
the subject would undoubtedly convince him that his son was exactly
right and nobly just.

The dinner at the Sea Cliff House was as good, though no better than
usual; but the guests, after the abundance of exercise during the
forenoon, were in better condition to enjoy it. They did enjoy it; and
they talked about the hidden treasure of High Rock while they did so.

While they were eating and talking, and the landlord and his son were
waiting upon them, the story of the bag of gold was travelling up the
main street of the village, and, following the angles and bifurcations
of the highways, was penetrating to the remotest corner of the town.
Among other places, it went to the Island House, and Ethan Wormbury was
utterly dismayed when he had listened to it. Though it was almost
dinner-time, he left the few guests in his house to wait upon
themselves, and hastened over to his father's house, where he found that
the astounding news had preceded him. Squire Moses was as much
disconcerted and cast down as his son had been.

"Twelve hundred dollars in gold!" exclaimed the old man, wiping the
perspiration from his bald head.

"Of course Bennington will be able to pay his interest money now," added
Ethan.

"I suppose so," groaned the squire. "But where on earth did the money
come from? Who buried it in the sand?"

"One of the men that was lost on the Waldo."

"Who was he?"

"I don't know," replied Ethan, for not many of the particulars in regard
to the hidden treasure had yet been circulated. "But they say Stumpy was
with young Bennington when he found the money."

"What! Stumpy! With him! Then they will divide it between them!"
exclaimed Squire Moses; and the amiable old gentleman did not seem to
rejoice at this possible accession of fortune on the part of his
grandson.

"I don't know about that," said Ethan, who was certainly not less
troubled than his worthy patriarch.

"But they ought not to touch the money--none of them. It belongs to the
heirs of the man that was drowned. It ain't no better'n stealing to keep
the gold," continued Squire Moses, with an overflow of honest
indignation.

"That's so," added Ethan, sharing the virtuous sentiments of his father.
"Of course the money belongs to somebody, if the man that buried it is
dead. But I want to know more about it; and I'm going down to see
Stumpy."

"I'll go with you, Ethan," said the squire; and together they left the
house.

"If they should keep the money, and divide it, Joel's widow would pay
off the mortgage on the house, and Bennington would settle up his
interest money on the first of July, I suppose," mused Ethan aloud, as
they walked along the street.

The landlord of the Island House appeared to be disposed to look the
facts squarely in the face, however disagreeable they might be. If the
money was divided, he could not expect to become the landlord of the new
hotel, which was the height of his ambition.

"I don't know," replied Squire Moses. "I don't go near Bennington now; I
don't say anything to him about the interest money; I don't want to
disturb him, or to set him a thinking. He not only promises to pay the
interest, but he promises to pay it on the first day of July. If he
don't do it at the right time, I shall foreclose. I believe the man is
ruined now; and the longer I wait, the more money I shall lose. He
ought to know that such a big hotel, furnished as extravagantly as the
new house, would not pay in such a place as Rockhaven. He can never
recover himself in the world."

"But, father, even if the boys don't divide the gold, Bennington's
customers will pay him enough to enable him to settle the interest,"
suggested Ethan, whose hopes were somewhat inflated by the reasoning of
his father.

"That may be; but Bennington owes everybody in town, and his expenses
for keeping those New Yorkers in his house are enough to swamp him. I
don't believe he'll think of the interest at all, he's so busy, till
after it is too late. He owes Jones three hundred dollars of borrowed
money, which Jones lent him till the first of July, when he is to pay
the mortgage on his house. I've already told Jones I couldn't wait a
single day for my money; and he will have to make Bennington pay. Then I
have hinted to Green, the market-man, Butler, the grocer, and others
Bennington owes, that they had better look out and get their pay before
the first of July. They are after him now, and he promises to pay them
all just as soon as these New York folks settle for their board. If
Bennington ain't short on the first of July, I'll lose my guess," said
the old man; and he believed that he had made things intensely hot for
his creditor. "I can count up over a thousand dollars he has promised to
pay by the first of July."

In justice to the landlord of the Sea Cliff House, it should be said
that Squire Moses had overstated the facts, for Mr. Bennington had not
_promised_ to pay, but had merely expressed his hope and belief that he
should be able to do so in the month of July. He actually owed, besides
his interest, about seven hundred dollars; and his debts troubled him
sorely. He could only hope that his creditors would wait a few weeks,
though even now they harassed him every day of his life.

Squire Moses and Ethan entered the cottage of Joel's widow, and found
the family at dinner. They did not knock at the door, or stand upon any
ceremony.

"Stumpy, what's this story about the money found on the beach?" demanded
Squire Moses, as though he felt that he had a right to know.

Now, half a dozen persons had already spoken to Stumpy about the hidden
treasure, and he was aware the subject was no longer a secret.

"Leopold found a bag of gold buried on the beach," replied Stumpy; and
without reserve, he proceeded to tell all he knew about the treasure.

"And you and he are going to divide this money between you!" exclaimed
Squire Moses, jumping at once to the point, as soon as Stumpy had told
the story.

"Who says we are?" asked Stumpy, indignantly.

"That is what they say," added Ethan, who had, possibly, heard such a
suggestion, as the narrative became distorted in its passage along the
main street.

"I want to tell you, Susan Wormbury," continued Squire Moses, addressing
himself to "Joel's widow," as he and Ethan usually called her,--"I want
to tell you, Susan Wormbury, that I don't believe this boy has been
brought up right. You ought to have brought him up to be honest."

"Like his grandfather!" exclaimed Stumpy, sullenly.

"Yes, like your grandfather," added the squire, severely. "No man can
say that Moses Wormbury ever stole a cent from anybody."

This remark evidently indicated the boundary line of the squire's
homestead.

"Done just the same thing," muttered Stumpy.

"Why, father, Stumpy is a good boy," pleaded Mrs. Wormbury.

"If he takes any of this money, it will be just the same as stealing
it," added the squire, projecting the remark savagely at the trembling
widow of his lost son.

"Who is going to take any of it?" demanded Stumpy, springing to his
