"I certainly am a great hero coming here and knowing so much," Hal
answered with amusement. "I think you will understand them better, sir,
if you forget what they're called and remember only what they do. They
actually combine three processes: slubbing, intermediate, and roving,
and their aim is to draw the sliver out until it is thinner, more
uniform, and cleaner for spinning. Surely that is simple enough. The
spinning is done on a mule or a ring frame--sometimes the one is
preferred, sometimes the other. Generally speaking, the thread from one
of these machines is what is used for weaving purposes. Sometimes,
though, it happens that an order comes for a crackajack fine yarn of
the best possible quality and then another combing or carding process
follows which takes out everything shorter than fibers of a specified
length. As a result about seventeen per cent. of waste is thrown out,
as great a percentage as in all the other processes put together.
Naturally it is a pretty expensive operation and it makes the yarn thus
turned out high in price."

"I suppose such yarn goes only into the finest quality goods," observed
Captain Dillingham.

"Exactly!" was Hal's answer.

"It all sounds simple as rolling off a log," Carl affirmed.

"If it seems so to you, just you think back over the problem Arkwright
and some of the other inventors, the fruit of whose labors we are now
reaping, had to solve," put in Uncle Frederick. "Even I, who am
ignorant as an Egyptian mummy concerning cotton manufacture, can
appreciate to some extent what they were up against. You must remember
that no material is stronger than its weakest part. You have, for
instance, a thin place in a string; it matters not how strong that
string may be in other spots; pull it taut and it will snap. The thick
places do not help make the string strong as a whole. So it is with
thread. You have to draw it out until every portion of it is as strong
as every other--a pretty little conundrum! It is the drawing, twisting,
and doubling which makes the thread first uniform and then strong. Try
working-out devices that shall do all these things--devices that shall
twist and then double without untwisting, for example. You'll find it
worse than a three-ringed circus."

"That's right, sir!" Hal agreed heartily. "I remember when I first went
into the mills how puzzled I was at seeing the bobbins whirling in
opposite directions. It seemed as if one was simply undoing what
another had done. I thought they all ought to turn the same way. It was
months before I got through my head what they were up to."

"I hadn't thought of the twisting and doubling part," Carl murmured.

"You decide with that thrown in maybe the answer to the puzzle isn't so
easy, eh?" responded Hal with a teasing smile.

"I might have to ponder over it," Carl confessed suavely.

"Ponder! I guess you would. What's more, you'd have a good smart
headache before you were through your _pondering_, I'll bet!" jeered
Hal, tweaking his chum's hair.




CHAPTER XIV

SPINNING YARNS


All good things, alas, come to an end and the McGregor's Christmas
holidays were no exception to this immutable law. A day arrived when
Carl, Mary and Tim were obliged to return to school, and following
swift on the heels of this dire occasion came a yet more lamentable one
when Uncle Frederick Dillingham was forced to go back to his ship and
sail for China. The latter calamity entirely overshadowed the former
and was a very real blow not only to Mulberry Court, where the captain
had become an object of universal pride and affection, but also to the
Harling family who had come to depend on his daily visits for cheer and
sunshine.

"I don't see why somebody else can't sail your ship to China, Uncle
Frederick, and let you stay here," wailed Mary.

"Somebody else sail my ship!" gasped the captain, every syllable of the
phrase echoing consternation. "Why, my dear child, I would no more turn
the command of the _Charlotte_ over to another person than you would
exchange your mother for somebody else's. The _Charlotte_ kind of
belongs to me, don't you see? She is my--well, I reckon I can't just
explain what she is. All I can say is that where she goes I go--if I am
alive."

"But--but the sea is so terrible," objected the timid Mary. "So
dangerous."

For answer Captain Dillingham burst into a peal of laughter.

"Dangerous? Why, lassie, there isn't a quarter a part the danger on the
water there is on land. I have come nearer to being killed right here
in Baileyville than ever I have while cruising in mid-ocean. Folks take
their lives in their hands every time they cross a city street. Then,
too, aren't there high buildings to topple over; flagpoles to snap
asunder, signs to blow down; chimneys to shower their bricks on your
head; not to mention the death-dealing currents that come through
telegraph and telephone wires? Add to this threatening collection trees
and snow-slides and slippery pavements and you have quite a list of
horrors. Danger! Why, the land is nothing but maelstrom of catastrophes
compared with which the serenity of the open sea, with nothing but its
moon and stars overhead, is an oasis of safety. Of course there are
certain things you must be on your guard against while on the
water--fogs, icebergs and gales. But where can you find a spot under
God's heaven entirely free from the possibilities of mishap of some
sort? I'd a hundred times rather take the risks the sea holds than run
my chances on land. Besides, aren't we a city, same as you? Just
because we are afloat and you can boast the solid ground under your
feet is it a sign we are not citizens with laws and duties? with the
wireless singing its messages to us wherever we go we certainly are not
cut off from the rest of the world."

For a moment he paused to catch his breath.

"No, siree!" continued he. "We folks on shipboard simply belong to a
floating republic, that's all. It's our country same as this is yours,
and we love it quite as much as you do."

"I never thought of the ocean that way," Mary returned with a
thoughtful smile. "It's always seemed to me a big, big place without
any--any streets or----"

"But we have streets, lassie," cried her uncle, instantly catching her
up. "Regular avenues they are. Travel 'em and you'll meet the passing
same as you would were you to drive along a boulevard. They are the
ocean highways, the latitudes and longitudes found to be the best paths
between given countries. In some cases the way chosen is shorter; or
maybe experience has proved it to be freer from fog or icebergs.
Anyhow, it has become an accepted thoroughfare and is as familiar to
seafaring men as if it had been smoothed down with a steam roller and
had a signpost set to mark it. Never think, child, of the ocean as a
lonely, uncharted waste of water. It is a nice quiet place with as much
sociability on it as a man wants. You don't, to be sure, rub elbows
with your neighbors as you do ashore; but on the other hand you don't
have to put up with their racket. Pleasant as it is to be on land the
hum of it gets on my nerves in time, and I am always thankful to be
back aboard ship."

"We'll miss you dreadfully, Frederick," his sister remarked.

"But remember I'll be putting in at various ports off and on," returned
the captain, "and be mailing you letters, postals and trinkets of one
sort and another. Moreover, you're all going to write to me, I
hope--even Martin. For if there's any one thing a sailor man looks
forward to it's the mail that awaits him in a foreign port. I must own
that with all the virtues the sea possesses the landlubber has the best
of us on mail service. Rural free delivery is one blessing we can't
boast. No blue-coated postmen come sauntering down our watery streets
to drop letters and papers into our boxes. We have to call for these
ourselves same as you might have to go to a post-office here ashore if
the government wasn't as thoughtful and generous as it is. Our
post-offices are sometimes pretty far apart, too, and I'm driven to
confess we don't always get our mail as often as we'd like. That's one
of the outs of seafaring. So when we do touch shore and go looking for
letters it is disappointing not to find any. Don't forget that. After
I'm gone you will get busy with your school, and your sewing, and your
fun, and you will not think so often about Uncle Frederick." He put up
a warning hand to stay the protest of his listeners. "You won't mean
to," continued he kindly, "but you'll do it all the same. It's human
nature."

This sinister prediction, however, did not prove true.

For days after Captain Dillingham said good-by to Baileyville, Mulberry
Court, the Harlings and the McGregors were inconsolable.

"The house isn't the same with Uncle Frederick gone, is it, Mother?"
commented Mary.

"No, it isn't. We miss him very much."

"I should say we did! Such a lot of things happen all the time that I
want to tell him," Carl broke in. "Why, only this morning the teacher
gave me a book to look up something and the first page I opened to had
a lot about foreign trade. A month ago I wouldn't have cast my eye over
it a second time but now, because of Uncle Frederick, that sort of
thing interests me. So I read along down the left-hand column and what
should it be about but the first spinning mills! I wished Uncle
Frederick could have read it."

"You must write him about it," flashed Mary. "What did it say, Carl?"

"Oh, I don't know," her brother answered awkwardly. "I'm not sure that
I can remember exactly. I wasn't learning it to recite."

"But you read it, didn't you?"

"Sure I did, Miss Schoolmarm!"

"Then you must remember some of it," Mary persisted.

"Oh, I remember scraps of it. It said at the outset that nobody really
knew when people began to spin. Most likely they got the idea from
pulling out fibers of cotton or wool long as they could make them with
their fingers, and then twisting the stuff together into larger and
longer threads. As they could do this better if they had the end
fastened to something, they got the notion of using a stick or some
sort of spool or spindle to wind the thread up on as they made it. They
would go walking round with a mass of material under one arm and this
crude spindle with the thread on it under the other. The book said that
even now in certain foreign countries there were peasants who did this.
It was during the reign of Henry VII that spindles and distaffs first
appeared in England. Afterward people improved on the idea and made
spinning wheels. The people of India had had these long before, so you
see they weren't really new; but they were new to England. To judge
from the book they weren't any great shakes of spinning wheels; still
they were better than nothing. Later on the English got finer ones such
as were used in Savoy and these not only had a spindle but a flyer and
bobbin. It was most likely these Saxony wheels that started inventors
trying to make something that would be better yet."

Holding the plug he was whittling for his double-runner up to the
light, Carl halted.

"I think you've done pretty well, son," remarked his mother over the
top of her sewing.

"I think so too," Carl returned with unaffected candor. "I had no idea
when I started that I could remember so much. I guess it was because I
was interested in the story and wasn't trying to learn it. When you
think you're learning things, you get to saying them over and over
until by and by what little sense there is in 'em seems to evaporate.
At least, that's the way it is with me. If I could just read and not
keep thinking that I was trying to learn I'd get on twice as well. Even
this page of stuff would have _looked_ different if I'd been going to
learn it. You see, you never have the chance to learn what you want to
at school; it's always what they pick out for you. Naturally you don't
care as much about it as you would if it was what you'd chosen
yourself."

Mrs. McGregor could not resist smiling in sympathy with this philosophy
of education, novel as it was.

"Now what the teacher sent me to look up in that book," went on Carl,
"was some old foreign treaty. Of course I read it over because she made
me. But do I remember a line of it? Nix! I told her what the book said
as fast as I could, so to get it off my soul before I forgot it. I
don't see what she cared about it for anyway, for it didn't seem to
hitch up to anything. But this spinning business hitched right up to
Uncle Frederick, Hal Harling and what we've been talking about. I don't
see why Miss Dewey couldn't have let me alone to learn about that."

"Probably she didn't dream you were interested in it," said Mary. "How
should she, pray?"

"I know it. I suppose she didn't," answered Carl with fairness. "She
certainly is no mind reader; and I didn't mention it."

"Then don't go blaming poor Miss Dewey," Mary retorted. "Besides, what
kind of a school would she have if every child in it refused to learn
anything but what he cared about. She would have fifty kids all going
fifty different ways."

Carl sighed. Plainly the flaws of the educational system were too many
for him. Nevertheless he attempted a modest defense of his theory.

"No, she wouldn't," contradicted he. "Some of 'em don't want to learn
anything anyhow, and since they have to they are as well pleased to
learn one thing as another. Billie Tarbox, for instance, hasn't any
preferences; he just hates all highbrow stuff alike. And the Murphys
and Jack Sullivan wouldn't care a hurrah what they learned. All Jack
wants to do when he grows up is to run a steam roller and if he can do
that he'll be perfectly satisfied."

"But he'll have to learn something before he can," observed Mrs.
McGregor.

"No, he won't, Ma. Mike Finnerty who lives in his block runs one and he
doesn't know a thing," Carl replied simply.

"On the contrary, I think you'll find Mr. Michael Finnerty knows much
more than you give him credit for," retorted Mrs. McGregor. "He
probably knows more than he himself realizes. He may not have learned
about engines out of books; but if not he has learned about them from
actual contact with them. All learning does not come from between book
covers, sonny. Experience is a wonderful teacher. Books simply give us
the same result without making us stumble along to learn everything
ourselves. They are somebody else's experience done up in a little
bundle and handed to us as a shorter cut. Mr. Michael Finnerty has had
to take the long way round to get his education, that is all. For
education is nothing but a training which enables us to live and be
useful to others; and if when we're through we can't do that all the
book learning in the world isn't going to be worth much to us."

"Why, Mother, I thought you were terribly keen on schools," ejaculated
Mary, aghast.

"So I am, my dear. A fine mind thoroughly trained is a glorious tool;
but far too often people forget that it is simply a tool. Just
sharpening and polishing it and never turning it to account for other
people isn't what it was made for. Learn all you can so you will be
able to help the world along the better. But don't just soak up and
soak up what books tell you and then store it away in your head like so
much old lumber."

"But what can you do with what you read, Ma?" Carl questioned, laying
down his whittling and facing his mother.

"Precisely what you have been doing this morning, for one thing," was
the quiet answer. "Pass it on to somebody else who hasn't read it. Mary
and I, for example, hadn't read about England and the early spinning
wheels. We hadn't the time to; nor had we the book. You've managed to
tell us quite a lot."

"Maybe I could tell you some more, if you wanted me to," said Carl,
urged on by altruistic impulse.

"Of course we do," his mother replied.

Carl took a long breath and considered thoughtfully.

"Well, what knocked me was that at first the English government didn't
want any cotton cloth made," began he.

"Why not? I should think they would have been delighted!" Mary put in.

"Oh, the English made a lot of woolen goods, and they had a hunch that
cotton cloth might cut into the trade for wool and fustians. So
Parliament passed a law placing a five-pound fine on any of the British
who wore things made of colored calico. As the restriction also covered
the use of painted, dyed or stenciled cottons it knocked out all these
products for hangings, bedspreads, or coverings."

"How horrid of them!" said Mary indignantly.

"They were darned afraid of their trade being interfered with, you
see," explained her brother. "I believe you could use an all blue
calico and of course there was no objection to making cotton cloth into
underclothes; also you were allowed to use a cloth woven of cotton and
wool. But you mustn't wear any pretty figured cotton dresses. When the
people heard that they kind of rose up, and when the government found
out they wouldn't stand for such a law, in 1736, after amending it,
they made another one letting folks wear any kind of decorated cloth
they had a mind to, so long as its warp was entirely of linen yarn.
This provided England with a market for her flax. But once the law was
passed the delighted manufacturers began to turn out colored cloth by
the bushelful, making any amount more than they could sell just because
they were allowed to. This led to another difficulty--where were they
going to get enough linen warp? The cottagers who worked at home with
their little spinning wheels could not begin to turn out the supply
that was needed, and weavers of cloth went traveling everywhere over
England buying up all the linen thread people would sell and begging
for more. And not only did they want linen warp but they wanted it
stronger and coarser so they could weave heavier cloth. Now the
spinning wheels only turned out single thread. What was to be done?"

"Well, what was to be done?" echoed Mary.

"It was trying to find an answer to all this weaving muddle that set
John Kay to inventing his flying shuttle," replied Carl. "Until then it
had taken two people to send the heavy shuttles with the warp on them
across the looms. His new flying shuttle did the same work with only
one person to operate it. You'd think that an improvement in weaving,
wouldn't you; and you'd have the right, if you worked out the idea, to
believe the weavers would be pleased?"

"Certainly," returned his mother.

"Well, instead of being pleased, the workmen were crazy," Carl
announced.

"Why?"

"Because they were such blockheads they were afraid Kay's invention was
going to put them out of their jobs. In fact, they got so soured on
poor old Kay that his life was actually in danger and he had to get out
of England. There's gratitude for you!" concluded the boy with a shrug.

"But later on they learned better, I suppose, and sent for him to come
back," Mary suggested. "That's the way people always do."

"These people didn't," was Carl's grim retort. "Not on your tin-type!
They never got Kay back again in spite of all he'd done for them.
Instead, he died somewhere abroad without receiving much of anything
for his invention. Wouldn't that make you hot? In the meantime, about
1738, a chap called Lewis Paul got out a double set of rollers that
would draw out thread and twist it--a stunt previously done by hand. So
it went. Here and there men all over England, knowing the need of
better spinning devices, went to it to see what they could do. John
Wyatt, who, like Paul, was a Birmingham native, tried spinning by means
of rollers; and for ever so long it was a question whether it was he or
Paul who should be credited with the invention of the roller and flyer
machine. After twenty years I believe Paul was granted the patent. In
point of fact, though, Arkwright thirty years before had tried to get a
patent on spinning by rollers, and no doubt both Lewis Paul and John
Wyatt got the suggestion from him. Anyhow, the idea spread like
wildfire and immediately no end of people went to work fussing with
rollers, flyers, and spindles. As a result, many small things were
added to improve the spinning contrivances in use at the time. Then in
1764, or thereabouts, along came James Hargreaves, a Lancashire
Englishman, with a machine that would spin eleven threads at once."

His listeners gave a little gasp.

"That was some stride ahead, wasn't it?" commented Carl, as proudly as
if he himself had done the deed. "Yes, siree! Hargreaves's spinning
jenny was a big step forward. And as usual it raised a row. When he got
it all perfected five years later and went to take out a patent on it,
his right to it was questioned and his life made miserable. But,
anyhow, people couldn't say he built on Arkwright or Paul, for whether
they liked it or not they had to admit his idea was quite new. His
jenny only spun cloth rovings, however. The rovings had to be prepared
first; that is, the cotton had to be carded and given its first twist.
