nevertheless, Barret knew at once that it was she, as his look and
colour instantly indicated.  There is something in such matters which we
cannot understand, and, perhaps, had better not attempt to comprehend.
It is sufficient to say that the young man instantly forgot his
occupation, and began to descend the cliff by break-neck routes in a way
that must have surprised--if not alarmed--the very eagle himself.  He
even trod some exceedingly rare "specimens" under foot in his haste.  In
a few minutes he drew near to the spot where Milly lay.

Then he suddenly stopped, for he remembered that she had that morning
spoken of her picnic as a very private one; and was it not taking a
base, unwarrantable advantage of her, thus to intrude on her privacy?
But then--ah! how fatally, if not fortunately, that "but then" often
comes in to seal our fate--"fix our flints," as backwoodsmen are fond of
putting it!--but then, was not the opportunity unsought--quite
accidental?  Would it not be utterly absurd, as well as disingenuous, to
pass her and pretend not to see her, with his botanical box full of her
own favourite plants and flowers?

Love is proverbially blind.  The argument was more than sufficient.  He
shut his eyes, metaphorically, and rushed upon his fate.

Milly heard him rushing--in reality, walking--and knew his step!
Another instance of the amazing--well--She started up in some confusion,
just in time to appear as if engaged in viewing with interest the
majestic landscape spread out before her.  Swooping downwards, and
hovering overhead on grand expanded pinions, the eagle seemed to watch
with keen interest the result of this meeting.

"Pardon this intrusion, Miss Moss.  I really did not know you were in
this neighbourhood till a few minutes ago," said Barret, sitting down on
the heather beside her.  "I accidentally observed you, and I have been
so very fortunate in finding rare plants this morning, that I thought I
might venture, just for a few minutes, to interrupt the privacy of your
picnic.  See, here!" he added, taking off the botanical box and opening
it; "just look at all this!"

"It is _very_ kind of you to take so much trouble on my account, Mr
Barret," said Milly, becoming deeply, almost too deeply-interested in
the plants.  "And, oh, _what_ a splendid specimen of the heliographipod.
My dear mother will be so glad to get this, for she is quite as fond of
botany as I am."

"Indeed!  Do you expect her soon?"

"Yes; her last letter leads me to expect her very soon now."

Milly looked up as she said this, but there was an expression on
Barret's face which induced her instantly to recur to scientific
research.

Now, good reader, if you think we are going further, and expect us
rudely to draw aside the curtain here, and betray confidences, you are
mistaken.  But there is no reason against--indeed, the development of
our story supplies every reason in favour of--our taking note of certain
facts which bear indirectly on the subject before us.

Far away on a shoulder of the mountain, which rose on the other side of
the valley, lying between it and the Eagle Cliff, a grey speck might
have been seen perched on a rock.  Even as the crow flies the distance
was so great that the unassisted human eye could not have distinguished
what it was.  It might have been a grey cow, or a grew crow, or a grey
rabbit, or a grey excrescence of the rock itself; but a telescope would
have revealed the fact that it was Allan Gordon, the laird of Kinlossie!

Serenity was stamped on the old man's brow, for he was amiable by
nature, and he had been rendered more amiable that morning by having had
a pleasant chat, while ascending the mountain, with Mabberly and
Jackman.  The latter he had begun facetiously to style the "Woods and
Forester."  The shooting party had left him there, according to previous
arrangement, and the old gentleman had seated himself on the grey rock
to rest and commune with nature for a short time, before beginning the
descent of the steep mountain path, and wending his way homeward.

From his commanding point of observation the entire range of the Eagle
Cliff lay spread out before him, with the sea visible on the extreme of
either hand.  The great valley lay between, with impassable gulfs and
gorges caused by its wild torrents, and its level patches, strewn with
the fallen _debris_ of ages, out of which the larger masses of rock rose
like islands in a grey ocean; but these huge masses became almost
insignificant, owing to the overpowering impression of the cliff itself.
For some time the laird gazed at it in silent admiration.  Presently a
smile beamed on his countenance.

"Ha! my puss, is that you?" he muttered, as he took a binocular
telescope from his pocket and adjusted it.  "I guessed as much.  The
Eagle Cliff has powerful attractions for you, what with its grandeur and
the `rare plants' you are so mad about.  I _think_ it is _you_, though
at such a distance I might easily mistake a sheep or a deer for you--
and, after all, that would be no mistake, for you _are_ a dear!"

He did not condescend to smile at his own mild little joke, as he
applied the telescope to his eyes.

"Yes, I'm right--and very comfortable you seem too, though I can't make
out your party.  Both Aggy and Junkie seem to have left you.  Perhaps
the rocks may hide them.  It's so far off that--hallo!"

A sudden frown clouded the laird's face as he gave vent to that hallo.

"The rascal!" he muttered between his compressed lips.  "He heard at
breakfast, as well as the rest of us, that Milly wanted no intruders.
Humph!  I had given him credit for better taste than this implies.  Eh!
come, sir, this is quite inexcusable!"

The laird became excited as he continued to gaze, and his indignation
deepened as he hastily wiped the glasses of the binocular.  Applying
them again to his eyes, his frown became still darker.

"For shame, you young scamp!" he continued to mutter, "taking advantage
of your contemptible botany to bring your two heads together in a way
that Milly would never have permitted _but_ for that ridiculous science.
Ha! they've let the whole concern fall--serves 'em right--and--no!
dropped it on purpose.  What!  Do you _dare_ to grip my niece's hand,
and--and--she lets you!  Eh! your arm round--Stop!" shouted the wrathful
man, springing up and almost hurling his binocular at the unconscious
pair.  But his shout, although fifty times louder, would have failed to
cross the valley.  Like his anger, it was unavailing.  Thrusting the
glass into its case with a bang, he strode down the mountain-side in
rampant fury, leaving the solemn eagle to watch the lovers as they
plighted their troth under the mighty cliff.  Happily they brought the
momentous transaction to a close just before Junkie and the highly
convalescent Aggy Anderson re-appeared upon the scene.

That afternoon, before dinner, John Barret asked Mr Gordon to accord
him the pleasure of a private interview in the library.

"Certainly, sir," said the laird sternly; "and all the more that I had
very much desired some private conversation with _you_."

Barret was not a little surprised at the old man's tone and manner, but
took no notice of it, and went alone with him into the library, where he
made a full and frank confession of his love for Milly, and of his
having proposed to her and been accepted--on condition that her mother
did not object.

"And now, Mr Gordon," added the youth, earnestly, "I have come to
apologise to you, to ask your forgiveness, in fact, and to express my
extreme regret at the precipitancy of my conduct.  It had been my full
intention, I do assure you, to wait until I had Mrs Moss' sanction to
pay my addresses to her daughter, but a--a--sudden opportunity, which I
had not sought for or expected--for, of course, I knew nothing of the
place where the picnic was to be--this--this--opportunity, I say, took
me by surprise, and threw me off my guard--and--and--in short, love--Oh!
_you_ know well enough the power of love, Mr Gordon, and can make
allowance for my acting precipitately!"

The old gentleman was touched on a tenderer spot than the young man was
aware of when he made this appeal to his own experience, for, in days
gone by, young Allan Gordon had himself acted precipitately.

But, although the appeal had touched him, he did not allow the fact to
be seen, nor did he interrupt the youth's confession.

"Observe, Mr Gordon," continued Barret, drawing himself up slightly,
"the only wrong-doing for which I ask pardon is undue haste.  My
position, financially and otherwise, entitles me to marry, and darling
Milly has a right to accept whom she will.  If it be thought that she is
too young and does not know her own mind, I am willing to wait.  If she
were to change her mind in the meantime, I would accept the inevitable--
but I have no fear of _that_!"

The laird's features had been relaxing while the enthusiastic youth
proceeded, but the last speech upset his gravity altogether.

"Well, well, Barret," he said, "since you have condemned yourself for
acting hastily, it would ill become your host to overwhelm you with
reproaches, and to say truth, after what you have said, I hope that the
course of true love will in your case run smooth.  But, my young
friend," he added, in more serious tones, "I must strictly forbid any
further reference to this with Milly, till her mother comes.  She is
under my care and, being responsible for her, I must see that nothing
further takes place till I am able to hand her, and all her affairs,
over to her mother.  I will explain this to Milly, and give her to
understand that you will behave to her in all respects as you did before
the occurrence of this unfortunate picnic.  Meanwhile it may comfort you
to know that her mother is already predisposed in your favour--naturally
too, for she would be ungrateful, as well as eccentric, if she had no
regard for the man who has twice saved her child's life.  Ah! there goes
the dinner-bell, and I'm glad of it, for prolonged speaking fatigues me.
Come along."



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

A CHAPTER OF CATASTROPHES.

It was the very next day after the conversation in the library that the
waggonette was sent over to Cove to meet the steamer and fetch Mrs
Moss, who was expected to arrive.  As Ian Anderson and Donald with the
ragged head had to return home that day, they were offered a lift by
their friend Roderick.

"I wad raither waalk, Rodereek," said Ian; "but I dar' say I may as weel
tak a lift as far as the Cluff; chump up, Tonal'."

Donald was not slow to obey.  Although active and vigorous as a mountain
goat, he had no objection to repose under agreeable conditions.

"What think ye o' the keeper _this_ time, Rodereek?" asked the boatman
as they drove away.

"Oo, it wull be the same as last time," answered the groom.  "He'll haud
on for a while, an' then he wull co pack like the soo to her wallowin'
i' the mire."

"I doubt ye're richt," returned Ian, with a solemn shake of the head.
"He's an unstiddy character, an' he hes naither the fear o' Cod nor man
pefore his eyes.  But he's a plees'nt man when he likes."

"Oo, ay, but there iss not in him the wull to give up the trink.  He hes
given it up more than wance before, an' failed.  He will co from pad to
worse in my opinion.  There iss no hope for him, I fear."

"Fery likely," and on the strength of that opinion Ian drew a flask from
his pocket, and the two cronies had what the groom called a "tram"
together.

Farther up the steep road they overtook John Barret and Giles Jackman,
who saluted them with pleasant platitudes about the weather as they
passed.  Curiously enough, these two chanced to be conversing on the
very subject that had engaged the thoughts of Ian and the groom.

"They say this is not the first time that poor Ivor has dashed his
bottle to pieces," said Barret.  "I fear it has become a disease in this
case, and that he has lost the power of self-control.  From all I hear I
have little hope of him.  It is all the more sad that he seems to have
gained the affections of that poor little girl, Aggy Anderson."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Giles, laughing; "a fellow-feeling makes you
wondrous sharp, I suppose, for I had not observed that interesting fact.
But why do you speak in such pitiful tones of Aggy?"

"Because she is an invalid, and her lover is a drunkard.  Sufficient
reasons, I should think."

"No, not quite, because she has almost recovered her usual health while
here, and poor Ivor is, after all, only one of the sinners for whom
Jesus Christ died.  I have great hopes of him."

"I'm glad to hear you say so, Jackman, though I don't see that the fact
of our Saviour's dying for us all proves his case to be hopeful.  Are
there not hundreds of men of whom the same may be said, yet they are not
delivered from drunkenness, and don't seem likely to be?"

"That is unquestionably true," rejoined his friend; "but such men as you
refer to have not been brought to the condition of renouncing self, and
trusting _only_ in our Saviour.  They want to have some credit in the
matter of their own salvation--hence they fail.  Ivor, I have good
reason to believe, _has_ been brought to that condition--a condition
which insures success--hence my great hopes of him.  I became aware of
his state of mind, partly from having had a long talk with him the other
day, and partly from the report of his good old mother.  She told me
yesterday that Ivor had come to her, laid his hand on her shoulder, and
said, `Mither, I've lost all hope o' mysel' noo,' to which the old woman
answered, `That's the best news I've heard for mony a day, my son, for
noo the Lord wull let ye see what He can do for ye.'  Ivor's reply to
that was, `I believe ye're richt, mither.'  Now I think that was a great
deal to come from two such undemonstrative Celts."

At this point in the conversation they reached a part of the road where
a footpath diverged down to the river, the road itself rising abruptly
towards the Eagle Cliff.

"We separate here," said Jackman.  "I need scarcely ask where you are
going, or what going to do!  Botany, coupled with inaccessible cliffs,
seems to be your mania just now.  Oh!  John Barret, my friend, may I not
with truth, in your case, paraphrase a well-known couplet,--

  "Milly in the heart breeds Milly in the brain,
  And this reciprocally that again?"

"Your paraphrases are about equal to your compositions, Jackman, and, in
saying that, I don't compliment you.  Pray, may I ask why you have
forsaken your favourite weapon, the gun, and taken to the rod to-day?"

"Because of amiability--pure and simple.  You know I don't care a rush
for fishing, but, to my surprise, this morning MacRummle expressed a
wish to try my repeating rifle at the rabbits, and offered to let me try
his rod, and--I might almost add--his river.  Wasn't it generous of him?
So I'm off to have a try for `that salmon,' and he is off no one knows
where, to send the terrified rabbits into their holes.  Good-bye, old
fellow--a pleasant day to you."

Left alone, Barret began to devote himself to the cliffs.  It was
arduous work, for the said cliffs were almost perpendicular, and plants
grew in such high-up crevices, and on such un-get-at-able places, that
it seemed as if "rare specimens" knew their own value, as well as the
great demand for them, and selected their habitations accordingly.

It was pleasant work, and our hero revelled in it!  To be in such
exceptional circumstances, with the grand cliffs above and below him,
with no one near, save the lordly eagle himself, to watch his doings,
with the wild sweeps of mountain-land everywhere, clothed with bracken,
heather, and birch, and backed by the island-studded sea; with the fresh
air and the bright sun, and brawling burns, and bleating sheep, and the
objects of his favourite science around him, and the strong muscular
frame and buoyant spirits that God had given to enable him to enjoy it
all, was indeed enough to arouse a feeling of gratitude and enthusiasm;
but when, in addition to this, the young man knew that he was not merely
botanising on his own account, but working at it for Milly, he felt as
though he had all but attained to the topmost pinnacle of felicity!

It is sad to think that in human affairs this condition is not
unfrequently the precursor of misfortune.  It is not necessarily so.
Happily, it is not always so.  Indeed, we would fain hope that it is not
often so, but it was so on this occasion.

Barret had about half filled his botanical box with what he believed to
be an interesting collection of plants that would cause the eyes of
Milly Moss to sparkle, when the position of the sun and internal
sensations induced him to think of his midday meal.  It was tied up in a
little square paper package.  There was a spring at the bottom of the
cliffs.  It was near the stone where he had met Milly, and had given way
to precipitancy.  Not far from the spot also where he had made Milly up
into a bundle, with a plaid, and started with her towards Kinlossie.  No
place could be better than that for his solitary luncheon.  He would go
there.

Descending the cliffs, he gained the road, and was walking along towards
the selected spot, when the sound of wheels arrested him.  Looking up,
he saw the waggonette turn sharp round the projecting cliff, and
approach him at a walk.  He experienced a little depression of spirit,
for there was no one in it, only the groom on the box.  Milly would be
sorely disappointed!

"Mrs Moss has not come, I see," he said, as the groom reined up.

"Oo, ay, sir, she's come.  But she iss a queer leddy.  She's been
chumpin' in an' oot o' the waginette a' the way up, like a whutret, to
admire the scenery, as she says.  When we cam' to the heed o' the pass
she chumped oot again, an' telt me to drive on slow, an wait at the futt
o' the first hull for her.  She's no far ahint."

"I'll go and meet her.  You can drive on, slowly."

Barret hurried forward with feelings of considerable uncertainty as to
whether this chance of meeting his mother-in-law to be (he hoped!)
alone, and in these peculiar circumstances, would be an advantage or
otherwise.  She might be annoyed by a sudden interruption in "admiring
the scenery."  There would be the awkwardness of having to introduce
himself, and she might be fatigued after all her "chumpin'" in and out
of the waggonette.

He was still pondering these points while he walked smartly forward,
turned the projecting cliff above referred to, and all but overturned
the identical little old lady whom he had run down on his bicycle, weeks
before, in London!

To say that these two drew back and gazed at each other intently--the
lady quivering and pale, the youth aghast and red--is to give but a
feeble account of the situation.

"Young man," she said, indignantly, in a low, repressed voice, "you have
a peculiar talent for assaulting ladies."

"Madam," explained the youth, growing desperate, "you are right.  I
certainly have a talent--at least a misfortune--of that sort--"

He stopped short, for, being quite overwhelmed, he knew not what to say.

"It is sad," continued the little old lady in a tone of contempt, "that
a youth like you should so much belie your looks.  It was so mean of you
to run away without a word of apology, just like a bad little boy, for
fear of being scolded--not that I cared much for being run down with
that horrid bicycle, for I was not hurt--though I _might_ have been
killed--but it was the cowardly way in which you left me lying helpless
among bakers, and sweeps, and policemen, and dirty boys.  Oh! it was
disgraceful."

Poor Barret became more and more overwhelmed as she went on.

"Spare me, madam," he cried, in desperation.  "Oh; if you only knew what
I have suffered on your account since that unlucky day!  Believe me, it
was not cowardice--well, I cannot say that exactly--but it was not the
fear of your just reproaches that made me fly.  It was the approach of
the police, and the fear of being taken up, and a public trial, and the
disgrace of--of--and--then I felt ashamed before I had fled more than a
few hundred yards, and I returned to the spot, but you were gone, and I
had no means of--of--"

"That will do, young man.  There is no need to keep me standing in this
wild place.  You are living somewhere in this neighbourhood, I suppose?"

"Yes.  I am living in the neighbourhood," said Barret bitterly.

"Well, I am going to stay at Kinlossie House.  You know Kinlossie House,
I suppose?"

"Oh, yes, I know it."

"There is no occasion to look so fierce or bitter, young sir.  I am
going to be at Kinlossie for some time.  If you choose to call there, I
shall be ready to listen to your explanations and apologies, for I have
no desire to appear either harsh or unforgiving.  Meanwhile, I wish you
good morning."

Saying which, and with a sweeping bow of a rather antiquated style, the
offended lady passed on.

For a considerable time Barret stood motionless, with folded arms,
"admiring the scenery" with a stony stare.  A stone about the size of
his fist lay at his foot.  He suddenly kicked that violently into space.
Had it been the size of his head, he would probably not have kicked it!
Then he gave vent to a wild laugh, became suddenly grave, thrust his
hands deep into his pockets, and walked up the road with clenched teeth
and a deadly stride.

Mrs Moss heard the laugh as it echoed among the great cliffs.

"What a dreadful young man!" she muttered, hurrying forward.

She thought of asking her driver who he was, but she had found Roderick
to be a very taciturn Highlander.  He had not shown much disposition to
converse on the way up, and his speech had not been very intelligible to
her English--or Anglicised--ears.  She re-entered the waggonette,
therefore, in silence.  Roderick drove on also in silence, although much
surprised that the "young shentleman" had not returned with the "leddy."
But that was none of his business "what-e-ver."

As the little old lady brooded over the matter, she resolved to say
nothing of the meeting to Milly.  She happened to possess a spice of
humour, and thought it might be well to wait until the youth should
call, and then, after forgiveness sought and obtained, introduce him at
Kinlossie as the young man who ran her down in London!

Meanwhile Barret walked himself into a better state of mind, clambered
to a nook on the face of one of the cliffs, and sat down to meditate and
