"Eight or nine thousand pounds, more or less," whispered the fiend,
quoting words used by Mr Hazlit on a former occasion.

"Ah--jis' so," muttered Maxwell.

"Don't you say a word more, David," said the fiend.

"I wont," muttered Maxwell's heart; for the hearts of men are
desperately wicked.

"That's right," continued the fiend, "for if you keep quiet, you know,
the contents will fall to be divided among you, and the loss won't be
felt by a rich fellow like old Hazlit."

Maxwell's heart approved and applauded the sentiment, but a stronger
power moved in the rough man's heart, and softly whispered, "Shame!"

"Why, Maxwell," said Edgar, smiling, "you look at the box as if it were
a ghost!"

"An' so it _is_," said Maxwell, with a sudden and unaccountable growl,
at the sound of which the fiend sprang overboard, and, diving into the
sea, disappeared from Maxwell's view for ever!

"Why, what d'ee mean, David?" asked Baldwin, in surprise.

"I mean, sir," said Maxwell, turning to Edgar with a look of unwonted
honesty on his rugged face, "that that box is the ghost of one that
belongs to Miss Hazlit, if it ain't the box itself."

"To Miss Hazlit," exclaimed Edgar, in surprise; "explain yourself."

In reply to this the diver told how he had originally become acquainted
with the box and its contents, and said that he had more than once
searched about the region of Miss Hazlit's cabin while down at the wreck
in hope of finding it, but without success.

"Strange," said Edgar, "I too have more than once searched in the same
place in the hope of finding something, or anything that might have
belonged to her, but everything had been washed away.  Of course,
knowing nothing about this box, I did not look for _it_, and found it at
last, by mere chance, some distance from the berth she occupied.  Why
did you not mention it before?"

Maxwell was silent, and at that moment the drift of thought and
conversation was abruptly turned by Rooney Machowl shouting, "Dinner
ahoy!" with impatient asperity.

While engaged in the pleasant duty of appeasing hunger, our divers
chatted on many subjects, chiefly professional.  Among other things,
Rooney remarked that he had heard it said a diving-dress contained
sufficient air in it to keep a man alive for more than five minutes.

"I have heard the same," said Edgar.

"Come, David," suggested Joe Baldwin, "let's test it on you."

"Ready," said Maxwell, rising and wiping his huge mouth.

The proposal which was made in jest was thereupon carried out in
earnest!

Dinner being over, Maxwell put on his diving-dress; the Chinamen set the
pump going, and the front-glass was screwed on.  Air was forced into the
dress until it was completely inflated and looked as if ready to burst,
while Maxwell stood on the deck holding on to a back-stay.  At a given
signal the pumpers ceased to work, and the adventurous man was thus cut
off from all further communication with the outward air.

At first the onlookers were amused; then they became interested, and as
the minutes flew by, a little anxious, but Maxwell's grave countenance,
as seen through the bull's-eye, gave no cause for alarm.  Thus he stood
for full ten minutes, and then opening the escape-valve, signalled for
more air.

This was a sufficient evidence that a man might have ample time to
return to the surface from great depths, even if the air-pumps should
break down.

"But, perhaps," said Edgar, as they conversed on the subject, "you might
not be able to hold out so long under water where the pressure would be
great."

"Sure that's true.  What d'ee say to try, David?" said Rooney.

Again Maxwell expressed willingness to risk the attempt.  The glass was
once more screwed on, the pumps set agoing, and down the bold diver went
to the bottom.  On receiving a pre-arranged signal, the pumps were
stopped.

This, let the reader fully understand, is a thing that is never done
with the ordinary pumps, which are not permitted to cease working from
the time the bull's-eye is fixed on until after it is taken off, on the
diver's return to the surface.  It was therefore with much anxiety that
the experimenters awaited the result--anxiety that was not allayed by
Rooney Machowl's expression of countenance, and his occasional
suggestion that "he must be dead by this time," or, "Och!  He's gone
entirely now!"

For full five minutes Maxwell stayed under water without a fresh supply
of air--then he signalled for it, and the anxious pumpers sent it down
with a will.  Thus it was found that there was still sufficient time for
a man to return to the surface with the air contained in his dress, in
the event of accident to the pumps.  [See Note 1.]

While the divers were engaged with these experiments, Chok-foo was sent
on shore in the small boat for a supply of fresh water from a spring
near the top of the island.

Having filled his keg, the Chinaman turned his fat good-humoured
countenance toward the sea, for the purpose of taking an amiable view of
Nature in general before commencing the descent.  As he afterwards gazed
in the direction of the mainland, he observed what appeared to be a line
of sea-gulls on the horizon.  He looked intently at these after
shouldering his water-keg.  Chok-foo's visage was yellow by nature.  It
suddenly became pale green.  He dropped his burden and bounded down the
hillside as if he had gone mad.  The water-keg followed him.  Being
small and heavy it overtook him, swept the legs from under him, and
preceded him to the beach, where it was dashed to atoms.  Chok-foo
recovered himself, continued his wild descent, sprang into the boat,
rowed out to his companions in furious haste, and breathlessly gave the
information that pirates were coming!

Those to whom he said this knew too well what he meant to require
explanation.  They were aware that many so-called "traders" in the
Eastern seas become pirates on the shortest notice when it suits their
convenience.

Edgar Berrington immediately drew a revolver from his pocket, and
stepping suddenly up to Dwarro, said sternly:--

"Look here!"

The pilot did look, and for the first time his calm, cool, imperturbable
expression deserted him, for he saw that he had to deal with a resolute
and powerful man.  At the same time his right hand moved towards his
breast, but it was arrested from behind in the iron grip of Joe Baldwin.

"Now, pilot," said Edgar, "submit, and no one shall harm you.  Resist,
and you are a dead man.  Search him, Joe."

The diver opened Dwarro's pilot-coat, and found beneath it a brace of
pistols and a long sheath knife, which he quietly removed and
transferred to his own person.  The other men in the boat looked on,
meanwhile, in silence.

"Dwarro," continued Edgar, "_you_ have planned this, I know, but I'll
thwart you.  I won't tie or gag you.  I'll make you sit at the helm and
steer, while we evade your friends.  I shall sit beside you, and you may
rely on it that if you disobey an order in the slightest degree, or give
a signal by word or look to any one, I'll blow out your brains.  D'you
understand me?"

The pilot made no reply save by a slight inclination of the head, while
a dark frown settled on his features.

It was obvious that fear found no place in the man's breast, for a deep
flush of indignation covered his countenance.  He merely felt that he
must obey or die, and wisely chose the former alternative.

Meanwhile the fleet of boats which had appeared to the Chinaman on the
hill-top was now seen by the party in the boat as they drew nearer under
the influence of a land breeze--their high sails rendering them visible
before the low boat of our divers could be seen by them.

The wind had not yet reached the island, but, even if it had, the divers
would not have hoisted sail, lest they should have been seen.

"Ship your oars now, lads, and pull for life," cried Edgar, seizing the
tiller with one hand, while with the other he held the revolver.  "You
take _this_ oar, Dwarro, and pull with a will."

In a few seconds the pilot boat was creeping pretty swiftly along the
rugged shore of the island, in the direction of the open sea.  To
lighten her, the little boat astern was cut adrift.  Continuing their
course, they rowed quite past the island, and then, turning abruptly to
the southward, they pulled steadily on until the first "cat's-paw" of
the breeze ruffled the glassy sea.

By this time the fleet of boats was distinctly visible, making straight
for the island.  Edgar now ordered the sails to be set, and bade Dwarro
take the helm.  The pilot obeyed with the air of a Stoic.  It was clear
that his mind was made up.  This had the effect of calling up a look of
settled resolution on Edgar's face.

In a few minutes the sails filled, and then, to the surprise not only of
Dwarro but all on board, Edgar ordered the pilot to steer straight for
the line of advancing boats.

Two of these had changed their course on first observing the divers'
boat, but when they saw it steering straight down, as if to meet or join
them, they resumed their course for the island.  Presently the breeze
increased, and the pilot boat leaped over the waves as if it had
received new life.

"It's a bowld thing to try," muttered Rooney Machowl, "but I'm afeard,
sir--"

He was silenced by a peremptory "Hush" from Edgar.  "Get down so as to
be out of sight," he continued, "all of you except the Chinamen.--You
two come and sit by Dwarro."

As he spoke, Edgar himself sat down on an oar, so as to be able to see
over the gunwale without himself being seen.  To those in the fleet it
would thus appear that their vessel was a pilot boat returning from
seaward with its skipper and two Chinamen.  Whatever Dwarro's intentions
had been, he was evidently somewhat disconcerted, and glanced more than
once uneasily at the calm youth who sat pistol in hand at his side
directing him how to steer.

Although there was a considerable fleet of the piratical boats, they
were spread out so that a space of several hundred yards intervened
between each.  Edgar steered for the centre of the widest gap, and his
bold venture was favoured by a sudden increase of wind, which caused the
waves to gurgle from the bow.

Just as they passed between two of the boats they were hailed by one of
them.  Edgar kept his eyes fixed on Dwarro, who became slightly pale.
The click of the pistol at the moment caused the pilot to start.

"You may inform and we may be caught," said Edgar, sternly; "but
whatever happens you shall die if you disobey.  Speak not, but wave your
hand in reply."

Dwarro obeyed.  Those who had hailed him apparently thought the distance
too great for speech; they waved their hands in return, and the boat
passed on.  A few minutes more and our divers were safely beyond the
chance of capture, making for the mainland under a steady breeze.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The pump used by Denayrouze of Paris, besides being very simple
in its parts and action, possesses an air-reservoir which renders a
cessation of the pump-action for a few minutes of no importance.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

MISS PRITTY'S "WORST FEARS" ARE MORE THAN REALISED.

Turn we now to Miss Pritty--and a pretty sight she is when we turn to
her!  In her normal condition Miss Pritty is the pink of propriety and
neatness.  At the present moment she lies with her mouth open, and her
eyes shut, hair dishevelled, garments disordered, slippers off, and
stockings not properly on.  Need we say that the sea is at the bottom of
it?  One of the most modest, gentle, unassuming, amiable of women has
been brought to the condition of calmly and deliberately asserting that
she "doesn't care!"--doesn't care for appearances; doesn't care for
character; doesn't care for past reminiscences or future prospects;
doesn't care, in short, for anything--life and death included.  It is a
sad state of mind and body--happily a transient!

"Stewardess."

"Yes, Miss?"

"I shall die."

"Oh no, Miss, don't say so.  You'll be quite well in a short time," (the
stewardess has a pleasant motherly way of encouraging the
faint-hearted).  "Don't give way to it, Miss.  You've no idea what a
happytite you'll 'ave in a few days.  You'll be soon able to eat hoceans
of soup and 'eaps of fat pork, and--"

She stops abruptly, for Miss Pritty has gone into sudden convulsions, in
the midst of which she begs the stewardess, quite fiercely, to "Go
away."

Let us draw a veil over the scene.

Miss Pritty has been brought to this pass by Mr Charles Hazlit, whose
daughter, Aileen, has been taken ill in China.  Being a man of unbounded
wealth, and understanding that Miss Pritty is a sympathetic friend of
his daughter and an admirable nurse, he has written home to that lady
requesting her, in rather peremptory terms, to "come out to them."  Miss
Pritty, resenting the tone of the request as much as it was in her
nature to resent anything, went off instanter, in a gush of tender love
and sympathy, and took passage in the first ship that presented itself
as being bound for the China seas.  She did not know much about ships.
Her maritime ideas were vague.  If a washing-tub had been advertised
just then as being A1 at Lloyds' and about to put forth for that region
of the earth with every possible convenience on board for the delight of
human beings, she would have taken a berth in it at once.

We do not intend to inflict Miss Pritty's voyage on our reader.  Suffice
it to say that she survived it, reached China in robust health, and
found her sick friend,--who had recovered,--in a somewhat similar
condition.

After an embrace such as women alone can bestow on each other, Miss
Pritty, holding her friend's hand, sat down to talk.  After an hour of
interjectional, exclamatory, disconnected, irrelevant, and largely
idiotical converse--sustained chiefly by herself--Miss Pritty said:--

"And oh!  The pirates!"

She said this with an expression of such awful solemnity that Aileen
could not forbear smiling as she asked--

"Did you see any?"

"Gracious!  No," exclaimed Miss Pritty, with a look of horror, "but we
_heard_ of them.  Only think of that!  If I have one horror on earth
which transcends all other horrors in horribleness, that horror is--
pirates.  I once had the misfortune to read of them when quite a girl--
they were called Buccaneers, I think, in the book--and I have never got
over it.  Well, one day when we were sailing past the straits of
Malacca,--I think it was,--our captain said they were swarming in these
regions, and that he had actually seen them--more than that, had slain
them with his own--oh!  It is too horrible to think of.  And our captain
was _such_ a dear good man too.  Not fierce one bit, and _so_ kind to
everybody on board, especially the ladies!  I really _cannot_ understand
it.  There are such dreadfully strange mixtures of character in this
world.  _No_, he did not say he had slain them, but he used nautical
expressions which amount to the same thing, I believe; he said he had
spiflicated lots of 'em and sent no end of 'em to somebody's locker.  It
may be wrong in me even to quote such expressions, dear Aileen, but I
cannot explain myself properly if I don't.  It is fearful to know there
are so many of them, `swarming,' as our captain said."

"The worst of it is that many of the boatmen and small traders on the
coast," said Aileen, "are also pirates, or little better."

"Dreadful!" exclaimed her friend.  "Why, oh _why_ do people go to sea at
all?"

"To transport merchandise, I suppose," said Aileen.  "We should be
rather badly off without tea, and silk, and spices, and such things--
shouldn't we?"

"Tea and silk!  Aileen.  I would be content to wear cotton and drink
coffee or cocoa--which latter I hate--if we only got rid of pirates."

"Even cotton, coffee, and cocoa are imported, I fear," suggested Aileen.

"Then I'd wear wool and drink water--anything for peace.  Oh _how_ I
wish," said Miss Pritty, with as much solemn enthusiasm as if she were
the first who had wished it, "that I were the Queen of England--_then_
I'd let the world see something."

"What would you do, dear?" asked Aileen.

"Do!  Well, I'll tell you.  Being the head of the greatest nation of the
earth--except, of course, the Americans, who assert their supremacy so
constantly that they _must_ be right--being the head, I say, of the
greatest earthly nation, with that exception, I would order out all my
gun-ships and turret-boats, and build new ones, and send them all round
to the eastern seas, attack the pirates in their strongholds, and--and--
blow them all out o' the water, or send the whole concern to the bottom!
You needn't laugh, Aileen.  Of course I do not use my own language.  I
quote from our captain.  Really you have no idea what strong, and to me
quite new expressions that dear man used.  So powerful too, but _never_
naughty.  No, never.  I often felt as if I ought to have been shocked by
them, but on consideration I never was, for it was more the manner than
the matter that seemed shocking.  He was so gentle and kind, too, with
it all.  I shall _never_ forget how he gave me his arm the first day I
