TALE 76

The Horsetail and the Jungle

Long, long ago, millions of years ago, this world was much hotter than
it is now. Yes, in mid-winter it was hotter than it is now in
mid-summer. Over all Pennsylvania there were huge forests of things that
looked a little like palms, but some looked like pipes with joints, and
had wheels of branches or limb wheels at every joint. They were as tall
as some palms, and grew in swamps.

When one of those big joint-wheels fell over, it sank into the mud and
was forgotten. So at last the swamp was filled up solid with their
trunks.

Then for some unknown reason all the big joint-trees died, and the sand,
mud, and gravel levelled off the swamp. There they lay, and slowly
become blacker and harder under the mud, until they turned into coal.

That is what we burn to-day, the trunks of the wheel-jointed swamp
trees. But their youngest great-grandchild is still with us, and shows,
in its small way, what its great ancestors were like.

You will find it along some railway bank, or in any damp woods. Country
people who know it, call it Joint Grass or Horsetails; the books call it
Equisetum. The drawing will show you what to look for.

Gather a handful and take them home. Then get some of the moss known as
ground-pine, a small piece of glass (the Guide should see that the edges
of the glass are well rubbed with a stone, to prevent cutting the
fingers), a cigar box, and white paste or putty, as in the Monkey-hunt.

Make a pool with the glass, and banks around it of the paste. Now cover
these banks with the ground pine; using a little glue on the under side
of each piece, but leave an open space without moss at the back, near
the pool. Take a pointed stick and make holes through the moss into the
clay or putty, and in each hole put one of the Horsetails, cutting it
off with scissors if too tall for the top, till you have a thicket of
these stems on each side; only make more on one side than on the other.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now for the grand finish. You must make an extinct monster. Get half a
walnut shell; cut a notch at one end where the neck will be; fill the
shell with putty; stick in wooden pegs for legs, tail, and head. The
central stalk of a tulip-tree fruit makes a wonderful sculptured tail;
the unopened buds of dogwood do for legs, also cloves have been used.
Any nobby stick serves for head if you make eyes and teeth on it.

When dry this makes a good extinct monster. Set it on the far bank of
the water, and you have a jungle, the old Pennsylvania jungle of the
days when the coal was packed away.


TALE 77

The Woods in Winter

Go out to the nearest chestnut tree, and get half a small burr; trim it
neatly. Fill it with putty; set four wooden pegs in this for legs, a
large peg for a head and a long thin one for a tail. On the head put two
little black pins for eyes. Now rub glue on the wooden pegs and sprinkle
them with powdered rotten wood, or fine sand, and you have a Burr
Porcupine. Sometimes carpet tacks are used for legs. You will have to
wear strong leather gloves in making this, it is so much like a real
Porcupine.

Now go into your woods and get a handful of common red cedar twigs with
leaves on, or other picturesque branches, some creeping moss of the
kind used by flower dealers to pack plants, various dried grasses, and a
few flat or sharp-cornered pebbles. Take these home. Get a cigar box or
a candy-box, some paper, clay or putty and glass, as already described
for the Monkey-hunt. Make a pond with the glass and a bank with the clay
and pebbles. Paint the top of the clay, and tops of the pebbles with the
thin glue, and also part of the glass; then sprinkle all with powdered
chalk, whitening, plaster of Paris or talcum powder for snow. Put the
Porcupine in the middle, and you have the "Woods in Winter."


TALE 78

The Fish and the Pond

[Illustration: The Fish and the Pond--and the Cone]

Go out and get the cone of a Norway Spruce tree, or a White Spruce; this
is the body of your Fish. Cut two round spots of white paper for eyes,
glue them on, and when dry, put a black ink spot in the middle of each.
Add a curved piece of paper on each side for gills. Then with an awl or
with the point of the scissors make holes in the sides, in which put
fins cut out of brown paper, fixing them in with glue. Then, with the
knife blade, make a long cut in the back, and split the tail, and in
each cut glue a thick piece of brown paper cut fin shape. When dry, draw
lines on these with ink. Now you have a good Fish.

For the pond, take a cigar-box, paint the lower quarter of it dark
green, and the upper part shaded into light blue, for sky. Glue a piece
of glass or else carwindow celluloid level across this near the bottom.
This is for water. Hide all the back and side edges of the glass with
clay banks as described in the Monkey-hunt, or with moss glued on. Put a
fine black thread to the Fish's back, another to his tail, and hang
him level above the water by fastening the threads to the top of the
box. Label it "Pond Life" or the "Fish at Home."


TALE 79

Smoke Prints of Leaves

[Illustration: Smoke Prints of Leaves]

Collect one or two leaves that have strongly marked ribs; elm and
raspberry are good ones. Take a piece of paper that is strong, but
rather soft, and about as big as this page. Grease, or oil it all over
with paint-oil, butter, or lard. Then hold it, grease-side down, in the
smoke of a candle, close to the flame, moving it about quickly so that
the paper won't burn, until it is everywhere black with soot.

Lay the paper flat on a table, soot-side up, on a piece of blotting
paper. Lay the leaf on this; then, over that, a sheet of paper. Press
this down over all the leaf. Lift the leaf and lay it on a piece of
soft, white paper; press it down as before, with a paper over it, on
which you rub with one hand while the other keeps it from slipping; lift
the leaf, and on the lower paper you will find a beautiful line-drawing
of the leaf, done in black ink; which, once it is dry, will never rub
out or fade away.

At one corner write down the date and the name of the leaf.


TALE 80

Bird-boxes

[Illustration: Bird-boxes]

You can win honours in Woodcraft if you make a successful bird-box. That
is one made by yourself, and used by some bird to raise its brood in.

There are three kinds of birds that are very ready to use the nesting
places you make. These are the Robin, Wren, and Phoebe. But each
bird wants its own kind exactly right, or will not use it.

First the Robin wants a shelf, as in the picture. It should be hung
against a tree or a building, about ten feet up, and not much exposed to
the wind. It should also be in a shady place or at least not where it
gets much sun.

The nails sticking up on the floor are to hold the nest so the wind will
not blow it away. The Phoebe-shelf is much the same only smaller.

The Wren-box should be about four or five inches wide and six inches
high inside, with a hole exactly seven eighths inch wide. If any bigger,
the Wren does not like it so well, and other birds may drive the Wren
away. Many Wren-boxes are made of tomato tins, but these are hard to cut
a hole in. The Wren-box should be hung where the sun never shines on it
all summer, as that would make it too hot inside.


TALE 81

A Hunter's Lamp

[Illustration: A Hunter's Lamp]

In the old pioneer days, every hunter used to make himself a lamp, for
it was much easier to make than a candle. It is a good stunt in
Woodcraft to make one. Each woodcrafter should have one of his own
handiwork. There are four things needed in it: The bowl, the wick, the
wick-holder and some fat, grease, or oil.

For the bowl a big clam shell does well.

For wick a strip of cotton rag rolled into a cord as thick as a slate
pencil, and about two inches long; a cotton cord will do, or perhaps the
fibrous bark of milkweed or other native stuff is the truly woodcraft
thing.

For wick-holder get a piece of brick, stone, or a small clam shell about
as big as a half dollar. Bore a hole through the middle to hold the
wick. It is not easy to get the hole through without splitting the
stone, but sometimes one can find a flat pebble already bored. Sometimes
one can make a disc of clay with a hole in it, then burn this hard in a
fierce fire, but the most primitive way is to rub the bump of a small
clam shell on a flat stone till it is worn through.

For oil use the fat, grease, lard, or butter of any animal, if it is
fresh, that is without salt in it.

Fill the bowl with the grease, soak the wick in grease and set it in the
holder so that half an inch sticks up; the rest is in the grease. The
holder rests on the bottom of the bowl.

Light the end that sticks up. It will burn with a clear, steady light
till all the oil is used up.

To have made a lamp that will burn for half an hour is counted an
"honour" in Woodcraft, and may win you a badge if you belong to a
Woodcraft Tribe.


TALE 82

The Coon Hunt

Take a little bundle of white rags, or paper, as large as a walnut; call
this the "Coon." While all the young folks hide their eyes or go out of
the room, the Guide puts the Coon on some place, high or low, but in
plain view; then, going away from it, shouts "Coon!"

Now the young scouts have to find that Coon, each looking about for
himself. As soon as one sees it, he says nothing, but sits down. Each
must find it for himself, then sit down silently, until all are down.
Last down is the "booby"; first down is the winner; and the winner has
the right to place the Coon the second time, if the Guide does not wish
to do it.

This is often played indoors and sometimes a thimble is used for the
Coon.


TALE 83

The Indian Pot

This is something everyone can make, no matter how young, and each,
including the Guide, should make one.

Get a lump of good stiff clay; yellow is better than blue, only because
it is a better colour when finished.

Work the clay up with water till soft, pick out all stones, lumps, and
straws. Then roll it out like a pancake; use a knife to cut this into
laces a foot long and about as thick as a pencil.

Dip your fingers in water, take one of these laces and coil it round and
round as in "a," soldering it together with water rubbed on and into the
joints. Keep on adding, shaping and rubbing, till you have a saucer
about three inches across and a quarter of an inch thick. Put this away
in some shady place to set, or harden a little; otherwise it would fall
down of its own weight.

After about an hour, wet the rim, and build up on that round and round
with laces as before, until you have turned the saucer into a cup, about
four inches across, and, maybe three inches high. Set this away to
stiffen. Then finish the shape, by adding more coils, and drawing it in
a little. When this has stiffened, make a "slip" or cream of clay and
water, rub this all over the pot inside and out; use your fingers and a
knife to make it smooth and even. When this is done, use a sharp point,
and draw on the pot any of the Indian designs show in the sketches,
using lines and dots for the shading.

[Illustration: The Indian Pot]

Now set the pot in some shady place to dry. High above the stove in the
kitchen is a good place, so long as it is not too near the stove-pipe.
After one day bring it nearer the heat. Then about the second day, put
it in the oven. Last of all, and this is the hardest part to do, let
the Guide put the bone-dry pot right into the fire, deep down into the
red coals at night, and leave it there till next day. In the morning
when the fire is dead, the pot should be carefully lifted out, and, if
all is well, it will be of hard ringing red terra cotta.

The final firing is always the hardest thing to do, because the pots are
so easily cracked. If they be drawn out of the fire while they are yet
hot, the sudden touch of cold air usually breaks them into pieces.

Now remember, O Guide! A pot is made of the earth, and holds the things
that come out of the earth to make life, that feed us and keep us. So on
it, you should draw the symbols that stand for these things. At the foot
of preceding page you see some of them.


TALE 84

Snowflakes, the Sixfold Gems of Snowroba

[Illustration: Snowflakes]

You have heard of the lovely Snowroba, white calm beautiful Snowroba,
the daughter of King Jackfrost the Winter King, whose sad history was
told in the first Tale. You remember how her robe was trimmed with white
lace and crystal gems, each gem with six points and six facets and six
angles, for that is one of the strange laws of the white Kingdom, the
sixfold rule of gems. I did not give a good portrait of the White
Princess, but I can show you how to make the Jewels which sparkled on
her robe.

Take a square of thin white paper three or four inches wide (a). Fold it
across (b), and again, until it is a square (c), half as wide as "a."
Mark on it the lines as in "d," and fold it in three equal parts as in
"e." Now with pencil draw the heavy black lines as in "f, g, h." Cut
along these lines with scissors, open out the central piece, and you
have your snow-gems as on facing page.

You can see for yourself that these are true to the gem-law of the White
Kingdom, if, when next the snow comes down, you look for the biggest
flakes as they lie on some dark surface. You will find many patterns all
of them beautiful, and all of them fashioned in accordance with the law.


Are You Alive?

Little boy or girl, are you all alive? Just as alive as an Indian? Can
you see like a hawk, feel like a blind man, hear like an owl? Are you
quick as a cat? You do not know! Well, let us find out in the next eight
tales. In these tests 100 is kept in view as a perfect score in each
department, although it is possible in some cases to go over that.


TALE 85

Farsight

1. Hold up a page of this book, and see how far off you can read it. If
at 60 inches, measured with a tapeline from your eye to the book, then
your eye number is 60, which is remarkably good. Very few get as high as
70.

