sacrificed oxen to Hercules to the number of 20 without any auspicious
sign, but in the twenty-first the desired tokens appeared and he
announced victory to his troops, provided they stood upon the
defensive."

The astronomical knowledge ascribed in this account to Paulus AEmilius,
constitutes a very interesting feature in this record because the Romans
though they were good at most things, were by no means adepts at the
science of Astronomy. Livy[124] tells us that Sulpicius Gallus, one of
the Roman tribunes, foretold this eclipse, first to the Consul and then,
with his leave, to the army, whereby that terror which eclipses were
wont to breed in ignorant minds was entirely taken off and the soldiers
more and more disposed to confide in officers of so great wisdom and of
such general knowledge. This eclipse is often identified with that of
June 21, 168 B.C., but Johnson gives reasons why this cannot be the case
and that the eclipse in question was that which happened on the night of
June 10-11, 167 B.C., and commenced about midnight, whereas the eclipse
of 168 B.C. was nearly over when the Moon was above the horizon at Rome.
Stockwell, however, fixes on the eclipse of September 3, 172 B.C. as
that which was connected with the Battle of Pydna.

Josephus[125] speaking of the barbarous acts of Herod, says:--"And that
very night there was an eclipse of the Moon." There has been some
controversy respecting the identification of this eclipse (the only one
mentioned by Josephus) which also is associated with Herod's last
illness, it not having been easy to reconcile some discordant
chronological statements connected with the length of Herod's reign and
the date when he began to reign. On the whole, probably, we shall be
safe in saying that the reference is to the eclipse of March 13, 4 B.C.
This was a partial eclipse to the extent of less than half the Moon's
diameter, a defalcation of light sufficient, however, to attract public
notice even at 3 a.m., seeing that no doubt, even at that hour, the
streets of Jerusalem were in a state of turmoil owing to the burning
alive by Herod of some seditious Rabbis.

It should be stated, however, that Hind assigns the account by Josephus
to the eclipse which occurred on January 9, 1 B.C. On this occasion the
Moon passed nearly centrally through the Earth's shadow soon after
midnight, emerging at 2.57 a.m. on the early morning of January 10,
local Mean Time at Jerusalem.

Tacitus[126] mentions an eclipse of the Moon as having happened soon
after the death of Augustus. This has been identified with the eclipse
of September 27, A.D. 14. Tacitus says:--"The Moon in the midst of a
clear sky became suddenly eclipsed; the soldiers who were ignorant of
the cause took this for an omen referring to their present adventures:
to their labours they compared the eclipse of the planet, and prophesied
'that if to the distressed goddess should be restored her wonted
brightness and splendour, equally successful would be the issue of
their struggle.' Hence they made a loud noise, by ringing upon brazen
metal, and by blowing trumpets and cornets; as she appeared brighter or
darker they exulted or lamented."

There was an eclipse of the Moon on the generally recorded date of the
Crucifixion of our Lord, April 3, A.D. 33. Hind found that our satellite
emerged from the Earth's dark shadow about a quarter of an hour before
she rose at Jerusalem (6h. 36m. p.m.), but the penumbra continued upon
her disc for an hour afterwards.

On Jan. 1, A.D. 47, a total eclipse of the Moon was seen at Rome, and on
the same night an island rose up in the AEgean Sea.

The total eclipse of Feb. 22, A.D. 72, noted by Pliny,[127] is the first
in which it is recorded that Sun and Moon were both visible at the same
time, the eclipse occurring when the Sun was rising and the Moon
setting.

Trithenius speaks of an eclipse of the Moon observed in the time of
Merovaeus. Johnson identifies it with the eclipse of Sept. 15, 452 A.D.
It was from Merovaeus that the line of French kings known as Merovingians
received their name.

On April 16, A.D. 683, according to Anastasius the Papal historian, the
Moon for nearly the whole night exhibited a blood-red appearance, and
did not emerge from obscurity till cockcrowing.

In A.D. 690 an eclipse of the Moon was observed in Wales. We are
told[128] that "the Moon was turned to the colour of blood." This would
seem to be the first eclipse of the Moon recorded in Britain.

The _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ tells us that in A.D. 734 "the Moon was as
if it had been sprinkled with blood, and Archbishop Tatwine and Beda
died and Ecgberht was hallowed bishop." The intended inference
apparently is that the Moon had something to do with the deaths of the
two ecclesiastics, but this theory will not hold water. Beda, it may be
remarked, is the correct name of the man generally known to us as the
"Venerable Bede." It is evident that from the description of the Moon it
exhibited on that occasion the well-known coppery hue which is a
recognised feature of many total eclipses of our satellite. This eclipse
occurred on January 24, beginning at about 1 a.m.

On the night of January 23, A.D. 753, "the Moon was covered with a
horrid black shield." This is the record of an eclipse. It occurred at
about midnight, and apparently we are entitled to infer that on this
occasion the Moon disappeared altogether, instead of being discoverable
during the total phase by exhibiting a coppery hue.

In A.D. 755 [or 756 in orig.], on November 23, there happened an
exceedingly interesting event which stands, I think, without a precedent
in the annals of science--an eclipse of the Moon contemporaneous with an
occultation of a planet by the Moon. This singular combination is thus
described in the annals of Roger de Hoveden[129]:--"On the 8th day
before the Calends of December the Moon on her 15th day being about her
full, appeared to be covered with the colour of blood, and then the
darkness decreasing she returned to her usual brightness; but, in a
wondrous manner, a bright star followed the Moon, and passing across
her, preceded her when shining, at the same distance which it had
followed her before she was darkened." The details here given are not
astronomically quite correct, but let that pass; the writer's intention
is fairly clear. Calculation shows that the eclipse occurred on November
23, and that the planet, which was Jupiter, was concealed in the evening
by the Moon for about an hour from 7h. 30m. to 8h. 30m. p.m., the
immersion taking place about the end of the total phase. This is the
first occultation of a star or planet by the Moon observed and recorded
in England.

Under the year 795 the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ says:--"In this year the
Moon was eclipsed between cockcrowing and dawn on the 5th of the Calends
of April; and Eardwalf succeeded to the kingdom of the Northumbrians on
the 2nd of the Ides of May." This signifies that the eclipse happened on
March 28 between 3h. and 6h. in the morning, the method of dividing the
hours of night into equal portions of three hours each being still in
use. There was no eclipse in 795 on the date in question but there was
one in 796, so we may suppose an error in the year. This assumed,
Johnson found that the eclipse began at about 4h. a.m., was total for
nearly an hour, and ended at about 71/2h., so that the Moon set eclipsed.
But the above assumption is dispensed with by Lynn who substitutes one
of his own.[130] For "5th of the _Calends_" he reads "5th of the
_Ides_," which means April 9; and on that day in 795 he says there was
an eclipse of the Moon, but I have not found any other record of it.

In the year A.D. 800, according to the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_, "the
Moon was eclipsed at the 2nd hour of the night (8h. p.m.) on the 17th
day of the Calends of February." Johnson finds that there was an eclipse
of the Moon on Jan. 15. The middle of the eclipse occurred at 8h. 34m.,
9/10ths of the Moon's upper limb having been obscured.

Under the date of 806 the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ says:--"This year was
the Moon eclipsed on the Kalends [1st] of September; and Eardwulf, King
of the Northumbrians, was driven from his kingdom, and Eanberht, Bishop
of Hexham, died." This eclipse was total, the totality lasting from
9h. 37m. to 10h. 59m. p.m.

On Feb. 15, 817, according to the _Annales Fuldenses_, an eclipse of the
Moon was observed in the early evening at Paris, and on the same night a
Comet was seen. This Comet is described by another authority as a
"monstrous" one and as being in Sagittarius on Feb. 5. The Chinese date
it for Feb. 17, and place it near the stars [Greek: alpha] and [Greek:
gamma] Tauri.

In 828 two lunar eclipses were seen in Europe, the first on July 1 very
early in the morning, and the second on the morning of Christmas Day.
The _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ thus speaks of the second eclipse:--"In this
year the Moon was eclipsed on Mid-winter's Mass-night, and the same year
King Ecgbryht subdued the kingdom of the Mercians and all that was South
of the Humber." The totality occurred after midnight. There is some
confusion in the year of this eclipse, the _Chronicle_ giving it as 827,
whilst calculation shows that it must have been 828. Lynn defines
"Mid-winter's Mass-night" as Christmas _Eve_.

Under the date of 904 the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ says:--"In this year
the Moon was eclipsed." There were two total eclipses of the Moon this
year, one on May 31, and the other on Nov. 25, and it does not appear
which one is referred to in the _Chronicle_ cited. Another writer,
Cedrenus, speaks of a great eclipse of the Moon this year which he says
foretold the death of a kinsman of the Emperor.

On October 6, 1009, there was a total eclipse of the Moon which
presumably is referred to in the statement that "this year the Moon was
changed into blood."

On Nov. 8, 1044, there was a large partial eclipse in the morning. Raoul
Glaber[131] (a French chronicler who died about 1050) comments upon it
thus:--"In what manner it happened, whether a prodigy brought to pass by
the Deity or by the intervention of some heavenly body, remains known to
the author of knowledge. For the Moon herself became like dark blood,
only getting clear of it a little before the dawn." Truly those times
were the "Dark Ages" in which ignorance and folly were rampant, seeing
that more than 1000 years previously the Greeks knew all about the
causes of eclipses.

Under 1078 the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ says:--"In this year the Moon was
eclipsed 3 nights before Candlemas, and AEgelwig, the 'world-wide' Abbot
of Evesham, died on St. Juliana's Mass-day [Feb. 16]; and in this year
was the dry summer, and wildfire came in many Shires and burned many
towns." Johnson found that a total eclipse of the Moon happened in the
early evening of Jan. 30.

On May 5, 1110, in the reign of Henry I., there occurred a total eclipse
of the Moon during which, says the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_, "the Moon
appeared in the evening brightly shining and afterwards by little and
little its light waned, so that as soon as it was night it was so
completely quenched that neither light nor orb nor anything at all of it
was seen. And so it continued very near until day, and then appeared
full and brightly shining. It was on this same day a fortnight old. All
the night the air was very clear, and the stars over all the heaven were
brightly shining. And the tree-fruits on that night were sorely nipt."
The totality occurred before mid-night. It is evident that this was an
instance of a "black" eclipse when the Moon becomes quite invisible
instead of shining with the familiar coppery hue.

In 1117 there were two total eclipses, the first on June 16, and the
second on December 10. The latter is thus referred to in the
_Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_:--"In the night of the 3rd of the Ides of
December the Moon was far in [during a long time of] the night as if it
were all bloody, and afterwards eclipsed." The totality commenced at
11.36 p.m.

It is recorded by Matthew Paris[132] in connection with the death of
Henry I. that "the Moon also was eclipsed the same year on the 29th of
July" [1135]. These words seem to indicate a total eclipse of the Moon.
Johnson gives the date as Dec. 22, 1135. If this is correct the text of
the _Chronicle_ must be corrupt. The whole eclipse was not visible in
England, the Moon setting before the middle of the eclipse. Stephen had
been crowned king the same day, namely Dec. 22.

On June 30, 1349, there was a total eclipse of the Moon visible at
London to which some interest attaches. Archdeacon Churton[133] connects
it with the following incident:--"The worthy Abp. Bradwardine, who
nourished in the reign of the Norman Edwards, and died A.D. 1349, tells
a story of a witch who was attempting to impose on the simple people of
the time. It was a fine summer's night, and the Moon was suddenly
eclipsed. 'Make me good amends,' said she, 'for old wrongs, or I will
bid the Sun also to withdraw his light from you.' Bradwardine, who had
studied the Arabian astronomers, was more than a match for this simple
trick, without calling in the aid of the Saxon law. 'Tell me,' he said,
'at what time you will do this, and we will believe you; or if you will
not tell me, I will tell you when the Sun or the Moon will next be
darkened, in what part of their orb the darkness will begin, how far it
will spread, and how long it will continue.'"

An eclipse of the Moon which happened when Columbus was at the Island of
Jamaica proved of great service to him when he was in difficulties owing
to the want of food supplies which the inhabitants refused to afford.
The eclipse was a total one, and so far as the description goes the
eclipses of April 2, 1493, and March 1, 1504, both respond to the
recorded circumstances: both were total and both occurred soon after
sunset. But, inasmuch as in the life of Columbus written by his son the
incident is placed nearly at the end of the work, there can be no doubt
that it is the later of the above eclipses which was the one in
question. The story is very graphically told by Sir A. Helps[134] in the
words following:--

"The Indians refused to minister to their wants any longer; and famine
was imminent. But just at this last extremity, the admiral, ever fertile
in devices, bethought him of an expedient for re-establishing his
influence over the Indians. His astronomical knowledge told him that on
a certain night an eclipse of the Moon would take place. One would think
that people living in the open air must be accustomed to see such
eclipses sufficiently often not to be particularly astonished at them.
But Columbus judged--and as the event proved, judged rightly--that by
predicting the eclipse he would gain a reputation as a prophet, and
command the respect and the obedience due to a person invested with
supernatural powers. He assembled the caciques of the neighbouring
tribes. Then, by means of an interpreter, he reproached them with
refusing to continue to supply provisions to the Spaniards. 'The God who
protects me,' he said, 'will punish you. You know what has happened to
those of my followers who have rebelled against me; and the dangers
which they encountered in their attempt to cross Haiti, while those who
went at my command made the passage without difficulty. Soon, too, shall
the divine vengeance fall on you; this very night shall the Moon change
her colour and lose her light, in testimony of the evils which shall be
sent upon you from the skies.'

"The night was fine: the moon shone down in full brilliancy. But at the
appointed time the predicted phenomenon took place, and the wild howls
of the savages proclaimed their abject terror. They came in a body to
Columbus and implored his intercession. They promised to let him want
for nothing if only he would avert this judgment. As an earnest of their
sincerity they collected hastily a quantity of food and offered it at
his feet. At first, diplomatically hesitating, Columbus presently
affected to be softened by their entreaties. He consented to intercede
for them; and, retiring to his cabin, performed, as they supposed, some
mystic rite which should deliver them from the threatened punishment.
Soon the terrible shadow passed away from the face of the moon, and the
gratitude of the savages was as deep as their previous terror. But being
blended with much awe, it was not so evanescent as gratitude often is;
and henceforth there was no failure in the regular supply of provisions
to the castaways."

Tycho Brahe observed a lunar eclipse on July 7, 1590. He writes:--"In the
morning about 33/4h. the Moon began to be eclipsed: in this eclipse it is
notable that both luminaries were at the same time above the horizon; a
like case which Pliny cites. For the centre of the Sun emerged when the
Moon was 2 deg. elevated above the Western horizon, and when her centre was
setting, the centre of the Sun was elevated nearly 2 deg.."[135]

On August 16, 1598, there occurred a total eclipse of the Moon, observed
by Kepler,[136] in which during totality a part of the Moon was visible
and the rest invisible. He says, that while one-half of the disc was
seen with great difficulty the other half was discernible by a deep red
light of such brilliancy that at first he was doubtful whether our
satellite was immersed in the Earth's shadow at all. This is an instance
of the simultaneous operation of those causes (whatever they may be)
which result in a totally-eclipsed Moon being sometimes wholly invisible
and sometimes entirely visible as a copper-coloured disc.

An eclipse of the Moon which happened on the morning of July 6, 1610,
may be mentioned as having been the first to be viewed through a
telescope. The eclipse was only a large partial one. The following
record of the fact is due to Tycho Brahe.[137] "The beginning of the
eclipse of the Moon as observed through the Roman telescope, appeared
like a dark thread in contact with the shadow"--a description which
cannot be said to be unduly explicit.

In 1620, on June 15, there was a total eclipse of the Moon, when during
the total phase "the Moon was seen with great difficulty. It shone,
moreover, like the thinnest nebula, far fainter than the Milky Way,
without any copper tinge. About the middle of the second hour nothing at
all could be seen of the Moon with the naked eye, and through the
telescope so doubtfully was anything seen that no one could tell whether
the Moon was not something else." It is expressly stated, however, that
the sky was quite clear. Kepler also observed this eclipse, and says
that the Moon quite disappeared, though stars of the 4th and 5th
magnitudes were plainly visible.[138] In this same year 1620, there was
on December 9 another total eclipse, when "the Moon altogether
disappeared so that nothing could be seen of it, though the stars shone
brightly all around: she continued lost and invisible for a quarter of
an hour more or less." This observation seems to have been made at
Ingolstadt.

Wendelinus mentions the eclipse of April 14, 1623, in connection with
the question of the visibility of the Moon when totally eclipsed. He
says, "but sometimes it so far retains the light derived from the Sun
that you would doubt whether any part of it were eclipsed." This eclipse
was observed by Gassendi, and if the above record is correct, it is the
more remarkable seeing that the eclipse was not total, only 11/12ths of
the Moon's diameter being obscured.

On April 25, 1642, on the occasion of a total eclipse, Hevelius[139]
noted that the Moon wholly disappeared when immersed in the Earth's
shadow. Crabtree is stated by Flamsteed[140] to have observed this
eclipse, but he does not plainly state that he lost sight of the Moon.
Crabtree or his editor dates this eclipse for April 4; Ferguson for
April 15. There appears to be some muddle as between "old style" and
"new style." Ferguson professing to be N.S. is evidently wrong. Hevelius
gives the double date, 15/25, which is evidently right.

On June 16, 1666, the Moon was seen in Tuscany to rise eclipsed, the Sun
not having yet set in the W.

On May 26, 1668, an eclipse of the Moon was in progress in the early
morning, when the Sun was seen to rise by members of the Academy of
Sciences who were observing the phenomenon at Montmartre near Paris.

On December 23, 1703, the Moon when totally immersed was seen at Avignon
showing a ruddy light of such brilliancy that we are told it had the
appearance of a transparent body illuminated by a light placed behind.
Johnson finds that the total phase took place in the early morning, and
lasted from 5h. 36m. to 7h. 22m. a.m.

The lunar eclipse of May 18, 1761, as observed by Wargentin,[141] at
Stockholm, furnishes a remarkable instance of the invisibility of the
Moon on certain occasions, when completely immersed in the earth's
shadow. The total immersion of the Moon took place at 10h. 41m. p.m. The
part of the margin of the lunar disc which had last entered the shadow
was fairly conspicuous for 5 or 6 minutes after the immersion, and to
the naked eye exhibited a lustre equal to that of a star of the 2nd
magnitude; but at 10h. 52m. this part, as well as the whole of the rest
of the Moon's body, "had disappeared so completely, that not the
slightest trace of any portion of the lunar disc could be discerned
either with the naked eye or with the telescope, although the sky was
clear, and the stars in the vicinity of the Moon were distinctly visible
in the telescope." After more than half an hour's search, Wargentin at
length discovered the whereabouts of the Moon by means of a faint light,
which was visible at the Eastern edge of the disc. A few minutes
afterwards, some persons of acute vision were able to discern, with the
naked eye, a trace of the Moon, looking like a patch of thin vapour, but
more than half the disc was still invisible.

An eclipse of the Moon, on March 29, 1801, was observed by Humboldt, on
board ship, off the Island of Baru, not far from Cartagena de las
Indias, in the Caribbean Sea.[142] He remarks that he was "exceedingly
struck with the greater luminous intensity of the Moon's disc under a
tropical sky than in my native North." Johnson makes Humboldt to refer
to the greater clearness of the "_reddened_ disc," but these words do
