
So he turned the crank in the Little Pink Bear's side and inquired:

"Did Ugu the Shoemaker steal Ozma of Oz?"

"Yes," answered the Little Pink Bear.

"Then what did he do with her?" asked the King.

"Shut her up in a dark place," answered the Little Pink Bear.

"Oh, that must be a dungeon cell!" cried Dorothy, horrified. "How
dreadful!"

"Well, we must get her out of it," said the Wizard. "That is what we
came for and of course we must rescue Ozma. But--how?"

Each one looked at some other one for an answer and all shook their
heads in a grave and dismal manner. All but Scraps, who danced around
them gleefully.

"You're afraid," said the Patchwork Girl, "because so many things can
hurt your meat bodies. Why don't you give it up and go home? How can you
fight a great magician when you have nothing to fight with?"

Dorothy looked at her reflectively.

"Scraps," said she, "you know that Ugu couldn't hurt you, a bit,
whatever he did; nor could he hurt me, 'cause I wear the Nome King's
Magic Belt. S'pose just we two go on together, and leave the others here
to wait for us?"

"No, no!" said the Wizard positively. "That won't do at all. Ozma is
more powerful than either of you, yet she could not defeat the wicked
Ugu, who has shut her up in a dungeon. We must go to the Shoemaker in
one mighty band, for only in union is there strength."

"That is excellent advice," said the Lavender Bear, approvingly.

"But what can we do, when we get to Ugu?" inquired the Cookie Cook
anxiously.

"Do not expect a prompt answer to that important question," replied the
Wizard, "for we must first plan our line of conduct. Ugu knows, of
course, that we are after him, for he has seen our approach in the Magic
Picture, and he has read of all we have done up to the present moment in
the Great Book of Records. Therefore we cannot expect to take him by
surprise."

"Don't you suppose Ugu would listen to reason?" asked Betsy. "If we
explained to him how wicked he has been, don't you think he'd let poor
Ozma go?"

"And give me back my dishpan?" added the Cookie Cook eagerly.

"Yes, yes; won't he say he's sorry and get on his knees and beg our
pardon?" cried Scraps, turning a flip-flop to show her scorn of the
suggestion. "When Ugu the Shoemaker does that, please knock at the front
door and let me know."

The Wizard sighed and rubbed his bald head with a puzzled air.

"I'm quite sure Ugu will not be polite to us," said he, "so we must
conquer this cruel magician by force, much as we dislike to be rude to
anyone. But none of you has yet suggested a way to do that. Couldn't the
Little Pink Bear tell us how?" he asked, turning to the Bear King.

"No, for that is something that is _going_ to happen," replied the
Lavender Bear. "He can only tell us what already _has_ happened."

Again they were grave and thoughtful. But after a time Betsy said in a
hesitating voice:

"Hank is a great fighter; perhaps _he_ could conquer the magician."

The Mule turned his head to look reproachfully at his old friend, the
young girl.

"Who can fight against magic?" he asked.

"The Cowardly Lion could," said Dorothy.

The Lion, who was lying with his front legs spread out, his chin on his
paws, raised his shaggy head.

"I can fight when I'm not afraid," said he calmly; "but the mere mention
of a fight sets me to trembling."

"Ugu's magic couldn't hurt the Sawhorse," suggested tiny Trot.

"And the Sawhorse couldn't hurt the Magician," declared that wooden
animal.

"For my part," said Toto, "I am helpless, having lost my growl."

"Then," said Cayke the Cookie Cook, "we must depend upon the Frogman.
His marvelous wisdom will surely inform him how to conquer the wicked
Magician and restore to me my dishpan."

All eyes were now turned questioningly upon the Frogman. Finding himself
the center of observation, he swung his gold-headed cane, adjusted his
big spectacles and after swelling out his chest, sighed and said in a
modest tone of voice:

"Respect for truth obliges me to confess that Cayke is mistaken in
regard to my superior wisdom. I am not very wise. Neither have I had any
practical experience in conquering magicians. But let us consider this
case. What is Ugu, and what is a magician? Ugu is a renegade shoemaker
and a magician is an ordinary man who, having learned how to do magical
tricks, considers himself above his fellows. In this case, the Shoemaker
has been naughty enough to steal a lot of magical tools and things that
did not belong to him, and it is more wicked to steal than to be a
magician. Yet, with all the arts at his command, Ugu is still a man, and
surely there are ways in which a man may be conquered. How, do you say,
how? Allow me to state that I don't know. In my judgment we cannot
decide how best to act until we get to Ugu's castle. So let us go to it
and take a look at it. After that we may discover an idea that will
guide us to victory."

"That may not be a wise speech, but it sounds good," said Dorothy
approvingly. "Ugu the Shoemaker is not only a common man, but he's a
wicked man and a cruel man and deserves to be conquered. We mustn't have
any mercy on him till Ozma is set free. So let's go to his castle, as
the Frogman says, and see what the place looks like."

No one offered an objection to this plan and so it was adopted. They
broke camp and were about to start on the journey to Ugu's castle when
they discovered that Button-Bright was lost again. The girls and the
Wizard shouted his name and the Lion roared and the Donkey brayed and
the Frogman croaked and the Big Lavender Bear growled (to the envy of
Toto, who couldn't growl but barked his loudest) yet none of them could
make Button-Bright hear. So, after vainly searching for the boy a full
hour, they formed a procession and proceeded in the direction of the
wicker castle of Ugu the Shoemaker.

"Button-Bright's always getting lost," said Dorothy. "And, if he wasn't
always getting found again, I'd prob'ly worry. He may have gone ahead of
us, and he may have gone back; but, wherever he is, we'll find him
sometime and somewhere, I'm almost sure."




Ugu the Shoemaker

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 19


A curious thing about Ugu the Shoemaker was that he didn't suspect, in
the least, that he was wicked. He wanted to be powerful and great and he
hoped to make himself master of all the Land of Oz, that he might compel
everyone in that fairy country to obey him. His ambition blinded him to
the rights of others and he imagined anyone else would act just as he
did if anyone else happened to be as clever as himself.

When he inhabited his little shoemaking shop in the City of Herku he had
been discontented, for a shoemaker is not looked upon with high respect
and Ugu knew that his ancestors had been famous magicians for many
centuries past and therefore his family was above the ordinary. Even his
father practiced magic, when Ugu was a boy; but his father had wandered
away from Herku and had never come back again. So, when Ugu grew up, he
was forced to make shoes for a living, knowing nothing of the magic of
his forefathers. But one day, in searching through the attic of his
house, he discovered all the books of magical recipes and many magical
instruments which had formerly been in use in his family. From that day
he stopped making shoes and began to study magic. Finally he aspired to
become the greatest magician in Oz, and for days and weeks and months he
thought on a plan to render all the other sorcerers and wizards, as well
as those with fairy powers, helpless to oppose him.

From the books of his ancestors he learned the following facts:

(1) That Ozma of Oz was the fairy ruler of the Emerald City and the Land
of Oz, and that she could not be destroyed by any magic ever devised.
Also, by means of her Magic Picture she would be able to discover
anyone who approached her royal palace with the idea of conquering it.

(2) That Glinda the Good was the most powerful Sorceress in Oz, among
her other magical possessions being the Great Book of Records, which
told her all that happened anywhere in the world. This Book of Records
was very dangerous to Ugu's plans and Glinda was in the service of Ozma
and would use her arts of sorcery to protect the girl Ruler.

(3) That the Wizard of Oz, who lived in Ozma's palace, had been taught
much powerful magic by Glinda and had a bag of magic tools with which he
might be able to conquer the Shoemaker.

(4) That there existed in Oz--in the Yip Country--a jeweled dishpan made
of gold, which dishpan possessed marvelous powers of magic. At a magic
word, which Ugu learned from the book, the dishpan would grow large
enough for a man to sit inside it. Then, when he grasped both the golden
handles, the dishpan would transport him in an instant to any place he
wished to go within the borders of the Land of Oz.

No one now living, except Ugu, knew of the powers of this Magic Dishpan;
so, after long study, the shoemaker decided that if he could manage to
secure the dishpan he could, by its means, rob Ozma and Glinda and the
Wizard of Oz of all their magic, thus becoming himself the most powerful
person in all the land.

His first act was to go away from the City of Herku and build for
himself the Wicker Castle in the hills. Here he carried his books and
instruments of magic and here for a full year he diligently practiced
all the magical arts learned from his ancestors. At the end of that time
he could do a good many wonderful things.

Then, when all his preparations were made, he set out for the Yip
Country and climbing the steep mountain at night he entered the house of
Cayke the Cookie Cook and stole her diamond-studded gold dishpan while
all the Yips were asleep. Taking his prize outside, he set the pan upon
the ground and uttered the required magic word. Instantly the dishpan
grew as large as a big washtub and Ugu seated himself in it and grasped
the two handles. Then he wished himself in the great drawing-room of
Glinda the Good.

He was there in a flash. First he took the Great Book of Records and put
it in the dishpan. Then he went to Glinda's laboratory and took all her
rare chemical compounds and her instruments of sorcery, placing these
also in the dishpan, which he caused to grow large enough to hold them.
Next he seated himself amongst the treasures he had stolen and wished
himself in the room in Ozma's palace which the Wizard occupied and where
he kept his bag of magic tools. This bag Ugu added to his plunder and
then wished himself in the apartments of Ozma.

Here he first took the Magic Picture from the wall and then seized all
the other magical things which Ozma possessed. Having placed these in
the dishpan he was about to climb in himself when he looked up and saw
Ozma standing beside him. Her fairy instinct had warned her that danger
was threatening her, so the beautiful girl Ruler rose from her couch and
leaving her bedchamber at once confronted the thief.

Ugu had to think quickly, for he realized that if he permitted Ozma to
rouse the inmates of her palace all his plans and his present successes
were likely to come to naught. So he threw a scarf over the girl's head,
so she could not scream, and pushed her into the dishpan and tied her
fast, so she could not move. Then he climbed in beside her and wished
himself in his own wicker castle. The Magic Dishpan was there in an
instant, with all its contents, and Ugu rubbed his hands together in
triumphant joy as he realized that he now possessed all the important
magic in the Land of Oz and could force all the inhabitants of that
fairyland to do as he willed.

So quickly had his journey been accomplished that before daylight the
robber magician had locked Ozma in a room, making her a prisoner, and
had unpacked and arranged all his stolen goods. The next day he placed
the Book of Records on his table and hung the Magic Picture on his wall
and put away in his cupboards and drawers all the elixirs and magic
compounds he had stolen. The magical instruments he polished and
arranged, and this was fascinating work and made him very happy. The
only thing that bothered him was Ozma. By turns the imprisoned Ruler
wept and scolded the Shoemaker, haughtily threatening him with dire
punishment for the wicked deeds he had done. Ugu became somewhat afraid
of his fairy prisoner, in spite of the fact that he believed he had
robbed her of all her powers; so he performed an enchantment that
quickly disposed of her and placed her out of his sight and hearing.
After that, being occupied with other things, he soon forgot her.

[Illustration]

But now, when he looked into the Magic Picture and read the Great Book
of Records, the Shoemaker learned that his wickedness was not to go
unchallenged. Two important expeditions had set out to find him and
force him to give up his stolen property. One was the party headed by
the Wizard and Dorothy, while the other consisted of Cayke and the
Frogman. Others were also searching, but not in the right places. These
two groups, however, were headed straight for the wicker castle and so
Ugu began to plan how best to meet them and to defeat their efforts to
conquer him.

[Illustration]




More Surprises

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 20


All that first day after the union of the two parties our friends
marched steadily toward the wicker castle of Ugu the Shoemaker. When
night came they camped in a little grove and passed a pleasant evening
together, although some of them were worried because Button-Bright was
still lost.

"Perhaps," said Toto, as the animals lay grouped together for the night,
"this Shoemaker who stole my growl, and who stole Ozma, has also stolen
Button-Bright."

"How do you know that the Shoemaker stole your growl?" demanded the
Woozy.

"He has stolen about everything else of value in Oz, hasn't he?" replied
the dog.

"He has stolen everything he wants, perhaps," agreed the Lion; "but what
could anyone want with your growl?"

"Well," said the dog, wagging his tail slowly, "my recollection is that
it was a wonderful growl, soft and low and--and--"

"And ragged at the edges," said the Sawhorse.

"So," continued Toto, "if that magician hadn't any growl of his own, he
might have wanted mine and stolen it."

"And, if he has, he will soon wish he hadn't," remarked the Mule. "Also,
if he has stolen Button-Bright he will be sorry."

"Don't you like Button-Bright, then?" asked the Lion in surprise.

"It isn't a question of liking him," replied the Mule. "It's a question
of watching him and looking after him. Any boy who causes his friends so
much worry isn't worth having around. _I_ never get lost."

"If you did," said Toto, "no one would worry a bit. I think
Button-Bright is a very lucky boy, because he always gets found."

"See here," said the Lion, "this chatter is keeping us all awake and
