and I couldn't get out of the scrape without hurting Dora's feelings,
you see,' began Tom, seeing that the fatal moment had come.

'So there were two donkeys in it, were there?' said Mrs Jo, foreseeing
fun of some sort.

'Don't laugh! It sounds funny, I know; but it might have been awful,'
answered Tom darkly, though a twinkle of the eye showed that his love
trials did not quite blind him to the comic side of the adventure.

'The girls admired our new wheels, and of course we liked to show off.
Took 'em to ride, and had larks generally. Well, one day, Dora was
on behind, and we were going nicely along a good bit of road, when a
ridiculous old donkey got right across the way. I thought he'd move, but
he didn't, so I gave him a kick; he kicked back, and over we went in a
heap, donkey and all. Such a mess! I thought only of Dora, and she had
hysterics; at least, she laughed till she cried, and that beast brayed,
and I lost my head. Any fellow would, with a poor girl gasping in the
road, and he wiping her tears and begging pardon, not knowing whether
her bones were broken or not. I called her my darling, and went on like
a fool in my flurry, till she grew calmer, and said, with such a look:
"I forgive you, Tom. Pick me up, and let us go on again."

'Wasn't that sweet now, after I'd upset her for the second time? It
touched me to the heart; and I said I'd like to go on for ever with such
an angel to steer for, and--well I don't know what I did say; but you
might have knocked me down with a feather when she put her arm round my
neck and whispered: "Tom, dear, with you I'm not afraid of any lions in
the path." She might have said donkeys; but she was in earnest, and she
spared my feelings. Very nice of the dear girl; but there I am with two
sweethearts on my hands, and in a deuce of a scrape.'

Finding it impossible to contain herself another moment, Mrs Jo laughed
till the tears ran down her cheeks at this characteristic episode; and
after one reproachful look, which only added to her merriment, Tom burst
into a jolly roar that made the room ring.

'Tommy Bangs! Tommy Bangs! who but you could ever get into such a
catastrophe?' said Mrs Jo, when she recovered her breath.

'Isn't it a muddle all round, and won't everyone chaff me to death about
it? I shall have to quit old Plum for a while,' answered Tom, as he
mopped his face, trying to realize the full danger of his position.

'No, indeed; I'll stand by you, for I think it the best joke of the
season. But tell me how things ended. Is it really serious, or only a
summer flirtation? I don't approve of them, but boys and girls will play
with edged tools and cut their fingers.'

'Well, Dora considers herself engaged, and wrote to her people at once.
I couldn't say a word when she took it all in solemn earnest and seemed
so happy. She's only seventeen, never liked anyone before, and is sure
all will be all right; as her father knows mine, and we are both well
off. I was so staggered that I said:

'"Why, you can't love me really when we know so little of one another?"
But she answered right out of her tender little heart: "Yes, I do,
dearly, Tom; you are so gay and kind and honest, I couldn't help it."
Now, after that what could I do but go ahead and make her happy while I
stayed, and trust to luck to straighten the snarl out afterwards?'

'A truly Tomian way of taking things easy. I hope you told your father
at once.'

'Oh yes, I wrote off and broke it to him in three lines. I said: "Dear
Father, I'm engaged to Dora West, and I hope she will suit the family.
She suits me tip-top. Yours ever, Tom." He was all right, never liked
Nan, you know; but Dora will suit him down to the ground.' And Tom
looked entirely satisfied with his own tact and taste.

'What did Demi say to this rapid and funny lovemaking? Wasn't he
scandalized?' asked Mrs Jo, trying not to laugh again as she thought of
the unromantic spectacle of donkey, bicycle, boy, and girl all in the
dust together.

'Not a bit. He was immensely interested and very kind; talked to me like
a father; said it was a good thing to steady a fellow, only I must be
honest with her and myself and not trifle a moment. Demi is a regular
Solomon, especially when he is in the same boat,' answered Tom, looking
wise.

'You don't mean--?' gasped Mrs Jo, in sudden alarm at the bare idea of
more love-affairs just yet.

'Yes, I do, please, ma'am; it's a regular sell all the way through, and
I owe Demi one for taking me into temptation blindfold. He said he went
to Quitno to see Fred Wallace, but he never saw the fellow. How could
he, when Wallace was off in his yacht all the time we were there? Alice
was the real attraction, and I was left to my fate, while they were
maundering round with that old camera. There were three donkeys in
this affair, and I'm not the worst one, though I shall have to bear the
laugh. Demi will look innocent and sober, and no one will say a word to
him.'

'The midsummer madness has broken out, and no one knows who will be
stricken next. Well, leave Demi to his mother, and let us see what you
are going to do, Tom.'

'I don't know exactly; it's awkward to be in love with two girls at
once. What do you advise?'

'A common-sense view of the case, by all means. Dora loves you and
thinks you love her. Nan does not care for you, and you only care for
her as a friend, though you have tried to do more. It is my opinion,
Tom, that you love Dora, or are on the way to it; for in all these
years I've never seen you look or speak about Nan as you do about Dora.
Opposition has made you obstinately cling to her till accident has shown
you a more attractive girl. Now, I think you had better take the old
love for a friend, the new one for a sweetheart, and in due time, if the
sentiment is genuine, marry her.'

If Mrs Jo had any doubts about the matter, Tom's face would have proved
the truth of her opinion; for his eyes shone, his lips smiled, and in
spite of dust and sunburn a new expression of happiness quite glorified
him as he stood silent for a moment, trying to understand the beautiful
miracle which real love works when it comes to a young man's heart.

'The fact is I meant to make Nan jealous, for she knows Dora, and I was
sure would hear of our doings. I was tired of being walked on, and I
thought I'd try to break away and not be a bore and a laughing-stock any
more,' he said slowly, as if it relieved him to pour out his doubts and
woes and hopes and joys to his old friend. 'I was regularly astonished
to find it so easy and so pleasant. I didn't mean to do any harm,
but drifted along beautifully, and told Demi to mention things in his
letters to Daisy, so Nan might know. Then I forgot Nan altogether, and
saw, heard, felt, cared for no one but Dora, till the donkey--bless his
old heart!--pitched her into my arms and I found she loved me. Upon my
soul, I don't see why she should! I'm not half good enough.'

'Every honest man feels that when an innocent girl puts her hand in his.
Make yourself worthy of her, for she isn't an angel, but a woman with
faults of her own for you to bear, and forgive, and you must help one
another,' said Mrs Jo, trying to realize that this sober youth was her
scapegrace Tommy.

'What troubles me is that I didn't mean it when I began, and was going
to use the dear girl as an instrument of torture for Nan. It wasn't
right, and I don't deserve to be so happy. If all my scrapes ended as
well as this, what a state of bliss I should be in!' and Tom beamed
again at the rapturous prospect.

'My dear boy, it is not a scrape, but a very sweet experience suddenly
dawning upon you,' answered Mrs Jo, speaking very soberly; for she saw
he was in earnest. 'Enjoy it wisely and be worthy of it, for it is a
serious thing to accept a girl's love and trust, and let her look up to
you for tenderness and truth in return. Don't let little Dora look in
vain, but be a man in all things for her sake, and make this affection a
blessing to you both.'

'I'll try. Yes, I do love her, only I can't believe it just yet. Wish
you knew her. Dear little soul, I long to see her already! She cried
when we parted last night and I hated to go.' Tom's hand went to his
cheek as if he still felt the rosy little seal Dora had set upon his
promise not to forget her, and for the first time in his happy-go-lucky
life Tommy Bangs understood the difference between sentiment and
sentimentality. The feeling recalled Nan, for he had never known that
tender thrill when thinking of her, and the old friendship seemed rather
a prosaic affair beside this delightful mingling of romance, surprise,
love, and fun. 'I declare, I feel as if a weight was off me, but
what the dickens will Nan say when she knows it!' he exclaimed with a
chuckle.

'Knows what?' asked a clear voice that made both start and turn, for
there was Nan calmly surveying them from the doorway.

Anxious to put Tom out of suspense and see how Nan would take the news,
Mrs Jo answered quickly:

'Tom's engagement to Dora West.'

'Really?' and Nan looked so surprised that Mrs Jo was afraid she might
be fonder of her old playmate than she knew; but her next words set the
fear at rest, and made everything comfortable and merry at once.

'I knew my prescription would work wonders if he only took it long
enough. Dear old Tom, I'm so glad. Bless you! bless you!' And she shook
both his hands with hearty affection.

'It was an accident, Nan. I didn't mean to, but I'm always getting into
messes, and I couldn't seem to get out of this any other way. Mother
Bhaer will tell you all about it. I must go and make myself tidy. Going
to tea with Demi. See you later.'

Stammering, blushing, and looking both sheepish and gratified, Tom
suddenly bolted, leaving the elder lady to enlighten the younger at
length, and have another laugh over this new sort of courtship, which
might well be called accidental. Nan was deeply interested, for she knew
Dora, thought her a nice little thing, and predicted that in time she
would make Tom an excellent wife, since she admired and 'appreciated'
him so much.

'I shall miss him of course, but it will be a relief to me and better
for him; dangling is so bad for a boy. Now he will go into business
with his father and do well, and everyone be happy. I shall give Dora an
elegant family medicine-chest for a wedding-present, and teach her how
to use it. Tom can't be trusted, and is no more fit for the profession
than Silas.'

The latter part of this speech relieved Mrs Jo's mind, for Nan had
looked about her as if she had lost something valuable when she began;
but the medicine-chest seemed to cheer her, and the thought of Tom in a
safe profession was evidently a great comfort.

'The worm has turned at last, Nan, and your bond-man is free. Let him
go, and give your whole mind to your work; for you are fitted for
the profession, and will be an honour to it by and by,' she said
approvingly.

'I hope so. That reminds me--measles are in the village, and you had
better tell the girls not to call where there are children. It would
be bad to have a run of them just as term begins. Now I'm off to Daisy.
Wonder what she will say to Tom. Isn't he great fun?' And Nan departed,
laughing over the joke with such genuine satisfaction that it was
evident no sentimental regrets disturbed her 'maiden meditation,
fancy-free'.

'I shall have my eye on Demi, but won't say a word. Meg likes to manage
her children in her own way, and a very good way it is. But the dear
Pelican will be somewhat ruffled if her boy has caught the epidemic
which seems to have broken out among us this summer.'

Mrs Jo did not mean the measles, but that more serious malady called
love, which is apt to ravage communities, spring and autumn, when winter
gaiety and summer idleness produce whole bouquets of engagements, and
set young people to pairing off like the birds. Franz began it, Nat was
a chronic and Tom a sudden case; Demi seemed to have the symptoms; and
worst of all, her own Ted had only the day before calmly said to her:
'Mum, I think I should be happier if I had a sweetheart, like the other
boys.' If her cherished son had asked her for dynamite to play with, she
would hardly have been more startled, or have more decidedly refused the
absurd request.

'Well, Barry Morgan said I ought to have one and offered to pick me out
a nice one among our set. I asked Josie first, and she hooted at the
idea, so I thought I'd let Barry look round. You say it steadies a
fellow, and I want to be steady,' explained Ted in a serious tone, which
would have convulsed his parent at any other time.

'Good lack! What are we coming to in this fast age when babes and boys
make such demands and want to play with one of the most sacred things in
life?' exclaimed Mrs Jo, and having in a few words set the matter in its
true light, sent her son away to wholesome baseball and Octoo for a safe
sweetheart.

Now, here was Tom's bomb-shell to explode in their midst, carrying
widespread destruction, perhaps; for though one swallow does not make a
summer, one engagement is apt to make several, and her boys were, most
of them, at the inflammable age when a spark ignites the flame, which
soon flickers and dies out, or burns warm and clear for life. Nothing
could be done about it but to help them make wise choices, and be worthy
of good mates. But of all the lessons Mrs Jo had tried to teach her
boys, this great one was the hardest; for love is apt to make lunatics
of even saints and sages, so young people cannot be expected to escape
the delusions, disappointments, and mistakes, as well as the delights,
of this sweet madness.

'I suppose it is inevitable, since we live in America, so I won't borrow
trouble, but hope that some of the new ideas of education will produce a
few hearty, happy, capable, and intelligent girls for my lads. Lucky for
me that I haven't the whole twelve on my hands, I should lose my wits if
I had, for I foresee complications and troubles ahead worse than Tom's
boats, bicycles, donkeys, and Doras,' meditated Mrs Jo, as she went back
to her neglected proof-sheets.

Tom was quite satisfied with the tremendous effect his engagement
produced in the little community at Plumfield.

'It was paralysing,' as Demi said; and astonishment left most of Tom's
mates little breath for chaff. That he, the faithful one, should turn
from the idol to strange goddesses, was a shock to the romantic and a
warning to the susceptible. It was comical to see the airs our Thomas
put on; for the most ludicrous parts of the affair were kindly buried in
oblivion by the few who knew them, and Tom burst forth as a full-blown
hero who had rescued the maiden from a watery grave, and won her
gratitude and love by his daring deed. Dora kept the secret, and enjoyed
the fun when she came to see Mother Bhaer and pay her respects to the
family generally. Everyone liked her at once, for she was a gay and
winning little soul; fresh, frank, and so happy, it was beautiful to see
her innocent pride in Tom, who was a new boy, or man rather; for with
this change in his life a great change took place in him. Jolly he would
always be, and impulsive, but he tried to become all that Dora believed
him, and his best side came uppermost for everyday wear. It was
surprising to see how many good traits Tom had; and his efforts to
preserve the manly dignity belonging to his proud position as an engaged
man was very comical. So was the entire change from his former abasement
and devotion to Nan to a somewhat lordly air with his little betrothed;
for Dora made an idol of him, and resented the idea of a fault or a flaw
in her Tom. This new state of things suited both, and the once blighted
being bloomed finely in the warm atmosphere of appreciation, love, and
confidence. He was very fond of the dear girl, but meant to be a slave
no longer, and enjoyed his freedom immensely, quite unconscious that the
great tyrant of the world had got hold of him for life.

To his father's satisfaction he gave up his medical studies, and
prepared to go into business with the old gentleman, who was a
flourishing merchant, ready now to make the way smooth and smile upon
his marriage with Mr West's well-endowed daughter. The only thorn in
Tom's bed of roses was Nan's placid interest in his affairs, and evident
relief at his disloyalty. He did not want her to suffer, but a decent
amount of regret at the loss of such a lover would have gratified him;
a slight melancholy, a word of reproach, a glance of envy as he passed
with adoring Dora on his arm, seemed but the fitting tribute to such
years of faithful service and sincere affection. But Nan regarded him
with a maternal sort of air that nettled him very much, and patted
Dora's curly head with a worldlywise air worthy of the withered
spinster, Julia Mills, in David Copperfield.

It took some time to get the old and the new emotions comfortably
adjusted, but Mrs Jo helped him, and Mr Laurie gave him some wise advice
upon the astonishing gymnastic feats the human heart can perform, and
be all the better for it if it only held fast to the balancing-pole
of truth and common sense. At last our Tommy got his bearings, and as
autumn came on Plumfield saw but little of him; for his new lode star
was in the city, and business kept him hard at work. He was evidently
in his right place now, and soon throve finely, to his father's great
contentment; for his jovial presence pervaded the once quiet office like
a gale of fresh wind, and his lively wits found managing men and
affairs much more congenial employment than studying disease, or playing
unseemly pranks with skeletons.

Here we will leave him for a time and turn to the more serious
adventures of his mates, though this engagement, so merrily made, was
the anchor which kept our mercurial Tom happy, and made a man of him.



Chapter 10. DEMI SETTLES

'Mother, can I have a little serious conversation with you?' asked Demi
one evening, as they sat together enjoying the first fire of the season,
while Daisy wrote letters upstairs and Josie was studying in the little
library close by.

'Certainly, dear. No bad news, I hope?' and Mrs Meg looked up from her
sewing with a mixture of pleasure and anxiety on her motherly face; for
she dearly loved a good talk with her son, and knew that he always had
something worth telling.

'It will be good news for you, I think,' answered Demi, smiling as he
threw away his paper and went to sit beside her on the little sofa which
just held two.

'Let me hear it, then, at once.'

'I know you don't like the reporting, and will be glad to hear that I
have given it up.'

'I am very glad! It is too uncertain a business, and there is no
prospect of getting on for a long time. I want you settled in some good
place where you can stay, and in time make money. I wish you liked a
profession; but as you don't, any clean, well-established business will
do.'

