So they settled in good places where they could see and hear all that
went on in the ring and still catch glimpses of white horses, bright
colors, and the glitter of helmets beyond the dingy red curtains. Ben
treated Bab to peanuts and pop-corn like an indulgent parent, and she
murmured protestations of undying gratitude with her mouth full, as she
sat blissfully between him and the congenial Billy.

Sancho, meantime, had been much excited by the familiar sights and
sounds, and now was greatly exercised in his doggish mind at the unusual
proceeding of his master; for he was sure that they ought to be within
there, putting on their costumes, ready to take their turn. He looked
anxiously at Ben, sniffed disdainfully at the strap as if to remind him
that a scarlet ribbon ought to take its place, and poked peanut shells
about with his paw as if searching for the letters with which to spell
his famous name.

"I know, old boy, I know; but it can't be done. We've quit the business
and must just look on. No larks for us this time, Sanch, so keep quiet
and behave,' whispered Ben, tucking the dog away under the seat with a
sympathetic cuddle of the curly head that peeped out from between his
feet.

"He wants to go and cut up, don't he?" said Billy, "and so do you, I
guess. Wish you were going to. Wouldn't it be fun to see Ben showing off
in there?"

"I'd be afraid to have him go up on a pile of elephants and jump through
hoops like these folks," answered Bab, poring over her pictured
play-bill with unabated relish.

"Done it a hundred times, and I'd just like to show you what I can do.
They don't seem to have any boys in this lot; shouldn't wonder if they'd
take me if I asked 'em," said Ben, moving uneasily on his seat and
casting wistful glances toward the inner tent where he knew he would
feel more at home than in his present place.

"I heard some men say that it's against the law to have small boys now;
it's so dangerous and not good for them, this kind of thing. If that's
so, you're done for, Ben," observed Sam, with his most grown-up air,
remembering Ben's remarks on "fat boys."

"Don't believe a word of it, and Sanch and I could go this minute and
get taken on, I'll bet. We are a valuable couple, and I could prove it
if I chose to," began Ben, getting excited and boastful.

"Oh, see, they're coming!--gold carriages and lovely horses, and flags
and elephants, and every thing," cried Bab, giving a clutch at Ben's arm
as the opening procession appeared headed by the band, tooting and
banging till their faces were as red as their uniforms.

Round and round they went till every one had seen their fill, then the
riders alone were left caracoling about the ring with feathers flying,
horses prancing, and performers looking as tired and indifferent as if
they would all like to go to sleep then and there.

"How splendid!" sighed Bab, as they went dashing out, to tumble off
almost before the horses stopped.

"That's nothing! You wait till you see the bareback riding and the
'acrobatic exercises,'" said Ben, quoting from the play-bill, with the
air of one who knew all about the feats to come, and could never be
surprised any more.

"What are 'crowbackic exercises'?" asked Billy, thirsting for
information.

"Leaping and climbing and tumbling; you'll see George! what a stunning
horse!" and Ben forgot every thing else to feast his eyes on the
handsome creature who now came pacing in to dance, upset and replace
chairs, kneel, bow, and perform many wonderful or graceful feats, ending
with a swift gallop while the rider sat in a chair on its back fanning
himself, with his legs crossed, as comfortably as you please.

"That, now, is something like," and Ben's eyes shone with admiration and
envy as the pair vanished, and the pink and silver acrobats came leaping
into the ring.

The boys were especially interested in this part, and well they might
be; for strength and agility are manly attributes which lads appreciate,
and these lively fellows flew about like India-rubber balls, each trying
to outdo the other, till the leader of the acrobats capped the climax by
turning a double somersault over five elephants standing side by side.

"There, Sir, how's that for a jump?" asked Ben, rubbing his hands with
satisfaction as his friends clapped till their palms tingled.

"We'll rig up a spring-board and try it," said Billy, fired with
emulation.

"Where'll you get your elephants?" asked Sam, scornfully, for gymnastics
were not in his line.

"You'll do for one," retorted Ben, and Billy and Bab joined in his laugh
so heartily that a rough-looking, man who sat behind them, hearing all
they said, pronounced them a "jolly set," and kept his eye on Sancho,
who now showed signs of insubordination.

"Hullo, that wasn't on the bill!" cried Ben, as a parti-colored clown
came in, followed by half a dozen dogs.

"I'm so glad; now Sancho will like it.  There's a poodle that might be
his ownty donty brother--the one with the blue ribbon," said Bab.
beaming with delight as the dogs took their seats in the chairs arranged
for them.

Sancho did like it only too well, for be scrambled out from under the
seat in a great hurry to go and greet his friends; and, being sharply
checked, sat up and begged so piteously that Ben found it very hard to
refuse and order him down. He subsided for a moment, but when the black
spaniel, who acted the canine clown, did something funny and was
applauded, Sancho made a dart as if bent on leaping into the ring to
outdo his rival, and Ben was forced to box his ears and put his feet on
the poor beast, fearing he would be ordered out if he made any
disturbance.

Too well trained to rebel again, Sancho lay meditating on his wrongs
till the dog act was over, carefully abstaining from any further sign of
interest in their tricks, and only giving a sidelong glance at the two
little poodles who came out of a basket to run up and down stairs on
their fore-paws, dance jigs on their hind-legs, and play various pretty
pranks to the great delight of all the children in the audience. If ever
a dog expressed by look and attitude, "Pooh! I could do much better than
that, and astonish you all, if I were only allowed to," that dog was
Sancho, as he curled himself up and affected to turn his back on an
unappreciative world.

"It's too bad, when he knows more than all those chaps put together. I'd
give any thing if I could show him off as I used to. Folks always like
it, and I was ever so proud of him. He's mad now because I had to cuff
him, and won't take any notice of me till I make up," said Ben,
regretfully eying his offended friend, but not daring to beg pardon yet.

More riding followed, and Bab was kept in a breathless state by the
marvellous agility and skill of the gauzy lady who drove four horses at
once, leaped through hoops, over banners and bars, sprang off and on at
full speed, and seemed to enjoy it all so much it was impossible to
believe that there could be any danger or exertion in it. Then two girls
flew about on the trapeze, and walked on a tight rope, causing Bab to
feel that she had at last found her sphere; for, young as she was, her
mother often said,

"I really don't know what this child is fit for, except mischief, like a
monkey."

"I'll fix the clothes-line when I get home, and show Ma how nice it is.
Then, may be, she'd let me wear red and gold trousers, and climb round
like these girls," thought the busy little brain, much excited by all it
saw on that memorable day.

Nothing short of a pyramid of elephants with a glittering gentleman in a
turban and top boots on the summit would have made her forget this new
and charming plan. But that astonishing spectacle, and the prospect of a
cage of Bengal tigers with a man among them, in imminent danger of being
eaten before her eyes, entirely absorbed her thoughts till, just as the
big animals went lumbering out, a peal of thunder caused considerable
commotion in the audience. Men on the highest seats popped their heads
through the openings in the tent-cover and reported that a heavy shower
was coming up. Anxious mothers began to collect their flocks of children
as hens do their chickens at sunset; timid people told cheerful stories
of tents blown over in gales, cages upset and wild beasts let loose.
Many left in haste, and the performers hurried to finish as soon as
possible.

"I'm going now before the crowd comes, so I can get a lift home. I see
two or three folks I know, so I'm off;" and, climbing hastily down, Sam
vanished without further ceremony.

"Better wait till the shower is over. We can go and see the animals
again, and get home all dry, just as well as not," observed Ben,
encouragingly, as Billy looked anxiously at the billowing canvas over his
head, the swaying posts before him, and heard the quick patter of drops
outside, not to mention the melancholy roar of the lion which sounded
rather awful through the sudden gloom which filled the strange place.

"I wouldn't miss the tigers for any thing. See, they are pulling in the
cart now, and the shiny man is all ready with his gun. Will he shoot any
of them, apprehension, for the sharp crack of a rifle startled her more
than the loudest thunder-clap she ever heard.

"Bless you, no, child; it 's only powder to make a noise and scare 'em.
I wouldn't like to be in his place, though; father says you can never
trust tigers as you can lions, no matter how tame they are. Sly
fellers, like cats, and when they scratch it's no joke, I tell you,"
answered Ben, with a knowing wag of the head, as the sides of the cage
rattled down, and the poor, fierce creatures were seen leaping and
snarling as if they resented this display of their captivity.

Bab curled up her feet and winked fast with excitement as she watched
the "shiny man" fondle the great cats, lie down among them, pull open
their red mouths, and make them leap over him or crouch at his feet as
he snapped the long whip. When he fired the gun and they all fell as if
dead, she with difficulty suppressed a small scream and clapped her
hands over her ears; but poor Billy never minded it a bit, for he was
pale and quaking with the fear of "heaven's artillery" thundering
overhead, and as a bright flash of lightning seemed to run down the
tall tent-poles he hid his eyes and wished with all his heart that he
was safe with mother.

"Afraid of thunder, Bill?" asked Ben, trying to speak stoutly, while a
sense of his own responsibilities began to worry him, for how was Bab to
be got home in such a pouring rain?

"It makes me sick; always did.  Wish I hadn't come," sighed Billy,
feeling, all too late, that lemonade and "lozengers" were not the
fittest food for man, or a stifling tent the best place to be in on a
hot July day, especially in a thunder-storm.

"I didn't ask you to come; you asked me; so it isn't my fault," said
Ben, rather gruffly, as people crowded by without pausing to hear the
comic song the clown was singing in spite of the confusion.

"Oh, I'm so tired," groaned Bab, getting up with a long stretch of arms
and legs.

"You'll be tireder before you get home, I guess. Nobody asked you to
Come, any way;" and Ben gazed dolefully round him, wishing he could see
a familiar face or find a wiser head than his own to help him out of the
scrape he was in.

"I said I wouldn't be a bother, and I won't.  I'll walk right home this
minute. I ain't afraid of thunder, and the rain won't hurt these old
clothes. Come along," cried Bab, bravely, bent on keeping her word,
though it looked much harder after the fun was all over than before.

"My head aches like fury.  Don't I wish old Jack was here to take me
back," said Billy, following his companions in misfortune with sudden
energy, as a louder peal than before rolled overhead.

"You might as well wish for Lita and the covered wagon while you are
about it, then we could all ride," answered Ben, leading the way to the
outer tent, where many people were lingering in hopes of fair weather.

"Why, Billy Barton, how in the world did you get here?" cried a
surprised voice as the crook of a cane caught the boy by the collar and
jerked him face to face with a young farmer, who was pushing along,
followed by his, wife and two or three children.

"Oh, Uncle Eben, I'm so glad you found Me! I walked over, and it's
raining, and I don't feel well. Let me go with you, can't I?" asked
Billy, casting himself and all his woes upon the strong arm that had
laid hold of him.

"Don't see what your mother was about to let you come so far alone, and
you just over scarlet fever. We are as full as ever we can be, but we'll
tuck you in somehow," said the pleasant-faced woman, bundling up her
baby, and bidding the two little lads "keep close to father."

"I didn't come alone.  Sam got a ride, and can't you tuck Ben and Bab in
too? They ain't very big, either of them," whispered Billy, anxious to
serve his friends now that he was provided for himself.

"Can't do it, any way.  Got to pick up mother at the corner, and that
will be all I can carry. It's lifting a little; hurry along, Lizzie, and
let us get out of this as quick is possible," said Uncle Eben,
impatiently; for going to a circus with a young family is not an easy
task, as every one knows who has ever tried it.

"Ben, I'm real sorry there isn't room for you. I'll tell Bab's mother
where she is, and may be some one will come for you," said Billy,
hurriedly, as he tore himself away, feeling rather mean to desert the
others, though he could be of no use.

"Cut away, and don't mind us. I'm all right, and Bab must do the best
she can," was all Ben had time to answer before his comrade was hustled
away by the crowd pressing round the entrance with much clashing of
umbrellas and scrambling of boys and men, who rather enjoyed the flurry.

"No use for us to get knocked about in that scrimmage.  We'll wait a
minute and then go out easy. It's a regular rouser, and you'll be as wet
as a sop before we get home. Hope you'll like that?" added Ben, looking
out at the heavy rain poring down as if it never meant to stop.

"Don't care a bit," said Bab, swinging on one of the ropes with a
happy-go-lucky air, for her spirits were not extinguished yet, and she
was bound to enjoy this exciting holiday to the very end. "I like
circuses so much! I wish I lived here all the time, and slept in a
wagon, as you did, and had these dear little colties to play with."

"It wouldn't be fun if you didn't have any folks to take care of you,"
began Ben, thoughtfully looking about the familiar place where the men
were now feeding the animals, setting their refreshment tables, or
lounging on the hay to get such rest as they could before the evening
entertainment. Suddenly he started, gave a long look, then turned to
Bab, and thrusting Sancho's strap into her hand, said, hastily:

"I see a fellow I used to know. May be he can tell me something about
father. Don't you stir till I come back."

Then he was off like a shot, and Bab saw him run after a man with a
bucket who bad been watering the zebra. Sancho tried to follow, but was
checked with an impatient,--

"No, you can't go!  What a plague you are, tagging around when people
don't want you."

Sancho might have answered, "So are you," but, being a gentlemanly dog,
he sat down with a resigned expression to watch the little colts, who
were now awake and seemed ready for a game of bo-peep behind their
mammas. Bab enjoyed their funny little frisks so much that she tied the
wearisome strap to a post, and crept under the rope to pet the tiny
mouse-colored one who came and talked to her with baby whinnies and
confiding glances of its soft, dark eyes.

"Oh, luckless Bab! why did you turn your back? Oh, too accomplished
Sancho! why did you neatly untie that knot and trot away to confer with
the disreputable bull-dog who stood in the entrance beckoning with
friendly wavings of an abbreviated tail? Oh, much afflicted Ben! why did
you delay till it was too late to save your pet from the rough man who
set his foot upon the trailing strap, and led poor Sanch quickly out of
sight among the crowd?

"It was Bascum, but he didn't know any thing. Why, where's Sanch?" said
Ben, returning. A breathless voice made Bab turn to see Ben looking
about him with as much alarm in his hot face as if the dog had been a
