Rodney gave this information unwillingly, for he saw that his secret was
likely to be discovered.

"How do you do, Arthur?" asked Jasper, with unwonted affability, for he
did not care for children.

"Pretty well," answered Arthur politely.

"Have you known Rodney long?"

"Why, he is my teacher," answered Arthur in some surprise.

Jasper's eyes gleamed with sudden intelligence. So this was Rodney's
secret, and this was the position for which he was so well paid.

Rodney bit his lip in vexation, but made no remark.

"Does he ever punish you for not getting your lessons?" asked Jasper
without much tact.

"Of course not," answered Arthur indignantly.

"Arthur always does get his lessons," said Rodney. "I suppose you have a
holiday from work today, Jasper."

"Yes; I am glad to get away now and then."

"I must bid you good morning now."

"Won't you let me call on you? Where do you live, Arthur?"

The boy gave the number of his house.

Jasper asked Arthur, thinking rightly that he would be more likely to
get an answer from him than from Rodney. He walked away triumphantly,
feeling that he had made a discovery that might prove of advantage to
him.

"Is that a friend of yours, Rodney?" asked little Arthur.

"I have known him for some time."

"I don't like him very much."

"Why?" asked Rodney with some curiosity.

"I don't know," answered the little boy slowly. "I can't like
everybody."

"Quite true, Arthur. Jasper is not a special friend of mine, and I am
not particular about your liking him. I hope you like me."

"You know I do, Rodney," and he gave Rodney's hand an assuring pressure.

Ten minutes after he left Rodney, Jasper fell in with Carton. The
intimacy between them had perceptibly fallen off. It had grown out of
business considerations.

Now that it was no longer safe to abstract articles from the store,
Jasper felt that he had no more use for his late confederate. When they
met he treated him with marked coldness.

On this particular day Carton was looking quite shabby. In fact, his
best suit was in pawn, and he had fallen back on one half worn and
soiled.

"Hello!" exclaimed Jasper, and was about to pass on with a cool nod.

"Stop!" said Philip, looking offended.

"I am in a hurry," returned Jasper. "I can't stop today."

"You are in a hurry, and on a holiday?"

"Yes; I am to meet a friend near the lake."

"I'll go along with you."

Jasper had to submit though with an ill grace.

"Wouldn't another day do?"

"No; the fact is, Jasper, I am in trouble,"

"You usually are," sneered Jasper.

"That is so. I have been out of luck lately."

"I am sorry, but I can't help it as I see."

"How much money do you think I have in my pocket?"

"I don't know, I am sure. I am not good at guessing conundrums."

"Just ten cents."

"That isn't much," said Jasper, indifferently.

"Let me have a dollar, thats a good fellow!"

"You seem to think I am made of money," said Jasper sharply. "I haven't
got much more myself."

"Then you might have. You get a good salary."

"Only seven dollars."

"You are able to keep most of it for yourself."

"Suppose I am? You seem to know a good deal of my affairs."

"Haven't you any pity for an old friend?"

"Yes, I'll give you all the pity you want, but when it comes to money
it's a different matter. Here you are, a man of twenty six, ten years
older than me, and yet you expect me to help support you."

"You didn't use to talk to me like that."

"Well, I do now. You didn't use to try to get money out of me."

"Look here, Jasper! I am poor, but I don't want you to talk to me as you
are doing."

"Indeed!" sneered Jasper.

"And I won't have it," said Carton firmly. "Listen to me, and I will
propose a plan that will help us both."

"What is it?"

"You can easily secrete articles, if you are cautious, without
attracting notice, and I will dispose of them and share the money with
you."

Jasper shook his head.

"I wouldn't dare to do it," he said. "Somebody might spy on me."

"Not if you are careful."

"If it were found out I would be bounced like Ropes."

"What is he doing? Have you seen him lately?"

"He is getting on finely. He is earning fifteen dollars a week."

"You don't mean it?"

"Yes I do."

"What firm is he working for?"

"For none at all. He is tutor to a young kid."

"I didn't know he was scholar enough."

"Oh yes, he knows Greek and Latin and a lot of other stuff."

"Who is the boy?"

"I don't feel at liberty to tell. I don't think he would care to have
you know."

"I'll tell you what you can do. Borrow five dollars of him for me."

"I don't know about that. If I were to borrow it would be for myself."

"You can do as you please. If you don't do something for me I will write
to Mr. Goodnow that you are the thief who stole the cloaks and dress
patterns."

"You wouldn't do that?" exclaimed Jasper in consternation.

"Wouldn't I? I am desperate enough to do anything."

After a little further conference Jasper agreed to do what was asked of
him. He did not dare to refuse.



CHAPTER XIX.


JASPER'S REVENGE


Rodney was considerably surprised one evening to receive a call from
Jasper in his room. He was alone, as Mike had been detailed about a
week ago for night duty. The room looked more attractive than formerly.
Rodney had bought a writing desk, which stood in the corner, and had put
up three pictures, which, though cheap, were attractive.

"Good evening, Jasper," he said. "It is quite friendly of you to call."

"I hadn't anything else on hand this evening, and thought I would come
round see how you were getting along."

"Take a seat and make yourself at home."

"Do you object to cigarettes?" asked Jasper, producing one from a case
in his pocket.

"I object to smoking them myself, but I don't want to dictate to my
friends."

"You look quite comfortable here," continued Jasper in a patronizing
tone.

"We try to be comfortable, though our room is not luxurious."

"Who do you mean by 'we'? Have you a room mate?"

"Yes. Mike Flynn rooms with me."

"Who is he--a newsboy?"

"No. He is a telegraph boy."

"You don't seem to very particular," said Jasper, shrugging his
shoulders.

"I am very particular."

"Yet you room with an Irish telegraph boy."

"He is a nice boy of good habit, and a devoted friend. What could I want
more?"

"Oh, well, you have a right to consult your own taste."

"You have a nice home, no doubt."

"I live with my uncle. Yes, he has a good house, but I am not so
independent as if I had a room outide."

"How are things going on at the store?"

"About the same as usual. Why don't you come in some day?"

"For two reasons; I am occupied during the day, and I don't want to go
where I am considered a thief."

"I wish I was getting your income. It is hard to get along on seven
dollars a week."

"Still you have a nice home, and I suppose you have most of your salary
to yourself."

"Yes, but there isn't much margin in seven dollars. My uncle expects
me to buy my own clothes. You were lucky to get out of the store. Old
Goodnow ought to give me ten dollars."

"Don't let him hear you speak of him as OLD Goodnow, Jasper."

"Oh, I'm smart enough for that. I mean to keep on the right side of the
old chap. What sort of a man are you working for?"

"Mr. Sargent is a fine man."

"He isn't mean certainly. I should like to be in your shoes."

"If I hear of any similar position shall I mention your name?" asked
Rodney, smiling.

"No; I could not take care of a kid. I hate them."

"Still Arthur is a nice boy."

"You are welcome to him. What do you have to teach?"

"He is studying Latin and French, besides English branches."

"I know about as much of Latin and French as a cow. I couldn't be a
teacher. I say, Rodney," and Jasper cleared his throat, "I want you to
do me a favor."

"What is it?"

"I want you to lend me ten dollars."

Rodney was not mean, but he knew very well that a loan to Jasper would
be a permanent one. Had Jasper been his friend even this consideration
would not have inspired a refusal, but he knew very well that Jasper had
not a particle of regard for him.

"I don't think I can oblige you, Jasper," he said.

"Why not? You get fifteen dollars a week."

"My expenses are considerable. Besides I am helping Mike, whose salary
is very small. I pay the whole of the rent and I have paid for some
clothes for him."

"You are spending your money very foolishly," said Jasper frowning.

"Would I spend it any less foolishly if I should lend you ten dollars?"

"There is some difference between Mike Flynn and me. I am a gentleman."

"So is Mike."

"A queer sort of gentleman! He is only a poor telegraph boy."

"Still he is a gentleman."

"I should think you might have money enough for both of us."

"I might but I want to save something from my salary. I don't know how
long I shall be earning as much. I might lose my place."

"So you might."

"And I could hardly expect to get another where the pay would be as
good."

"I would pay you on installment--a dollar a week," urged Jasper.

"I don't see how you could, as you say your pay is too small for you
now."

"Oh, well, I could manage."

"I am afraid I can't oblige you, Jasper," said Rodney in a decided tone.

