she was lying right before them in the coffin. But he s'posed they
carried the coffin to the garret afterwards. Well, when Milty and his
mother went upstairs after it was all over to get her bonnet he asked
her where heaven was that Jane Ellen had gone to, and she pointed right
to the ceiling and said, 'Up there.' Milty knew there wasn't anything
but the garret over the ceiling, so that's how HE found out. And he's
been awful scared to go to his Uncle Simon's ever since."

Anne took Davy on her knee and did her best to straighten out this
theological tangle also. She was much better fitted for the task than
Marilla, for she remembered her own childhood and had an instinctive
understanding of the curious ideas that seven-year-olds sometimes get
about matters that are, of course, very plain and simple to grown up
people. She had just succeeded in convincing Davy that heaven was NOT in
Simon Fletcher's garret when Marilla came in from the garden, where she
and Dora had been picking peas. Dora was an industrious little soul and
never happier than when "helping" in various small tasks suited to her
chubby fingers. She fed chickens, picked up chips, wiped dishes, and ran
errands galore. She was neat, faithful and observant; she never had
to be told how to do a thing twice and never forgot any of her little
duties. Davy, on the other hand, was rather heedless and forgetful; but
he had the born knack of winning love, and even yet Anne and Marilla
liked him the better.

While Dora proudly shelled the peas and Davy made boats of the pods,
with masts of matches and sails of paper, Anne told Marilla about the
wonderful contents of her letter.

"Oh, Marilla, what do you think? I've had a letter from Priscilla and
she says that Mrs. Morgan is on the Island, and that if it is fine
Thursday they are going to drive up to Avonlea and will reach here about
twelve. They will spend the afternoon with us and go to the hotel at
White Sands in the evening, because some of Mrs. Morgan's American
friends are staying there. Oh, Marilla, isn't it wonderful? I can hardly
believe I'm not dreaming."

"I daresay Mrs. Morgan is a lot like other people," said Marilla drily,
although she did feel a trifle excited herself. Mrs. Morgan was a famous
woman and a visit from her was no commonplace occurrence. "They'll be
here to dinner, then?"

"Yes; and oh, Marilla, may I cook every bit of the dinner myself? I want
to feel that I can do something for the author of 'The Rosebud Garden,'
if it is only to cook a dinner for her. You won't mind, will you?"

"Goodness, I'm not so fond of stewing over a hot fire in July that it
would vex me very much to have someone else do it. You're quite welcome
to the job."

"Oh, thank you," said Anne, as if Marilla had just conferred a
tremendous favor, "I'll make out the menu this very night."

"You'd better not try to put on too much style," warned Marilla, a
little alarmed by the high-flown sound of 'menu.' "You'll likely come to
grief if you do."

"Oh, I'm not going to put on any 'style,' if you mean trying to do or
have things we don't usually have on festal occasions," assured Anne.
"That would be affectation, and, although I know I haven't as much sense
and steadiness as a girl of seventeen and a schoolteacher ought to have,
I'm not so silly as THAT. But I want to have everything as nice and
dainty as possible. Davy-boy, don't leave those peapods on the back
stairs . . . someone might slip on them. I'll have a light soup to begin
with . . . you know I can make lovely cream-of-onion soup . . . and then
a couple of roast fowls. I'll have the two white roosters. I have real
affection for those roosters and they've been pets ever since the gray
hen hatched out just the two of them . . . little balls of yellow down.
But I know they would have to be sacrificed sometime, and surely there
couldn't be a worthier occasion than this. But oh, Marilla, _I_ cannot
kill them . . . not even for Mrs. Morgan's sake. I'll have to ask John
Henry Carter to come over and do it for me."

"I'll do it," volunteered Davy, "if Marilla'll hold them by the legs,
'cause I guess it'd take both my hands to manage the axe. It's awful
jolly fun to see them hopping about after their heads are cut off."

"Then I'll have peas and beans and creamed potatoes and a lettuce salad,
for vegetables," resumed Anne, "and for dessert, lemon pie with whipped
cream, and coffee and cheese and lady fingers. I'll make the pies and
lady fingers tomorrow and do up my white muslin dress. And I must tell
Diana tonight, for she'll want to do up hers. Mrs. Morgan's heroines
are nearly always dressed in white muslin, and Diana and I have always
resolved that that was what we would wear if we ever met her. It will
be such a delicate compliment, don't you think? Davy, dear, you mustn't
poke peapods into the cracks of the floor. I must ask Mr. and Mrs. Allan
and Miss Stacy to dinner, too, for they're all very anxious to meet Mrs.
Morgan. It's so fortunate she's coming while Miss Stacy is here. Davy
dear, don't sail the peapods in the water bucket . . . go out to the
trough. Oh, I do hope it will be fine Thursday, and I think it will, for
Uncle Abe said last night when he called at Mr. Harrison's, that it was
going to rain most of this week."

"That's a good sign," agreed Marilla.

Anne ran across to Orchard Slope that evening to tell the news to Diana,
who was also very much excited over it, and they discussed the matter in
the hammock swung under the big willow in the Barry garden.

"Oh, Anne, mayn't I help you cook the dinner?" implored Diana. "You know
I can make splendid lettuce salad."

"Indeed you, may" said Anne unselfishly. "And I shall want you to help
me decorate too. I mean to have the parlor simply a BOWER of blossoms
. . . and the dining table is to be adorned with wild roses. Oh, I do
hope everything will go smoothly. Mrs. Morgan's heroines NEVER get
into scrapes or are taken at a disadvantage, and they are always so
selfpossessed and such good housekeepers. They seem to be BORN good
housekeepers. You remember that Gertrude in 'Edgewood Days' kept house
for her father when she was only eight years old. When I was eight
years old I hardly knew how to do a thing except bring up children. Mrs.
Morgan must be an authority on girls when she has written so much about
them, and I do want her to have a good opinion of us. I've imagined
it all out a dozen different ways . . . what she'll look like, and what
she'll say, and what I'll say. And I'm so anxious about my nose. There
are seven freckles on it, as you can see. They came at the A.V.I S.
picnic, when I went around in the sun without my hat. I suppose it's
ungrateful of me to worry over them, when I should be thankful they're
not spread all over my face as they once were; but I do wish they hadn't
come . . . all Mrs. Morgan's heroines have such perfect complexions. I
can't recall a freckled one among them."

"Yours are not very noticeable," comforted Diana. "Try a little lemon
juice on them tonight."

The next day Anne made her pies and lady fingers, did up her muslin
dress, and swept and dusted every room in the house . . . a quite
unnecessary proceeding, for Green Gables was, as usual, in the apple pie
order dear to Marilla's heart. But Anne felt that a fleck of dust would
be a desecration in a house that was to be honored by a visit from
Charlotte E. Morgan. She even cleaned out the "catch-all" closet under
the stairs, although there was not the remotest possibility of Mrs.
Morgan's seeing its interior.

"But I want to FEEL that it is in perfect order, even if she isn't to
see it," Anne told Marilla. "You know, in her book 'Golden Keys,' she
makes her two heroines Alice and Louisa take for their motto that verse
of Longfellow's,

     'In the elder days of art
     Builders wrought with greatest care
     Each minute and unseen part,
     For the gods see everywhere,'

and so they always kept their cellar stairs scrubbed and never forgot
to sweep under the beds. I should have a guilty conscience if I thought
this closet was in disorder when Mrs. Morgan was in the house. Ever
since we read 'Golden Keys,' last April, Diana and I have taken that
verse for our motto too."

That night John Henry Carter and Davy between them contrived to execute
the two white roosters, and Anne dressed them, the usually distasteful
task glorified in her eyes by the destination of the plump birds.

"I don't like picking fowls," she told Marilla, "but isn't it fortunate
we don't have to put our souls into what our hands may be doing? I've
been picking chickens with my hands but in imagination I've been roaming
the Milky Way."

"I thought you'd scattered more feathers over the floor than usual,"
remarked Marilla.

Then Anne put Davy to bed and made him promise that he would behave
perfectly the next day.

"If I'm as good as good can be all day tomorrow will you let me be just
as bad as I like all the next day?" asked Davy.

"I couldn't do that," said Anne discreetly, "but I'll take you and Dora
for a row in the flat right to the bottom of the pond, and we'll go
ashore on the sandhills and have a picnic."

"It's a bargain," said Davy. "I'll be good, you bet. I meant to go over
to Mr. Harrison's and fire peas from my new popgun at Ginger but another
day'll do as well. I espect it will be just like Sunday, but a picnic at
the shore'll make up for THAT."




XVII

A Chapter of Accidents


Anne woke three times in the night and made pilgrimages to her window to
make sure that Uncle Abe's prediction was not coming true. Finally the
morning dawned pearly and lustrous in a sky full of silver sheen and
radiance, and the wonderful day had arrived.

Diana appeared soon after breakfast, with a basket of flowers over one
arm and HER muslin dress over the other . . . for it would not do to don
it until all the dinner preparations were completed. Meanwhile she wore
her afternoon pink print and a lawn apron fearfully and wonderfully
ruffled and frilled; and very neat and pretty and rosy she was.

"You look simply sweet," said Anne admiringly.

Diana sighed.

"But I've had to let out every one of my dresses AGAIN. I weigh four
pounds more than I did in July. Anne, WHERE will this end? Mrs. Morgan's
heroines are all tall and slender."

"Well, let's forget our troubles and think of our mercies," said Anne
gaily. "Mrs. Allan says that whenever we think of anything that is a
trial to us we should also think of something nice that we can set
over against it. If you are slightly too plump you've got the dearest
dimples; and if I have a freckled nose the SHAPE of it is all right. Do
you think the lemon juice did any good?"

"Yes, I really think it did," said Diana critically; and, much elated,
Anne led the way to the garden, which was full of airy shadows and
wavering golden lights.

"We'll decorate the parlor first. We have plenty of time, for Priscilla
said they'd be here about twelve or half past at the latest, so we'll
have dinner at one."

There may have been two happier and more excited girls somewhere in
Canada or the United States at that moment, but I doubt it. Every snip
of the scissors, as rose and peony and bluebell fell, seemed to chirp,
"Mrs. Morgan is coming today." Anne wondered how Mr. Harrison COULD go
on placidly mowing hay in the field across the lane, just as if nothing
were going to happen.

The parlor at Green Gables was a rather severe and gloomy apartment,
with rigid horsehair furniture, stiff lace curtains, and white
antimacassars that were always laid at a perfectly correct angle, except
at such times as they clung to unfortunate people's buttons. Even Anne
had never been able to infuse much grace into it, for Marilla would not
permit any alterations. But it is wonderful what flowers can accomplish
if you give them a fair chance; when Anne and Diana finished with the
room you would not have recognized it.

A great blue bowlful of snowballs overflowed on the polished table. The
shining black mantelpiece was heaped with roses and ferns. Every shelf
of the what-not held a sheaf of bluebells; the dark corners on either
side of the grate were lighted up with jars full of glowing crimson
peonies, and the grate itself was aflame with yellow poppies. All
this splendor and color, mingled with the sunshine falling through the
honeysuckle vines at the windows in a leafy riot of dancing shadows over
walls and floor, made of the usually dismal little room the veritable
"bower" of Anne's imagination, and even extorted a tribute of admiration
from Marilla, who came in to criticize and remained to praise.

"Now, we must set the table," said Anne, in the tone of a priestess
about to perform some sacred rite in honor of a divinity. "We'll have a
big vaseful of wild roses in the center and one single rose in front
of everybody's plate--and a special bouquet of rosebuds only by Mrs.
Morgan's--an allusion to 'The Rosebud Garden' you know."

The table was set in the sitting room, with Marilla's finest linen and
the best china, glass, and silver. You may be perfectly certain that
every article placed on it was polished or scoured to the highest
possible perfection of gloss and glitter.

Then the girls tripped out to the kitchen, which was filled with
appetizing odors emanating from the oven, where the chickens were
already sizzling splendidly. Anne prepared the potatoes and Diana got
the peas and beans ready. Then, while Diana shut herself into the pantry
to compound the lettuce salad, Anne, whose cheeks were already beginning
to glow crimson, as much with excitement as from the heat of the fire,
prepared the bread sauce for the chickens, minced her onions for the
soup, and finally whipped the cream for her lemon pies.

And what about Davy all this time? Was he redeeming his promise to
be good? He was, indeed. To be sure, he insisted on remaining in the
kitchen, for his curiosity wanted to see all that went on. But as he sat
quietly in a corner, busily engaged in untying the knots in a piece of
herring net he had brought home from his last trip to the shore, nobody
objected to this.

At half past eleven the lettuce salad was made, the golden circles of
the pies were heaped with whipped cream, and everything was sizzling and
bubbling that ought to sizzle and bubble.

"We'd better go and dress now," said Anne, "for they may be here by
twelve. We must have dinner at sharp one, for the soup must be served as
soon as it's done."

Serious indeed were the toilet rites presently performed in the east
gable. Anne peered anxiously at her nose and rejoiced to see that its
freckles were not at all prominent, thanks either to the lemon juice
or to the unusual flush on her cheeks. When they were ready they looked
quite as sweet and trim and girlish as ever did any of "Mrs. Morgan's
heroines."

"I do hope I'll be able to say something once in a while, and not sit
like a mute," said Diana anxiously. "All Mrs. Morgan's heroines converse
so beautifully. But I'm afraid I'll be tongue-tied and stupid. And I'll
be sure to say 'I seen.' I haven't often said it since Miss Stacy taught
here; but in moments of excitement it's sure to pop out. Anne, if I
were to say 'I seen' before Mrs. Morgan I'd die of mortification. And it
would be almost as bad to have nothing to say."

"I'm nervous about a good many things," said Anne, "but I don't think
there is much fear that I won't be able to talk."

And, to do her justice, there wasn't.

Anne shrouded her muslin glories in a big apron and went down to concoct
her soup. Marilla had dressed herself and the twins, and looked more
excited than she had ever been known to look before. At half past twelve
the Allans and Miss Stacy came. Everything was going well but Anne was
beginning to feel nervous. It was surely time for Priscilla and Mrs.
Morgan to arrive. She made frequent trips to the gate and looked as
anxiously down the lane as ever her namesake in the Bluebeard story
peered from the tower casement.

"Suppose they don't come at all?" she said piteously.

"Don't suppose it. It would be too mean," said Diana, who, however, was
beginning to have uncomfortable misgivings on the subject.

"Anne," said Marilla, coming out from the parlor, "Miss Stacy wants to
see Miss Barry's willowware platter."

Anne hastened to the sitting room closet to get the platter. She had,
in accordance with her promise to Mrs. Lynde, written to Miss Barry of
Charlottetown, asking for the loan of it. Miss Barry was an old friend
of Anne's, and she promptly sent the platter out, with a letter exhorting
Anne to be very careful of it, for she had paid twenty dollars for it.
The platter had served its purpose at the Aid bazaar and had then been
returned to the Green Gables closet, for Anne would not trust anybody
but herself to take it back to town.

She carried the platter carefully to the front door where her guests
were enjoying the cool breeze that blew up from the brook. It was
examined and admired; then, just as Anne had taken it back into her own
hands, a terrific crash and clatter sounded from the kitchen pantry.
Marilla, Diana, and Anne fled out, the latter pausing only long enough
to set the precious platter hastily down on the second step of the
stairs.

When they reached the pantry a truly harrowing spectacle met their eyes
