was well pleased at finding that the wounded had been carefully attended
to, and bade the men be content that they had rendered good service
to the public, and that Scipio would be well satisfied with them. The
native chief now exhibited the helmet and armour of Malchus, who was led
forward by two of his men.

"Who are you?" the commander asked Malchus in Greek, a language which
was understood by the educated both of Rome and Carthage.

"I am Malchus, and command the scouts of Hannibal's army."

"You are young for such a post," the officer said; "but in Carthage
it is interest not valour which secures promotion. Doubtless you are
related to Hannibal."

"I am his cousin," Malchus said quietly.

"Ah!" the Roman said sarcastically, "that accounts for one who is a mere
lad being chosen for so important a post. However, I shall take you
to Scipio, who will doubtless have questions to ask of you concerning
Hannibal's army."

Many of the riderless horses on the plain came in on hearing the sound
of the Roman trumpets and rejoined the troop. Malchus was placed on
one of these. Such of the wounded Romans as were able to ride mounted
others, and a small party being left behind to look after those unable
to move, the troops started on their way.

They were unable, however, to proceed far; the horses had been
travelling since morning and were now completely exhausted; therefore,
after proceeding a few miles the troop halted. Strong guards were
posted, and the men lay down by their horses, ready to mount at a
moment's notice, for it was possible that Hannibal might have sent a
large body of horsemen in pursuit. As on the night before, Malchus felt
that even if Nessus had so far followed him he could do nothing while so
strong a guard was kept up, and he therefore followed the example of the
Roman soldiers around him and was soon fast asleep.

At daybreak next morning the troops mounted and again proceeded to the
south. Late in the afternoon a cloud of dust was seen in the distance,
and the party presently rode into the midst of the Roman army, who had
made a day's march from their ships and were just halting for the night.
The commander of the cavalry at once hastened to Scipio's tent to inform
him of the surprising fact that Hannibal had already, in the face of
the opposition of the tribes, forced the passage of the Rhone, and that,
with the exception of the elephants, which had been seen still on the
opposite bank, all the army were across.

Scipio was greatly mortified at the intelligence, for he had deemed it
next to impossible that Hannibal could carry his army across so wide and
rapid a river in the face of opposition. He had little doubt now that
Hannibal's intention was to follow the Rhone down on its left bank to
its mouth, and he prepared at once for a battle. Hearing that a prisoner
of some importance had been captured, he ordered Malchus to be brought
before him. As the lad, escorted by a Roman soldier on each side, was
led in, Scipio, accustomed to estimate men, could not but admire the
calm and haughty self possession of his young prisoner. His eye fell
with approval upon his active sinewy figure, and the knotted muscles of
his arms and legs.

"You are Malchus, a relation of Hannibal, and the commander of the
scouts of his army, I hear," Scipio began.

Malchus bowed his head in assent.

"What force has he with him, and what are his intentions?"

"I know nothing of his intentions," Malchus replied quietly, "as to his
force, it were better that you inquired of your allies, who saw us pass
the river. One of them was brought hither with me, and can tell you what
he saw."

"Know you not," Scipio said, "that I can order you to instant execution
if you refuse to answer my questions?"

"Of that I am perfectly well aware," Malchus replied; "but I
nevertheless refuse absolutely to answer any questions."

"I will give you until tomorrow morning to think the matter over, and if
by that time you have not made up your mind to give me the information I
require, you die."

So saying he waved his hand to the soldiers, who at once removed Malchus
from his presence. He was taken to a small tent a short distance away,
food was given to him, and at nightfall chains were attached to his
ankles, and from these to the legs of two Roman soldiers appointed to
guard him during the night, while a sentry was placed at the entrance.
The chains were strong, and fitted so tightly round the ankles that
escape was altogether impossible. Even had he possessed arms and could
noiselessly have slain the two soldiers, he would be no nearer getting
away, for the chains were fastened as securely round their limbs as
round his own. Malchus, therefore, at once abandoned any idea of escape,
and lying quietly down meditated on his fate in the morning.



CHAPTER XII: AMONG THE PASSES


It was not until long after the guards to whom he was chained had fallen
asleep that Malchus followed their example. It seemed to him he had been
asleep a long time when a pressure by a hand on his shoulder woke him;
at the same moment another hand was placed over his mouth.

"Hush, my lord!" a voice said. It was Nessus. "Arise and let us go.
There is no time to be lost, for it is nigh morning. I have been the
whole night in discovering where you were."

"But the guards, Nessus?"

"I have killed them," Nessus said in a tone of indifference.

"But I am chained to them by the ankles."

Nessus gave a little exclamation of impatience, and then in the darkness
felt the irons to discover the nature of the fastenings. In a minute
there was a sound of a dull crashing blow, then Nessus moved to the
other side and the sound was repeated. With two blows of his short heavy
sword the Arab had cut off the feet of the dead Romans at the ankle, and
the chains were free.

"Put on the clothes of this man, my lord, and take his arms; I will take
those of the other."

As soon as this was done Nessus wrapped some folds of cloth round each
of the chains to prevent their clanking, then passing a band through the
ends he fastened them to Malchus' waist.

"Quick, my lord," he said as he finished the work; "daylight is
beginning to break."

They stepped over the dead sentry at the door of the tent and were going
on when Malchus said:

"Best lift him inside, Nessus; it may be some little time before it is
noticed that he is missing from his post."

This was quickly done, and they then moved away quietly among the tents
till they approached the rear of the camp. It was now light enough to
enable them to see dimly the figures of the Roman sentries placed at
short intervals round the camp.

"We cannot get through unseen," Malchus said.

"No, my lord," Nessus replied; "I have wasted too much time in finding
you."

"Then we had best lie down quietly here," Malchus said; "in a short time
the men will be moving about, and we can then pass through the sentries
without remark."

As the light spread over the sky sounds of movement were heard in the
camp, and soon figures were moving about, some beginning to make fires,
others to attend to their horses. The two Carthaginians moved about
among the tents as if similarly occupied, secure that their attire as
Roman soldiers would prevent any observation being directed towards
them. They were anxious to be off, for they feared that at any moment
they might hear the alarm raised on the discovery that the sentry was
missing.

It was nearly broad daylight now, and when they saw two or three
soldiers pass out between the sentries unquestioned they started at once
to follow them. The morning was very cold, and the soldiers who were
about were all wearing their military cloaks. Malchus had pulled the
irons as high up as he could possibly force them, and they did not show
below his cloak.

Walking carelessly along they passed through the sentries, whose duties,
now that morning had dawned, related only to discovering an enemy
approaching the camp, the soldiers being now free to enter or leave as
they pleased.

"It is of no use to go far," Malchus said; "the nearer we hide to the
camp the better. We are less likely to be looked for there than at a
distance, and it is impossible for me to travel at any speed until I get
rid of these heavy irons. As soon as we get over that little brow ahead
we shall be out of sight of the sentries, and will take to the first
hiding place we see."

The little rise was but a short distance from camp, the country beyond
was open but was covered with low brushwood. As soon as they were over
the brow and were assured that none of those who had left the camp
before them were in sight, they plunged into the brushwood, and, making
their way on their hands and knees for a few hundred yards, lay down in
the midst of it.

"They are not likely to search on this side of the camp," Malchus said.
"They will not know at what hour I escaped, and will naturally suppose
that I started at once to regain our camp. Listen, their trumpets are
blowing. No doubt they are about to strike their camp and march; by
this time my escape must be known. And now tell me, Nessus, how did you
manage to follow and discover me?"

"It was easy to follow you, my lord," Nessus said. "When I heard your
order I lay still, but watched through the bushes your meeting with the
Gauls. My arrow was in the string, and had they attacked you I should
have loosed it among them, and then rushed out to die with you, but
when I saw them take you a prisoner I followed your orders. I had no
difficulty in keeping you in sight until nightfall. Then I crept up to
the wood and made my way until I was within a few yards of you and lay
there till nearly morning; but, as the men around you never went to
sleep, I could do nothing and stole away again before daylight broke.
Then I followed again until I saw our horsemen approaching. I had
started to run towards them to lead them to you when I saw the Roman
horse, and I again hid myself.

"The next night again the Romans kept too vigilant a watch for me to do
anything, and I followed them all yesterday until I saw them enter the
Roman camp. As soon as it was dark I entered, and, getting into the
part of the camp occupied by the Massilians, whose Gaulish talk I could
understand a little, I gathered that a Carthaginian prisoner who had
been brought in was to be executed in the morning. So I set to work
to find you; but the night was too dark to see where the sentries were
placed, and I had to crawl round every tent to see if one stood at the
entrance on guard, for I was sure that a sentry would be placed over
you. I entered seven tents, at whose doors sentries were placed, before
I found yours, but they were all those of Roman generals or persons of
importance. I entered each time by cutting a slit in the back of the
tent. At last when I was beginning to despair, I found your tent.

"It was the smallest of any that had been guarded, and this made me
think I was right. When I crawled in I found feeling cautiously about,
that two Roman soldiers were asleep on the ground and that you were
lying between them. Then I went to the entrance. The sentry was standing
with his back to it. I struck a blow on his neck from behind, and he
died without knowing he was hurt. I caught him as I struck and lowered
him gently down, for the crash of his arms as he fell would have roused
everyone near. After that it was easy to stab the two guards sleeping by
you, and then I woke you."

"You have saved my life, Nessus, and I shall never forget it," Malchus
said gratefully.

"My life is my lord's," the Arab replied simply. "Glad am I indeed that
I have been able to do you a service."

Just as he spoke they saw through the bushes a party of Roman horse
ride at a gallop over the brow between them and the camp. They halted,
however, on passing the crest, and an officer with them gazed long and
searchingly over the country. For some minutes he sat without speaking,
then he gave an order and the horsemen rode back again over the crest.

"I think we shall see no more of them," Malchus said. "His orders were,
no doubt, that if I was in sight they were to pursue, if not, it would
be clearly useless hunting over miles of brushwood in the hope of
finding me, especially as they must deem it likely that I am far away in
the opposite direction."

An hour later Nessus crept cautiously forward among the bushes, making a
considerable detour until he reached the spot whence he could command a
view of the Roman camp. It had gone, not a soul remained behind, but at
some distance across the plain he could see the heavy column marching
north. He rose to his feet and returned to the spot where he had left
Malchus, and told him that the Romans had gone.

"The first thing, Nessus, is to get rid of these chains."

"It is easy as to the chains," Nessus said, "but the rings around your
legs must remain until we rejoin the camp, it will need a file to free
you from them."

The soil was sandy, and Nessus could find no stone sufficiently large
for his purpose. They, therefore, started in the direction which the
Romans had taken until, after two hours' slow walking, they came upon
the bed of a stream in which were some boulders sufficiently large for
the purpose.

The rings were now pushed down again to the ankles, and Nessus wound
round them strips of cloth until he had formed a pad between the iron
and the skin to lessen the jar of the blow, then he placed the link of
the chain near to the leg upon the edge of the boulder, and, drawing his
sharp heavy sword, struck with all his force upon the iron.

A deep notch was made; again and again he repeated the blow, until the
link was cut through, then, with some difficulty, he forced the two
ends apart until the shackle of the ring would pass between them. The
operation was repeated on the other chain, and then Malchus was free,
save for the two iron rings around his ankles. The work had taken
upwards of an hour, and when it was done they started at a rapid walk in
the direction taken by the column. They had no fear now of the natives,
for should any come upon them they would take them for two Roman
soldiers who had strayed behind the army.

Scipio made a long day's march, and it was not until nightfall that his
army halted. Malchus and his companion made a long detour round the camp
and continued their way for some hours, then they left the track that
the army would follow, and, after walking for about a mile, lay down
among some bushes and were soon asleep.

In the morning they agreed that before proceeding further it was
absolutely necessary to obtain some food. Malchus had been fed when
among the Romans, but Nessus had had nothing from the morning when he
had been upset in the Rhone four days before, save a manchet of bread
which he had found in one of the tents he had entered. Surveying the
country round carefully, the keen eye of the Arab perceived some light
smoke curling up at the foot of the hills on their right, and they at
once directed their course towards it. An hour's walking brought them
within sight of a native village.

As soon as they perceived it they dropped on their hands and knees and
proceeded with caution until within a short distance of it. They were
not long in discovering a flock of goats browsing on the verdure in some
broken ground a few hundred yards from the village. They were under the
charge of a native boy, who was seated on a rock near them. They made
their way round among the brushwood until they were close to the spot.

"Shall I shoot him?" Nessus asked, for he had carried his bow and arrows
concealed in his attire as a Roman soldier.

"No, no," Malchus replied, "the lad has done us no harm; but we must
have one of his goats. His back is towards us, and, if we wait, one of
them is sure to come close to us presently."

They lay quiet among the bushes until, after a delay of a quarter of an
hour, a goat, browsing upon the bushes, passed within a yard or two of
them.

Nessus let fly his arrow, it passed almost through the animal, right
behind its shoulder, and it fell among the bushes. In an instant
Nessus was upon it, and, grasping its mouth tightly to prevent it from
bleating, cut its throat. They dragged it away until a fall in the
ground hid them from the sight of the natives, then they quickly skinned
and cut it up, devoured some of the meat raw, and then, each taking a
leg of the animal, proceeded upon their way.

They now walked without a halt until, late in the evening, they came
down upon the spot where the Carthaginian army had crossed. It was
deserted. Going down to the edge of the river they saw the great rafts
upon which the elephants had crossed.

"We had best go on a mile or two ahead," Nessus said, "the Roman cavalry
may be here in the morning, though the column will be still a day's
march away. By daylight we shall have no difficulty in finding the
traces of the army."

Malchus took the Arab's advice, and the next morning followed on the
traces of the army, which were plainly enough to be seen in the broken
bushes, the trampled ground, and in various useless articles dropped or
thrown away by the troops. They were forced to advance with caution, for
they feared meeting any of the natives who might be hanging on the rear
of the army.

After three days' travelling with scarce a pause they came upon the army
just as the rear guard was crossing the Isere, and Malchus received a
joyous welcome from his friends, who had supposed him drowned at the
passage of the Rhone. His account of his adventure was eagerly listened
to, and greatly surprised were they when they found that he had been a
prisoner in the camp of Scipio, and had been rescued by the fidelity and
devotion of Nessus. Hannibal asked many questions as to the strength
of Scipio's army, but Malchus could only say that, not having seen it
except encamped, he could form but a very doubtful estimate as to its
numbers, but considered it to be but little superior to that of the
Carthaginian.

"I do not think Scipio will pursue us," Hannibal said. "A defeat here
would be as fatal to him as it would be to us, and I think it more
likely that, when he finds we have marched away north, he will return to
his ships and meet us in Italy."

Malchus learned that everything had progressed favourably since the army
had crossed the Rhone, the natives having offered no further opposition
to their advance. A civil war was going on in the region the army had
now entered, between two rival princes, brothers, of the Allobroges.
Hannibal was requested to act as umpire in the quarrel, and decided in
favour of the elder brother and restored order. In return he received
from the prince whom he reseated on his throne, provisions, clothing,
and other necessaries for the army, and the prince, with his troops,
escorted the Carthaginians some distance up into the Alps, and prevented
the tribes dwelling at the foot of the mountains from attacking them.

The conquest of Catalonia, the passage of the Pyrenees, and the march
across the south of Gaul, had occupied many months. Summer had come and
gone, autumn had passed, and winter was at hand. It was the eighteenth
of October when Hannibal led his army up the narrow valleys into the
heart of the Alps. The snow had already fallen thickly upon the upper
part of the mountains, and the Carthaginians shuddered at the sight
of these lofty summits, these wild, craggy, and forbidding wastes.
The appearance of the wretched huts of the inhabitants, of the people
themselves, unshaved and unkempt and clad in sheepskins, and of the
flocks and herds gathering in sheltered spots and crowding together to
resist the effects of the already extreme cold, struck the Carthaginian
troops with dismay. Large bodies of the mountaineers were perceived
posted on the heights surrounding the valleys, and the column,
embarrassed by its length and the vast quantity of baggage, was also
exposed to attack by hordes who might at any moment rush out from the
lateral ravines. Hannibal, therefore, ordered his column to halt.

Malchus was now ordered to go forward with his band of scouts, and to
take with him a party of Gauls, who, their language being similar
to that of the natives, could enter into conversation with them. The
mountaineers, seeing but a small party advancing, allowed them to
approach peaceably and entered freely into conversation with them. They
declared that they would on no account permit the Carthaginian army to
pass forward, but would oppose every foot of their advance.

The Gauls learned, however, that, believing the great column could only
move forward in the daytime, the natives were in the habit of retiring
from their rocky citadels at nightfall. Malchus returned with this news
to Hannibal, who prepared to take advantage of it. The camp was at once
pitched, and the men set to work to form an intrenchment round it as if
