
"A small one?"

"Yes, sir."

"It was mine."

"You don't say so, sir! And such a respectable-lookin' gemman, sir."

"He may have looked respectable, but he was a thief all the same."

"You don't say? Did he take anything else, sir?"

"He took my pocketbook."

"Well, well! He was a rascal, sure! But maybe it dropped on the floor."

Carl turned his attention to the carpet, but saw nothing of the lost
pocketbook. He did find, however, a small book in a brown cover, which
Stuyvesant had probably dropped. Picking it up, he discovered that it
was a bank book on the Sixpenny Savings Bank of Albany, standing in the
name of Rachel Norris, and numbered 17,310.

"This is stolen property, too," thought Carl. "I wonder if there is much
in it."

Opening the book he saw that there were three entries, as follows:

     1883. Jan. 23. Five hundred dollars.
      "    June 10. Two hundred dollars.
      "    Oct. 21. One hundred dollars.

There was besides this interest credited to the amount of seventy-five
dollars. The deposits, therefore, made a grand total of $875.

No doubt Mr. Stuyvesant had stolen this book, but had not as yet found
an opportunity of utilizing it.

"What's dat?" asked the colored servant.

"A savings bank book. My roommate must have dropped it. It appears to
belong to a lady named Rachel Norris. I wish I could get it to her."

"Is she an Albany lady, sir?"

"I don't know."

"You might look in the directory."

"So I will. It is a good idea."

"I hope the gemman didn't take all your money, sir."

"No; he didn't even take half of it. I only wish I had been awake when
the boat got to the dock."

"I would have called you, sir, if you had asked me."

"I am not much used to traveling. I shall know better next time what to
do."

The finding of the bank book partially consoled Carl for the loss of his
pocketbook and gripsack. He was glad to be able to defeat Stuyvesant in
one of his nefarious schemes, and to be the instrument of returning Miss
Norris her savings bank book.

When he left the boat he walked along till he reached a modest-looking
hotel, where he thought the charges would be reasonable. He entered,
and, going to the desk, asked if he could have a room.

"Large or small?" inquired the clerk.

"Small."

"No. 67. Will you go up now?"

"Yes, sir."

"Any baggage?"

"No; I had it stolen on the boat."

The clerk looked a little suspicious.

"We must require pay in advance, then," he said.

"Certainly," answered Carl, pulling out a roll of bills. "I suppose you
make special terms to commercial travelers?"

"Are you a drummer?"

"Yes. I represent Henry Jennings, of Milford, New York."

"All right, sir. Our usual rates are two dollars a day. To you they will
be a dollar and a quarter."

"Very well; I will pay you for two days. Is breakfast ready?"

"It is on the table, sir."

"Then I will go in at once. I will go to my room afterwards."

In spite of his loss, Carl had a hearty appetite, and did justice to the
comfortable breakfast provided. He bought a morning paper, and ran his
eye over the advertising columns. He had never before read an Albany
paper, and wished to get an idea of the city in its business aspect. It
occurred to him that there might be an advertisement of the lost bank
book. But no such notice met his eyes.

He went up to his room, which was small and plainly furnished, but
looked comfortable. Going down again to the office, he looked into the
Albany directory to see if he could find the name of Rachel Norris.

There was a Rebecca Norris, who was put down as a dressmaker, but that
was as near as he came to Rachel Norris.

Then he set himself to looking over the other members of the Norris
family. Finally he picked out Norris & Wade, furnishing goods, and
decided to call at the store and inquire if they knew any lady named
Rachel Norris. The prospect of gaining information in this way did not
seem very promising, but no other course presented itself, and Carl
determined to follow up the clew, slight as it was.

Though unacquainted with Albany streets, he had little difficulty in
finding the store of Norris & Wade. It was an establishment of good
size, well supplied with attractive goods. A clerk came forward to wait
upon Carl.

"What can I show you?" he asked.

"You may show me Mr. Norris, if you please," responded Carl, with a
smile.

"He is in the office," said the clerk, with an answering smile.

Carl entered the office and saw Mr. Norris, a man of middle age,
partially bald, with a genial, business-like manner.

"Well, young man?" he said, looking at Carl inquiringly.

"You must excuse me for troubling you, sir," said Carl, who was afraid
Mr. Norris would laugh at him, "but I thought you might direct me to
Rachel Norris."

Mr. Norris looked surprised.

"What do you want of Rachel Norris?" he asked, abruptly.

"I have a little business with her," answered Carl.

"Of what nature?"

"Excuse me, but I don't care to mention it at present."

"Humph! you are very cautious for a young man, or rather boy."

"Isn't that a good trait, sir?"

"Good, but unusual. Are you a schoolboy?"

"No, sir; I am a drummer."

Mr. Norris put on a pair of glasses and scrutinized Carl more closely.

"I should like to see--just out of curiosity--the man that you travel
for," he said.

"I will ask him to call whenever he visits Albany. There is his card."

Mr. Norris took it.

"Why, bless my soul!" he exclaimed. "It is Henry Jennings, an old
schoolmate of mine."

"And a good business man, even if he has sent out such a young drummer."

"I should say so. There must be something in you, or he wouldn't have
trusted you. How is Jennings?"

"He is well, sir--well and prosperous."

"That is good news. Are you in his employ?"

"Yes, sir. This is the first time I have traveled for him."

"How far are you going?"

"As far as Chicago."

"I don't see what you can have to do with Rachel Norris. However, I
don't mind telling you that she is my aunt, and--well, upon my soul!
Here she is now."

And he ran hastily to greet a tall, thin lady, wearing a black shawl,
who at that moment entered the office.



CHAPTER XXX.

AN ECCENTRIC WOMAN.


Miss Norris dropped into a chair as if she were fatigued.

"Well, Aunt Rachel, how are you feeling this morning?" asked her nephew.

"Out of sorts," was the laconic reply.

"I am very sorry for that. I suppose there is reason for it."

"Yes; I've been robbed."

"Indeed!" said Mr. Norris. "Lost your purse? I wonder more ladies are
not robbed, carrying their money as carelessly as they do."

"That isn't it. I am always careful, as careful as any man."

"Still you got robbed."

"Yes, but of a bank book."

Here Carl became attentive. It was clear that he would not have to look
any farther for the owner of the book he had found in his stateroom.

"What kind of a bank book?" inquired Mr. Norris.

"I had nearly a thousand dollars deposited in the Sixpenny Savings Bank.
I called at the bank to make some inquiries about interest, and when I
came out I presume some rascal followed me and stole the book----"

"Have you any idea who took it?"

"I got into the horse cars, near the bank; next to me sat a young man in
a light overcoat. There was no one on the other side of me. I think he
must have taken it."

"That was Stuyvesant," said Carl to himself.

"When did this happen, Aunt Rachel?"

"Three days since."

"Why didn't you do something about it before?"

"I did. I advertised a reward of twenty-five dollars to anyone who would
restore it to me."

"There was no occasion for that. By giving notice at the bank, they
would give you a new book after a time."

"I preferred to recover the old one. Besides, I thought I would like to
know what became of it."

"I can tell you, Miss Norris," said Carl, who thought it time to speak.

Hitherto Miss Norris had not seemed aware of Carl's presence. She turned
abruptly and surveyed him through her glasses.

"Who are you?" she asked.

This might seem rude, but it was only Miss Rachel's way.

"My name is Carl Crawford."

"Do I know you?"

"No, Miss Norris, but I hope you will."

"Humph! that depends. You say you know what became of my bank book?"

"Yes, Miss Norris."

"Well?"

"It was taken by the young man who sat next to you."

"How do you know?"

"He robbed me last night on the way from New York in a Hudson River
steamboat."

"That doesn't prove that he robbed me. I was robbed here in this city."

"What do you say to this?" asked Carl, displaying the bank book.

"Bless me! That is my book. Where did you get it?"

Carl told his story briefly, how, on discovering that he had been
robbed, he explored the stateroom and found the bank book.

"Well, well, I am astonished! And how did you know Mr. Norris was my
nephew?"

"I didn't know. I didn't know anything about him or you, but finding his
name in the directory, I came here to ask if he knew any such person."

"You are a smart boy, and a good, honest one," said Miss Norris. "You
have earned the reward, and shall have it."

"I don't want any reward, Miss Norris," rejoined Carl. "I have had very
little trouble in finding you."

"That is of no consequence. I offered the reward, and Rachel Norris is a
woman of her word."

She thrust her hand into her pocket, and drew out a wallet, more
suitable to a man's use. Openings this, she took out three bills, two
tens and a five, and extended them toward Carl.

"I don't think I ought to take this money, Miss Norris," said Carl,
reluctantly.

"Did that rascal rob you, too?"

"Yes."

"Of how much?"

"Ten dollars in money and some underclothing."

"Very well! This money will go toward making up your loss. You are not
rich, I take it?"

"Not yet."

"I am, and can afford to give you this money. There, take it."

"Thank you, Miss Norris."

"I want to ask one favor of you. If you ever come across that young man
in the light overcoat, have him arrested, and let me know."

"I will, Miss Norris."

"Do you live in Albany?"

Carl explained that he was traveling on business, and should leave the
next day if he could get through.

"How far are you going?"

"To Chicago."

"Can you attend to some business for me there?"

"Yes, if it won't take too long a time."

"Good! Come round to my house to supper at six o'clock, and I will tell
you about it. Henry, write my address on a piece of paper, and give it
to this young man."

Henry Norris smiled, and did as his aunt requested.

"You have considerable confidence in this young man?" he said.

"I have."

"You may be mistaken."

"Rachel Norris is not often mistaken."

"I will accept your invitation with pleasure, Miss Norris," said Carl,
bowing politely. "Now, as I have some business to attend to, I will bid
you both good-morning."

As Carl went out, Miss Norris said: "Henry, that is a remarkable boy."

"I think favorably of him myself. He is in the employ of an old
schoolmate of mine, Henry Jennings, of Milford. By the way, what
business are you going to put into his hands?"

"A young man who has a shoe store on State Street has asked me for a
loan of two thousand dollars to extend his business. His name is John
French, and his mother was an old schoolmate of mine, though some
years younger. Now I know nothing of him. If he is a sober, steady,
industrious young man, I may comply with his request. This boy will
investigate and report to me."

"And you will be guided by his report?"

"Probably."

"Aunt Rachel, you are certainly very eccentric."

"I may be, but I am not often deceived."

"Well, I hope you won't be this time. The boy seems to me a very good
boy, but you can't put an old head on young shoulders."

"Some boys have more sense than men twice their age."

"You don't mean me, I hope, Aunt Rachel," said Mr. Norris, smiling.

"Indeed, I don't. I shall not flatter you by speaking of you as only
twice this boy's age."

"I see, Aunt Rachel, there is no getting the better of you."

Meanwhile Carl was making business calls. He obtained a map of the city,
and located the different firms on which he proposed to call. He had
been furnished with a list by Mr. Jennings. He was everywhere pleasantly
received--in some places with an expression of surprise at his
youth--but when he began to talk he proved to be so well informed upon
the subject of his call that any prejudice excited by his age quickly
vanished. He had the satisfaction of securing several unexpectedly
large orders for the chair, and transmitting them to Mr. Jennings by the
afternoon mail.

He got through his business at four o'clock, and rested for an hour
or more at his hotel. Then he arranged his toilet, and set out for the
residence of Miss Rachel Norris.

It was rather a prim-looking, three-story house, such as might be
supposed to belong to a maiden lady. He was ushered into a sitting-room
on the second floor, where Miss Norris soon joined him.

"I am glad to see you, my young friend," she said, cordially. "You are
in time."

"I always try to be, Miss Norris."

"It is a good way to begin."

Here a bell rang.

"Supper is ready," she said. "Follow me downstairs."

Carl followed the old lady to the rear room on the lower floor. A small
table was set in the center of the apartment.

"Take a seat opposite me," said Miss Norris.

There were two other chairs, one on each side--Carl wondered for whom
they were set. No sooner were he and Miss Norris seated than two large
cats approached the table, and jumped up, one into each chair. Carl
looked to see them ordered away, but instead, Miss Norris nodded
pleasantly, saying: "That's right, Jane and Molly, you are punctual at
meals."

The two cats eyed their mistress gravely, and began to purr contentedly.



