three days before, had been provoked by Christopher's complaint
of some real or fancied ill-treatment from his aunt, and the
latter had no mind to bring on another.  She went over to the
bed, and straightened the clothes.

"Sarah and I are going out to milk, Naomi, Eunice will stay with
you.  She can run for us if you feel another spell coming on."

Naomi Holland looked up at her sister-in-law with something like
malicious enjoyment.

"I ain't going to have any more spells, Car'line Anne.  I'm going
to die to-night.  But you needn't hurry milking for that, at all.
I'll take my time."

She liked to see the alarm that came over the other woman's face.
It was richly worth while to scare Caroline Holland like that.

"Are you feeling worse, Naomi?" asked the latter shakily.  "If
you are I'll send for Charles to go for the doctor."

"No, you won't.  What good can the doctor do me?  I don't want
either his or Charles' permission to die.  You can go and milk at
your ease.  I won't die till you're done--I won't deprive you of
the pleasure of seeing me."

Mrs. Holland shut her lips and went out of the room with a
martyr-like expression.  In some ways Naomi Holland was not an
exacting patient, but she took her satisfaction out in the
biting, malicious speeches she never failed to make.  Even on her
death-bed her hostility to her sister-in-law had to find vent.

Outside, at the steps, Sarah Spencer was waiting, with the milk
pails over her arm.  Sarah Spencer had no fixed abiding place,
but was always to be found where there was illness.  Her
experience, and an utter lack of nerves, made her a good nurse.
She was a tall, homely woman with iron gray hair and a lined
face.  Beside her, the trim little Caroline Anne, with her light
step and round, apple-red face, looked almost girlish.

The two women walked to the barnyard, discussing Naomi in
undertones as they went.  The house they had left behind grew
very still.

In Naomi Holland's room the shadows were gathering.  Eunice
timidly bent over her mother.

"Ma, do you want the light lit?"

"No, I'm watching that star just below the big cherry bough.
I'll see it set behind the hill.  I've seen it there, off and on,
for twelve years, and now I'm taking a good-by look at it.  I
want you to keep still, too.  I've got a few things to think
over, and I don't want to be disturbed."

The girl lifted herself about noiselessly and locked her hands
over the bed-post.  Then she laid her face down on them, biting
at them silently until the marks of her teeth showed white
against their red roughness.

Naomi Holland did not notice her.  She was looking steadfastly at
the great, pearl-like sparkle in the faint-hued sky.  When it
finally disappeared from her vision she struck her long, thin
hands together twice, and a terrible expression came over her
face for a moment.  But, when she spoke, her voice was quite
calm.

"You can light the candle now, Eunice.  Put it up on the shelf
here, where it won't shine in my eyes.  And then sit down on the
foot of the bed where I can see you.  I've got something to say
to you."

Eunice obeyed her noiselessly.  As the pallid light shot up, it
revealed the child plainly.  She was thin and ill-formed--one
shoulder being slightly higher than the other.  She was dark,
like her mother, but her features were irregular, and her hair
fell in straggling, dim locks about her face.  Her eyes were a
dark brown, and over one was the slanting red scar of a birth
mark.

Naomi Holland looked at her with the contempt she had never made
any pretense of concealing.  The girl was bone of her bone and
flesh of her flesh, but she had never loved her; all the mother
love in her had been lavished on her son.

When Eunice had placed the candle on the shelf and drawn down the
ugly blue paper blinds, shutting out the strips of violet sky
where a score of glimmering points were now visible, she sat down
on the foot of the bed, facing her mother.

"The door is shut, is it, Eunice?"

Eunice nodded.

"Because I don't want Car'line or any one else peeking and
harking to what I've got to say.  She's out milking now, and I
must make the most of the chance.  Eunice, I'm going to die,
and..."

"Ma!"

"There now, no taking on!  You knew it had to come sometime soon.
I haven't the strength to talk much, so I want you just to be
quiet and listen.  I ain't feeling any pain now, so I can think
and talk pretty clear.  Are you listening, Eunice?"

"Yes, ma."

"Mind you are.  It's about Christopher.  It hasn't been out of my
mind since I laid down here.  I've fought for a year to live, on
his account, and it ain't any use.  I must just die and leave
him, and I don't know what he'll do.  It's dreadful to think of."

She paused, and struck her shrunken hand sharply against the
table.

"If he was bigger and could look out for himself it wouldn't be
so bad.  But he is only a little fellow, and Car'line hates him.
You'll both have to live with her until you're grown up.  She'll
put on him and abuse him.  He's like his father in some ways;
he's got a temper and he is stubborn.  He'll never get on with
Car'line.  Now, Eunice, I'm going to get you to promise to take
my place with Christopher when I'm dead, as far as you can.
You've got to; it's your duty.  But I want you to promise."

"I will, ma," whispered the girl solemnly.

"You haven't much force--you never had.  If you was smart, you
could do a lot for him.  But you'll have to do your best.  I want
you to promise me faithfully that you'll stand by him and protect
him--that you won't let people impose on him; that you'll never
desert him as long as he needs you, no matter what comes.
Eunice, promise me this!"

In her excitement the sick woman raised herself up in the bed,
and clutched the girl's thin arm.  Her eyes were blazing and two
scarlet spots glowed in her thin cheeks.

Eunice's face was white and tense.  She clasped her hands as one
in prayer.

"Mother, I promise it!"

Naomi relaxed her grip on the girl's arm and sank back exhausted
on the pillow.  A death-like look came over her face as the
excitement faded.

"My mind is easier now.  But if I could only have lived another
year or two!  And I hate Car'line--hate her!  Eunice, don't you
ever let her abuse my boy!  If she did, or if you neglected him,
I'd come back from my grave to you!  As for the property, things
will be pretty straight.  I've seen to that.  There'll be no
squabbling and doing Christopher out of his rights.  He's to have
the farm as soon as he's old enough to work it, and he's to
provide for you.  And, Eunice, remember what you've promised!"


Outside, in the thickly gathering dusk, Caroline Holland and
Sarah Spencer were at the dairy, straining the milk into
creamers, for which Christopher was sullenly pumping water.  The
house was far from the road, up to which a long red lane led;
across the field was the old Holland homestead where Caroline
lived; her unmarried sister-in-law, Electa Holland, kept house
for her while she waited on Naomi.

It was her night to go home and sleep, but Naomi's words haunted
her, although she believed they were born of pure
"cantankerousness."

"You'd better go in and look at her, Sarah," she said, as she
rinsed out the pails.  "If you think I'd better stay here
to-night, I will.  If the woman was like anybody else a body
would know what to do; but, if she thought she could scare us by
saying she was going to die, she'd say it."

When Sarah went in, the sick room was very quiet.  In her
opinion, Naomi was no worse than usual, and she told Caroline so;
but the latter felt vaguely uneasy and concluded to stay.

Naomi was as cool and defiant as customary.  She made them bring
Christopher in to say good-night and had him lifted up on the bed
to kiss her. Then she held him back and looked at him
admiringly--at the bright curls and rosy cheeks and round, firm
limbs.  The boy was uncomfortable under her gaze and squirmed
hastily down.  Her eyes followed him greedily, as he went out.
When the door closed behind him, she groaned.  Sarah Spencer was
startled.  She had never heard Naomi Holland groan since she had
come to wait on her.

"Are you feeling any worse, Naomi?  Is the pain coming back?"

"No.  Go and tell Car'line to give Christopher some of that grape
jelly on his bread before he goes to bed.  She'll find it in the
cupboard under the stairs."

Presently the house grew very still.  Caroline had dropped asleep
on the sitting-room lounge, across the hall.  Sarah Spencer
nodded over her knitting by the table in the sick room.  She had
told Eunice to go to bed, but the child refused.  She still sat
huddled up on the foot of the bed, watching her mother's face
intently.  Naomi appeared to sleep.  The candle burned long, and
the wick was crowned by a little cap of fiery red that seemed to
watch Eunice like some impish goblin.  The wavering light cast
grotesque shadows of Sarah Spencer's head on the wall.  The thin
curtains at the window wavered to and fro, as if shaken by
ghostly hands.

At midnight Naomi Holland opened her eyes.  The child she had
never loved was the only one to go with her to the brink of the
Unseen.

"Eunice--remember!"

It was the faintest whisper.  The soul, passing over the
threshold of another life, strained back to its only earthly tie.
A quiver passed over the long, pallid face.

A horrible scream rang through the silent house.  Sarah Spencer
sprang out of her doze in consternation, and gazed blankly at the
shrieking child.  Caroline came hurrying in with distended eyes.
On the bed Naomi Holland lay dead.


In the room where she had died Naomi Holland lay in her coffin.
It was dim and hushed; but, in the rest of the house, the
preparations for the funeral were being hurried on.  Through it
all Eunice moved, calm and silent.  Since her one wild spasm of
screaming by her mother's death-bed she had shed no tear, given
no sign of grief.  Perhaps, as her mother had said, she had no
time.  There was Christopher to be looked after.  The boy's grief
was stormy and uncontrolled.  He had cried until he was utterly
exhausted.  It was Eunice who soothed him, coaxed him to eat,
kept him constantly by her.  At night she took him to her own
room and watched over him while he slept.

When the funeral was over the household furniture was packed away
or sold.  The house was locked up and the farm rented.  There was
nowhere for the children to go, save to their uncle's.  Caroline
Holland did not want them, but, having to take them, she grimly
made up her mind to do what she considered her duty by them.  She
had five children of her own and between them and Christopher a
standing feud had existed from the time he could walk.

She had never liked Naomi.  Few people did.  Benjamin Holland had
not married until late in life, and his wife had declared war on
his family at sight.  She was a stranger in Avonlea,--a widow,
with a three year-old child.  She made few friends, as some
people always asserted that she was not in her right mind.

Within a year of her second marriage Christopher was born, and
from the hour of his birth his mother had worshiped him blindly.
He was her only solace.  For him she toiled and pinched and
saved.  Benjamin Holland had not been "fore-handed" when she
married him; but, when he died, six years after his marriage, he
was a well-to-do man.

Naomi made no pretense of mourning for him.  It was an open
secret that they had quarreled like the proverbial cat and dog.
Charles Holland and his wife had naturally sided with Benjamin,
and Naomi fought her battles single-handed.  After her husband's
death, she managed to farm alone, and made it pay.  When the
mysterious malady which was to end her life first seized on her
she fought against it with all the strength and stubbornness of
her strong and stubborn nature.  Her will won for her an added
year of life, and then she had to yield.  She tasted all the
bitterness of death the day on which she lay down on her bed, and
saw her enemy come in to rule her house.

But Caroline Holland was not a bad or unkind woman.  True, she
did not love Naomi or her children; but the woman was dying and
must be looked after for the sake of common humanity.  Caroline
thought she had done well by her sister-in-law.

When the red clay was heaped over Naomi's grave in the Avonlea
burying ground, Caroline took Eunice and Christopher home with
her.  Christopher did not want to go; it was Eunice who
reconciled him.  He clung to her with an exacting affection born
of loneliness and grief.

In the days that followed Caroline Holland was obliged to confess
to herself that there would have been no doing anything with
Christopher had it not been for Eunice.  The boy was sullen and
obstinate, but his sister had an unfailing influence over him.

In Charles Holland's household no one was allowed to eat the
bread of idleness.  His own children were all girls, and
Christopher came in handy as a chore boy.  He was made to
work--perhaps too hard.  But Eunice helped him, and did half his
work for him when nobody knew.  When he quarreled with his
cousins, she took his part; whenever possible she took on herself
the blame and punishment of his misdeeds.

Electa Holland was Charles' unmarried sister.  She had kept house
for Benjamin until he married; then Naomi had bundled her out.
Electa had never forgiven her for it.  Her hatred passed on to
Naomi's children.  In a hundred petty ways she revenged herself
on them.  For herself, Eunice bore it patiently; but it was a
different matter when it touched Christopher.

Once Electa boxed Christopher's ears.  Eunice, who was knitting
by the table, stood up.  A resemblance to her mother, never
before visible, came out in her face like a brand.  She lifted
her hand and slapped Electa's cheek deliberately twice, leaving a
dull red mark where she struck.

"If you ever strike my brother again," she said, slowly and
vindictively, "I will slap your face every time you do.  You have
no right to touch him."

"My patience, what a fury!" said Electa.  "Naomi Holland'll never
be dead as long as you're alive!"

She told Charles of the affair and Eunice was severely punished.
But Electa never interfered with Christopher again.


All the discordant elements in the Holland household could not
prevent the children from growing up.  It was a consummation
which the harrassed Caroline devoutly wished.  When Christopher
Holland was seventeen he was a man grown--a big, strapping
fellow.  His childish beauty had coarsened, but he was thought
handsome by many.

He took charge of his mother's farm then, and the brother and
sister began their new life together in the long-unoccupied
house.  There were few regrets on either side when they left
Charles Holland's roof.  In her secret heart Eunice felt an
unspeakable relief.

Christopher had been "hard to manage," as his uncle said, in the
last year.  He was getting into the habit of keeping late hours
and doubtful company.  This always provoked an explosion of wrath
from Charles Holland, and the conflicts between him and his
nephew were frequent and bitter.

For four years after their return home Eunice had a hard and
anxious life.  Christopher was idle and dissipated.  Most people
regarded him as a worthless fellow, and his uncle washed his
hands of him utterly.  Only Eunice never failed him; she never
reproached or railed; she worked like a slave to keep things
together.  Eventually her patience prevailed.  Christopher, to a
great extent, reformed and worked harder.  He was never unkind to
Eunice, even in his rages.  It was not in him to appreciate or
return her devotion; but his tolerant acceptance of it was her
solace.

When Eunice was twenty-eight, Edward Bell wanted to marry her.
He was a plain, middle-aged widower with four children; but, as
Caroline did not fail to remind her, Eunice herself was not for
every market, and the former did her best to make the match.  She
might have succeeded had it not been for Christopher.  When he,
in spite of Caroline's skillful management, got an inkling of
what was going on, he flew into a true Holland rage.  If Eunice
married and left him--he would sell the farm and go to the Devil
by way of the Klondike.  He could not, and would not, do without
her.  No arrangement suggested by Caroline availed to pacify him,
and, in the end, Eunice refused to marry Edward Bell.  She could
not leave Christopher, she said simply, and in this she stood
rock-firm.  Caroline could not budge her an inch.

"You're a fool, Eunice," she said, when she was obliged to give
up in despair.  "It's not likely you'll ever have another chance.
As for Chris, in a year or two he'll be marrying himself, and
where will you be then?  You'll find your nose nicely out of
joint when he brings a wife in here."

The shaft went home.  Eunice's lips turned white.  But she said,
faintly, "The house is big enough for us both, if he does."

Caroline sniffed.

"Maybe so.  You'll find out.  However, there's no use talking.
You're as set as your mother was, and nothing would ever budge
her an inch.  I only hope you won't be sorry for it."

When three more years had passed Christopher began to court
Victoria Pye.  The affair went on for some time before either
Eunice or the Hollands go wind of it.  When they did there was an
explosion.  Between the Hollands and the Pyes, root and branch,
existed a feud that dated back for three generations.  That the
original cause of the quarrel was totally forgotten did not
matter; it was matter of family pride that a Holland should have
no dealings with a Pye.

When Christopher flew so openly in the face of this cherished
hatred, there could be nothing less than consternation.  Charles
Holland broke through his determination to have nothing to do
with Christopher, to remonstrate.  Caroline went to Eunice in as
much of a splutter as if Christopher had been her own brother.

Eunice did not care a row of pins for the Holland-Pye feud.
Victoria was to her what any other girl, upon whom Christopher
cast eyes of love, would have been--a supplanter.  For the first
time in her life she was torn with passionate jealousy; existence
became a nightmare to her.  Urged on by Caroline, and her own
pain, she ventured to remonstrate with Christopher, also.  She
had expected a burst of rage, but he was surprisingly
good-natured.  He seemed even amused.

"What have you got against Victoria?" he asked, tolerantly.

Eunice had no answer ready.  It was true that nothing could be
said against the girl.  She felt helpless and baffled.
Christopher laughed at her silence.

"I guess you're a little jealous," he said.  "You must have
expected I would get married some time.  This house is big enough
for us all.  You'd better look at the matter sensibly, Eunice.
Don't let Charles and Caroline put nonsense into your head.  A
man must marry to please himself."

Christopher was out late that night.  Eunice waited up for him,
as she always did.  It was a chilly spring evening, reminding her
of the night her mother had died.  The kitchen was in spotless
order, and she sat down on a stiff-backed chair by the window to
wait for her brother.

She did not want a light.  The moonlight fell in with faint
illumination.  Outside, the wind was blowing over a bed of
new-sprung mint in the garden, and was suggestively fragrant.  It
was a very old-fashioned garden, full of perennials Naomi Holland
had planted long ago.  Eunice always kept it primly neat.  She
had been working in it that day, and felt tired.

She was all alone in the house and the loneliness filled her with
a faint dread.  She had tried all that day to reconcile herself
to Christopher's marriage, and had partially succeeded.  She told
herself that she could still watch over him and care for his
comfort.  She would even try to love Victoria; after all, it
might be pleasant to have another woman in the house.  So,
sitting there, she fed her hungry soul with these husks of
comfort.

When she heard Christopher's step she moved about quickly to get
