
'But suppose you get tired of me?' said Graciosa.

The Prince was so grieved at this want of confidence that he left her
without another word.

The wicked Queen was in such a hurry to punish Graciosa that she thought
the sun would never set; and indeed it was before the appointed time
that she came with her four Fairies, and as she fitted the three keys
into the locks she said:

'I'll venture to say that the idle minx has not done anything at
all--she prefers to sit with her hands before her to keep them white.'

But, as soon as she entered, Graciosa presented her with the ball of
thread in perfect order, so that she had no fault to find, and could
only pretend to discover that it was soiled, for which imaginary fault
she gave Graciosa a blow on each cheek, that made her white and pink
skin turn green and yellow. And then she sent her back to be locked into
the garret once more.

Then the Queen sent for the Fairy again and scolded her furiously.
'Don't make such a mistake again; find me something that it will be
quite impossible for her to do,' she said.

So the next day the Fairy appeared with a huge barrel full of the
feathers of all sorts of birds. There were nightingales, canaries,
goldfinches, linnets, tomtits, parrots, owls, sparrows, doves,
ostriches, bustards, peacocks, larks, partridges, and everything
else that you can think of. These feathers were all mixed up in such
confusion that the birds themselves could not have chosen out their own.
'Here,' said the Fairy, 'is a little task which it will take all your
prisoner's skill and patience to accomplish. Tell her to pick out and
lay in a separate heap the feathers of each bird. She would need to be a
fairy to do it.'

The Queen was more than delighted at the thought of the despair this
task would cause the Princess. She sent for her, and with the same
threats as before locked her up with the three keys, ordering that all
the feathers should be sorted by sunset. Graciosa set to work at once,
but before she had taken out a dozen feathers she found that it was
perfectly impossible to know one from another.

'Ah! well,' she sighed, 'the Queen wishes to kill me, and if I must die
I must. I cannot ask Percinet to help me again, for if he really loved
me he would not wait till I called him, he would come without that.'

'I am here, my Graciosa,' cried Percinet, springing out of the barrel
where he had been hiding. 'How can you still doubt that I love you with
all my heart?'

Then he gave three strokes of his wand upon the barrel, and all the
feathers flew out in a cloud and settled down in neat little separate
heaps all round the room.

'What should I do without you, Percinet?' said Graciosa gratefully. But
still she could not quite make up her mind to go with him and leave her
father's kingdom for ever; so she begged him to give her more time to
think of it, and he had to go away disappointed once more.

When the wicked Queen came at sunset she was amazed and infuriated to
find the task done. However, she complained that the heaps of feathers
were badly arranged, and for that the Princess was beaten and sent back
to her garret. Then the Queen sent for the Fairy once more, and scolded
her until she was fairly terrified, and promised to go home and think of
another task for Graciosa, worse than either of the others.

At the end of three days she came again, bringing with her a box.

'Tell your slave,' said he, 'to carry this wherever you please, but on
no account to open it. She will not be able to help doing so, and then
you will be quite satisfied with the result.' So the Queen came to
Graciosa, and said:

'Carry this box to my castle, and place it upon the table in my own
room. But I forbid you on pain of death to look at what it contains.'

Graciosa set out, wearing her little cap and wooden shoes and the old
cotton frock, but even in this disguise she was so beautiful that all
the passers-by wondered who she could be. She had not gone far before
the heat of the sun and the weight of the box tired her so much that she
sat down to rest in the shade of a little wood which lay on one side of
a green meadow. She was carefully holding the box upon her lap when she
suddenly felt the greatest desire to open it.

'What could possibly happen if I did?' she said to herself. 'I should
not take anything out. I should only just see what was there.'

And without farther hesitation she lifted the cover.

Instantly out came swarms of little men and women, no taller than
her finger, and scattered themselves all over the meadow, singing and
dancing, and playing the merriest games, so that at first Graciosa was
delighted and watched them with much amusement. But presently, when
she was rested and wished to go on her way, she found that, do what she
would, she could not get them back into their box. If she chased them
in the meadow they fled into the wood, and if she pursued them into the
wood they dodged round trees and behind sprigs of moss, and with peals
of elfin laughter scampered back again into the meadow.

At last, weary and terrified, she sat down and cried.

'It is my own fault,' she said sadly. 'Percinet, if you can still care
for such an imprudent Princess, do come and help me once more.'

Immediately Percinet stood before her.

'Ah, Princess!' he said, 'but for the wicked Queen I fear you would
never think of me at all.'

'Indeed I should,' said Graciosa; 'I am not so ungrateful as you think.
Only wait a little and I believe I shall love you quite dearly.'

Percinet was pleased at this, and with one stroke of his wand compelled
all the wilful little people to come back to their places in the box,
and then rendering the Princess invisible he took her with him in his
chariot to the castle.

When the Princess presented herself at the door, and said that the Queen
had ordered her to place the box in her own room, the governor laughed
heartily at the idea.

'No, no, my little shepherdess,' said he, 'that is not the place for
you. No wooden shoes have ever been over that floor yet.'

Then Graciosa begged him to give her a written message telling the Queen
that he had refused to admit her. This he did, and she went back to
Percinet, who was waiting for her, and they set out together for the
palace. You may imagine that they did not go the shortest way, but
the Princess did not find it too long, and before they parted she had
promised that if the Queen was still cruel to her, and tried again to
play her any spiteful trick, she would leave her and come to Percinet
for ever.

When the Queen saw her returning she fell upon the Fairy, whom she had
kept with her, and pulled her hair, and scratched her face, and would
really have killed her if a Fairy could be killed. And when the Princess
presented the letter and the box she threw them both upon the fire
without opening them, and looked very much as if she would like to throw
the Princess after them. However, what she really did do was to have
a great hole as deep as a well dug in her garden, and the top of it
covered with a flat stone. Then she went and walked near it, and said to
Graciosa and all her ladies who were with her:

'I am told that a great treasure lies under that stone; let us see if we
can lift it.'

So they all began to push and pull at it, and Graciosa among the others,
which was just what the Queen wanted; for as soon as the stone was
lifted high enough, she gave the Princess a push which sent her down to
the bottom of the well, and then the stone was let fall again, and there
she was a prisoner. Graciosa felt that now indeed she was hopelessly
lost, surely not even Percinet could find her in the heart of the earth.

'This is like being buried alive,' she said with a shudder. 'Oh,
Percinet! if you only knew how I am suffering for my want of trust in
you! But how could I be sure that you would not be like other men and
tire of me from the moment you were sure I loved you?'

As she spoke she suddenly saw a little door open, and the sunshine
blazed into the dismal well. Graciosa did not hesitate an instant, but
passed through into a charming garden. Flowers and fruit grew on every
side, fountains plashed, and birds sang in the branches overhead, and
when she reached a great avenue of trees and looked up to see where it
would lead her, she found herself close to the palace of crystal. Yes!
there was no mistaking it, and the Queen and Percinet were coming to
meet her.

'Ah, Princess!' said the Queen, 'don't keep this poor Percinet in
suspense any longer. You little guess the anxiety he has suffered while
you were in the power of that miserable Queen.'

The Princess kissed her gratefully, and promised to do as she wished
in everything, and holding out her hand to Percinet, with a smile, she
said:

'Do you remember telling me that I should not see your palace again
until I had been buried? I wonder if you guessed then that, when that
happened, I should tell you that I love you with all my heart, and will
marry you whenever you like?'

Prince Percinet joyfully took the hand that was given him, and, for fear
the Princess should change her mind, the wedding was held at once with
the greatest splendour, and Graciosa and Percinet lived happily ever
after.(11)

(11) Gracieuse et Percinet. Mdme. d'Aulnoy.




THE THREE PRINCESSES OF WHITELAND

THERE was once upon a time a fisherman, who lived hard by a palace and
fished for the King's table. One day he was out fishing, but caught
nothing at all. Let him do what he might with rod and line, there was
never even so much as a sprat on his hook; but when the day was well
nigh over, a head rose up out of the water, and said: 'If you will
give me what your wife shows you when you go home, you shall catch fish
enough.'

So the man said 'Yes' in a moment, and then he caught fish in plenty;
but when he got home at night, and his wife showed him a baby which had
just been born, and fell a-weeping and wailing when he told her of the
promise which he had given, he was very unhappy.

All this was soon told to the King up at the palace, and when he heard
what sorrow the woman was in, and the reason of it, he said that he
himself would take the child and see if he could not save it. The baby
was a boy, and the King took him at once and brought him up as his own
son until the lad grew up. Then one day he begged to have leave to go
out with his father to fish; he had a strong desire to do this, he said.
The King was very unwilling to permit it, but at last the lad got leave.
He stayed with his father, and all went prosperously and well with them
the whole day, until they came back to land in the evening. Then the lad
found that he had lost his pocket-handkerchief, and would go out in the
boat after it; but no sooner had he got into the boat than it began to
move off with him so quickly that the water foamed all round about, and
all that the lad did to keep the boat back with the oars was done to no
purpose, for it went on and on the whole night through, and at last he
came to a white strand that lay far, far away. There he landed, and when
he had walked on for some distance he met an old man with a long white
beard.

'What is the name of this country?' said the youth.

'Whiteland,' answered the man, and then he begged the youth to tell him
whence he came and what he was going to do, and the youth did so.

'Well, then,' said the man, 'if you walk on farther along the seashore
here, you will come to three princesses who are standing in the earth so
that their heads alone are out of it. Then the first of them will call
you--she is the eldest--and will beg you very prettily to come to her
and help her, and the second will do the same, but you must not go near
either of them. Hurry past, as if you neither saw nor heard them; but
you shall go to the third and do what she bids you; it will bring you
good fortune.'

When the youth came to the first princess, she called to him and begged
him to come to her very prettily, but he walked on as if he did not even
see her, and he passed by the second in the same way, but he went up to
the third.

'If thou wilt do what I tell thee, thou shalt choose among us three,'
said the Princess.

So the lad said that he was most willing, and she told him that three
Trolls had planted them all three there in the earth, but that formerly
they had dwelt in the castle which he could see at some distance in the
wood.

'Now,' she said, 'thou shalt go into the castle, and let the Trolls beat
thee one night for each of us, and if thou canst but endure that, thou
wilt set us free.'

'Yes,' answered the lad, 'I will certainly try to do so.'

'When thou goest in,' continued the Princess, 'two lions will stand by
the doorway, but if thou only goest straight between them they will do
thee no harm; go straight forward into a small dark chamber; there thou
shalt lie down. Then the Troll will come and beat thee, but thou
shalt take the flask which is hanging on the wall, and anoint thyself
wheresoever he has wounded thee, after which thou shalt be as well as
before. Then lay hold of the sword which is hanging by the side of the
flask, and smite the Troll dead.'

So he did what the Princess had told him. He walked straight in between
the lions just as if he did not see them, and then into the small
chamber, and lay down on the bed.

The first night a Troll came with three heads and three rods, and beat
the lad most unmercifully; but he held out until the Troll was done with
him, and then he took the flask and rubbed himself. Having done this, he
grasped the sword and smote the Troll dead.

In the morning when he went to the sea-shore the Princesses were out of
the earth as far as their waists.

The next night everything happened in the same way, but the Troll who
came then had six heads and six rods, and he beat him much more severely
than the first had done but when the lad went out of doors next morning,
the Princesses were out of the earth as far as their knees.

On the third night a Troll came who had nine heads and nine rods, and he
struck the lad and flogged him so long, that at last he swooned away; so
the Troll took him up and flung him against the wall, and this made the
flask of ointment fall down, and it splashed all over him, and he became
as strong as ever again.

Then, without loss of time, he grasped the sword and struck the Troll
dead, and in the morning when he went out of the castle the Princesses
were standing there entirely out of the earth. So he took the youngest
for his Queen, and lived with her very happily for a long time.

At last, however, he took a fancy to go home for a short time to see his
parents. His Queen did not like this, but when his longing grew so great
that he told her he must and would go, she said to him:

'One thing shalt thou promise me, and that is, to do what thy father
bids thee, but not what thy mother bids thee,' and this he promised.

So she gave him a ring, which enabled him who wore it to obtain two
wishes.

He wished himself at home, and instantly found himself there; but his
parents were so amazed at the splendour of his apparel that their wonder
never ceased.

When he had been at home for some days his mother wanted him to go up to
the palace, to show the King what a great man he had become.

The father said, 'No; he must not do that, for if he does we shall have
no more delight in him this time; 'but he spoke in vain, for the mother
begged and prayed until at last he went.

When he arrived there he was more splendid, both in raiment and in all
else, than the other King, who did not like it, and said:

'Well, you can see what kind of Queen mine is, but I can't see yours. I
do not believe you have such a pretty Queen as I have.'

'Would to heaven she were standing here, and then you would be able to
see!' said the young King, and in an instant she was standing there.

But she was very sorrowful, and said to him, 'Why didst thou not
remember my words, and listen only to what thy father said? Now must I
go home again at once, and thou hast wasted both thy wishes.'

Then she tied a ring in his hair, which had her name upon it, and wished
herself at home again.

And now the young King was deeply afflicted, and day out and day in went
about thinking of naught else but how to get back again to his Queen.
'I will try to see if there is any place where I can learn how to find
Whiteland,' he thought, and journeyed forth out into the world.

When he had gone some distance he came to a mountain, where he met a man
who was Lord over all the beasts in the forest--for they all came to him
when he blew a horn which he had. So the King asked where Whiteland was.

'I do not know that,' he answered, 'but I will ask my beasts.' Then he
blew his horn and inquired whether any of them knew where Whiteland lay,
but there was not one who knew that.

So the man gave him a pair of snow shoes. 'When you have these on,' he
said, 'you will come to my brother, who lives hundreds of miles from
here; he is Lord over all the birds in the air--ask him. When you have
got there, just turn the shoes so that the toes point this way, and then
they will come home again of their own accord.'

When the King arrived there he turned the shoes as the Lord of the
beasts had bidden him, and they went back.

And now he once more asked after Whiteland, and the man summoned all the
birds together, and inquired if any of them knew where Whiteland lay.
No, none knew this. Long after the others there came an old eagle. He
had been absent ten whole years, but he too knew no more than the rest.

'Well, well,' said the man, 'then you shall have the loan of a pair of
snow shoes of mine. If you wear them you will get to my brother, who
lives hundreds of miles from here. He is Lord of all the fish in the
sea--you can ask him. But do not forget to turn the shoes round.'

The King thanked him, put on the shoes, and when he had got to him who
was Lord of all the fish in the sea, he turned the snow shoes round, and
back they went just as the others had gone, and he asked once more where
Whiteland was.

The man called the fish together with his horn, but none of them knew
anything about it. At last came an old, old pike, which he had great
difficulty in bringing home to him.

When he asked the pike, it said, 'Yes, Whiteland is well known to me,
for I have been cook there these ten years. To-morrow morning I have
to go back there, for now the Queen, whose King is staying away, is to
marry some one else.'

'If that be the case I will give you a piece of advice,' said the man.
'Not far from here on a moor stand three brothers, who have stood there
a hundred years fighting for a hat, a cloak, and a pair of boots; if
any one has these three things he can make himself invisible, and if he
desires to go to any place, he has but to wish and he is there. You may
tell them that you have a desire to try these things, and then you will
be able to decide which of the men is to have them.'

So the King thanked him and went, and did what he had said.

'What is this that you are standing fighting about for ever and ever?'
said he to the brothers; 'let me make a trial of these things, and then
I will judge between you.'

They willingly consented to this, but when he had got the hat, the
cloak, and the boots, he said, 'Next time we meet you shall have my
decision,' and hereupon he wished himself away.

While he was going quickly through the air he fell in with the North
Wind.

'And where may you be going?' said the North Wind.

'To Whiteland,' said the King, and then he related what had happened to
him.

'Well,' said the North Wind, 'you can easily go a little quicker than
I can, for I have to puff and blow into every corner; but when you get
there, place yourself on the stairs by the side of the door, and then
I will come blustering in as if I wanted to blow down the whole castle,
and when the Prince who is to have your Queen comes out to see what is
astir, just take him by the throat and fling him out, and then I will
try to carry him away from court.'

As the North Wind had said, so did the King. He stood on the stairs, and
when the North Wind came howling and roaring, and caught the roof and
walls of the castle till they shook again, the Prince went out to see
what was the matter; but as soon as he came the King took him by the
neck and flung him out, and then the North Wind laid hold of him and
carried him off. And when he was rid of him the King went into the
castle. At first the Queen did not know him, because he had grown so
thin and pale from having travelled so long and so sorrowfully; but when
she saw her ring she was heartily glad, and then the rightful wedding
was held, and held in such a way that it was talked about far and
wide.(12)

(12) From J. Moe.




THE VOICE OF DEATH

ONCE upon a time there lived a man whose one wish and prayer was to get
rich. Day and night he thought of nothing else, and at last his prayers
were granted, and he became very wealthy. Now being so rich, and having
so much to lose, he felt that it would be a terrible thing to die and
leave all his possessions behind; so he made up his mind to set out in
search of a land where there was no death. He got ready for his journey,
took leave of his wife, and started. Whenever he came to a new country
the first question that he asked was whether people died in that land,
and when he heard that they did, he set out again on his quest. At last
he reached a country where he was told that the people did not even know
the meaning of the word death. Our traveller was delighted when he heard
this, and said:

'But surely there are great numbers of people in your land, if no one
ever dies?'

'No,' they replied, 'there are not great numbers, for you see from time
to time a voice is heard calling first one and then another, and whoever
hears that voice gets up and goes away, and never comes back.'

'And do they see the person who calls them,' he asked, 'or do they only
hear his voice?'

'They both see and hear him,' was the answer.

Well, the man was amazed when he heard that the people were stupid
enough to follow the voice, though they knew that if they went when it
called them they would never return. And he went back to his own home
and got all his possessions together, and, taking his wife and family,
he set out resolved to go and live in that country where the people did
not die, but where instead they heard a voice calling them, which they
followed into a land from which they never returned. For he had made
up his own mind that when he or any of his family heard that voice they
would pay no heed to it, however loudly it called.

After he had settled down in his new home, and had got everything in
order about him, he warned his wife and family that, unless they wanted
to die, they must on no account listen to a voice which they might some
day hear calling them.

For some years everything went well with them, and they lived happily in
their new home. But one day, while they were all sitting together round
the table, his wife suddenly started up, exclaiming in a loud voice:

'I am coming! I am coming!'

And she began to look round the room for her fur coat, but her husband
jumped up, and taking firm hold of her by the hand, held her fast, and
reproached her, saying:

'Don't you remember what I told you? Stay where you are unless you wish
to die.'

'But don't you hear that voice calling me?' she answered. 'I am merely
going to see why I am wanted. I shall come back directly.'

So she fought and struggled to get away from her husband, and to go
where the voice summoned. But he would not let her go, and had all the
