"Why, that is doing famously. You are a good boy, Larry."

"Thank you, Hector; but, though it is doing very well for me, it isn't
as much as they need at home. Besides, I can't keep it up, as, after
a while, I shall need to buy some new clothes. If your father had been
alive, my father would never have lost his place. Master Hector, won't
you use your influence with your uncle to have him taken back?"

Hector felt keenly how powerless he was in the matter. He looked grave,
as he answered:

"Larry, you may be sure that I would do all in my power to have your
father restored to the position from which he never should have been
removed; but I fear I can do nothing."

"Won't you write to Mr. Roscoe?" pleaded Larry, who, of course, did not
understand why Hector was powerless.

"Yes, I will write to him, but I am sorry to say that I have very little
influence with Mr. Roscoe."

"That is strange," said Larry; "and you the owner of the estate."

Hector did not care to explain to Larry just how matters stood, so he
only said:

"I can't explain to you what seems strange to you, Larry, but I may be
able to do so some time. I will certainly write to Mr. Roscoe, as you
desire; but you must not build any hopes upon it. Meanwhile, will you
accept this from me, and send it to your father?"

As he spoke, he drew from his pocketbook a five-dollar bill and handed
it to his humble friend.

Larry would not have accepted it had he known that Hector was nearly as
poor as himself, but, supposing him to be the heir of a large and rich
estate, he felt no hesitation.

"Thank you very much, Hector," he said; "you had always a kind heart.
This money will do my father very much good. I will send it to him
to-day."

"Do you generally stand here, Larry?" asked Hector.

"Yes."

"Then I will take pains to see you again."

"Shall you stay long in the city, Master Hector?"

"Not Master Hector."

"Then Hector, if you don't mind."

"I shall be here for the present--I don't know how long."

"Then let me black your boots for nothing every time you come by--I want
to do something for you."

"Thank you, Larry; but I don't like to have a friend perform such a
service. Remember me to your father when you write."

"I wish I could do something for Larry," said Hector, to himself, as he
walked away. "As it is, I stand in need of help myself."

He was to make a friend that day under rather unusual circumstances.




CHAPTER XXVIII. TWO MORE ACQUAINTANCES.



Hector continued his walk downtown. Despite the crowds of persons who
thronged the sidewalks, he did not anticipate meeting anyone else that
he knew. But he was destined to another surprise. On the corner of
Murray Street he saw two persons advancing toward him, the last,
perhaps, that he expected to see. Not to keep the reader in suspense, it
was Allan Roscoe and his son, Guy.

Guy was the first to recognize Hector. Of course, he, too, was
surprised.

"Why, there's Hector!" he exclaimed, directing his father's attention to
our hero.

Allan Roscoe looked up quickly. It is hard to tell whether he felt glad
or the reverse at this meeting with the boy whom he called his ward.

An instant later Hector recognized Guy and his father.

"How do you do, Mr. Roscoe?" he said, politely.

"Very well. When did you reach New York?"

"On Saturday."

It should have been explained that Hector had spent Sunday quietly with
Mr. Ross and Walter, and that this was Monday.

"Ahem! I was very much surprised at your leaving the institute," said
Mr. Roscoe.

"I explained to you in my letter why I proposed to leave it," Hector
answered, coldly.

"I did not think your reason sufficient."

"As Mr. Smith saw fit to bring a base charge against me, and persisted
in it, even after he must have been convinced that his nephew was
guilty, I was unwilling to remain under his charge any longer."

"The circumstances were against you," said Mr. Roscoe.

"You might have known me better than that, Mr. Roscoe," said Hector,
proudly. "Yet you condemned me unheard."

"Of course, I am very glad that the charge is unfounded," said Mr.
Roscoe, awkwardly.

"Where there is smoke there is generally fire," said Guy, spitefully.

"I understand you, Guy," said Hector, half turning to look at the boy
who had usurped his place. "I hope you won't think it impolite if I say
that I care nothing whatever for your opinion."

"You put on as many airs as ever," sneered Guy. "I should think you
would be a little more humble in your changed position."

"I have not changed, even if my position has," answered Hector. "Money
is nothing to be proud of."

"I apprehend that the world judges differently," said Allan Roscoe.
"Since you have taken your destiny into your own hands, you will excuse
me for asking how you intend to earn your living?"

"I hope to get a mercantile position," answered Hector.

"Take my advice," said Guy, with a derisive smile, "and buy yourself a
blacking box and brush. I am told bootblacks make a good deal of money."

"Hush, Guy!" said his father. "Do not insult Hector."

But Hector concerned himself but little with any slight received from
Guy Roscoe. His words, however, recalled his thoughts to the boy he had
so recently met, Larry Deane, and he resolved to see if he could not
help him by an appeal to Allan Roscoe.

"Mr. Roscoe," said he, quickly, "I nearly forgot something I want very
much to say to you."

"What is it?" asked his guardian, suspiciously. It occurred to him that
Hector wished to borrow some money, and he was considering how little he
could decently give him.

"I hear you have discharged Reuben Deane from his position?"

"How did you hear it?"

"From his son, Larry."

"Where did you see Larry?" asked Allan, in some curiosity.

"He has been driven to take up that employment which Guy so kindly
recommended to me."

"Larry Deane a bootblack! That's a good one!" exclaimed Guy, with
evident relish.

"I don't think so," said Hector. "The poor boy is picking a poor
living, and sending home what he can to his father, who cannot get new
employment. Mr. Roscoe, why did you discharge him?"

"I can answer that question, though it's none of your business all
the same," volunteered Guy. "The boy Larry was impudent to me, and his
father took his part."

"Mr. Roscoe," said Hector, "Reuben Deane was in my father's employ
before I was born. Larry and I used to play together when we were little
boys, and since when we were older."

"A bootblack is a nice playmate," said Guy, with his usual sneer.

"He was not a bootblack then," retorted Hector, "nor would he be now but
for your mean spite. Mr. Roscoe, as I happen to know, my father always
valued the services of Reuben Deane, and I ask, in his name, that you
give him back his place."

"My brother may have been deceived in him," said Allan Roscoe, coldly,
emphasizing the first two words, in order to remind Hector that he was
no longer to consider him as his father; "but I cannot promise to adopt
all his views and protege's. I have displaced Deane and substituted for
him a gardener with whom I am better pleased."

"Have you no sympathy for the poverty and distress of a man who has
served our family faithfully for so many years?" asked Hector, half
indignantly.

"My father is competent to manage his own affairs," said Guy,
offensively.

"You don't appear to think so, or you would not answer for him,"
retorted Hector.

"Boys, I must request you to desist from this bickering," said Allan
Roscoe. "I am sorry, Hector, that I cannot comply with your request. By
the way, you did not tell me where you were staying."

"With a gentleman on Forty-second Street."

"What is his name?"

"Andrew Ross."

"Not the eminent merchant of that name?" asked Allan Roscoe, in
surprise.

"Yes, I believe so."

"He is worth a million."

"I supposed he was rich. He lives in an elegant house."

"Where did you get acquainted with him, Hector?"

"At Saratoga, a year and a half ago."

"Did you beg him to take you in?" asked Guy, unpleasantly.

Hector quietly ignored the question.

"Walter Boss and I have been very intimate, and I was invited to pay him
a visit."

"Does he know that you are a poor boy?" asked Guy.

"I have communicated to Mr. Ross what your father told me," answered
Hector, coldly. "He is a real friend, and it made no difference in his
treatment of me. I hope to get a situation through his influence."

"You are lucky to have such a man for a friend," said Allan Roscoe, who
would himself have liked to become acquainted with a man whose social
position was so high. "I hope you will not misrepresent me to him.
Should any opportunity occur, I will try to procure you employment."

"Thank you, sir," said Hector, but his tone lacked heartiness. He saw
that his being a visitor to Mr. Ross and his son had made a difference
in his favor. Guy, too, began to think he might be a little more
gracious. He, like his father, liked to associate with boys of high
social position, and he would have liked to be introduced to Walter
Ross.

"What is your number?" he asked of Hector, "I don't know but I'll call
and see you some time. Is Walter Ross generally at home?"

"Don't put yourself to any inconvenience to call," said Hector,
significantly. "Walter and I are generally away in the afternoon."

"Oh, I don't care to call upon you," said Guy, annoyed. "I can have all
the company I want."

"I won't detain you any longer, Mr. Roscoe," said Hector, realizing that
the conversation had occupied considerable time. "Good-morning."

"That boy is as proud as ever," said Guy, after Hector had left them.
"He doesn't seem to realize that he has lost his money."

"He has not had time to realize it yet. It won't be long before he will
understand the difference it makes."

"I am glad he isn't my cousin," continued Guy. "I dislike him more than
any boy I know."

Allan Roscoe looked thoughtful.

"I fear that boy will give me trouble yet," he said to himself. "He
evidently suspects that something is wrong."




CHAPTER XXIX. JIM SMITH EFFECTS A LOAN.



After parting with Allan Roscoe and Guy, Hector kept on his way
downtown. He did not expect to meet any more acquaintances, but he
was again to be surprised. Standing on the sidewalk having his boots
blacked, he recognized the schoolfellow he had least reason to like--Jim
Smith.

"What brings Jim here?" he asked himself, in some surprise.

He did not feel inclined to go up and claim acquaintance, but it chanced
that he became witness of a piece of meanness characteristic of Jim.

When the young bootblack had finished polishing his shoes, he waited for
his customary fee.

Jim fumbled in his pockets, and finally produced two cents.

"There, boy," he said, placing them in the hand of the disgusted knight
of the brush.

"What's that for?" he asked.

"It's your pay."

"Look here, mister, you've made a mistake; here's only two cents."

"I know it."

"Do you think I work for any such price as that?"

"Perhaps you expect a dollar!" sneered Jim.

"No, I don't; but a nickel's my lowest price. Plenty of gentlemen give
me a dime."

"That's too much; I've paid you all I'm going to."

"Wait a minute. That boot don't look as well as the other."

Jim unsuspiciously allowed the boy to complete his work, but he had
occasion to regret it. The bootblack hastily rubbed his brush in the mud
on the sidewalk and daubed it on one of Jim's boots, quite effacing the
shine.

"There, that'll do," he said, and, scrambling to his feet, ran round the
corner.

Then, for the first time, Jim looked down, and saw what the boy had
done. He uttered an exclamation of disgust and looked round hastily to
see where the offender had betaken himself. His glance fell upon Hector,
who was quietly looking on, and not without a sense of enjoyment.

It often happens that we greet cordially those for whom we have even a
feeling of aversion when we meet them unexpectedly away from our usual
haunts. Jim, who was beginning to regret that circumstances had forced
him to leave the serene sanctuary of Smith Institute, since now he would
be under the necessity of making his own living, was glad to see our
hero.

"Is it you, Roscoe?" he said, eagerly.

"Yes," answered Hector, coolly.

"What are you doing?"

"Walking about the city, just at present."

"Suppose we go together."

Hector hardly knew how to refuse, and the two boys kept down Broadway in
company.

"You're surprised to see me, ain't you?" asked Jim.

"Rather so."

"You see, I got tired of the school. I've been there three years, so I
told my uncle I would come to New York and see if I couldn't get work."

"I hope you may succeed," said Hector, for he would not allow his
dislikes to carry him too far. He felt that there was room in the world
for Jim and himself, too.

"Are you going to work?" asked Jim.

"I hope so."

"Got anything in view?"

"Not exactly.'"

"It would be a good thing if we could get into the same place."

"Do you say that because we have always agreed so well?" asked Hector,
amused.

"We may be better friends in future," said Jim, with a grin.

Hector was judiciously silent.

"Where are you staying?"

"Up on Forty-second Street."

"That's a good way uptown, isn't it?"

"Yes, pretty far up."

"Are you boarding?"

"No; I am visiting some friends."

"Couldn't you get me in there as one of your school friends?"

