presence I will surrender it."

"Do you take me for a fool?" thundered the robber.

"No, and I want you to understand that I am not a fool, either."

"You are acting like a fool and a knave."

"I should certainly be acting like a fool if I gave up the revolver, and
had it immediately pointed at me or my companion, with a demand for our
money."

"But I gave you my word--"

"Of course you did, but I put no confidence in your word."

While this conversation was going on the poor professor looked on and
listened with an expression of helplessness on his broad face. He was
essentially a man of peace, and was by no means fitted to deal with a
highwayman.

"Look here," said the outlaw, after a pause, and in a milder tone, "I
have a special attachment for that weapon, or I would drop the whole
matter and buy another one. But this was given me by an old pal, now
dead, and I set great store by it. Professor, although the revolver is
mine by rights, I will waive all that and offer you twenty-five dollars
for it. That will pay you for all the trouble I have put you to."

Professor Robinson, though not a mean man, was fond of money, and this
offer tempted him. It would be getting twenty-five dollars for nothing,
and that was a piece of good luck not likely to present itself every
day.

"I accept your offer," he said gladly.

"But I don't," put in Walter, calmly. "Allow me to say that the
professor has no claim to the weapon. I took it with my own hand, and it
has never been in his possession."

"All right! Then I'll give you twenty-five dollars for it."

"I decline your offer."

"I'd like to wring your neck, you young thief!"

"I have no doubt you would."

"Once more, and for the last time, will you give me back that revolver?"

"I have told you when and on what conditions I would surrender it."

"When?"

"At Stilwell, in the presence of a magistrate."

"You are very crafty. You want me to be arrested for attempted robbery."

"Yes, that is my wish."

"I've a great mind to snatch the revolver from you."

"Come on, then!" said Walter, holding it firmly, pointing at the outlaw.

"You've got the drop on me, youngster, but mark my word, I'll have that
weapon yet, and I'll punish you for giving me all this trouble."

"Have you anything more to say?"

"No."

"Then suppose you ride on. We have been delayed long enough."

The robber did go, but aimed a volley of imprecations at Walter, of
which the latter took no notice.

In the early evening they arrived at Stilwell and secured rooms at the
hotel.

Among the guests was a cattleman from Dakota, who had been to Chicago
with a herd of cattle and was now on his way back. He was loud in his
complaints of a highwayman whom he had met two days previous, who had
relieved him of a wallet containing five hundred dollars.

"Won't you describe him?" asked Walter, struck by a sudden suspicion.

The cattle dealer did so. His description tallied with the personal
appearance of Walter's enemy.

"Was he on foot?" asked Walter.

"No; he was on a black horse."

Walter nodded.

"I know him," he said.

"Has he robbed you?"

"No; I have robbed him."

"What do you mean?" inquired the cattle dealer, in wonder.

"Do you recognize this?" and Walter exhibited the revolver.

"Yes; it looks like the revolver he pointed at me."

"Probably it is."

"But how do you happen to have it?"

"I took it from him."

"You--a mere boy!" exclaimed the cattle dealer, incredulously.

"Yes. I will tell you about it."

And Walter gave an account of the circumstances under which the revolver
had come into his possession.

"It is a handsome weapon," said the cattle dealer, taking it into his
hands and examining it. "It must be worth a hundred dollars."

"I think I shall keep it for my own use," said Walter, quietly.

"I'll give you seventy-five dollars for it."

"I would rather not part with it. Indeed, I should not feel justified in
selling it, considering the way it came into my hands."

"Well, boy, you're a smart one; but I surmise you haven't seen the last
of the owner."

The speaker was right.




CHAPTER XXV

DICK RANNEY'S SCHEME


Dick Ranney--for the first time we give the name of the highwayman--had
no intention of going away without his revolver. It had been his
constant companion for years, and had served him well during his
connection with the famous band of Jesse James. Now, his leader dead, he
was preying upon the community on his own account. So daring and so full
of resources was he that he had never been arrested but once, and then
managed to escape from the cabin in which he was temporarily confined.

The weapon he was so anxious to recover had been given him by his old
commander, and for this reason, and also because the revolver was a very
handsome and valuable one, he was willing to expose himself to the risk
of capture in order to recover it.

The opposition he met with from a "beardless boy"--as he styled
Walter--irritated and surprised him. He was fifty pounds heavier
than Walter, and he had expected that a mere boy would give in almost
immediately. But he saw that he had misjudged the lad. He was little
more than a boy in years and appearance, but he evidently had a man's
courage and spirit. Ranney would have secured another revolver if he
had not felt so certain of recovering his own. After his last failure he
began to consider what course to adopt.

It was easy to find out the professor's route. He knew that he was to
stay a night at Stilwell, and to Stilwell he went. He did not venture
into the village until nightfall, and then, for reasons easy to divine,
he abstained from visiting the hotel.

Looking about for a confederate, his attention was drawn to a boy of
sixteen who was sawing wood in front of a humble cottage half a mile
from the village.

"I see you know how to work," said Dick Ranney, affably, as he leaned
carelessly against the fence.

"I know how, but I don't like it," answered the boy, pausing in his
task.

"I don't blame you. I don't like that kind of work myself."

"I guess you don't have to do it now," answered the boy, glancing at the
neat and expensive attire of his new acquaintance.

"Well, no; I can do better."

"Are you in business?"

"Yes," answered Ranney, vaguely. "I am traveling for a house in New
York."

"I should like that."

"Give me your name. I may be able to give you a place some day."

"My name is Oren Trott."

Dick Ranney took out a note-book and put the name down, greatly to the
boy's satisfaction.

"By the way," went on Ranney, "do you want to earn half a dollar?"

"Yes," answered Oren, with alacrity.

"Perhaps I can put you in the way of doing so. Do you know the hotel
people?"

"Yes, sir. I worked there for a short time."

"All the better. Then you know about the house, the location of rooms,
etc.?"

"Yes, sir."

"There are two parties staying there in whom I am interested. One is
Professor Robinson."

"Yes, I know--the man that sells bottles of balm."

"The same."

"I saw him come into town with his wagon."

"Well, I want to find what room he will occupy to-night. The fact is,"
he continued, as he noted Oren's look of surprise, "the man owes me
quite a sum of money and is trying to evade payment."

"He doesn't look like that kind of man," said Oren, thoughtfully.

"My boy, you are young and are hardly qualified to judge of a man by his
appearance. The man looks honest, I admit, but he's slippery. And, by
the way, did you notice a young fellow in the wagon with him?"

"Yes, sir; he isn't much larger than I am."

"Exactly so. Well, I want to find out what room he occupies, also."

"Yes, sir," answered Oren, looking a little surprised.

"You see," explained Dick Ranney, "I want to make the professor a call,
and I can perhaps tell from the outside whether he is in or not. He will
avoid meeting me if he can. Now, do you think you can find out for me
what I require?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then go at once."

"Shall I find you here when I get back?" asked Oren, cautiously.

"Yes."

"I wouldn't like to take all that trouble for nothing."

"You won't. Here is a quarter in advance, and I will give you the fifty
cents besides if you find out what I wish."

"Good for you! You're a gentleman!" said Oren, with an expression of
satisfaction on his honest country face.

Two hours later Walter and the cattle dealer returned from a walk they
had taken together. Walter found his new acquaintance, though not an
educated man, an agreeable companion, and by no means deficient in
shrewdness, though he had allowed himself to be robbed by Dick Ranney.

They went up to the desk for their keys.

"Will you two gentlemen do me a favor?" asked the clerk.

"What is it?" asked the cattle dealer.

"A gentleman and lady have just arrived and want to stay here to-night,
but the number of our rooms is limited and we are full. Now, if you,
sir, will go into Mr. Sherwood's room--there are two beds there--we
shall be able to give the party yours."

"I have no objection if he hasn't," said the cattle dealer.

"I have none whatever," said Walter, cheerfully.

"Then we can fix it. I am sure I am very much obliged to you both. By
the way, Mr. Sherwood, there was a boy here a little while since who was
anxious to find out what room you occupied, also what room was Professor
Robinson's."

"A boy?" repeated Walter, puzzled.

"Yes, a village boy--Oren Trott."

"I don't know any such boy."

"He is a good, industrious lad."

"That may all be, but what does he want to know about my room for?"

"That's the question I put to him. I found him very close-mouthed at
first, but finally he admitted that he was employed by some man--a
stranger in the village--to find out."

Walter and the cattle dealer exchanged glances. The same thought had
come to each.

"Did he describe the man?"

"No; it seems he did not take much notice of him."

"Was that all the boy wanted to know?"

"Yes."

"He didn't say what the man's object was in seeking this information?"

"No. Probably he didn't know."

Walter and his new friend, whom we will call Manning, went upstairs.

"What does it all mean, Mr. Manning?" asked Walter.

"It probably means that our old friend proposes to make a call upon you
during the night."

"Do you really think so?" asked Walter, naturally startled at the
suggestion.

"Yes. You still have his revolver, you know."

"I think he will find me ready for him," said Walter, resolutely.

"He will find us ready, you mean," corrected Manning. "You know I am
going to be your roommate."

"I am glad of that, under the circumstances."

"So am I. I should like to recover the money the fellow robbed me of. I
should like to know his name."

"I can tell you that. I was examining the revolver this afternoon, when
I saw a name engraved upon it in very small letters."

"What name?"

"R. Ranney."

"Then," said Manning, in excitement, "he is the famous Dick Ranney,
formerly with Jesse James."

"I never heard of him."

"He is well known in this Western country. Why, there is a reward of a
thousand dollars offered for his apprehension."

"I should like to earn that money," said Walter.

"You shall; and this very night, if I can bring it about."

"Half of the reward should be yours."

"I am rich enough without It. As to the money the fellow robbed me of, I
shall try to recover that, though the loss won't in the least embarrass
me."

"How do you think Ranney will try to get into the room?"

"Through the window. The casements are loose, and nothing could be
easier."

Walter went to the window and found that there was no way of fastening
it.

"I think we could fasten it with a knife."

"I don't want it fastened," said Manning.

"Why not?"

"I want Mr. Ranney to get into the room. Once in, we must secure him. If
we are smart, our enterprising visitor will find himself in a trap."




CHAPTER XXVI

THE EVENTS OF A NIGHT


In the country it may safely be assumed that by twelve o'clock at night
every sound and healthy person will be asleep. Dick Ranney gave an
extra margin of half an hour, and thirty minutes after midnight made
his appearance in the hotel yard. Thanks to the information given by his
young messenger, Oren Trott, who, of course, did not know that in this
way he was assisting a dishonest scheme, he was able to fix at once upon
