"I am thinking of it as if I was afraid of taking cold," he said. "And
to-morrow--!"

There would be no To-morrow. To-morrows were at an end.  No more
nights--no more days--no more morrows.

He finished dressing, putting on his discriminatingly chosen
shabby-genteel clothes with a care for the effect he intended them to
produce. The collar and cuffs of his shirt were frayed and yellow, and
he fastened his collar with a pin and tied his worn necktie carelessly.
His overcoat was beginning to wear a greenish shade and look threadbare,
so was his hat. When his toilet was complete he looked at himself in the
cracked and hazy glass, bending forward to scrutinize his unshaven face
under the shadow of the dingy hat.

"It is all right," he muttered. "It is not far to the pawnshop where I
saw it."

The stillness of the room as he turned to go out was uncanny.  As it was
a back room, there was no street below from which could arise sounds of
passing vehicles, and the thickness of the fog muffled such sound as
might have floated from the front.  He stopped half-way to the door, not
knowing why, and listened. To what--for what?  The silence seemed to
spread through all the house--out into the streets--through all
London--through all the world, and he to stand in the midst of it, a man
on the way to Death--with no To-morrow.

What did it mean?  It seemed to mean something.  The world withdrawn--
life withdrawn--sound withdrawn--breath withdrawn.  He stood and waited.
Perhaps this was one of the symptoms of the morbid thing for which there
was that name.  If so he had better get away quickly and have it over,
lest he be found wandering about not knowing--not knowing.  But now he
knew--the Silence.  He waited--waited and tried to hear, as if
something was calling him--calling without sound.  It returned to him--
the thought of That which had waited through all the ages to see what
he--one man--would do. He had never exactly pitied himself before--he
did not know that he pitied himself now, but he was a man going to his
death, and a light, cold sweat broke out on him and it seemed as if it
was not he who did it, but some other--he flung out his arms and cried
aloud words he had not known he was going to speak.

"Lord!  Lord!  What shall I do to be saved?"

But the Silence gave no answer. It was the Silence still.

And after standing a few moments panting, his arms fell and his head
dropped, and turning the handle of the door, he went out to buy the
pistol.

II

As he went down the narrow staircase, covered with its dingy and
threadbare carpet, he found the house so full of dirty yellow haze that
he realized that the fog must be of the extraordinary ones which are
remembered in after-years as abnormal specimens of their kind.  He
recalled that there had been one of the sort three years before, and
that traffic and business had been almost entirely stopped by it, that
accidents had happened in the streets, and that people having lost their
way had wandered about turning corners until they found themselves far
from their intended destinations and obliged to take refuge in hotels or
the houses of hospitable strangers.  Curious incidents had occurred and
odd stories were told by those who had felt themselves obliged by
circumstances to go out into the baffling gloom. He guessed that
something of a like nature had fallen upon the town again.  The
gas-light on the landings and in the melancholy hall burned feebly--so
feebly that one got but a vague view of the rickety hat-stand and the
shabby overcoats and head-gear hanging upon it.  It was well for him
that he had but a corner or so to turn before he reached the pawnshop in
whose window he had seen the pistol he intended to buy.

When he opened the street-door he saw that the fog was, upon the whole,
perhaps even heavier and more obscuring, if possible, than the one so
well remembered.  He could not see anything three feet before him, he
could not see with distinctness anything two feet ahead.  The sensation
of stepping forward was uncertain and mysterious enough to be almost
appalling.  A man not sufficiently cautious might have fallen into any
open hole in his path.  Antony Dart kept as closely as possible to the
sides of the houses.  It would have been easy to walk off the pavement
into the middle of the street but for the edges of the curb and the step
downward from its level.  Traffic had almost absolutely ceased, though
in the more important streets link-boys were making efforts to guide
men or four-wheelers slowly along. The blind feeling of the thing was
rather awful.  Though but few pedestrians were out, Dart found himself
once or twice brushing against or coming into forcible contact with men
feeling their way about like himself.

"One turn to the right," he repeated mentally, "two to the left, and the
place is at the corner of the other side of the street."

He managed to reach it at last, but it had been a slow, and therefore,
long journey.  All the gas-jets the little shop owned were lighted, but
even under their flare the articles in the window--the one or two once
cheaply gaudy dresses and shawls and men's garments--hung in the haze
like the dreary, dangling ghosts of things recently executed. Among
watches and forlorn pieces of old-fashioned jewelry and odds and ends,
the pistol lay against the folds of a dirty gauze shawl.  There it was.
It would have been annoying if someone else had been beforehand and had
bought it.

Inside the shop more dangling spectres hung and the place was almost
dark.  It was a shabby pawnshop, and the man lounging behind the counter
was a shabby man with an unshaven, unamiable face.

"I want to look at that pistol in the right-hand corner of your window,"
Antony Dart said.

The pawnbroker uttered a sound something between a half-laugh and a
grunt.  He took the weapon from the window.

Antony Dart examined it critically. He must make quite sure of it.  He
made no further remark. He felt he had done with speech.

Being told the price asked for the purchase, he drew out his purse and
took the money from it.  After making the payment he noted that he still
possessed a five-pound note and some sovereigns.  There passed through
his mind a wonder as to who would spend it.  The most decent thing,
perhaps, would be to give it away.  If it was in his room--to-morrow--
the parish would not bury him, and it would be safer that the parish
should.

He was thinking of this as he left the shop and began to cross the
street.  Because his mind was wandering he was less watchful.  Suddenly
a rubber-tired hansom, moving without sound, appeared immediately in his
path--the horse's head loomed up above his own.  He made the inevitable
involuntary whirl aside to move out of the way, the hansom passed, and
turning again, he went on.  His movement had been too swift to allow of
his realizing the direction in which his turn had been made.  He was
wholly unaware that when he crossed the street he crossed backward
instead of forward.  He turned a corner literally feeling his way, went
on, turned another, and after walking the length of the street, suddenly
understood that he was in a strange place and had lost his bearings.

This was exactly what had happened to people on the day of the memorable
fog of three years before. He had heard them talking of such
experiences, and of the curious and baffling sensations they gave rise
to in the brain.  Now he understood them.  He could not be far from his
lodgings, but he felt like a man who was blind, and who had been turned
out of the path he knew. He had not the resource of the people whose
stories he had heard.  He would not stop and address anyone. There could
be no certainty as to whom he might find himself speaking to.  He would
speak to no one. He would wander about until he came upon some clew.
Even if he came upon none, the fog would surely lift a little and become
a trifle less dense in course of time.  He drew up the collar of his
overcoat, pulled his hat down over his eyes and went on--his hand on the
thing he had thrust into a pocket.

He did not find his clew as he had hoped, and instead of lifting the fog
grew heavier.  He found himself at last no longer striving for any end,
but rambling along mechanically, feeling like a man in a dream--a
nightmare.  Once he recognized a weird suggestion in the mystery about
him.  To-morrow might one be wandering about aimlessly in some such
haze.  He hoped not.

His lodgings were not far from the Embankment, and he knew at last that
he was wandering along it, and had reached one of the bridges. His mood
led him to turn in upon it, and when he reached an embrasure to stop
near it and lean upon the parapet looking down.  He could not see the
water, the fog was too dense, but he could hear some faint splashing
against stones.  He had taken no food and was rather faint. What a
strange thing it was to feel faint for want of food--to stand alone, cut
off from every other human being--everything done for. No wonder that
sometimes, particularly on such days as these, there were plunges made
from the parapet--no wonder.  He leaned farther over and strained his
eyes to see some gleam of water through the yellowness.  But it was not
to be done.  He was thinking the inevitable thing, of course; but such a
plunge would not do for him.  The other thing would destroy all traces.

As he drew back he heard something fall with the solid tinkling sound of
coin on the flag pavement. When he had been in the pawnbroker's shop he
had taken the gold from his purse and thrust it carelessly into his
waistcoat pocket, thinking that it would be easy to reach when he chose
to give it to one beggar or another, if he should see some wretch who
would be the better for it.  Some movement he had made in bending had
caused a sovereign to slip out and it had fallen upon the stones.

He did not intend to pick it up, but in the moment in which he stood
looking down at it he heard close to him a shuffling movement. What he
had thought a bundle of rags or rubbish covered with sacking--some
tramp's deserted or forgotten belongings--was stirring.  It was alive,
and as he bent to look at it the sacking divided itself, and a small
head, covered with a shock of brilliant red hair, thrust itself out, a
shrewd, small face turning to look up at him slyly with deep-set black
eyes.

It was a human girl creature about twelve years old.

"Are yer goin' to do it?" she said in a hoarse, street-strained voice.
"Yer would be a fool if yer did--with as much as that on yer."

She pointed with a reddened, chapped, and dirty hand at the sovereign.

"Pick it up," he said.  "You may have it."

Her wild shuffle forward was an actual leap.  The hand made a snatching
clutch at the coin.  She was evidently afraid that he was either not in
earnest or would repent.  The next second she was on her feet and ready
for flight.

"Stop," he said; "I've got more to give away."

She hesitated--not believing him, yet feeling it madness to lose a
chance.

"MORE!" she gasped.  Then she drew nearer to him, and a singular change
came upon her face.  It was a change which made her look oddly human.

"Gawd, mister!" she said.  "Yer can give away a quid like it was
nothin'--an' yer've got more--an' yer goin' to do THAT--jes cos yer 'ad
a bit too much lars night an' there's a fog this mornin'!  You take it
straight from me--don't yer do it. I give yer that tip for the suvrink."

She was, for her years, so ugly and so ancient, and hardened in voice
and skin and manner that she fascinated him.  Not that a man who has no
To-morrow in view is likely to be particularly conscious of mental
processes.  He was done for, but he stood and stared at her.  What part
of the Power moving the scheme of the universe stood near and thrust him
on in the path designed he did not know then--perhaps never did.  He was
still holding on to the thing in his pocket, but he spoke to her again.

"What do you mean?" he asked glumly.

She sidled nearer, her sharp eyes on his face.

"I bin watchin' yer," she said. "I sat down and pulled the sack over me
'ead to breathe inside it an' get a bit warm.  An' I see yer come. I
knowed wot yer was after, I did. I watched yer through a 'ole in me
sack.  I wasn't goin' to call a copper. I shouldn't want ter be stopped
meself if I made up me mind.  I seed a gal dragged out las' week an'
it'd a broke yer 'art to see 'er tear 'er clothes an' scream.  Wot
business 'ad they preventin' 'er goin' off quiet?  I wouldn't 'a'
stopped yer--but w'en the quid fell, that made it different."

"I--" he said, feeling the foolishness of the statement, but making it,
nevertheless, "I am ill."

"Course yer ill.  It's yer 'ead. Come along er me an' get a cup er
cawfee at a stand, an' buck up.  If yer've give me that quid straight--
wish-yer-may-die--I'll go with yer an' get a cup myself.  I ain't 'ad a
bite since yesterday--an' 't wa'n't nothin' but a slice o' polony
sossidge I found on a dust-'eap.  Come on, mister."

She pulled his coat with her cracked hand.  He glanced down at it
mechanically, and saw that some of the fissures had bled and the
roughened surface was smeared with the blood.  They stood together in
the small space in which the fog enclosed them--he and she--the man with
no To-morrow and the girl thing who seemed as old as himself, with her
sharp, small nose and chin, her sharp eyes and voice--and yet--perhaps
the fogs enclosing did it--something drew them together in an uncanny
way. Something made him forget the lost clew to the lodging-house--
something made him turn and go with her--a thing led in the dark.

"How can you find your way?" he said.  "I lost mine."
