the door on the little prisoners, and rushed downstairs. As she said,
her heart was drawing her. Nothing but that passionate hunger would
have caused her to forsake the children at this supreme moment. The
house was intensely quiet, for most of the lodgers had gone out on
their day's avocations. Not a sign of Granger was to be seen.

Bet walked fast, and presently reached the police-court, where Will was
to be tried. A crowd of people were waiting outside; a few policemen
stood about. The doors of the building were not yet open. Bet saw
Hester Wright standing very near the entrance. She made an effort to
get to her, and called her name over the heads of the crowd; but
Hester, after looking at her coldly, turned her back without making any
response. This action cut Bet to the quick. She found the tears again
springing to her eyes. Oh! for one glance, if only the last, of Will's
kind face. The minutes dragged themselves along; the crowd increased;
but as the right hour had not yet come, the doors remained fast shut.
At last, at the stroke of ten, they were opened, and Bet was pressing
in with the rest, when she felt a hand laid heavily on her arm. She
turned, to see the coarse black-eyed girl who had bought her beat from
Granger.

"Ef I was you, I'd go home, Bet," said the girl.

"You mind your own business," said Bet, shaking her off roughly.

"Well--there's a mischief brewing, and I saw what I saw. Don't you say
as you wasn't warned; and ef the two little chaps come to grief, it
ain't Louisa Perkins' fault."

These last words alarmed Bet.

"Say out yer say at once," she answered, clutching the girl now, and
forcing her back against the crowd who were pushing their way into the
building,--"say your say and have done," she repeated. "What has come
to the lads? I left them safe not an hour agone."

"I saw Granger making off with them."

"You didn't--that's a lie! I left them locked up safe in my room."

"Granger was hurrying off with them," repeated Louisa, "werry red in
the face, and mad like. The captain was crying, and t'other chap had a
red mark down his cheek--it's not a quarter of an hour by St. Giles'
clock as I saw him."

"Where was they going?" asked Bet. "Tell me quick, or I'll shake you."

"Down Castle Street, making for Lime Street and the railway station, I
expect."

Bet ceased to push inwards with the crowd. They went past her, and the
little police-court was soon filled to overflowing. Isaac Dent almost
rubbed against her shoulder as he went by. He winked at Louisa, but Bet
never noticed him.

"Hester--Hester Wright!" she suddenly called out.

Hester had not yet gone into the police-court. She was standing against
one of the posts of the door, watching the crowd as they filed past.

"Hester!" repeated Bet. "Hetty--Hetty! Come and speak to me for a
minute! I must go, but I want to send a message. Just one word,
Hetty,--Hetty, come!"

Perhaps Hester did not hear. At any rate, she neither turned nor
heeded. Bet gave a low despairing cry; then, flinging her shawl off her
shoulders, she ran as fast as if there were wings to her feet in the
direction of Sparrow Street.




CHAPTER XXIV.


She reached her destination very quickly. The smooth-faced landlord was
standing at the door.

"Eh! is that you, Bet Granger?" he exclaimed. "Eh--you are in a taking.
You might stop a minute to pass a civil good-morning with a chap. Well,
what a gel that is! But ain't she handsome--just."

Bet flew past him like a whirlwind, and his last words were addressed
to the empty air. Three pairs up she ran, her breath coming quicker and
quicker. On the landing she paused, and pressed her hand to her wildly
beating heart. It was all quite true. Louisa Perkins had not told her a
lie. The room door stood wide open; the room itself was empty.

"Boys!" she called, when she could gather breath to speak. "Little
lads, I ha' come back to you! You needn't hide no more, for Bet's yere."

But she knew as she said the words that the boys were not hiding. They
had fallen into the clutches of the oppressor--they had gone. She went
slowly now into the deserted room. She was waiting for her breath to
return, for her heart to beat easily, to commence her search. Yes: that
was the only duty left to her in life--to find the boys and redeem her
promise to her mother. She sat down on a chair, and wiped her heated
forehead, and gradually made her plans. First of all she would go to
Mother Bunch--and then, then--away to Warrington. Warrington was not a
big place; it would be impossible for Granger to elude her long there.
Could she once again find the lads she need not greatly fear her
father. After all she had nearly, if not quite, his physical strength;
and she believed that if it came to a personal encounter between them,
her muscles, joined to her woman's wit, would give her the victory.

Opening the front of her dress, she pulled out a handkerchief, and,
unknotting it, looked at the little money in her possession. The
handkerchief only contained a few pence--certainly not the price of a
third-class fare to Warrington. As she was leaving the room, however,
she caught a hidden gleam on the little deal dresser. She ran to it and
picked up half-a-crown. How had it got there? She had no time to think
of that; it was hers now, to use as she thought best. She would go to
Mother Bunch first. That worthy was offended with her; but what of
that, she must soothe Mother Bunch's temper, make her once more her
friend, get her to look out for any tidings of the boys, and then go on
her wild goose chase to Warrington.

Whenever Mother Bunch was not eating, sleeping, or scolding some one,
she was engaged over the wash-tub. It might have puzzled an outsider to
know what results she achieved from such arduous labor, for she scorned
to take in washing as a profession; and neither she nor her good man, a
certain lanky-looking Patrick O'Flaherty, were remarkable for the
whiteness of their linen, or the general cleanliness of their apparel.

Mother Bunch washed and washed, hanging out numerous garments to dry,
rinsing the suds from her own arms, rendering her small kitchen damp
and messy at all hours, and during all seasons. She scarcely raised her
head when Bet entered. The soft sound of the soapy water and the gentle
splash of the dripping garments greeted the girl as an accustomed
sound, and Mother Bunch's broad back was reassuring.

"Oh, Mrs. O'Flaherty," said Bet, running up to her, putting her arms
round her neck, and imprinting a kiss on her soapy forehead. "I'm in a
sight of trouble, and I've come to you to help me."

"Glory! child, don't stand right in the way of the soap suds! There you
go--splashing all the clothes, and I'll have to wash 'em all over
again. Oh, dearie, dearie me--my heart's broke, and that's the truth
I'm telling ye. Well, honey--and so ye comes back to Mother Bunch when
you want a rale drop of consolation. You know as the old Irishwoman's
your frind, and don't bear no malice."

"I know that, Mother Bunch! I think now I did wrong to take the lads
away from you--only I did it for the best."

"Well, now, honey, I wouldn't say that ef I was you. You did it for
love, and love's contrairey. But don't talk to me of doing it for the
best. How's that broth of a boy, Scarlett? Have you got your own way
about him, lovey?"

"Yes," said Bet. "Will has got his liberty by now." Her face turned
white. "We won't talk of that; there was a price to be paid and it's
paid. Will is free, that's a comfort."

"Yes," said Mother Bunch. "But there's a sore thrubble on ye, honey. I
see it in your eyes. I'm glad the lad's free. Ef they consailed a lad
like that in prison--why it would have been the death of him, my dear.
Will's the boy that must have his liberty. I expect you'll find him
quare and altered, even after one week of prison, Bet."

Bet's face brightened, "I'm glad that you, too, understand Will," she
said. "I knew that the prison would kill my lad. He's free now."

"And why arn't you with him, honey? Why, it's an iligant wedding you
ought to be having together, and Mother Bunch dancing an Irish jig, and
pouring down blessings on the heads of two of yez. Come now, Bet,
what's up? Spake your mind free to the old Irishwoman."

"I have nothing to tell, and I can't wait," said Bet. "Father have took
away the two lads, and I'm follering of him. He said he would take them
to Warrington. I'm a-going arter him, and I'll fetch them back; only I
thought I'd tell you, Mother Bunch, so as you might keep your ears
open, and let me know ef there's any tidings or news going. Father may
have said Warrington jest to deceive me, for he's awful deep, and the
lads may be here all the time. You keep your eyes open, and your ears
too, Mother Bunch, and I'll come back to you in a day or so ef I can't
find them. Now, good-bye--I'm off, I want to catch a train."

Bet found herself at Warrington soon after one o'clock.

She was landed on the platform and stood looking round her in a
bewildered way. The place was totally strange, and she felt like a
deserted vessel cast adrift from its usual moorings. There was no part
of Liverpool where she would not know what to do and how to act; but
here, standing on this lonely, deserted platform, with scarcely any
money in her pocket, her head aching, her tired brain dull and
confused, she scarcely knew where to turn. If her father were really
here with the children, it might not be such a very easy task to find
them.

She was startled by a familiar, half-mocking, half-exultant voice at
her elbow. She turned quickly, and there stood the sailor, Isaac Dent.

"Ha, ha! sweetheart!" he said. "I wasn't long in a-follering of you
up--was I? And you're mine now, my beautiful Bet. You're mine, and no
mistake."

Bet's eyes flashed, and her face grew crimson,--it was as much as she
could do to restrain the impulse to raise her hand, and strike Dent.
But then she recollected herself. After all, she did belong to this
man, and Will's liberty was the price. "You know my terms," she said,
when she could find her voice to speak. "Is my lad free? Ef my lad's
not free as the air--I'll--! Tell me that afore I have any more words
with you."

Dent laughed; he was in exuberant spirits.

"Your lad!" he repeated. "It seems to me as I'm your lad. Name the
feller you mean in some other way afore I answers any saucy questions.
You're a fine young woman, Bet, but you has to go Isaac Dent's way now.
What's the name of the feller you wants me to tell you about?"

"Will Scarlett--is he out of prison?" replied the girl. She swallowed a
deep breath, and her face was white and cold as marble.

"Yes; Will Scarlett's free," answered Dent "He's out of prison, in
course, and he's free as the air. All owing to that good feller Dent
standing up for him, and witnessing for him, and proving him as
innercent as the babe unborn. My word!--worn't he glad to get his
liberty. And didn't he wring my hand, and say, 'God bless you, my boy!'
You sent him a letter, Bet, and he read it, and gived me a line or two
to take to you. You'd know Will's fist ef you see'd it on an envelope
now--wouldn't you?"

"I can't say," replied Bet. "Give me his letter!"

"All in good time, my pretty--all in werry good time! Shall we walk
down the street a bit? You're obliged to poor Isaac Dent, now, ain't
you, Bet? He have done his part by Will Scarlett, haven't he?"

"Yes, Isaac. I'm much obleeged to yer. I'm glad as Will is free. Give
me the letter what he writ to me, please."

"I will, by-and-bye. You have got to forget him now. You're mine
now--you remember as that's the bargain?"

"Yes, Isaac, I remember--I'll wed you as soon as you can fix up the
license. Oh, I'm glad that Will is free! Did he look awful bad and
changed, Isaac?"

"Bad?" repeated Dent. "Yaller as a guinea,--awful, he look--but he'll
be better soon. He said to me, 'Another week o' this, and I'd ha' been
a dead man, Dent--bless you, Dent, old pal' said Will--'and take the
gel and my blessing too. She was right, Bet wor--liberty's more nor
anything else to a sailor chap. Oh, yes--I'll miss her; for she was
rare and handsome; but, lord there's plenty of other good fish in the
sea;' and then he writ this letter, and give it me--jest a line or two,
to make it all square atween you and me, as he said. And he'll come and
see us arter his next voyage, he said. Here's the letter, Bet--and
obleeged you ought to be to me, sweetheart."

"Thank you, Isaac," replied Bet.

She took Will's letter with a hand that trembled, and thrust it
unopened into the bosom of her dress.

"It wor what I wanted," she muttered, half under her breath. "All the
same I'm stunned like. Isaac, I ha' come here to find father and the
lads. Father has made off with the two boys, and he dropped a hint
about bringing 'em here."

"Werry like he did," replied Dent. "He dropped a hint to me about
making a tidy penny or so out of them boys round yere. Ef you stay for
a day or two, Bet, you'll most likely find them. I'll help you all I
can. And Warrington ain't a bad place to stop in. We might be married
here--why not? I know a decent gel here what'll share her room with
you--we'll go and find her now."




CHAPTER XXV.


Dent soon made terms with the girl who was to accommodate Bet with half
her room. Her terms were half-a-crown a week, which Dent offered to
provide. Bet, however, scowled at him.

"None o' that," she said. "I ain't your wife yet--and I can't be,
neither, thank goodness, for a fortnight. Jenny here says I may go
round with her and help her to hawk her basket. I'll help Jenny with
her bits of cress and vegetables-and I want no help from you."

"You're a proud 'un," said Dent, "but I'll break yer in yet."

He spoke more angrily than he had meant. Bets cheeks grew white; he was
turning away, but she followed him.

"Listen, Isaac," she said. "I'm not your wife yet; and by the laws of
England I can't be for a fortnight. It was them laws as parted me and
Will--cruel, I thought them--bitter cruel. Him and me would have been
mated together, and safe and happy--oh, yes! we two would have been
happy but for them laws which we mustn't break, if we was to be honest
and true man and woman. And them same laws stand good still, Isaac
Dent; and I can't come to you to be wedded to you under a fortnight.
They was cruel once--now they're kind; they gives me a fortnight afore
I steps into a state what will be worse nor death to me--ay, worse than
the cold grave! We must wait a fortnight, Dent--you must wait a whole
fourteen days afore you take to bullying me. And, listen, Dent--I'm a
despert girl. I have lost all that makes life worth anything. You trust
me 'cause you know it's said everywhere as Bet Granger keeps true to
her word through all things. But I ha' broke a promise already made
most solemn to my mother when she lay a-dying; and ef you tries me too
far, and don't do what I wish for the next fortnight afore we can come
together--why, I'll fling my word back in your face, and dare you to do
your worst. I'm despert--evn my word ain't much to me, now. And I'll do
it, Isaac, I'll do it; I'll declare as I'll never, never be wed to you!
You can't harm me--you can't force me. And Will's free now. You could
never touch me at all except through Will. And now my lad's free, and
the salt sea will soon blow the prison look out of his face. You
haven't got me yet, Isaac Dent: so you had better humor me for the next
fortnight."

Dent's unwholesome face became much mottled and disturbed in hue during
Bet's speech. When she spoke of Will being free, his lips took an ugly
sneer, and he found extreme difficulty in restraining himself. He was
well aware, however, that if he disclosed the fact of his own treachery
his last hope of winning this proud lass was over. After all, nothing
held her to him but her promise; and if she came to regard promises in
the same light in which he did, all his pains and troubles would be
thrown away. If he wished to win her, it behoved him, therefore, to be
cautious, and, as she put it very plainly, to humor her. After the
wedding day all the self-restraint which he must at present exhibit
might be withdrawn. His feelings for Bet contained a curious mixture of
anger and fierce admiration. It never occurred to him for a moment even
to try to make her a good husband; but get her he would--oh,
yes--possess her he must.

When she harangued him thus, with her eyes flashing, and a world of
scorn curving her beautiful lips, he replied gently, drawing close to
her, but not offering to touch her.

"I'll do anything in my power to please you, Bet," he said. "I ain't a
