every instant; and I blamed Jack in my heart for his rashness.  But I did
him injustice, for, although during two seconds the water rushed in-board
in a torrent, he succeeded in steering us sharply round to the leeward
side of the rock, where the water was comparatively calm, and the force
of the breeze broken.

"Out your oars now, lads; that's well done.  Give way!"  We obeyed
instantly.  The oars splashed into the waves together.  One good hearty
pull, and we were floating in a comparatively calm creek that was so
narrow as to be barely able to admit our boat.  Here we were in perfect
safety, and, as we leaped on shore and fastened our cable to the rocks, I
thanked God in my heart for our deliverance from so great danger.  But,
although I have said we were now in safety, I suspect that few of my
readers would have envied our position.  It is true we had no lack of
food, but we were drenched to the skin; the sea was foaming round us and
the spray flying over our heads, so that we were completely enveloped, as
it were, in water; the spot on which we had landed was not more than
twelve yards in diameter, and from this spot we could not move without
the risk of being swept away by the storm.  At the upper end of the creek
was a small hollow or cave in the rock, which sheltered us from the fury
of the winds and waves; and as the rock extended in a sort of ledge over
our heads, it prevented the spray from falling upon us.

"Why," said Peterkin, beginning to feel cheery again, "it seems to me
that we have got into a mermaid's cave, for there is nothing but water
all round us; and as for earth or sky, they are things of the past."

Peterkin's idea was not inappropriate, for, what with the sea roaring in
white foam up to our very feet, and the spray flying in white sheets
continually over our heads, and the water dripping heavily from the ledge
above like a curtain in front of our cave, it did seem to us very much
more like being below than above water.

"Now, boys," cried Jack, "bestir yourselves, and let's make ourselves
comfortable.  Toss out our provisions, Peterkin; and here, Ralph, lend a
hand to haul up the boat.  Look sharp."

"Ay, ay, captain," we cried, as we hastened to obey, much cheered by the
hearty manner of our comrade.

Fortunately the cave, although not very deep, was quite dry, so that we
succeeded in making ourselves much more comfortable than could have been
expected.  We landed our provisions, wrung the water out of our garments,
spread our sail below us for a carpet, and, after having eaten a hearty
meal, began to feel quite cheerful.  But as night drew on, our spirits
sank again, for with the daylight all evidence of our security vanished
away.  We could no longer see the firm rock on which we lay, while we
were stunned with the violence of the tempest that raged around us.  The
night grew pitchy dark, as it advanced, so that we could not see our
hands when we held them up before our eyes, and were obliged to feel each
other occasionally to make sure that we were safe, for the storm at last
became so terrible that it was difficult to make our voices audible.  A
slight variation of the wind, as we supposed, caused a few drops of spray
ever and anon to blow into our faces; and the eddy of the sea, in its mad
boiling, washed up into our little creek until it reached our feet and
threatened to tear away our boat.  In order to prevent this latter
calamity, we hauled the boat farther up and held the cable in our hands.
Occasional flashes of lightning shone with a ghastly glare through the
watery curtains around us, and lent additional horror to the scene.  Yet
we longed for those dismal flashes, for they were less appalling than the
thick blackness that succeeded them.  Crashing peals of thunder seemed to
tear the skies in twain, and fell upon our ears through the wild yelling
of the hurricane as if it had been but a gentle summer breeze; while the
billows burst upon the weather side of the island until we fancied that
the solid rock was giving way, and, in our agony, we clung to the bare
ground, expecting every moment to be whirled away and whelmed in the
black howling sea!  Oh! it was a night of terrible anxiety, and no one
can conceive the feelings of intense gratitude and relief with which we
at last saw the dawn of day break through the vapory mists around us.

For three days and three nights we remained on this rock, while the storm
continued to rage with unabated fury.  On the morning of the fourth day
it suddenly ceased, and the wind fell altogether; but the waves still ran
so high that we did not dare to put off in our boat.  During the greater
part of this period we scarcely slept above a few minutes at a time, but
on the third night we slept soundly and awoke early on the fourth morning
to find the sea very much down, and the sun shining brightly again in the
clear blue sky.

It was with light hearts that we launched forth once more in our little
boat and steered away for our island home, which, we were overjoyed to
find, was quite visible on the horizon, for we had feared that we had
been blown out of sight of it altogether.  As it was a dead calm we had
to row during the greater part of the day; but towards the afternoon a
fair breeze sprang up, which enabled us to hoist our sail.  We soon
passed Penguin Island, and the other island which we had failed to reach
on the day the storm commenced; but as we had still enough of provisions,
and were anxious to get home, we did not land, to the great
disappointment of Peterkin, who seemed to entertain quite an affection
for the penguins.

Although the breeze was pretty fresh for several hours, we did not reach
the outer reef of our island till night-fall, and before we had sailed
more than a hundred yards into the lagoon, the wind died away altogether,
so that we had to take to our oars again.  It was late and the moon and
stars were shining brightly when we arrived opposite the bower and leaped
upon the strand.  So glad were we to be safe back again on our beloved
island, that we scarcely took time to drag the boat a short way up the
beach, and then ran up to see that all was right at the bower.  I must
confess, however, that my joy was mingled with a vague sort of fear lest
our home had been visited and destroyed during our absence; but on
reaching it we found everything just as it had been left, and the poor
black cat curled up, sound asleep, on the coral table in front of our
humble dwelling.




CHAPTER XIX.


Shoemaking--The even tenor of our way suddenly interrupted--An unexpected
visit and an appalling battle--We all become warriors, and Jack proves
himself be a hero.

For many months after this we continued to live on our island in
uninterrupted harmony and happiness.  Sometimes we went out a-fishing in
the lagoon, and sometimes went a-hunting in the woods, or ascended to the
mountain top, by way of variety, although Peterkin always asserted that
we went for the purpose of hailing any ship that might chance to heave in
sight.  But I am certain that none of us wished to be delivered from our
captivity, for we were extremely happy, and Peterkin used to say that as
we were very young we should not feel the loss of a year or two.
Peterkin, as I have said before, was thirteen years of age, Jack
eighteen, and I fifteen.  But Jack was very tall, strong, and manly for
his age, and might easily have been mistaken for twenty.

The climate was so beautiful that it seemed to be a perpetual summer, and
as many of the fruit-trees continued to bear fruit and blossom all the
year round, we never wanted for a plentiful supply of food.  The hogs,
too, seemed rather to increase than diminish, although Peterkin was very
frequent in his attacks on them with his spear.  If at any time we failed
in finding a drove, we had only to pay a visit to the plum-tree before
mentioned, where we always found a large family of them asleep under its
branches.

We employed ourselves very busily during this time in making various
garments of cocoa-nut cloth, as those with which we had landed were
beginning to be very ragged.  Peterkin also succeeded in making excellent
shoes out of the skin of the old hog, in the following manner:--He first
cut a piece of the hide, of an oblong form, a few inches longer than his
foot.  This he soaked in water, and, while it was wet, he sewed up one
end of it, so as to form a rough imitation of that part of the heel of a
shoe where the seam is.  This done, he bored a row of holes all round the
edge of the piece of skin, through which a tough line was passed.  Into
the sewed-up part of this shoe he thrust his heel, then, drawing the
string tight, the edges rose up and overlapped his foot all round.  It is
true there were a great many ill-looking puckers in these shoes, but we
found them very serviceable notwithstanding, and Jack came at last to
prefer them to his long boots.  We ago made various other useful
articles, which added to our comfort, and once or twice spoke of building
us a house, but we had so great an affection for the bower, and, withal,
found it so serviceable, that we determined not to leave it, nor to
attempt the building of a house, which, in such a climate, might turn out
to be rather disagreeable than useful.

We often examined the pistol that we had found in the house on the other
side of the island, and Peterkin wished much that we had powder and shot,
as it would render pig-killing much easier; but, after all, we had become
so expert in the use of our sling and bow and spear, that we were
independent of more deadly weapons.

Diving in the Water Garden also continued to afford us as much pleasure
as ever; and Peterkin began to be a little more expert in the water from
constant practice.  As for Jack and I, we began to feel as if water were
our native element, and revelled in it with so much confidence and
comfort that Peterkin said he feared we would turn into fish some day,
and swim off and leave him; adding, that he had been for a long time
observing that Jack was becoming more and more like a shark every day.
Whereupon Jack remarked, that if he, Peterkin, were changed into a fish,
he would certainly turn into nothing better or bigger than a shrimp.  Poor
Peterkin did not envy us our delightful excursions under water, except,
indeed, when Jack would dive down to the bottom of the Water Garden, sit
down on a rock and look up and make faces at him.  Peterkin did feel
envious then, and often said he would give anything to be able to do
that.  I was much amused when Peterkin said this; for if he could only
have seen his own face when he happened to take a short dive, he would
have seen that Jack's was far surpassed by it.  The great difference
being, however, that Jack made faces on purpose--Peterkin couldn't help
it!

Now, while we were engaged with these occupations and amusements, an
event occurred one day which was as unexpected as it was exceedingly
alarming and very horrible.

Jack and I were sitting, as we were often wont to do, on the rocks at
Spouting Cliff, and Peterkin was wringing the water from his garments,
having recently fallen by accident into the sea,--a thing he was
constantly doing,--when our attention was suddenly arrested by two
objects which appeared on the horizon.

"What are yon, think you?" I said, addressing Jack.

"I can't imagine," answered he; "I've noticed them for some time, and
fancied they were black sea-gulls, but the more I look at them the more I
feel convinced they are much larger than gulls."

"They seem to be coming towards us," said I.

"Hallo! what's wrong?" inquired Peterkin, coming up.

"Look there," said Jack.

"Whales!" cried Peterkin, shading his eyes with his hand.  "No! eh! can
they be boats, Jack?"

Our hearts beat with excitement at the very thought of seeing human faces
again.

"I think you are about right, Peterkin;--but they seem to me to move
strangely for boats," said Jack, in a low tone, as if he were talking to
himself.

I noticed that a shade of anxiety crossed Jack's countenance as he gazed
long and intently at the two objects, which were now nearing us fast.  At
last he sprang to his feet.  "They are canoes, Ralph! whether war-canoes
or not I cannot tell, but this I know, that all the natives of the South
Sea Islands are fierce cannibals, and they have little respect for
strangers.  We must hide if they land here, which I earnestly hope they
will not do."

I was greatly alarmed at Jack's speech, but I confess I thought less of
what he said than of the earnest, anxious manner in which he said it, and
it was with very uncomfortable feelings that Peterkin and I followed him
quickly into the woods.

"How unfortunate," said I, as we gained the shelter of the bushes, "that
we have forgotten our arms."

"It matters not," said Jack; "here are clubs enough and to spare."  As he
spoke, he laid his hand on a bundle of stout poles of various sizes,
which Peterkin's ever-busy hands had formed, during our frequent visits
to the cliff, for no other purpose, apparently, than that of having
something to do.

We each selected a stout club according to our several tastes, and lay
down behind a rock, whence we could see the canoes approach, without
ourselves being seen.  At first we made an occasional remark on their
appearance, but after they entered the lagoon, and drew near the beach,
we ceased to speak, and gazed with intense interest at the scene before
us.

We now observed that the foremost canoe was being chased by the other,
and that it contained a few women and children, as well as men,--perhaps
forty souls altogether; while the canoe which pursued it contained only
men.  They seemed to be about the same in number, but were better armed,
and had the appearance of being a war party.  Both crews were paddling
with all their might, and it seemed as if the pursuers exerted themselves
to overtake the natives ere they could land.  In this, however, they
failed.  The foremost canoe made for the beach close beneath the rocks
behind which we were concealed.  Their short paddles flashed like meteors
in the water, and sent up a constant shower of spray.  The foam curled
from the prow, and the eyes of the rowers glistened in their black faces
as they strained every muscle of their naked bodies; nor did they relax
their efforts till the canoe struck the beach with a violent shock; then,
with a shout of defiance, the whole party sprang, as if by magic, from
the canoe to the shore.  Three women, two of whom carried infants in
their arms, rushed into the woods; and the men crowded to the water's
edge, with stones in their hands, spears levelled, and clubs brandished,
to resist the landing of their enemies.

The distance between the two canoes had been about half a mile, and, at
the great speed they were going, this was soon passed.  As the pursuers
neared the shore, no sign of fear or hesitation was noticeable.  On they
came like a wild charger,--received but recked not of a shower of stones.
The canoe struck, and, with a yell that seemed to issue from the throats
of incarnate fiends, they leaped into the water, and drove their enemies
up the beach.

The battle that immediately ensued was frightful to behold.  Most of the
men wielded clubs of enormous size and curious shapes, with which they
dashed out each other's brains.  As they were almost entirely naked, and
had to bound, stoop, leap, and run, in their terrible hand-to-hand
encounters, they looked more like demons than human beings.  I felt my
heart grow sick at the sight of this bloody battle, and would fain have
turned away, but a species of fascination seemed to hold me down and glue
my eyes upon the combatants.  I observed that the attacking party was led
by a most extraordinary being, who, from his size and peculiarity, I
concluded was a chief.  His hair was frizzed out to an enormous extent,
so that it resembled a large turban.  It was of a light-yellow hue, which
surprised me much, for the man's body was as black as coal, and I felt
convinced that the hair must have been dyed.  He was tattooed from head
to foot; and his face, besides being tattooed, was besmeared with red
paint, and streaked with white.  Altogether, with his yellow turban-like
hair, his Herculean black frame, his glittering eyes and white teeth, he
seemed the most terrible monster I ever beheld.  He was very active in
the fight, and had already killed four men.

Suddenly the yellow-haired chief was attacked by a man quite as strong
and large as himself.  He flourished a heavy club something like an
eagle's beak at the point.  For a second or two these giants eyed each
other warily, moving round and round, as if to catch each other at a
disadvantage, but seeing that nothing was to be gained by this caution,
and that the loss of time might effectually turn the tide of battle
either way, they apparently made up their minds to attack at the same
instant, for, with a wild shout and simultaneous spring, they swung their
heavy clubs, which met with a loud report.  Suddenly the yellow-haired
savage tripped, his enemy sprang forward, the ponderous club was swung,
but it did not descend, for at that moment the savage was felled to the
ground by a stone from the hand of one who had witnessed his chief's
danger.  This was the turning-point in the battle.  The savages who
landed first turned and fled towards the bush, on seeing the fall of
their chief.  But not one escaped.  They were all overtaken and felled to
the earth.  I saw, however, that they were not all killed.  Indeed, their
enemies, now that they were conquered, seemed anxious to take them alive;
and they succeeded in securing fifteen, whom they bound hand and foot
with cords, and, carrying them up into the woods, laid them down among
the bushes.  Here they left them, for what purpose I knew not, and
returned to the scene of the late battle, where the remnant of the party
were bathing their wounds.

Out of the forty blacks that composed the attacking party, only twenty-
eight remained alive, two of whom were sent into the bush to hunt for the
women and children.  Of the other party, as I have said, only ten
survived, and these were lying bound and helpless on the grass.

Jack and Peterkin and I now looked at each other, and whispered our fears
that the savages might clamber up the rocks to search for fresh water,
and so discover our place of concealment; but we were so much interested
in watching their movements that we agreed to remain where we were; and,
indeed, we could not easily have risen without exposing ourselves to
detection.  One of the savages now went up to the wood and soon returned
with a bundle of fire-wood, and we were not a little surprised to see him
set fire to it by the very same means used by Jack the time we made our
first fire,--namely, with the bow and drill.  When the fire was kindled,
two of the party went again to the woods and returned with one of the
bound men.  A dreadful feeling of horror crept over my heart, as the
thought flashed upon me that they were going to burn their enemies.  As
they bore him to the fire my feelings almost overpowered me.  I gasped
for breath, and seizing my club, endeavoured to spring to my feet; but
Jack's powerful arm pinned me to the earth.  Next moment one of the
savages raised his club, and fractured the wretched creature's skull.  He
must have died instantly, and, strange though it may seem, I confess to a
feeling of relief when the deed was done, because I now knew that the
poor savage could not be burned alive.  Scarcely had his limbs ceased to
quiver when the monsters cut slices of flesh from his body, and, after
roasting them slightly over the fire, devoured them.

