
And the witch herself assumed the form of the Queen, and decked herself
out in the royal robes, and sat among the Court ladies, awaiting the
King's return. And suddenly the tramp of horses' hoofs was heard, and
the barking of dogs, and the witch hastened forward to meet the royal
carriages, and, throwing her arms round the King's neck, kissed him.
And in his great joy the King did not know that the woman he held in his
arms was not his own dear wife, but a wicked witch.

In the meantime, outside the palace walls, the poor White Duck swam up
and down the pond; and near it laid three eggs, out of which there came
one morning two little fluffy ducklings and a little ugly drake. And the
White Duck brought the little creatures up, and they paddled after her
in the pond, and caught gold-fish, and hopped upon the bank and waddled
about, ruffling their feathers and saying 'Quack, quack' as they
strutted about on the green banks of the pond. But their mother used to
warn them not to stray too far, telling them that a wicked witch lived
in the castle beyond the garden, adding, 'She has ruined me, and she
will do her best to ruin you.' But the young ones did not listen to
their mother, and, playing about the garden one day, they strayed close
up to the castle windows. The witch at once recognised them by their
smell, and ground her teeth with anger; but she hid her feelings, and,
pretending to be very kind she called them to her and joked with them,
and led them into a beautiful room, where she gave them food to eat, and
showed them a soft cushion on which they might sleep. Then she left them
and went down into the palace kitchens, where she told the servants to
sharpen the knives, and to make a great fire ready, and hang a large
kettleful of water over it.

In the meantime the two little ducklings had fallen asleep, and the
little drake lay between them, covered up by their wings, to be kept
warm under their feathers. But the little drake could not go to sleep,
and as he lay there wide awake in the night he heard the witch come to
the door and say:

'Little ones, are you asleep?'

And the little drake answered for the other two:

          'We cannot sleep, we wake and weep,
           Sharp is the knife, to take our life;
           The fire is hot, now boils the pot,
           And so we wake, and lie and quake.'

'They are not asleep yet,' muttered the witch to herself; and she walked
up and down in the passage, and then came back to the door, and said:

'Little ones, are you asleep?'

And again the little drake answered for his sisters:

          'We cannot sleep, we wake and weep,
           Sharp is the knife, to take our life;
           The fire is hot, now boils the pot,
           And so we wake, and lie and quake.'

'Just the same answer,' muttered the witch; 'I think I'll go in and
see.' So she opened the door gently, and seeing the two little ducklings
sound asleep, she there and then killed them.

The next morning the White Duck wandered round the pond in a distracted
manner, looking for her little ones; she called and she searched, but
could find no trace of them. And in her heart she had a foreboding that
evil had befallen them, and she fluttered up out of the water and flew
to the palace. And there, laid out on the marble floor of the court,
dead and stone cold, were her three children. The White Duck threw
herself upon them, and, covering up their little bodies with her wings,
she cried:

          'Quack, quack--my little loves!
           Quack, quack--my turtle-doves!
            I brought you up with grief and pain,
           And now before my eyes you're slain.

           I gave you always of the best;
           I kept you warm in my soft nest.
            I loved and watched you day and night--
           You were my joy, my one delight.'


The King heard the sad complaint of the White Duck, and called to the
witch: 'Wife, what a wonder is this? Listen to that White Duck.'

But the witch answered, 'My dear husband, what do you mean? There is
nothing wonderful in a duck's quacking. Here, servants! Chase that duck
out of the courtyard.' But though the servants chased and chevied, they
could not get rid of the duck; for she circled round and round, and
always came back to the spot where her children lay, crying:

          'Quack, quack--my little loves!
           Quack, quack--my turtle-doves!
            The wicked witch your lives did take--
           The wicked witch, the cunning snake.
            First she stole my King away,
           Then my children did she slay.
            Changed me, from a happy wife,
           To a duck for all my life.
            Would I were the Queen again;
           Would that you had never been slain.'

And as the King heard her words he began to suspect that he had been
deceived, and he called out to the servants, 'Catch that duck, and bring
it here.' But, though they ran to and fro, the duck always fled past
them, and would not let herself be caught. So the King himself stepped
down amongst them, and instantly the duck fluttered down into his hands.
And as he stroked her wings she was changed into a beautiful woman, and
he recognised his dear wife. And she told him that a bottle would be
found in her nest in the garden, containing some drops from the spring
of healing. And it was brought to her; and the ducklings and little
drake were sprinkled with the water, and from the little dead bodies
three lovely children arose. And the King and Queen were overjoyed when
they saw their children, and they all lived happily together in the
beautiful palace. But the wicked witch was taken by the King's command,
and she came to no good end.




THE WITCH AND HER SERVANTS(22)

(22) From the Russian. Kletke.

Long time ago there lived a King who had three sons; the eldest was
called Szabo, the second Warza, and the youngest Iwanich.

One beautiful spring morning the King was walking through his
gardens with these three sons, gazing with admiration at the various
fruit-trees, some of which were a mass of blossom, whilst others were
bowed to the ground laden with rich fruit. During their wanderings they
came unperceived on a piece of waste land where three splendid trees
grew. The King looked on them for a moment, and then, shaking his head
sadly, he passed on in silence.

The sons, who could not understand why he did this, asked him the reason
of his dejection, and the King told them as follows:

'These three trees, which I cannot see without sorrow, were planted by
me on this spot when I was a youth of twenty. A celebrated magician, who
had given the seed to my father, promised him that they would grow into
the three finest trees the world had ever seen. My father did not live
to see his words come true; but on his death-bed he bade me transplant
them here, and to look after them with the greatest care, which I
accordingly did. At last, after the lapse of five long years, I noticed
some blossoms on the branches, and a few days later the most exquisite
fruit my eyes had ever seen.

'I gave my head-gardener the strictest orders to watch the trees
carefully, for the magician had warned my father that if one unripe
fruit were plucked from the tree, all the rest would become rotten at
once. When it was quite ripe the fruit would become a golden yellow.

'Every day I gazed on the lovely fruit, which became gradually more
and more tempting-looking, and it was all I could do not to break the
magician's commands.

'One night I dreamt that the fruit was perfectly ripe; I ate some of it,
and it was more delicious than anything I had ever tasted in real life.
As soon as I awoke I sent for the gardener and asked him if the fruit on
the three trees had not ripened in the night to perfection.

'But instead of replying, the gardener threw himself at my feet and
swore that he was innocent. He said that he had watched by the trees all
night, but in spite of it, and as if by magic, the beautiful trees had
been robbed of all their fruit.

'Grieved as I was over the theft, I did not punish the gardener, of
whose fidelity I was well assured, but I determined to pluck off all the
fruit in the following year before it was ripe, as I had not much belief
in the magician's warning.

'I carried out my intention, and had all the fruit picked off the tree,
but when I tasted one of the apples it was bitter and unpleasant, and
the next morning the rest of the fruit had all rotted away.

'After this I had the beautiful fruit of these trees carefully guarded
by my most faithful servants; but every year, on this very night, the
fruit was plucked and stolen by an invisible hand, and next morning not
a single apple remained on the trees. For some time past I have given up
even having the trees watched.'

When the King had finished his story, Szabo, his eldest son, said to
him: 'Forgive me, father, if I say I think you are mistaken. I am sure
there are many men in your kingdom who could protect these trees from
the cunning arts of a thieving magician; I myself, who as your eldest
son claim the first right to do so, will mount guard over the fruit this
very night.'

The King consented, and as soon as evening drew on Szabo climbed up on
to one of the trees, determined to protect the fruit even if it cost him
his life. So he kept watch half the night; but a little after midnight
he was overcome by an irresistible drowsiness, and fell fast asleep.
He did not awake till it was bright daylight, and all the fruit on the
trees had vanished.

The following year Warza, the second brother, tried his luck, but with
the same result. Then it came to the turn of the third and youngest son.

Iwanich was not the least discouraged by the failure of his elder
brothers, though they were both much older and stronger than he was,
and when night came climbed up the tree as they had done, The moon had
risen, and with her soft light lit up the whole neighbourhood, so that
the observant Prince could distinguish the smallest object distinctly.

At midnight a gentle west wind shook the tree, and at the same moment
a snow-white swan-like bird sank down gently on his breast. The
Prince hastily seized the bird's wings in his hands, when, lo! to his
astonishment he found he was holding in his arms not a bird but the most
beautiful girl he had ever seen.

'You need not fear Militza,' said the beautiful girl, looking at the
Prince with friendly eyes. 'An evil magician has not robbed you of your
fruit, but he stole the seed from my mother, and thereby caused her
death. When she was dying she bade me take the fruit, which you have no
right to possess, from the trees every year as soon as it was ripe.
This I would have done to-night too, if you had not seized me with such
force, and so broken the spell I was under.'

Iwanich, who had been prepared to meet a terrible magician and not a
lovely girl, fell desperately in love with her. They spent the rest of
the night in pleasant conversation, and when Militza wished to go away
he begged her not to leave him.

'I would gladly stay with you longer,' said Militza, 'but a wicked witch
once cut off a lock of my hair when I was asleep, which has put me in
her power, and if morning were still to find me here she would do me
some harm, and you, too, perhaps.'

Having said these words, she drew a sparkling diamond ring from her
finger, which she handed to the Prince, saying: 'Keep this ring in
memory of Militza, and think of her sometimes if you never see her
again. But if your love is really true, come and find me in my own
kingdom. I may not show you the way there, but this ring will guide you.

'If you have love and courage enough to undertake this journey, whenever
you come to a cross-road always look at this diamond before you settle
which way you are going to take. If it sparkles as brightly as ever go
straight on, but if its lustre is dimmed choose another path.'

Then Militza bent over the Prince and kissed him on his forehead, and
before he had time to say a word she vanished through the branches of
the tree in a little white cloud.

Morning broke, and the Prince, still full of the wonderful apparition,
left his perch and returned to the palace like one in a dream, without
even knowing if the fruit had been taken or not; for his whole mind was
absorbed by thoughts of Militza and how he was to find her.

As soon as the head-gardener saw the Prince going towards the palace he
ran to the trees, and when he saw them laden with ripe fruit he hastened
to tell the King the joyful news. The King was beside himself for joy,
and hurried at once to the garden and made the gardener pick him some of
the fruit. He tasted it, and found the apple quite as luscious as it
had been in his dream. He went at once to his son Iwanich, and after
embracing him tenderly and heaping praises on him, he asked him how
he had succeeded in protecting the costly fruit from the power of the
magician.

This question placed Iwanich in a dilemma. But as he did not want the
real story to be known, he said that about midnight a huge wasp had
flown through the branches, and buzzed incessantly round him. He had
warded it off with his sword, and at dawn, when he was becoming quite
worn out, the wasp had vanished as suddenly as it had appeared.

The King, who never doubted the truth of this tale, bade his son go to
rest at once and recover from the fatigues of the night; but he himself
went and ordered many feasts to be held in honour of the preservation of
the wonderful fruit.

The whole capital was in a stir, and everyone shared in the King's joy;
the Prince alone took no part in the festivities.

While the King was at a banquet, Iwanich took some purses of gold, and
mounting the quickest horse in the royal stable, he sped off like the
wind without a single soul being any the wiser.

It was only on the next day that they missed him; the King was very
distressed at his disappearance, and sent search-parties all over the
kingdom to look for him, but in vain; and after six months they gave him
up as dead, and in another six months they had forgotten all about him.
But in the meantime the Prince, with the help of his ring, had had a
most successful journey, and no evil had befallen him.

At the end of three months he came to the entrance of a huge forest,
which looked as if it had never been trodden by human foot before, and
which seemed to stretch out indefinitely. The Prince was about to enter
the wood by a little path he had discovered, when he heard a voice
shouting to him: 'Hold, youth! Whither are you going?'

Iwanich turned round, and saw a tall, gaunt-looking man, clad in
miserable rags, leaning on a crooked staff and seated at the foot of
an oak tree, which was so much the same colour as himself that it was
little wonder the Prince had ridden past the tree without noticing him.

'Where else should I be going,' he said, 'than through the wood?'

'Through the wood?' said the old man in amazement. 'It's easily seen
that you have heard nothing of this forest, that you rush so blindly to
meet your doom. Well, listen to me before you ride any further; let me
tell you that this wood hides in its depths a countless number of the
fiercest tigers, hyenas, wolves, bears, and snakes, and all sorts of
other monsters. If I were to cut you and your horse up into tiny morsels
and throw them to the beasts, there wouldn't be one bit for each hundred
of them. Take my advice, therefore, and if you wish to save your life
follow some other path.'

The Prince was rather taken aback by the old man's words, and considered
for a minute what he should do; then looking at his ring, and perceiving
that it sparkled as brightly as ever, he called out: 'If this wood held
even more terrible things than it does, I cannot help myself, for I must
go through it.'

Here he spurred his horse and rode on; but the old beggar screamed so
loudly after him that the Prince turned round and rode back to the oak
tree.

'I am really sorry for you,' said the beggar, 'but if you are quite
determined to brave the dangers of the forest, let me at least give you
a piece of advice which will help you against these monsters.

'Take this bagful of bread-crumbs and this live hare. I will make you
a present of them both, as I am anxious to save your life; but you must
leave your horse behind you, for it would stumble over the fallen trees
or get entangled in the briers and thorns. When you have gone about a
hundred yards into the wood the wild beasts will surround you. Then you
must instantly seize your bag, and scatter the bread-crumbs among them.
They will rush to eat them up greedily, and when you have scattered the
last crumb you must lose no time in throwing the hare to them; as soon
as the hare feels itself on the ground it will run away as quickly as
possible, and the wild beasts will turn to pursue it. In this way you
will be able to get through the wood unhurt.'

Iwanich thanked the old man for his counsel, dismounted from his horse,
and, taking the bag and the hare in his arms, he entered the forest. He
had hardly lost sight of his gaunt grey friend when he heard growls and
snarls in the thicket close to him, and before he had time to think he
found himself surrounded by the most dreadful-looking creatures. On
one side he saw the glittering eye of a cruel tiger, on the other the
gleaming teeth of a great she-wolf; here a huge bear growled fiercely,
and there a horrible snake coiled itself in the grass at his feet.

But Iwanich did not forget the old man's advice, and quickly put his
hand into the bag and took out as many bread-crumbs as he could hold in
his hand at a time. He threw them to the beasts, but soon the bag grew
lighter and lighter, and the Prince began to feel a little frightened.
And now the last crumb was gone, and the hungry beasts thronged round
him, greedy for fresh prey. Then he seized the hare and threw it to
them.

No sooner did the little creature feel itself on the ground than it
lay back its ears and flew through the wood like an arrow from a bow,
closely pursued by the wild beasts, and the Prince was left alone. He
looked at his ring, and when he saw that it sparkled as brightly as ever
he went straight on through the forest.

He hadn't gone very far when he saw a most extraordinary looking man
coming towards him. He was not more than three feet high, his legs
were quite crooked, and all his body was covered with prickles like a
hedgehog. Two lions walked with him, fastened to his side by the two
ends of his long beard.

He stopped the Prince and asked him in a harsh voice: 'Are you the man
who has just fed my body-guard?'

Iwanich was so startled that he could hardly reply, but the little man
continued: 'I am most grateful to you for your kindness; what can I give
you as a reward?'

'All I ask,' replied Iwanich, 'is, that I should be allowed to go
through this wood in safety.'

'Most certainly,' answered the little man; 'and for greater security I
will give you one of my lions as a protector. But when you leave this
wood and come near a palace which does not belong to my domain, let the
lion go, in order that he may not fall into the hands of an enemy and be
killed.'

With these words he loosened the lion from his beard and bade the beast
guard the youth carefully.

With this new protector Iwanich wandered on through the forest, and
though he came upon a great many more wolves, hyenas, leopards, and
other wild beasts, they always kept at a respectful distance when they
saw what sort of an escort the Prince had with him.

Iwanich hurried through the wood as quickly as his legs would carry him,
but, nevertheless, hour after hour went by and not a trace of a green
field or a human habitation met his eyes. At length, towards evening,
the mass of trees grew more transparent, and through the interlaced
branches a wide plain was visible.

