
As he was driving the sheep out to grass he said to his master: 'Out
there is a splendid pasture, and I will keep the sheep there for two or,
perhaps, three days, so do not be surprised at our absence.'

'Very good!' said the man; and Mohammed started. For two days he drove
them on and on, till he reached his uncle, and said to him, 'Dear uncle,
take these sheep and look after them. I have killed the old woman and
the boys, and the flock I have brought to you!'

Then Mohammed returned to his master; and on the way he took a stone and
beat his own head with it till it bled, and bound his hands tight,
and began to scream. The master came running and asked, 'What is the
matter?'

And Mohammed answered: 'While the sheep were grazing, robbers came and
drove them away, and because I tried to prevent them, they struck me on
the head and bound my hands. See how bloody I am!'

'What shall we do?' said the master; 'are the animals far off?'

'So far that you are not likely ever to see them again,' replied
Mohammed. 'This is the fourth day since the robbers came down. How
should you be able to overtake them?'

'Then go and herd the cows!' said the man.

'All right!' replied Mohammed, and for two days he went. But on the
third day he drove the cows to his uncle, first cutting off their tails.
Only one cow he left behind him.

'Take these cows, dear uncle,' said he. 'I am going to teach that man a
lesson.'

'Well, I suppose you know your own business best,' said the uncle. 'And
certainly he almost worried me to death.'

So Mohammed returned to his master, carrying the cows' tails tied up in
a bundle on his back. When he came to the sea-shore, he stuck all the
tails in the sand, and went and buried the one cow, whose tail he had
not cut off, up to her neck, leaving the tail projecting. After he had
got everything ready, he began to shriek and scream as before, till
his master and all the other servants came running to see what was the
matter.

'What in the world has happened?' they cried

'The sea has swallowed up the cows,' said Mohammed, 'and nothing remains
but their tails. But if you are quick and pull hard, perhaps you may get
them out again!'

The master ordered each man instantly to take hold of a tail, but at
the first pull they nearly tumbled backwards, and the tails were left in
their hands.

'Stop,' cried Mohammed, 'you are doing it all wrong. You have just
pulled off their tails, and the cows have sunk to the bottom of the
sea.'

'See if you can do it any better,' said they; and Mohammed ran to the
cow which he had buried in the rough grass, and took hold of her tail
and dragged the animal out at once.

'There! that is the way to do it!' said he, 'I told you you knew nothing
about it!'

The men slunk away, much ashamed of themselves; but the master came up
to Mohammed. 'Get you gone!' he said, 'there is nothing more for you
to do! You have killed my mother, you have slain my children, you have
stolen my sheep, you have drowned my cows; I have now no work to give
you.'

'First give me the strip of your skin which belongs to me of right, as
you have broken your contract!'

'That a judge shall decide,' said the master; 'we will go before him.'

'Yes, we will,' replied Mohammed. And they went before the judge.

'What is your case?' asked the judge of the master.

'My lord,' said the man, bowing low, 'my shepherd here has robbed me of
everything. He has killed my children and my old mother; he has stolen
my sheep, he has drowned my cows in the sea.'

The shepherd answered: 'He must pay me what he owes me, and then I will
go.'

'Yes, that is the law,' said the judge.

'Very well,' returned the master, 'let him reckon up how long he has
been in my service.'

'That won't do,' replied Mohammed, 'I want my strip of skin, as we
agreed in the contract.'

Seeing there was no help for it, the master cut a bit of skin, and gave
it to Mohammed, who went off at once to his uncle.

'Now we are rich, dear uncle,' cried he; 'we will sell our cows and
sheep and go to a new country. This one is no longer the place for us.'

The sheep were soon sold, and the two comrades started on their travels.
That night they reached some Bedouin tents, where they had supper with
the Arabs. Before they lay down to sleep, Mohammed called the owner of
the tent aside. 'Your greyhound will eat my strip of leather,' he said
to the Arab.

'No; do not fear.'

'But supposing he does?'

'Well, then, I will give him to you in exchange,' replied the Arab.

Mohammed waited till everyone was fast asleep, then he rose softly, and
tearing the bit of skin in pieces, threw it down before the greyhound,
setting up wild shrieks as he did so.

'Oh, master, said I not well that your dog would eat my thong?'

'Be quiet, don't make such a noise, and you shall have the dog.'

So Mohammed put a leash round his neck, and led him away.

In the evening they arrived at the tents of some more Bedouin, and asked
for shelter. After supper Mohammed said to the owner of the tent, 'Your
ram will kill my greyhound.'

'Oh, no, he won't.'

'And supposing he does?'

'Then you can take him in exchange.'

So in the night Mohammed killed the greyhound, and laid his body across
the horns of the ram. Then he set up shrieks and yells, till he roused
the Arab, who said: 'Take the ram and go away.'

Mohammed did not need to be told twice, and at sunset he reached another
Bedouin encampment. He was received kindly, as usual, and after supper
he said to his host: 'Your daughter will kill my ram.'

'Be silent, she will do nothing of the sort; my daughter does not need
to steal meat, she has some every day.'

'Very well, I will go to sleep; but if anything happens to my ram I will
call out.'

'If my daughter touches anything belonging to my guest I will kill her,'
said the Arab, and went to his bed.

When everybody was asleep, Mohammed got up, killed the ram, and took out
his liver, which he broiled on the fire. He placed a piece of it in the
girl's hands, and laid some more on her night-dress while she slept and
knew nothing about it. After this he began to cry out loudly.

'What is the matter? be silent at once!' called the Arab.

'How can I be silent, when my ram, which I loved like a child, has been
slain by your daughter?'

'But my daughter is asleep,' said the Arab.

'Well, go and see if she has not some of the flesh about her.'

'If she has, you may take her in exchange for the ram;' and as they
found the flesh exactly as Mohammed had foretold, the Arab gave his
daughter a good beating, and then told her to get out of sight, for she
was now the property of this stranger.

They wandered in the desert till, at nightfall, they came to a Bedouin
encampment, where they were hospitably bidden to enter. Before lying
down to sleep, Mohammed said to the owner of the tent: 'Your mare will
kill my wife.'

'Certainly not.'

'And if she does?'

'Then you shall take the mare in exchange.'

When everyone was asleep, Mohammed said softly to his wife: 'Maiden, I
have got such a clever plan! I am going to bring in the mare and put
it at your feet, and I will cut you, just a few little flesh wounds, so
that you may be covered with blood, and everybody will suppose you to be
dead. But remember that you must not make a sound, or we shall both be
lost.'

This was done, and then Mohammed wept and wailed louder than ever.

The Arab hastened to the spot and cried, 'Oh, cease making that terrible
noise! Take the mare and go; but carry off the dead girl with you. She
can lie quite easily across the mare's back.'

Then Mohammed and his uncle picked up the girl, and, placing her on the
mare's back, led it away, being very careful to walk one on each side,
so that she might not slip down and hurt herself. After the Arab tents
could be seen no longer, the girl sat up on the saddle and looked about
her, and as they were all hungry they tied up the mare, and took out
some dates to eat. When they had finished, Mohammed said to his uncle:
'Dear uncle, the maiden shall be your wife; I give her to you. But the
money we got from the sheep and cows we will divide between us. You
shall have two-thirds and I will have one. For you will have a wife, but
I never mean to marry. And now, go in peace, for never more will you see
me. The bond of bread and salt is at an end between us.'

So they wept, and fell on each other's necks, and asked forgiveness for
any wrongs in the past. Then they parted and went their ways.

[Maerchen und Gedichte aus der Stadt Tripolis. Von Haus Stumme.]




Bobino


Once on a time there was a rich merchant, who had an only son called
Bobino. Now, as the boy was clever, and had a great desire for
knowledge, his father sent him to be under a master, from whom he
thought he would learn to speak all sorts of foreign languages. After
some years with this master, Bobino returned to his home.

One evening, as he and his father were walking in the garden, the
sparrows in the trees above their heads began such a twittering, that
they found it impossible to hear each other speak. This annoyed the
merchant very much, so, to soothe him, Bobino said: 'Would you like me
to explain to you what the sparrows are saying to each other?'

The merchant looked at his son in astonishment, and answered: 'What can
you mean? How can you explain what the sparrows say? Do you consider
yourself a soothsayer or a magician?'

'I am neither a soothsayer nor a magician,' answered Bobino; 'but my
master taught me the language of all the animals.'

'Alas! for my good money!' exclaimed the merchant. 'The master has
certainly mistaken my intention. Of course I meant you to learn the
languages that human beings talk, and not the language of animals.'

'Have patience,' answered the son. 'My master thought it best to begin
with the language of animals, and later to learn the languages of human
beings.'

On their way into the house the dog ran to meet them, barking furiously.

'What can be the matter with the beast?' said the merchant. 'Why should
he bark at me like that, when he knows me quite well?'

'Shall I explain to you what he is saying?' said Bobino.

'Leave me in peace, and don't trouble me with your nonsense,' said the
merchant quite crossly. 'How my money has been wasted!'

A little later, as they sat down to supper, some frogs in a neighbouring
pond set up such a croaking as had never been heard. The noise so
irritated the merchant that he quite lost his temper and exclaimed:
'This only was wanting to add the last drop to my discomfort and
disappointment.'

'Shall I explain to you?' began Bobino.

'Will you hold your tongue with your explanations?' shouted the
merchant. 'Go to bed, and don't let me see your face again!'

So Bobino went to bed and slept soundly. But his father, who could not
get over his disappointment at the waste of his money, was so angry,
that he sent for two servants, and gave them orders, which they were to
carry out on the following day.

Next morning one of the servants awakened Bobino early, and made him get
into a carriage that was waiting for him. The servant placed himself on
the seat beside him, while the other servant rode alongside the carriage
as an escort. Bobino could not understand what they were going to do
with him, or where he was being taken; but he noticed that the servant
beside him looked very sad, and his eyes were all swollen with crying.

Curious to know the reason he said to him: 'Why are you so sad? and
where are you taking me?'

But the servant would say nothing. At last, moved by Bobino's
entreaties, he said: 'My poor boy, I am taking you to your death, and,
what is worse, I am doing so by the order of your father.'

'But why,' exclaimed Bobino, 'does he want me to die? What evil have I
done him, or what fault have I committed that he should wish to bring
about my death?'

'You have done him no evil,' answered the servant 'neither have you
committed any fault; but he is half mad with anger because, in all these
years of study, you have learnt nothing but the language of animals.
He expected something quite different from you, that is why he is
determined you shall die.'

'If that is the case, kill me at once,' said Bobino. 'What is the use of
waiting, if it must be done?'

'I have not the heart to do it,' answered the servant. 'I would
rather think of some way of saving your life, and at the same time of
protecting ourselves from your father's anger. By good luck the dog has
followed us. We will kill it, and cut out the heart and take it back to
your father. He will believe it is yours, and you, in the meantime, will
have made your escape.'

When they had reached the thickest part of the wood, Bobino got out of
the carriage, and having said good-bye to the servants set out on his
wanderings.

On and on he walked, till at last, late in the evening, he came to a
house where some herdsmen lived. He knocked at the door and begged
for shelter for the night. The herdsmen, seeing how gentle a youth he
seemed, made him welcome, and bade him sit down and share their supper.

While they were eating it, the dog in the courtyard began to bark.
Bobino walked to the window, listened attentively for a minute, and then
turning to the herdsmen said: 'Send your wives and daughters at once to
bed, and arm yourselves as best you can, because at midnight a band of
robbers will attack this house.'

The herdsmen were quite taken aback, and thought that the youth must
have taken leave of his senses.

'How can you know,' they said, 'that a band of robbers mean to attack
us? Who told you so?'

'I know it from the dog's barking,' answered Bobino. 'I understand his
language, and if I had not been here, the poor beast would have wasted
his breath to no purpose. You had better follow my advice, if you wish
to save your lives and property.'

The herdsmen were more and more astonished, but they decided to do as
Bobino advised. They sent their wives and daughters upstairs, then,
having armed themselves, they took up their position behind a hedge,
waiting for midnight.

Just as the clock struck twelve they heard the sound of approaching
footsteps, and a band of robbers cautiously advanced towards the house.
But the herdsmen were on the look-out; they sprang on the robbers from
behind the hedge, and with blows from their cudgels soon put them to
flight.

You may believe how grateful they were to Bobino, to whose timely
warning they owed their safety. They begged him to stay and make his
home with them; but as he wanted to see more of the world, he thanked
them warmly for their hospitality, and set out once more on his
wanderings. All day he walked, and in the evening he came to a peasant's
house. While he was wondering whether he should knock and demand shelter
for the night, he heard a great croaking of frogs in a ditch behind the
house. Stepping to the back he saw a very strange sight. Four frogs
were throwing a small bottle about from one to the other, making a great
croaking as they did so. Bobino listened for a few minutes, and then
knocked at the door of the house. It was opened by the peasant, who
asked him to come in and have some supper.

When the meal was over, his host told him that they were in great
trouble, as his eldest daughter was so ill, that they feared she could
not recover. A great doctor, who had been passing that way some time
before, had promised to send her some medicine that would have cured
her, but the servant to whom he had entrusted the medicine had let it
drop on the way back, and now there seemed no hope for the girl.

Then Bobino told the father of the small bottle he had seen the frogs
play with, and that he knew that was the medicine which the doctor had
sent to the girl. The peasant asked him how he could be sure of this,
and Bobino explained to him that he understood the language of animals,
and had heard what the frogs said as they tossed the bottle about. So
the peasant fetched the bottle from the ditch, and gave the medicine
to his daughter. In the morning she was much better, and the grateful
father did not know how to thank Bobino enough. But Bobino would accept
nothing from him, and having said good-bye, set out once more on his
