
"Nay; while thanking you for your offer, I cannot so trouble you, Sir
Robert."

"'Tis no trouble. On the contrary, after what your son did for me, it
will be a pleasure to lift some small share of the burden of obligation
from my shoulders, and if you will not let me ride with you, I shall go
down on my own account."

"I thank you heartily, Sir Robert, and assuredly will not refuse so
good an offer, for my men in the castle are scarce numerous enough to
make defence against a strong attack. I doubt not that all the serfs on
the estate have been in the Tyler's following, and my vassals would
scarce be enough, even if I could gather them, to make head against a
crowd."

"When do you start, Sir Ralph?"

"As soon as the gate at Aldgate is open I shall ride through it."

"Then I will be at the head of the bridge, awaiting you with my men."

"I am afraid that I cannot send a contingent, sir knight," Van Voorden
said, "for so many of my countrymen have been slaughtered that we could
scarce gather a company."

"Nay; I shall have enough with those our good friend will bring me.
With him by my side, and my son, and that stout swordsman, young Edgar,
and with fifty sturdy Londoners, who have always in their wars proved
themselves to be as good fighters as any in our armies, I would ride
through a host of the rabble."

"Will you be returning, Sir Ralph?"

"Yes; I leave my wife and daughter here, and as soon as matters are
settled, come back to fetch them."

"Then may I beg you to leave them with me?" the Fleming said,
earnestly. "They will hardly wish to go back to the Tower at present,
after their late experience of it. My wife and daughter will do their
best to make them comfortable."

"I accept your invitation for them thankfully," the knight replied.
"The Tower is already crowded, so many ladies and gentlemen have come
in during the last few days; nor do I like to leave them here without
protection."

"I thank you most heartily, sir knight. It will be a pleasure, indeed,
to my wife and daughter to have ladies with them, for indeed both are
somewhat shaken from what they have gone through. I will, if it pleases
you, be at the gate to-morrow if they will accompany you so far, and
will escort them to my house; or, should you prefer it, my wife will
come thither with me to take them back after they have had their
morning meal."

"Thanks, sir; but I will escort them myself and hand them over to you.
Will you kindly bring a servant with you to carry their valises, for I
had yesterday all their things removed from that room in the Tower, and
at the same time had the dead bodies of the rioters carried down and
thrown into the Thames."

"I wish that there was more that I could do," Van Voorden said to Sir
Robert Gaiton as they walked back to the city.

"I will tell you what you can do, Master Van Voorden. I had the
intention of doing it myself; but if you wish it I will relinquish it
to you. I marked as we rode two days since to Smithfield that our
friend's son and Master Edgar Ormskirk had but body armour and wore
steel caps, and I intended to buy this afternoon two complete suits for
them."

"I thank you greatly for your offer; it would be a relief to me to do
something for them. Know you about their size?"

"To within an inch, for I fitted them on two citizen suits. If you like
I will go with you to Master Armstrong's. He is accounted the best
armourer in the county, and provides no small share of the armour for
our knights and nobles."

"I know his name well," the Fleming said. "I shall be glad if you will
accompany me to choose them, for indeed I am but a poor judge of such
matters."

"I would fain have two suits of the best armour in your store, Master
Armstrong," Van Voorden said, as he entered the armourer's shop. "The
cost is a matter of no account, but I want the best, and I know that no
one can supply better than yourself. My friend, Sir Robert Gaiton, will
do the choosing for me."

The armourer bowed to the wealthy Fleming, who was well known to
everyone in the city.

"'Tis but a matter of size that I have to decide upon," the alderman
said, "See and get the suits somewhat large, for the gentlemen for whom
Mynheer Van Voorden intends them have not yet come to their full
stature."

The armourer led them to an inner room. "These are my best suits," he
said, pointing to a score of lay figures in armour ranged along the
wall. "They would soon get tarnished were they exposed to the fogs of
London. They are all of foreign make save these two, which, as you see,
are less ornamented than the rest. The others are all of Spanish or
Milanese workmanship. These two suits are my own make. Our craftsmen
are not so skilled in inlaying or ornamenting as the foreigners, but I
will guarantee the temper of the steel and its strength to keep out a
lance thrust, a cross-bow bolt, or a cloth-yard arrow against the best
of them."

"Methinks, Mynheer," the alderman said, "that if these suits are of the
right size they were better than the Italian or Spanish suits. In the
first place, these others would scarce be in keeping with two young men
who are not yet knights, seeing that they are such as would be worn by
wealthy nobles; in the next place, there is no saying how much the lads
may grow; and lastly, I have myself promised their father to present
them with a suit of armour when they obtain the rank of knighthood."

"So be it, then," the Fleming said. "If Master Armstrong guarantees the
suits equal in strength to the others I care not, and indeed there is
reason in what you say as to their fitness for the youths."

"Will you run a yard measure round the shoulders?" Sir Robert said. One
was forty inches, the other thirty-six.

"That will do well; one is bigger than the other, and the measurement
will give them an inch or two to spare. And now as to heights. The one
is five feet ten, the other an inch less; but this matters little,
seeing that another strip of steel can be added or one taken away from
the leg pieces without difficulty. I think that they will do
excellently well. And now, what is the price?"

It was a heavy one, for the armour was of exceptional make and strength
by reason of its temper, but was still light, the excellence of the
steel rendering it unnecessary to get anything like the weight of
ordinary armour.

Van Voorden made no attempt to bargain, but merely said, "Please send
them round at once to the Golden Fleece, in the Poultry, which was till
yesterday the abode of Master Nicholas Leyd, and also furnish me with
the bill by your messenger."

"My son will come," said the armourer, "with two men to carry the
armour, and in a quarter of an hour the suits shall be at your door."

"Send also, I pray you, swords and daggers of the finest temper with
each suit, and add the charge to the account."




CHAPTER X

A FIGHT IN THE OPEN


It was seven in the evening, and Sir Ralph and his family had just
finished their evening meal, when one of the retainers announced that
two porters had brought a letter and some goods from Mynheer Van
Voorden.

"Let them bring the goods in here," Sir Ralph said, "and then take them
into the kitchen and give them a tankard of ale and refreshment, and
keep them there till we have a letter ready for their master."

The party were surprised to see the bulky parcels brought in. One of
the men handed a letter addressed to Sir Ralph. "Go with my retainers,
my good fellows," the latter said, "and remain until I see what your
master says. Here, Albert, my scholarship is rusty; read what the
Fleming says; it may tell us what are in those crates."

"They are not for you, father," Aline, who had run across to look at
them, said; "one is for Albert and the other for Edgar."

The letter was as follows:--

"_To the good knight, Sir Ralph De Courcy, greeting--It seems to me
that, prone as your son and Master Edgar Ormskirk are to rush into
danger in order to aid and succour those in peril, it were but right
that they should be clad in armour suitable for such adventures, and
meet that such armour should be provided for them by one of those who
has benefited by their valour, whose life and that of his wife and
daughter have been preserved by them. Therefore I send them two suits
as the only token I can at present give them of my thankfulness and
gratitude. It is feeble testimony indeed, but none the less sincere. I
know well that the armour made by Master Armstrong could be borne by
none worthier, and trust that the swords will ever be used in the cause
of right and in the protection of the oppressed and the unfortunate._"

Aline clapped her hands joyfully as Albert finished reading the letter.

"A timely gift indeed," the knight said; "and one that does honour both
to the giver and those who receive it. Open the crates, lads, and let
us see what the worthy Fleming has sent us."

The casques were the first pieces that came to view. Albert carried his
to his father, while Aline placed Edgar's on the table in front of Dame
Agatha. The knight examined it carefully.

"I know the suit," he said, "for I was in the armourer's shop a week
before these troubles began, with the Earl of Suffolk, who had asked me
to go with him to choose a suit. This, and another like it, stood in
one corner, and mightily took my fancy, though others were there from
the master armourers of Milan and Toledo. These two suits were,
however, he thought, not as fine and ornamental as he should like;
indeed, they were scarce large enough for him, for he is well-nigh as
big as I am myself, and he chose a Milan suit, but Master Armstrong
said to me, 'I see you know a good piece of steel, sir knight, for
methinks those two suits are the best that I have ever forged, and I
would not part with them for less than the price of the very finest of
those inlaid ones. I have tried their strength in every way and am
proud of them, but it may be that I shall keep them here for some time
before I sell them. The foreign arms are now all the fashion, and those
who can afford the best would take the more showy of the foreign suits,
but I would not bate a penny in their price were these two suits to
stand in my shop as long as I live. Do you see that tiny mark?--you
need to look closely at it to make it out. That was made by a
cloth-yard arrow shot by an archer, who is reputed the strongest in the
city, and who carries a bow that few others can bend to its full; he
shot at a distance of five yards, and I doubt if among all those suits
you would find one that would have stood such a test without a deep
dint.' 'Tis a noble gift, lads, and the Fleming, whom I should hardly
take to be a judge of armour, must either have had a good adviser with
him, or he must have trusted himself wholly to Master Armstrong's
advice."

"'Tis like enough, father, that Sir Robert Gaiton may have gone with
him to choose them when they left us yesterday. I have heard him say
that though 'tis in the stuffs of Italy and the East that he chiefly
deals, that his agents abroad sometimes send him suits of the finest
Milan armour, swords of Damascus, and other such things, for which he
can always find purchasers among the nobles who deal with him. He
therefore would probably be a good judge."

By this time the crates were completely unpacked, and the armour, with
the swords and daggers, laid upon the table, where the two lads
surveyed them in silent admiration.

"Put them on," Sir Ralph said. "I know that you are longing to do so,
and it would be strange were you not. Do you buckle them on the lads,
dame. You have done me the service many a time, and it is right that
you should be the first to do it for Albert. Aline, do you wait upon
Edgar. As you are new to such work, your mother will show you how to do
it, but seeing that he has struck five mortal blows in your defence, it
is right that you should do him this service."

Aline coloured with pleasure. Her mother first instructed her how to
arm Edgar, and then herself buckled on Albert's harness. Their swords
were girt on, and the casques added last of all.

"They look two proper esquires, wife," the knight said; "and as we ride
to-morrow I shall make but a sorry show beside them."

"Ah, father," said Albert, "but your armour has many an honourable
mark, and it can be seen that, if it is not as bright as ours, 'tis in
battle that its lustre has been lost, while all can see that, bright as
our armour may be, it has not had the christening of battle."

"Well put!" his mother said, softly. "There was no more noble figure
than your father when I first buckled his armour on for him. It was a
new suit he had taken from a great French lord he had overthrown in
battle, and I was as proud of him as I now feel of you, for you have
shown yourself worthy of him, and though your arms are unmarked, 'tis
but because your battles were fought before you had them."

"We had hardly ventured to hope for this, dame," Sir Ralph said, with a
strange huskiness in his throat. "No knight could have begun a career
more creditably or more honourably. Three times has he fought--once on
behalf of you and Aline, twice for men and women in danger. In what
better causes could he have first fleshed his sword? Now, unbuckle him
at once, dame, that he may write in my name a letter of thanks to this
noble Fleming. I have not written a letter for years, and our friend
would scarce be able to decipher it were I to try." Then he went on, as
she removed Albert's casque: "There was good taste as well as judgment
in the purchase of those arms, Agatha. To me who knows what arms are,
they are superb, but to the ordinary eye they would seem no better than
those generally worn by knights or by esquires of good family; whereas,
had he bought one of these damascened suits it would at once have
attracted attention, and the lads would have been taken for great
nobles. I doubt not that guided the stout alderman in his choice. He is
a man of strong sense and sober taste, and had he not been born a
merchant he would have made a rare good fighter."

As soon as Albert's harness was taken off he sat down and wrote, in his
fair clerkly hand, a letter of the warmest thanks on the part of Sir
Ralph, Edgar, and himself to Van Voorden. After this had been sent off,
the swords and daggers were examined and admired, Sir Ralph declaring
the former to be of the finest Toledo steel and the latter to come from
Damascus. Edgar had said little, but he was even more delighted with
his new acquisition than Albert. To have a good suit of armour had been
his greatest ambition, but his father was by no means wealthy, and he
had thought that his only chance of obtaining such a suit would be to
overthrow some French noble in battle.

The next morning they were up betimes, and mounted a few minutes before
the hour at which the city gates would be opened. Sir Ralph and his
dame rode first, Aline took her place between her brother and Edgar,
the latter keeping a watchful eye over her horse, which was fresh after
six or seven days' idleness. The two retainers rode behind, having the
ladies' valises strapped behind them. The city churches rang out the
hour when they were within a hundred yards of the gate, and as this
opened, Van Voorden, with his daughter behind him on a pillion, rode
out to meet them, followed by two mounted men.

"That is thoughtful and courteous of him, dame," the knight said. "He
might well have come alone; but it is kindly of him as well as
courteous to bring his daughter."

As the party met, the Fleming bowed deeply to Lady Agatha.

"I have brought my daughter with me," he said, "in that I might
introduce her to you, and that she might assure you, in her mother's
name, of the pleasure your visit will give her."

"'Tis kind and courteous of you, Mynheer Van Voorden," Dame Agatha
said, as, leaning over, she shook his daughter's hand.

"My mother bade me say that she is impatiently waiting your coming, and
that your visit will give her the greatest pleasure--and yours also,
Mistress Aline," she added, as the girl rode up, "and I am sure that it
will give me great pleasure too."

Joanna Van Voorden was some two years older than Aline. Both were fair,
but of a different type, for while Aline's hair was golden, the
Joanna's was of a tawny red. Even making allowance for the difference
in age, she was of a heavier build than the English girl, and gave
signs of growing up into a stately woman.

"And now, Master Van Voorden," the knight said, as the latter turned
his horse, and they proceeded on their way, "I must repeat in person
what I said in my letter, how deeply obliged we are to you for the
superb suits of armour you sent last night to my son and his friend."

"Speak not of it again, I pray you," the merchant said. "I owe them a
debt of gratitude that I never can hope to repay, and the harness was
indeed but a slight token of it. I can only hope that some day I may
have an opportunity of more worthily testifying my gratitude. We shall
scarcely be able to lodge you, lady," he went on, turning to Dame
Agatha, "as I could have done in my house at Bread Street, for the one
I have hired, although comfortable enough, is much less commodious;
still, I doubt not that you will find your rooms more comfortable than
those you occupied in the Tower, for indeed, as yet, even English
palaces, stately though they be, have not the comforts that we Flemings
have come to regard as necessaries."

"So I have understood, sir, but I think that some of our city merchants
cannot be far behind you, judging from what my daughter has told me of
the abode of Sir Robert Gaiton."

"No; many of the London traders are in this respect far better housed
than any of the nobles with whose castles I am acquainted, and Sir
Robert has, in Italy and elsewhere, had opportunities of seeing how the
merchant princes there live. I have known him for some years. He is one
of the foremost men in the city; he has broad and liberal ideas, and
none of the jealousy of us Flemings that is so common among the
citizens, although my countrymen more directly rival him in his trade
than they do many others who grumble at us, though they are in no way
injured by our trading."

So they chatted until they reached the spot where the knight required
to turn off towards the bridge. There was a moment's pause, the valises
were transferred to the saddles of the Van Voorden's followers, while
adieux were exchanged. Then the Fleming's party turned to the right,
while the knight, Edgar, Albert, and the two retainers trotted down at
a smart pace to the bridge. Here Sir Robert Gaiton, in full armour,
with fifty stout men-at-arms, were awaiting them.

"Good morrow, Sir Ralph, and you, young sirs," Sir Robert said, as they
rode up. "Let me congratulate you on your armour, which becomes you
mightily."

"And for which," Sir Ralph put in, "I think we have somewhat to thank
you for choosing."

"Yes; I went with Van Voorden to Master Armstrong's, not so much to
choose the harness as to give my opinion as to the size required, and
these suits greatly took my fancy. The armourer guaranteed their
temper, and they were, as it seemed to me, about the right size; for
although just at first they may be somewhat roomy, 'tis a matter that a
few months will mend.

"Are they comfortable, Edgar?" he added.

"I suppose as much so as any armour can be, Sir Robert; but 'tis the
first time I have worn such things, and they seem to me marvellously to
confine me, and with the vizor down I should feel well-nigh stifled in
my casque, and as if fighting in the dark."

"You will get accustomed to it in a short time. I know that when I
began to be known in the city, and found that I must, like others of
the better class of citizens, ride in full armour when occasion
offered, I felt just as you do. Perhaps more so, for I was some seven
or eight years older, and less accustomed to changes, but even now I
