about disagreeables. I suppose, my dear, it is just as I have heard,
that starving people talk about the feasts they have eaten, so we talk
of the pleasant times we have had. It is the contrast that makes them
dearer. It is funny, too, if anything can be funny in these days, how
different we are in the evening, when we have the men with us, to what
we are when we are together alone in the day. Another curious thing is
that our trouble seems to make us more like each other. Of course we are
not more like, but we all somehow take the same tone, and seem to have
given up our own particular ways and fancies.

"Now the men don't seem like that. Mr. Hunter, for example, whom I used
to think an even tempered and easygoing sort of man, has become fidgety
and querulous. The Major is even more genial and kind than usual. The
Doctor snaps and snarls at everyone and everything. Anyone listening
to my husband would say that he was in the wildest spirits. Rintoul is
quieter than usual, and the two lads have grown older and nicer; I don't
say they are less full of fun than they were, especially Wilson, but
they are less boyish in their fun, and they are nice with everyone,
instead of devoting themselves to two or three of us, you principally.
Perhaps Richards is the most changed; he thinks less of his collars and
ties and the polish of his boots than he used to do, and one sees
that he has some ideas in his head besides those about horses. Captain
Forster is, perhaps, least changed, but of that you can judge better
than I can, for you see more of him. As to Mr. Bathurst, I can say
nothing, for we never see him now. I think he is the only man in the
station who goes about his work as usual; he starts away the first thing
in the morning, and comes back late in the evening, and I suppose spends
the night in writing reports, though what is the use of writing reports
at the present time I don't know. Mr. Hunter was saying last night it
was very foolish of him. What with disbanded soldiers, and what with
parties of mutineers, it is most dangerous for any European to stir
outside the station."

"Uncle was saying the same," Isobel said quietly.

"Well, here we separate. Of course you will be in as usual this
evening?" for the Major's house was the general rendezvous after dinner.

Isobel had her private troubles, although, as she often said angrily
to herself, when she thought of them, what did it matter now? She was
discontented with herself for having spoken as strongly as she did as
to the man's cowardice. She was very discontented with the Doctor
for having repeated it. She was angry with Bathurst for staying away
altogether, although willing to admit that, after he knew what she had
said, it was impossible that he should meet her as before. Most of all,
perhaps, she was angry because, at a time when their lives were all in
deadly peril, she should allow the matter to dwell in her mind a single
moment.

Late one afternoon Bathurst walked into the Major's bungalow just as he
was about to sit down to dinner.

"Major, I want to speak to you for a moment," he said.

"Sit down and have some dinner, Bathurst. You have become altogether a
stranger."

"Thank you, Major, but I have a great deal to do. Can you spare me five
minutes now? It is of importance."

Isobel rose to leave the room.

"There is no reason you should not hear, Miss Hannay, but it would be
better that none of the servants should be present. That is why I wish
to speak before your uncle goes in to dinner."

Isobel sat down with an air of indifference.

"For the last week, Major, I have ridden every day five and twenty to
thirty miles in the direction of Cawnpore; my official work has been
practically at an end since we heard the news from Meerut. I could be of
no use here, and thought that I could do no better service than trying
to obtain the earliest news from Cawnpore; I am sorry to say that this
afternoon I distinctly heard firing in that direction. What the result
is, of course, I do not know, but I feel that there is little doubt that
troubles have begun there. But this is not all. On my return home,
ten minutes ago, I found this letter on my dressing table. It had no
direction and is, as you see, in Hindustanee," and he handed it to the
Major, who read:

"To the Sahib Bathurst,--Rising at Cawnpore today. Nana Sahib and
his troops will join the Sepoys. Whites will be destroyed. Rising at
Deennugghur at daylight tomorrow. Troops, after killing whites, will
join those at Cawnpore. Be warned in time--this tiger is not to be
beaten off with a whip."

"Good Heavens!" the Major exclaimed; "can this be true? Can it be
possible that the Rajah of Bithoor is going to join the mutineers? It is
impossible; he could never be such a scoundrel."

"What is it, uncle?" Isobel asked, leaving her seat and coming up to
him.

The Major translated the letter.

"It must be a hoax," he went on; "I cannot believe it. What does this
stuff about beating a tiger with a whip mean?"

"I am sorry to say, Major Hannay, that part of the letter convinces me
that the contents can be implicitly relied upon. The writer did not dare
sign his name, but those words are sufficient to show me, and were no
doubt intended to show me, who the warning comes from. It is from that
juggler who performed here some six weeks ago. Traveling about as he
does, and putting aside altogether those strange powers of his, he
has no doubt the means of knowing what is going on. As I told you that
night, I had done him some slight service, and he promised at the time
that, if the occasion should ever arise, he would risk his life to save
mine. The fact that he showed, I have no doubt, especially to please me,
feats that few Europeans have seen before, is, to my mind, a proof of
his goodwill and that he meant what he said."

"But how do you know that it is from him. Bathurst? You will excuse
my pressing the question, but of course everything depends on my being
assured that this communication is trustworthy."

"This allusion to the tiger shows me that, Major. It alludes to an
incident that I believe to be known only to him and his daughter and to
Dr. Wade, to whom alone I mentioned it."

As the Major still looked inquiringly, Bathurst went on reluctantly.
"It was a trifling affair, Major, the result of a passing impulse. I was
riding home from Narkeet, and while coming along the road through the
jungle, which was at that time almost deserted by the natives on account
of the ravages of the man eater whom the Doctor afterwards shot, I heard
a scream. Galloping forward, I came upon the brute, standing with
one paw upon a prostrate girl, while a man, the juggler, was standing
frantically waving his arms. On the impulse of the moment I sprang from
my horse and lashed the tiger across the head with that heavy dog whip I
carry, and the brute was so astonished that it bolted in the jungle.

"That was the beginning and end of affairs, except that, although
fortunately the girl was practically unhurt, she was so unnerved that
we had to carry her to the next village, where she lay for some time
ill from the shock and fright. After that they came round here and
performed, for my amusement, the feats I told you of. So you see I have
every reason to believe in the good faith of the writer of this letter."

"By Jove, I should think you had!" the Major said. "Why, my dear
Bathurst, I had no idea that you could do such a thing!"

"We have all our strong points and our weak ones, Major. That was one of
my strong ones, I suppose. And now what had best be done, sir? That is
the important question at present."

This was so evident, that Major Hannay at once dismissed all other
thoughts from his mind.

"Of course I and the other officers must remain at our posts until the
Sepoys actually arrive. The question is as to the others. Now that we
know the worst, or believe we know it, ought we to send the women and
children away?"

"That is the question, sir. But where can they be sent? Lucknow is
besieged; the whites at Cawnpore must have been surrounded by this time;
the bands of mutineers are ranging the whole country, and at the news
that Nana Sahib has joined the rebels it is probable that all will
rise. I should say that it was a matter in which Mr. Hunter and other
civilians had better be consulted."

"Yes, we will hold a council," the Major said.

"I think, Major, it should be done quietly. It is probable that many of
the servants may know of the intentions of the Sepoys, and if they see
that anything like a council of the Europeans was being held they
may take the news to the Sepoys, and the latter, thinking that their
intention is known, may rise at once."

"That is quite true. Yes, we must do nothing to arouse suspicion. What
do you propose, Mr. Bathurst?"

"I will go and have a talk with the Doctor; he can go round to the other
officers one by one. I will tell Mr. Hunter, and he will tell the other
residents, so that when they meet here in the evening no explanations
will be needed, and a very few words as we sit out on the veranda will
be sufficient."

"That will be a very good plan. We will sit down to dinner as if nothing
had happened; if they are watching at all, they will be keeping their
eyes on us then."

"Very well; I will be in by nine o'clock, Major;" and with a slight bow
to Isobel, Bathurst stepped out through the open window, and made his
way to the Doctor's.



CHAPTER XIII.


The Doctor had just sat down to dinner when Bathurst came in. The two
subalterns were dining with him.

"That's good, Bathurst," the Doctor said, as he entered. "Boy, put a
chair for Mr. Bathurst. I had begun to think that you had deserted me as
well as everybody else."

"I was not thinking of dining," Bathurst said, as he sat down, "but I
will do so with pleasure, though I told my man I should be back in half
an hour;" and as the servant left the room he added, "I have much to
say, Doctor; get through dinner as quickly as you can, and get the
servants out of the tent."

The conversation was at once turned by the Doctor upon shooting and
hunting, and no allusion was made to passing events until coffee was put
on the table and the servant retired. The talk, which had been lively
during dinner, then ceased.

"Well, Bathurst," the Doctor asked, "I suppose you have something
serious to tell me?"

"Very serious, Doctor;" and he repeated the news he had given the Major.

"It could not be worse, Bathurst," the Doctor said quietly, after the
first shock of the news had passed. "You know I never had any faith in
the Sepoys since I saw how this madness was spreading from station
to station. This sort of thing is contagious. It becomes a sort of
epidemic, and in spite of the assurances of the men I felt sure they
would go. But this scoundrel of Bithoor turning against us is more than
I bargained for. There is no disguising the fact that it means a general
rising through Oude, and in that case God help the women and children.
As for us, it all comes in the line of business. What does the Major
say?"

"The only question that seemed to him to be open was whether the women
and children could be got away."

"But there does not seem any possible place for them to go to. One or
two might travel down the country in disguise, but that is out of the
question for a large party. There is no refuge nearer than Allahabad.
With every man's hand against them, I see not the slightest chance of a
party making their way down."

"You or I might do it easily enough, Doctor, but for women it seems to
me out of the question; still, that is a matter for each married man to
decide for himself. The prospect is dark enough anyway, but, as before,
it seems to me that everything really depends upon the Zemindars. If we
hold the courthouse it is possible the Sepoys may be beaten off in their
first attack, and in their impatience to join the mutineers, who are
all apparently marching for Delhi, they may go off without throwing away
their lives by attacking us, for they must see they will not be able
to take the place without cannon. But if the Zemindars join them with
cannon, we may defend ourselves till the last, but there can be but one
end to it."

The Doctor nodded. "That is the situation exactly, Bathurst."

"I am glad we know the danger, and shall be able to face it openly,"
Wilson said. "For the last month Richards and I have been keeping watch
alternately, and it has been beastly funky work sitting with one's
pistols on the table before one, listening, and knowing any moment there
might be a yell, and these brown devils come pouring in. Now, at least,
we are likely to have a fight for it, and to know that some of them will
go down before we do."

Richards cordially agreed with his companion.

"Well, now, what are the orders, Bathurst?" said the Doctor.

"There are no orders as yet, Doctor. The Major says you will go round
to the others, Doolan, Rintoul, and Forster, and tell them. I am to go
round to Hunter and the other civilians. Then, this evening we are to
meet at nine o'clock, as usual, at the Major's. If the others decide
that the only plan is for all to stop here and fight it out, there will
be no occasion for anything like a council; it will only have to be
arranged at what time we all move into the fort, and the best means for
keeping the news from spreading to the Sepoys. Not that it will make
much difference after they have once fairly turned in. If there is one
thing a Hindoo hates more than another, it is getting from under his
blankets when he has once got himself warm at night. Even if they heard
at one or two o'clock in the morning that we were moving into the fort I
don't think they would turn out till morning."

"No, I am sure they would not," the Doctor agreed.

"If there were a few more of us," Richards said, "I should vote for our
beginning it. If we were to fall suddenly upon them we might kill a lot
and scare the rest off."

"We are too few for that," the Doctor said. "Besides, although Bathurst
answers for the good faith of the sender of the warning, there has as
yet been no act of mutiny that would justify our taking such a step as
that. It would come to the same thing. We might kill a good many, but in
the long run three hundred men would be more than a match for a dozen,
and then the women would be at their mercy. Well, we had better be
moving, or we shall not have time to go round to the bungalows before
the people set out for the Major's."

It was a painful mission that Bathurst had to perform, for he had to
tell those he called upon that almost certain death was at hand, but
the news was everywhere received calmly. The strain had of late been so
great, that the news that the crisis was at hand was almost welcome. He
did not stay long anywhere, but, after setting the alternative before
them, left husband and wife to discuss whether to try to make down to
Allahabad or to take refuge in the fort.

Soon after nine o'clock all were at Major Hannay's. There were pale
faces among them, but no stranger would have supposed that the whole
party had just received news which was virtually a death warrant. The
ladies talked together as usual, while the men moved in and out of the
room, sometimes talking with the Major, sometimes sitting down for a few
minutes in the veranda outside, or talking there in low tones together.

The Major moved about among them, and soon learned that all had
resolved to stay and meet together whatever came, preferring that to the
hardships and unknown dangers of flight.

"I am glad you have all decided so," he said quietly. "In the state the
country is, the chances of getting to Allahabad are next to nothing.
Here we may hold out till Lawrence restores order at Lucknow, and then
he may be able to send a party to bring us in. Or the mutineers may draw
off and march to Delhi. I certainly think the chances are best here;
besides, every rifle we have is of importance, and though if any of
you had made up your minds to try and escape I should have made no
objection, I am glad that we shall all stand together here."

The arrangements were then briefly made for the removal to the
courthouse. All were to go back and apparently to retire to bed as
usual. At twelve o'clock the men, armed, were to call up their servants,
load them up with such things as were most required, and proceed with
them, the women, and children, at once to the courthouse. Half the men
were to remain there on guard, while the others would continue with
the servants to make journeys backwards and forwards to the bungalows,
bringing in as much as could be carried, the guard to be changed every
hour. In the morning the servants were all to have the choice given them
of remaining with their masters or leaving.

Captain Forster was the only dissentient. He was in favor of the whole
party mounting, placing the women and children in carriages, and making
off in a body, fighting their way if necessary down to Allahabad. He
admitted that, in addition to the hundred troopers of his own squadron,
they might be cut off by the mutinous cavalry from Cawnpore, fall in
with bodies of rebels or be attacked by villagers, but he maintained
that there was at least some chance of cutting their way through, while,
once shut up in the courthouse, escape would be well nigh impossible.

"But you all along agreed to our holding the courthouse, Forster," the
Major said.

"Yes; but then I reckoned upon Cawnpore holding out with the assistance
of Nana Sahib, and upon the country remaining quiet. Now the whole thing
is changed. I am quite ready to fight in the open, and to take my chance
of being killed there, but I protest against being shut up like a rat in
a hole."

To the rest, however, the proposal appeared desperate. There would be no
withstanding a single charge of the well trained troopers, especially as
it would be necessary to guard the vehicles. Had it not been for that,
the small body of men might possibly have cut their way through the
cavalry; but even then they would be so hotly pursued that the most of
them would assuredly be hunted down. But encumbered by the women such
an enterprise seemed utterly hopeless, and the whole of the others were
unanimously against it.

The party broke up very early. The strain of maintaining their ordinary
demeanor was too great to be long endured, and the ladies with children
were anxious to return as soon as possible to them, lest at the last
moment the Sepoys should have made some change in their arrangements. By
ten o'clock the whole party had left.

The two subalterns had no preparations to make; they had already sent
most of their things into the hospital; and, lighting their pipes, they
sat down and talked quietly till midnight; then, placing their pistols
in their belts and wrapping themselves in their cloaks, they went into
the Doctor's tent, which was next to theirs.

The Doctor at once roused his servant, who was sleeping in a shelter
tent pitched by the side of his. The man came in looking surprised at
being called. "Roshun," the Doctor said, "you have been with me ten
years, and I believe you to be faithful."

"I would lay down my life for the sahib," the man said quietly.

"You have heard nothing of any trouble with the Sepoys?"

"No, sahib; they know that Roshun is faithful to his master."

"We have news that they are going to rise in the morning and kill all
Europeans, so we are going to move at once into the hospital."

"Good, sahib; what will you take with you?"

"My books and papers have all gone in," the Doctor said; "that
portmanteau may as well go. I will carry these two rifles myself; the
ammunition is all there except that bag in the corner, which I will
sling round my shoulder."

"What are in those two cases, Doctor?" Wilson asked.

"Brandy, lad."

"We may as well each carry one of those, Doctor, if your boy takes the
portmanteau. It would be a pity to leave good liquor to be wasted by
those brutes."

"I agree with you, Wilson; besides, the less liquor they get hold of
the better for us. Now, if you are all ready, we will start; but we must
move quietly, or the sentry at the quarter guard may hear us."

Ten minutes later they reached the hospital, being the last of the party
to arrive there.

"Now, Major," the Doctor said cheerily, as soon as he entered, "as this
place is supposed to be under my special charge I will take command for
the present. Wilson and Richards will act as my lieutenants. We have
nothing to do outside, and can devote ourselves to getting things a
little straight here. The first thing to do is to light lamps in all the
lower rooms; then we can see what we are doing, and the ladies will be
able to give us their help, while the men go out with the servants to
bring things in; and remember the first thing to do is to bring in the
horses. They may be useful to us. There is a good store of forage piled
in the corner of the yard, but the syces had best bring in as much
more as they can carry. Now, ladies, if you will all bring your bundles
inside the house we will set about arranging things, and at any rate get
the children into bed as quickly as possible."

As it had been already settled as to the rooms to be occupied, the
ladies and their ayahs set to work at once, glad to have something to
employ them. One of the rooms which had been fitted up with beds had
been devoted to the purposes of a nursery, and the children, most of
whom were still asleep, were soon settled there. Two other rooms had
been fitted up for the use of the ladies, while the men were occupying
two others, the courtroom being turned into a general meeting and dining
room.

At first there was not much to do; but as the servants, closely watched
by their masters, went backwards and forwards bringing in goods of all
kinds, there was plenty of employment in carrying them down to a large
underground room, where they were left to be sorted later on.

The Doctor had appointed Isobel Hannay and the two Miss Hunters to the
work of lighting a fire and getting boiling water ready, and a plentiful
supply of coffee was presently made, Wilson and Richards drawing the
water, carrying the heavier loads downstairs, and making themselves
generally useful.

Captain Forster had not come in. He had undertaken to remain in his tent
in the lines, where he had quietly saddled and unpicketed his horse,
tying it up to the tent ropes so that he could mount in an instant. He
still believed that his own men would stand firm, and declared he would
at their head charge the mutinous infantry, while if they joined the
mutineers he would ride into the fort. It was also arranged that he
should bring in word should the Sepoys obtain news of what was going on
and rise before morning.

All felt better and more cheerful after having taken some coffee.

"It is difficult to believe, Miss Hannay," Richards said, "that this
is all real, and not a sort of picnic, or an early start on a hunting
expedition."

"It is indeed, Mr. Richards. I can hardly believe even now that it is
all true, and have pinched myself two or three times to make sure that I
am awake."

"If the villains venture to attack us," Wilson said, "I feel sure we
shall beat them off handsomely."

"I have no doubt we shall, Mr. Wilson, especially as it will be in
daylight. You know you and Mr. Richards are not famous for night
shooting."

The young men both laughed.

"We shall never hear the last of that tiger story, Miss Hannay. I can
tell you it is no joke shooting when you have been sitting cramped up
on a tree for about six hours. We are really both pretty good shots.
Of course, I don't mean like the Doctor; but we always make good scores
with the targets. Come, Richards, here is another lot of things; if they
go on at this rate the Sepoys won't find much to loot in the bungalows
tomorrow."

Just as daylight was breaking the servants were all called together, and
given the choice of staying or leaving. Only some eight or ten, all of
whom belonged to the neighborhood, chose to go off to their villages.
The rest declared they would stay with their masters.

Two of the party by turns had been on watch all night on the terrace
to listen for any sound of tumult in the lines, but all had gone on
quietly. Bathurst had been working with the others all night, and
after seeing that all his papers were carried to the courthouse, he
had troubled but little about his own belongings, but had assisted the
others in bringing in their goods.

At daylight the Major and his officers mounted and rode quietly down
towards the parade ground. Bathurst and Mr. Hunter, with several of the
servants, took their places at the gates, in readiness to open and close
them quickly, while the Doctor and the other Europeans went up to the
roof, where they placed in readiness six muskets for each man, from the
store in the courthouse. Isobel Hannay and the wives of the two Captains
were too anxious to remain below, and went up to the roof also. The
Doctor took his place by them, examining the lines with a field glass.

The officers halted when they reached the parade ground, and sat on
their horses in a group, waiting for the men to turn out as usual.

"There goes the assembly," the Doctor said, as the notes of the bugle
came to their ears. "The men are turning out of their tents. There, I
can make out Forster; he has just mounted; a plucky fellow that."

Instead of straggling out onto the parade ground as usual, the Sepoys
seemed to hang about their tents. The cavalry mounted and formed up in
their lines. Suddenly a gun was fired, and as if at the signal the whole
of the infantry rushed forward towards the officers, yelling and
firing, and the latter at once turned their horses and rode towards the
courthouse.

"Don't be alarmed, my dear," the Doctor said to Isobel; "I don't suppose
anyone is hit. The Sepoys are not good shots at the best of times, and
firing running they would not be able to hit a haystack at a hundred
yards. The cavalry stand firm, you see," he said, turning his glass in
that direction. "Forster is haranguing them. There, three of the native
officers are riding up to him. Ah! one has fired at him! Missed! Ah!
that is a better shot," as the man fell from his horse, from a shot from
his Captain's pistol.

The other two rushed at him. One he cut down, and the other shot. Then
he could be seen again, shouting and waving his sword to the men, but
their yells could be heard as they rode forward at him.

"Ride, man, ride!" the Doctor shouted, although his voice could not have
been heard at a quarter of the distance.

But instead of turning Forster rode right at them. There was a confused
melee for a moment, and then his figure appeared beyond the line,
through which he had broken. With yells of fury the troopers reined in
their horses and tried to turn them, but before they could do so the
officer was upon them again. His revolver cracked in his left hand, and
his sword flashed in his right. Two or three horses and men were seen to
roll over, and in a moment he was through them again and riding at full
