
I think every one had expected the cell to be the 'deepest dungeon below
the castle moat'. I am sure no one had doubted that the burglar, chained
by heavy fetters to a ring in the damp stone wall, would be tossing
uneasily on a bed of straw, with a pitcher of water and a mouldering
crust, untasted, beside him. Robert, remembering the underground passage
and the treasure, had brought a candle and matches, but these were not
needed.

The cell was a little white-washed room about twelve feet long and
six feet wide. On one side of it was a sort of shelf sloping a little
towards the wall. On this were two rugs, striped blue and yellow, and a
water-proof pillow. Rolled in the rugs, and with his head on the pillow,
lay the burglar, fast asleep. (He had had his tea, though this the
children did not know--it had come from the coffee-shop round the
corner, in very thick crockery.) The scene was plainly revealed by the
light of a gas-lamp in the passage outside, which shone into the cell
through a pane of thick glass over the door.

'I shall gag him,' said Cyril, 'and Robert will hold him down. Anthea
and Jane and the Phoenix can whisper soft nothings to him while he
gradually awakes.'

This plan did not have the success it deserved, because the burglar,
curiously enough, was much stronger, even in his sleep, than Robert and
Cyril, and at the first touch of their hands he leapt up and shouted out
something very loud indeed.

Instantly steps were heard outside. Anthea threw her arms round the
burglar and whispered--

'It's us--the ones that gave you the cats. We've come to save you, only
don't let on we're here. Can't we hide somewhere?'

Heavy boots sounded on the flagged passage outside, and a firm voice
shouted--

'Here--you--stop that row, will you?'

'All right, governor,' replied the burglar, still with Anthea's arms
round him; 'I was only a-talking in my sleep. No offence.'

It was an awful moment. Would the boots and the voice come in. Yes! No!
The voice said--

'Well, stow it, will you?'

And the boots went heavily away, along the passage and up some sounding
stone stairs.

'Now then,' whispered Anthea.

'How the blue Moses did you get in?' asked the burglar, in a hoarse
whisper of amazement.

'On the carpet,' said Jane, truly.

'Stow that,' said the burglar. 'One on you I could 'a' swallowed, but
four--AND a yellow fowl.'

'Look here,' said Cyril, sternly, 'you wouldn't have believed any one if
they'd told you beforehand about your finding a cow and all those cats
in our nursery.'

'That I wouldn't,' said the burglar, with whispered fervour, 'so help me
Bob, I wouldn't.'

'Well, then,' Cyril went on, ignoring this appeal to his brother, 'just
try to believe what we tell you and act accordingly. It can't do you any
HARM, you know,' he went on in hoarse whispered earnestness. 'You can't
be very much worse off than you are now, you know. But if you'll just
trust to us we'll get you out of this right enough. No one saw us come
in. The question is, where would you like to go?'

'I'd like to go to Boolong,' was the instant reply of the burglar. 'I've
always wanted to go on that there trip, but I've never 'ad the ready at
the right time of the year.'

'Boolong is a town like London,' said Cyril, well meaning, but
inaccurate, 'how could you get a living there?'

The burglar scratched his head in deep doubt.

'It's 'ard to get a 'onest living anywheres nowadays,' he said, and his
voice was sad.

'Yes, isn't it?' said Jane, sympathetically; 'but how about a sunny
southern shore, where there's nothing to do at all unless you want to.'

'That's my billet, miss,' replied the burglar. 'I never did care about
work--not like some people, always fussing about.'

'Did you never like any sort of work?' asked Anthea, severely.

'Lor', lumme, yes,' he answered, 'gardening was my 'obby, so it was. But
father died afore 'e could bind me to a nurseryman, an'--'

'We'll take you to the sunny southern shore,' said Jane; 'you've no idea
what the flowers are like.'

'Our old cook's there,' said Anthea. 'She's queen--'

'Oh, chuck it,' the burglar whispered, clutching at his head with both
hands. 'I knowed the first minute I see them cats and that cow as it was
a judgement on me. I don't know now whether I'm a-standing on my hat or
my boots, so help me I don't. If you CAN get me out, get me, and if you
can't, get along with you for goodness' sake, and give me a chanst
to think about what'll be most likely to go down with the Beak in the
morning.'

'Come on to the carpet, then,' said Anthea, gently shoving. The others
quietly pulled, and the moment the feet of the burglar were planted on
the carpet Anthea wished:

'I wish we were all on the sunny southern shore where cook is.'

And instantly they were. There were the rainbow sands, the tropic
glories of leaf and flower, and there, of course, was the cook, crowned
with white flowers, and with all the wrinkles of crossness and tiredness
and hard work wiped out of her face.

'Why, cook, you're quite pretty!' Anthea said, as soon as she had got
her breath after the tumble-rush-whirl of the carpet. The burglar stood
rubbing his eyes in the brilliant tropic sunlight, and gazing wildly
round him on the vivid hues of the tropic land.

'Penny plain and tuppence coloured!' he exclaimed pensively, 'and well
worth any tuppence, however hard-earned.'

The cook was seated on a grassy mound with her court of copper-coloured
savages around her. The burglar pointed a grimy finger at these.

'Are they tame?' he asked anxiously. 'Do they bite or scratch, or do
anything to yer with poisoned arrows or oyster shells or that?'

'Don't you be so timid,' said the cook. 'Look'e 'ere, this 'ere's only
a dream what you've come into, an' as it's only a dream there's no
nonsense about what a young lady like me ought to say or not, so I'll
say you're the best-looking fellow I've seen this many a day. And the
dream goes on and on, seemingly, as long as you behaves. The things what
you has to eat and drink tastes just as good as real ones, and--'

'Look 'ere,' said the burglar, 'I've come 'ere straight outer the pleece
station. These 'ere kids'll tell you it ain't no blame er mine.'

'Well, you WERE a burglar, you know,' said the truthful Anthea gently.

'Only because I was druv to it by dishonest blokes, as well you knows,
miss,' rejoined the criminal. 'Blowed if this ain't the 'ottest January
as I've known for years.'

'Wouldn't you like a bath?' asked the queen, 'and some white clothes
like me?'

'I should only look a juggins in 'em, miss, thanking you all the same,'
was the reply; 'but a bath I wouldn't resist, and my shirt was only
clean on week before last.'

Cyril and Robert led him to a rocky pool, where he bathed luxuriously.
Then, in shirt and trousers he sat on the sand and spoke.

'That cook, or queen, or whatever you call her--her with the white bokay
on her 'ed--she's my sort. Wonder if she'd keep company!'

'I should ask her.'

'I was always a quick hitter,' the man went on; 'it's a word and a blow
with me. I will.'

In shirt and trousers, and crowned with a scented flowery wreath which
Cyril hastily wove as they returned to the court of the queen, the
burglar stood before the cook and spoke.

'Look 'ere, miss,' he said. 'You an' me being' all forlorn-like, both on
us, in this 'ere dream, or whatever you calls it, I'd like to tell you
straight as I likes yer looks.'

The cook smiled and looked down bashfully.

'I'm a single man--what you might call a batcheldore. I'm mild in my
'abits, which these kids'll tell you the same, and I'd like to 'ave the
pleasure of walkin' out with you next Sunday.'

'Lor!' said the queen cook, ''ow sudden you are, mister.'

'Walking out means you're going to be married,' said Anthea. 'Why not
get married and have done with it? _I_ would.'

'I don't mind if I do,' said the burglar. But the cook said--

'No, miss. Not me, not even in a dream. I don't say anythink ag'in the
young chap's looks, but I always swore I'd be married in church, if at
all--and, anyway, I don't believe these here savages would know how
to keep a registering office, even if I was to show them. No, mister,
thanking you kindly, if you can't bring a clergyman into the dream I'll
live and die like what I am.'

'Will you marry her if we get a clergyman?' asked the match-making
Anthea.

'I'm agreeable, miss, I'm sure,' said he, pulling his wreath straight.
''Ow this 'ere bokay do tiddle a chap's ears to be sure!'

So, very hurriedly, the carpet was spread out, and instructed to fetch
a clergyman. The instructions were written on the inside of Cyril's cap
with a piece of billiard chalk Robert had got from the marker at the
hotel at Lyndhurst. The carpet disappeared, and more quickly than you
would have thought possible it came back, bearing on its bosom the
Reverend Septimus Blenkinsop.

The Reverend Septimus was rather a nice young man, but very much mazed
and muddled, because when he saw a strange carpet laid out at his feet,
in his own study, he naturally walked on it to examine it more closely.
And he happened to stand on one of the thin places that Jane and Anthea
had darned, so that he was half on wishing carpet and half on plain
Scotch heather-mixture fingering, which has no magic properties at all.

The effect of this was that he was only half there--so that the children
could just see through him, as though he had been a ghost. And as for
him, he saw the sunny southern shore, the cook and the burglar and the
children quite plainly; but through them all he saw, quite plainly also,
his study at home, with the books and the pictures and the marble clock
that had been presented to him when he left his last situation.

He seemed to himself to be in a sort of insane fit, so that it did not
matter what he did--and he married the burglar to the cook. The cook
said that she would rather have had a solider kind of a clergyman, one
that you couldn't see through so plain, but perhaps this was real enough
for a dream.

And of course the clergyman, though misty, was really real, and able
to marry people, and he did. When the ceremony was over the clergyman
wandered about the island collecting botanical specimens, for he was a
great botanist, and the ruling passion was strong even in an insane fit.

There was a splendid wedding feast. Can you fancy Jane and Anthea,
and Robert and Cyril, dancing merrily in a ring, hand-in-hand with
copper-coloured savages, round the happy couple, the queen cook and the
burglar consort? There were more flowers gathered and thrown than you
have ever even dreamed of, and before the children took carpet for home
the now married-and-settled burglar made a speech.

'Ladies and gentlemen,' he said, 'and savages of both kinds, only I know
you can't understand what I'm a saying of, but we'll let that pass.
If this is a dream, I'm on. If it ain't, I'm onner than ever. If it's
betwixt and between--well, I'm honest, and I can't say more. I don't
want no more 'igh London society--I've got some one to put my arm around
of; and I've got the whole lot of this 'ere island for my allotment, and
if I don't grow some broccoli as'll open the judge's eye at the cottage
flower shows, well, strike me pink! All I ask is, as these young gents
and ladies'll bring some parsley seed into the dream, and a penn'orth of
radish seed, and threepenn'orth of onion, and I wouldn't mind goin' to
fourpence or fippence for mixed kale, only I ain't got a brown, so I
don't deceive you. And there's one thing more, you might take away the
parson. I don't like things what I can see 'alf through, so here's how!'
He drained a coconut-shell of palm wine.

It was now past midnight--though it was tea-time on the island.

With all good wishes the children took their leave. They also collected
the clergyman and took him back to his study and his presentation clock.

The Phoenix kindly carried the seeds next day to the burglar and his
bride, and returned with the most satisfactory news of the happy pair.

'He's made a wooden spade and started on his allotment,' it said, 'and
she is weaving him a shirt and trousers of the most radiant whiteness.'

The police never knew how the burglar got away. In Kentish Town Police
Station his escape is still spoken of with bated breath as the Persian
mystery.

As for the Reverend Septimus Blenkinsop, he felt that he had had a
very insane fit indeed, and he was sure it was due to over-study. So he
planned a little dissipation, and took his two maiden aunts to Paris,
where they enjoyed a dazzling round of museums and picture galleries,
and came back feeling that they had indeed seen life. He never told his
aunts or any one else about the marriage on the island--because no
one likes it to be generally known if he has had insane fits, however
interesting and unusual.



CHAPTER 10. THE HOLE IN THE CARPET


     Hooray! hooray! hooray!
     Mother comes home to-day;
     Mother comes home to-day,
     Hooray! hooray! hooray!'

Jane sang this simple song directly after breakfast, and the Phoenix
shed crystal tears of affectionate sympathy.

'How beautiful,' it said, 'is filial devotion!'

'She won't be home till past bedtime, though,' said Robert. 'We might
have one more carpet-day.'

He was glad that mother was coming home--quite glad, very glad; but at
the same time that gladness was rudely contradicted by a quite strong
feeling of sorrow, because now they could not go out all day on the
carpet.

'I do wish we could go and get something nice for mother, only she'd
want to know where we got it,' said Anthea. 'And she'd never, never
believe it, the truth. People never do, somehow, if it's at all
interesting.'

'I'll tell you what,' said Robert. 'Suppose we wished the carpet to take
us somewhere where we could find a purse with money in it--then we could
buy her something.'

'Suppose it took us somewhere foreign, and the purse was covered with
strange Eastern devices, embroidered in rich silks, and full of money
that wasn't money at all here, only foreign curiosities, then we
couldn't spend it, and people would bother about where we got it, and we
shouldn't know how on earth to get out of it at all.'

Cyril moved the table off the carpet as he spoke, and its leg caught
in one of Anthea's darns and ripped away most of it, as well as a large
slit in the carpet.

'Well, now you HAVE done it,' said Robert.

But Anthea was a really first-class sister. She did not say a word
till she had got out the Scotch heather-mixture fingering wool and the
darning-needle and the thimble and the scissors, and by that time she
had been able to get the better of her natural wish to be thoroughly
disagreeable, and was able to say quite kindly--

'Never mind, Squirrel, I'll soon mend it.'

Cyril thumped her on the back. He understood exactly how she had felt,
and he was not an ungrateful brother.

'Respecting the purse containing coins,' the Phoenix said, scratching
its invisible ear thoughtfully with its shining claw, 'it might be as
well, perhaps, to state clearly the amount which you wish to find, as
well as the country where you wish to find it, and the nature of the
coins which you prefer. It would be indeed a cold moment when you should
find a purse containing but three oboloi.'

'How much is an oboloi?'

'An obol is about twopence halfpenny,' the Phoenix replied.

'Yes,' said Jane, 'and if you find a purse I suppose it is only because
some one has lost it, and you ought to take it to the policeman.'

'The situation,' remarked the Phoenix, 'does indeed bristle with
difficulties.'

'What about a buried treasure,' said Cyril, 'and every one was dead that
it belonged to?'

'Mother wouldn't believe THAT,' said more than one voice.

'Suppose,' said Robert--'suppose we asked to be taken where we could
find a purse and give it back to the person it belonged to, and they
would give us something for finding it?'

'We aren't allowed to take money from strangers. You know we aren't,
Bobs,' said Anthea, making a knot at the end of a needleful of Scotch
heather-mixture fingering wool (which is very wrong, and you must never
do it when you are darning).

'No, THAT wouldn't do,' said Cyril. 'Let's chuck it and go to the North
Pole, or somewhere really interesting.'

'No,' said the girls together, 'there must be SOME way.'

'Wait a sec,' Anthea added. 'I've got an idea coming. Don't speak.'

There was a silence as she paused with the darning-needle in the air!
Suddenly she spoke:

'I see. Let's tell the carpet to take us somewhere where we can get the
money for mother's present, and--and--and get it some way that she'll
believe in and not think wrong.'

'Well, I must say you are learning the way to get the most out of the
carpet,' said Cyril. He spoke more heartily and kindly than usual,
because he remembered how Anthea had refrained from snarking him about
tearing the carpet.

'Yes,' said the Phoenix, 'you certainly are. And you have to remember
that if you take a thing out it doesn't stay in.'

No one paid any attention to this remark at the time, but afterwards
every one thought of it.

'Do hurry up, Panther,' said Robert; and that was why Anthea did hurry
up, and why the big darn in the middle of the carpet was all open and
webby like a fishing net, not tight and close like woven cloth, which is
what a good, well-behaved darn should be.

Then every one put on its outdoor things, the Phoenix fluttered on to
the mantelpiece and arranged its golden feathers in the glass, and all
was ready. Every one got on to the carpet.

'Please go slowly, dear carpet,' Anthea began; we like to see where
we're going.' And then she added the difficult wish that had been
decided on.

Next moment the carpet, stiff and raftlike, was sailing over the roofs
of Kentish Town.
