the nice one. He stood with his hands in his pockets just as though
he was quite used to seeing great stone bulls and all sorts of small
Babylonish objects float out into the Museum yard.

But he sent a man to close the big iron gates.

A journalist, who was just leaving the museum, spoke to Robert as he
passed.

'Theosophy, I suppose?' he said. 'Is she Mrs Besant?'

'YES,' said Robert recklessly.

The journalist passed through the gates just before they were shut.

He rushed off to Fleet Street, and his paper got out a new edition
within half an hour.

   MRS BESANT AND THEOSOPHY

   IMPERTINENT MIRACLE AT THE BRITISH MUSEUM.

People saw it in fat, black letters on the boards carried by the sellers
of newspapers. Some few people who had nothing better to do went down
to the Museum on the tops of omnibuses. But by the time they got there
there was nothing to be seen. For the Babylonian Queen had suddenly seen
the closed gates, had felt the threat of them, and had said--

'I wish we were in your house.'

And, of course, instantly they were.

The Psammead was furious.

'Look here,' it said, 'they'll come after you, and they'll find ME.
There'll be a National Cage built for me at Westminster, and I shall
have to work at politics. Why wouldn't you leave the things in their
places?'

'What a temper you have, haven't you?' said the Queen serenely. 'I wish
all the things were back in their places. Will THAT do for you?'

The Psammead swelled and shrank and spoke very angrily.

'I can't refuse to give your wishes,' it said, 'but I can Bite. And I
will if this goes on. Now then.'

'Ah, don't,' whispered Anthea close to its bristling ear; 'it's dreadful
for us too. Don't YOU desert us. Perhaps she'll wish herself at home
again soon.'

'Not she,' said the Psammead a little less crossly.

'Take me to see your City,' said the Queen.

The children looked at each other.

'If we had some money we could take her about in a cab. People wouldn't
notice her so much then. But we haven't.'

'Sell this,' said the Queen, taking a ring from her finger.

'They'd only think we'd stolen it,' said Cyril bitterly, 'and put us in
prison.'

'All roads lead to prison with you, it seems,' said the Queen.

'The learned gentleman!' said Anthea, and ran up to him with the ring in
her hand.

'Look here,' she said, 'will you buy this for a pound?'

'Oh!' he said in tones of joy and amazement, and took the ring into his
hand. 'It's my very own,' said Anthea; 'it was given to me to sell.'

'I'll lend you a pound,' said the learned gentleman, 'with pleasure; and
I'll take care of the ring for you. Who did you say gave it to you?'

'We call her,' said Anthea carefully, 'the Queen of Babylon.'

'Is it a game?' he asked hopefully.

'It'll be a pretty game if I don't get the money to pay for cabs for
her,' said Anthea.

'I sometimes think,' he said slowly, 'that I am becoming insane, or
that--'

'Or that I am; but I'm not, and you're not, and she's not.'

'Does she SAY that she's the Queen of Babylon?' he uneasily asked.

'Yes,' said Anthea recklessly.

'This thought-transference is more far-reaching than I imagined,' he
said. 'I suppose I have unconsciously influenced HER, too. I never
thought my Babylonish studies would bear fruit like this. Horrible!
There are more things in heaven and earth--'

'Yes,' said Anthea, 'heaps more. And the pound is the thing _I_ want
more than anything on earth.'

He ran his fingers through his thin hair.

'This thought-transference!' he said. 'It's undoubtedly a Babylonian
ring--or it seems so to me. But perhaps I have hypnotized myself. I will
see a doctor the moment I have corrected the last proofs of my book.'

'Yes, do!' said Anthea, 'and thank you so very much.'

She took the sovereign and ran down to the others.

And now from the window of a four-wheeled cab the Queen of Babylon
beheld the wonders of London. Buckingham Palace she thought
uninteresting; Westminster Abbey and the Houses of Parliament little
better. But she liked the Tower, and the River, and the ships filled her
with wonder and delight.

'But how badly you keep your slaves. How wretched and poor and neglected
they seem,' she said, as the cab rattled along the Mile End Road.

'They aren't slaves; they're working-people,' said Jane.

'Of course they're working. That's what slaves are. Don't you tell me.
Do you suppose I don't know a slave's face when I see it?

Why don't their masters see that they're better fed and better clothed?
Tell me in three words.'

No one answered. The wage-system of modern England is a little difficult
to explain in three words even if you understand it--which the children
didn't.

'You'll have a revolt of your slaves if you're not careful,' said the
Queen.

'Oh, no,' said Cyril; 'you see they have votes--that makes them safe not
to revolt. It makes all the difference. Father told me so.'

'What is this vote?' asked the Queen. 'Is it a charm? What do they do
with it?'

'I don't know,' said the harassed Cyril; 'it's just a vote, that's all!
They don't do anything particular with it.'

'I see,' said the Queen; 'a sort of plaything. Well, I wish that all
these slaves may have in their hands this moment their fill of their
favourite meat and drink.'

Instantly all the people in the Mile End Road, and in all the other
streets where poor people live, found their hands full of things to eat
and drink. From the cab window could be seen persons carrying every kind
of food, and bottles and cans as well. Roast meat, fowls, red lobsters,
great yellowy crabs, fried fish, boiled pork, beef-steak puddings, baked
onions, mutton pies; most of the young people had oranges and sweets
and cake. It made an enormous change in the look of the Mile End
Road--brightened it up, so to speak, and brightened up, more than you
can possibly imagine, the faces of the people.

'Makes a difference, doesn't it?' said the Queen.

'That's the best wish you've had yet,' said Jane with cordial approval.

just by the Bank the cabman stopped.

'I ain't agoin' to drive you no further,' he said. 'Out you gets.'

They got out rather unwillingly.

'I wants my tea,' he said; and they saw that on the box of the cab was a
mound of cabbage, with pork chops and apple sauce, a duck, and a spotted
currant pudding. Also a large can.

'You pay me my fare,' he said threateningly, and looked down at the
mound, muttering again about his tea.

'We'll take another cab,' said Cyril with dignity. 'Give me change for a
sovereign, if you please.'

But the cabman, as it turned out, was not at all a nice character. He
took the sovereign, whipped up his horse, and disappeared in the stream
of cabs and omnibuses and wagons, without giving them any change at all.

Already a little crowd was collecting round the party.

'Come on,' said Robert, leading the wrong way.

The crowd round them thickened. They were in a narrow street where many
gentlemen in black coats and without hats were standing about on the
pavement talking very loudly.

'How ugly their clothes are,' said the Queen of Babylon. 'They'd be
rather fine men, some of them, if they were dressed decently, especially
the ones with the beautiful long, curved noses. I wish they were dressed
like the Babylonians of my court.'

And of course, it was so.

The moment the almost fainting Psammead had blown itself out every man
in Throgmorton Street appeared abruptly in Babylonian full dress.

All were carefully powdered, their hair and beards were scented and
curled, their garments richly embroidered. They wore rings and armlets,
flat gold collars and swords, and impossible-looking head-dresses.

A stupefied silence fell on them.

'I say,' a youth who had always been fair-haired broke that silence,
'it's only fancy of course--something wrong with my eyes--but you chaps
do look so rum.'

'Rum,' said his friend. 'Look at YOU. You in a sash! My hat! And your
hair's gone black and you've got a beard. It's my belief we've been
poisoned. You do look a jackape.'

'Old Levinstein don't look so bad. But how was it DONE--that's what I
want to know. How was it done? Is it conjuring, or what?'

'I think it is chust a ver' bad tream,' said old Levinstein to his
clerk; 'all along Bishopsgate I haf seen the gommon people have their
hants full of food--GOOT food. Oh yes, without doubt a very bad tream!'

'Then I'm dreaming too, Sir,' said the clerk, looking down at his legs
with an expression of loathing. 'I see my feet in beastly sandals as
plain as plain.'

'All that goot food wasted,' said old Mr Levinstein. A bad tream--a bad
tream.'

The Members of the Stock Exchange are said to be at all times a noisy
lot. But the noise they made now to express their disgust at the
costumes of ancient Babylon was far louder than their ordinary row. One
had to shout before one could hear oneself speak.

'I only wish,' said the clerk who thought it was conjuring--he was quite
close to the children and they trembled, because they knew that whatever
he wished would come true. 'I only wish we knew who'd done it.'

And, of course, instantly they did know, and they pressed round the
Queen.

'Scandalous! Shameful! Ought to be put down by law. Give her in charge.
Fetch the police,' two or three voices shouted at once.

The Queen recoiled.

'What is it?' she asked. 'They sound like caged lions--lions by the
thousand. What is it that they say?'

'They say "Police!",' said Cyril briefly. 'I knew they would sooner or
later. And I don't blame them, mind you.'

'I wish my guards were here!' cried the Queen. The exhausted Psammead
was panting and trembling, but the Queen's guards in red and green
garments, and brass and iron gear, choked Throgmorton Street, and bared
weapons flashed round the Queen.

'I'm mad,' said a Mr Rosenbaum; 'dat's what it is--mad!'

'It's a judgement on you, Rosy,' said his partner. 'I always said you
were too hard in that matter of Flowerdew. It's a judgement, and I'm in
it too.'

The members of the Stock Exchange had edged carefully away from the
gleaming blades, the mailed figures, the hard, cruel Eastern faces.

But Throgmorton Street is narrow, and the crowd was too thick for them
to get away as quickly as they wished.

'Kill them,' cried the Queen. 'Kill the dogs!'

The guards obeyed.

'It IS all a dream,' cried Mr Levinstein, cowering in a doorway behind
his clerk.

'It isn't,' said the clerk. 'It isn't. Oh, my good gracious! those
foreign brutes are killing everybody. Henry Hirsh is down now, and
Prentice is cut in two--oh, Lord! and Huth, and there goes Lionel Cohen
with his head off, and Guy Nickalls has lost his head now. A dream? I
wish to goodness it was all a dream.'

And, of course, instantly it was! The entire Stock Exchange rubbed its
eyes and went back to close, to over, and either side of seven-eights,
and Trunks, and Kaffirs, and Steel Common, and Contangoes, and
Backwardations, Double Options, and all the interesting subjects
concerning which they talk in the Street without ceasing.

No one said a word about it to anyone else. I think I have explained
before that business men do not like it to be known that they have
been dreaming in business hours. Especially mad dreams including such
dreadful things as hungry people getting dinners, and the destruction of
the Stock Exchange.


The children were in the dining-room at 300, Fitzroy Street, pale and
trembling. The Psammead crawled out of the embroidered bag, and lay flat
on the table, its leg stretched out, looking more like a dead hare than
anything else.

'Thank Goodness that's over,' said Anthea, drawing a deep breath.

'She won't come back, will she?' asked Jane tremulously.

'No,' said Cyril. 'She's thousands of years ago. But we spent a whole
precious pound on her. It'll take all our pocket-money for ages to pay
that back.'

'Not if it was ALL a dream,' said Robert.
