
"Dig," said he.

"But you can't dig forever; and what are you going to do then?" she
persisted.

"Don't know," said the boy.

"But you MUST know SOMETHING," declared Dorothy, getting provoked.

"Must I?"  he asked, looking up in surprise.

"Of course you must."

"What must I know?"

"What's going to become of you, for one thing," she answered.

"Do YOU know what's going to become of me?" he asked.

"Not--not 'zactly," she admitted.

"Do you know what's going to become of YOU?"  he continued, earnestly.

"I can't say I do," replied Dorothy, remembering her present
difficulties.

The shaggy man laughed.

"No one knows everything, Dorothy," he said.

"But Button-Bright doesn't seem to know ANYthing," she declared.  "Do
you, Button-Bright?"

He shook his head, which had pretty curls all over it, and replied with
perfect calmness:

"Don't know."

Never before had Dorothy met with anyone who could give her so little
information.  The boy was evidently lost, and his people would be sure
to worry about him.  He seemed two or three years younger than Dorothy,
and was prettily dressed, as if someone loved him dearly and took much
pains to make him look well.  How, then, did he come to be in this
lonely road? she wondered.

Near Button-Bright, on the ground, lay a sailor hat with a gilt anchor
on the band.  His sailor trousers were long and wide at the bottom, and
the broad collar of his blouse had gold anchors sewed on its corners.
The boy was still digging at his hole.

"Have you ever been to sea?" asked Dorothy.

"To see what?" answered Button-Bright.

"I mean, have you ever been where there's water?"

"Yes," said Button-Bright; "there's a well in our back yard."

"You don't understand," cried Dorothy.  "I mean, have you ever been on
a big ship floating on a big ocean?"

"Don't know," said he.

"Then why do you wear sailor clothes?"

"Don't know," he answered, again.

Dorothy was in despair.

"You're just AWFUL stupid, Button-Bright," she said.

"Am I?" he asked.

"Yes, you are."

"Why?" looking up at her with big eyes.

She was going to say: "Don't know," but stopped herself in time.

"That's for you to answer," she replied.

"It's no use asking Button-Bright questions," said the shaggy man, who
had been eating another apple; "but someone ought to take care of the
poor little chap, don't you think?  So he'd better come along with us."

Toto had been looking with great curiosity in the hole which the boy
was digging, and growing more and more excited every minute, perhaps
thinking that Button-Bright was after some wild animal.  The little dog
began barking loudly and jumped into the hole himself, where he began
to dig with his tiny paws, making the earth fly in all directions.  It
spattered over the boy.  Dorothy seized him and raised him to his feet,
brushing his clothes with her hand.

"Stop that, Toto!"  she called. "There aren't any mice or woodchucks in
that hole, so don't be foolish."

Toto stopped, sniffed at the hole suspiciously, and jumped out of it,
wagging his tail as if he had done something important.

"Well," said the shaggy man, "let's start on, or we won't get anywhere
before night comes."

"Where do you expect to get to?" asked Dorothy.

"I'm like Button-Bright.  I don't know," answered the shaggy man, with
a laugh.  "But I've learned from long experience that every road leads
somewhere, or there wouldn't be any road; so it's likely that if we
travel long enough, my dear, we will come to some place or another in
the end.  What place it will be we can't even guess at this moment, but
we're sure to find out when we get there."

"Why, yes," said Dorothy; "that seems reas'n'ble, Shaggy Man."




3.  A Queer Village


Button-Bright took the shaggy man's hand willingly; for the shaggy man
had the Love Magnet, you know, which was the reason Button-Bright had
loved him at once.  They started on, with Dorothy on one side, and Toto
on the other, the little party trudging along more cheerfully than you
might have supposed.  The girl was getting used to queer adventures,
which interested her very much.  Wherever Dorothy went Toto was sure to
go, like Mary's little lamb.  Button-Bright didn't seem a bit afraid or
worried because he was lost, and the shaggy man had no home, perhaps,
and was as happy in one place as in another.

Before long they saw ahead of them a fine big arch spanning the road,
and when they came nearer they found that the arch was beautifully
carved and decorated with rich colors.  A row of peacocks with spread
tails ran along the top of it, and all the feathers were gorgeously
painted.  In the center was a large fox's head, and the fox wore a
shrewd and knowing expression and had large spectacles over its eyes
and a small golden crown with shiny points on top of its head.

While the travelers were looking with curiosity at this beautiful arch
there suddenly marched out of it a company of soldiers--only the
soldiers were all foxes dressed in uniforms.  They wore green jackets
and yellow pantaloons, and their little round caps and their high boots
were a bright red color.  Also, there was a big red bow tied about the
middle of each long, bushy tail.  Each soldier was armed with a wooden
sword having an edge of sharp teeth set in a row, and the sight of
these teeth at first caused Dorothy to shudder.

A captain marched in front of the company of fox-soldiers, his uniform
embroidered with gold braid to make it handsomer than the others.

Almost before our friends realized it the soldiers had surrounded them
on all sides, and the captain was calling out in a harsh voice:

"Surrender!  You are our prisoners."

"What's a pris'ner?" asked Button-Bright.

"A prisoner is a captive," replied the fox-captain, strutting up and
down with much dignity.

"What's a captive?" asked Button-Bright.

"You're one," said the captain.

That made the shaggy man laugh

"Good afternoon, captain," he said, bowing politely to all the foxes
and very low to their commander.  "I trust you are in good health, and
that your families are all well?"

The fox-captain looked at the shaggy man, and his sharp features grew
pleasant and smiling.

"We're pretty well, thank you, Shaggy Man," said he; and Dorothy knew
that the Love Magnet was working and that all the foxes now loved the
shaggy man because of it.  But Toto didn't know this, for he began
barking angrily and tried to bite the captain's hairy leg where it
showed between his red boots and his yellow pantaloons.

"Stop, Toto!" cried the little girl, seizing the dog in her arms.
"These are our friends."

"Why, so we are!" remarked the captain in tones of astonishment.  "I
thought at first we were enemies, but it seems you are friends instead.
You must come with me to see King Dox."

"Who's he?" asked Button-Bright, with earnest eyes.

"King Dox of Foxville; the great and wise sovereign who rules over our
community."

"What's sov'rin, and what's c'u'nity?" inquired Button-Bright.

"Don't ask so many questions, little boy."

"Why?"

"Ah, why indeed?" exclaimed the captain, looking at Button-Bright
admiringly.  "If you don't ask questions you will learn nothing.  True
enough.  I was wrong.  You're a very clever little boy, come to think
of it--very clever indeed.  But now, friends, please come with me, for
it is my duty to escort you at once to the royal palace."

The soldiers marched back through the arch again, and with them marched
the shaggy man, Dorothy, Toto, and Button-Bright.  Once through the
opening they found a fine, big city spread out before them, all the
houses of carved marble in beautiful colors.  The decorations were
mostly birds and other fowl, such as peacocks, pheasants, turkeys,
prairie-chickens, ducks, and geese.  Over each doorway was carved a
head representing the fox who lived in that house, this effect being
quite pretty and unusual.

As our friends marched along, some of the foxes came out on the porches
and balconies to get a view of the strangers.  These foxes were all
handsomely dressed, the girl-foxes and women-foxes wearing gowns of
feathers woven together effectively and colored in bright hues which
Dorothy thought were quite artistic and decidedly attractive.

Button-Bright stared until his eyes were big and round, and he would
have stumbled and fallen more than once had not the shaggy man grasped
his hand tightly.  They were all interested, and Toto was so excited he
wanted to bark every minute and to chase and fight every fox he caught
sight of; but Dorothy held his little wiggling body fast in her arms
and commanded him to be good and behave himself.  So he finally quieted
down, like a wise doggy, deciding there were too many foxes in Foxville
to fight at one time.

By-and-by they came to a big square, and in the center of the square
stood the royal palace.  Dorothy knew it at once because it had over
its great door the carved head of a fox just like the one she had seen
on the arch, and this fox was the only one who wore a golden crown.

There were many fox-soldiers guarding the door, but they bowed to the
captain and admitted him without question.  The captain led them
through many rooms, where richly dressed foxes were sitting on
beautiful chairs or sipping tea, which was being passed around by
fox-servants in white aprons.  They came to a big doorway covered with
heavy curtains of cloth of gold.

Beside this doorway stood a huge drum.  The fox-captain went to this
drum and knocked his knees against it--first one knee and then the
other--so that the drum said: "Boom-boom."

"You must all do exactly what I do," ordered the captain; so the shaggy
man pounded the drum with his knees, and so did Dorothy and so did
Button-Bright.  The boy wanted to keep on pounding it with his little
fat knees, because he liked the sound of it; but the captain stopped
him.  Toto couldn't pound the drum with his knees and he didn't know
enough to wag his tail against it, so Dorothy pounded the drum for him
and that made him bark, and when the little dog barked the fox-captain
scowled.

The golden curtains drew back far enough to make an opening, through
which marched the captain with the others.

The broad, long room they entered was decorated in gold with
stained-glass windows of splendid colors.  In the corner of the room
upon a richly carved golden throne, sat the fox-king, surrounded by a
group of other foxes, all of whom wore great spectacles over their
eyes, making them look solemn and important.

Dorothy knew the King at once, because she had seen his head carved on
the arch and over the doorway of the palace.  Having met with several
other kings in her travels, she knew what to do, and at once made a low
bow before the throne.  The shaggy man bowed, too, and Button-Bright
bobbed his head and said "Hello."

"Most wise and noble Potentate of Foxville," said the captain,
addressing the King in a pompous voice, "I humbly beg to report that I
found these strangers on the road leading to your Foxy Majesty's
dominions, and have therefore brought them before you, as is my duty."

"So--so," said the King, looking at them keenly.  "What brought you
here, strangers?"

"Our legs, may it please your Royal Hairiness," replied the shaggy man.

"What is your business here?" was the next question.

"To get away as soon as possible," said the shaggy man.

The King didn't know about the Magnet, of course; but it made him love
the shaggy man at once.

"Do just as you please about going away," he said; "but I'd like to
show you the sights of my city and to entertain your party while you
are here.  We feel highly honored to have little Dorothy with us, I
assure you, and we appreciate her kindness in making us a visit.  For
whatever country Dorothy visits is sure to become famous."

This speech greatly surprised the little girl, who asked:

"How did your Majesty know my name?"

"Why, everybody knows you, my dear," said the Fox-King.  "Don't you
realize that?  You are quite an important personage since Princess Ozma
of Oz made you her friend."

"Do you know Ozma?" she asked, wondering.

"I regret to say that I do not," he answered, sadly; "but I hope to
meet her soon.  You know the Princess Ozma is to celebrate her birthday
on the twenty-first of this month."

"Is she?" said Dorothy.  "I didn't know that."

"Yes; it is to be the most brilliant royal ceremony ever held in any
city in Fairyland, and I hope you will try to get me an invitation."

Dorothy thought a moment.

"I'm sure Ozma would invite you if I asked her," she said; "but how
could you get to the Land of Oz and the Emerald City?  It's a good way
from Kansas."

"Kansas!" he exclaimed, surprised.

"Why, yes; we are in Kansas now, aren't we?" she returned.

"What a queer notion!" cried the Fox-King, beginning to laugh.
"Whatever made you think this is Kansas?"

"I left Uncle Henry's farm only about two hours ago; that's the
reason," she said, rather perplexed.

"But, tell me, my dear, did you ever see so wonderful a city as
Foxville in Kansas?" he questioned.

"No, your Majesty."

"And haven't you traveled from Oz to Kansas in less than half a jiffy,
by means of the Silver Shoes and the Magic Belt?"

"Yes, your Majesty," she acknowledged.

"Then why do you wonder that an hour or two could bring you to
Foxville, which is nearer to Oz than it is to Kansas?"

"Dear me!" exclaimed Dorothy; "is this another fairy adventure?"

"It seems to be," said the Fox-King, smiling.

Dorothy turned to the shaggy man, and her face was grave and
reproachful.

"Are you a magician? or a fairy in disguise?" she asked.  "Did you
enchant me when you asked the way to Butterfield?"

The shaggy man shook his head.

"Who ever heard of a shaggy fairy?" he replied.  "No, Dorothy, my dear;
I'm not to blame for this journey in any way, I assure you.  There's
been something strange about me ever since I owned the Love Magnet; but
I don't know what it is any more than you do.  I didn't try to get you
away from home, at all.  If you want to find your way back to the farm
I'll go with you willingly, and do my best to help you."

"Never mind," said the little girl, thoughtfully.  "There isn't so much
to see in Kansas as there is here, and I guess Aunt Em won't be VERY
much worried; that is, if I don't stay away too long."

"That's right," declared the Fox-King, nodding approval.  "Be contented
with your lot, whatever it happens to be, if you are wise.  Which
reminds me that you have a new companion on this adventure--he looks
very clever and bright."

"He is," said Dorothy; and the shaggy man added:

"That's his name, your Royal Foxiness--Button-Bright."




4.  King Dox


It was amusing to note the expression on the face of King Dox as he
looked the boy over, from his sailor hat to his stubby shoes, and it
was equally diverting to watch Button-Bright stare at the King in
return.  No fox ever beheld a fresher, fairer child's face, and no
child had ever before heard a fox talk, or met with one who dressed so
handsomely and ruled so big a city.  I am sorry to say that no one had
ever told the little boy much about fairies of any kind; this being the
case, it is easy to understand how much this strange experience
startled and astonished him.

"How do you like us?" asked the King.

"Don't know," said Button-Bright.

"Of course you don't.  It's too short an acquaintance," returned his
Majesty.  "What do you suppose my name is?"

"Don't know," said Button-Bright.

"How should you?  Well, I'll tell you.  My private name is Dox, but a
King can't be called by his private name; he has to take one that is
official.  Therefore my official name is King Renard the Fourth.
Ren-ard with the accent on the 'Ren'."

"What's 'ren'?" asked Button-Bright.

"How clever!" exclaimed the King, turning a pleased face toward his
counselors.  "This boy is indeed remarkably bright.  'What's 'ren'?' he
asks; and of course 'ren' is nothing at all, all by itself.  Yes, he's
very bright indeed."

"That question is what your Majesty might call foxy," said one of the
counselors, an old grey fox.

"So it is," declared the King.  Turning again to Button-Bright, he
asked:

"Having told you my name, what would you call me?"

"King Dox," said the boy.

"Why?"

"'Cause 'ren''s nothing at all," was the reply.

"Good!  Very good indeed!  You certainly have a brilliant mind.  Do you
know why two and two make four?"

"No," said Button-Bright.

"Clever! clever indeed!  Of course you don't know.  Nobody knows why;
we only know it's so, and can't tell why it's so.  Button-Bright, those
curls and blue eyes do not go well with so much wisdom.  They make you
look too youthful, and hide your real cleverness.  Therefore, I will do
you a great favor.  I will confer upon you the head of a fox, so that
you may hereafter look as bright as you really are."

As he spoke the King waved his paw toward the boy, and at once the
pretty curls and fresh round face and big blue eyes were gone, while in
their place a fox's head appeared upon Button-Bright's shoulders--a
hairy head with a sharp nose, pointed ears, and keen little eyes.

"Oh, don't do that!" cried Dorothy, shrinking back from her transformed
companion with a shocked and dismayed face.

"Too late, my dear; it's done.  But you also shall have a fox's head if
you can prove you're as clever as Button-Bright."

"I don't want it; it's dreadful!" she exclaimed; and, hearing this
verdict, Button-Bright began to boo-hoo just as if he were still a
little boy.

"How can you call that lovely head dreadful?" asked the King.  "It's a
much prettier face than he had before, to my notion, and my wife says
I'm a good judge of beauty.  Don't cry, little fox-boy.  Laugh and be
proud, because you are so highly favored.  How do you like the new
head, Button-Bright?"

"D-d-don't n-n-n-know!" sobbed the child.

"Please, PLEASE change him back again, your Majesty!" begged Dorothy.

King Renard IV shook his head.

"I can't do that," he said; "I haven't the power, even if I wanted to.
No, Button-Bright must wear his fox head, and he'll be sure to love it
dearly as soon as he gets used to it."

Both the shaggy man and Dorothy looked grave and anxious, for they were
sorrowful that such a misfortune had overtaken their little companion.
Toto barked at the fox-boy once or twice, not realizing it was his
former friend who now wore the animal head; but Dorothy cuffed the dog
and made him stop.  As for the foxes, they all seemed to think
Button-Bright's new head very becoming and that their King had
conferred a great honor on this little stranger.  It was funny to see
the boy reach up to feel of his sharp nose and wide mouth, and wail
afresh with grief.  He wagged his ears in a comical manner and tears
were in his little black eyes.  But Dorothy couldn't laugh at her
friend just yet, because she felt so sorry.

Just then three little fox-princesses, daughters of the King, entered
the room, and when they saw Button-Bright one exclaimed: "How lovely he
is!" and the next one cried in delight: "How sweet he is!" and the
third princess clapped her hands with pleasure and said, "How beautiful
he is!"

Button-Bright stopped crying and asked timidly:

"Am I?"

"In all the world there is not another face so pretty," declared the
biggest fox-princess.

"You must live with us always, and be our brother," said the next.

"We shall all love you dearly," the third said.

This praise did much to comfort the boy, and he looked around and tried
to smile.  It was a pitiful attempt, because the fox face was new and
stiff, and Dorothy thought his expression more stupid than before the
transformation.

"I think we ought to be going now," said the shaggy man, uneasily, for
he didn't know what the King might take into his head to do next.

"Don't leave us yet, I beg of you," pleaded King Renard.  "I intend to
have several days of feasting and merry-making in honor of your visit."

"Have it after we're gone, for we can't wait," said Dorothy, decidedly.
But seeing this displeased the King, she added: "If I'm going to get
Ozma to invite you to her party I'll have to find her as soon as
poss'ble, you know."

In spite of all the beauty of Foxville and the gorgeous dresses of its
inhabitants, both the girl and the shaggy man felt they were not quite
safe there, and would be glad to see the last of it.

"But it is now evening," the King reminded them, "and you must stay
with us until morning, anyhow.  Therefore, I invite you to be my guests
at dinner, and to attend the theater afterward and sit in the royal
box.  To-morrow morning, if you really insist upon it, you may resume
your journey."

They consented to this, and some of the fox-servants led them to a
suite of lovely rooms in the big palace.

Button-Bright was afraid to be left alone, so Dorothy took him into her
own room.  While a maid-fox dressed the little girl's hair--which was a
bit tangled--and put some bright, fresh ribbons in it, another maid-fox
combed the hair on poor Button-Bright's face and head and brushed it
carefully, tying a pink bow to each of his pointed ears.  The maids
wanted to dress the children in fine costumes of woven feathers, such
as all the foxes wore; but neither of them consented to that.

"A sailor suit and a fox head do not go well together," said one of the
maids, "for no fox was ever a sailor that I can remember."

"I'm not a fox!" cried Button-Bright.

"Alas, no," agreed the maid.  "But you've got a lovely fox head on your
skinny shoulders, and that's ALMOST as good as being a fox."

The boy, reminded of his misfortune, began to cry again.  Dorothy
petted and comforted him and promised to find some way to restore him
his own head.

"If we can manage to get to Ozma," she said, "the Princess will change
you back to yourself in half a second; so you just wear that fox head
as comf't'bly as you can, dear, and don't worry about it at all.  It
isn't nearly as pretty as your own head, no matter what the foxes say;
but you can get along with it for a little while longer, can't you?"

"Don't know," said Button-Bright, doubtfully; but he didn't cry any
more after that.

Dorothy let the maids pin ribbons to her shoulders, after which they
were ready for the King's dinner.  When they met the shaggy man in the
splendid drawing room of the palace they found him just the same as
before.  He had refused to give up his shaggy clothes for new ones,
because if he did that he would no longer be the shaggy man, he said,
