
9. For a time, his actions showed him to be suspicious that a guard
might be stationed to watch any unusual appearance, who would give the
alarm in case of danger; but, all appearing quiet, he ventured forward
more boldly, rested upon his toes, and was distinctly seen to move his
finger as he numbered each log of wood, or what he supposed to be a
human being quietly enjoying repose.

10. To satisfy himself more fully, as to the number, he counted them
over a second time, and cautiously retired. He was succeeded by another
Indian, who went through the same movements, and retired in the same
manner. Soon after, the whole party, sixteen in number, were discovered
approaching, and greedily eyeing their supposed victims.

11. The feelings of the sergeant's men can be better imagined than
described, when they saw the base and cruel purpose of their enemies,
who were now so near that they could scarcely be restrained from firing
upon them. The plan, however, of the sergeant, was to have his men
remain silent in their places of concealment, till the muskets of the
savages were discharged, that their own fire might be effectual, and
opposition less formidable.

12. Their suspense was not of long duration. The Indians, in a body,
cautiously approached till within a short distance: they then halted,
took deliberate aim, discharged their pieces upon inanimate logs, gave a
dreadful war-whoop, and instantly rushed forward, with tomahawk and
scalping knife in hand, to dispatch the living, and obtain the scalps of
the dead.

13. As soon as they had collected in close order, more effectually to
execute their horrid intentions, the sergeant's party discharged their
pieces, not on logs of wood, but perfidious savages,--many of whom fell
under the hot fire of the little band, and the rest precipitately fled.
But for this ingenious scheme, it is probable that not one of these
twelve men would have escaped the tomahawk of the savages.

QUESTIONS.--1. What did the sergeant say to his men, after parting with
the Indians? 2. What plan did the sergeant propose for their
preservation? 3. Did the plan succeed? 4. Describe the closing scene.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XLIX.

   VEN' ER A BLE, worthy of reverence.
   IN VA' SION, irruption; inroad.
   EX CIT' ED, roused; stirred up.
   IRE, wrath; indignation.
   VENGE' ANCE, retaliation.
   RE LEAS' ED, set free; liberated.
   TRO PHIES, memorials of victory.
   BE REFT', deprived.
   VULT' URE, rapacious bird.
   TRAV' ERS ED, crossed over.
   DE SCRIP' TION, representation.
   MA TER' NAL, motherly.
   FIL' IAL, becoming a child.
   CON SAN GUIN' I TY, blood relationship.
   IN TEL' LI GENCE, news; information.
   I DEN' TI TY, sameness.
   SUR VIV' ED, remained alive.
   AS CER TAIN' ED, found out.
   IN TER' PRET ER, explainer.
   LIN' E A MENTS, features.


FRANCES SLOCUM, THE YOUNG CAPTIVE.

[Footnote: The great massacre at Wyoming was, perhaps, the most bloody
and terrible chapter of the Revolution. A combined Indian and Tory force
had flung itself upon the peaceful valley, and murdered or made captive
nearly all its unoffending inhabitants; its old and its young,--men,
women, and children alike,--were either indiscriminately butchered or
made prisoners. Among the prisoners taken on that occasion, was an
infant child by the name of Frances Slocum. The story is a very strange
one; we copy it from Lossing's very excellent work, "The Field Book of
the Revolution."]

B.J. LOSSING.

1. I passed the evening with the venerable Joseph Slocum, whose family
was among the sufferers, in Wyoming Valley. He related to me all the
particulars of the capture and final discovery of his sister Frances,
and other incidents connected with the sufferings of his family.

2. His father was a Quaker, and was distinguished for his kindness to
the Indians. He remained unharmed at the time of the invasion, and,
while the torch was applied to the dwellings of others, _his_ was left
untouched. But his son Giles was in the battle. This, doubtless, excited
the ire of the Indians, and they resolved on vengeance. 3. Late in the
autumn, they were seen prowling about the house, which was situated
about one hundred rods from the Wilkesbarre Fort. A neighbor, named
Kingsley, had been made prisoner, and his wife and two sons had a
welcome home in Mr. Slocum's family. One morning, the boys were grinding
a knife near the house, when a rifle-shot and a shriek brought Mrs.
Slocum to the door. An Indian was scalping the eldest boy, a lad of
fifteen, with the knife he had been grinding.

4. The savage then went into the house, and caught up a little son of
Mrs. Slocum. "See!" exclaimed the frightened mother, "he can do thee no
good; he is lame." The Indian released the boy, took up her little
daughter Frances, aged five years, gently in his arms, and, seizing the
younger Kingsley, hastened to the mountains.

5. Two Indians who were with him, carried off a black girl, about
seventeen years of age. Mr. Slocum's daughter caught up her brother
Joseph, (my informant,) two and a half years old, and fled in safety to
the fort, where an alarm was given; but the savages were beyond
successful pursuit.

6. About six weeks afterward, Mr. Slocum and his father-in-law Ira
Tripp, were shot and scalped by some Indians while foddering cattle near
the house. Again the savages escaped with their horrid trophies. Mrs.
Slocum, bereft of father, husband, and child, and stripped of all
possessions but the house that sheltered her, could not leave the
valley, for nine helpless children were yet in her household.

7. She trusted in the God of Elijah; and, if she was not fed by the
ravens, she was spared by the vultures. She mourned not for the dead;
for they were at rest: but little Frances, her lost darling, where was
she? The lamp of hope kept on burning; but years rolled by, and no
tidings of the little one came.

8. When peace returned, and friendly intercourse with Canada was
established, two of the little captive's brothers started in search of
her. They traversed the wilderness to Niagara, offering rewards for her
recovery; but all in vain. They returned to Wyoming, convinced that the
child was dead. But the mother's heart was still the shrine of hope, and
she felt assured that Frances was not in the grave.

9. Her soul appeared to commune with that of her child, and she often
said, "I know Frances is still living." At length, the mother's heart
was cheered: a woman (for many years had now passed, and Frances, if
living, must have arrived to womanhood) was found among the Indians,
answering the description of the lost one. She only remembered being
carried away from the Susquehanna.

10. Mrs. Slocum took her home, and cherished her with a mother's
tenderness. Yet the mysterious link of sympathy which binds the maternal
spirit to its offspring, was unfelt, and the bereaved mother was
bereaved still. "It may be Frances, but it does not seem so; yet the
woman shall ever be welcome," said Mrs. Slocum. The foundling, also,
felt no filial yearnings; and, both becoming convinced that no
consanguinity existed, the orphan returned to her Indian friends.

11. From time to time, the hope of the mother would be revived, and
journeys were made to distant Indian settlements in search of the lost
sister; but in vain. The mother went "down into the grave, mourning,"
and little Frances was almost forgotten. Her brothers had become aged
men, and their grandchildren were playing upon the very spot, whence she
had been taken.

12. In the summer of 1837, fifty-nine years after her capture,
intelligence of Frances was received. Colonel Ewing, an Indian agent and
trader, in a letter from Logansport, Indiana, to the editor of the
_Lancaster Intelligencer_, gave such information, that all doubts
respecting her identity were removed; and Joseph Slocum, with the sister
who carried him to the fort, and yet survived, immediately journeyed to
Ohio, where they were joined by their younger brother Isaac.

13. They proceeded to Logansport, where they found Mr. Ewing, and
ascertained that the woman spoken of by him, lived about twelve miles
from the village. She was immediately sent for; and, toward evening the
next day, she came into the town, riding a spirited young horse,
accompanied by her two daughters, and the husband of one of them,--all
dressed in full Indian costume.

14. An interpreter was procured, (for she could not speak or understand
English,) and she listened seriously to what her brothers had to say.
She answered but little, and, at sunset, departed for her home,
promising to return the next morning. The brother and sister were quite
sure that it was indeed Frances, though in her face nothing but Indian
lineaments were seen, her color alone revealing her origin.

15. True to her appointment, she appeared the following morning,
accompanied as before. Mr. Joseph Slocum then mentioned a mark of
recognition, which, his mother had said, was a sure test. While playing,
one day, with a hammer in a blacksmith's shop, Joseph, then a child two
and a half years old, gave Frances a blow upon the middle finger of the
left hand, which crushed the bone, and deprived the finger of its nail.

16. This test Mr. Slocum had withheld until others should fail. When he
mentioned it, the aged woman was greatly agitated; and, while tears
filled the furrows of her face, she held out the wounded finger. There
was no longer a doubt, and a scene of great interest ensued. Her
affections for her kindred, that had slumbered half a century, were
aroused, and she made earnest inquiries after her father, mother,
brothers, and sisters. Her full heart--full with the cherished secrets
of her history--was opened, and the story of her life freely given.

17. She said the savages, who were Delawares, after taking her to a
rocky cave in the mountains, departed to the Indian country. The first
night was the unhappiest of her life. She was kindly treated,--being
carried tenderly in their arms when she was weary. She was adopted in an
Indian family, and brought up as their daughter. For years she lived a
roving life, and loved it. She was taught the use of the bow and arrow,
and became expert in all the employments of savage existence.

18. When she was grown to womanhood, both her Indian parents died, and
she soon afterward married a young chief of the nation, and removed to
the Ohio country. She was treated with more respect than the Indian
women generally; and so happy was she in her domestic relations, that
the chance of being discovered, and compelled to return among the
whites, was the greatest evil that she feared; for she had been taught
that they were the implacable enemies of the Indians, whom she loved.

19. Her husband died; and, her people having joined the Miamies, she
went with them, and married one of that tribe. The last husband was also
dead, and she had been a widow many years. Children and grandchildren
were around her, and her life was passing pleasantly away. When she
concluded the narrative, she lifted her right hand in a solemn manner,
and said, "All this is as true as that there is a Great Spirit in the
heavens!" she had entirely forgotten her native language, and was a
pagan.

20. On the day after the second interview, the brothers and sisters,
with the interpreter, rode out to her dwelling. It was a well-built
log-house, in the midst of cultivation. A large herd of cattle and sixty
horses were grazing in the pasture. Everything betokened plenty and
comfort; for she was wealthy, when her wants and her means were
compared. Her annuity from government, which she received as one of the
Miami tribe, had been saved, and she had about one thousand dollars in
specie.

21. Her white friends passed several days very agreeably with her; and
subsequently her brother Joseph, with his daughter, the wife of the Hon.
Mr. Bennet, of Wyoming, made her another visit, and bade her a last
farewell. She died a few years ago, and was buried with considerable
pomp; for she was regarded as a queen among her tribe.

QUESTIONS.--1. Where is the Wyoming Valley? 2. Relate the incidents
connected with the capture of little Frances. 3. What efforts were made
to find her? 4. How many years after her capture before she was found?
5. Where did they find her? 6. By what test did Mr. Slocum prove that
she was his sister? 7. What history did she relate of herself? 8.
Describe her home.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON L.

   FRING' ING, bordering; edging.
   LEDGE, layer; ridge.
   DAI  SY,  (literally  _day's  eye_,) a little wild flower very
   common in summer.
   RI' OT OUS, noisy; reveling.
   BOIS' TER OUS, tumultuous; violent.
   CULL' ING, selecting; picking.
   BOU QUETS', (_boo kas_,) bunches of flowers.
   SULK' Y, morose.
   BOTH' ER ING, perplexing.
   UN WONT' ED, rare: uncommon.
   TE' DI OUS, tiresome; wearisome.


THE RAIN-DROPS.

DELIA LOUISE COLTON.

1. _The silver rain, the golden rain,_
   _The tripping, dancing, laughing rain!_
   Stringing its pearls on the green leaf's edge,
   Fringing with gems the brown rock's ledge,
   Spinning a vail for the water-fall,
   And building an amber-colored wall
   Across the West where the sun-beams fall:
   _The gentle rain_, in the shady lane,
   _The pattering, peering, winning rain!_

2. _The noisy rain, the marching rain,_
   _The rushing tread of the heavy rain!_
   Pouring its rivers from out the blue,
   Down on the grass where the daisies grew,
   Darting in clouds of angry drops
   Across the hills and the green tree-tops,
   And kissing, at last, in its giant glee,
   The foaming lips of the great green sea:
   _The fierce, wild rain, the riotous rain,_
   _The boisterous, dashing, shouting rain!_

3. _The still night rain, the solemn rain!_
   _The soldier-step of the midnight rain!_
   With its measured beat on the roof o'erhead,
   With its tidings sweet of the faithful dead,
   Whispers from loves who are laid asleep
   Under the sod where the myrtles creep,
   Culling bouquets from the sun-lit past,
   Of flowers too sweet, too fair to last:
   _The faithful rain, the untiring rain,_
   _The cooing, sobbing, weeping rain!_

4. _The sulky rain, the spiteful rain,_
   _The bothering, pilfering, thieving rain!_
   Creeping so lazily over the sky,
   A leaden mask o'er a bright blue eye,
   And shutting in, with its damp, strong hands,
   The rosy faces in curls, and bands
   Of girls who think, with unwonted frown
   Of the charming laces and things down-town,
   That might as well for this tiresome rain,
   Be in the rose land of Almahain:
   _The horrid rain, the tedious rain,_
   _The never-ending, dingy rain!_

QUESTIONS.--1. What is the meaning of the suffix _ing_, in such words as
_tripping, dancing, laughing_, &c.? See SANDERS & McELLIGOTT'S ANALYSIS,
page 153, Ex. 206. 2. What is the use of the hyphen in such words as
_water-fall, amber-colored_, &c.? See SANDERS' NEW SPELLER, page l65.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LI.

   LAV' ISH, liberal; profuse.
   PER' FUMES, pleasant odors.
   HAR MO' NI OUS, concordant.
   RAPT' URE, extreme joyousness.
   GERMS, seed-buds; beginnings.
   PAR'TICLES, minute parts; atoms.
   MOTES, very small particles.
   VENT' URE, dare; have courage.
   COL' UMNS, pillars.
   DOME, arched roof; cupola.
   TI' NY, very small.
   ES' SENCE, perfume.


"SMALL THINGS."

F. BENNOCH.

1. Who dares to scorn the meanest thing,
     The humblest weed that grows,
   While pleasure spreads its joyous wing
     On every breeze that blows?
   The simplest flower that, hidden, blooms
     The lowest on the ground,
   Is lavish of its rare perfumes,
     And scatters sweetness round.

2. The poorest friend upholds a part
     Of life's harmonious plan;
   The weakest hand may have the art
     To serve the strongest man.
   The bird that highest, clearest sings,
     To greet the morning's birth,
   Falls down to drink, with folded wings,
     Love's rapture on the earth.

3. From germs too small for mortal sight
     Grow all things that are seen,
   Their floating particles of light
     Weave Nature's robe of green.
   The motes that fill the sunny rays
     Build ocean, earth, and sky,--
   The wondrous orbs that round us blaze
     Are motes to Deity!

4. Life, love, devotion, closely twine,
     Like tree, and flower, and fruit;
   They ripen by a power divine,
     Though fed by leaf and root.
   And he who would be truly great,
     Must venture to be small;
   On airy columns rests the dome
     That, shining, circles all.

5. Small duties grow to mighty deeds;
     Small words to thoughts of power;
   Great forests spring from tiny seeds,
     As moments make the hour.
   And life, howe'er it lowly grows,
     The essence to it given,
   Like odor from the breathing rose,
     Floats evermore to Heaven.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LII.

   EX TINCT', extinguished.
   IN COR' PO RA TED, united.
   TAC' IT, silent; implied.
   SUB SIST' ED, existed.
   HOS PI TAL' I TY, kind treatment.
   IN POR' TU NATE, urgent; pressing.
   EN CROACH' MENT, intrusion.
   IR' RI TA TED, provoked; exasperated.
   MAS' SA CRE, (_mas' sa ker_,) slaughter.
   GRAV' I TY, seriousness.
   DE LIB' ER ATE, take council.
   TREA' SON, treachery; disloyalty.
   AP PRIS' ING, informing.
   BE TRAY', expose.
   IN VIN CI BLE, unconquerable.
   WAX' ED, became, grew.
   BE SOUGHT', entreated; implored.
   SUF FICE, (_c like z_,) prove sufficient.


MURDERER'S CREEK.

[Footnote: In Orange County, New York.]

JAMES K. PAULDING.

1. Little more than a century ago, the beautiful region watered by this
stream, was possessed by a small tribe of Indians, which has long since
become extinct, or incorporated with some other savage nation of the
West. Three or four hundred yards from where the stream discharges
itself into the Hudson, a white family, of the name of Stacy, had
established itself in a log-house, by tacit permission of the tribe, to
whom Stacy had made himself useful by his skill in a variety of little
arts, highly estimated by the savages.

2. In particular, a friendship subsisted between him and an old Indian,
called Naoman, who often came to his house, and partook of his
hospitality. _The Indians never forgive injuries, nor forget benefits_.
The family consisted of Stacy, his wife, and two children, a boy and a
girl, the former five, the latter three years old.

3. One day, Naoman came to Stacy's log-hut, in his absence, lighted his
pipe, and sat down. He looked very serious, sometimes sighed deeply, but
said not a word. Stacy's wife asked him what was the matter,--if he was
sick. He shook his head, sighed, but said nothing, and soon went away.
The next day, he came again and behaved in the same manner. Stacy's wife
began to think strange of this, and related it to her husband, who
advised her to urge the old man to an explanation the next time he came.

4. Accordingly, when he repeated his visit the day after, she was more
importunate than usual. At last, the old Indian said. "I am a red man,
and the pale faces are our enemies: why should I speak?"--"But my
husband and I are your friends: you have eaten salt with us a thousand
times, and my children have sat on your knees as often. If you have
anything on your mind, tell it me."--"It will cost me my life if it is
known, and the white-faced women are not good at keeping secrets,"
replied Naoman.

5. "Try me, and see."--"Will you swear by your Great Spirit that you
will tell none but your husband?"--"I have none else to tell."--"But
will you swear?"--"I do swear by our Great Spirit, I will tell none but
my husband."--"Not if my tribe should _kill you_ for not telling?"--"Not
if your tribe should kill me for not telling."

6. Naoman then proceeded to tell her that, owing to some encroachments
of the white people below the mountains, his tribe had become irritated,
and were resolved that night to massacre all the white settlers within
their reach; that she must send for her husband, inform him of the
danger, and, as secretly and speedily as possible, take their canoe and
paddle, with all haste, over the river to Fishkill for safety. "Be
quick, and do nothing that may excite suspicion," said Naoman, as he
departed.

7. The good wife sought her husband, who was down on the river fishing,
told him the story, and, as no time was to be lost, they proceeded to
their boat, which was unluckily filled with water. It took some time to
clear it out, and, meanwhile, Stacy recollected his gun, which had been
left behind. He proceeded to the house, and returned with it. All this
took up considerable time, and precious time it proved to this poor
family.

8. The daily visits of old Naoman, and his more than ordinary gravity,
had excited suspicion in some of the tribe, who had, accordingly, paid
particular attention to the movements of Stacy. One of the young
Indians, who had been kept on the watch, seeing the whole family about
to take to the boat, ran to the little Indian village, about a mile off,
and gave the alarm. Five Indians collected, ran down to the river, where
their canoes were moored, jumped in, and paddled after Stacy, who, by
this time, had got some distance out into the stream.

9. They gained on him so fast, that twice he dropped his paddle, and
took up his gun. But his wife prevented his shooting by telling him
that, if he fired, and they were afterwards overtaken, they would meet
with no mercy from the Indians. He accordingly refrained, and plied his
paddle till the sweat rolled in big drops down his forehead. All would
not do; they were overtaken within a hundred yards from the shore, and
carried back with shouts of yelling triumph.

10. When they got ashore, the Indians set fire to Stacy's house, and
dragged himself, his wife, and children, to their village. Here the
principal old men, and Naoman among them, assembled to deliberate on the
affair. The chief men of the council stated that some of the tribe had,
undoubtedly, been guilty of treason, in apprising Stacy, the white man,
of the designs of the tribe, whereby they took the alarm, and well-nigh
escaped.

11. He proposed to examine the prisoners, to learn who gave the
information. The old men assented to this, and Naoman among the rest.
Stacy was first interrogated by one of the old men, who spoke English
and interpreted to the others. Stacy refused to betray his informant.
His wife was then questioned; while, at the same moment, two Indians
stood threatening the two children, with tomahawks, in case she did not
confess.

12. She attempted to evade the truth, by declaring she had a dream the
night before, which alarmed her, and that she had persuaded her husband
to fly. "The Great Spirit never deigns to talk in dreams to a white
face," said the old Indian. "Woman, thou hast two tongues, and two
faces. Speak the truth, or thy children shall surely die." The little
boy and girl were then brought close to her, and the two savages stood
over them, ready to execute their bloody orders.

13. "Wilt thou name," said the old Indian, "the red man who betrayed his
tribe? I will ask thee three times." The mother answered not. "Wilt thou
name the traitor? This is the second time." The poor mother looked at
her husband, and then at her children, and stole a glance at Naoman, who
sat smoking his pipe with invincible gravity.

14. She wrung her hands, and wept; but remained silent. "Wilt thou name
the traitor? 'Tis the third and last time." The agony of the mother
waxed more bitter; again she sought the eye of Naoman; but it was cold
and motionless. A pause of a moment awaited her reply, and the tomahawks
were raised over the heads of the children, who besought their mother
not to let them be murdered.

15. "Stop!" cried Naoman. All eyes were turned upon him. "Stop!"
repeated he, in a tone of authority. "White woman, thou hast kept thy
word with me to the last moment. _I am the traitor_. I have eaten of the
salt, warmed myself at the fire, shared the kindness, of these Christian
white people, and it was _I_ that told them of their danger. I am a
withered, leafless, branchless trunk. Cut me down, if you will: I am
ready."

16. A yell of indignation sounded on all sides. Naoman descended from
the little bank where he sat, shrouded his face with his mantle of
skins, and submitted to his fate. He fell dead at the feet of the white
woman by a blow of the tomahawk.

17. But the sacrifice of Naoman, and the firmness of the Christian white
woman, did not suffice to save the lives of the other victims. They
perished,--how, it is needless to say; and the memory of their fate has
been preserved in the name of the pleasant stream, on whose banks they
lived and died, which, to this day, is called MURDERER'S CREEK.

QUESTIONS.--1. Where is Murderer's Creek? 2. What is said of Naoman and
Stacy's family? 3. Why did Naoman, at first, refuse to tell Mrs. Stacy
of her danger? 4. Did Stacy's family make their escape? 5. Where were
they taken? 6. Did Mrs. Stacy tell who had informed her? 7. What
measures did the Indians adopt, to make her tell? What did Naoman say?
9. What did the Indians do with Naoman and Stacy's family?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON LIII.

   PER' IL OUS, hazardous; dangerous.
   DE FILES', narrow passages.
   PREC' I PIC ES, steep descents.
   SOL'I TUDE, lonely places.
   AM MU NI' TION, military stores, as powder, balls, &c.
   DRA GOONS, mounted soldiers.
   SUM' MIT, top; highest point.
   AV A LANCHE', snow-slip.
   CROUCH' ED, cringed.
   AD VANCE', forward; proceed.
