panting on the sand; there was no evading the awful responsibility of a
reply, for Rebecca's eyes were searchlights, that pierced the fiction
of his brain and perceived the bald spot on the back of his head.

"I s'pose there's a brook somewheres near it," he said timorously.

Rebecca looked disappointed but not quite dis-heartened. "That's pretty
good," she said encouragingly. "You're warm but not hot; there's a
brook, but not a common brook. It has young trees and baby bushes on
each side of it, and it's a shallow chattering little brook with a
white sandy bottom and lots of little shiny pebbles. Whenever there's a
bit of sunshine the brook catches it, and it's always full of sparkles
the livelong day. Don't your stomach feel hollow? Mine doest I was so
'fraid I'd miss the stage I couldn't eat any breakfast."

"You'd better have your lunch, then. I don't eat nothin' till I get to
Milltown; then I get a piece o' pie and cup o' coffee."

"I wish I could see Milltown. I suppose it's bigger and grander even
than Wareham; more like Paris? Miss Ross told me about Paris; she
bought my pink sunshade there and my bead purse. You see how it opens
with a snap? I've twenty cents in it, and it's got to last three
months, for stamps and paper and ink. Mother says aunt Mirandy won't
want to buy things like those when she's feeding and clothing me and
paying for my school books."

"Paris ain't no great," said Mr. Cobb disparagingly. "It's the dullest
place in the State o' Maine. I've druv there many a time."

Again Rebecca was obliged to reprove Mr. Cobb, tacitly and quietly, but
none the less surely, though the reproof was dealt with one glance,
quickly sent and as quickly withdrawn.

"Paris is the capital of France, and you have to go to it on a boat,"
she said instructively. "It's in my geography, and it says: 'The French
are a gay and polite people, fond of dancing and light wines.' I asked
the teacher what light wines were, and he thought it was something like
new cider, or maybe ginger pop. I can see Paris as plain as day by just
shutting my eyes. The beautiful ladies are always gayly dancing around
with pink sunshades and bead purses, and the grand gentlemen are
politely dancing and drinking ginger pop. But you can see Milltown most
every day with your eyes wide open," Rebecca said wistfully.

"Milltown ain't no great, neither," replied Mr. Cobb, with the air of
having visited all the cities of the earth and found them as naught.
"Now you watch me heave this newspaper right onto Mis' Brown's
doorstep."

Piff! and the packet landed exactly as it was intended, on the corn
husk mat in front of the screen door.

"Oh, how splendid that was!" cried Rebecca with enthusiasm. "Just like
the knife thrower Mark saw at the circus. I wish there was a long, long
row of houses each with a corn husk mat and a screen door in the
middle, and a newspaper to throw on every one!"

"I might fail on some of 'em, you know," said Mr. Cobb, beaming with
modest pride. "If your aunt Mirandy'll let you, I'll take you down to
Milltown some day this summer when the stage ain't full."

A thrill of delicious excitement ran through Rebecca's frame, from her
new shoes up, up to the leghorn cap and down the black braid. She
pressed Mr. Cobb's knee ardently and said in a voice choking with tears
of joy and astonishment, "Oh, it can't be true, it can't; to think I
should see Milltown. It's like having a fairy godmother who asks you
your wish and then gives it to you! Did you ever read Cinderella, or
The Yellow Dwarf, or The Enchanted Frog, or The Fair One with Golden
Locks?"

"No," said Mr. Cobb cautiously, after a moment's reflection. "I don't
seem to think I ever did read jest those partic'lar ones. Where'd you
get a chance at so much readin'?"

"Oh, I've read lots of books," answered Rebecca casually. "Father's and
Miss Ross's and all the dif'rent school teachers', and all in the
Sunday-school library. I've read The Lamplighter, and Scottish Chiefs,
and Ivanhoe, and The Heir of Redclyffe, and Cora, the Doctor's Wife,
and David Copperfield, and The Gold of Chickaree, and Plutarch's Lives,
and Thaddeus of Warsaw, and Pilgrim's Progress, and lots more.--What
have you read?"

"I've never happened to read those partic'lar books; but land! I've
read a sight in my time! Nowadays I'm so drove I get along with the
Almanac, the Weekly Argus, and the Maine State Agriculturist.--There's
the river again; this is the last long hill, and when we get to the top
of it we'll see the chimbleys of Riverboro in the distance. 'T ain't
fur. I live 'bout half a mile beyond the brick house myself."

Rebecca's hand stirred nervously in her lap and she moved in her seat.
"I didn't think I was going to be afraid," she said almost under her
breath; "but I guess I am, just a little mite--when you say it's coming
so near."

"Would you go back?" asked Mr. Cobb curiously.

She flashed him an intrepid look and then said proudly, "I'd never go
back--I might be frightened, but I'd be ashamed to run. Going to aunt
Mirandy's is like going down cellar in the dark. There might be ogres
and giants under the stairs,--but, as I tell Hannah, there MIGHT be
elves and fairies and enchanted frogs!--Is there a main street to the
village, like that in Wareham?"

"I s'pose you might call it a main street, an' your aunt Sawyer lives
on it, but there ain't no stores nor mills, an' it's an awful one-horse
village! You have to go 'cross the river an' get on to our side if you
want to see anything goin' on."

"I'm almost sorry," she sighed, "because it would be so grand to drive
down a real main street, sitting high up like this behind two splendid
horses, with my pink sunshade up, and everybody in town wondering who
the bunch of lilacs and the hair trunk belongs to. It would be just
like the beautiful lady in the parade. Last summer the circus came to
Temperance, and they had a procession in the morning. Mother let us all
walk in and wheel Mira in the baby carriage, because we couldn't afford
to go to the circus in the afternoon. And there were lovely horses and
animals in cages, and clowns on horseback; and at the very end came a
little red and gold chariot drawn by two ponies, and in it, sitting on
a velvet cushion, was the snake charmer, all dressed in satin and
spangles. She was so beautiful beyond compare, Mr. Cobb, that you had
to swallow lumps in your throat when you looked at her, and little cold
feelings crept up and down your back. Don't you know how I mean? Didn't
you ever see anybody that made you feel like that?"

Mr. Cobb was more distinctly uncomfortable at this moment than he had
been at any one time during the eventful morning, but he evaded the
point dexterously by saying, "There ain't no harm, as I can see, in our
makin' the grand entry in the biggest style we can. I'll take the whip
out, set up straight, an' drive fast; you hold your bo'quet in your
lap, an' open your little red parasol, an' we'll jest make the natives
stare!"

The child's face was radiant for a moment, but the glow faded just as
quickly as she said, "I forgot--mother put me inside, and maybe she'd
want me to be there when I got to aunt Mirandy's. Maybe I'd be more
genteel inside, and then I wouldn't have to be jumped down and my
clothes fly up, but could open the door and step down like a lady
passenger. Would you please stop a minute, Mr. Cobb, and let me change?"

The stage driver good-naturedly pulled up his horses, lifted the
excited little creature down, opened the door, and helped her in,
putting the lilacs and the pink sunshade beside her.

"We've had a great trip," he said, "and we've got real well acquainted,
haven't we?--You won't forget about Milltown?"

"Never!" she exclaimed fervently; "and you're sure you won't, either?"

"Never! Cross my heart!" vowed Mr. Cobb solemnly, as he remounted his
perch; and as the stage rumbled down the village street between the
green maples, those who looked from their windows saw a little brown
elf in buff calico sitting primly on the back seat holding a great
bouquet tightly in one hand and a pink parasol in the other. Had they
been farsighted enough they might have seen, when the stage turned into
the side dooryard of the old brick house, a calico yoke rising and
falling tempestuously over the beating heart beneath, the red color
coming and going in two pale cheeks, and a mist of tears swimming in
two brilliant dark eyes.

Rebecca's journey had ended.

"There's the stage turnin' into the Sawyer girls' dooryard," said Mrs.
Perkins to her husband. "That must be the niece from up Temperance way.
It seems they wrote to Aurelia and invited Hannah, the oldest, but
Aurelia said she could spare Rebecca better, if 't was all the same to
Mirandy 'n' Jane; so it's Rebecca that's come. She'll be good comp'ny
for our Emma Jane, but I don't believe they'll keep her three months!
She looks black as an Injun what I can see of her; black and kind of
up-an-comin'. They used to say that one o' the Randalls married a
Spanish woman, somebody that was teachin' music and languages at a
boardin' school. Lorenzo was dark complected, you remember, and this
child is, too. Well, I don't know as Spanish blood is any real
disgrace, not if it's a good ways back and the woman was respectable."



II

REBECCA'S RELATIONS

They had been called the Sawyer girls when Miranda at eighteen, Jane at
twelve, and Aurelia at eight participated in the various activities of
village life; and when Riverboro fell into a habit of thought or
speech, it saw no reason for falling out of it, at any rate in the same
century. So although Miranda and Jane were between fifty and sixty at
the time this story opens, Riverboro still called them the Sawyer
girls. They were spinsters; but Aurelia, the youngest, had made what
she called a romantic marriage and what her sisters termed a mighty
poor speculation. "There's worse things than bein' old maids," they
said; whether they thought so is quite another matter.

The element of romance in Aurelia's marriage existed chiefly in the
fact that Mr. L. D. M. Randall had a soul above farming or trading and
was a votary of the Muses. He taught the weekly singing-school (then a
feature of village life) in half a dozen neighboring towns, he played
the violin and "called off" at dances, or evoked rich harmonies from
church melodeons on Sundays. He taught certain uncouth lads, when they
were of an age to enter society, the intricacies of contra dances, or
the steps of the schottische and mazurka, and he was a marked figure in
all social assemblies, though conspicuously absent from town-meetings
and the purely masculine gatherings at the store or tavern or bridge.

His hair was a little longer, his hands a little whiter, his shoes a
little thinner, his manner a trifle more polished, than that of his
soberer mates; indeed the only department of life in which he failed to
shine was the making of sufficient money to live upon. Luckily he had
no responsibilities; his father and his twin brother had died when he
was yet a boy, and his mother, whose only noteworthy achievement had
been the naming of her twin sons Marquis de Lafayette and Lorenzo de
Medici Randall, had supported herself and educated her child by making
coats up to the very day of her death. She was wont to say plaintively,
"I'm afraid the faculties was too much divided up between my twins. L.
D. M. is awful talented, but I guess M. D. L. would 'a' ben the
practical one if he'd 'a' lived."

"L. D. M. was practical enough to get the richest girl in the village,"
replied Mrs. Robinson.

"Yes," sighed his mother, "there it is again; if the twins could 'a'
married Aurelia Sawyer, 't would 'a' been all right. L. D. M. was
talented 'nough to GET Reely's money, but M. D. L. would 'a' ben
practical 'nough to have KEP' it."

Aurelia's share of the modest Sawyer property had been put into one
thing after another by the handsome and luckless Lorenzo de Medici. He
had a graceful and poetic way of making an investment for each new son
and daughter that blessed their union. "A birthday present for our
child, Aurelia," he would say,--"a little nest-egg for the future;" but
Aurelia once remarked in a moment of bitterness that the hen never
lived that could sit on those eggs and hatch anything out of them.

Miranda and Jane had virtually washed their hands of Aurelia when she
married Lorenzo de Medici Randall. Having exhausted the resources of
Riverboro and its immediate vicinity, the unfortunate couple had moved
on and on in a steadily decreasing scale of prosperity until they had
reached Temperance, where they had settled down and invited fate to do
its worst, an invitation which was promptly accepted. The maiden
sisters at home wrote to Aurelia two or three times a year, and sent
modest but serviceable presents to the children at Christmas, but
refused to assist L. D. M. with the regular expenses of his rapidly
growing family. His last investment, made shortly before the birth of
Miranda (named in a lively hope of favors which never came), was a
small farm two miles from Temperance. Aurelia managed this herself, and
so it proved a home at least, and a place for the unsuccessful Lorenzo
to die and to be buried from, a duty somewhat too long deferred, many
thought, which he performed on the day of Mira's birth.

It was in this happy-go-lucky household that Rebecca had grown up. It
was just an ordinary family; two or three of the children were handsome
and the rest plain, three of them rather clever, two industrious, and
two commonplace and dull. Rebecca had her father's facility and had
been his aptest pupil. She "carried" the alto by ear, danced without
being taught, played the melodeon without knowing the notes. Her love
of books she inherited chiefly from her mother, who found it hard to
sweep or cook or sew when there was a novel in the house. Fortunately
books were scarce, or the children might sometimes have gone ragged and
hungry.

But other forces had been at work in Rebecca, and the traits of unknown
forbears had been wrought into her fibre. Lorenzo de Medici was flabby
and boneless; Rebecca was a thing of fire and spirit: he lacked energy
and courage; Rebecca was plucky at two and dauntless at five. Mrs.
Randall and Hannah had no sense of humor; Rebecca possessed and showed
it as soon as she could walk and talk.

She had not been able, however, to borrow her parents' virtues and
those of other generous ancestors and escape all the weaknesses in the
calendar. She had not her sister Hannah's patience or her brother
John's sturdy staying power. Her will was sometimes willfulness, and
the ease with which she did most things led her to be impatient of hard
tasks or long ones. But whatever else there was or was not, there was
freedom at Randall's farm. The children grew, worked, fought, ate what
and slept where they could; loved one another and their parents pretty
well, but with no tropical passion; and educated themselves for nine
months of the year, each one in his own way.

As a result of this method Hannah, who could only have been developed
by forces applied from without, was painstaking, humdrum, and limited;
while Rebecca, who apparently needed nothing but space to develop in,
and a knowledge of terms in which to express herself, grew and grew and
grew, always from within outward. Her forces of one sort and another
had seemingly been set in motion when she was born; they needed no
daily spur, but moved of their own accord--towards what no one knew,
least of all Rebecca herself. The field for the exhibition of her
creative instinct was painfully small, and the only use she had made of
it as yet was to leave eggs out of the corn bread one day and milk
another, to see how it would turn out; to part Fanny's hair sometimes
in the middle, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left side;
and to play all sorts of fantastic pranks with the children,
occasionally bringing them to the table as fictitious or historical
characters found in her favorite books. Rebecca amused her mother and
her family generally, but she never was counted of serious importance,
and though considered "smart" and old for her age, she was never
thought superior in any way. Aurelia's experience of genius, as
exemplified in the deceased Lorenzo de Medici led her into a greater
admiration of plain, every-day common sense, a quality in which
Rebecca, it must be confessed, seemed sometimes painfully deficient.

Hannah was her mother's favorite, so far as Aurelia could indulge
herself in such recreations as partiality. The parent who is obliged to
feed and clothe seven children on an income of fifteen dollars a month
seldom has time to discriminate carefully between the various members
of her brood, but Hannah at fourteen was at once companion and partner
in all her mother's problems. She it was who kept the house while
Aurelia busied herself in barn and field. Rebecca was capable of
certain set tasks, such as keeping the small children from killing
themselves and one another, feeding the poultry, picking up chips,
hulling strawberries, wiping dishes; but she was thought irresponsible,
and Aurelia, needing somebody to lean on (having never enjoyed that
luxury with the gifted Lorenzo), leaned on Hannah. Hannah showed the
result of this attitude somewhat, being a trifle careworn in face and
sharp in manner; but she was a self-contained, well-behaved, dependable
child, and that is the reason her aunts had invited her to Riverboro to
be a member of their family and participate in all the advantages of
their loftier position in the world. It was several years since Miranda
and Jane had seen the children, but they remembered with pleasure that
Hannah had not spoken a word during the interview, and it was for this
reason that they had asked for the pleasure of her company. Rebecca, on
the other hand, had dressed up the dog in John's clothes, and being
requested to get the three younger children ready for dinner, she had
held them under the pump and then proceeded to "smack" their hair flat
to their heads by vigorous brushing, bringing them to the table in such
a moist and hideous state of shininess that their mother was ashamed of
their appearance. Rebecca's own black locks were commonly pushed
smoothly off her forehead, but on this occasion she formed what I must
perforce call by its only name, a spit-curl, directly in the centre of
her brow, an ornament which she was allowed to wear a very short time,
only in fact till Hannah was able to call her mother's attention to it,
when she was sent into the next room to remove it and to come back
looking like a Christian. This command she interpreted somewhat too
literally perhaps, because she contrived in a space of two minutes an
extremely pious style of hairdressing, fully as effective if not as
startling as the first. These antics were solely the result of nervous
irritation, a mood born of Miss Miranda Sawyer's stiff, grim, and
martial attitude. The remembrance of Rebecca was so vivid that their
sister Aurelia's letter was something of a shock to the quiet, elderly
spinsters of the brick house; for it said that Hannah could not
possibly be spared for a few years yet, but that Rebecca would come as
soon as she could be made ready; that the offer was most thankfully
appreciated, and that the regular schooling and church privileges, as
well as the influence of the Sawyer home, would doubtless be "the
making of Rebecca."



III

A DIFFERENCE IN HEARTS

"I don' know as I cal'lated to be the makin' of any child," Miranda had
said as she folded Aurelia's letter and laid it in the light-stand
drawer. "I s'posed, of course, Aurelia would send us the one we asked
for, but it's just like her to palm off that wild young one on somebody
else."

"You remember we said that Rebecca or even Jenny might come, in case
Hannah couldn't," interposed Jane.

"I know we did, but we hadn't any notion it would turn out that way,"
grumbled Miranda.

"She was a mite of a thing when we saw her three years ago," ventured
Jane; "she's had time to improve."

"And time to grow worse!"

"Won't it be kind of a privilege to put her on the right track?" asked
Jane timidly.

"I don' know about the privilege part; it'll be considerable of a
chore, I guess. If her mother hain't got her on the right track by now,
she won't take to it herself all of a sudden."

This depressed and depressing frame of mind had lasted until the
eventful day dawned on which Rebecca was to arrive.

"If she makes as much work after she comes as she has before, we might
as well give up hope of ever gettin' any rest," sighed Miranda as she
hung the dish towels on the barberry bushes at the side door.

"But we should have had to clean house, Rebecca or no Rebecca," urged
Jane; "and I can't see why you've scrubbed and washed and baked as you
have for that one child, nor why you've about bought out Watson's stock
of dry goods."

"I know Aurelia if you don't," responded Miranda. "I've seen her house,
and I've seen that batch o' children, wearin' one another's clothes and
never carin' whether they had 'em on right sid' out or not; I know what
they've had to live and dress on, and so do you. That child will like
as not come here with a passel o' things borrowed from the rest o' the
family. She'll have Hannah's shoes and John's undershirts and Mark's
socks most likely. I suppose she never had a thimble on her finger in
her life, but she'll know the feelin' o' one before she's ben here many
days. I've bought a piece of unbleached muslin and a piece o' brown
gingham for her to make up; that'll keep her busy. Of course she won't
pick up anything after herself; she probably never see a duster, and
she'll be as hard to train into our ways as if she was a heathen."

"She'll make a dif'rence," acknowledged Jane, "but she may turn out
more biddable 'n we think."

"She'll mind when she's spoken to, biddable or not," remarked Miranda
with a shake of the last towel.

Miranda Sawyer had a heart, of course, but she had never used it for
any other purpose than the pumping and circulating of blood. She was
just, conscientious, economical, industrious; a regular attendant at
church and Sunday-school, and a member of the State Missionary and
Bible societies, but in the presence of all these chilly virtues you
longed for one warm little fault, or lacking that, one likable failing,
something to make you sure she was thoroughly alive. She had never had
any education other than that of the neighborhood district school, for
her desires and ambitions had all pointed to the management of the
house, the farm, and the dairy. Jane, on the other hand, had gone to an
academy, and also to a boarding-school for young ladies; so had
Aurelia; and after all the years that had elapsed there was still a
slight difference in language and in manner between the elder and the
two younger sisters.

Jane, too, had had the inestimable advantage of a sorrow; not the
natural grief at the loss of her aged father and mother, for she had
been content to let them go; but something far deeper. She was engaged
