thrilled every nerve came from a far point in the dark background.
It was the scalp yell, the most terrible of all Indian cries, long,
high-pitched, and quavering, having in it something of the barking howl
of the wolf and the fiendish shriek of a murderous maniac. The warriors
instantly took it up, and gave it back in a gigantic chorus.

A ghastly figure bounded into the circle of the firelight. It was that
of a woman, middle-aged, tall and powerful, naked to the waist, her body
covered with red and black paint, her long black hair hanging in a loose
cloud down her back. She held a fresh scalp, taken from a white head,
aloft in either band. It was Catharine Montour, and it was she who had
first emitted the scalp yell. After her came more warriors, all bearing
scalps. The scalp yell was supposed to be uttered for every scalp taken,
and, as they had taken more than three hundred, it did not cease for
hours, penetrating every part of the forest. All the time Catharine
Montour led the dance. None bounded higher than she. None grimaced more
horribly.

While they danced, six men, with their hands tied behind them and black
caps on their heads, were brought forth and paraded around amid hoots
and yells and brandishing of tomahawks in their faces. They were the
surviving prisoners, and the black caps meant that they were to be
killed and scalped on the morrow. Stupefied by all through which they
had gone, they were scarcely conscious now.

Midnight came. The Iroquois still danced and sang, and the calm stars
looked down upon the savage and awful scene. Now the dancers began to
weary. Many dropped unconscious, and the others danced about them where
they lay. After a while all ceased. Then the chiefs brought forth a
white dog, which Hiokatoo killed and threw on the embers of the fire.
When it was thoroughly roasted, the chiefs cut it in pieces and ate it.
Thus closed the Festival of Thanksgiving for the victory of Wyoming.




CHAPTER XIII. A FOREST PAGE


When the survivors of the band of Wyoming fugitives that the five had
helped were behind the walls of Fort Penn, securing the food and rest
they needed so greatly, Henry Ware and his comrades felt themselves
relieved of a great responsibility. They were also aware how much they
owed to Timmendiquas, because few of the Indians and renegades would
have been so forbearing. Thayendanegea seemed to them inferior to
the great Wyandot. Often when Brant could prevent the torture of the
prisoners and the slaughter of women and children, he did not do it.
The five could never forget these things in after life, when Brant was
glorified as a great warrior and leader. Their minds always turned to
Timmendiquas as the highest and finest of Indian types.

While they were at Fort Penn two other parties came, in a fearful state
of exhaustion, and also having paid the usual toll of death on the way.
Other groups reached the Moravian towns, where they were received with
all kindness by the German settlers. The five were able to give some
help to several of these parties, but the beautiful Wyoming Valley lay
utterly in ruins. The ruthless fury of the savages and of many of the
Tories, Canadians, and Englishmen, can scarcely be told. Everything was
slaughtered or burned. As a habitation of human beings or of anything
pertaining to human beings, the valley for a time ceased to be. An
entire population was either annihilated or driven out, and finally
Butler's army, finding that nothing more was left to be destroyed,
gathered in its war parties and marched northward with a vast store
of spoils, in which scalps were conspicuous. When they repassed Tioga
Point, Timmendiquas and his Wyandots were still with them. Thayendanegea
was also with them here, and so was Walter Butler, who was destined
shortly to make a reputation equaling that of his father, "Indian"
Butler. Nor had the terrible Queen Esther ever left them. She marched
at the head of the army, singing, horrid chants of victory, and swinging
the great war tomahawk, which did not often leave her hand.

The whole force was re-embarked upon the Susquehanna, and it was still
full of the impulse of savage triumph. Wild Indian songs floated along
the stream or through the meadows, which were quiet now. They advanced
at their ease, knowing that there was nobody to attack them, but they
were watched by five woodsmen, two of whom were boys. Meanwhile the
story of Wyoming, to an extent that neither Indians nor woodsmen
themselves suspected, was spreading from town to town in the East, to
invade thence the whole civilized world, and to stir up an indignation
and horror that would make the name Wyoming long memorable. Wyoming
had been a victory for the flag under which the invaders fought, but it
sadly tarnished the cause of that flag, and the consequences were to be
seen soon.

Henry Ware, Paul Cotter, Sol Hyde, Tom Ross, and Jim Hart were thinking
little of distant consequences, but they were eager for the present
punishment of these men who had committed so much cruelty. From the
bushes they could easily follow the canoes, and could recognize some of
their occupants. In one of the rear boats sat Braxton Wyatt and a young
man whom they knew to be Walter Butler, a pallid young man, animated by
the most savage ferocity against the patriots. He and Wyatt seemed to
be on the best of terms, and faint echoes of their laughter came to the
five who were watching among the bushes on the river bank. Certainly
Braxton Wyatt and he were a pair well met.

"Henry," said Shif'less Sol longingly, "I think I could jest about reach
Braxton Wyatt with a bullet from here. I ain't over fond o' shootin'
from ambush, but I done got over all scruples so fur ez he's concerned.
Jest one bullet, one little bullet, Henry, an' ef I miss I won't ask fur
a second chance."

"No, Sol, it won't do," said Henry. "They'd get off to hunt us. The
whole fleet would be stopped, and we want 'em to go on as fast as
possible."

"I s'pose you're right, Henry," said the shiftless one sadly, "but
I'd jest like to try it once. I'd give a month's good huntin' for that
single trial."

After watching the British-Indian fleet passing up the river, they
turned back to the site of the Wyoming fort and the houses near it. Here
everything had been destroyed. It was about dusk when they approached
the battlefield, and they heard a dreadful howling, chiefly that of
wolves.

"I think we'd better turn away," said Henry. "We couldn't do anything
with so many."

They agreed with him, and, going back, followed the Indians up the
Susquehanna. A light rain fell that night, but they slept under a little
shed, once attached to a house which had been destroyed by fire. In some
way the shed had escaped the flames, and it now came into timely use.
The five, cunning in forest practice, drew up brush on the sides, and
half-burned timber also, and, spreading their blankets on ashes which
had not long been cold, lay well sheltered from the drizzling rain,
although they did not sleep for a long time.

It was the hottest period of the year in America, but the night had come
on cool, and the rain made it cooler. The five, profiting by experience,
often carried with them two light blankets instead of one heavy one.
With one blanket beneath the body they could keep warmer in case the
weather was cold.

Now they lay in a row against the standing wall of the old outhouse,
protected by a six- or seven-foot slant of board roof. They had eaten
of a deer that they had shot in the morning, and they had a sense
of comfort and rest that none of them had known before in many days.
Henry's feelings were much like those that he had experienced when he
lay in the bushes in the little canoe, wrapped up from the storm and
hidden from the Iroquois. But here there was an important increase
of pleasure, the pattering of the rain on the board roof, a pleasant,
soothing sound to which millions of boys, many of them afterwards great
men, have listened in America.

It grew very dark about them, and the pleasant patter, almost musical
in its rhythm, kept up. Not much wind was blowing, and it, too, was
melodious. Henry lay with his head on a little heap of ashes, which
was covered by his under blanket, and, for the first time since he had
brought the warning to Wyoming, he was free from all feeling of danger.
The picture itself of the battle, the defeat, the massacre, the torture,
and of the savage Queen Esther cleaving the heads of the captives, was
at times as vivid as ever, and perhaps would always return now and then
in its original true colors, but the periods between, when youth, hope,
and strength had their way, grew longer and longer.

Now Henry's eyelids sank lower and lower. Physical comfort and the
presence of his comrades caused a deep satisfaction that permeated his
whole being. The light wind mingled pleasantly with the soft summer
rain. The sound of the two grew strangely melodious, almost piercingly
sweet, and then it seemed to be human. They sang together, the wind and
rain, among the leaves, and the note that reached his heart, rather than
his ear, thrilled him with courage and hope. Once more the invisible
voice that had upborne him in the great valley of the Ohio told him,
even here in the ruined valley of Wyoming, that what was lost would be
regained. The chords ended, and the echoes, amazingly clear, floated far
away in the darkness and rain. Henry roused himself, and came from the
imaginative borderland. He stirred a little, and said in a quiet voice
to Shif'less Sol:

"Did you hear anything, Sol?"

"Nothin' but the wind an' the rain."

Henry knew that such would be the answer.

"I guess you didn't hear anything either, Henry," continued the
shiftless one, "'cause it looked to me that you wuz 'bout ez near sleep
ez a feller could be without bein' ackshooally so."

"I was drifting away," said Henry.

He was beginning to realize that he had a great power, or rather gift.
Paul was the sensitive, imaginative boy, seeing everything in brilliant
colors, a great builder of castles, not all of air, but Henry's gift
went deeper. It was the power to evoke the actual living picture of
the event that bad not yet occurred, something akin in its nature
to prophecy, based perhaps upon the wonderful power of observation,
inherited doubtless, from countless primitive ancestors. The finest
product of the wilderness, he saw in that wilderness many things that
others did not see, and unconsciously he drew his conclusions from
superior knowledge.

The song had ceased a full ten minutes, and then came another note, a
howl almost plaintive, but, nevertheless, weird and full of ferocity.
All knew it at once. They had heard the cry of wolves too often in their
lives, but this had an uncommon note like the yell of the Indian in
victory. Again the cry arose, nearer, haunting, and powerful. The five,
used to the darkness, could see one another's faces, and the look that
all gave was the same, full of understanding and repulsion.

"It has been a great day for the wolf in this valley," whispered Paul,
"and striking our trail they think they are going to find what they have
been finding in such plenty before."

"Yes," nodded Henry, "but do you remember that time when in the house
we took the place of the man, his wife and children, just before the
Indians came?"

"Yes," said Paul.

"We'll treat them wolves the same way," said Shif'less Sol.

"I'm glad of the chance," said Long Jim.

"Me, too," said Tom Ross.

The five rose up to sitting positions against the board wall, and
everyone held across his knees a long, slender barreled rifle, with the
muzzle pointing toward the forest. All accomplished marksmen, it would
only be a matter of a moment for the stock to leap to the shoulder, the
eye to glance down the barrel, the finger to pull the trigger, and the
unerring bullet to leap forth.

"Henry, you give the word as usual," said Shif'less Sol.

Henry nodded.

Presently in the darkness they heard the pattering of light feet, and
they saw many gleaming eyes draw near. There must have been at least
thirty of the wolves, and the five figures that they saw reclining,
silent and motionless, against the unburned portion of the house might
well have been those of the dead and scalped, whom they had found in
such numbers everywhere. They drew near in a semicircular group, its
concave front extended toward the fire, the greatest wolves at the
center. Despite many feastings, the wolves were hungry again. Nothing
had opposed them before, but caution was instinctive. The big gray
leaders did not mind the night or the wind or the rain, which they
had known all their lives, and which they counted as nothing, but they
always had involuntary suspicion of human figures, whether living or
not, and they approached slowly, wrinkling back their noses and sniffing
the wind which blew from them instead of the five figures. But their
confidence increased as they advanced. They had found many such burned
houses as this, but they had found nothing among the ruins except what
they wished.

The big leaders advanced more boldly, glaring straight at the human
figures, a slight froth on their lips, the lips themselves curling
back farther from the strong white teeth. The outer ends of the concave
semicircle also drew in. The whole pack was about to spring upon its
unresisting prey, and it is, no doubt, true that many a wolfish pulse
beat a little higher in anticipation. With a suddenness as startling
 figures raised themselves, five long, dark tubes leaped to their
shoulders, and with a suddenness that was yet more terrifying, a gush
of flame shot from five muzzles. Five of the wolves-and they were the
biggest and the boldest, the leaders-fell dead upon the ashes of the
charred timbers, and the others, howling their terror to the dark,
skies, fled deep into the forest.

Henry strode over and pushed the body of the largest wolf with his foot.

"I suppose we only gratified a kind of sentiment in shooting those
wolves," he said, "but I for one am glad we did it."

"So am I," said Paul.

"Me, too," said the other three together.

They went back to their positions near the wall, and one by one fell
asleep. No more wolves howled that night anywhere near them.

When the five awakened the next morning the rain had ceased, and a
splendid sun was tinting a blue sky with gold. Jim Hart built a fire
among the blackened logs, and cooked venison. They had also brought from
Fort Penn a little coffee, which Long Jim carried with a small coffee
pot in his camp kit, and everyone had a small tin cup. He made coffee
for them, an uncommon wilderness luxury, in which they could rarely
indulge, and they were heartened and strengthened by it.

Then they went again up the valley, as beautiful as ever, with its
silver river in the center, and its green mountain walls on either side.
But the beauty was for the eye only. It did not reach the hearts of
those who had seen it before. All of the five loved the wilderness, but
they felt now how tragic silence and desolation could be where human
life and all the daily ways of human life had been.

It was mid-summer, but the wilderness was already reclaiming its own.
The game knew that man was gone, and it had come back into the valley.
Deer ate what had grown in the fields and gardens, and the wolves were
everywhere. The whole black tragedy was written for miles. They were
never out of sight of some trace of it, and their anger grew again as
they advanced in the blackened path of the victorious Indians.

It was their purpose now to hang on the Indian flank as scouts and
skirmishers, until an American army was formed for a campaign against
the Iroquois, which they were sure must be conducted sooner or later.
Meanwhile they could be of great aid, gathering news of the Indian
plans, and, when that army of which they dreamed should finally march,
they could help it most of all by warning it of ambush, the Indian's
deadliest weapon.

Everyone of the five had already perceived a fact which was manifest in
all wars with the Indians along the whole border from North to South,
as it steadily shifted farther West. The practical hunter and scout was
always more than a match for the Indian, man for man, but, when the raw
levies of settlers were hastily gathered to stem invasion, they were
invariably at a great disadvantage. They were likely to be caught in
ambush by overwhelming numbers, and to be cut down, as had just happened
at Wyoming. The same fate might attend an invasion of the Iroquois
country, even by a large army of regular troops, and Henry and his
comrades resolved upon doing their utmost to prevent it. An army needed
eyes, and it could have none better than those five pairs. So they went
swiftly up the valley and northward and eastward, into the country of
the Iroquois. They had a plan of approaching the upper Mohawk village
of Canajoharie, where one account says that Thayendanegea was born,
although another credits his birthplace to the upper banks of the Ohio.

They turned now from the valley to the deep woods. The trail showed
that the great Indian force, after disembarking again, split into large
parties, everyone loaded with spoil and bound for its home village. The
five noted several of the trails, but one of them consumed the whole
attention of Silent Tom Ross.

He saw in the soft soil near a creek bank the footsteps of about eight
Indians, and, mingled with them, other footsteps, which he took to be
those of a white woman and of several children, captives, as even a
tyro would infer. The soul of Tom, the good, honest, and inarticulate
frontiersman, stirred within him. A white woman and her children being
carried off to savagery, to be lost forevermore to their kind! Tom,
still inarticulate, felt his heart pierced with sadness at the tale that
the tracks in the soft mud told so plainly. But despair was not the only
emotion in his heart. The silent and brave man meant to act.

"Henry," he said, "see these tracks here in the soft spot by the creek."

The young leader read the forest page, and it told him exactly the same
tale that it had told Tom Ross.

"About a day old, I think," he said.

"Just about," said Tom; "an' I reckon, Henry, you know what's in my
mind."

"I think I do," said Henry, "and we ought to overtake them by to-morrow
night. You tell the others, Tom."

Tom informed Shif'less Sol, Paul, and Long Jim in a few words, receiving
from everyone a glad assent, and then the five followed fast on the
trail. They knew that the Indians could not go very fast, as their speed
must be that of the slowest, namely, that of the children, and it seemed
likely that Henry's prediction of overtaking them on the following night
would come true.

It was an easy trail. Here and there were tiny fragments of cloth,
caught by a bush from the dress of a captive. In one place they saw a
fragment of a child's shoe that had been dropped off and abandoned. Paul
picked up the worn piece of leather and examined it.

"I think it was worn by a girl," he said, "and, judging from its size,
she could not have been more than eight years old. Think of a child like
that being made to walk five or six hundred miles through these woods!"

"Younger ones still have had to do it," said Shif'less Sol gravely, "an'
them that couldn't-well, the tomahawk."

The trail was leading them toward the Seneca country, and they had no
doubt that the Indians were Senecas, who had been more numerous than
any others of the Six Nations at the Wyoming battle. They came that
afternoon to a camp fire beside which the warriors and captives had
slept the night before.

"They ate bar meat an' wild turkey," said Long Jim, looking at some
bones on the ground.

"An' here," said Tom Ross, "on this pile uv bushes is whar the women an'
children slept, an' on the other side uv the fire is whar the warriors
lay anywhars. You can still see how the bodies uv some uv 'cm crushed
down the grass an' little bushes."

"An' I'm thinkin'," said Shif'less Sol, as he looked at the trail that
led away from the camp fire, "that some o' them little ones wuz gittin'
pow'ful tired. Look how these here little trails are wobblin' about."

"Hope we kin come up afore the Injuns begin to draw thar tomahawks,"
said Tom Ross.

The others were silent, but they knew the dreadful significance of Tom's
remark, and Henry glanced at them all, one by one.

