first reply to her son, after listening to a calculation of his, which
almost made it seem as if Dick would make money by going to Grantley,
was,--

"What if Mrs. Lee should say she can't spare him?"

Dab's countenance fell. He knew Mrs. Lee, but he had not thought so far
as that.

He said something not very intelligible, but to that effect.

"Well, Dabney, if we can make the other arrangements, I'll see her about
it."

Ham Morris had been exchanging remarkable winks with Miranda and
Samantha, and now gravely suggested,--

"Maybe the academy authorities will refuse to take him."

"Ford says they had a blacker boy than he is, there, last year."

"Now, Dab!" exclaimed Ham.

"Well, I know he's pretty black; but it don't come off."

"Mother," said Samantha, "Mrs. Foster and Annie are coming through the
gate."

Dab waited just long enough after that to learn the news concerning the
"Richard Lee Education Fund" and Mr. Foster's offer, and then he was off
towards the shore.

He knew very well in which direction it was best to go; and, half way to
the landing, he met Dick coming up the road with a basket of eels on his
arm.

"Dick," shouted Dabney, "I'm going away to boarding-school, at an
academy."

"'Cad'my? Whar?"

"Up in New England. They call it Grantley Academy,--where Frank and Ford
are going."

"Dat spiles it all," said Dick ruefully. "Now I's got to fish wid
fellers 'at don't know nuffin."

"No, you won't. You're going with us. It's all fixed,--money and all."

Dick would never have thought, ordinarily, of questioning a statement
made by "Captain Kinzer;" but the rueful expression deepened on his
face, the basket of eels dropped heavily on the grass, the tough black
fingers of his hands twisted nervously together for a moment, and then
he sat mournfully down beside the basket.

"It ain't no use, Dab."

"No use? Why not?"

"I ain't a w'ite boy."

"What of it? Don't you learn well enough, over at the school?"

"More dar like me. Wot'd I do in a place whar all de res' was w'ite?"

"Well as anybody."

"Wot'll my mudder say, w'en she gits de news? You isn't a-jokin', is
you, Dab Kinzer?"

"Joking? I guess not."

"You's lit onto me powerful sudden 'bout dis. Yonder's Ford an' Frank
a-comin'. Don't tell 'em. Not jes' yit."

"They know all about it. They helped raise the money."

"Did dey? I's obleeged to 'em. Well, 'tain't no use. All I's good for is
eels and crabs and clams and sech. Har dey come. Oh, my!"

Ford and Frank brought a fresh gust of enthusiasm with them, and they
had Dick and his eels up from the grass in short order.

"We must see Mrs. Lee right away," said Ford. "It would never do to let
Dick tell her."

"Guess dat's so," said Dick.

Quite an embassy they made, those four boys, with Dab Kinzer for
spokesman, and Dick Lee almost crouching behind them. Mrs. Lee listened
with open mouth while Dab unfolded his plan, but when he had finished
she shut her lips firmly together. They were not very thin, and not at
all used to being shut, and in another instant they opened again.

"Sho! De boy! Is dat you, Dick? Dat's wot comes ob dressin' on 'im up.
How's he goin' to git clo'es? Wot's he got to do wid de 'Cad'my, anyhow?
Wot am I to do, yer all alone, arter he's gone? Who's goin' to run
err'nds an' do de choahs? Wot's de use ob bringin' up a boy an' den hab
him go trapesin' off to de 'Cad'my? Wot good'll it do 'im?"

"I tole yer so, Dab," groaned poor Dick. "It ain't no use. I 'most wish
I was a eel!"

Dabney was on the point of opening a whole broadside of eloquence, when
Ford Foster pinched his arm, and whispered,--

"Your mother's coming, and our Annie's with her."

"Then let's clear out. She's worth a ten-acre lot full of us. Come on,
boys!"

If Mrs. Lee was surprised by their very sudden and somewhat
unceremonious retreat, she need not have been, after she learned the
cause of it. She stood in wholesome awe of Mrs. Kinzer; and a "brush"
with the portly widow, re-enforced by the sweet face of Annie Foster,
was a pretty serious matter.

She did not hesitate about beginning the skirmish, however; for her
tongue was already a bit loosened, and in fine working-order.

"Wot's dis yer, Mrs. Kinzer, 'bout sendin' away my Dick to a furrin
'Cad'my? Isn't he 'most nigh nuff spiled a'ready?"

"Oh! it's all arranged nicely. Miss Foster and I only came over to see
what we could do about getting his clothes ready. He must have things
warm and nice, for the winters are cold up there."

"I hasn't said he might go--Dick, put down dem eels; an' he hasn't said
he'd go--Dick, take off yer hat; an' his father"--

"Now, Glorianna," interrupted Mrs. Kinzer, calling Dick's mother by her
first name, "I've known you these forty years, and do you suppose I'm
going to argue about it? Just tell us what Dick'll need, and don't let's
have any nonsense. The money's all provided. How do you know what'll
become of him? He may be governor yet."

"He mought preach!"

That idea had suddenly dawned upon the perplexed mind of Mrs. Lee, and
Dick's fate was settled. She was prouder than ever of her boy; and,
truth to tell, her opposition was only what Mrs. Kinzer had considered
it, a piece of unaccountable "nonsense," to be brushed away by just such
a hand as the widow's own.





CHAPTER XIX.

A GRAND SAILING-PARTY, AND AN EXPERIMENT BY RICHARD LEE.


That was a great day for the boys; but, before the close of it, Ford
Foster had told his friends the news that Joe Hart and his brother Fuz
had been invited to visit with him.

"Will they come?" asked Dab.

"Certainly. That kind of boy always comes. Nobody wants to keep him from
coming."

"When do you look for them?"

"Right away. Vacation's almost gone, you know."

"Won't they be ashamed to meet your sister?"

"Not a bit. They'll try their tricks, even after they get here."

"All right. We'll help 'em all we know how. But, boys, I'll tell you
what we must try for."

"What's that?"

"One grand good sailing-party in 'The Swallow,' before they get here."

"Hurrah for that! Annie was wishing for one, only yesterday."

"We'll have all of your folks and all of ours. 'The Swallow' is plenty
big enough."

"Mother wouldn't go, and father can't just now. He's trying a case. But
there's Annie and Frank and me"--

"And my mother, and Ham and Miranda, and our girls. Ham'll go, sure.
Then we must take Dick Lee along. It'd make him sick if we didn't."

"Of course. Ain't I glad about him! Could we get ready and go
to-morrow?"

"Guess not so quick as that. We might by the day after, if the weather's
all right."

Exactly. There is always a large-sized "if" to be put in, where any
thing depends on the weather, Mrs. Kinzer took the matter up with
enthusiasm, and so did the girls, Miranda included; and Ford Foster was
quite right about his part of the company.

But the weather!

It looked well enough, to unpractised eyes; but Ham Morris shook his
head, and went to consult his fishermen friends. There was a good deal
of head-shaking done thereupon; for every human barometer among them
advised him to wait a day or so, and hardly any two of them gave him the
same reason for doing it.

Ford Foster was at the house when Ham made his report, and was a little
surprised to see how promptly Dab Kinzer yielded his assent to the
verdict.

"Such warm, nice weather as this is," he remonstrated; "and there isn't
any wind to speak of."

"There's too much of it coming," was Ham's response; and there was no
help for it after that, not even when the mail brought word from "Aunt
Maria" that both of her dear boys would arrive in a day or two.

"Our last chance is gone, Annie," said Ford, when the news came.

"O mother!" she said despondingly, "what shall we do?"

"Have your sail, just the same, and invite your cousins."

"But the Kinzers"--

"Why, Annie! Mrs. Kinzer will not think of neglecting them. She's as
kind as kind can be."

"And we are to pay her with Joe and Fuz," said Ford. "Well, I wish Ham
Morris's storm would come along."

He only had to wait until the next day for it, and he felt quite
contented to be safe on shore while it lasted. There was no call for any
laughter at the prophecies of the fishermen after it began to blow.
Still the blow was not a long one, and Ham Morris remarked,--

"This is only an outside edge of it. It's a good deal worse than this
out at sea. I'm glad we're not out in it."

Ford Foster thought that about the worst of that weather was when the
afternoon train came in, and he had to show a pair of tired, moist, and
altogether unpleasant cousins to the room set apart for them. The clouds
in his mind did not clear away perceptibly even when, just after supper,
a note came in from Mrs. Kinzer, inviting the Hart boys to join the
yachting-party next morning.

"The storm may not be over," growled Ford a little sulkily.

"Oh!" said Annie, "Mrs. Kinzer adds that the weather will surely be fine
after such a blow, and the bay will be quite safe and smooth."

"Does she know the clerk of the weather?" asked Joe Hart.

"Got one of her own," said Ford.

Joe and Ford both found something to laugh at in that, but they said
nothing. They were both feeling a little "strange," as yet, and were
almost inclined to try and behave themselves; the main difficulty in the
way of it being a queer idea they had that their ordinary way of doing
things made up a fair article of "good behavior." Nobody had taken the
pains to bounce them out of the notion.

When the morning really came, sea and earth and sky seemed to be all the
better for the trial they had been through, and the weather was all that
Mrs. Kinzer had prophesied of it. The grass and trees were greener, and
the bay seemed bluer; while the few clouds visible were very white and
clean, as if all the storms had been recently washed out of them.

There was no question now to be raised concerning the yachting-party, or
any part of it. Not a single thing went wrong in Mrs. Kinzer's
management of the "setting out," and that was half the day won to begin
with. Ford had some difficulty in getting Joe and Fuz out of bed so
early as was necessary; but he gave them an intimation which proved
quite sufficient:--

"You'd better hop, boys. Ham Morris wouldn't wait five minutes for the
Queen of England, or even for me."

"Joe," whispered Fuz, a little while after they got on board the yacht,
"are we to be gone a week?"

"Why? What's up?"

"Such piles of provisions as they've stowed away in that kennel!"

The bit of a water-tight cabin under the half-deck, at which Fuz
pointed, was pretty well filled, beyond a doubt; but Mrs. Kinzer knew
what she was about. She had provided luncheon for most of that party
before, and the effect on them of the sea-air was also to be taken into
account.

"Dab," said Ford Foster, "you've forgotten to unhitch the 'Jenny,' Here
she is, towing astern."

"That's all right. We may need her. She's too heavy to be taken on
board."

A careful fellow was Mr. Hamilton Morris, and he well knew the value of
a rowboat to a sea-going picnic-party. As for Joe and Fuz, they were
compelled to overcome a strong inward inclination to cast the boat
loose. Such a good joke it would have been! But Ham Morris was in the
way of it, so long as he stood at the tiller.

"The Swallow" was steady enough to inspire even Annie Foster with a
feeling of confidence; but Ford carefully explained to her the
difference between slipping over the little waves of the landlocked bay,
and plunging into the gigantic billows of the stormy Atlantic.

"I prefer this," said Annie.

"But I wouldn't have missed the other for any thing," replied Ford.
"Would you, Dick?"

Mr. Richard Lee had taken his full share in the work of starting, and
