
The Doctor--the quiet, kindly, peaceable, little Doctor!--well, you
wouldn't have known him if you had seen him that day dealing out whacks
you could hear a mile off, walloping and swatting in all directions.

As for Bumpo, with staring eye-balls and grim set teeth, he was
a veritable demon. None dared come within yards of that wicked,
wide-circling door-post. But a stone, skilfully thrown, struck him at
last in the centre of the forehead. And down went the second of the
Three. John Dolittle, the last of the Terribles, was left fighting
alone.

Jip and I rushed to his side and tried to take the places of the fallen
ones. But, far too light and too small, we made but a poor exchange.
Another length of the fence crashed down, and through the widened gap
the Bag-jagderags poured in on us like a flood.

"To the canoes!--To the sea!" shouted the Popsipetels. "Fly for your
lives!--All is over!--The war is lost!"

But the Doctor and I never got a chance to fly for our lives. We were
swept off our feet and knocked down flat by the sheer weight of the mob.
And once down, we were unable to get up again. I thought we would surely
be trampled to death.

But at that moment, above the din and racket of the battle, we heard
the most terrifying noise that ever assaulted human ears: the sound of
millions and millions of parrots all screeching with fury together.

The army, which in the nick of time Polynesia had brought to our rescue,
darkened the whole sky to the westward. I asked her afterwards, how many
birds there were; and she said she didn't know exactly but that they
certainly numbered somewhere between sixty and seventy millions. In
that extraordinarily short space of time she had brought them from the
mainland of South America.

If you have ever heard a parrot screech with anger you will know that it
makes a truly frightful sound; and if you have ever been bitten by one,
you will know that its bite can be a nasty and a painful thing.

The Black Parrots (coal-black all over, they were--except for a scarlet
beak and a streak of red in wing and tail) on the word of command
from Polynesia set to work upon the Bag-jagderags who were now pouring
through the village looking for plunder.

And the Black Parrots' method of fighting was peculiar. This is what
they did: on the head of each Bag-jagderag three or four parrots settled
and took a good foot-hold in his hair with their claws; then they leant
down over the sides of his head and began clipping snips out of his
ears, for all the world as though they were punching tickets. That is
all they did. They never bit them anywhere else except the ears. But it
won the war for us.

With howls pitiful to hear, the Bag-jagderags fell over one another in
their haste to get out of that accursed village. It was no use their
trying to pull the parrots off their heads; because for each head there
were always four more parrots waiting impatiently to get on.

Some of the enemy were lucky; and with only a snip or two managed to get
outside the fence--where the parrots immediately left them alone. But
with most, before the black birds had done with them, the ears presented
a very singular appearance--like the edge of a postage-stamp. This
treatment, very painful at the time, did not however do them any
permanent harm beyond the change in looks. And it later got to be the
tribal mark of the Bag-jagderags. No really smart young lady of this
tribe would be seen walking with a man who did not have scalloped
ears--for such was a proof that he had been in the Great War. And that
(though it is not generally known to scientists) is how this people
came to be called by the other Indian nations, the Ragged-Eared
Bag-jagderags.

As soon as the village was cleared of the enemy the Doctor turned his
attention to the wounded.

In spite of the length and fierceness of the struggle, there were
surprisingly few serious injuries. Poor Long Arrow was the worst off.
However, after the Doctor had washed his wound and got him to bed, he
opened his eyes and said he already felt better. Bumpo was only badly
stunned.

With this part of the business over, the Doctor called to Polynesia to
have the Black Parrots drive the enemy right back into their own country
and to wait there, guarding them all night.

Polynesia gave the short word of command; and like one bird those
millions of parrots opened their red beaks and let out once more their
terrifying battle-scream.

The Bag-jagderags didn't wait to be bitten a second time, but fled
helter-skelter over the mountains from which they had come; whilst
Polynesia and her victorious army followed watchfully behind like a
great, threatening, black cloud.

The Doctor picked up his high hat which had been knocked off in the
fight, dusted it carefully and put it on.

"To-morrow," he said, shaking his fist towards the hills, "we will
arrange the terms of peace--and we will arrange them--in the City of
Bag-jagderag."

His words were greeted with cheers of triumph from the admiring
Popsipetels. The war was over.




THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. THE PEACE OF THE PARROTS

THE next day we set out for the far end of the island, and reaching it
in canoes (for we went by sea) after a journey of twenty-five hours, we
remained no longer than was necessary in the City of Bag-jagderag.

When he threw himself into that fight at Popsipetel, I saw the Doctor
really angry for the first time in my life. But his anger, once aroused,
was slow to die. All the way down the coast of the island he never
ceased to rail against this cowardly people who had attacked his
friends, the Popsipetels, for no other reason but to rob them of their
corn, because they were too idle to till the land themselves. And he was
still angry when he reached the City of Bag-jagderag.

Long Arrow had not come with us for he was as yet too weak from his
wound. But the Doctor--always clever at languages--was already
getting familiar with the Indian tongue. Besides, among the half-dozen
Popsipetels who accompanied us to paddle the canoes, was one boy to whom
we had taught a little English. He and the Doctor between them managed
to make themselves understood to the Bag-jagderags. This people, with
the terrible parrots still blackening the hills about their stone town,
waiting for the word to descend and attack, were, we found, in a very
humble mood.

Leaving our canoes we passed up the main street to the palace of the
chief. Bumpo and I couldn't help smiling with satisfaction as we saw
how the waiting crowds which lined the roadway bowed their heads to the
ground, as the little, round, angry figure of the Doctor strutted ahead
of us with his chin in the air.

At the foot of the palace-steps the chief and all the more important
personages of the tribe were waiting to meet him, smiling humbly
and holding out their hands in friendliness. The Doctor took not the
slightest notice. He marched right by them, up the steps to the door
of the palace. There he turned around and at once began to address the
people in a firm voice.

I never heard such a speech in my life--and I am quite sure that they
never did either. First he called them a long string of names: cowards,
loafers, thieves, vagabonds, good-for-nothings, bullies and what not.
Then he said he was still seriously thinking of allowing the parrots to
drive them on into the sea, in order that this pleasant land might be
rid, once for all, of their worthless carcases. At this a great cry
for mercy went up, and the chief and all of them fell on their knees,
calling out that they would submit to any conditions of peace he wished.

Then the Doctor called for one of their scribes--that is, a man who did
picture-writing. And on the stone walls of the palace of Bag-jagderag he
bade him write down the terms of the peace as he dictated it. This peace
is known as The Peace of The Parrots, and--unlike most peaces--was, and
is, strictly kept--even to this day.

It was quite long in words. The half of the palace-front was covered
with picture-writing, and fifty pots of paint were used, before the
weary scribe had done. But the main part of it all was that there should
be no more fighting; and that the two tribes should give solemn promise
to help one another whenever there was corn-famine or other distress in
the lands belonging to either.

This greatly surprised the Bag-jagderags. They had expected from the
Doctor's angry face that he would at least chop a couple of hundred
heads off--and probably make the rest of them slaves for life.

But when they saw that he only meant kindly by them, their great fear of
him changed to a tremendous admiration. And as he ended his long speech
and walked briskly down the steps again on his way back to the canoes,
the group of chieftains threw themselves at his feet and cried, "Do but
stay with us. Great Lord, and all the riches of Bag-jagderag shall
be poured into your lap. Gold-mines we know of in the mountains and
pearl-beds beneath the sea. Only stay with us, that your all-powerful
wisdom may lead our Council and our people in prosperity and peace." The
Doctor held up his hand for silence.

"No man," said he, "would wish to be the guest of the Bag-jagderags till
they had proved by their deeds that they are an honest race. Be true to
the terms of the Peace and from yourselves shall come good government
and prosperity--Farewell!"

Then he turned and followed by Bumpo, the Popsipetels and myself, walked
rapidly down to the canoes.




THE EIGHTH CHAPTER. THE HANGING STONE

BUT the change of heart in the Bag-jagderags was really sincere. The
Doctor had made a great impression on them--a deeper one than even he
himself realized at the time. In fact I sometimes think that that
speech of his from the palace-steps had more effect upon the Indians of
Spidermonkey Island than had any of his great deeds which, great though
they were, were always magnified and exaggerated when the news of them
was passed from mouth to mouth.

A sick girl was brought to him as he reached the place where the boats
lay. She turned out to have some quite simple ailment which he quickly
gave the remedy for. But this increased his popularity still more. And
when he stepped into his canoe, the people all around us actually burst
into tears. It seems (I learned this afterwards) that they thought he
was going away across the sea, for good, to the mysterious foreign lands
from which he had come.

Some of the chieftains spoke to the Popsipetels as we pushed off. What
they said I did not understand; but we noticed that several canoes
filled with Bag-jagderags followed us at a respectful distance all the
way back to Popsipetel.

The Doctor had determined to return by the other shore, so that we
should be thus able to make a complete trip round the island's shores.

Shortly after we started, while still off the lower end of the island,
we sighted a steep point on the coast where the sea was in a great state
of turmoil, white with soapy froth. On going nearer, we found that this
was caused by our friendly whales who were still faithfully working away
with their noses against the end of the island, driving us northward. We
had been kept so busy with the war that we had forgotten all about them.
But as we paused and watched their mighty tails lashing and churning
the sea, we suddenly realized that we had not felt cold in quite along
while. Speeding up our boat lest the island be carried away from us
altogether, we passed on up the coast; and here and there we noticed
that the trees on the shore already looked greener and more healthy.
Spidermonkey Island was getting back into her home climates.

About halfway to Popsipetel we went ashore and spent two or three days
exploring the central part of the island. Our Indian paddlers took us up
into the mountains, very steep and high in this region, overhanging the
sea. And they showed us what they called the Whispering Rocks.

This was a very peculiar and striking piece of scenery. It was like a
great vast basin, or circus, in the mountains, and out of the centre of
it there rose a table of rock with an ivory chair upon it. All around
this the mountains went up like stairs, or theatre-seats, to a great
height--except at one narrow end which was open to a view of the sea.
You could imagine it a council-place or concert-hall for giants, and the
rock table in the centre the stage for performers or the stand for the
speaker.

We asked our guides why it was called the Whispering Rocks; and they
said, "Go down into it and we will show you."

The great bowl was miles deep and miles wide. We scrambled down the
rocks and they showed us how, even when you stood far, far apart from
one another, you merely had to whisper in that great place and every one
in the theatre could hear you. This was, the Doctor said, on account of
the echoes which played backwards and forwards between the high walls of
rock.

Our guides told us that it was here, in days long gone by when the
Popsipetels owned the whole of Spidermonkey Island, that the kings were
crowned. The ivory chair upon the table was the throne in which they
sat. And so great was the big theatre that all the Indians in the island
were able to get seats in it to see the ceremony.

They showed us also an enormous hanging stone perched on the edge of a
volcano's crater--the highest summit in the whole island. Although it
was very far below us, we could see it quite plainly, and it looked
wobbly enough to be pushed off its perch with the hand. There was
a legend among the people, they said, that when the greatest of all
Popsipetel kings should be crowned in the ivory chair, this hanging
stone would tumble into the volcano's mouth and go straight down to the
centre of the earth.

The Doctor said he would like to go and examine it closer.

And when we were come to the lip of the volcano (it took us half a day
to get up to it) we found the stone was unbelievably large--big as a
cathedral. Underneath it we could look right down into a black hole
which seemed to have no bottom. The Doctor explained to us that
volcanoes sometimes spurted up fire from these holes in their tops; but
that those on floating islands were always cold and dead.

"Stubbins," he said, looking up at the great stone towering above us,
"do you know what would most likely happen if that boulder should fall
in?"

"No," said I, "what?"

"You remember the air-chamber which the porpoises told us lies under the
centre of the island?"

"Yes."

"Well, this stone is heavy enough, if it fell into the volcano, to break
through into that air-chamber from above. And once it did, the air would
escape and the floating island would float no more. It would sink."

"But then everybody on it would be drowned, wouldn't they?" said Bumpo.

"Oh no, not necessarily. That would depend on the depth of the sea where
the sinking took place. The island might touch bottom when it had only
gone down, say, a hundred feet. But there would be lots of it still
sticking up above the water then, wouldn't there?"

"Yes," said Bumpo, "I suppose there would. Well, let us hope that the
ponderous fragment does not lose its equilibriosity, for I don't believe
it would stop at the centre of the earth--more likely it would fall
right through the world and come out the other side."

Many other wonders there were which these men showed us in the central
regions of their island. But I have not time or space to tell you of
them now.

Descending towards the shore again, we noticed that we were still being
watched, even here among the highlands, by the Bag-jagderags who
had followed us. And when we put to sea once more a boatload of them
proceeded to go ahead of us in the direction of Popsipetel. Having
lighter canoes, they traveled faster than our party; and we judged that
they should reach the village--if that was where they were going--many
hours before we could.

The Doctor was now becoming anxious to see how Long Arrow was getting
on, so we all took turns at the paddles and went on traveling by
moonlight through the whole night.

We reached Popsipetel just as the dawn was breaking.

To our great surprise we found that not only we, but the whole village
also, had been up all night. A great crowd was gathered about the dead
chief's house. And as we landed our canoes upon the beach we saw a large
number of old men, the seniors of the tribe, coming out at the main
door.

We inquired what was the meaning of all this; and were told that the
election of a new chief had been going on all through the whole night.
Bumpo asked the name of the new chief; but this, it seemed, had not yet
been given out. It would be announced at mid-day.

As soon as the Doctor had paid a visit to Long Arrow and seen that he
was doing nicely, we proceeded to our own house at the far end of the
village. Here we ate some breakfast and then lay down to take a good
rest.

Rest, indeed, we needed; for life had been strenuous and busy for us
ever since we had landed on the island. And it wasn't many minutes after
our weary heads struck the pillows that the whole crew of us were sound
asleep.




THE NINTH CHAPTER. THE ELECTION

WE were awakened by music. The glaring noonday sunlight was streaming
in at our door, outside of which some kind of a band appeared to be
playing.

We got up and looked out. Our house was surrounded by the whole
population of Popsipetel. We were used to having quite a number of
curious and admiring Indians waiting at our door at all hours; but this
was quite different. The vast crowd was dressed in its best clothes.
Bright beads, gawdy feathers and gay blankets gave cheerful color to
the scene. Every one seemed in very good humor, singing or playing on
musical instruments--mostly painted wooden whistles or drums made from
skins.

We found Polynesia--who while we slept had arrived back from
Bag-jagderag--sitting on our door-post watching the show. We asked her
what all the holiday-making was about.

"The result of the election has just been announced," said she. "The
name of the new chief was given out at noon."

"And who is the new chief?" asked the Doctor.

"You are," said Polynesia quietly.

"I!" gasped the Doctor--"Well, of all things!"

"Yes," said she. "You're the one--And what's more, they've changed
your surname for you. They didn't think that Dolittle was a proper or
respectful name for a man who had done so much. So you are now to be
known as Jong Thinkalot. How do you like it?"

"But I don't WANT to be a chief," said the Doctor in an irritable voice.

"I'm afraid you'll have hard work to get out of it now," said
she--"unless you're willing to put to sea again in one of their
rickety canoes. You see you've been elected not merely the Chief of the
Popsipetels; you're to be a king--the King of the whole of Spidermonkey
Island. The Bag-jagderags, who were so anxious to have you govern them,
sent spies and messengers ahead of you; and when they found that you
had been elected Chief of the Popsipetels overnight they were
bitterly disappointed. However, rather than lose you altogether, the
Bag-jagderags were willing to give up their independence, and insisted
that they and their lands be united to the Popsipetels in order that you
could be made king of both. So now you're in for it."

"Oh Lord!" groaned the Doctor, "I do wish they wouldn't be so
enthusiastic! Bother it, I don't WANT to be a king!"

"I should think, Doctor," said I, "you'd feel rather proud and glad. I
wish I had a chance to be a king."

"Oh I know it sounds grand," said he, pulling on his boots miserably.
"But the trouble is, you can't take up responsibilities and then
just drop them again when you feel like it. I have my own work to do.
Scarcely one moment have I had to give to natural history since I landed
on this island. I've been doing some one else's business all the time.
And now they want me to go on doing it! Why, once I'm made King of the
Popsipetels, that's the end of me as a useful naturalist. I'd be too
busy for anything. All I'd be then is just a er--er just a king."

"Well, that's something!" said Bumpo. "My father is a king and has a
hundred and twenty wives."

"That would make it worse," said the Doctor--"a hundred and twenty times
worse. I have my work to do. I don't want to be a king."

"Look," said Polynesia, "here come the head men to announce your
election. Hurry up and get your boots laced."

The throng before our door had suddenly parted asunder, making a long
lane; and down this we now saw a group of personages coming towards us.
The man in front, a handsome old Indian with a wrinkled face, carried
in his hands a wooden crown--a truly beautiful and gorgeous crown, even
though of wood. Wonderfully carved and painted, it had two lovely blue
feathers springing from the front of it. Behind the old man came eight
strong Indians bearing a litter, a sort of chair with long handles
underneath to carry it by.

Kneeling down on one knee, bending his head almost to the ground, the
old man addressed the Doctor who now stood in the doorway putting on his
collar and tie.

"Oh, Mighty One," said he, "we bring you word from the Popsipetel
people. Great are your deeds beyond belief, kind is your heart and your
wisdom, deeper than the sea. Our chief is dead. The people clamor for
a worthy leader. Our old enemies, the Bag-jagderags are become, through
you, our brothers and good friends. They too desire to bask beneath the
sunshine of your smile. Behold then, I bring to you the Sacred Crown of
Popsipetel which, since ancient days when this island and its peoples
were one, beneath one monarch, has rested on no kingly brow. Oh Kindly
