"At times they are, sir," replied the young Onondaga.

"Um-m. Is that so? What was the date of the battle of Zama?"

"It was fought 202 B.C., sir."

"You're correct, but it must have been only a lucky guess. I'll try
you again. What was the date of the battle of Hastings?"

"It was fought 1066 A.D., sir."

"Very good. Since you have answered correctly twice it must be
knowledge and not mere surmise on your part. Robert, whom do you
esteem the greatest of the Greek dramatic poets?"

"Sophocles, sir."

"Why?"

"Because he combined the vigor and power of Aeschylus with the polish
and refinement of Euripides."

"Correct. I see that you remember what I told you, as you have quoted
almost my exact words. And now, lads, be seated, while I order
refreshments for you."

"We thank you, sir," said Robert, "but 'tis less than an hour since we
almost ate ourselves to death at the house of Mynheer Jacobus
Huysman."

"A good man, Jacob, but too fat, and far too brusque in speech,
especially to the young. I'll warrant me he has been addressing
upbraiding words to you, finding fault, perhaps, with your manners and
your parts of speech."

The two youths hid their smiles.

"Mynheer Jacobus was very good to us," said Robert. "Just as you are,
Master McLean."

"I am not good to you, if you mean by it weakness and softness of
heart. Never spoil the young. Speak sternly to them all the time. Use
the strap and the rod freely upon them and you may make men of them."

Again Robert and Tayoga hid their smiles, but each knew that he had a
soft place in the heart of the crusty teacher, and they spent a
pleasant hour with him. That night they slept in their old room at
Mynheer Huysman's and two days later they and Willet went on board a
sloop for New York, where they intended to see Governor de
Lancey. Before they left many more alarming reports about the French
and Indians had come to Albany. They had made new ravages in the north
and west, and their power was spreading continually. France was
already helping her colonists. When would England help hers?

But Robert forgot all alarm in the pleasure of the voyage. It was a
good sloop, it had a stout Dutch captain, and with a favoring wind
they sped fast southward. Pride in the splendid river swelled in
Robert's soul and he and Tayoga, despite the cold, sat together on the
deck, watching the lofty shores and the distant mountains.

But Willet, anxious of mind, paced back and forth. He had seen much
at Albany that did not please him. The Indian Commissioners were
doing little to cement the alliance with the Hodenosaunee. The
Mohawks, alone of the great League, were giving aid against the
French. The others remained in their villages, keeping a strict
neutrality. That was well as far as it went, but the hunter had hoped
that all the members of the Hodenosaunee would take the field for the
English. He believed that Father Drouillard would soon be back among
the Onondagas, seeking to sway his converts to France, and he dreaded,
too, the activity and persistency of St. Luc.

But he kept his anxieties from Robert, knowing how eagerly the lad
anticipated his arrival in New York, and not blaming him at all for
it, since New York, although inferior in wealth, size and power to
Philadelphia, and in leadership to Boston, was already, in the eye of
the prophets, because of its situation, destined to become the first
city of America. And Willet felt his own pulses beat a little faster
at the thought of New York, a town that he knew well, and already a
port famous throughout the world.

Tayoga, although he wore his Indian dress, attracted no particular
attention from Captain Van Zouten and his crew. Indians could be seen
daily at Albany, and along the river, and they had been for
generations a part of American life. Captain Van Zouten, in truth,
noticed the height and fine bearing of the Onondaga, but he was a
close mouthed Dutchman, and if he felt like asking questions he put
due Dutch restraint upon himself.

The wind held good all day long, and the sloop flew southward, leaving
a long white trail in the blue water, but toward night it rose to a
gale, with heavy clouds that promised snow. Captain Hendrick Van
Zouten looked up with some anxiety at his sails, through which the
wind was now whistling, and, after a consultation with his mate,
decided to draw into a convenient cove and anchor for the night.

"I'm sorry," he said to Willet, "that our voyage to New York will be
delayed, but there'll be nasty weather on the river, and I don't like
to risk the sloop in it. But I didn't promise you that I'd get you to
the city at any particular time."

"We don't blame wind, weather and water upon you, Captain Van Zouten,"
laughed Willet, "and although I'm no seaman if you'd have consulted me
I too would have suggested shelter for the night."

Captain Van Zouten breathed his relief.

"If my passengers are satisfied," he said, "then so am I."

All the sails were furled, the sloop was anchored securely in a cove
where she could not injure herself, no matter how fiercely the wind
might beat, and Robert and Tayoga, wrapped in their fur cloaks, stood
on her deck, watching the advance of the fierce winter storm, and
remembering those other storms they had passed through on Lake
Champlain, although there was no danger of Indians here.

It began to snow heavily, and a fierce wind whistled among the
mountains behind them, lashing the river also into high waves, but the
sloop was a tight, strong craft, and it rocked but little in its snug
cove. Despite snow, wind and darkness Robert, Tayoga and the hunter
remained a long, time on deck. The Onondaga's feather headdress had
been replaced by a fur cap, similar to those now worn by Robert and
Willet, and all three were wrapped in heavy cloaks of furs.

Robert was still thinking of New York, a town that he knew to some
extent, and yet he was traveling toward it with a feeling akin to that
with which he had approached Quebec. It was in a way and for its time
a great port, in which many languages were spoken and to which many
ships came. Despite its inferiority in size it was already the chief
window through which the New World looked upon the Old. He expected
to see life in the seething little city at the mouth of the Hudson and
he expected also that a crisis in his fortunes would come there.

"Dave," he said to the hunter, "have you any plans for us in New
York?"

"They've not taken very definite shape," replied Willet, "but you know
you want to serve in the war, and so do I. A great expedition is
coming out from England, and in conjunction with a Colonial force it
will march against Fort Duquesne. The point to which that force
advances is bound to be the chief scene of action."

"And that, Dave, is where we want to go."

"With proper commissions in the army. We must maintain our dignity and
station, Robert."

"Of course, Dave. And you, Tayoga, are you willing to go with us?"

"It is far from the vale of Onondaga," replied the young Indian, "but
I have already made the great journey to Quebec with my comrades,
Dagaeoga and the Great Bear. I am willing to see more of the world of
which I read in the books at Albany. If the fortunes of Dagaeoga take
him on another long circle I am ready to go with him."

"Spoken like a warrior, Tayoga," said the hunter. "I have some
influence, and if we join the army that is to march against Fort
Duquesne I'll see that you receive a place befitting your Onondaga
rank and your quality as a man."

"And so that is settled," said Robert. "We three stand together no
matter what may come."

"Stand together it is, no matter what may come," said Willet.

"We are, perhaps, as well in one place as in another," said Tayoga
philosophically, "because wherever we may be Manitou holds us in the
hollow of his hand."

A great gust of wind came with a shriek down one of the gorges, and
the snow was whipped into their faces, blinding them for a moment.

"It is good to be aboard a stout sloop in such a storm," said Robert,
as he wiped his eyes clear. "It would be hard to live up there on
those cliffs in all this driving white winter."

A deep rumbling sound came back from the mountains, and he felt a
chill that was not of the cold creep into his bones.

"It is the wind in the deep gorges," said Tayoga, "but the winds
themselves are spirits and the mountains too are spirits. On such a
wild night as this they play together and the rumbling you hear is
their voices joined in laughter."

Robert's vivid mind as usual responded at once to Tayoga's imagery,
and his fancy went as far as that of the Onondaga, and perhaps
farther. He filled the air with spirits. They lined the edge of the
driving white storm. They flitted through every cleft and gorge, and
above every ridge and peak. They were on the river, and they rode upon
the waves that were pursuing one another over its surface. Then he
laughed a little at himself.

"My fancy is seeing innumerable figures for me," he said, "where my
eyes really see none. No human being is likely to be abroad on the
river on such a night as this."

"And yet my own eyes tell me that I do see a human being," said
Tayoga, "one that is living and breathing, with warm blood running in
his veins."

"A living, breathing man! where, Tayoga?"

"Look at the sloping cliff above us, there where the trees grow close
together. Notice the one with the boughs hanging low, and by the dark
trunk you will see the figure. It is a tall man with his hat drawn low
over his eyes, and a heavy cloak wrapped closely around his body."

"I see him now, Tayoga! What could a man want at such a place on such
a night? It must be a farmer out late, or perhaps a wandering hunter!"

"Nay, Dagaeoga, it is not a farmer, nor yet a wandering hunter. The
shoulders are set too squarely. The figure is too upright. And even
without these differences we would be sure that it is not the farmer,
nor yet the wandering hunter, because it is some one else whom we
know."

"What do you mean, Tayoga?"

"Look! Look closely, Dagaeoga!"

"Now the wind drives aside the white veil of snow and I see him
better. His figure is surely familiar!"

"Aye, Dagaeoga, it is! And do you not know him?"

"St. Luc! As sure as we live, Tayoga, it's St. Luc."

"Yes," said the hunter, who had not spoken hitherto. "It's St. Luc,
and I could reach him from here with a rifle shot."

"But you must not! You must not fire upon him!"  exclaimed Robert.

Willet laughed.

"I wasn't thinking of doing so," he said. "And now it's too
late. St. Luc has gone."

The dark figure vanished from beside the trunk, and Robert saw only
the lofty slope, and the whirling snow. He passed his hands before his
eyes.

"Did we really see him?" he said.

"We beheld him alive and in the flesh," replied the hunter, "deep down
in His Britannic Majesty's province of New York."

"What could have brought him here at such a time?"

"The cause of France, no doubt. He speaks English as well as you and
I, and he is probably in civilian clothing, seeking information for
his country. I know something of St. Luc. He has in him a spice of the
daring and romantic. Luck and adventure would appeal to him. He
probably knows already what forces we have at Albany and Kingston and
what is their state of preparation. Valuable knowledge for Quebec,
too."

"Do you think St. Luc will venture to New York?"

"Scarce likely, lad. He can obtain about all he wishes to know without
going so far south."

"I'm glad of that, Dave. I shouldn't want him to be captured and
hanged as a spy."

"Nor I, Robert. St. Luc is the kind of man who, if he falls at all in
this war, should fall sword in hand on the battle field. He must know
this region or he would not dare to come here, on such a terrible
night. He has probably gone now to shelter. And, since there is
nothing more to be seen we might do the same."

But Robert and Tayoga were not willing to withdraw yet. Well wrapped
and warm, they found a pleasure in the fierce storm that raged among
the mountains and over the river, and their own security on the deck
of the stout sloop, fastened so safely in the little cove. They
listened to the wind rumbling anew like thunder through the deep
gorges and clefts, and they saw the snow swept in vast curtains of
white over the wild river.

"I wonder what we shall find in New York, Tayoga," said Robert.

"We shall find many people, of many kinds, Dagaeoga, but what will
happen to us there Manitou alone knows. But he has us in his
keeping. Look how he watched over us in Quebec, and look how the sword
of the Great Bear was stretched before you when your enemies planned
to slay you."

"That's true, Tayoga. I don't look forward to New York with any
apprehension, but I do wonder what fate has prepared for us there."

"We must await it with calm," said Tayoga philosophically.

The Onondaga himself was not a stranger to New York. He had gone there
once with the chiefs of the Hodenosaunee for a grand council with the
British and provincial authorities, and he had gone twice with Robert
when they were schoolboys together in Albany. His enlightened mind,
without losing any of its dignity and calm, took a deep interest in
everything he saw at the port, through which the tide of nations
already flowed. He had much of the quality shown later by the fiery
Thayendanegea, who bore himself with the best in London and who was
their equal in manners, though the Onondaga, while as brave and daring
as the Mohawk, was gentler and more spiritual, being, in truth, what
his mind and circumstances had made him, a singular blend of red and
white culture.

Willet, also wrapped in a long fur cloak, came from the cabin of the
sloop and looked at the two youths, each of whom had such a great
place in his heart. Both were white with snow as they stood on the
deck, but they did not seem to notice it.

"Come now," said the hunter with assumed brusqueness. "You needn't
stand here all night, looking at the river, the cliffs and the
storm. Off to your berths, both of you."

"Good advice, or rather command, Dave," said Robert, "and we'll obey
it."

Their quarters were narrow, because sloops plying on the river in
those days were not large, but the three who slept so often in the
forest were not seekers after luxury. Robert undressed, crept into his
bunk, which was not over two feet wide, and slept soundly until
morning. After midnight the violence of the storm abated. It was still
snowing, but Captain Van Zouten unfurled his sails, made for the
middle of the river, and, when the sun came up over the eastern hills,
the sloop was tearing along at a great rate for New York.

So when Robert awoke and heard the groaning of timbers and the creak
of cordage he knew at once that they were under way and he was
glad. The events of the night before passed rapidly through his mind,
but they seemed vague and indistinct. At first he thought the vision
of St. Luc on the cliff in the storm was but a dream, and he had to
make an effort of the will to convince himself that it was
reality. But everything came back presently, as vivid as it had been
when it occurred, and rising he dressed and went on deck. Tayoga and
Willet were already there.

"Sluggard," said the Onondaga. "The French warships would capture you
while you are still in the land of dreams."

"We'll find no French warships in the Hudson," retorted Robert, "and
as for sluggards, how long have you been on deck yourself, Tayoga?"

"Two minutes, but much may happen in two minutes. Look, Dagaeoga, we
come now into a land of plenty. See, how many smokes rise on either
shore, and the smoke is not of camps, but of houses."

"It comes from strong Dutch farmhouses, and from English manor houses,
Tayoga. They nestle in the warm shelter of the hills or at the mouths
of the creeks. Surely, the world cannot furnish a nobler scene."

All the earth was pure white from the fallen snow, but the river
itself was a deep blue, reflected from the dazzling blue of the sky
overhead. The air, thin and cold, was exhilarating, and as the sloop
fled southward a panorama, increasing continually in magnificence,
unfolded before them. Other vessels appeared upon the river, and
Captain Van Zouten gave them friendly signals. Tiny villages showed
and the shores were an obvious manifestation of comfort and opulence.

"I have heard that the French, if their success continues, mean to
attack Albany," said Robert, "but we must stop them there, Dave. We
can never let them invade such a region as this."

"They'll invade it, nevertheless," said the hunter, "unless stout arms
and brave hearts stop them. We can drive both French and Indians back,
if we ever unite. There lies the trouble. We must get some sort of
concentrated action."

"And New York is the best place to see whether it will be done or
not."

"So it is."

The wind remained favorable all that day, the next night there was a
calm, but the following day they drew near to New York, Captain Van
Zouten assuring them he would make a landing before sunset.

He was well ahead of his promise, because the sun was high in the
heavens when the sloop began to pass the high, wooded hills that lie
