the depth.  Turtle dives; after a while he emerges.  There he is
swimming and singing:

  "In water, in my home!
  In water, in my home!"

The people said: "Oh!  Turtle has fooled us.  We were going to kill him
with hatchets; he says, 'Hatchet will not kill me a bit.'  We spoke of
casting him into the water; he says, 'I am going to die.'  We came; we
cast him into the water; but we saved him."

This is what caused the Turtle to live in the water: the people were
going to kill him; but he was shrewd.



Nianga Dia Ngenga and Leopard

Nianga Dia Ngenga takes up his gun, saying: "I will go a-hunting."  He
has reached the bush; he has hunted; he saw not game; he says: "I will
go."

When he returns home, he finds Mr. Leopard, whom they have stuck up in
the fork of a tree.  When he sees Nianga, he says: "Father Nianga, help
me out!"  Nianga says: "What has done this to thee?"  He says: "Unfork
me first; I shall tell thee."

Nianga took him out; he set him on the ground.  He says: "Elephant has
stuck me up in the fork of the tree.  Sir, to whom one has given life,
one gives more.  I have been two days on the tree; give me a little
food."  Nianga says: "Where shall I find food?"  He says: "Anywhere."

Nianga takes up his dog; he gives it to Mr. Leopard.  Mr. Leopard ate
it and said, "I am not satisfied."  Nianga takes up also the other dog;
he gives it to Mr. Leopard.  He has eaten, says, "Still I have not
enough."  Nianga dia Ngenga took up his cartridge-box; he gives him it.
Mr. Leopard, when he had eaten it, said, "Still I have not enough."

Hare comes; he finds them talking; says: "Why are you quarrelling?"
Nianga says: "Mr.  Leopard, I found him in the fork of a tree.  Says
he, 'Take me out!'  I took him out.  Says he, 'Give me to eat!'  I gave
him both my dogs and my cartridge-box.  He says, 'Give me more to eat.'
That is what we are quarrelling about."

Hare says: "Mr. Leopard, let him be again on the tree, where he was;
that I may see." Mr. Leopard returns to the tree, where he was.  Hare
moves off to a distance; he calls Nianga.  He says: "Thou, Nianga, art
unwise.  Mr. Leopard is a wild beast, he is wont to catch people.
Thou, who didst get him out of there, he wanted to devour thee.  Shoot
him."

Nianga then shoots Mr. Leopard.

The end . . . "is with God."



Leopard and the Other Animals

Mr. Leopard lived.  One day hunger grasps him.  He says: "How shall I
do?  I will call all the animals in the world, saying, 'Come ye, let us
have a medical consultation.'  When the animals come then I may catch
and eat."

He sends at once to call Deer, Antelope, Soko, Hare, and Philantomba.
They gather, saying: "Why didst thou send for us?"  He says: "Let us
consult medicine, that we get health."

The sun is broken down.  They begin the drums outside with the songs.
Mr. Leopard himself is beating the drum; he is saying, saying:

  "O Antelope! O Deer!
  Your friend is sick;
  Do not shun him!
  O Antelope! O Deer!
  Your friend is sick;
  Do not shun him!
  O Antelope! O Deer!
  Your friend is sick;
  Do not shun him'"

Deer says: "Chief, the drum, how art thou playing it?  Bring it here;
that I play it."  Mr. Leopard gives him it.  Deer takes the drum, says:

  "Not sickness;
  Wiliness holds thee
  Not sickness;
  Wiliness holds thee!
  Not sickness;
  Wiliness holds thee!"

Mr. Leopard stood up from ground, said: "Thou, Deer, knowest not how to
play the drum."

The animals all then ran away, saying, "Mr. Leopard has a scheme to
catch us."



Elephant and Frog

I often tell of Mr. Elephant and Mr. Frog, who were courting at one
house.

One day Mr. Frog spake to the sweetheart of Mr. Elephant, saying: "Mr.
Elephant is my horse."  Mr. Elephant, when he came at night, then the
girls tell him, saying: "Thou art the horse of Mr. Frog!"

Mr. Elephant then goes to Mr. Frog's, saying: "Didst thou tell my
sweetheart that I am thy horse?"  Mr. Frog says, saying: "No; I did not
say so."  They go together to find the sweetheart of Mr. Elephant.

On the way, Mr. Frog told Mr. Elephant, saying: "Grandfather, I have
not strength to walk.  Let me get up on thy back!"  Mr. Elephant said:
"Get up, my grandson."  Mr. Frog then goes up.

When a while passed, he told Mr. Elephant: "Grandfather, I am going to
fall.  Let me seek small cords to bind thee in mouth."  Mr. Elephant
consents.  Mr. Frog then does what he has asked.

When passed a little while, he told again Mr. Elephant, saying: "Let me
seek a green twig to fan the mosquitoes off thee."  Mr. Elephant says:
"Go."  He then fetches the twig.

Then, when they were about to arrive, the girls saw them, and they went
to meet them with shouting, saying: "Thou, Mr. Elephant, art the horse
indeed of Mr. Frog!"



Dog and the Kingship

Mr. Dog, they wanted to invest him with the kingship.  They sought all
the things of royalty: the cap, the sceptre, the rings, the skin of
mulkaka.  The things are complete; they say: "The day has come to
install."

The headmen all came in full; they sent for the players of drum and
marimba; they have come.  They spread coarse mats and fine mats.  Where
the lord is going to sit, they laid a coarse mat; they spread on it a
fine mat; they set a chair on.  They say: "Let the lord sit down."  He
sat down.  The people begin to divide the victuals.

He, Mr. Dog, on seeing the breast of a fowl, greed grasped him.  He
stood up in haste; took the breast of the fowl; ran into the bush.  The
people said: "The lord, whom we are installing, has run away with the
breast of the fowl into the bush!"  The people separated.

Mr. Dog, who was going to be invested with the kingship, because of his
thievery, the kingship he lost it.

I have told my little tale.  Finished.



The Builder of Ability and the Builder of Haste

Two men called themselves one name.  This one said: "I am Ndala, the
builder of ability."  The other one said: "I am Ndala, the builder of
haste."

They say: "We will go to trade."  They start; they arrive in middle of
road.  A storm comes.  They stop, saying: "Let us build grass-huts!"
Ndala, the builder of haste, built in haste; he entered into his hut.
Ndala, the builder of ability is building carefully.  The storm comes;
it kills him outside.  Ndala, the builder of haste escaped, because his
hut was finished; it sheltered him when the storm came on.




FABLES FROM KRILOF

    "Shall not my fable censure vice,
  Because a Knave is over-nice?
    And, lest the guilty hear and dread,
  Shall not the decalogue be read?"

      JOHN GAY


FABLES FROM KRILOF


The Education of the Lion

To the Lion, king of the forests, was given a son.

Among us, a child a year old, even if it belong to a royal family, is
small and weak.  But, by the time it has lived a twelve-month, a
lion-cub has long ago left off its baby-clothes.

So, at the end of a year, the Lion began to consider that he must not
allow his royal son to remain ignorant, that the dignity of the kingdom
be not degraded, and that when the son's turn should come to govern the
kingdom the nation should have no cause to reproach the father on his
account.

But whom should he entreat, or compel, or induce by rewards, to
instruct the czarevitch to become a czar?

The Fox is clever, but it is terribly addicted to lying, and a liar is
perpetually getting into trouble.  "No," thought the Lion, "the science
of falsehood is not one which princes ought to study."

Should he trust him to the Mole?  All who speak of that animal say that
it is an extreme admirer of order and regularity; that it never takes a
step till it has examined the ground before it, and that it cleans and
shells with its own paws every grain of corn that comes to its table.
In fact, the Mole has the reputation of being very great in small
affairs; but, unfortunately, it cannot see anything at a distance.  The
Mole's love of order is an excellent thing for animals of its own kind,
but the Lion's kingdom is considerably more extensive than a mole-run.

Should he choose the Panther?  The Panther is brave and strong, and is,
besides, a great master of military tactics; but the Panther knows
nothing of politics, is ignorant of everything that belongs to civil
affairs.  A king must be a judge and a minister as well as a warrior.
The Panther is good for nothing but fighting; so it, too, is unfit to
educate royal children.

To be brief, not a single beast, not even the Elephant himself, who was
as much esteemed in the forest as Plato used to be in Greece, seemed
wise enough to satisfy the Lion.

By good fortune, or the opposite--we shall find out which--another
king, the king of birds, the Eagle, an old acquaintance and friend of
the Lion, heard of that monarch's difficulty, and, wishing to do his
friend a great kindness, offered to educate the young Lion himself.

The Lion felt a great weight removed from his shoulders.  What could be
better than a king as the tutor for a prince?  So the Lion-cub was got
ready, and sent off to the Eagle's court, there to learn how to govern.

And now two or three years go by.  Ask whom you will, meanwhile, you
hear nothing but praise of the young Lion; and all the birds scatter
throughout the forests the wonderful stories of his merits.

At last the appointed time comes, and the Lion sends for his son.  The
prince arrives, and all the people are gathered together, great and
small alike.

The king embraces his son before them all, and thus addresses him: "My
beloved son, you are my only heir.  I am looking forward to the grave,
but you are just entering upon life.  Before I make over my sceptre to
you, tell me, in the presence of this assembly, what you have been
taught, and in what manner you propose to make your people happy."

"Papa," exclaimed the prince, "I know what no one here knows.  I can
tell where each bird, from the Eagle to the Quail, can most readily
find water, on what each of them lives, and how many eggs it lays; and
I can count up the wants of every bird, without missing one.  Here is
the certificate my tutor gave me.  It was not for nothing that the
birds used to say that I could pick the stars out of the sky.  When you
have made up your mind to transfer the kingdom to me, I will
immediately begin to teach the beasts how to make nests."

On this the king and all his beasts howled aloud; the members of the
council hung their heads; and, too late, the Lion perceived that the
young Lion had learned nothing of what was wanted, that he was
acquainted with birds only, not knowing anything of the nature of
beasts, although he was destined to rule over them, and that he was
destitute of that which is most requisite in kings--the knowledge of
the wants of their own people and the interests of their own country.



The Pebble and the Diamond

A Diamond, which some one had lost, lay for some time on the high road.
At last it happened that a merchant picked it up.  By him it was
offered to the king, who bought it, had it set in gold, and made it one
of the ornaments of the royal crown.  Having heard of this, a Pebble
began to make a fuss.  The brilliant fate of the Diamond fascinated it;
and, one day, seeing a Moujik passing, it besought him thus:

"Do me a kindness, fellow-countryman, and take me with you to the
capital.  Why should I go on suffering here in rain and mud, while our
Diamond is, men say, in honour there?  I don't understand why it has
been treated with such respect.  Side by side with me here it lay so
many years; it is just such a stone as I am--my close companion.  Do
take me!  How can one tell?  If I am seen there, I too, perhaps, may be
found worthy of being turned to account."

The Moujik took the stone into his lumbering cart, and conveyed it to
the city.  Our stone tumbled into the cart, thinking that it would soon
be sitting by the side of the Diamond.  But a quite different fate
befell it.  It really was turned to account, but only to mend a hole in
the road.



The Pike and the Cat

A conceited Pike took it into its head to exercise the functions of a
cat.  I do not know whether the Evil One had plagued it with envy, or
whether, perhaps, it had grown tired of fishy fare; but, at all events,
it thought fit to ask the Cat to take it out to the chase, with the
intention of catching a few mice in the warehouse.  "But, my dear
friend," Vaska says to the Pike, "do you understand that kind of work?
Take care, gossip, that you don't incur disgrace.  It isn't without
reason that they say: 'The work ought to be in the master's power.'"

"Why really, gossip, what a tremendous affair it is!  Mice, indeed!
Why, I have been in the habit of catching perches!"

"Oh, very well.  Come along!"

They went; they lay each in ambush.  The Cat thoroughly enjoyed itself;
made a hearty meal; then went to look after its comrade.  Alas! the
Pike, almost destitute of life, lay there gasping, its tail nibbled
away by the mice.  So the Cat, seeing that its comrade had undertaken a
task quite beyond its strength, dragged it back, half dead, to its pond.



Trishka's Caftan

Trishka's caftan was out at the elbows.  But why should he ponder long
over it?  He took to his needle, cut a quarter off each sleeve: so
mended the elbows.

The caftan was all right again, only his arms were bare for a quarter
of their length.  That is no great matter, but every one is always
laughing at Trishka.  So Trishka says:

"I'm not a fool.  I'll set this affair straight also.  I'll make the
sleeves longer than they were before.  They shall see Trishka is no
mere commonplace fellow."

So he cut off the skirts of his caftan, and used them to lengthen his
sleeves.

Then Trishka was happy, though he had a caftan which was as short as a
waistcoat.

In a similar way I have sometimes seen other embarrassed people set
straight their affairs.  Take a look at them as they dash away.  They
have all got on Trishka's caftan.



The Elephant as Governor

An Elephant was once appointed ruler of a forest.  Now it is well known
that the race of elephants is endowed with great intelligence; but
every family has its unworthy scion.  Our Governor was as stout as the
