mustang, cutting the lariat that held him by a sweep of the knife.

"I s'pose you'll own I've got some claim on this beast; so good-by."

[Illustration: "I S'POSE YOU'LL OWN I'VE GOT SOME CLAIM ON THIS BEAST."]

And, without turning to look at him again, he rode deliberately away.

The Apache stood like a statute staring at him until he was hidden from
view by the intervening trees. Then he turned and walked slowly in the
opposite direction, no doubt with strange thoughts in his brain.

"I don't know how that scamp will take it," muttered Sut, as he rode
along. "He's one of the ugliest dogs that ever wore a painted face; and if
he could catch me with a broken arm or head, he wouldn't want anything
better than to chop me up into mincemeat; but, as I told the old varmint
himself, he's an Injin and I ain't, and that's what's the matter."

The wood was too dense and the ground too uneven to permit him to ride at
a faster gait than a walk, but long before the appointed hour was up, he
rejoined his friends, who were as surprised as pleased at his prompt
reappearance.

"But where are the bastes that ye promised to furnish us?" inquired
Mickey, who had very little relish for the prospect of walking any portion
of the distance homeward.

"That's what I'll have for yer before the sun goes down," was the
confident reply. "I'll get you one hoss, anyway, which, maybe, is just as
good as two, for the weight of the younker don't make no difference, and
we kin git along with one beast better than two."

"I submit to your suparior judgment," said the Irishman, deferentially,
"and would suggist that the sooner the same quadruped is procured the
better all round. I hope the thing won't be delayed, as me aunt obsarved
when the joodge sintenced her husband to be hung."

Sut explained that his plan was to ride some distance further, to a spot
which he had in mind, where they would be safer against being trailed.
There, consequently, they could wait with more security while he went for
the much-needed horse. Time was precious, and no one realized it more than
Sut Simpson. He turned the head of his mustang toward the left, and, after
he had started, leaped to the ground and walked ahead, acting the part of
a guide for the horse as well as for his friends.

The surface over which they journeyed was of the roughest nature. The fact
of it was, the scout was working the party out toward the open prairie,
without availing himself of the pass--an undertaking which would have been
almost impossible to any one else. At the same time, by picking his way
over the rocky surface, and using all means possible to conceal their
trail, he hoped to baffle any pursuit that might be attempted.

Lone Wolf was not the redskin to allow such a formidable enemy as Sut
Simpson to walk away unmolested, even though he had received an unexpected
piece of magnanimity at his hands. He had learned that it was he who had
played such havoc among his warriors the day before, who had deceived them
by cunningly uttered signals, and had drawn away the redskins sufficiently
to permit his two intended victims to walk out of his clutches. It had
been a series of unparalleled exploits, the results of which would have
exasperated the mildest tempered Indian ever known.

These thoughts were constantly in the mind of the scout as he picked out
the path for his equine and human companions. He took unusual pains, for a
great deal depended upon his success in hiding the trail as much as
possible. Perhaps it is not correct to say that the Apaches could be
thrown entirely off the scent, if they should set themselves to work to
run the fugitives under cover. None knew this better than Sut himself, but
he knew also that the thing could be partially done, and a partial success
could be made a perfect one. That is, by adopting all the artifices at his
command, the work of trailing could be rendered so difficult that it would
be greatly delayed--so that it would require hours for the Apaches to
unearth the hiding-place. And Sut meant to accomplish his self-imposed
task during those few hours, so as to rejoin his friends, and resume their
flight before the sharp-witted pursuers could overhaul them.

The journey, therefore, was made one of the most difficult imaginable. The
mustang was unshod, and yet he clambered up steep places, and over rocks,
and through gravelly gullies, where the ordinary horse would have been
powerless. The animal seemed to enter into the spirit of the occasion and
his performances again and again excited the wonder and admiration of
Mickey and Fred. The creature had undergone the severest kind of training
at the hands of an unsurpassed veteran of the frontier.

This laborious journeying continued for a couple of hours, during which it
seemed to the man and lad that they passed over several miles of the
roughest traveling they had ever witnessed. The mustang had fallen several
times, but he sprang up again like a dog and showed no signs of injury or
fatigue. Finally Sut made a halt, just as Mickey was on the point of
protesting, and, turning about, so as to face his companions, he smiled in
his peculiar way as he spoke.

"You've stood it pretty well for greenhorns, and now I'm going to give yer
a good rest."

"Do you maan to go into camp for a week or a month, or until the warm
season is over?"

"I'm going to leave yer here, while I go for some hoss flesh, and it'll
take longer time than before."

But the Irishman insisted that he should be allowed to accompany the scout
upon this dangerous expedition.

"For the raison that ye are going to pick out this animal for _me_," he
added, "how do I know but what ye'll pick out some ring-boned, spavined
critter that trots sideways, and is blind in both eyes?"

Fred, who dreaded the long spell of dreary waiting which seemed before
him, asked that he might make one of the company; but Sut would not
consent, and he objected to both. He finally compromised by agreeing to
take the Irishman, but insisted that the lad should stay behind with his
mustang.

"A younker like you couldn't do us a bit of good," added Sut, by way of
explanation, "and like as not yer'd get us into the worst kind of
difficulty. Better stay whar you be, rest and be ready to mount your new
animal as soon as we're back, and scoot away for New Boston."

"How soon will you be back?" he asked, feeling that he ought to make no
objection to the decision.

The forenoon was about half gone, and the scout looked up at the sky,
removed his coon-skin cap, and thoughtfully wrinkled his brows, as though
he were solving some important mental problem.

"Yer may skulp me, younker, but it's a mighty hard thing to tell. Now I
got back with my own animile a good deal sooner than I expected, but that
same thing ain't likely to happen agin. More likely it'll be t'other way,
and we may be gone all day, and p'raps all night."

"And what am I to do all that time?"

"Wait; that'll be easy enough, arter such a rough tramp as I've given
yer."

"But suppose some of the Indians come here; I haven't got any gun or
pistol, so what shall I do?"

"The hoss thar will let you know when any of the varmints come sneaking
round, and he'll do it, too, afore they know whar yer be, so you'll have
time to dig out. I ain't much in the way of using a knife," added the
scout. "I depends on me gun for a long range, and when I gets into close
quarters, I throw this yer (tapping the handle of his knife), round
careless like; but I've got a little plaything yer that has stood me well,
once or twice, and if it's any help to yer, why, yer are welcome to it. It
was give to me by an officer down at Fort Massachusetts."

As he spoke, the scout drew a small revolver, beautifully mounted and
ornamented with silver, which he handed to the lad, who, as may be
supposed, was delighted with the weapon.

"Just the thing, exactly," he said, as he turned it over in his hand.
"There are five barrels."

"And every one is loaded," added the scout. "The pill which it gives a
redskin ain't very big, but it's sure, and it'll hunt for him a good ways
off; so the dog is apt to bite better than you expect."

Sut told him that he expected to return by nightfall, and possible before,
but they might be kept away until morning. Under any circumstances,
whether successful or not, they would be back within twenty-four hours,
for they could better afford to wait and repeat the attempt than to stay
away longer than that. The reason for this decision was that if any of the
Apaches should attempt to trail them, and there was every reason to
believe that they would, they would not need more than twenty-four hours
to track them to this hiding place. It was especially necessary that a
collision with them should be avoided as long as possible, for the whites
had everything to gain by such a course. As time was valuable, Sut did not
delay the departure, and, as he and Mickey gave the lad a cheery good-by,
they turned off to the right, and a minute later disappeared from view.

"Here I am alone again," he said to himself, "excepting the horse, and
I've got a loaded revolver. Sut don't think those Apaches can get here
before to-morrow morning, and he knows more than I do about it, so I hope
he's right. We've got thus far on our way home, and it would be a pity if
we should fail."

As he looked around, he saw nothing in the place or surroundings which
would have commended it to him. There was water in the shape of a
trickling stream, and that was plenty everywhere, but there was scarcely a
spear of grass visible. The vegetation was stunted and unthrifty in
appearance. There were stones and rocks everywhere, with nothing that
could serve as a shelter in case of storm. He searched for a considerable
distance around, but was unable to find even a shelving rock, beneath
which he might creep and gather himself up if one of those terrific
tempests peculiar to this region should happen to strike him. Nor did
there seem to be any suitable refuge if the Apaches should attack him
before he could retreat.

He might crouch down behind some of the boulders and rocks, but the
make-up of the surface around him was so similar that three red skins
could surround him with perfect ease and without any danger to themselves.
Fred therefore made up his mind that he was in about as uncomfortable a
situation as a fugitive could well be.




CHAPTER XXIV.

NIGHT VISITORS.


As young Munson expected to remain where he was for the rest of the day,
and perhaps through the succeeding night, and knew that he was in great
danger, he made it his business to acquaint himself thoroughly with his
position and with all the approaches thereto. The first natural
supposition was that the Apaches, in following the fugitives to the spot,
would, from the force of circumstances, keep to the trail, that being
their only guide.

This trail, for the last two hundred yards, led up a slope to where he was
stationed upon what might have been called a landing in the ascent of the
mountain. At the bottom of this two hundred yards or so was an irregular
plateau, beyond which the trail was lost.

"If the Apaches should show themselves before dark," he concluded, as he
looked over the ground, "there is where they will be seen, and that's the
spot I must watch so long as I can see it."

Fred was able to hide himself from view for the time being, but there was
no way in which he could conceal the horse. He was sure to be the first
object that would attract the eye of the redskins from below, revealing to
them the precise position of the fugitives. This reflection disturbed the
lad a good deal, until he succeeded in convincing himself that, after all,
it was fortunate that it was so.

The redskins, detecting the mustang among the rocks, would believe that
the three whites were there on the defensive. No matter if their force
were a half dozen times as great, they would make the attack with a great
deal of caution, and would probably manoeuvre around until dark, in the
expectation of a desperate fight--all of which Fred hoped would give him a
good chance of stealing out and escaping them.

This, as a matter of course, was based upon the idea that Sut Simpson, the
veteran scout, had committed a serious error in believing that the pursuit
would be slow. And such a mistake he had indeed made, as the lad
discovered in due time.

The afternoon wore slowly away, and sunset was close at hand, when Fred
was lying upon his face, peering over the upper edge of a rock at the
plateau below. The fact of it was, his eyes had been roaming over the same
place so long, that the stare had become a dreary, aimless one. He was
suddenly aroused, however, to the most intense attention by the discovery
of an Apache warrior, who drifted very serenely into the field of vision
as if he were part of a moving panorama upon which the lad was gazing.

The boy had been waiting so long for his appearance that he uttered an
exclamation, and half arose to his feet in his excitement. But he quickly
settled back again, and, with an interest which it would be hard to
describe, watched every movement of the redskin, as the tiger watches the
approach of its victim.

The indian stalked up the other side of the plateau, walking slowly,
looking right and left, in front and rear, and down at the ground, his
manner showing that he was engaged in trailing the party, using all the
care and skill of which he was the master. Reaching the middle of the
plateau, he stopped, looked about, and made a gesture to some one behind
him. A moment later, a second indian appeared, and then a third, the trio
meeting near the centre of the irregular plot, where they immediately
began a conversation.

Each of the three was liberal with his gestures, and now and then Fred
could catch the sound of their voices. What it was that could so deeply
interest them at such a time, he was at a loss to conjecture, but there
could be no doubt that it related to the party they were pursuing.

"That must be all there are of them," he reflected, after several minutes
had passed, without any other Apaches becoming visible; "but it seems to
me it is a small force to chase us with. I've always understood that the
Indians wanted double the number of their enemies, whenever they are going
to attack them, but I suppose they've got some plan that I can't
understand."

They had been talking but a short time, when Fred understood from their
actions that they had detected the mustang above them on the mountain
side. They looked up several times, and pointed and gesticulated in the
same earnest fashion. It suddenly occurred to the lad that he might play a
good point on the redskins, with the idea of delaying any offensive
movement they might have under discussion. Pointing his revolver over the
rock in front of him, he pulled the trigger.

The report was as sharp and loud almost as that of a rifle, but the
parties against whom it it was aimed were in no more danger than if they
had been in the city of Newark. The report had no sooner reached the ears
of the Apaches than they scattered as wildly as if they had heard the
whizz of a dozen bullets by their faces. Fred chuckled over the success of
his ruse and made sure to keep himself hid from view.

"That will make them think that we're holding a sharp look-out for them,
and they'll be careful before they make an attack upon us."

It seemed strange to him that the Apaches, who must know of the presence
of Sut Simpson, who was equal to half a dozen men in such a situation,
should have sent forward only three of their warriors to trail him.

"It may be," he thought, after a while, "that these men know how to follow
a trail faster than the others, and they have gone on ahead, while the
others are coming after them. I should think Lone Wolf would do anything
in the world to catch Sut, who has done him so much injury."

Night was drawing on apace, darkness being due in less than an hour. Fred
was naturally perplexed and alarmed, for he could not help feeling that he
was in a most perilous position, regarding which he should have had more
advice from the scout before his departure. The only thing that seemed
prudent for him to do was to wait until dark and then quietly steel out
and shift his position. It looked very much as if he could take care of
himself for the night, at least, but he did not see how he could take care
of the mustang, which had already changed hands so often, and which was so
necessary to their safety.

"Sut said he expected to be home by dark, and I wish he'd come," was the
thought that passed through his mind over and over again as he looked into
the gathering darkness and listened for the sound of his friends.

But the stillness remained unbroken and the shadows deepened, until he saw
that the night was fully come, and he could move about without danger of
being fired upon from a distance. The moon was late in rising, so that the
gloom was deep enough to hide one person from another, when the distance
was extremely slight. Although aware of this, Fred was afraid of some
flank movement upon the part of the Apaches, before he could get out of
their reach. The suspicion that there were two men besides would make the
redskins very cautious in their movements, but a little manoeuvring on
their part might reveal the truth, in which case the situation of the lad
would be critical in the extreme.

Fred had nerved himself to the task of stealing around the corner of a
large rock and off into the darkness, when he was startled by a quick,
sudden stamp of the horse. There might have been nothing in this; but,
