being rejoiced at this, I was frightened, fearing that the Indians were
upon me! I crawled under some bushes, by the side of a large log, and lay
perfectly still. I was wet, cold, scared, altogether very miserable
indeed; yet, when the voices came near, I did not start up and show
myself.

14. At last I heard my own name called; but I remembered that Indians were
very cunning, and thought they might have found it out some way, so I did
not answer. Then came a voice near me, that sounded like that of my eldest
brother, who lived away from home, and whom I had not seen for many
months; but I dared not believe that the voice was his.

15. Soon some one sprang up on the log by which I lay, and stood there
calling. I could not see his face; I could only see the tips of his toes,
but by them I saw that he wore a nice pair of boots, and not moccasins.
Yet I remembered that some Indians dressed like white folks; so I still
kept quiet, till I heard shouted over me a pet name, which this brother
had given me. It was the funniest name in the world.

16. I knew that no Indian knew of the name, as it was a little family
secret; so I sprang up, and caught my brother about the ankles. I hardly
think that an Indian could have given a louder yell than he gave then; and
he jumped so that he fell off the log down by my side. But nobody was
hurt; and, after kissing me till he had kissed away all my tears, he
hoisted me on to his shoulder, called my other brothers, who were hunting
in different directions, and we all set out for home.

17. I had been gone nearly three hours, and had wandered a number of
miles. My brother Joseph's coming and asking for me, had first set them to
inquiring and searching me out. When I went into the room where my brother
Rufus sat, he said, "Why, my poor little sister! I did not mean to send
you off on such a wild-goose chase to the end of the rainbow. I thought
you would know I was only quizzing you."

18. Then my eldest brother took me on his knee, and told me what the
rainbow really is: that it is only painted air, and does not rest on the
earth, so nobody could ever find the end; and that God has set it in the
cloud to remind him and us of his promise never again to drown the world
with a flood. "Oh, I think God's Promise would be a beautiful name for the
rainbow!" I said.

19. "Yes," replied my mother, "but it tells us something more than that he
will not send great floods upon the earth,--it tells us of his beautiful
love always bending over us from the skies. And I trust that when my
little girl sets forth on a pilgrimage to find God's love, she will be led
by the rainbow of his promise through all the dark places of this world to
'treasures laid up in heaven,' better, far better, than silver or gold."


DEFINITIONS.--2. Re-cov'er-ing, growing well. 3. Win'ter--green, a
creeping evergreen plant with bright red berries. 6. Im--posed', (used
with on or upon), deceived, misled. 7. Drab'-bling, making dirty by
drawing in mud and water. 10. Por'cu--pine, a small quadruped whose body
is covered with sharp quills. 11. Pil'grim-age, journey.  15. Moc'ca-sins,
shoes of deerskin without soles, such as are usually worn by Indians. 17.
Quiz'zing, making sport of.



LXXII. THE OLD OAKEN BUCKET. (202)

By Samuel Woodworth, who was born in Massachusetts in 1785. He was both
author and editor. This is his best known poem. He died in 1842.

1. How dear to this heart are the scenes of my childhood,
     When fond recollection presents them to view!
   The orchard, the meadow, the deep tangled wildwood,
     And every loved spot which my infancy knew;
   The wide-spreading pond, and the mill that stood by it:
     The bridge and the rock where the cataract fell:
   The cot of my father, the dairy house nigh it,
     And e'en the rude bucket which hung in the well:
   The old oaken bucket, the ironbound bucket,
     The moss-covered bucket which hung in the well.

2. That moss-covered vessel I hail as a treasure;
     For often, at noon, when returned from the field,
   I found it the source of an exquisite pleasure,
     The purest and sweetest that nature can yield.
   How ardent I seized it, with hands that were glowing,
     And quick to the white-pebble bottom it fell;
   Then soon, with the emblem of truth overflowing,
     And dripping with coolness, it rose from the well:
   The old oaken bucket, the ironbound bucket,
     The moss-covered bucket arose from the well.

3. How sweet from the green mossy brim to receive it,
     As poised on the curb, it inclined to my lips!
   Not a full blushing goblet could tempt me to leave it,
     Though filled with the nectar which Jupiter sips;
   And now, far removed from thy loved situation,
     The tear of regret will intrusively swell,
   As fancy reverts to my father's plantation,
     And sighs for the bucket which hangs in the well:
   The old oaken bucket, the ironbound bucket,
     The moss-covered bucket, which hangs in the well.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Cat'a-ract, a great fall of water. 2. O-ver--flow'ing,
running over. Ex'qui-site, exceeding, extreme. 3. Poised', balanced.
Goblet, a kind of cup or drinking vessel. Nec'tar, the drink of the gods.
In-tru'sive-ly, without right or welcome. Re-verts', returns.


EXERCISES.--Who was the author of "The Old Oaken Bucket"? What is said of
this piece? What does the poem describe? and what feeling does it express?



LXXIII. THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT. (204)

1. And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was
set, his disciples came unto him; and he opened his mouth and taught them,
saying,

2. Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the
meek; for they shall inherit the earth.

3. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness; for
they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain
mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart; for they shall see God.

4. Blessed are the peacemakers; for they shall be called the children of
God. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake; for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

5. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall
say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven. * * *

6. Ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, Thou shalt
not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths: but I
say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven; for it is God's throne:
nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for it is
the city of the great King.

7. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one
hair white or black. But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay:
for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil.

8. Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth: but I say unto you, That ye resist not evil; but whosoever
shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if
any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy
cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him
twain. Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of
thee turn not thou away.

9. Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor and
hate thine enemy: but I say unto you, Love your enemies; bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you and persecute you; that ye may be the children of
your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil
and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.

10. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even
the publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye
more than others? do not even the publicans so? Be ye, therefore, perfect,
even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. * * *

11. Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge, ye
shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to
you again. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye,
but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?

12. Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of
thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first
cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to
cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye. * * *

13. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you: for everyone that asketh, receiveth; and he that
seeketh, findeth; and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened. Or what
man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?
Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?

14. If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good
things to them that ask him? Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the law and the
prophets. * * *

15. Whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken
him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock: and the rain
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that
house; and it fell not; for it was founded upon a rock.

16. And everyone that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not,
shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand:
and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it.

17. And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people
were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as one having
authority, and not as the scribes.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Dis-ci'ple, one who receives instruction from another. 2.
Bless'ed, happy. In-her'it, to come into possession of. 5. Re-vile', to
speak against without cause. Per'se-cute, to punish on account of
religion. 6. For-swear', to swear falsely. 9. De-spite'ful-ly,
maliciously, cruelly. 10. Pub'li-cans, tax collectors (they were often
oppressive and were hated by the Jews). 11. Mete, to measure. Mote, a
small particle. 12. Hyp'o-crite, a false pretender. 17. Scribes, men among
the Jews who read and explained the law to the people.


EXERCISES.--Who delivered this sermon? Who are blessed? and why? Is it
right to swear? How should we treat our enemies? Should we judge others
harshly? What does Jesus say of him who finds faults in his neighbor, but
does not see his own? What is said about prayer? About our conduct to
others?



LXXIV. THE YOUNG WITNESS. (207)
By S. H. HAMMOND.

1. A little girl nine years of age was brought into court, and offered as
a witness against a prisoner who was on trial for a crime committed in her
father's house.

2. "Now, Emily," said the counsel for the prisoner, "I wish to know if you
understand the nature of an oath?"

3. "I don't know what you mean," was the simple answer.

4. "Your Honor," said the counsel, addressing the judge, "it is evident
that this witness should be rejected. She does not understand the nature
of an oath."

5. "Let us see," said the judge. "Come here, my daughter."

6. Assured by the kind tone and manner of the judge, the child stepped
toward him, and looked confidingly in his face, with a calm, clear eye,
and in a manner so artless and frank that it went straight to the heart.

7. "Did you ever take an oath?" inquired the judge.

8. The little girl stepped back with a look of horror; and the red blood
rose and spread in a blush all over her face and neck, as she answered,
"No, sir." She thought he intended to ask if she had ever used profane
language.

9. "I do not mean that," said the judge, who saw her mistake; "I mean were
you ever a witness?"

10. "No, sir; I never was in court before," was the answer.

11. He handed her the Bible open. "Do you know that book, my daughter?"

12. She looked at it and answered, "Yes, sir; it is the Bible."

13. "Do you ever read in it?" he asked.

14. "Yes, sir; every evening."

15. "Can you tell me what the Bible is?" inquired the judge.

16. "It is the word of the great God," she answered.

17. "Well," said the judge, "place your hand upon this Bible, and listen
to what I say;" and he repeated slowly and solemnly the following oath:
"Do you swear that in the evidence which you shall give in this case, you
will tell the truth, and nothing but the truth; and that you will ask God
to help you?"

18. "I do," she replied.

19. "Now," said the judge, "you have been sworn as a witness; will you
tell me what will befall you if you do not tell the truth?"

20. "I shall be shut up in the state prison," answered the child.

21. "Anything else?" asked the judge.

22. "I shall never go to heaven," she replied.

23. "How do you know this?" asked the judge again.

24. The child took the Bible, turned rapidly to the chapter containing the
commandments, and, pointing to the one which reads, "Thou shalt not bear
false witness against thy neighbor," said, "I learned that before I could
read."

25. "Has anyone talked with you about being a witness in court here
against this man?" inquired the judge.

26. "Yes, sir," she replied, "my mother heard they wanted me to be a
witness; and last night she called me to her room, and asked me to tell
her the Ten Commandments; and then we kneeled down together, and she
prayed that I might understand how wicked it was to bear false witness
against my neighbor, and that God would help me, a little child, to tell
the truth as it was before him.

27. "And when I came up here with father, she kissed me, and told me to
remember the Ninth Commandment, and that God would hear every word that I
said."

28. "Do you believe this?" asked the judge, while a tear glistened in his
eye, and his lip quivered with emotion.

29. "Yes, sir," said the child, with a voice and manner which showed that
her conviction of the truth was perfect.

30. "God bless you, my child," said the judge, "you have a good mother.
The witness is competent," he continued. "Were I on trial for my life, and
innocent of the charge against me, I would pray God for such a witness as
this. Let her be examined."

31. She told her story with the simplicity of a child, as she was; but her
voice and manner carried conviction of her truthfulness to every heart.

32. The lawyers asked her many perplexing questions, but she did not vary
in the least from her first statement.

33. The truth, as spoken by a little child, was sublime. Falsehood and
perjury had preceded her testimony; but before her testimony, falsehood
was scattered like chaff.

34. The little child, for whom a mother had prayed for strength to be
given her to speak the truth as it was before God, broke the cunning
device of matured villainy to pieces, like a potter's vessel. The strength
that her mother prayed for was given her; and the sublime and terrible
simplicity,--terrible to the prisoner and his associates,--was like a
revelation from God himself.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Wit'ness, one who gives testimony. Com--mit'ted, done,
performed. 2. Coun'sel, a lawyer. 4. Re-ject'ed, refused. 6. As-sured',
made bold. Con-fid'ing-ly, with trust. 8. Pro-fane', irreverent, taking
the name of God in vain. 33. Per'ju-ry, the act of willfully making a
false oath. Chaff, the light dry husk of grains or grasses. 34. Ma-tured',
perfected, fully developed. Pot'ter, one whose occupation is to make
earthen vessels. Rev--e-la'tion, the act of disclosing or showing what was
before unknown.


EXERCISES.--What is this story about? Why did the counsel wish to have
Emily refused as a witness? Was she a fit person to be a witness? How was
this shown? Which commandment forbids us to bear false witness? What was
the result of Emily's testimony?



LXXV. KING SOLOMON AND THE ANTS. (211)

By John Greenleaf Whittier, born near Haverhill, Mass., In 1807, and died
at Hampton Falls, N. H., In 1892. Until he was eighteen years old he
worked on the farm, and during that time learned the trade at a shoemaker.
He afterwards became an editor and one of the first poets of America.

1. Out from Jerusalem
     The king rode with his great
     War chiefs and lords of state,
   And Sheba's queen with them.

2. Proud in the Syrian sun,
     In gold and purple sheen,
     The dusky Ethiop queen
   Smiled on King Solomon.

3. Wisest of men, he knew
     The languages of all
     The creatures great or small
   That trod the earth or flew.

4. Across an ant-hill led
     The king's path, and he heard
     Its small folk, and their word
   He thus interpreted:

5. "Here comes the king men greet
     As wise and good and just,
     To crush us in the dust
   Under his heedless feet."

6. The great king bowed his head,
     And saw the wide surprise
     Of the Queen of Sheba's eyes
   As he told her what they said.

7. "O king!" she whispered sweet,
     "Too happy fate have they
     Who perish in thy way
   Beneath thy gracious feet!

8. "Thou of the God-lent crown,
     Shall these vile creatures dare
     Murmur against thee where
   The knees of kings kneel down?"

9. "Nay," Solomon replied,
     "The wise and strong should seek
     The welfare of the weak;"
   And turned his horse aside.

10. His train, with quick alarm,
      Curved with their leader round
      The ant-hill's peopled mound,
    And left it free from harm.

11. The jeweled head bent low;
      "O king!" she said, "henceforth
      The secret of thy worth
    And wisdom well I know.

12. "Happy must be the State
      Whose ruler heedeth more
      The murmurs of the poor
    Than flatteries of the great."


DEFINITIONS.--4. In-ter'pret-ed, explained the meaning of. 5. Greet,
Address, salute. 9. Wel'fare, happiness. 10. Train, a body of followers.
12. Flat'ter-ies, praises for the purpose of gratifying vanity or gaining
favor.



LXXVI. RIVERMOUTH THEATER. (213)

From "The Story of a Bad Boy," by Thomas Bailey Aldrich. The author was
born at Portsmouth, N. H., in 1836. When quite young his family moved to
Louisiana, but he was sent back to New England to be educated, and later
he located at New York. He is a well-known writer of both prose and
poetry.

1. "Now, boys, what shall we do?" I asked, addressing a thoughtful
