LVIII. THE BLUE AND THE GRAY.

1. By the flow of the inland river,
     Whence the fleets of iron have fled,
   Where the blades of the grave grass quiver,
     Asleep are the ranks of the dead;--
       Under the sod and the dew,
         Waiting the judgment day;
       Under the one, the Blue;
         Under the other, the Gray.

2. These, in the robings of glory,
     Those, in the gloom of defeat,
   All, with the battle blood gory,
     In the dusk of eternity meet;--
       Under the sod and the dew,
         Waiting the judgment day;
       Under the laurel, the Blue;
         Under the willow, the Gray.

3. From the silence of sorrowful hours,
     The desolate mourners go,
   Lovingly laden with flowers,
     Alike for the friend and the foe;--
       Under the sod and the dew,
         Waiting the judgment day;
       Under the roses, the Blue;
         Under the lilies, the Gray.

4. So, with an equal splendor,
     The morning sun rays fall,
   With a touch, impartially tender,
     On the blossoms blooming for all;--
       Under the sod and the dew,
         Waiting the judgment day;
       Broidered with gold, the Blue;
         Mellowed with gold, the Gray.

5. So, when the summer calleth,
     On forest and field of grain,
   With an equal murmur falleth
     The cooling drip of the rain;--
       Under the sod and the dew,
         Waiting the judgment day;
       Wet with the rain, the Blue;
         Wet with the rain, the Gray.

6. Sadly, but not with upbraiding,
     The generous deed was done:
   In the storm of the years that are fading,
     No braver battle was won;--
       Under the sod and the dew,
         Waiting the judgment day;
       Under the blossoms, the Blue;
         Under the garlands, the Gray.

7. No more shall the war cry sever,
     Or the winding rivers be red;
   They banish our anger forever,
     When they laurel the graves of our dead;--
       Under the sod and the dew,
         Waiting the judgment day;
       Love and tears, for the Blue;
         Tears and love, for the Gray.
                                          --F. M. Finch.

NOTE.--The above touching little poem first appeared in the "Atlantic
Monthly" in September, 1867. It commemorates the noble action on the part
of the women at Columbus, Miss., who in decorating the graves strewed
flowers impartially on those of the Confederate and of the Federal
soldiers.



LIX. THE MACHINIST'S RETURN.

[Adapted from a letter written by a correspondent of the Washington
"Capital."]

1. On our way from Springfield to Boston, a stout, black-whiskered man
sat immediately in front of me, in the drawing-room car, whose maneuvers
were a source of constant amusement. He would get up every five minutes,
hurry away to the narrow passage leading to the door of the car, and
commence laughing in the most violent manner, continuing that healthful
exercise until he observed that some one was watching him, when he would
return to his seat.

2. As we neared Boston these demonstrations increased in frequency and
violence, but the stranger kept his seat and chuckled to himself. He
shifted the position of his two portmanteaus, or placed them on the seat
as if he was getting ready to leave. As we were at least twenty-five miles
from Boston, such early preparations seemed extremely ridiculous. He
became so excited at last that he could not keep his secret. Some one must
be made a confidant; and as I happened to be the nearest to him, he
selected me.

3. Turning around suddenly, and rocking himself to and fro in his chair,
he said, "I have been away from home three years. Have been in Europe. My
folks don't expect me for three months yet, but I got through and started.
I telegraphed them at the last station--they've got the dispatch by this
time." As he said this he rubbed his hands, and changed the portmanteau on
his left to the right, and then the one on the right to the left.

4. "Have you a wife?" said I. "Yes, and three children," was the answer.
He then got up and folded his overcoat anew, and hung it over the back of
the seat. "You are somewhat nervous just now, are you not?" said I.

5. "Well, I should think so," he replied. "I have n't slept soundly for a
week. Do you know," he went on, speaking in a low tone, "I am almost
certain this train will run off the track and break my neck before I get
to Boston. I have had too much good luck lately for one man. It can't
last. It rains so hard, sometimes, that you think it's never going to
stop; then it shines so bright you think it's always going to shine; and
just as you are settle in either belief, you are knocked over by a change,
to show you that you know nothing about it."

6. "Well, according to your philosophy," I said, "you will continue to
have sunshine because you are expecting a storm." "Perhaps so," he
replied; "but it is curious that the only thing which makes me think I
shall get through safe is, I fear that I shall not."

7. "I am a machinist," he continued; "I made a discovery; nobody believed
in it; I spent all my money in trying to bring it out; I mortgaged my
home--everything went. Everybody laughed at me--everybody but my wife. She
said she would work her fingers off before I should give it up. I went to
England. At first I met with no encouragement whatever, and came very near
jumping off London Bridge. I went into a workshop to earn money enough to
come home with: there I met the man I wanted. To make a long story short,
I've brought home 50,000 Pounds with me, and here I am."

8. "Good!" I exclaimed. "Yes," said he, "and the best of it is, she knows
nothing about it. She has been disappointed so often that I concluded I
would not write to her about my unexpected good luck. When I got my money,
though, I started for home at once."

9. "And now, I suppose, you will make her happy?" "Happy!" he replied;
"why, you don't know anything about it! She's worked night and day since I
have been in England, trying to support herself and the children decently.
They paid her thirteen cents apiece for making shirts, and that's the way
she has lived half the time. She'll come down to the depot to meet me in a
gingham dress and a shawl a hundred years old, and she'll think she's
dressed up! Perhaps she won't have any fine dresses in a week or so, eh?'"
10. The stranger then strode down the passageway again, and getting in a
corner where he seemed to suppose that he was out of sight, went through
the strangest pantomime,--laughing putting his mouth into the drollest
shapes, and swinging himself back and forth in the limited space.

11. As the train was going into the depot, I placed myself on the platform
of the car in front of the one in which I had been riding, and opposite
the stranger, who, with a portmanteau in each hand, was standing on the
lowest step, ready to jump to the ground. I looked from his face to the
faces of the people before us, but saw no sign of recognition. Suddenly he
cried, "There they are!"

12. Then he laughed outright, but in a hysterical way, as he looked over
the crowd in front of him. I followed his eye and saw, some distance back,
as if crowded out by the well-dressed and elbowing throng, a little woman
in a faded dress and a well-worn hat, with a face almost painful in its
intense but hopeful expression, glancing rapidly from window to window as
the coaches passed by.

13. She had not seen the stranger, but a moment after she caught his eye.
In another instant he had jumped to the platform with his two
portmanteaus, and, pushing his way through the crowd, he rushed towards
the place where she was standing. I think I never saw a face assume so
many different expressions in so short a time as did that of the little
woman while her husband was on his way to meet her.

14. She was not pretty,--on the contrary, she was very plain-looking; but
somehow I felt a big lump rise in my throat as I watched her. She was
trying to laugh, but, God bless her, how completely she failed in the
attempt! Her mouth got into the position to laugh, but it never moved
after that, save to draw down at the corners and quiver, while her eyes
blinked so fast that I suspect she only caught occasional glimpses of the
broad-shouldered fellow who elbowed his way so rapidly toward her.

15. As he drew close, and dropped the portmanteaus, she turned to one
side, and covered her face with her hands; and thus she was when the
strong man gathered her up in his arms as if she were a child, and held
her sobbing to his breast.

16. There were enough staring at them, heaven knows; so I turned my eyes
away a moment, and then I saw two boys in threadbare roundabouts standing
near, wiping their eyes on their sleeves, and bursting into tears anew at
every fresh demonstration on the part of their mother. When I looked at
the stranger again he had his hat drawn over his eyes; but his wife was
looking up at him, and it seemed as if the pent-up tears of those weary
months of waiting were streaming through her eyelids.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Ma-neu'vers, movements. 2. Dem-on-stra'-tions, expression
of the feelings by outward signs. Port-man'teau (pro. port-man'to), a
traveling bag, usually made of leather. Con-fi-dant', one to whom secrets
are intrusted. 3. Dis-patch', a message. 6. Phi-los'o-phy, reasoning. 7.
Ma-chin'ist, a constructor of ma-chines and engines. Mort'gaged (pro.
mor'gajd), given as security for debt. 9. Ging'ham, a kind of cotton cloth
which is dyed before it is woven. 10. Pan'to-mime, acting without
speaking, dumb show. 12. Hys-ter'ic-al, convulsive, fitful.



LX. MAKE WAY FOR LIBERTY.

James Montgomery (b. 1771, d. 1854) was born in Irvine, Ayrshire,
Scotland. His father, a Moravian preacher, sent him to a Moravian school
at Fulneck, Yorkshire, England, to be educated. In 1794 he started "The
Sheffield Iris," a weekly paper, which he edited, with marked ability,
till 1825. He was fined and imprisoned twice for publishing articles
decided to be seditious. His principal poetical works are "The World
before the Flood," "Greenland," "The West Indies," "The Wanderer in
Switzerland," "The Pelican Island," and "Original Hymns, for Public,
Private, and Social Devotion." Mr. Montgomery's style is generally too
diffuse; but its smoothness and the evident sincerity of his emotions have
made many of his hymns and minor poems very popular. A pension of 300
Pounds a year was granted to him in 1833.

1. "Make way for Liberty!" he cried;
   Made way for Liberty, and died!

2. In arms the Austrian phalanx stood,
   A living wall, a human wood!
   A wall, where every conscious stone
   Seemed to its kindred thousands grown;
   A rampart all assaults to bear,
   Till time to dust their frames should wear
   A wood like that enchanted grove,
   In which, with fiends, Rinaldo strove,
   Where every silent tree possessed
   A spirit prisoned in its breast,
   Which the first stroke of coming strife
   Would startle into hideous life:
   So dense, so still, the Austrians stood,
   A living wall, a human wood!

3. Impregnable their front appears,
   All horrent with projected spears,
   Whose polished points before them shine,
   From flank to flank, one brilliant line,
   Bright as the breakers' splendors run
   Along the billows to the sun.

4. Opposed to these, a hovering band,
   Contending for their native laud;
   Peasants, whose new-found strength had broke
   From manly necks the ignoble yoke,
   And forged their fetters into swords,
   On equal terms to fight their lords;
   And what insurgent rage had gained,
   In many a mortal fray maintained:
   Marshaled once more at Freedom's call,
   They came to conquer or to fall,
   Where he who conquered, he who fell.
   Was deemed a dead or living Tell!

5. And now the work of life and death
   Hung on the passing of a breath;
   The fire of conflict burned within;
   The battle trembled to begin;
   Yet, while the Austrians held their ground,
   Point for attack was nowhere found;
   Where'er the impatient Switzers gazed,
   The unbroken line of lances blazed;
   That line 't were suicide to meet,
   And perish at their tyrants' feet;
   How could they rest within their graves,
   And leave their homes the home of slaves?
   Would they not feel their children tread
   With clanking chains above their head?

6. It must not be: this day, this hour,
   Annihilates the oppressor's power
   All Switzerland is in the field,
   She will not fly, she can not yield;
   Few were the numbers she could boast,
   But every freeman was a host,
   And felt as though himself were he
   On whose sole arm hung victory.

7. It did depend on one, indeed:
   Behold him! Arnold Winkelried!
   There sounds not to the trump of fame
   The echo of a nobler name.
   Unmarked he stood amid the throng,
   In rumination deep and long,
   Till you might see with sudden grace,
   The very thought come o'er his face;
   And by the motion of his form:
   Anticipate the bursting storm;
   And by the uplifting of his brow,
   Tell where the bolt would strike, and how.
   But 't was no sooner thought than done;
   The field was in a moment won.

8. "Make way for Liberty!" he cried:
   Then ran, with arms extended wide,
   As if his dearest friend to clasp;
   Ten spears he swept within his grasp:
   "Make way for Liberty!" he cried,
   Their keen points met from side to side;
   He bowed among them like a tree,
   And thus made way for Liberty.

9. Swift to the breach his comrades fly;
   "Make way for Liberty!" they cry,
   And through the Austrian phalanx dart,
   As rushed the spears through Arnold's heart;
   While instantaneous as his fall,
   Rout, ruin, panic, scattered all.
   An earthquake could not overthrow
   A city with a surer blow.

10. Thus Switzerland again was free,
    Thus Death made way for Liberty!


DEFINITIONS.--2. Pha'lanx, a body of troops formed in close array.
Con'scious, sensible, knowing. Kin'dred, those of like nature, relatives.
Ram'part, that which defends from assault, a bulwark. 3. Im-preg'na-ble,
that can not be moved or shaken. Hor'rent, standing out like bristles. 4.
In-sur'gent, rising in opposition to authority. 13. An-ni'hi-lates,
destroys. 7. Ru-mi-na'tion, the act of musing, meditation. 9. Breach, a
gap or opening made by breaking.


NOTES.--The incident related in this poem is one of actual occurrence, and
took place at the battle of Sempach, fought in 1386 A.D., between only
1,300 Swiss and a large army of Austrians. The latter had obtained
possession of a narrow pass in the mountains, from which it seemed
impossible to dislodge them until Arnold von Winkelried made a breach in
their line, as narrated.

Rinaldo is a knight in Tasso's "Jerusalem Delivered" (Canto XVIII, 17-40),
who enters an enchanted wood, and, by cutting down a tree in spite of the
nymphs and phantoms that endeavor in every way to stop him, breaks the
spell; the Christian army are thus enabled to enter the grove and obtain
timber for their engines of war.



LXI. THE ENGLISH SKYLARK.

Elihu Burritt (b. 1810, d. 1879). "the learned blacksmith," was born in
New Britain, Conn. His father was a shoemaker. Having received only a
limited amount of instruction at the district school, he was apprenticed
to a blacksmith about 1827. During his apprenticeship he labored hard at
self-instruction. He worked at his trade many years, from ten to twelve
hours each day, but managed, in the meantime to acquire a knowledge of
many ancient and modern languages. He made translations from several of
these, which were published in the "American Eclectic Review." In 1844 he
commenced the publication of "The Christian Citizen." His leading literary
works are "Sparks from the Anvil," "A Voice from the Forge," "Peace
Papers," and "Walks to John o' Groat's House." From the last of these the
following selection is abridged.

1. Take it in all, no bird in either hemisphere equals the English lark in
heart or voice, for both unite to make it the sweetest, the happiest, the
welcomest singer that was ever winged, like the high angels of God's love.
It is the living ecstasy of joy when it mounts up into its "glorious
privacy of light."

2. On the earth it is timid, silent, and bashful, as if not at home, and
not sure of its right to be there at all. It is rather homely withal,
having nothing in feather, feature, or form to attract notice. It is
seemingly made to be heard, not seen, reversing the old axiom addressed to
children when getting noisy.

3. Its mission is music, and it floods a thousand acres of the blue sky
with it several times a day. Out of that palpitating speck of living joy
there wells forth a sea of twittering ecstasy upon the morning and evening
air. It does not ascend by gyrations, like the eagle and birds of prey. It
mounts up like a human aspiration.

4. It seems to spread its wings and to be lifted straight upwards out of
sight by the afflatus of its own happy heart. To pour out this in
undulating rivulets of rhapsody is apparently the only motive of its
ascension. This it is that has made it so loved of all generations.

5. It is the singing angel of man's nearest heaven, whose vital breath is
music. Its sweet warbling is only the metrical palpitation of its life of
joy. It goes up over the rooftrees of the rural hamlet on the wings of its
song, as if to train the human soul to trial flights heavenward.

6. Never did the Creator put a voice of such volume into so small a living
thing. It is a marvel--almost a miracle. In a still hour you can hear it
at nearly a mile's distance. When its form is lost in the hazy lace work
of the sun's rays above, it pours down upon you all the thrilling
semitones of its song as distinctly as if it were warbling to you in your
window.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Ec'sta-sy, overmastering joy, rapture. 2. Ax'i-om, a
self-evident truth. 3. Pal'pi-tat-ing, throbbing, fluttering. Wells,
pours, flows. Gy-ra'tions, circular or spiral motions. 4. Af--fla'tus,
breath, inspiration. Un'du-la-ting, rising and falling like waves.
Rhap'so-dy, that which is uttered in a disconnected way under strong
excitement. Gen-er-a'tion, the mass of beings at one period. 5.
Met'ric-al, arranged in measures, as poetry and music. Roof 'tree, the
beam in the angle of a roof, hence the roof itself. Ham'let, a little
cluster of houses.



LXII. HOW SLEEP THE BRAVE.

William Collins (b. 1721, d. 1759) was born at Chichester, England. He was
educated at Winchester and Oxford. About 1745, he went to London as a
literary adventurer, and there won the esteem of Dr. Johnson. His "Odes"
were published in 1746, but were not popular. He was subsequently relieved
from pecuniary embarrassment by a legacy of 2,000 Pounds from a maternal
uncle; but he soon became partially insane, and was for some time confined
in an asylum for lunatics. He afterwards retired to Chichester, where he
was cared for by his sister until his death.

1. How sleep the brave who sink to rest
   By all their country's wishes blessed!
   When Spring, with dewy fingers cold,
   Returns to deck their hallowed mold,
   She there shall dress a sweeter sod
   Than Fancy's feet have ever trod.

2. By fairy hands their knell is rung;
   By forms unseen their dirge is sung;
   There honor comes a pilgrim gray,
   To bless the turf that wraps their clay;
   And Freedom shall awhile repair
   To dwell a weeping hermit there!



LXIII. THE RAINBOW.

John Keble (b. 1792. d. 1866) was born near Fairfax, Gloucestershire,
England. He graduated at Oxford with remarkably high honors, and
afterwards was appointed to the professorship of poetry in that
university. Since his death, Keble College, at Oxford, has been erected to
his memory. In 1835, he became vicar of Hursley and rector of Otterbourne,
and held these livings until his death. His most famous work is "The
Christian Year," a collection of sacred poems.

1. A fragment of a rainbow bright
     Through the moist air I see,
   All dark and damp on yonder height,
     All bright and clear to me.

