
Charles led the way to the Sylph, and getting on board of her by the aid
of one of the boats, they proceeded to unbend her sails.

"Bravo! Charley," said Barney. "That's a good idea; but why can't some
of us sleep in this bit of a cuddy house?"

"So we can. Here is Uncle Ben's boat cloak, which will make a first-rate
bed. Don't say a word about it, though, and you and I can have it all to
ourselves."

The sails were carried ashore, and were ample covering for the tent. Dry
leaves, which covered the ground, were then gathered up and put inside
for their bed.

"Now, Tim, they are finished, and for one, I begin to feel sleepy," said
Charles.

"We can't all sleep, you know," added the prudent chief.

"Why not?"

"We must set a watch."

"I am too sleepy to watch," said Charles, with a long gape. "The clock
has just struck one."

"You needn't watch, you are the second in command."

"I see," replied Charles, standing upon his dignity.

"There are four watches, and each must do duty two hours a night. Who
shall keep the first watch?"

"I will," said Barney.

"Good! You must keep the fire going, and have an eye to both sides of
the island."

"Ay, ay."

"And you must go down to the boats every time the clock strikes, to see
if they are all right. If they should get adrift, you know, our game
would be up."

"I'll see to it."

"At three o'clock, you must call the watch that is to relieve you."

"Who will that be?"

"I," volunteered the three other officers of the watches, in concert.

"Ben, you shall relieve him. If anything happens, call me."

Tim and his followers then retired to their tent, and buried themselves
in the leaves. Charles ordered those of his band who were not on duty to
"turn in;" saying that he wanted to warm his feet. The Rovers were so
fatigued by their unusual labors that they soon fell asleep, and Charles
then repaired to the little cabin of the Sylph. Arranging the cloak for
his bed, he wrapped himself up in his great-coat and lay down.

Fatigued as he was, he could not go to sleep. The novelty of his
situation, and the guilt, now that the excitement was over, which
oppressed his conscience, banished that rest his exhausted frame
required. He heard the village clock strike two and three; and then he
rose, unable to endure the reproaches of his own heart.

"What a fool I am!" he exclaimed to himself; and a flood of tears came
to his relief. "To desert my warm bed, my happy home, the friendship of
my club, for such a set of fellows as this! O, how I wish I had not
come!"

Leaving the cabin, he seated himself in the stern sheets of the boat.
The bright stars had disappeared, and the sky was veiled in deep black
clouds. The wind blew very fresh from the north-east, and he was certain
that a severe storm was approaching. He wept bitterly when he thought of
the gloomy prospect.

He had repented his folly, and would have given the world to get away
from the island. Ah, a lucky thought! He could escape! The Rovers were
all asleep; the fresh breeze would soon drive the Sylph to the land, and
he could return home, and perhaps not be missed. It was an easy thing;
and without further reflection, he unfastened the cable, and dropped it
overboard.

The Sylph immediately commenced drifting away from the island. Taking
the helm, he put her before the wind, and was gratified to observe that
she made very good headway.

The clock struck four, and he heard the footsteps of the watch upon the
shore.

"Boat adrift!" shouted Ben, who was the officer of the watch.

The words were repeated several times, and in a few moments he heard
Tim's voice summoning his crew. Then the Butterfly dashed down upon
him, and his hopes died within him. But he had the presence of mind to
crawl back again to the cabin; and when Tim came onboard, he had the
appearance of being sound asleep, so that the chief did not suspect his
treachery.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE ESCAPE.


Monday was a cold, dreary, disagreeable day. The wind continued
northeast; a fine, drizzly rain was falling, and a thick fog had settled
over the lake, which effectually concealed the camp of the Rovers from
the main shore.

An excursion had been planned for the day by the two boat clubs; but the
weather was so unpropitious that it was abandoned. About nine o'clock,
however, the members of the clubs began to assemble at their halls in
search of such recreation as could be found indoors.

Frank opened the Zephyr's boat-house as usual, and great was his dismay
when he discovered that the boat was not in its berth. Calling Uncle Ben
from the stable, he announced to him the astounding intelligence that
the Zephyr had been stolen!

"What does it mean, Uncle Ben?" he asked, in deep anxiety.

"I can't tell you, Frank; only, as you say, it has been stolen. It
couldn't have broken adrift."

"Of course not; and one of the windows is open."

"That accounts for it," replied Uncle Ben, as he walked down the
boat-house and looked out upon the lake. "I will take the Sylph and
hunt it up."

"Let me go with you, Uncle Ben."

"My eyes! but the Sylph is gone too!" exclaimed the veteran, as he
perceived the moorings afloat where she usually lay.

"Strange, isn't it?"

Uncle Ben scratched his head, and did not know what to make of it.

"Here comes Tony, running with all his might," continued Frank. "What's
the matter, Tony?"

"Somebody has stolen the Butterfly!" gasped Tony, out of breath."

"And the Zephyr and the Sylph!"

Several of the members of the club now arrived, and the matter was
thoroughly discussed.

"Who do you suppose stole them!" said Frank.

"Who? why, Tim Bunker of course," replied Fred.

"But he must have had some help."

"Perhaps not; he has done it to be revenged, because your father turned
him out of the club."

"Very likely."

"May be he'll smash them up," suggested William Bright.

"Have you seen anything of Charles this morning?" asked Mr. Hardy,
entering the boat-house at this moment.

"No, sir."

"He did not sleep at home last night."

The Zephyrs looked at each other with astonishment, and most of them,
probably, connected him with the disappearance of the boats. His
intimacy with Tim Bunker created a great many painful misgivings,
especially when Mr. Hardy told them that his son had played truant on
Saturday; and one of the boys had heard of his being seen with Tim on
that day. Various other facts were elicited, which threw additional
light upon the loss of the boats. Mr. Hardy was in great distress. It
was clear that his son had wandered farther from the path of truth than
he had ever suspected.

Frank had gone up to the house to inform his father of the loss of the
boats, and Captain Sedley soon joined the party. He sympathized deeply
with Mr. Hardy, and was satisfied that his son could not be far off. It
was impossible to search the lake, as there were no boats for the
purpose.

As nothing could be done at present on the lake, Captain Sedley ordered
his horse, with the intention of driving round it in search of the
fugitive and of the boats. Mr. Hardy was invited to go with him.

On their arrival at Rippleton they found that Tim Bunker was missing, as
well as a great many other boys. They continued to examine the shores of
the lake till they reached Joe Braman's house, on the north side.

Captain Sedley inquired for his boat; and Joe, after trying to evade the
truth, confessed that he had let it to Tim for a week, but did not know
where he had gone with it. They were sure then that the boys were
engaged in some mad enterprise: and at about eleven o'clock the two
gentlemen reached home, without having obtained any intelligence of
Charles.

"Have you discovered anything, Ben?" asked Captain Sedley.

"Yes, sir; I heard voices in the direction of Center Island."

"They are there, then," replied Captain Sedley, as he repaired to the
boat-house.

About one o'clock the fog lifted, and revealed to the astonished party
the camp of the Rovers. A large fire burned near the two tents, around
which the boys were gathered, for the weather was so inclement as to
render Tim's enterprise anything but romantic.

The Sylph, the two club boats, and Joe Braman's "gondola" lay near the
shore, apparently uninjured.

"This is a mad frolic," said Captain Sedley; "but we may be thankful it
is no worse."

"My boy in company with such young scoundrels!" added Mr. Hardy,
bitterly.

"He is sick of them and the adventure I will warrant."

"I hope so."

"Charles never did like Tim Bunker," suggested Frank.

"What is to be done?" asked Mr. Hardy.

"We can do nothing; they have all the boats. They have managed well, and
we are helpless."

"Can't we build a raft, father?" added Frank.

"If we did, they would take to the boats and keep out of our way. Go to
the house, Frank, and bring me the spy-glass. We will examine them a
little more closely."

"They'll get enough on't afore to-morrow," said Uncle Ben.

"It will cure them of camping out."

"Tim said, the last time he was with us, that we ought to camp out,"
added William.

"The best way is to let them have it out till they are sick on't,"
continued Uncle Ben. "It won't hurt 'em; they won't get the scurvy."

Captain Sedley took the glass on Frank's return, and examined the camp.
By its aid he obtained a very correct idea of their encampment. The
Rovers were at dinner, and he recognized Charles Hardy and several of
his companions. The glass was taken by several of the party; and, after
this examination, even Mr. Hardy concluded that it was best to make a
merit of necessity, and let the foolish boys have out their frolic.

Soon after, the Rovers took to the boats, and pulled up the lake. Then,
the anxious party on shore discovered that Charles was in command of the
Zephyr. With the help of the spy-glass, they were able to form a very
correct idea of the state of feeling on board the boats. There was a
great deal of quarreling in both; and, after they had been out half an
hour, a regular fight occurred in the Zephyr.

About five o'clock they returned to the island, and before dark it began
to rain. All the evening a great fire blazed on the island; but the
frail tents of the Rovers must have been entirely inadequate to protect
them from the severity of the weather.

At nine o'clock the Zephyrs, who had spent the evening in the hall, went
home, leaving Uncle Ben, who had been deputed by Captain Sedley to watch
the Rovers, still gazing through his night-glass at the camp-fires on
the island. Soon after, discordant cries were wafted over the waters,
and it was plain to the veteran that there was "trouble in the camp."
The sounds seemed to indicate that a fight was in progress. After a
time, however, all was quiet again, and the old sailor sought his bed.

During the night it cleared off, and Tuesday was a bright, pleasant day.
It was found in the morning that one of the tents had been moved away
from the other. About nine o'clock all the Rovers gathered on the beach;
but they were divided into two parties, and there seemed to be a violent
dispute between them. One of the parties, as they attempted to get into
the Zephyr, was assaulted by the other, and a fight ensued, in which
neither gained a victory. Then a parley, and each party took one of the
boats and pulled away from the island. It was observed that Charles was
no longer the coxswain. He seemed to have lost the favor of his
companions, and several of them were seen to kick and strike him.

The boats went in different directions--the Zephyr pulling towards
Rippleton. When her crew observed the party who were watching them from
the shore, they commenced cheering lustily, and the coxswain, out of
bravado, steered towards them.

"Who is he?" asked Frank.

"It is Barney Ropes," replied Tony. "He is as big a rascal as there is
out of jail."

"Here they come."

"Suppose we give them a volley of stones," suggested Fred Harper.

"No!" said Frank, firmly.

The boat was pulling parallel with the shore, and not more than ten
rods from it. The Rovers yelled, and indulged freely in coarse and
