ground, and in some cases, a little below the surface of the ground,
rising and spreading out in all directions.

The common currant bushes, blackberry bushes, and rose bushes which we
see in gardens, are shrubs.

So also are grape-vines, honeysuckles, ivy, and all other creeping
vines. These are called climbing plants, because little tendrils or
claspers which grow out of their branches, wind around and fasten
themselves to any thing in their way.

Trees are the largest and strongest of all plants.

They have woody stems or trunks, and branches. These branches do not, as
in shrubs, start close to the ground, but at some distance above, from
which height they extend in different directions.

It is difficult to believe that some of the large trees we see, sprung
from small seeds; yet it is true that all trees started in this manner.

The seeds are scattered about by birds and tempests, and falling on the
soft ground, where they become covered with, leaves and earth, they take
root and grow.

Thus the little acorn sprouts, and from it springs the sturdy oak, which
is not only the noblest of trees, but lives hundreds of years.

The trunks and branches of trees are protected by a covering called
bark. This bark is thicker near the base or root of the tree than it is
higher up among the branches.

On some trees, the bark is very rough and shaggy looking, as on the oak,
ash, walnut, and pine; on others, the bark is smooth, as on the beech,
apple, and birch.

Some trees live for only a few years, rapidly reaching their full
growth, and rapidly decaying. The peach-tree is one of this kind.

Other trees live to a great age. An elm-tree has been known to live for
three hundred years; a chestnut-tree, six hundred years; and oaks, eight
hundred years.

The baobab-tree of Africa lives to be many hundred years old. There is a
yew-tree in England that is known to be over two thousand years old.

The "big trees" of California are the largest in the world, although not
of so great an age as some that have been mentioned. The tallest of
these trees that has yet been discovered, measures over three hundred
and fifty feet in height, and the distance around it near the ground is
almost one hundred feet. The age of this tree must be between one
thousand five hundred and two thousand years.


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Let, pupils pronounce in concert and singly,
the following words: _corn, stalks, important, form, tall, walnut,
horses_.

In the fifth paragraph on page 199, why are _some_ and _others_
emphatic?[12]

Mark _inflections_ of _oak, ash, walnut_, and _pine_; and of _beech,
apple_, and _birch_.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Place _dis_ before each of the following words,
and then give the meaning of each of the words so formed.

    appear    covered    able    like    believe

[12] See fifth paragraph from the end of the lesson.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XLII.


flush, _bright red color_.

low'ing, _the bellowing or cry of cattle_.

rang'ing, _wandering_.

in tent', _determined_.

striv'ing, _making great efforts_.

pre serve', _keep in safety_.

re flect'ed, _shining back; thrown back, as by a looking-glass_.

pro ceed'ed, _went forward_.

checked, _stopped_.

blasts, _sounds made by blowing_.


       *       *       *       *       *




A FOREST ON FIRE.

PART I.


We were sound asleep one night, when, about two hours before day, the
snorting of our horses and lowing of our cattle, which were ranging in
the woods, suddenly awoke us.

I took my rifle and went to the door to see what beast had caused the
hubbub, when I was struck by the glare of light reflected on all the
trees before me, as far as I could see through the woods.

My horses were leaping about, snorting loudly, and the cattle ran among
them in great confusion.

On going to the back of the house I plainly heard the crackling made by
the burning brushwood, and saw the flames coming toward us in a
far-extended line.

I ran to the house, told my wife to dress herself and the child as
quickly as possible, and take the little money we had, while I managed
to catch and saddle two of the best horses.

All this was done in a very short time, for I felt that every moment was
precious to us.

We then mounted our horses, and made off from the fire. My wife, who is
an excellent rider, kept close to me; and my daughter, who was then a
small child, I took in one arm.

When making off, I looked back and saw that the frightful blaze was
close upon us, and had already laid hold of the house.

By good luck there was a horn attached to my hunting-clothes, and I blew
it, to bring after us, if possible, the remainder of my live-stock, as
well as the dogs.

The cattle followed for a while; but before an hour had passed they all
ran, as if mad, through the woods, and that was the last we saw of them.

My dogs, too, although at all other times easily managed, ran after the
deer that in great numbers sprung before us as if fully aware of the
death, that was so rapidly approaching.

We heard blasts from the horns of our neighbors as we proceeded, and
knew that they were in the same unfortunate condition that we were in
ourselves.

Intent on striving to the utmost to preserve our lives, I thought of a
large lake, some miles off, where the flames might possibly be checked,
and we might find a place of safety.

Urging my wife to whip up her horse, we set off at full speed, making
the best way we could over the fallen trees and the brush heaps, which
lay like so many articles placed on purpose to keep up the terrific
fires that advanced with a broad front upon us.

By this time we were suffering greatly from the effects of the heat, and
we were afraid that our horses would be overcome and drop down at any
moment.

A singular kind of breeze was passing over our heads, and the glare of
the burning trees shone more brightly than the daylight. I was sensible
of a slight faintness, and my wife looked pale.

The heat had produced such a flush in the child's face that, when she
turned toward either of us, our grief and anxiety were greatly
increased.


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--What tone of voice should be used in reading
the lesson?

Should the rate of reading be slow or rapid?

Point out two paragraphs requiring a somewhat different rate.

Should the feelings expressed in the lesson be rendered in a quiet or
loud tone?

Different inflections are sometimes used, simply to give variety to the
reading and not for emphasis.

In the first paragraph, mark _inflection_ of _night, day, horses,
cattle, woods, us_.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XLIII.


de voured', _eaten up greedily, as by wild animals_.

por'cu pine, _a kind of animal_.

smold'der ing,  _burning slowly; smoking_.

in suf'fer a ble, _not to be borne_.

shift'ed, _moved about; changed position_.

sti'fling, _stopping the breath_.

dismal, _gloomy; cheerless_.

un grate'ful, _not thankful_.

rem'e died, _relieved; cured_.


       *       *       *       *       *




A FOREST ON FIRE.

PART II.


Ten miles are soon gone over on swift horses; but yet, when we reached
the borders of the lake we were quite exhausted, and our hearts failed
us. The heat of the smoke was insufferable, and sheets of blazing fire
flew over us in a manner beyond belief.

[Illustration]

We reached the shore, however, coasted the lake for a while, and got
round to the sheltered side. There we gave up our horses, which we never
saw again.

We plunged down among the rushes, by the edge of the water, and laid
ourselves down flat, to await the chance of escaping from being burned
or devoured. The water greatly refreshed us, and we enjoyed the
coolness.

On went the fire, rushing and crashing through the woods. Such a morning
may we never again see! The heavens themselves, I thought, were
frightened.

All above us was a bright, red glare, mingled with, dark, threatening
clouds and black smoke, rolling and sweeping away in the distance.

Our bodies were cool enough, but our heads were scorching; and the
child, who now seemed to understand the matter, cried so as nearly to
break our hearts.

The day passed on, and we became hungry. Many wild beasts came plunging
into the water beside us, and others swam across to our side, and stood
still. Although faint and weary, I managed to shoot a porcupine, and we
all tasted its flesh.

The night passed, I cannot tell you how. Smoldering fires covered the
ground, and the trees stood like pillars of fire, or fell across each
other.

The stifling and sickening smoke still rushed over us, and the burnt
cinders and ashes fell thick around us.

When morning came, every thing about us was calm; but a dismal smoke
still filled the air, and the smell seemed worse than ever. What was to
become of us I did not know.

My wife hugged the child to her breast, and wept bitterly; but God had
preserved us through the worst of the danger, and the flames had gone
past, so I thought it would be both ungrateful to Him and unmanly to
despair now.

Hunger once more pressed upon us, but this was soon remedied. Several
deer were standing in the water, up to the head, and I shot one of them.
Some of its flesh was soon roasted, and after eating it we felt
wonderfully strengthened.

By this time the blaze of the burning forest was beyond our sight,
although the remains of the fires of the night before were still burning
in many places, and it was dangerous to go among the burnt trees.

After resting for some time, we prepared to commence our march. Taking
up the child in my arms, I led the way over the hot ground and rocks;
and after two weary days and nights of suffering, during which we
shifted in the best manner we could, we at last succeeded in reaching
the hard woods, which had been free from the fire.

Soon after we came to a house, where we were kindly treated. Since then
I have worked hard and constantly as a lumber-man; and, thanks to God,
we are safe, sound, and happy.


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Point out, breathing-places in the last
paragraph of page 207.[13]

Name the _emphatic words_ in the last sentence of the lesson.

Mark _inflection_ in the last line of the lesson.

Pronounce carefully the following words: _dark, march, hard, calm,
hearts_.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Let pupils define the following words: _complete,
attract, locate, intent, procrastinate, separate_; then add to each
word as a stem, the ending _ion_, and define the words so formed.

Point out the omissions of letters necessary in joining the stems and
endings.

Let pupils make out an _analysis_ in six parts for the last two
lessons, and use it in writing or telling the story in their own words.


[13] See third paragraph from the end of the lesson.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XLIV.


peas'ants, _those who work on farms_.

hedge'rows, _rows of shrubs or trees used to inclose a space_.

tow'ers, _very high buildings_.

an ces'tral, _belonging to a family for a great many years_.

mon'arch, _king; ruler_.

roy'al ty, _kings and queens_.

gifts, _things given; presents_.


       *       *       *       *       *




COMMON GIFTS.


  The sunshine is a glorious thing,
    That comes alike to all,
  Lighting the peasant's lowly cot,
    The noble's painted hall.

  The moonlight is a gentle thing,
    Which through the window gleams
  Upon the snowy pillow, where
    The happy infant dreams.

  It shines upon the fisher's boat
    Out on the lonely sea,
  As  well as on the flags which float
    On towers of royalty.

  The dewdrops of the summer morn
    Display their silver sheen
  Upon the smoothly shaven lawn,
    And on the village green.

  There are no gems in monarch's crown
    More beautiful than they;
  And yet you scarcely notice them,
    But tread them off in play.

  The music of the birds is heard,
    Borne on the passing breeze,
  As sweetly from the hedgerows as
    From old ancestral trees.

  There are as many lovely things,
    As many pleasant tones,
  For those who dwell by cottage hearths
    As those who sit on thrones.


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--This lesson should be read with a full and
clear tone of voice. The thoughts expressed are not of a conversational
nature.

In the first stanza, in the contrast between _peasant's lowly cot_ and
_noble's painted hall_, the inflections are _rising circumflexes_
and _falling circumflexes_.

The _rising circumflex_ consists of a downward turn of the voice
followed by an upward turn; the _falling circumflex_, of an upward
turn followed by a downward turn.

Let pupils mark the inflections in the last two lines of the poem.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Let pupils express the meaning of what is given
below in dark type, using a single word for each example.

    For _those who dwell by cottage hearths_

    As _those who sit on thrones_.


