seemed to be suddenly seized with a desire for lead-pencils, for she
began to sharpen all that she could get together, one after the other.
Oscar was writing out his speech. Any one would have thought that he was
composing a drama and acting it out as he went along; he kept throwing
up his head, and gazing enthusiastically first at one inkstand and then
at another, as if he were summoning them all to great heroic deeds.

Aunt Clarissa, who generally sat in the room during the lesson-time to
keep order in the little company, had just been called out by Lina, the
maid-servant, who was usually a most quiet and reserved young person,
but who was now, evidently, much excited and almost distressed as she
asked to "speak a word with Mrs. Clarissa."

No sooner was the door closed than Oscar broke out eagerly:--

"Though neither you nor anybody knows where the Festival is to be this
evening, Fani, yet promise me, on your word of honor, that you will
join us--Promise! at quarter before six, at the three oaks. Promise! and
from there we march to the place of celebration."

Fani looked at Emma.

"Yes, of course you can promise. We shall be back by that time," said
Emma, decidedly. "You see, Oscar, we have something to do together
before that; but we are going at two o'clock if we can get away."

"Go where you please; only promise to be back," said Oscar.

Fani promised that he would be at the three oaks before six o'clock.

"And you too, Fred; we have not too many at the best. Promise that
you'll come too."

It was not so easy to get Fred's consent; he was always slow to make a
promise. Perhaps he would come; but, if he had anything important to
attend to, he couldn't come if he did promise, so he must be excused.

Oscar was determined to have his own way. Fred was obstinate and would
not yield. Emma and Fani were not at all loath to give up their studies
and join in the dispute.

In the other room, Lina, her cheeks flaming with excitement, was
declaring to Mrs. Clarissa that she would not stay another day in the
house; no one would believe such things could happen who hadn't seen
them; she never heard of such things before in her life.

"Do try to speak plainly, so that I can understand what you mean," said
Clarissa, who had not an idea what the girl was talking about.

"Well, I noticed it a little once or twice before," said the agitated
house-maid; "but I thought it came in at the open window. But to-day,
just now, when I opened the drawer of the young gentleman's wash-stand
to clean it, out jumped a live frog. I opened another and there were a
lot of spiders crawling about! I slapped at them with a cloth and they
ran into all the corners, and I couldn't get them out. Then I saw that
the key was in the writing-desk, and I thought what if by chance any of
the disgusting creatures had got in there; for what would Mrs. Stanhope
say? I opened one division and then another and another. Hu! how it
looked! I can't tell you how horrid it was! Snails, caterpillars,
beetles, every sort of ugly living creature crawled out of every
place,--it was all dirty and nasty and abominable! I cleaned and brushed
and washed and scrubbed as well as I could; but it was so dirty and so
sticky! Ugh! And it was done on purpose, too; that's the worst of it;
and the nasty things have got into my clothes and my hair and all over
me! That stupid young gentleman did it just to frighten whoever came and
found them there! I know he did!"

"No, Lina, you're mistaken," said Clarissa, when she could get in a
word. "Come with me, and I'll see what can be done with the room. The
boy didn't mean to frighten any one. I'm only afraid he was trying to
hide them where they wouldn't be found. Let's go and see."

The aspect of Fred's room was indeed alarming. All the drawers and
shelves in the different pieces of furniture were pulled out, and all
were dirty and bore the marks of the creatures who had been kept in
them. On the floor lay the remains of the spiders and worms that Lina
had destroyed. The windows also were spotted with the dead bodies of
insects. Clarissa shook her head sadly.

"Call the lad to come up here," she said. "But do not make any more fuss
about the matter. Listen to me, Lina; we must make this all clean and
nice again without letting Mrs. Stanhope know anything about it. Do you
understand?"

Lina muttered something to herself and went to call Fred. When the poor
lad entered his room and saw the destruction of all his carefully
preserved treasures, he turned as white as chalk, and spoke not one
word.

"My dear boy," said Clarissa very gently, "you need not be frightened,
but I must tell you that you cannot use these drawers nor this desk for
this purpose. Now, we will clean them all out, but remember that no more
creatures must be brought into the house."

"Oh, my collection! my whole collection!"

"Yes, you see this is not the way to go to work to make a collection.
Don't be unhappy. I will see about your getting some more creatures. But
the first thing is to get this room cleaned up, and I'm sure you won't
want to give us so much trouble again."

Fred glanced at the places where his most cherished treasures had been
stored. His rare oleander-worms and his priceless beetles all were
destroyed. The drawers all opened, the creatures all killed and spoiled.
He went down stairs again, but he could not go back to the others and
have them ask him why he had been sent for. He went out into the garden,
and down to the seat under the lindens by the river. The thought of his
specimens, his precious specimens, was too much for the poor fellow. He
threw himself on the ground and poured out his sorrows in sobs and
tears.

In the afternoon, when the others all ran out rejoicing in the sunshine,
he hid himself in a corner of the school-room, and wrote the following
letter:--

     DEAR AUNTY:--You will cry when you read this, I am sure. It is all
     done for, my entire collection; all killed with a dust-cloth,
     squashed, smashed, driven out of windows, and into holes, and all
     by a maid-servant. As I had no boxes for them, I naturally put my
     specimens into the best places I could find for them. In the
     writing-desk in my room were ever so many little divisions, just
     the very thing to put different varieties into. When the maid came
     to clear up the room, she didn't know anything about their value,
     of course, and she thrust her hateful brush right in and destroyed
     them all. She is a savage, an ignorant savage. I did as you told
     me, dear aunty. Not one tiny little frog even have I carried in my
     pockets, not even a beetle; and this is the result. I will not tell
     you all the things I had found; I couldn't bear to describe them.
     Two such beauties of beetles--bright red wings, the body lilac
     blue, and glittering as any precious stone! Such a rare species!
     And an oleander-sphinx! And my magnificent caterpillar of the
     humming-bird moth!--you know, aunty, that one with yellow stripes
     and blue eye-spots. All trodden to death on the floor.

     I must stop; the longer I think of it, the worse I feel. I will
     say one thing though. You may call a person "Aunty," but that
     doesn't make her one. When we first came here, I used to say to
     Fani, when he wanted anything, "Why don't you go and ask Aunt
     Clarissa?" and he answered more than a dozen times, "That isn't
     allowed here." So at last I understood, and as I didn't want to
     lead him to do anything out of the way, I didn't say it any more.
     But now you see the difference between a real aunt and a
     make-believe one. There is nothing in the world that we can't ask
     you. If you can't do it, you say so, and there's the end of it. But
     that's no reason for not asking another time; there is always
     something to ask, and you understand that, and don't expect us to
     stop asking just because you have to say no sometimes. Now, this
     whole trouble comes from this; for when I asked Fani to ask Aunt
     Clarissa to give me some twenty or thirty old boxes to keep my
     specimens in, he said it was not proper to ask for so many things,
     and I could pack them in paper. Just think of that! To wrap living
     creatures up in paper! Of course Fani doesn't understand anything
     about such things.

     Now what I want you to do, dear aunty, is to write in your next
     letter that we are to come home; it is high time. It is four weeks
     since we came, and that is long enough to be away from home; for
     home is the best place in the whole world. There are plenty of
     boxes to be had there, and everything that you want, and there are
     nice places for things, and there isn't such danger of accidents.
     And if anything does go wrong, you are there, aunty, and in a
     minute it is set right again. Do write and say that we may leave
     here on Saturday, and then on Sunday we shall be at home again. How
     glad we shall be! Good-bye, dear aunty; your ever-loving nephew,

     FRED.

The evening came; lovely and bright. Under the three oaks were assembled
the two Fink boys, the baker's son from Lucerne, the shoemaker's
apprentice from Uri, the hotel porter from Schwyz, and Feklitus! Oscar
stood in the midst with his banner, and looked sharply in every
direction, for it was almost six o'clock and neither Fred nor Fani was
in sight. The clock struck; five, ten minutes passed, and they did not
come.

Oscar felt that it was useless to wait longer. Fred did not mean to
come; he had seen that in the morning; but Fani, where was he? As he
asked himself this question, Oscar raised his fist threateningly in the
air and muttered to himself:--

"Oh, that Emma! that Xanthippe!"

His original intention had been to march to the windmill to the music of
fife and drum, flute and harmonicon, but he had given up part of this
plan; chiefly, he said to himself, on account of his father's advice not
to make any disturbance in a strange place; but also because he could
not get a drum, and Feklitus would not play the flute.

Now it was time to move, and the procession began to march. The lad from
Lucerne went first, playing briskly upon the harmonicon; the others
followed two and two, and Oscar in the middle held aloft the banner. The
staff was quickly planted as previously arranged; the beautiful banner
floated proudly over the land. Oscar took his stand by it, and the
others formed a circle, lying on the grass about him. With a loud
ringing voice he began:--

"Friends and brothers!"

"What does this mean? What is this all about?" suddenly thundered a
voice behind him.

The boys sprang to their feet. Oscar looked round. Two bearded men in
uniform stood close behind him and looked at him with threatening
glances. In a flash Oscar turned about, made one great leap down the
hill-side and away across the field like a madman. Behind him came the
Finks, scarcely touching the ground. Down the other side ran the
Lucerner fast on the heels of the Schwyzer, who tripped, and both went
headlong into a ditch. Feklitus was the only one who kept his ground. He
knew who he was; Fortunatus, the only son of Mr. Bickel. No one would
dare to meddle with him. He knew, too, that he was by no means nimble,
and the sudden appearance of the men in uniform had given him a strange
feeling of heaviness in his legs. He had no mind to stay alone, however,
and so he seized the shoemaker's boy by the collar, and held him as in a
vise.

One of the men now came up to them and said roughly,--

"Come along to the watch-house and explain what you have been about, and
what it all means."

The Uri boy hid himself as well as he could. Feklitus, half-frightened,
half-angry, answered,--

"We have done nothing. We are not to blame. It's all Oscar's doing."

"We don't know anything about that," said the man. "You come along with
us. Our motto is, 'Taken together, hung together.'" Then he turned to
his comrade, and they began to whisper.

Feklitus was as pale as a ghost.

"Did you hear that? They are going to hang us," he said, grasping his
companion still more tightly.

"Let us run away," gasped the boy, hardly able to speak for choking.

Feklitus looked at the men; they were in earnest conversation with the
miller. He sprang from the ground; fear gave him unwonted agility. Down
the hill he raced, his hair fairly standing on end with fright, and the
Uri boy after him. Neither looked back to see whether they were pursued,
but they thought they heard footsteps behind them. On they ran--on, on;
at last they separated; one this way, the other that; and then both
disappeared. They had not been followed.

Oscar reached Rosemount all out of breath. He rushed up the steps, ran
to his bed-room, took out his portfolio, threw himself on a seat before
the table, and wrote the following, sobbing more and more as he went
on:--

     DEAR AUNTY,--I want your help. Something has happened that may have
     very unpleasant consequences, and you are the only person that can
     help me; you will know how. I really did mean to be careful, just
     as my father bade me, and not do anything out of the way, and
     particularly not make a noise. You will not think that I did wrong
     to select the best of the mottoes. You know you said yourself that
     though we had no tyrants ourselves, yet, where there were any, it
     was a splendid verse. I cannot explain it all exactly, but we were
     taken by surprise in the middle of a perfectly harmless meeting. We
     succeeded in escaping, but I think perhaps we shall be prosecuted;
     and if my name comes out, they may write to papa from the court of
     justice here, and that would be horrible. You will stand by me,
     won't you, dear aunty? If a letter should come to my father,
     couldn't you get hold of it and read it and answer it yourself,
     without letting him know? You can explain to the gentlemen that we
     were only having a little Swiss celebration just among ourselves.
     Pray do help me, and not let the story get out. I hope you will
     write to-morrow and tell us to come home. We have been away long
     enough. I am sure papa and mamma would be glad, for we cannot do
     our lessons nicely here, at all. Everything is far better at home;
     things are better arranged, and the amusements are a great deal
     better. Do write to us to come home directly; and tell me too that
     you have done what I ask about the letter to papa. Best love,
     dearest aunty,

     From your loving nephew,

     OSCAR.

The letter was folded in haste, and the address quickly added; and the
writer ran with all his might to the post-office, a short distance from
the house. He had to hurry, for it was nearly supper-time. As he came
tearing along into the court-yard at Rosemount, on his return, he
started back; for there stood one of the men in uniform, with the
deserted banner in his hand. He was waiting to be let in. The door
opened. He entered. Oscar drew back behind a great oak-tree. His heart
beat like a trip-hammer. What was going on inside there? Mrs. Stanhope
would know now all about it! What would she think of him after this!
Perhaps she would send them all home with a letter of complaint to their
father! His heart beat louder and louder. Perhaps the man came to fetch
him to be punished and imprisoned. Had he broken some law when he had
the hole dug in front of the mill, when there was nothing but short
grass there? Oh, if he had only followed his father's advice, and not
tried to do anything in this strange country without leave! All these
anxious thoughts ran through Oscar's head, and the longer that dreadful
man stayed, the more alarmed he grew.

Clarissa had just finished her disagreeable task, and, assisted very
reluctantly by the indignant Lina, had at last succeeded in removing all
traces of Fred's unfortunate collection, when a tremendous ringing at
the house-door called her down stairs. It was the watchman with the
banner. Another strange occurrence. What would happen next? She was
really frightened when she recognized Oscar's banner, and read the too
distinctly printed motto which embellished it. Clarissa looked anxiously
at the different doors for fear that Mrs. Stanhope might come through
one of them. She asked the man what his business might be. He replied
that they had discovered that the owner of the banner he held in his
hand belonged at Rosemount, and also that they had come to the
conclusion that all that affair was only boys' play, though at first the
miller had thought otherwise because of the motto. This was why he had
informed the police. Now, they merely wished to advise Mrs. Stanhope to
bid her young people keep such games within the limits of her own
grounds.

Clarissa still glanced anxiously towards the doors, while she assured
the man that his advice would be followed, and pressed a coin into his
hand as an acknowledgment of the trouble he had taken. Then she
hurriedly took the banner, rolled it up, and carried it away. She was
determined, if possible, to keep from Mrs. Stanhope all knowledge of
this day's occurrences. But would it be possible?

However, all was safe for the present; and, when the bell rang for
supper, Clarissa laid aside her anxiety and went cheerfully into the
dining-room. Oscar and Fred followed each other with slow steps and
dejected demeanor. Their usual vivacity had vanished, and, as they
seated themselves at the table, they hung their heads like hyacinths
nipped by the frost.

Elsli sat next to Fred; her cheeks were glowing with exercise, for she
had had to run fast all the way home to be in time for supper. She, too,
hung her head over her plate to hide her heated face.

Emma and Fani were not there.

Mrs. Stanhope looked silently first at the empty places, then at the
children.
