matter a serious one. Having secured a rest for his paws, his whole body
was supported in the water, and the beast, which was no doubt very
tired, simply ceased all effort, and floated with the wind.

"Why don't you knock him off?" asked Nellie, impatiently.

"Because I ain't strong enough, I suppose; he's the toughest customer I
ever got hold of, or seemed to have a good chance to get hold of me."

"I've a great notion to dig out his eyes myself."

"If you try it, it will be the last bear you ever scratch; look at those
paws! did you ever see such nails? didn't you hear them rattle against
the logs when he struck them?"

"Suppose he tries to climb upon the raft," ventured Nellie, trying to
edge still further away, "what will become of us?"

"The raft won't hold him; he'll sink it, and we'll have to get along as
best we can; but, Nellie, he acts to me as though he is satisfied with
being where he is, and he won't disturb us so long as we let him alone."

"But you struck him several hard blows."

"He's forgotten all about it, if he ever knew it. I guess he has had a
pretty lively run to reach the pond in time to save his hide, and now
that he is in the water, he will stay there a good while."

There was a likelihood that Nick was right, and that the bear wanted
nothing more than a rest; and yet the possibility that he would soon try
to draw his entire body upon the raft prevented the brother and sister
from having any peace of mind.

When this singular tableau had lasted several minutes, it was discovered
that the wind was carrying the raft, with its incubus, toward the
western shore again, and Nick, afraid that if they all landed together,
the bear might seize the occasion to make a supper off of them, reached
the pole over the side, and began working the logs to the middle of the
pond.

During this performance the brute never stirred. His head, shoulders and
paws were out of the water, the principal bulk of his body being
beneath, and he seemed contented to be navigated about the small lake in
any fashion the proprietor of the raft deemed best.

When considerable time had passed without his offering to destroy them,
the boy and girl were able to view the beast with feelings of less
alarm. They looked at the large head, pig-like snout, round, dark eyes,
and could well understand the terror which an unarmed person feels on
meeting one of them in the woods.

But so long as bruin remained there, so long was he a threat; and Nick
was trying hard to think of some plan by which to get rid of him.

He had tested beating him, but with no success, while he ran the risk of
exciting him to a dangerous degree of savagery if he should persist in
it. The boy had no weapon about him, unless his jack-knife should be
counted as such, and nothing could be accomplished with that. He asked
himself whether it were possible to dive under the raft and give him two
or three vigorous thrusts with the implement; but, fortunately, the lad
had too much sense to undertake anything of that sort, which, more than
likely, would have resulted in the destruction of himself and sister.

There really seemed no way open for the young hero to do anything at
all, except to follow the advice of his father: "Do all you can for
yourself and then leave the rest to Providence."

"If I could think of anything," said he to Nellie, "I would do it, but
we shall have to wait."

"Maybe when he is rested he will swim off and go ashore."

"I wish he would; but it seems to me that he has got a look in his eye,
which says that pretty soon he will try to enjoy a little more of the
raft than he now does: and when he undertakes it, you can make up your
mind, Nellie, that there will be a row."

"Why not let the raft drift close to land, so as to give him a chance to
get off?" she asked.

"Suppose he doesn't take the chance, which he has now; no, we'll wait
awhile and see what he thinks about it."

So soon as they could feel anything like relief from watching the
passenger, the brother and sister looked at the scene around them, which
was enough to strike any one with awe.

The murky vapor was pouring across the water; burning leaves, sticks,
and large branches of wood seemed to be carried almost horizontally on
the wind, while the blazing forest roared like the ocean when swept by
the monsoon.

Whether the memorable dark day of 1881 still overspread the earth
beyond, the two had no means of knowing; but they did know and feel that
they were enveloped in an awful night, illumined only by the burning
forests about them.

Should the bear fail to harm them, they might well ask themselves the
question, when would they be able to leave the water, in which they had
taken refuge. It was not likely they would be forced to keep to the raft
itself very long, but, after stepping foot on shore, they would be
surrounded, if not by the burning forest itself, by its embers, which
would render traveling perilous for days to come.

Altogether, it will be seen that the situation of the two was as
unpleasant--if, not absolutely dangerous--as it could well be.

Nick was on the point, more than once, of following the advice of his
sister,--to allow the raft to be carried by the wind against the shore,
with the hope that the bear, when his hind legs should touch bottom,
would take himself off; but he was afraid to do so, for it seemed to him
that when the brute should be relieved of the necessity of looking after
himself, he would turn and look after the boy and girl too closely for
their safety.

The very danger, however, that was dreaded more than all others, came
when least expected.

Nick had worked the unwieldy craft out in the pond again and had sat
down beside Nellie, when, with one of his startling sniffs, the bear
made a plunge, which heaved half of his body out of the water and lifted
it upon the raft.

As Nick Ribsam had previously remarked, the structure was not built for
the accommodation of such passengers, and it began sinking, as the
unwonted weight bore it down.

"Don't be scared," said he to his sister; "maybe it's the best thing
that could happen; put your hands on my shoulders and keep cool, and
we'll swim out yet."




CHAPTER XXXVII.

A BRAVE STRUGGLE.


It was a trying ordeal for little Nellie Ribsam; but she met it with the
courage and coolness of her brother. She could not swim a stroke, and,
under heaven, everything depended on him. If she should lose her
self-control, as would be the case with nine tenths of the girls of her
age placed in a similar situation she was likely to drown both herself
and her brother.

But so long as she obeyed instructions, and the bear did not interfere,
they were safe. She placed her hands on the shoulders of Nick, as he
told her to do, and he struck out with his powerful stroke, which he
could keep up for an hour if need be.

The difficulty of the situation was deepened tenfold by the anxiety to
know what the bear meant to do. He had it in his power to overtake both,
and it would have been a trifling matter for him to "dispose" of them
in a twinkling: one or two strokes of his immense paw were sufficient.

It was the aim of Nick, therefore, to get away as speedily as possible;
and he exerted himself to the utmost, glancing continually over his
shoulder, as did the sorely frightened Nellie, who could not avoid a
half gasping scream as the waters closed about her to her chin.

But bruin seemed to be absorbed in the management of the raft, which, in
fact, was more than he could manage. It was all well enough, so long as
it only half supported him; but when he came to lift his huge bulk out
of the water the buoyancy of the float was overcome, and it went down.

The bear did not seem to understand it: a moment before he was resting
upon a mass of logs, and now, when he looked around, they were
invisible, and he was compelled to swim to support himself. He therefore
struck out with a loud splash, and had scarcely done so when the light
pine logs popped up again like so much cork.

The brute turned around and dropped both paws upon them. Finding they
kept afloat, he was too foolish to be content, but repeated his
performance, and, as a consequence, speedily found himself pawing the
water again to keep his own head above the surface.

This second failure seemed to disgust him, and he paid no further
attention to the logs, but headed for the shore, which was so close at
hand that he reached it in a minute or two.

This proceeding on the part of the bear, it will be understood, was of
great benefit to the brother and sister, who improved it to the utmost.
It occupied a brief time, during which Nick swam strongly and steadily,
and before the brute was master of the situation Nick's feet touched
bottom, and, taking the hand of Nellie in his own, they walked ashore.

"Where is he?" asked the girl, the moment their feet rested on dry land.

"He isn't far off," replied Nick, "and I don't think he cares to disturb
us, but I would rather keep him at a distance."

It may be set down as certain that Nick and Nellie were never in such
serious peril from the beast as they believed. The bear was of the
ordinary black kind, found in the Middle States, which is not
particularly savage, and often passes a person without offering him
harm.

It is only when the hunter and his dogs assail the brute, or when he is
driven by hunger, that he will boldly attack a person.

Besides this, the animal of which I am speaking, had, no doubt, been
routed out of his lair in the woods by the approach of the fire, and it
was the most he could do to reach the pond in time to save himself. This
accounted for his excessive fatigue, which made him loth to enter the
water, where he knew he must swim, and which caused him, after entering
it, immediately to make for the raft, that he might avail himself of its
support.

He had no purpose of molesting the children, and was too indolent to
resent the insignificant attack made upon him by Nick with the stick.

But it was not to be supposed that the boy and girl could feel any
assurance on this point, and their fright was such as would have come
to any older person placed as they were.

It was only through the protection of a wonderful Providence that they
had escaped thus far from the fate of hundreds who, in different parts
of the country, fell victims to the innumerable forest fires.

When the two emerged from the water, they saw nothing of the bear that
had caused them so much disquietude. He had probably headed for the
other side of the pond, and was now shut out from view by the volume of
smoke which intervened.

"He'll be here after us," said the alarmed Nellie, whose nervousness was
excusable; "and I wish you would hurry away."

"I don't think there is any need to be scared, after all," replied her
brother; "the bear has all he can do to look after himself, without
bothering us."

The fugitives were in a pitiable plight. Nellie's garments were soaked
by the water through which she had passed, but the heavy heat of the air
prevented her suffering from cold, though the clinging garments caused
her to feel ill at ease; and, like her tidy mother, she longed to be at
home, that she might change them for clean, dry ones.

When Nick found they had to leave the raft, he caught up his shoes, with
the stockings stuffed in them, and, hastily tying the strings together,
slung them around his neck. He did not forget, in the excitement of the
moment, that they were indispensable.

But there was no way of saving coat, vest and hat, without running more
risk than any one ought to run, and the lad let them go, hoping that,
possibly, he might recover them after a time.

He had scarcely set his feet upon the ground, when he took them off
again. The earth was baking hot to the water's edge, and a live ember,
which the ashes concealed from sight, was revealed when the bare foot
was placed upon it.

Nick cooled his blistering toes, and then, as quick as possible, drew on
his wet shoes and stockings.

"I would be in a pretty fix if barefoot," said he, "I wouldn't have been
able to walk home through these woods for a week or less."

It was plain to be seen that the fury of the conflagration had spent
itself, so far as it affected this portion of the wood. That tornado of
the flame, which swept everything before it, had leaped across the pond,
and was speeding onward until it should die out from want of fuel.

In its path was the blackness of desolation. The trees were still
burning, but it was in a smoldering, smoking way, with blazing branches
here and there, dropping piecemeal to the ground. The flames, which
charged forward as they do through the dry prairie grass, had passed by,
and the brother and sister had now the opportunity to attempt to reach
home.

But it would be hard to overestimate the distress caused by the
atmosphere which the forest fires left behind them. There are many gases
and vapors which we cannot breathe; but the trouble about smoke is that
although we can manage to get along with it when it is not too dense, it
is excessively irritating to the lungs.

Several minutes passed, during which little trouble was experienced,
and then the two were forced to cough and gasp until they almost sank to
the ground from exhaustion. Occasionally the vapor would lift, and,
floating away, leave the air below comparatively pure, and then the
black and blue atmosphere, heavy with impurities, would descend and wrap
them about as with a garment.

"There's one thing sure," said Nick, when he found himself able to speak
with some degree of comfort.

"What is that?" asked his sister.

"This will gradually get better and better."

"I don't see how it can get any worse," was the truthful answer of
Nellie, who felt as though she had stood all she could bear.

Since the danger of being caught in the flames was gone, the two were at
liberty to venture in any direction they chose.

"We'll make the start, any way!" said Nick, with his old resolution of
manner; "keep close to me, and, if you see any new bears, don't run into
the woods to hide without saying something to me."




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

BEAR AND FORBEAR.


"See here," said Nick Ribsam, stopping suddenly, after taking only a few
steps, "I don't like this idea of going home and leaving so many of my
clothes behind. That's a good coat and vest, and the hat is my Sunday
one."

"You ain't going back to get them, Nick, when the bear is waiting for
you!" exclaimed the sister; "if you do, I just think you haven't got any
sense at all--now there! that's all there is about _that_."

This was a severe denunciation, but it did not deter the lad from
turning directly about and hurrying to the spot where he had landed,
when forced to help Nellie ashore.

A strong breeze was still blowing, so that the craft, whether the bear
was clinging to it or not, would be sure to come to land again. Nick did
not know that the animal had left it, and he was not foolish enough to
invite the beast to assail him.

The logs, relieved from their burden, were floating over the surface,
and the lad caught sight of them but a short distance off, steadily
approaching the shore.

"The raft must have gone under with the coat, vest, and hat," he said,
watching the floating mass, "and I should think my clothes would have
been lost; but there is something on the logs that looks like my coat
and vest. It would be odd if they had kept their place."

Naturally, the whole attention of Nick was absorbed in this matter; and,
when he found that the wind was carrying the raft and its freight toward
another point, he moved along the margin so as to anticipate its
arrival.

As he did so, like the renowned Captain John Smith when pursued by
Powhatan's warriors, he paid no attention to where his feet led him. He
was studying the raft, as best he could through the smoky darkness, and,
knowing the shore as well as he did, he saw no need of looking downward.

All at once his feet struck a large, soft mass, and, before he could
check himself, he pitched headlong over it, as though it were a bale of
cloth in his path. The nimble boy was on his feet like a flash, and,
quick as he was, he was not a moment too soon.

He had caught the ominous growl, and he knew the bear had got in his way
again, as it had persisted in doing before.

It did seem singular that the boy and bruin should meet so often, and it
may be that the animal, that was resting himself, lost patience over
such persecution, for he raised his huge body and made for the
frightened boy.

It was an alarming situation for the latter, who did not lose his
presence of mind. He knew much of the nature of the animal, though he
had never before been brought face to face in this fashion with a wild
one.

Desperate as was the haste with which Nick Ribsam fled, he did not
forget to run directly away from his sister, so as to prevent her
becoming involved in this new danger.

Nor did the lad make any outcry, that could only have resulted in
frightening her, but he simply devoted all his energy to getting away
from his pursuer, whose whole savage nature seemed to have been aroused
by the last disturbance.

Who shall not say that bruin did not identify the youngster as the one
that had rapped him so smartly over the snout when he was seeking a
resting-place on the raft? If such were the fact, it cannot be wondered
that the beast pursued the fellow with such persistency.

Nick Ribsam was considered a rapid runner by his playmates, but it took
only a minute or two for him to find out he was no match for his
pursuer, who, starting only a short distance to the rear, was
overhauling him "hand-over-hand."

The boy hoped that the scorching earth would keep the beast from chasing
him with too much ardor, but it did not; and, as there was no other
