plan of getting the warriors to the front and then dashing back and
helping them out.  This was a wild scheme, and involved great personal
risk to himself, for he was sure to be punished for rendering aid whose
discovery was inevitable.

At the very moment he was about to make the attempt, Grimcke and Long
gave him unexpected help by opening their united fire from the front
upon the warriors marshalling for the decisive charge.

This afforded him just the pretext he wanted, to order the Murhapas to
hasten to the other side of the building to assist in what was in
contemplation there, though, even with such a movement under way, it
will be seen that the right place for a portion of the savages was at
the rear, in order to head off the very thing that was attempted.

Thus it was, that, while the two explorers were congratulating
themselves on the success of their clever scheme, they never suspected
that its success was due to their giant friend, who kept himself so
well in the background that neither of them caught sight of him.

Having got his men away, Ziffak slipped back with the purpose of
carrying out the rest of the plan he had formed; but before he could
reach the rear entrance, he caught sight of Professor Grimcke running
like a deer toward the woods.

Ziffak was puzzled, not knowing that his friend had preceded him, and
he dashed into the building to hurry him out.  As he came in at one
door, Waggaman and the Murhapas swarmed in at the other, and
pandemonium was let loose.

The certainty of another murderous fire from the rifles of the
defenders caused some lagging at the threshold, but those in the rear
forced those at the front forward, and the next moment the mob was
inside.

Still there was no sound of firearms, though, the savages were crowding
into both apartments.  Some one kicked the ashes from the embers, and
the blaze which followed made known the astounding fact that both of
the white men had fled.

Ziffak seemed to be in a towering rage because such a blunder had been
made, and called upon the fleetest runners to follow him.

Out of the door he went as if shot from the throat of a columbiad, with
a procession of sinewy-limbed warriors at his heels.  All ran as fast
as they could, though none were his equal in fleetness.

It need hardly be said that Ziffak took mighty good care that he did
not pursue the course of Professor Grimcke, and presumably that of his
companion who preceded him.  Instead of aiming for the woods, he
diverged toward the river, and seemed to find it necessary to shout and
yell every second or two at the top of his voice.

His followers may have imagined he was laboring under uncontrollable
rage or deemed it necessary to keep their courage up to the highest
point by such means; but the two fugitives who had joined each other in
the woods, and were picking their way with the utmost care, held a
strong suspicion that the prodigious shouts were intended for their
special benefit.  At any rate, they accepted them as such, and took
pains to continue their flight in a different course from that of the
howling Murhapas.

It did not require Ziffak long to find out that the fugitives were
irrecoverably gone, and he came back with his report to the king.

There he was met by astounding news.  Burkhardt had been slain by a
poisoned javelin, and Ariel, the beloved daughter of the ruler, had
been seen in full flight toward the enchanted lake in the company of
the execrated white man, Ashman.  Pursuit was to be organized at once,
and, though Ziffak was to take part, yet the chosen warriors were to be
led by the king in person.




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE BURNING MOUNTAIN.

The tunnel through which Ashman propelled the canoe containing himself
and Ariel, was more than a hundred yards in length.  It was only for
the smallest distance that the craft was in darkness, when the water
began to reflect light and reveal its outlines.

A few minutes later the tunnel was passed, and they debouched into an
expansion of the enchanted lake.  The second division was similar to
the other and almost as large, but its appearance was tenfold more
wonderful.

The sheet of water may be said to have been divided into two nearly
equal parts by the narrow tunnel running under the mass of rocks
described.  One division was in the outer air, after the usual fashion
of lakes, while the other was wholly underground.

The interior lake was nearly circular in shape, with an arching roof
hundreds of feet high.  It was surrounded by towering crags, and
volcanic masses of stone, which gave it an appearance different from
anything on which Fred Ashman had ever looked.  Nothing grander,
wilder, more picturesque or romantic can be conceived.  It was a scene
which an explorer could stand for hours and contemplate in rapt
admiration.

But the most amazing feature of this underground lake was the way in
which it was illuminated, so that every portion stood out in as bold
relief as if under the flaming sun of mid-day.

At the western side, the shore, as was the case in nearly all other
directions, was a mass of jagged rocks, piled upon each other in the
wildest confusion.  Beyond these rocks, was a vast chasm above the
level of the lake, and extending right and left for a distance of fifty
rods.  This huge chasm was one mass of crimson light, whose rays
pierced every nook and cranny on every side of the lake.

The eye gazing in that direction saw something similar to that which
greets the traveller in the far north, when viewing the play of the
aurora borealis in the horizon, or when the red sun is rising from its
ocean bed.

This enormous opening was so surcharged with light that Ashman, after
contemplating it but a minute or two, did not need to ask its source.
Beyond the area of illumination was the burning mountain whose
blood-red glow covered the entire surface and shores of the underground
portion of the enchanted lake.  The volcano had been aflame for ages,
and was likely to continue to burn for centuries to come.

Such an eternal conflagration must have an outlet for the vast quantity
of vapor generated, and Ashman wondered that he had not noticed the
ascending smoke on his way thither.  He recalled that when he and his
friend were coming up the Xingu, far below the last rapids, they
observed a dark cloud resting in the western horizon.  There was no
thought at that time that it was caused by a burning mountain, but such
must have been the fact.  The most singular fact was, that while on his
way across the lake to the tunnel, he had failed to notice and remark
it.

There was a steady draft in the direction of the flaming cavern.  He
had observed it while paddling through the tunnel where it was strong
enough to assist in the propulsion of the canoe.  It was caused by the
ascent of the vapor through the chimney of the fiery mountain, and
averted the intolerable heat that otherwise would have been felt over
every portion of the lake.  As it was, a moderate increase of
temperature was perceptible.

Ashman was tempted to paddle the canoe to the black rocks which
separated the chasm from the lake, and he timidly moved the blade,
restrained by the fear of something in the nature of a "back draft,"
which might consume them before they could escape.

Ariel assured him that she had never encountered or heard of anything
of the kind, though she had often visited this remarkable region in the
company of her father.  Thereupon Ashman sent the boat ahead faster
than before, and a minute later the bow touched the rocky wharf.

Stepping out, he drew the bow upon the rocks, so as to hold it fast,
and, extending his hand, assisted her to shore.  Then he drew the craft
still further up, and, taking her hand again in his own, began picking
their way over the jagged bowlders and stones to the edge of the
volcano.

From the margin of the lake to the other side of the mass of rocks was
a hundred feet.  This may be defined as a solid wall, shutting out the
water from the burning mountain.  The rocks rose to a height of a dozen
rods or so, attaining which a spectator found himself half-way across
the dividing ridge, where, viewed from the lake, his figure looked as
if stamped in ink on the crimson background.

It was here that the lovers paused and viewed the striking picture
spread out before their vision.

That which they saw might properly be considered the crater of the
volcano.  It was four or five acres in extent, irregular in contour,
and so filled with gases and vapors that one could not see the bottom,
while the jagged boundary on the farther side came out to view only at
intervals, when the obstructing smoke was swept aside.

Spiral columns of black vapor twisted swiftly upward from the fiery
depths, sometimes side by side, and sometimes they would unite and
climb toward the opening above, like a couple of huge serpents
struggling together.  The air quivered and pulsated in certain
portions, as if with fervid heat, and Ashman fancied once or twice that
he caught glimpses of a vast mass of molten stuff, far down in the
mountain, surging; seething and turning upon itself with terrific
violence.  But the glare was so dazzling that it was like staring at
the sun, and he was compelled to withdraw his gaze.

The opening above, through which all this vapor and gas effected its
escape into the clear atmosphere outside, was of irregular outline and
no more than twenty feet across.  It was at a great height above the
spectators, and ought to have been visible many miles in every
direction.

Now and then Ashman caught the odor of the sulphurous fumes rising from
the naming depth, and he could not help reflecting that if the
ascending vapors should swerve toward them only for a minute or two,
they would be asphyxiated before they could get away; but he could not
shrink, when his lovely companion stood so boldly by his side, unmoved
by the impressive scene.

When he had become accustomed in a degree to the sight, the like of
which he had never viewed before, he recalled that they could not
occupy a more conspicuous position, in the event of being pursued by
their enemies to the underground lake.

As we have explained, they were standing on the highest portion of the
rocky wall, separating the burning mountain from the subterranean
portion of the enchanted lake.  In this situation, they were in sight
from every portion of the shore; any one entering by the tunnel, as
they had done, would descry them almost at once, because of the vivid
background against which their figures were thrown.

This fact led Ashman to turn to his love and suggest that they should
leave the spot.  She nodded her head in acquiescence, and, still
clasping hands, they began picking their way down among the bowlders to
the spot where they had left their canoe a short time before.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE PURSUERS.

Haffgo, king of the Murhapas, intended to keep his promise to Ziffak,
so far as permitting the explorers to remain in his village until the
morrow, at which time he intended that the men should be allowed to go
in safety.

But the barbarian was very similar to some of us whose resentment grows
with reflection.  When he recalled the admiring glances of the handsome
young member of the company towards his beloved Ariel, his anger became
intense, fanned by the strong suspicion that the princess herself felt
some interest in the stranger.

At this critical time, Waggaman put in an appearance.  The ruffian was
shrewd enough to see his opportunity, and it took him but a few minutes
to rouse him to the exploding point.  He determined that every one of
the whites should die, and he ordered the assault which has already
been described.

As has been explained, the king kept within his home, while the attack
was under way; but since he resided adjoining the structure which was
assaulted, he was aware of every phase of the progress.

His rage has been hinted at because of the repulse of his warriors
directly under his own eyes; but when he came to learn that the youth
against whom his resentment burned so hotly was not within the
building; that the two who had fought so bravely had escaped with their
native helpers; that his own daughter the princess was absent; that she
had been seen fleeing with the white youth in the direction of the
enchanted lake:--when all this became known to the ruler, it may be
said that his fury was such that no language could do it justice.  It
is not impossible that the despot felt thus himself, for, without
pausing to give utterance to a few of his imaginings, he made instant
preparations to follow the couple to the region which he never
permitted a white man to look upon.

A native woman had seen the princess pass up the side of the river,
followed a few minutes later by the young man.  Her curiosity led her
to watch them.  She saw the two meet and stand for some time in loving
converse.  Then one of the white men stole behind them and was about to
fire his dreadful weapon, when Ziffak hurled his terrible javelin which
pinned him to the ground.  Then the native woman hastened to the palace
to tell the news, but she could not gain the chance for some time.

When the king turned upon his brother for an explanation of what he had
done, Ziffak was prepared.  It was the intention of Burkhardt to shoot
not the white man but the princess herself, because she had refused his
love.  He heard Burkhardt mutter those words to himself and it was
because of those words that Ziffak drove his javelin through his body.

King Haffgo looked sharply at his kinsman when he made this unblushing
response, but his doubts if there were any quickly vanished, when he
recalled the impetuosity with which he had attacked the defenders in
the house and the vigor of his pursuit and his evident indignation and
chagrin at the escape of the two white men.  No, Ziffak might talk
plainly with his royal brother, but when the time for action came he
was a true Murhapa, who knew only his duty to his king.

Besides, the little flurry between the two had helped to clear away the
fogs of misunderstanding as the lightning often purifies the murky
atmosphere.  The pursuit of the lovers was quickly organized, for they
now occupied the thoughts of the king to the exclusion of everything
else.  Grimcke and Long could not be far off, and a vigorous hunt was
likely to discover one or both of them, but the king gave orders that
no attempt of the kind should be made.  It was his intention to leave
the village for an indefinite time, and he wished every one of his
warriors to remain while he was absent.  It cannot be said that he was
afraid of such an insignificant force, but there was a strong vein of
superstition in his nature, which caused a vague fear of the men that
had escaped him with such wonderful cleverness.  Individuals who could
do _that_ sort of thing, were capable of doing things still more
marvellous, and to use homely language, King Haffgo was taking no
chances.

The party in pursuit numbered just ten persona including the king,
Ziffak, Waggaman, and the very pick of the tribe.  They were all
splendid fellows, fit to be the body-guard of a king, who, when he laid
aside the robes of cumbrous dress he was accustomed to wear, and
arrayed himself similarly to the warriors, proved himself no mean
leader of such a party.

Any one looking upon the little company would have been most impressed
by the fact that there were nine dusky barbarians, half naked and as
black as Africans, under the guidance of a man as fair as any European;
and yet, as the reader knows, the most prominent warrior of the party
was the brother of that king, dusky, tall and a giant in stature.

A tribe living in a country as well watered as the Matto Grosso, is
sure to be well provided with the means of navigation, though the
explorers, when they first reached the neighborhood of the rapids,
deemed there was an unusual absence of such craft.  A canoe, longer
even than that used by our friends in ascending from the Amazon, was
carried a short distance down the bank and launched in the Xingu.  Five
of the warriors seized their long paddles and swung them with the skill
of veterans.  They were accustomed to that kind of work, and sent the
craft up the current with much greater speed than would have been
suspected, even by those accustomed to see such work.

Two of the dusky occupants were furnished with bows and arrows, while
Waggaman carried his rifle.  Thus every species of weapon known to the
Murhapas was in the boat.

King Haffgo sat at the stern, his brow dark and threatening, his arms
folded and his lips set.  His thoughts were too deep for utterance and
no one ventured to disturb him.  Though the pale countenance was
outwardly calm, yet a volcano was raging in that breast, hot and
furious enough to burst out and consume the barbarian.

Just in front of him, Ziffak was facing toward the prow, directing the
actions of the crew, though for a time little of that was required of
him.  Waggaman was at the prow, silent, glum, scowling.  He did not
speak for a long while, but, now and then, glanced at Ziffak.  When he
did so, he was pretty sure to find the black eyes of the head chieftain
fixed upon him.

The two thoroughly distrusted each other.  Waggaman knew why that
javelin had been driven through the body of his associate and, though
the convict felt little sorrow for the loss of his companion, yet he
hated the chieftain with a deadly hatred, well aware as he was that the
feeling was thoroughly reciprocated by Ziffak.

Whether King Haffgo suspected the truth cannot be known, nor is it of
importance to know.  All the energy of his nature was concentrated in
the emotion of fury against Fred Ashman, who had committed the
unparalleled presumption of robbing him of his daughter; and even
against that lovely maiden he was so incensed that he stood ready to
bury his spear in her snowy bosom.

Though it may have seemed strange to Ashman that Ziffak had ordered him
to make all haste to the enchanted lake, instead of starting on a
direct flight through the woods, returning to the Xingu at a lower
point, yet the sagacious chieftain had the best of reasons for his
course, as will soon appear.

Had Ashman fled through the forest, the fact would have been discovered
at daybreak, if not before, and such a vigorous pursuit would have been
pressed as to render escape out of the question.  There was a
possibility of outwitting Haffgo by the flight to the lake, though it
was remote enough to cause the giant warrior to shudder when he
reflected upon it.

That which caused Ziffak regret was, that he had not paused long enough
before parting from the couple, to arrange a better understanding with
them.  As it was, he was mostly in the dark concerning their movements,
and greatly handicapped by the necessity of appearing to be the devoted
ally of his royal brother.

Under the powerful propulsion of the five paddles, the long narrow
canoe sped swiftly up the Xingu, and, sooner than even Ziffak
anticipated, it turned into the narrow stream leading to the enchanted
lake.  Along this it sped like a swallow until the huge rock with its
sentinel came in sight.

It was here that King Haffgo, for the first time, showed some interest
in his surroundings.  He scanned the massive rock closely and
manifestly was surprised that the guard did not rise to his feet and
challenge them.

Observing that the figure remained motionless, he commanded the craft
to approach the rock.  This was silently done, the boat halting with
the prow touching the mass of black stone.

Still the sentinel moved not, all unaware of his peril.  One keen
glance showed he was committing the unpardonable sin of sleeping at his
post.

Rising quickly to his feet, the king stood upright for an instant, and
then, with a furious exclamation, drove the javelin which he snatched
from the hands of one of the warriors through the breast of the
unfaithful servant, who uttered but a single groan as he perished by
the hands of his master and sovereign.

Then Haffgo commanded one of his men to take his place.  The fellow
instantly sprang from the boat and took his station on the rock, as the
successor of him who had died so ignominiously.  Little fear of his
falling asleep on his post.

A minute later the boat shot out upon the moonlit surface of the
enchanted lake.  There the occupants used their eyes for all they were
worth, the craft making a partial circuit of the sheet of water.  There
was a possibility that the fugitives were there, though it was slight.
