before--Gracious alive!"

Just then Tom felt as if some one had jabbed a burning needle into his
neck.  Almost at the same instant came a similar dagger thrust on the
top of his head, where he always wore his hair short.  Uttering a gasp
of affright, he leaped from his seat, with a score of fierce hornets
buzzing about his ears.  The terrified glance around the room showed
that the teacher had slipped noiselessly out of the door, but, before
doing so, he had raised the lid of his desk to its fullest extent.

The next moment Tom bounded through the door, striking at the insects
that were doing painful execution about the exposed parts of his body.
It was not until after a long run that he was entirely freed of them
and was able to take an inventory of his wounds.

It was a lesson the lad never forgot.  In the final contest between him
and his teacher, he was conquered and he admitted it.  Mr. Lathrop made
a study of his character, and having proven himself physically his
master, set out to acquire the moral conquest that was needed to
complete the work.  It need hardly be added that he succeeded, for he
was a thoughtful, conscientious instructor of youth, who loved his
work, and who toiled as one who knows that he must render an account of
his stewardship to Him who is not only loving and merciful, but just.




A YOUNG HERO.

Reuben Johnson leaned on his hoe, and, looking up at the sun, wondered
whether, as in the Biblical story, it had not been stationary for
several hours.  He was sure it was never so long in descending to the
horizon.

"Wake up, Rube," sharply called his Uncle Peter, smartly hoeing another
row a few paces behind him, "doan be idlin' your time; de sun am foah
hours high yit."

The nephew started and raised his implement, but stopped.  He was
staring at the corner of the fence just ahead, where sat the jug of
cold water, with the Revolutionary musket leaning against the rails.
The crows were so annoying that the double-loaded weapon was kept ready
to be used against the pests when they ventured too near.

"See dar, uncle!" said Rube in a scared voice.  The old man also ceased
work, adjusted his iron-rimmed spectacles, and looked toward the fence.

Within a few feet of where the flint lock musket inclined against the
rails, a yellow dog was trying to push his way through.  Watching his
efforts for a few minutes, the elder said:

"Rube, I wish we had de gun; dat dog ain't peaceable."

"He am mad; dis ain't de place fur us."

"Slip down to de fence and got de gun; dat's a good boy!"

"Gracious!" gasped the youth; "it am right dar by de dog."

"He won't notice you; run behind him and be quick 'bout it, or he'll
chaw us bofe to def."

"He'll chaw _me_ suah if I goes near him," was the reply of Rube, who
felt little ardor for the task his relative urged upon him.

"Ain't it better dat _one_ ob us should go dead, dan bofe should be
obstinguished?" asked the uncle reproachfully.

"Dat 'pends which am de one to go dead; if it am _me_, it am better for
_you_, but I don't see whar _I'm_ to come in; 'spose you see wheder you
can got de gun--"

"Dar he comes!" whispered Uncle Pete.

Sure enough the cur, having twisted his body between the rails, began
trotting toward the couple that were watching him with such interest.

There was good reason for fear, since the canine was afflicted with the
rabies in the worst form.  He showed no froth at the jaws, for animals
thus affected do not, but his eyes were fiery, his mouth dry, the
consuming fever burning up all moisture.  He moaned as if in pain, his
torture causing him to snap at everything in reach.  He had bitten
shrubbery, branches, wood and other objects, and now made for the
persons with the purpose of using his teeth on them.

"Rube," said his uncle, "stand right whar you am!  No use ob runnin',
for he'll cotch you; when he gets nigh 'nough bang him wid your hoe; if
dat don't fotch him, I'll gib him anoder whack and dat'll finish him
suah."

Fate seemed to have ordered that the younger person should hold the van
in the peril, though he was tempted to take his place by his relative,
so that the attack of the dog should be met by both at the same
instant.  This promised to be effective, but the time was too brief to
permit any plan of campaign.

The brute was already within a hundred yards of Rube, who, with his hoe
drawn back, as though it were a club, tried to calm his nerves for the
struggle.  He would have fled, had he not known that that would draw
pursuit to himself.  He was inclined to urge his uncle to join him in a
break for freedom, the two taking diverging routes.  Since the canine
could not chase both at the same time, such a course was certain to
save one, but, inasmuch as the youth was at the front, he knew he must
be the victim, and the prospect of a mad dog nipping at his heels, with
fangs surcharged with one of the most fearful venoms known, was too
terrifying to be borne.  He, therefore, braced himself, and, with a
certain dignity and courage, held his ground.

A dog suffering from the rabies often shows odd impulses.  This one was
within fifty feet of Rube, when he turned at right angles and trotted
toward the other side of the cornfield.

"_Now's_ your time, chile!" called Uncle Pete; "got de gun quick, and
if he comes back we'll be ready for him."

It was the first suggestion that struck the nephew favorably, and he
acted upon it at once.  The dog might change his mind again and return
to the attack, in which event no weapon could equal a loaded gun.

As Rube ran with his broad-brimmed hat flapping in his eyes, he kept
glancing over his shoulder, to make sure the brute was not following
him, while his uncle held his position, with his hoe grasped and his
eye fixed on the animal, trotting between the hills of corn.  He
managed also to note the action of his nephew, who was making good
time, and whose progress caused the hearts of the two to heat high with
hope.

Had the fence ahead of the dog been open, doubtless he would have soon
passed out of sight; but, as if recalling his trouble in entering the
field, and possibly seeing his error in leaving two victims, he stopped
only an instant in front of the rails, when he turned and came at a
swifter gait than before, straight for Uncle Pete.

The latter stared a second or two and then shouted:

"Quick, Rube! he means _me_ dis time!"  And he dashed off, not to join
his nephew, but to reach the side of the field opposite the nose of the
animal.

By this time the youth had his hands on the smoothbore musket and his
courage came back.  He saw his uncle crashing over the hills, the
picture of dismay, while the dog rapidly gained on him.

"Hey dar! hey dar!" shouted Rube, breaking into a run and trying to
draw attention to himself.  But the brute only sped the faster.  He was
near the middle of the procession, but gaining on the fugitive, who had
thrown aside his hoe, flung his hat to the ground, and was making
better progress than when he used to run races with the boys in his
younger days.

The fence was near and he strained every nerve.  It looked as if man
and dog would reach it at the same moment, but the former put forth an
extra spurt and arrived a pace or two ahead, with the cur at his heels.

Rube, however, was not far to the rear.  Seeing the crisis had come, he
stopped short, brought the musket to his shoulder, and, taking the best
aim he could, let fly with the whole load that clogged several inches
of the barrel.

He did not observe at the moment of pressing the trigger that his uncle
and the dog were in line, but it could have made no difference, since
the shot had to be made at that instant or not at all.

Just as the weapon was fired, Uncle Pete with a great bound cleared the
fence, landing on his hands and knees; and, rolling over on his back,
kicked the air with such vigor that his shoes flew off, one after the
other, as if keeping time with his frenzied outcries.

The yellow cur was scared, as a shark is sometimes driven off by the
loud splashing of a swimmer, and, though he leaped the fence, he
wheeled again, and, without harming the man, ran down the highway
toward the Woodvale school.

For a moment after firing, Rube Johnson believed he was killed.  The
flint shot a spark among the powder grains, there was a flash, a hiss,
and then, as the fire worked its way to the charge inside, the
explosion came and he toppled over, half stunned, with the gun flying a
dozen feet away.

But his fear for his relative brought him to his feet, and he hurried
to the old gentleman, who was climbing uncertainly to an upright
posture.

"What's de matter?" asked Rube; "you ain't bit."

"I know dat; I warn't yellin' on _dat_ 'count."

"What fur den?"

"You black rascal, you shot me instid ob de yaller dog."

"Lemme see," said Rube, turning his uncle round and scanning him from
head to foot.

"I done pepper you purty well, uncle, but dare ain't any ob de slugs
dat hit yer--only de fine bird shot."

"How many ob dem?" was the rueful question.

"I don't tink dar's more dan five or six hundred; Aunt Jemimer can gib
her spar time de next six weeks pickin' 'em out; she'll enj'y it, but
dat shot ob mine scared off de mad dog, and yer oughter be tankful to
me, uncle, all yer life."

It was recess at the Woodvale school, and the forty-odd boys and girls
were having a merry time on the playgrounds, which included the broad
highway.  Within the building, Mr. Hobbs, the young teacher was busy
"setting copies," his only companion just then being Tod Clymer, a
pale-faced cripple, who, unable to take part in the sports of the other
boys, preferred to stay within doors and con his lessons, in which he
was always far in advance of the rest.

A strange confusion outside caused him to raise his head and look
through the window near him.

"Oh, Mr. Hobbs," he said, "there's a mad dog!"

The teacher started up, and saw the yellow cur running about the
grounds, snapping at the children, while a couple of boys had already
raised the fearful cry, and there was a scattering in all directions.
Although without any weapon, the instructor was on the point of
hurrying out to the help of the children, when he observed the canine
coming toward the outer door.  He tried to close it in his face, but
the brute was too quick and was inside before he could be stopped.  He
made for the second door, leading into the session-room, but, in this
instance, the teacher slammed it shut just in time.

Instead of going out the dog slunk into the entry and crawled under a
bench, so nearly behind the outer door that he was invisible to any one
beyond.

"Mr. Hobbs," said Tod Clymer a moment later, "will you please help me
out of the window?"

"I think you are safer here," replied the teacher, "for he cannot reach
you, but you will not be able to get away from him outside."

"I want to leave, please, very much."

It was a strange request, and the teacher waited some minutes before
complying, but the heart of the lame boy was so set upon it, that he
finally assisted him to the window furthest from where the dog was
crouching, gently lifted him down to the ground, and then passed his
crutches to him.

"Now, Tod," said he kindly, "don't tarry a moment, for there's no
saying how soon he will be outside again.  The other children are away,
but you cannot run like them."

"Thank you," replied Tod, who never forgot to be courteous, as he
carefully adjusted the collars of his crutches under his shoulders.

Mr. Hobbs motioned from the window for several of the boys to keep off.
With a natural curiosity, they were stealing closer to the building, in
the hope of finding out what the rabid dog was doing.

The teacher, seeing his gestures were understood, turned back, when to
his surprise, he noticed the top of Tom Clymer's straw hat, as it
slowly rose and sank, moving along the front of the building toward the
front door.

Instead of hurrying off, as he should have done, the lad was making his
way toward the very spot where the dreadful animal was crouching.

"Why, Tod, what are you doing?" called Mr. Hobbs through the open
window; "you will surely be bitten."

Instead of replying or heeding the words, the lad turned his pale face
toward his friend and shook his head, as a warning for him to make no
noise.  Then he resumed his advance to the open outer door, doing so
with great care and stealth, as if afraid of being heard by the brute.

The entrance to the old Woodvale school building was reached by two
steps, consisting of the same number of broad high stones worn smooth
by the feet of the hundreds of children that had trod them times
without number.  To make his way into the entry where the pupils hung
their hats and bonnets on the double rows of pegs, Tod had to move
slowly and carefully use his crutches.  Being tipped with iron he could
not set them down on the smooth stones without causing noise.

But he acted without hesitation.  The teacher read his purpose and knew
it was useless to try to check him.  He leaned his head out of the
window and held his breath, while he watched him.

Tod never faltered, though none could have understood the danger he ran
better than he.  He had a brother and sister among the children that
had scattered in such haste before the snapping cur, and who were
gathering again around the building despite the warning gesture of the
teacher.

He could not know whether they had all escaped or not, but he was sure
that if the dog came forth again, more than one of them must suffer,
and in those days there was no Pasteur with his wonderful cure to whom
the afflicted ones could be taken.

Tod did not tremble, though it seemed to him the brute must hear the
tumultuous throbbing of his heart and rush forth.  Puny as was his
strength, he meant that, if he did so, he would steady himself on his
one support, and grasping the other with both hands, strike the dog
with might and main.  It is doubtful whether the blow would have
stunned the dog, for the little fellow's confidence in himself was
greater than his bodily powers warranted.

At the moment he rested the end of the crutch on the smooth surface of
the second stone, it slipped, and only by a strong wrench did he save
himself from falling.  The noise was heard by the animal, who was not
six feet distant, and he emitted another moan, which can never be
forgotten by those that have heard it.

Certain that the cur was about to rush forth, Tod steadied himself on
the single crutch, and, reversing the other, held it firmly in his weak
hands.  He knew the shuffling sound was caused by the animal moving:
uneasily about the entry, and it was strange he did not burst through
the open door.  But he did not do so, and, like a flash, the cripple
shifted his weapon in place under his shoulder.  Then, with the same
coolness he had shown from the first, he reached his hand forward and
grasped the latch.

The smart pull he gave, however, did not stir it.  It resisted the
effort, as though it was fastened in position.  If such were the fact,
his scheme was futile.

Setting down both crutches, Tod now leaned against the jamb to prevent
himself from falling, seized the handle with both hands, and drew back
suddenly and with all his might.  This time the door yielded and was
closed.

As it did so, the rabid animal flung himself against it with a violence
that threatened to carry it off its hinges, but it remained firm and he
was a prisoner.

"You are a hero!" called the teacher in a voice tremulous with
suppressed emotion.

"I guess we've got him fast, but look out, Mr. Hobbs, that he doesn't
reach you."

"I think there is little danger of that," said the other, looking
anxiously at the inner door, "but we must get help to dispose of him
before he can do further injury."

By this time, so many of the children had come back to the playgrounds
that several of those living near were sent home for assistance.  It
quickly arrived; for Reuben Johnson and his uncle lost no time in
spreading the news, and three young men, each with a loaded gun,
appeared on the scene, eager to dispose of the dangerous animal.  The
latter was at such disadvantage that this was done without trouble or
risk.

Providentially none of the children had been bitten, though more than
one underwent a narrow escape.  Such animals as had felt the fangs of
the rabid cur were slain, and thus no harm resulted from the brief run
of the brute.




OVERREACHED.

Bushrod, or "Bush" Wyckoff was only twelve years old when he went to
work for Zeph Ashton, who was not only a crusty farmer, but one of the
meanest men in the country, and his wife was well fitted to be the life
partner of such a parsimonious person.

They had no children of their own, and had felt the need for years of a
willing, nimble-footed youngster to do the odd chores about the house,
such as milking cows, cutting and bringing in wood, running of errands,
and the scores of odd little jobs which are easy enough for boys, but
sorely try the stiff and rheumatic limbs of a man in the decline of
life.

Bush was a healthy little fellow--not very strong for his years, but
quick of movement, bright-witted, willing, and naturally a general
favorite.  The misfortunes which suddenly overtook his home roused the
keenest sympathy of his neighbors.  His father was a merchant in New
York, who went to and from the metropolis each week day morning and
evening, to his pleasant little home in New Jersey.  One day his
lifeless body was brought thither, and woe and desolation came to the
happy home.  He was killed in a railway accident.

The blow was a terrible one, and for weeks it seemed as if his stricken
widow would follow him across the dark river; but her Christian
fortitude and her great love for their only child sustained her in her
awful grief, and she was even able to thank her Heavenly Father that
her dear boy was spared to her.

But how true it is that misfortunes rarely come singly.  Her husband
had amassed a competency sufficient to provide comfortably for those
left behind; but his confidence in his fellow-men was wofully betrayed.
He was one of the bondsmen of a public official who made a hasty
departure to Canada, one evening, leaving his business in such a shape
that his securities were compelled to pay fifty thousand dollars.  Two
others were associated with Mr. Wyckoff, and with the aid of their
tricky lawyers they managed matters so that four-fifths of the loss
fell upon the estate of the deceased merchant.

The result swept it away as utterly as were the dwellings in the
Johnstown Valley by the great flood.  The widow and her boy left their
home and moved into a little cottage, with barely enough left to keep
the wolf of starvation from the door.

It was then that Bush showed the stuff of which he was made.  He
returned one afternoon and told his mother, in his off-hand way, that
he had engaged to work through the summer months for Mr. Ashton, who
not only agreed to pay him six dollars a month, but would allow him to
remain at home over night, provided, of course, that he was there early
each morning and stayed late enough each day to attend to all the
chores.

The tears filled the eyes of the mother as she pressed her little boy
to her heart, and comprehended his self-sacrificing nature.

"You are too young, my dear child, to do this; we have enough left to
keep us awhile, and I would prefer that you wait until you are older
and stronger."

"Why, mother, I am old enough and strong enough now to do all that Mr.
Ashton wants me to do.  He explained everything to me, and it won't be
work at all, but just fun."

"Well, I hope you will find it so, but if he does not treat you kindly,
you must not stay one day."

Bush never complained to his mother, but he did find precious little
fun and plenty of the hardest kind of work.  The miserly farmer bore
down heavily on his young shoulders.  He and his wife seemed to be
continually finding extra labor for the lad.  The little fellow was on
hand each morning, in stormy as well as in clear weather, at daybreak,
ready and willing to perform to the best of his ability whatever he was
directed to do.  Several times he became so weak and faint from the
severe labor, that the frugal breakfast he had eaten at home proved
insufficient, and he was compelled to ask for a few mouthfuls of food
