became only a complimentary title, of which people in the subdued
countries were very proud.

[Illustration: DIOCLETIAN.]

He divided the empire into two parts, feeling that it was beyond the
management of any one man, and chose an able soldier of low birth but
much courage, named Maximian, to rule the West from Trier as his
capital, while he himself ruled the East from Nicomedia. Each of the two
Emperors chose a future successor, who was to rule in part of his
dominions under the title of Caesar, and to reign after him. Diocletian
chose his son-in-law Galerius, and sent him to fight on the Danube; and
Maximian chose, as Caesar, Constantius Chlorus, who commanded in Britain,
Gaul, and Spain; and thus everything was done to secure that a strong
hand should be ready everywhere to keep the legions from setting up
Emperors at their own will.

Diocletian was esteemed the most just and kind of the Emperors;
Maximian, the fiercest and most savage. He had a bitter hatred of the
Christian name, which was shared by Galerius; but, on the other hand,
the wife of Diocletian was believed to be a Christian, and Helena, the
wife of Constantius, was certainly one. However, Maximian and Galerius
were determined to put down the faith. Maximian is said to have had a
whole legion of Christians in his army, called the Theban, from the
Egyptian Thebes. These he commanded to sacrifice, and on their refusal
had them decimated--that is, every tenth man was slain. They were called
on again to sacrifice, but still were staunch, and after a last summons
were, every man of them, slain as they stood with their tribune Maurice,
whose name is still held in high honor in the Engadine. Diocletian was
slow to become a persecutor, until a fire broke out in his palace at
Nicomedia, which did much mischief in the city, but spared the chief
Christian church. The enemies of the Christians accused them of having
caused it, and Diocletian required every one in his household to clear
themselves by offering sacrifice to Jupiter. His wife and daughter
yielded, but most of his officers and slaves held out, and died in cruel
torments. One slave was scourged till the flesh parted from his bones,
and then the wounds were rubbed with salt and vinegar; others were
racked till their bones were out of joint, and others hung up by their
hands to hooks, with weights fastened to their feet. A city in Phrygia
was surrounded by soldiers and every person in it slaughtered; and the
Christians were hunted down like wild beasts from one end of the empire
to the other, everywhere save in Britain, where, under Constantius, only
one martyrdom is reported to have taken place, namely, that of the
soldier at Verulam, St. Alban. It was the worst of all the persecutions,
and lasted the longest.

[Illustration: DIOCLETIAN IN RETIREMENT.]

The two Emperors were good soldiers, and kept the enemies back, so that
Diocletian celebrated a triumph at Nicomedia; but he had an illness just
after, and, as he was fifty-nine years old, he decided that it would be
better to resign the empire while he was still in his full strength,
and he persuaded Maximian to do the same, in 305, making Constantius and
Galerius Emperors in their stead. Constantius stopped the persecution in
the West, but it raged as much as ever in the East under Galerius and
the Caesar he had appointed, whose name was Daza, but who called himself
Maximin. Constantius fought bravely, both in Britain and Gaul, with the
enemies who tried to break into the empire. The Franks, one of the
Teuton nations, were constantly breaking in on the eastern frontier of
Gaul, and the Caledonians on the northern border of the settlement of
Britain. He opposed them gallantly, and was much loved, but he died at
York, 305, and Galerius passed over his son Constantine, and appointed a
favorite of his own named Licinius. Constantine was so much beloved by
the army and people of Gaul that they proclaimed him Emperor, and he
held the province of Britain and Gaul securely against all enemies.

Old Maximian, who had only retired on the command of Diocletian, now
came out from his retreat, and called on his colleague to do the same;
but Diocletian was far too happy on his little farm at Salona to leave
it, and answered the messenger who urged him again to take upon him the
purple with--"Come and look at the cabbages I have planted." However,
Maximian was accepted as the true Emperor by the Senate, and made his
son Maxentius, Caesar, while he allied himself with Constantine, to whom
he gave his daughter Fausta in marriage. Maxentius turned out a rebel,
and drove the old man away to Marseilles, where Constantine gave him a
home on condition of his not interfering with government; but he could
not rest, and raised the troops in the south against his son-in-law.
Constantine's army marched eagerly against him and made him prisoner,
but even then he was pardoned; yet he still plotted, and tried to
persuade his daughter Fausta to murder her husband. Upon this
Constantine was obliged to have him put to death.

[Illustration: CONSTANTINE THE GREAT.]

Galerius died soon after of a horrible disease, during which he was
filled with remorse for his cruelties to the Christians, sent to entreat
their prayers, and stopped the persecution. On his death, Licinius
seized part of his dominions, and there were four men calling themselves
Emperors--Licinius in Asia, Daza Maximin in Egypt, Maxentius at Rome,
and Constantine in Gaul.

There was sure soon to be a terrible struggle. It began between
Maxentius and Constantine. This last marched out of Gaul and entered
Italy. He had hitherto seemed doubtful between Christianity and
paganism, but a wonder was seen in the heavens before his whole army,
namely, a bright cross of light in the noon-tide sky with the words
plainly to be traced round it, _In hoc signo vinces_--"In this sign thou
shalt conquer." This sight decided his mind; he proclaimed himself a
Christian, and from Milan issued forth an edict promising the Christians
his favor and protection. Great victories were gained by him at Turin,
Verona, and on the banks of the Tiber, where, at the battle of the
Milvian Bridge in 312, Maxentius was defeated, and was drowned in
crossing the river. Constantine entered Rome, and was owned by the
Senate as Emperor of the West.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

CONSTANTINE THE GREAT.

312-337.


Constantine entered Rome as a Christian, and from his time forward
Christianity prevailed. He reigned only over the West at first, but
Licinius overthrew Daza, treating him and his family with great
barbarity, and then Constantine, becoming alarmed at his power, marched
against him, beat him in Thrace, and ten years later made another attack
on him. In the battle of Adrianople, Licinius was defeated, and soon
after made prisoner and put to death. Thus, in 323, Constantine became
the only Emperor.

He was a Christian in faith, though not as yet baptized. He did not
destroy heathen temples nor forbid heathen rites, but he did everything
to favor the Christians and make Christian laws. Churches were rebuilt
and ornamented; Sunday was kept as the day of the Lord, and on it no
business might be transacted except the setting free of a slave;
soldiers might go to church, and all that had made it difficult and
dangerous to confess the faith was taken away. Constantine longed to see
his whole empire Christian; but at Rome, heathen ceremonies were so
bound up with every action of the state or of a man's life that it was
very hard for the Emperor to avoid them, and he therefore spent as
little time as he could there, but was generally at the newer cities of
Arles and Trier; and at last he decided on founding a fresh capital, to
be a Christian city from the first.

The place he chose was the shore of the Bosphorus, where Asia and Europe
are only divided by that narrow channel, and where the old Greek city of
Byzantium already stood. From hence he hoped to be able to rule the East
and the West. He enlarged the city with splendid buildings, made a
palace there for himself, and called it after his own name--Constantinople,
or New Rome, neither of which names has it ever lost. He carried many of
the ornaments of Old Rome thither, but consecrated them as far as
possible, and he surrounded himself with Bishops and clergy. His mother
Helena made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, to visit the spots where our
blessed Lord lived and died, and to clear them from profanation. The
churches she built over the Holy Sepulchre and the Cave of the nativity
at Bethlehem have been kept up even to this day.

[Illustration: CONSTANTINOPLE.]

There was now no danger in being a Christian, and thus worldly and even
wicked men and women owned themselves as belonging to the Church. So
much evil prevailed that many good men fled from the sight of it,
thinking to do more good by praying in lonely places free from
temptation than by living in the midst of it. These were called hermits,
and the first and most noted of them was St. Anthony. The Thebaid, or
hilly country above Thebes in Egypt, was full of these hermits. When
they banded together in brotherhoods they were called monks, and the
women who did the like were called nuns.

At this time there arose in Egypt a priest named Arius, who fell away
from the true faith respecting our blessed Lord, and taught that he was
not from the beginning, and was not equal with God the Father. The
Patriarch of Alexandria tried to silence him, but he led away an immense
number of followers, who did not like to stretch their souls to confess
that Jesus Christ is God. At last Constantine resolved to call together
a council of the Bishops and the wisest priests of the whole Church, to
declare what was the truth that had been always held from the beginning.
The place he appointed for the meeting was Nicea, in Asia Minor, and he
paid for the journeys of all the Bishops, three hundred and eighteen in
number, who came from all parts of the empire, east and west, so as to
form the first Oecumenical or General Council of the Church. Many of
them still bore the marks of the persecutions they had borne in
Diocletian's time: some had been blinded, or had their ears cut off;
some had marks worn on their arms by chains, or were bowed by hard labor
in the mines. The Emperor, in purple and gold, took a seat in the
council as the prince, but only as a layman and not yet baptized; and
the person who used the most powerful arguments was a young deacon of
Alexandria named Athanasius. Almost every Bishop declared that the
doctrine of Arius was contrary to what the Church had held from the
first, and the confession of faith was drawn up which we call the Nicene
Creed. Three hundred Bishops at once set their seals to it, and of those
who at first refused all but two were won over, and these were banished.
It was then that the faith of the Church began to be called Catholic or
universal, and orthodox or straight teaching; while those who attacked
it were called heretics, and their doctrine heresy, from a Greek word
meaning to choose.

[Illustration: COUNCIL OF NICEA.]

The troubles were not at an end with the Council and Creed of Nicea.
Arius had pretended to submit, but he went on with his false teaching,
and the courtly Bishop Eusebius of Nicomedia, who had the ear of the
Emperor, protected him. Athanasius had been made Patriarch, or
Father-Bishop, of Alexandria, and with all his might argued against the
false doctrine, and cut off those who followed it from the Church. But
Eusebius so talked that Constantine fancied quiet was better than truth,
and sent orders to Athanasius that no one was to be shut out. This the
Patriarch could not obey, and the Emperor therefore banished him to
Gaul. Arius then went to Constantinople to ask the Emperor to insist on
his being received back to communion. He declared that he believed that
which he held in his hand, showing the Creed of Nicea, but keeping
hidden under it a statement of his own heresy.

[Illustration: CATACOMBS.]

"Go," said Constantine; "if your faith agree with your oath, you are
blameless; if not, God be your judge;" and he commanded that Arius
should be received to communion the next day, which was Sunday. But on
his way to church, among a great number of his friends, Arius was struck
with sudden illness, and died in a few minutes. The Emperor, as well as
the Catholics, took this as a clear token of the hand of God, and
Constantine was cured of any leaning to the Arians, though he still
believed the men who called Athanasius factious and troublesome, and
therefore would not recall him from exile.

The great grief of Constantine's life was, that he put his eldest son
Crispus to death on a wicked accusation of his stepmother Fausta. On
learning the truth, he caused a silver statue to be raised, bearing the
inscription, "My son, whom I unjustly condemned;" and when other crimes
of Fausta came to light, he caused her to be suffocated.

Baptism was often in those days put off to the end of life, that there
might be no more sin after it, and Constantine was not baptized till his
last illness had begun, when he was sixty-four years old, and he sent
for Sylvester, Pope or Bishop of Rome, where he then was, and received
from him baptism, absolution, and Holy Communion. After this,
Constantine never put on purple robes again, but wore white till the day
of his death in 337.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

CONSTANTIUS.

337-364.


Constantine the Great left three sons, who shared the empire between
them; but two were slain early in life, and only Constantius, the second
and worst of the brothers, remained Emperor. He was an Arian, and under
him Athanasius, who had returned to Alexandria, was banished again, and
took refuge with the Pope Liberius at Rome. Pope--papa in Latin--is the
name for father, just as patriarch is; and the Pope had become more
important since the removal of the court from Rome; but Constantius
tried to overcome Liberius, banished him to Thrace, and placed an Arian
named Felix in his room. The whole people of Rome rose in indignation,
and Constantius tried to appease them by declaring that Liberius and
Felix should rule the Church together; but the Romans would not submit
to such a decree. "Shall we have the circus factions in the Church?"
they said. "No! one God, one Christ, one Bishop!" In the end Felix was
forced to fly, and Liberius kept his seat. Athanasius found his safest
refuge in the deserts among the hermits of the Thebaid in Egypt.

Meantime Sapor, king of Persia, was attacking Nisibis, the most Eastern
city of the Roman empire, where a brave Catholic named James was Bishop,
and encouraged the people to a most brave resistance, so that they held
out for four months; and Sapor, thinking the city was under some divine
protection, and finding that his army sickened in the hot marshes around
it, gave up the siege at last.

[Illustration: JULIAN.]

Constantius was a little, mean-looking man, but he dressed himself up to
do his part as Emperor. He had swarms of attendants like any Eastern
prince, most of them slaves, who waited on him as if he was perfectly
helpless. He had his face painted, and was covered with gold embroidery
and jewels on all state occasions, and he used to stand like a statue to
be looked at, never winking an eyelid, nor moving his hand, nor doing
anything to remind people that he was a man like themselves. He was
timid and jealous, and above all others, he dreaded his young cousin
Julian, the only relation he had. Julian had studied at Athens, and what
he there heard and fancied of the old Greek philosophy seemed to him far
grander than the Christianity that showed itself in the lives of
Constantius and his courtiers. He was full of spirit and ability, and
Constantius thought it best to keep him at a distance by sending him to
fight the Germans on the borders of Gaul. There he was so successful,
and was such a favorite with the soldiers, that Constantius sent to
recall him. This only made the army proclaim him Emperor, and he set out
with them across the Danubian country towards Constantinople, but on the
way met the tidings that Constantius was dead.

This was in 361, and without going to Rome Julian hastened on to
Constantinople, where he was received as Emperor. He no longer pretended
to be a Christian, but had all the old heathen temples opened again, and
the sacrifices performed as in old times, though it was not easy to find
any one who recollected how they were carried on. He said that all forms
of religion should be free to every one, but he himself tried to live
like an ancient philosopher, getting rid of all the pomp of jewels,
robes, courtiers, and slaves who had attended Constantius, wearing
simply the old purple garb of a Roman general, sleeping on a lion's
skin, and living on the plainest food. Meantime, he tried to put down
the Christian faith by laughing at it, and trying to get people to
despise it as something low and mean. When this did not succeed, he
forbade Christians to be schoolmasters or teachers; and as they declared
that the ruin of the Temple of Jerusalem proved our Lord to have been a
true Prophet, he commanded that it should be rebuilt. As soon as the
foundations were dug, there was an outburst of fiery smoke and balls of
flame which forced the workmen to leave off. Such things sometimes
happen when long-buried ruins are opened, from the gases that have
formed there; but it was no doubt the work of God's providence, and the
Christians held it as a miracle.

Julian hated the Catholic Christians worse than the Arians, because he
found them more staunch against him. Athanasius had come back to
Alexandria, but the Arians got up an accusation against him that he had
been guilty of a murder, and brought forward a hand in a box to prove
the crime; and though Athanasius showed the man said to have been
murdered alive, and with both his hands in their places, he was still
hunted out of Alexandria, and had to hide among the hermits of the
Thebaid again. When any search was threatened of the spot where he was,
the horn was sounded which called the hermits together to church, and he
was taken to another hiding-place. Sometimes he visited his flock at
Alexandria in secret, and once, when he was returning down the Nile, he
learned that a boat-load of soldiers was pursuing him. Turning back, his
boat met them. They called out to know if Athanasius had been seen. "He
was going down the Nile a little while ago," the Bishop answered. His
enemies hurried on, and he was safe.

Julian was angered by finding it impossible to waken paganism. At one
grand temple in Asia, whither hundreds of oxen used to be brought to
sacrifice, all his encouragement only caused one goose to be offered,
which the priest of the temple received as a grand gift. Julian
expected, too, that pagans would worship their old gods and yet live the
virtuous lives of Christians; and he was disappointed and grieved to
find that no works of goodness or mercy sprang from those who followed
his belief. He was a kind man by nature, but he began to grow bitter
with disappointment, and to threaten when he found it was of no use to
persuade; and the Christians expected that there would be a great
persecution when he should return from an expedition into the East
against the king of Persia.

[Illustration: ARCH OF CONSTANTINE.]

He went with a fine army in ships down the Euphrates, and thence marched
into Persia, where King Sapor was wise enough to avoid a battle, and
only retreat before him. The Romans were half starved, and obliged to
turn back. Then Sapor attacked their rear, and cut off their stragglers.
