vote was tabulated, while the boys stood around on the tiptoe of
expectation.

"I will read the result," announced Captain Putnam, after receiving a
paper from Mr. Strong, and he read as follows:

          "Whole number of votes cast, 83.
           Necessary to a choice, 42.
           Paul Singleton has 4.
           Henry Lee has 5.
           Harry Blossom has 7.
           David Kearney has 9.
           Reffton Ritter has 12.
           Daniel Baxter has 18.
           Bart Conners has 28."

"Nobody is elected," said Pepper, in a disappointed voice.

"Boys, you will have to try it again," said Captain Putnam.

"I beg to withdraw my name from the list of candidates," cried Paul
Singleton. "All who voted for me will kindly vote for Bart Conners, who
is my choice."

"We must beat Ritter and Baxter!" said Andy, in a low voice.

"That's right!" cried another of the cadets. "But how?"

"Let us try to make up a slate," proposed Jack, who was something of a
politician. "Harry Blossom and Dave Kearney might withdraw in favor of
Bart Conners if the fellows promised to support them for the two
captaincies."

"Let us see if it can be done," returned Pepper, quickly. "Hustle now,
for we've got to vote again in fifteen minutes."

They hurried around and interviewed Blossom and Kearney, and about
twenty other cadets. As a consequence, the pair named said they would
withdraw in favor of Bart Conners if supported for the captaincies
later. In the meantime Henry Lee said he would drop out also, since he
expected to leave school in June.

Once again the ballots were cast, and now it was easy to see that Bart,
Ritter and Baxter were exceedingly anxious. Both Ritter and Baxter did
their best to gain the votes dropped by Henry Lee and Paul Singleton.

"I will read the result," said Captain Putnam, a few minutes later. And
amid a breathless silence, he read the following:

          "Whole number of votes cast, 83.
           Necessary to a choice, 42.
           Robert Grenwood has 5.
           Reffton Ritter has 10.
           Daniel Baxter has 12.
           Bart Conners has 56."

"Hurrah for Bart Conners!" shouted half a dozen cadets in chorus.

"Bart Conners is declared elected major for the ensuing term," went on
Captain Putnam. "Major Conners, allow me to congratulate you," and he
came forward and held out his hand.

"And let me congratulate you, too," added Major Jack, and he shook hands
also.

A great number of cadets, and some teachers, come up to shake Bart by
the hand. Ritter and Baxter were conspicuous by their absence. Each of
the bullies was chagrined at the poor showing he had made. Instead of
gaining on the second ballot they had lost.

"That shows how much one can depend on his friends," growled Baxter to
Mumps.

"Never mind, Dan, maybe you'll be elected a captain," answered the toady
and sneak.

"I don't want to be a captain; I want to be a major or nothing,"
grumbled the bully.

A little later the balloting for a captain for Company A was started.
There were half a dozen candidates, including both Ritter and Coulter,
and Ritter did all he could to get the boys who had voted for Baxter to
support him, and then bribed Coulter to step out in his favor. But Jack,
Pepper and Bart Conners worked hard for Harry Blossom, as agreed, and as
a consequence Harry was elected on the third ballot by fifty-two votes.

"Hurrah for Harry Blossom!" was the cry, and the newly-elected captain
of Company A was congratulated on all sides.

This election was followed by that for a captain for Company B. Here the
struggle was as fierce as before, but Dave Kearney won out on the sixth
ballot. Then came ballots for the lieutenants, and Bob Grenwood came out
strong with fifty-five votes. Dale Blackmore was made the new
quartermaster, much to his delight, although Dale cared more for
athletics than he did for military matters.

Not one of the Ritter or the Baxter crowd got an office, much to their
disgust. Baxter went off by himself to sulk, but Ritter and Coulter
denounced their rivals openly.

"I reckon votes were bought," said Ritter.

"Sure they were bought," responded Coulter.

"So they were, by Ritter & Company," retorted Andy, who overheard the
talk.

"Oh, give us a rest, Snow!" muttered Ritter. "I don't want the old
office anyway, and all my real friends know it."

"Sour grapes," answered the acrobatic youth.

"Don't you get fresh, or I'll punch your head!" cried the bully,
savagely.

"Will you?" answered Andy. "Just you try it, if you dare!"

"I will!" came hotly from Ritter, and leaping forward he hit Andy a
sharp blow on the chin.

The assault came so suddenly that the acrobatic youth had no time to
defend himself. He staggered and fell, and as he went down the bully
gave him a sharp kick in the side.




CHAPTER XXIV

ANDY SHOWS HIS COURAGE


"Stop that, Ritter! What do you mean by kicking Andy when he is down?"

It was Pepper who uttered these words, as he rushed up from the other
side of the campus.

"I didn't kick him," retorted Ritter. He was startled, for he had not
anticipated being seen.

"You did!"

"A fight! A fight!" was the cry, and soon a crowd of cadets began to
collect.

Slowly Andy arose to his feet. His face was pale, for both the blow on
the chin and the kick in the side had been severe.

"You--you brute!" he gasped. "You dirty brute!"

"Hi, don't you call me a brute!" roared Ritter.

"You are a brute!" put in Pepper. "No fair-minded chap would kick a
fellow when he was down."

"Ditmore, you keep out of this," grumbled the bully.

"I'm going to see that Andy has fair play," returned Pepper.

The encounter had occurred after Captain Putnam and the teachers had
disappeared, so there was little chance of an interruption by the Hall
authorities.

Andy stood up and tried to collect himself. He was "boiling mad," for
the attack had been a dastardly one.

"Had enough?" demanded the bully, coming closer, and with his fists
clenched.

"No, I haven't!" answered the acrobatic youth, and then, of a sudden, he
sprang high in the air, to come down on Ritter's shoulder. Then he
caught the bully around the neck with one arm.

"Hi! hi! let up----" began Ritter. "I--I----"

"I'll not let up!" retorted Andy. "You brought this on yourself, Reff
Ritter, and now you can take the consequences. How do you like that, and
that, and that?"

Each "that" was accompanied by a stinging blow, one on the ear, one on
the eye and one on the nose. The second made the bully's left optic
black, and the third caused the blood to spurt freely. Then Andy landed
another blow on Ritter's mouth, leaped to the ground, and shoved the
fellow from him.

"I'll give you those for an opener," he said, breathing heavily. "You
can have some more in another minute."

"You--you rat!" hissed the bully and came at Andy with a rush. But the
acrobatic youth dodged, and Ritter ran full tilt into Dan Baxter.

"Hi, keep your distance, Ritter!" growled Baxter.

"I'll fix him!" yelled Ritter, and made another lunge for Andy. This
time he hit Andy on the shoulder. But the acrobatic youth came back at
him in double-quick order, and Ritter received a blow in the chin that
bowled him over into the arms of Nick Paxton. As he went over his eyes
closed, and then he slid in a heap to the ground.

"A knockout for Snow!"

"Say, that was a smashing blow!"

"It served Ritter right; he kicked Andy when he was down."

"Yes, and he hit him before he was ready."

Paxton, Coulter and several others gathered around the fallen bully and
rubbed his face with some snow. In a few minutes he opened his eyes and
stared around.

"Don't--don't hit me again!" he mumbled, between his bleeding teeth.

"Have you had enough?" demanded Andy. "If you haven't, stand up and get
some more."

"Don't--don't hit me again!"

"Then you have had enough?"

"I'll--I'll meet you another time."

"No, you won't, Ritter, you'll meet me now."

"That's the talk!" cried several. "Finish the fight."

"I don't want to fight any more," answered the bully, and his words came
in almost a whine.

"Then you have had enough? Yes or no?"

"I've--I've had enough," said Ritter, in a low tone.

"Very well; see that you remember this lesson," declared Andy, and then
turned on his heel and walked towards the Hall, followed by a dozen of
his admirers.

"Andy, it was great, the way you jumped on him!" declared Pepper.

"It was only a little acrobatic stunt," declared Andy. "But it came in
mighty handy. I shouldn't have tried it only he didn't fight
fair--hitting me before I was ready, and kicking me when I was down."

"You watch out that he doesn't play you foul," said Dale, who was
present.

"I'll keep my eyes open."

It was soon whispered around the school how Andy had met and vanquished
the bully, and as a consequence many of the fellows who had toadied to
Ritter deserted him. Even Paxton gave him the cold shoulder openly, and
Baxter simply sneered at him. Only Gus Coulter clung to Ritter, and the
pair seemed to become greater cronies than ever.

After the election of officers, and the fight, matters ran along swiftly
until the midwinter holidays. During those days many of the boys visited
their homes. Captain Putnam spent his time in trying to clear up the
mystery surrounding the disappearance of the things from the Hall, but
without success. The detective he had hired unearthed nothing of
importance and was discharged. One of the waiters left of his own
accord, and the master of the school could not help but wonder if he was
the guilty party.

In the meantime, Andy and his chums had been trying to find out
something about Cameron Smith. They were equally unsuccessful, for no
one they knew in Boston had ever heard of that individual. His name was
not in the directory.

"There was something strange about him," said Andy. "I wish Ritter would
tell us more about him. But I know it would be useless to ask Reff. He
hasn't spoken to me since the fight."

After the holidays came some fine skating on the lake, and also some
iceboating.

Fred Century had had a new iceboat built at Cedarville. It was called
the _Skimmer_, and he was exceedingly proud of the craft.

"You must come out with me," he said to Jack, Pepper and Andy, one
Saturday afternoon. "The ice is as smooth as glass, and the wind is just
right."

"All right!" cried Pepper. "A sail will suit me down to the ground."

Jack and Andy were also pleased to go, and the quartet of boys were soon
down at the boathouse, where the _Skimmer_ was tied up.

They were just getting aboard of the iceboat when they saw another craft
heave in sight.

"Who is that on board?" asked Andy.

"It is Reff Ritter," answered Pepper, "and Gus Coulter is with him."

"The iceboat belongs to a fellow in Cedarville," said a cadet standing
near. "Ritter hired it for a week."

The second craft was called the _Rosebud_, and was rather a fine-looking
outfit, with steel runners and a snowy-white sail.

"He must have paid something to rent that," observed Jack. "I thought he
didn't have much money?"

"He says his father is in business again and is doing better," answered
Paxton, who was present. "Hello, Reff!" he called out. "Want another
passenger?"

"I don't want you!" answered the bully, briefly.

"All right, you don't have to have me!" growled Paxton.

"Say, Century, do you want to race me?" asked Ritter, as he brought the
_Rosebud_ alongside the dock.

"I don't know," answered Fred, slowly. "What do you say?" he whispered
to the others.

"Do you think you can beat him?" asked Pepper.

"I can try."

"Then go ahead," said Jack. "You don't care, do you, Andy?"

"Not at all--if Fred can beat him," was the reply from the acrobatic
youth.

"All right, I'll race!" called out Fred. "But you will have to carry
four, the same as myself."

"Humph!" growled Ritter. "I don't know about that."

"I'll go, Reff!" cried Mumps.

"So will I!" added a cadet named White.

"All right, jump aboard," cried the bully, and Mumps and White lost no
time in doing as bidden.

"Where do you want to race to?" asked Fred.

"Up to Dorsett's Point and back."

"All right. Are you ready?"

"Yes."

"Then let her go!" yelled the owner of _Skimmer_; and in a moment the
iceboat race had started.




CHAPTER XXV

THE MAN AT POINT VIEW LODGE


At first it was an even race. Reff Ritter knew how to handle an iceboat
to perfection and brought his craft up in the breeze in a manner that
won considerable admiration.

"Take care that he doesn't beat you, Fred," said Pepper. "If he does, he
will never get done crowing over you."

"This race isn't over yet," answered the owner of the _Skimmer_. "Wait
till we round the bend yonder."

When the bend mentioned was gained the _Rosebud_ was a good three
lengths in the lead.

"Good-by!" shouted Coulter. "Here is where we leave you behind!"

"Your iceboat isn't in it with this," added Mumps.

"We'll tell them you are coming by-and-by!" came from Ritter.

"Don't answer them," whispered Jack. "Fred, can we do anything to help
the boat along?"

"Just shift a little more to the left--that's it," was the reply. "Now
we'll soon get the breeze and then we'll do better."

Fred's words proved true. As the _Skimmer_ rounded the bend, a good,
stiff blast struck her sails and away she started after the _Rosebud_.

"Now we are going some!" cried Andy, his face brightening.

"Make her hum!" cried Pepper.

Slowly but surely the _Skimmer_ crept up on the _Rosebud_, until the bow
of the second craft overlapped the stern of the first.

"Not walking away so fast now, are you?" questioned Pepper, cheerily.

"Just wait, we'll beat you, see if we don't!" growled Coulter.

"Swing the mainsail over!" cried Ritter.

His order was obeyed, and the _Rosebud_ commenced to pick up again. But
the _Skimmer_ kept on steadily, and at last, when the turning-point was
reached, was several lengths ahead.

"Now for the homestretch!" cried Jack.

"I hope we win by about a mile!" was Andy's wish.

The turning-point was a well-known rock, and the _Skimmer_ came around
this in fine style. But, just as this was accomplished, Ritter allowed
the _Rosebud_ to swing around out of the proper course.

"Look out, you'll run us down!" yelled Fred, in alarm.

"Clear the track!" yelled Ritter, angrily. "Clear the track!"

"The clown!" muttered Jack. "Does he want to run into us?"

Fred worked quickly, assisted by all the others and the _Skimmer_ was
thrown out of her course. On rushed both of the iceboats and the
_Rosebud_ slid by the other with less than six inches to spare.

"Ritter, that wasn't fair!" shouted Fred. "I won't race with a fellow
who won't sail fair!"

"You go to grass! I don't care about the race anyway!" howled the bully.

"You are beaten and you know it," cried Pepper.

"In a regular race such actions would disqualify you," was Jack's
comment.

"Oh, don't preach! I know what I am doing!" grumbled Ritter, and then he
