they never tasted in the least like elderberry syrup. Richard used to
make flutes out of the stalks, and one really did to play tunes on,
but it always made Perronet bark.

Richard's every-day cap had a large hole in the top, and when we were
in Our Field we always hung it on the top of the tallest of the two
stile-posts, to show that we were there; just as the Queen has a flag
hung out at Windsor Castle, when she is at home.

We played at castles and houses, and when we were tired of the houses,
we pretended to pack up, and went to the seaside for change of air by
the brook. Sandy and I took off our shoes and stockings and were
bathing-women, and we bathed Perronet; and Richard sat on the bank and
was a "tripper," looking at us through a telescope; for when the
elder-stems cracked and wouldn't do for flutes, he made them into
telescopes. And before we went down to the brook we made jam of hips
and haws from the hedge at the top of the field, and put it into acorn
cups, and took it with us, that the children might not be short of
rolypolies at the seaside.

Whatever we played at we were never disturbed. Birds, and cows, and
men and horses ploughing in the distance, do not disturb you at all.

We were very happy that summer: the boys were quite happy, and the
only thing that vexed me was thinking of Perronet's tax-money. For
months and months went on and we did not save it. Once we got as far
as twopence half-penny, and then one day Richard came to me and said,
"I must have some more string for the kite. You might lend me a penny
out of Perronet's stocking, till I get some money of my own."

So I did; and the next day Sandy came and said, "You lent Dick one of
Perronet's coppers; I'm sure Perronet would lend me one," and then
they said it was ridiculous to leave a half-penny there by itself, so
we spent it in acid drops.

It worried me so much at last, that I began to dream horrible dreams
about Perronet having to go away because we hadn't saved his
tax-money. And then I used to wake up and cry, till the pillow was so
wet, I had to turn it. The boys never seemed to mind, but then boys
don't think about things; so that I was quite surprised when one day I
found Sandy alone in our field with Perronet in his arms, crying, and
feeding him with cake; and I found he was crying about the tax-money.

I cannot bear to see boys cry. I would much rather cry myself, and I
begged Sandy to leave off, for I said I was quite determined to try
and think of something.

It certainly was remarkable that the very next day should be the day
when we heard about the flower-show.

It was in school--the village school, for Mother could not afford to
send us anywhere else--and the schoolmaster rapped on his desk and
said, "Silence, children!" and that at the agricultural show there was
to be a flower-show this year, and that an old gentleman was going to
give prizes to the school-children for window-plants and for the best
arranged wild flowers. There were to be nosegays and wreaths, and
there was to be a first prize of five shillings, and a second prize of
half-a-crown, for the best collection of wild flowers with the names
put to them.

"The English names," said the schoolmaster; "and there may
be--silence, children!--there may be collections of ferns, or grasses,
or mosses to compete, too, for the gentleman wishes to encourage a
taste for natural history."

And several of the village children said, "What's that?" and I
squeezed Sandy's arm, who was sitting next to me, and whispered, "Five
shillings!" and the schoolmaster said, "Silence, children!" and I
thought I never should have finished my lessons that day for thinking
of Perronet's tax-money.

July is not at all a good month for wild flowers; May and June are far
better. However, the show was to be in the first week in July.

I said to the boys, "Look here: I'll do a collection of flowers. I
know the names, and I can print. It's no good two or three people
muddling with arranging flowers; but; if you will get me what I want,
I shall be very much obliged. If either of you will make another
collection, you know there are ten kinds of mosses by the brook; and
we have names for them of our own, and they are English. Perhaps
they'll do. But everything must come out of Our Field."

The boys agreed, and they were very good. Richard made me a box,
rather high at the back. We put sand at the bottom and damped it, and
then Feather Moss, lovely clumps of it, and into that I stuck the
flowers. They all came out of Our Field. I like to see grass with
flowers, and we had very pretty grasses, and between every bunch of
flowers I put a bunch of grass of different kinds. I got all the
flowers and all the grasses ready first, and printed the names on
pieces of cardboard to stick in with them, and then I arranged them by
my eye, and Sandy handed me what I called for, for Richard was busy at
the brook making a tray of mosses.

Sandy knew the flowers and the names of them quite as well as I did,
of course; we knew everything that lived in Our Field; so when I
called, "Ox-eye daisies, cock's-foot grass, labels; meadow-sweet,
fox-tail grass, labels; dog-roses, shivering grass, labels;" and so
on, he gave me the right things, and I had nothing to do but to put
the colours that looked best together next to each other, and to make
the grass look light, and pull up bits of moss to show well. And at
the very end I put in a label, "All out of Our Field."

I did not like it when it was done; but Richard praised it so much, it
cheered me up, and I thought his mosses looked lovely.

The flower-show day was very hot. I did not think it could be hotter
anywhere in the world than it was in the field where the show was; but
it was hotter in the tent.

We should never have got in at all--for you had to pay at the
gate--but they let competitors in free, though not at first. When we
got in, there were a lot of grown-up people, and it was very hard work
getting along among them, and getting to see the stands with the
things on. We kept seeing tickets with "1st Prize" and "2nd Prize,"
and struggling up; but they were sure to be dahlias in a tray, or
fruit that you mightn't eat, or vegetables. The vegetables
disappointed us so often, I got to hate them. I don't think I shall
ever like very big potatoes (before they are boiled) again,
particularly the red ones. It makes me feel sick with heat and anxiety
to think of them.

We had struggled slowly all round the tent, and seen all the
cucumbers, onions, lettuces, long potatoes, round potatoes, and
everything else, when we saw an old gentleman, with spectacles and
white hair, standing with two or three ladies. And then we saw three
nosegays in jugs, with all the green picked off, and the flowers tied
as tightly together as they would go, and then we saw some prettier
ones, and then we saw my collection, and it had got a big label in it
marked "1st Prize," and next to it came Richard's moss-tray, with the
Hair-moss, and the Pincushion-moss, and the Scale-mosses, and a lot of
others with names of our own, and it was marked "2nd Prize." And I
gripped one of Sandy's arms just as Richard seized the other, and we
both cried, "Perronet is paid for!"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was two-and-sixpence over. We never had such a feast! It was a
picnic tea, and we had it in Our Field. I thought Sandy and Perronet
would have died of cake, but they were none the worse.

We were very much frightened at first when the old gentleman invited
himself; but he would come, and he brought a lot of nuts, and he did
get inside the oak, though it is really too small for him.

I don't think there ever was anybody so kind. If he were not a man, I
should really and truly believe in Sandy's fairy godmother.

Of course I don't really believe in fairies. I am not so young as
that. And I know that Our Field does not exactly belong to us.

I wonder to whom it does belong? Richard says he believes it belongs
to the gentleman who lives at the big red house among the trees. But
he must be wrong; for we see that gentleman at church every Sunday,
but we never saw him in Our Field.

And I don't believe anybody could have such a field of their very own,
and never come to see it, from one end of Summer to the other.




MADAM LIBERALITY.

    "Like little body with a mighty heart."

    _King Henry V., Act 2._




PART I.


It was not her real name: it was given to her by her brothers and
sister. People with very marked qualities of character do sometimes
get such distinctive titles, to rectify the indefiniteness of those
they inherit and those they receive in baptism. The ruling peculiarity
of a character is apt to show itself early in life, and it showed
itself in Madam Liberality when she was a little child.

Plum-cakes were not plentiful in her home when Madam Liberality was
young, and such as there were, were of the "wholesome" kind--plenty of
bread-stuff, and the currants and raisins at a respectful distance
from each other. But few as the plums were, she seldom ate them. She
picked them out very carefully, and put them into a box, which was
hidden under her pinafore.

When we grown-up people were children, and plum-cake and plum-pudding
tasted very much nicer than they do now, we also picked out the plums.
Some of us ate them at once, and had then to toil slowly through the
cake or pudding, and some valiantly dispatched the plainer portion of
the feast at the beginning, and kept the plums to sweeten the end.
Sooner or later we ate them ourselves, but Madam Liberality kept her
plums for other people.

When the vulgar meal was over--that commonplace refreshment ordained
and superintended by the elders of the household--Madam Liberality
would withdraw into a corner, from which she issued notes of
invitation to all the dolls. They were "fancy written" on curl papers
and folded into cocked hats.

Then began the real feast. The dolls came, and the children with them.
Madam Liberality had no toy tea-sets or dinner-sets, but there were
acorn-cups filled to the brim, and the water tasted deliciously,
though it came out of the ewer in the night nursery, and had not even
been filtered. And before every doll was a flat oyster-shell covered
with a round oyster-shell, a complete set of complete pairs, which had
been collected by degrees, like old family plate. And when the upper
shell was raised, on every dish lay a plum. It was then that Madam
Liberality got her sweetness out of the cake.

She was in her glory at the head of the inverted tea-chest; and if
the raisins would not go round, the empty oyster-shell was hers, and
nothing offended her more than to have this noticed. That was her
spirit, then and always. She could "do without" anything, if the
wherewithal to be hospitable was left to her.

When one's brain is no stronger than mine is, one gets very much
confused in disentangling motives and nice points of character. I have
doubted whether Madam Liberality's besetting virtue were a virtue at
all. Was it unselfishness or a love of approbation, benevolence or
fussiness, the gift of sympathy or the lust of power? Or was it
something else? She was a very sickly child, with much pain to bear,
and many pleasures to forego. Was it, as doctors say, "an effort of
nature," to make her live outside herself and be happy in the
happiness of others?

Equal doubt may hang over the conduct of her brothers and sister
towards her. Did they more love her, or find her useful? Was their
gratitude--as gratitude has been defined to be--"a keen sense of
favours to come"? They certainly got used to her services, and to
begging and borrowing the few things that were her "very own," without
fear of refusal. But if they rather took her benevolence for granted,
and thought that she "liked lending her things," and that it was her
way of enjoying possessions, they may have been right; for next to
one's own soul, one's own family is perhaps the best judge of one's
temper and disposition.

And they called her Madam Liberality, so Madam Liberality she shall
remain.

It has been hinted that there was a reason for the scarceness of the
plums in the plum-cake. Madam Liberality's father was dead, and her
mother was very poor, and had several children. It was not an easy
matter with her to find bread for the family, putting currants and
raisins out of the question.

Though poor, they were, however, gentle-folk, and had, for that
matter, rich relations. Very rich relations indeed! Madam Liberality's
mother's first cousin had fifteen thousand a year. His servants did
not spend ten thousand. (As to what he spent himself, it was
comparatively trifling.) The rest of the money accumulated. Not that
it was being got together to do something with by and by. He had no
intention of ever spending more than he spent at present. Indeed, with
a lump of coal taken off here, and a needless candle blown out there,
he rather hoped in future to spend less.

His wife was Madam Liberality's godmother. She was a good-hearted
woman, and took real pleasure in being kind to people, in the way she
thought best for them. Sometimes it was a graceful and appropriate
way, and very often it was not. The most acceptable act of kindness
she ever did to her god-daughter was when the child was recovering
from an illness, and she asked her to visit her at the seaside.

Madam Liberality had never seen the sea, and the thought of it proved
a better stimulus than the port wine which her doctor ordered so
easily, and her mother got with such difficulty.

When new clothes were bought, or old ones refurbished, Madam
Liberality, as a rule, went to the wall. Not because her mother was
ever guilty of favouritism, but because such occasions afforded an
opportunity of displaying generosity towards her younger sister.

But this time it was otherwise; for whatever could be spared towards
"summer things" for the two little girls was spent upon Madam
Liberality's outfit for the seaside. There was a new dress, and a
jacket "as good as new," for it was cut out of "mother's" cloth cloak
and made up, with the best binding and buttons in the shop, by the
village tailor. And he was bribed, in a secret visit, and with much
coaxing from the little girls, to make real pockets instead of braided
shams. The _second best_ frock was compounded of two which had
hitherto been _very bests_--Madam Liberality's own, eked out by
"Darling's" into a more fashionable fullness, and with a cape to
match.

There was a sense of solid property to be derived from being able to
take in at a glance the stock of well-mended under-garments, half of
which were generally at the wash. Besides, they had been added to, and
all the stockings were darned, and only one pair in the legs where it
would show, below short petticoat mark.

Then there was a bonnet newly turned and trimmed, and a pair and a
half of new boots, for surely boots are at least half new when they
have been (as the village cobbler described it in his bill) "souled
and healed"?

Poor little Madam Liberality! When she saw the things which covered
her bed in their abundance, it seemed to her an outfit for a princess.
And yet when her godmother asked Podmore, the lady's-maid, "How is the
child off for clothes?" Podmore unhesitatingly replied, "She've
nothing fit to be seen, ma'am," which shows how differently the same
things appear in different circumstances.

Podmore was a good friend to Madam Liberality. She had that
open-handed spirit which one acquires quite naturally in a house where
everything goes on on a large scale, at somebody else's expense. Now
Madam Liberality's godmother, from the very largeness of her
possessions, was obliged to leave the care of them to others, in such
matters as food, dress, the gardens, the stables, etc. So, like many
other people in a similar case, she amused herself and exercised her
economical instincts by troublesome little thriftinesses, by making
cheap presents, dear bargains, and so forth. She was by nature a
managing woman; and when those very grand people, the butler, the
housekeeper, the head-gardener, and the lady's-maid had divided her
household duties among them, there was nothing left for her to be
clever about, except such little matters as joining the fag-ends of
the bronze sealing-wax sticks which lay in the silver inkstand on the
malachite writing-table, and being good-natured at the cheapest rate
at which her friends could be benefited.

Madam Liberality's best neckerchief had been very pretty when it was
new, and would have been pretty as well as clean still if the
washerwoman had not used rather too hot an iron to it, so that the
blue in the check pattern was somewhat faded. And yet it had felt very
smart as Madam Liberality drove in the carrier's cart to meet the
coach at the outset of her journey. But when she sat against the rich
blue leather of her godmother's coach as they drove up and down the
esplanade, it was like looking at fairy jewels by daylight when they
turn into faded leaves.

"Is that your best neckerchief, child?" said the old lady.

"Yes, ma'am," blushed Madam Liberality,

So when they got home her godmother went to her odds-and-ends drawer.

Podmore never interfered with this drawer. She was content to be
despotic among the dresses, and left the old lady to faddle to her
heart's content with bits of old lace and ribbon which she herself
would not have condescended to wear.

The old lady fumbled them over. There were a good many half-yards of
ribbon with very large patterns, but nothing really fit for Madam
Liberality's little neck but a small Indian scarf of many-coloured
silk. It was old, and Podmore would never have allowed her mistress to
drive on the esplanade in anything so small and youthful-looking; but
the colours were quite bright, and there was no doubt but that Madam
Liberality might be provided for by a cheaper neck-ribbon. So the old
lady shut the drawer, and toddled down the corridor that led to
Podmore's room.

She had a good general idea that Podmore's perquisites were large, but
perquisites seem to be a condition of valuable servants in large
establishments, and then anything which could be recovered from what
had already passed into Podmore's room must be a kind of economy. So
she resolved that Podmore should "find something" for Madam
Liberality's neck.

"I never noticed it, ma'am, till I brought your shawl to the
carriage," said Podmore. "If I had seen it before, the young lady
shouldn't have come with you so. I'll see to it, ma'am."

"Thank you, Podmore."

"Can you spare me to go into the town this afternoon, ma'am?" added
the lady's-maid. "I want some things at Huckaback and Woolsey's."

Huckaback and Woolsey were the linendrapers where Madam Liberality's
godmother "had an account." It was one of the things on a large scale
over the details of which she had no control.

"You'll be back in time to dress me?"

"Oh dear, yes, ma'am." And having settled the old lady's shawl on her
shoulders, and drawn out her cap-lappets, Podmore returned to her
work.

It was a work of kindness. The old lady might deal shabbily with her
faded ribbons and her relations, but the butler, the housekeeper, and
the lady's-maid did their best to keep up the credit of the family.

It was well known that Madam Liberality was a cousin, and Podmore
resolved that she should have a proper frock to go down to dessert in.

