"For that I will go bail, my son. She is liker to override thee. But the
ground is soft to fall upon after all this rain. Now come out into the
yard, young man, for the sake of your mother's cabbages. And the mellow
strawbed will be softer for thee, since pride must have its fall. I am
thy mother's cousin, boy, and I'm going up to the house. Tom Faggus is
my name, as everybody knows, and this is my young mare, Winnie."

What a fool I must have been not to know it at once! Tom Faggus, the
great highwayman, and his young blood mare, the strawberry.

Already her fame was noised abroad nearly as much as her master's, and
my longing to ride her grew tenfold, but fear came at the back of it.
Not that I had the smallest fear of what the mare could do to me, by
fair play and horse-trickery, but that the glory of sitting upon her
seemed to be too great for me; especially as there were rumours abroad
that she was not a mare, after all, but a witch.

Mr. Faggus gave his mare a wink, and she walked demurely after him, a
bright young thing, flowing over with life, yet dropping her soul to a
higher one, and led by love to anything, as the manner is of such
creatures, when they know what is best for them. Then Winnie trod
lightly upon the straw, because it had soft muck under it, and her
delicate feet came back again.

"Up for it still, boy, be ye?" Tom Faggus stopped, and the mare stopped
there; and they looked at me provokingly.

"Is she able to leap, sir? There is good take-off on this side of the
brook."

Mr. Faggus laughed very quietly, turning round to Winnie so that she
might enter into it. And she, for her part, seemed to know exactly where
the fun lay.

"Good tumble-off, you mean, my boy. Well, there can be small harm to
thee. I am akin to thy family, and know the substance of their skulls."

"Let me get up," said I, waxing wroth, for reasons I cannot tell you,
because they are too manifold; "take off your saddle-bag things. I will
try not to squeeze her ribs in, unless she plays nonsense with me."

Then Mr. Faggus was up on his mettle at this proud speech of mine, and
John Fry was running up all the while, and Bill Dadds, and half a dozen
others. Tom Faggus gave one glance around, and then dropped all regard
for me. The high repute of his mare was at stake, and what was my life
compared to it? Through my defiance, and stupid ways, here was I in a
duello, and my legs not come to their strength yet, and my arms as limp
as a herring.

Something of this occurred to him, even in his wrath with me, for he
spoke very softly to the filly, who now could scarcely subdue herself;
but she drew in her nostrils, and breathed to his breath, and did all
she could to answer him.

"Not too hard, my dear," he said; "let him gently down on the mixen.
That will be quite enough." Then he turned the saddle off, and I was up
in a moment. She began at first so easily, and pricked her ears so
lovingly, and minced about as if pleased to find so light a weight upon
her, that I thought she knew I could ride a little, and feared to show
any capers. "Gee wugg, Polly!" cried I, for all the men were now looking
on, being then at the leaving-off time; "Gee wugg, Polly, and show what
thou be'est made of." With that I plugged my heels into her, and Billy
Dadds flung his hat up.

Nevertheless, she outraged not, though her eyes were frightening Annie,
and John Fry took a pick to keep him safe; but she curbed to and fro
with her strong forearms rising like springs ingathered, waiting and
quivering grievously, and beginning to sweat about it. Then her master
gave a shrill, clear whistle, when her ears were bent towards him, and
I felt her form beneath me gathering up like whalebone, and her hind
legs coming under her, and I knew that I was in for it.

First she reared upright in the air, and struck me full on the nose with
her comb, till I bled worse than Robin Snell made me; and then down with
her forefeet deep in the straw, and with her hind feet going to heaven.
Finding me stick to her still like wax, for my mettle was up as hers
was, away she flew with me swifter than ever I went before or since, I
trow.

She drove full head at the cob wall--"Oh, Jack, slip off!" screamed
Annie--then she turned like light, when I thought to crush her, and
ground my left knee against it. "Dear me!" I cried, for my breeches were
broken, and short words went the furthest--"if you kill me, you shall
die with me." Then she took the courtyard gate at a leap, knocking my
words between my teeth, and then right over a quick-set hedge, as if the
sky were a breath to her; and away for the water meadows, while I lay on
her neck like a child, and wished I had never been born.

Straight away, all in the front of the wind, and scattering clouds
around her, all I knew of the speed we made was the frightful flash of
her shoulders, and her mane like trees in a tempest. I felt the earth
under us rushing away, and the air left far behind us, and my breath
came and went, and I prayed to God, and was sorry to be so late of it.

All the long swift while, without power of thought, I clung to her crest
and shoulders, and was proud of holding on so long, though sure of being
beaten. Then in her fury at feeling me still, she rushed at another
device for it, and leaped the wide water-trough sideways across, to and
fro, till no breath was left in me. The hazel boughs took me too hard in
the face, and the tall dog-briers got hold of me, and the ache of my
back was like crimping a fish, till I longed to give it up, thoroughly
beaten, and lie there and die in the cresses.

But there came a shrill whistle from up the home hill, where the people
had hurried to watch us, and the mare stopped as if with a bullet, then
set off for home with the speed of a swallow, and going as smoothly and
silently. I never had dreamed of such delicate motion, fluent, and
graceful, and ambient, soft as the breeze flitting over the flowers, but
swift as the summer lightning.

I sat up again, but my strength was all spent, and no time left to
recover it; and though she rose at our gate like a bird, I tumbled off
into the soft mud.

"Well done, lad," Mr. Faggus said, good-naturedly; for all were now
gathered round me, as I rose from the ground, somewhat tottering, and
miry, and crest-fallen, but otherwise none the worse (having fallen upon
my head, which is of uncommon substance); "not at all bad work, my boy;
we may teach you to ride by and by, I see; I thought not to see you
stick on so long--"

"I should have stuck on much longer, sir, if her sides had not been wet.
She was so slippery--"

"Boy, thou art right. She hath given many the slip. Ha! ha! Vex not,
Jack, that I laugh at thee. She is like a sweetheart to me, and better
than any of them be. It would have gone to my heart if thou hadst
conquered. None but I can ride my Winnie mare."

R. D. BLACKMORE: "Lorna Doone."




    Full many a gem of purest ray serene
      The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear:
    Full many a flower is born to blush unseen
      And waste its sweetness on the desert air.

GRAY




THE ARAB AND HIS STEED


    My beautiful! my beautiful! that standest meekly by,
    With thy proudly arched and glossy neck, and dark and fiery eye;
    Fret not to roam the desert now, with all thy winged speed,
    I may not mount on thee again--thou'rt sold, my Arab steed.

    Fret not with that impatient hoof, snuff not the breezy wind,
    The further that thou fliest now, so far am I behind;
    The stranger hath thy bridle-rein--thy master hath his gold--
    Fleet-limbed and beautiful! farewell! thou'rt sold, my steed, thou'rt sold!

    Farewell! those free untired limbs full many a mile must roam,
    To reach the chill and wintry sky which clouds the stranger's home;
    Some other hand, less fond, must now thy corn and bed prepare;
    The silky mane I braided once must be another's care.

    The morning sun shall dawn again, but never more with thee
    Shall I gallop through the desert paths, where we were wont to be:
    Evening shall darken on the earth; and o'er the sandy plain,
    Some other steed, with slower step, shall bear me home again.

    Yes, thou must go! the wild free breeze, the brilliant sun and sky,
    Thy master's home--from all of these my exiled one must fly.
    Thy proud, dark eye will grow less proud, thy step become less fleet,
    And vainly shalt thou arch thy neck, thy master's hand to meet.

    Only in sleep shall I behold that dark eye glancing bright;
    Only in sleep shall hear again that step so firm and light;
    And when I raise my dreaming arm to check or cheer thy speed,
    Then must I, starting, wake to feel--thou'rt sold, my Arab steed!

    Ah! rudely then, unseen by me, some cruel hand may chide,
    Till foam-wreaths lie, like crested waves, along thy panting side,
    And the rich blood that's in thee swells in thy indignant pain,
    Till careless eyes, which rest on thee, may count each startled vein.

    Will they ill-use thee? If I thought--but no, it cannot be--
    Thou art so swift, yet easy curbed; so gentle, yet so free.
    And yet, if haply, when thou'rt gone my lonely heart should yearn,
    Can the hand which casts thee from it now, command thee to return?

    Return! alas! my Arab steed! what shall thy master do,
    When thou who wert his all of joy, hast vanished from his view?
    When the dim distance cheats mine eye, and through the gathering tears,
    Thy bright form for a moment, like the false mirage appears?

    Slow and unmounted will I roam, with weary step alone,
    Where with fleet step and joyous bound thou oft hast borne me on!
    And sitting down by that green well, I'll pause and sadly think:
    It was here he bowed his glossy neck when last I saw him drink!

    When last I saw thee drink!--Away! the fevered dream is o'er;
    I could not live a day, and know that we should meet no more!
    They tempted me, my beautiful! for hunger's power is strong,
    They tempted me, my beautiful! but I have loved too long.

    Who said that I had given thee up, who said that thou wert sold?
    'Tis false--'tis false, my Arab steed! I fling them back their gold.
    Thus, thus I leap upon thy back, and scour the distant plains,
    Away! who overtakes us now shall claim thee for his pains!

THE HONOURABLE MRS. NORTON




THE POET'S SONG


    The rain had fallen, the Poet arose,
      He pass'd by the town and out of the street,
    A light wind blew from the gates of the sun,
      And waves of shadow went over the wheat,
    And he sat him down in a lonely place,
      And chanted a melody loud and sweet,
    That made the wild-swan pause in her cloud,
      And the lark drop down at his feet.

    The swallow stopt as he hunted the fly,
      The snake slipt under a spray,
    The wild hawk stood with the down on his beak,
      And stared, with his foot on the prey,
    And the nightingale thought, "I have sung many songs,
      But never a one so gay,
    For he sings of what the world will be
      When the years have died away."

TENNYSON




Never to tire, never to grow cold; to be patient, sympathetic, tender;
to look for the budding flower, and the opening heart; to hope always,
like God, to love always--this is duty.

AMIEL




ADVENTURE WITH A WHALE


I gaily flung myself into my place in the mate's boat one morning, as we
were departing in chase of a magnificent cachalot that had been raised
just after breakfast. There were no other vessels in sight,--much to our
satisfaction,--the wind was light, with a cloudless sky, and the whale
was dead to leeward of us. We sped along at a good rate towards our
prospective victim, who was, in his leisurely enjoyment of life, calmly
lolling on the surface, occasionally lifting his enormous tail out of
water and letting it fall flat upon the surface with a boom audible for
miles.

We were, as usual, first boat; but, much to the mate's annoyance, when
we were a short half-mile from the whale our main-sheet parted. It
became immediately necessary to roll the sail up, lest its flapping
should alarm the watchful monster, and this delayed us sufficiently to
allow the other boats to shoot ahead of us. Thus the second mate got
fast some seconds before we arrived on the scene, seeing which, we
furled sail, unshipped the mast, and went in on him with the oars only.
At first the proceedings were quite of the usual character, our chief
wielding his lance in most brilliant fashion, while not being fast to
the animal allowed us much greater freedom in our evolutions; but that
fatal habit of the mate's--of allowing his boat to take care of herself
so long as he was getting in some good home-thrusts--once more asserted
itself. Although the whale was exceedingly vigorous, churning the sea
into yeasty foam over an enormous area, there we wallowed close to him,
right in the middle of the turmoil, actually courting disaster.

He had just settled down for a moment, when, glancing over the gunwale,
I saw his tail, like a vast shadow, sweeping away from us towards the
second mate, who was lying off the other side of him. Before I had time
to think, the mighty mass of gristle leaped into the sunshine, curved
back from us like a huge bow. Then with a roar it came at us, released
from its tension of Heaven knows how many tons. Full on the broadside it
struck us, sending every soul but me flying out of the wreckage as if
fired from catapults. I did not go because my foot was jammed somehow in
the well of the boat, but the wrench nearly pulled my thighbone out of
its socket. I had hardly released my foot when, towering above me, came
the colossal head of the great creature, as he ploughed through the
bundle of _debris_ that had just been a boat. There was an appalling
roar of water in my ears, and darkness that might be felt all around.
Yet, in the midst of it all, one thought predominated as clearly as if I
had been turning it over in my mind in the quiet of my bunk
aboard--"What if he should swallow me?" Nor to this day can I understand
how I escaped the portals of his gullet, which, of course, gaped wide as
a church door. But the agony of holding my breath soon overpowered every
other feeling and thought, till just as something was going to snap
inside my head, I rose to the surface. I was surrounded by a welter of
bloody froth, which, made it impossible for me to see; but oh, the air
was sweet!

I struck out blindly, instinctively, although I could feel so strong an
eddy that voluntary progress was out of the question. My hand touched
and clung to a rope, which immediately towed me in some direction--I
neither knew nor cared whither. Soon the motion ceased, and, with a
seaman's instinct, I began to haul myself along by the rope I grasped,
although no definite idea was in my mind as to where it was attached.
Presently I came butt up against something solid, the feel of which
gathered all my scattered wits into a compact knob of dread. It was the
whale! "Any port in a storm," I murmured, beginning to haul away again
on my friendly line. By dint of hard work I pulled myself right up the
sloping, slippery bank of blubber, until I reached the iron, which, as
luck would have it, was planted in that side of the carcass now
uppermost.

Carcass I said--well, certainly I had no idea of there being any life
remaining within the vast mass beneath me; yet I had hardly time to take
a couple of turns round myself with the rope (or whale-line, as I had
proved it to be), when I felt the great animal quiver all over, and
begin to forge ahead. I was now composed enough to remember that help
could not be far away, and that my rescue, providing that I could keep
above water, was but a question of a few minutes. But I was hardly
prepared for the whale's next move. Being very near his end, the boat,
or boats, had drawn off a bit, I supposed, for I could see nothing of
them. Then I remembered the flurry.

Almost at the same moment it began; and there was I, who, with fearful
admiration had so often watched the titanic convulsions of a dying
