him success with all my heart," added Captain Rombold. "I have kept a
list of the names of the vessels in the Federal navy so far as I could
obtain them; but it does not include the St.-- What you call her?
I never heard the name before."

"The St. Regis, after a river in the Adirondacks," said Captain
Passford, laughing. "But I can assure you, Captain, that you know her
better than any of the rest of us, for I never even saw her."

"The St. Regis?" interrogated the commander, puzzled by the assertion.

"Just now this steamer is something like a newly-married widow, for she
is entering upon her third name," continued the host, very lightly.
"Formerly she was the Trafalgar, a highly honored name in British
history; but more recently she received the name of Tallahatchie; and
now she becomes the St. Regis."

"I see," replied the Confederate commander, evidently trying to hide his
intense chagrin that the magnificent steamer, purchased by Colonel Homer
Passford for him, had so soon become a ship belonging to the Federal
navy. "You expressed a doubt in regard to her speed, my dear Captain."

"I simply doubted if she could make twenty knots an hour, for the
Bellevite overhauled her without difficulty."

"That was because our coal was very bad. The Trafalgar made twenty knots
an hour several times when she was under my command."

"So much the better, Captain; if the speed is in her, her new engineer
will get it out of her," replied the host. "But I must take the next
train for New York, and I am going over to see the St. Regis, for she
has been put in the best of repair. Perhaps you would like to go with
me, Christy."

"I should, father; I was expecting Charley Graines over this morning,
and he would like to see his future home on the deep," replied the
lieutenant-commander.

"He is in the reception-room now, waiting to see you," said Florry.

"I have his appointment in my pocket, and you may give it to him, my
son," added the captain.

The guests were not to leave at once, and the trio hastened to the
train. As soon as they were seated, Christy gave his friend the envelope
containing his appointment, and Charley Graines was quite as happy as
the future commander of the St. Regis. On the way the latter gave the
other all the news that had come out that morning.

"I suppose Paul Vapoor will not come on board till we get to the Gulf,
father," said Christy.

"You will receive your orders to-morrow, as you have been advised; and
though I cannot properly inform you where you will be bound, I can tell
you where you are not bound; you are not going to the Gulf of Mexico,"
answered Captain Passford.

"Not to the Gulf? All my service so far in blockaders has been in the
Gulf, and this will be a tremendous change for me. But where shall we
pick up our chief engineer?"

"About all the business growing out of the capture of the Tallahatchie,
including the promotions, was done very nearly four weeks ago. I was in
Washington when Captain Breaker's very full report came, and the
officers were promoted then. The appointments were also made then; but I
have been obliged, for reasons not necessary to be named, to keep them
to myself. The steamer that carried a cargo of coal, provisions, and
stores to the Eastern Gulf squadron, was the bearer of Paul's
appointment to the St. Regis, and Mr. Bolter's commission as chief
engineer of the Bellevite. Your friend was ordered to report at the
Brooklyn Navy Yard at once. The steamer in which he came put in at
Delaware Breakwater, short of coal. He will be here by to-morrow
morning, or sooner."

After a visit at his office Captain Passford and his companions
proceeded to the navy yard. The St. Regis was off the shore at
anchor. She was a magnificent steamer; and the captain indulged in an
exclamation, which he seldom did, when she was pointed out to him. She
was all ready for sea, and would go into commission as soon as her
commander presented himself. They went on board of her, and were
heartily welcomed by such officers as had already occupied their
staterooms.

Captain Passford went all over her, accompanied by Christy, while the
new first assistant engineer confined his attention to the engine. The
lieutenant-commander informed the proper officer of the yard that he
would hoist the flag on board of the St. Regis at noon the next day. The
party took their leave, and in the afternoon returned to Bonnydale.

The guests were now relieved from their parole, and they took their
leave before night, with a repetition of the good wishes which had been
expressed before. The next morning Christy was at the railroad station
on the arrival of the train from New York, and the first person that
rushed into his arms like a school-girl was Paul Vapoor. Of course
Christy was delighted to see him, but he kept watching the steps of the
principal car all the time. At last he discovered Bertha Pembroke, and
he rushed to her, leaving Paul talking into the air.

He grasped the beautiful maiden by both hands, and both of them blushed
like a carnation pink. The young officer was not given to demonstrations
in public, and he reserved them to a more suitable occasion. He picked
up her hand-bag and bundles which she had dropped when the lover took
possession of her, and conducted her to his father's carriage.

Christy presented her to Paul, who had heard much about her, but had
never seen her. He was simply polite, though there was mischief in his
eye, and the commander was in danger of being teased very nicely when
they were alone together. Both Bertha and Paul were cordially welcomed
by Mrs. Passford and Florry, and Christy needed nothing more to complete
his happiness.

But there was no time to spare, and Captain Passford hurried them
without mercy, and without considering that the lovers had not met
before for several months; but the commander of the St. Regis was to
hoist his flag at noon, and there was no room for long speeches. Christy
and Paul hurried themselves into their new uniforms, not made for the
occasion, but kept in store. The engineer's uniform was all right as it
was, for he had before reached the top of the ladder in his profession,
but Flurry had changed the shoulder-straps of her brother.

Captain Passford was not remorseless in separating the newly reunited
friends; for Paul and Flora had done some blushing, and had crept away
into a corner of the great drawing-room as soon as he had put on his
best uniform, and he finally insisted that all the ladies should go to
the navy yard and witness the ceremony. The company were rather late;
but the captain had sent a man to the station in advance, and the train
was held for them.

It is hardly necessary to state in what manner the seats in the car were
occupied; but the captain and Mrs. Passford had to sit together. A navy
yard tugboat was at the foot of Grand Street on the arrival of the
party, for it had been telegraphed for early in the morning. Captain
Passford was a very distinguished magnate in the eyes of all naval
officers, not only on account of his great wealth, but because he was
the most influential man in the city at the department.

Half an hour before the time the party were on the deck of the St.
Regis. All the officers were now on board; and while Paul was showing
the ladies over the vessel, the commander was renewing his acquaintance
with Mr. Baskirk, the executive officer. His father introduced Mr.
Makepeace to him; and he found him a sturdy old salt, without as much
polish as many of the officers, but a gentleman in every respect.

"I am very glad to know you, Captain Passford," said Mr. Makepeace. "We
have one of the most brilliant commanders in the service, and I suppose
he will make things hum on board of the St. Regis, if we get into
action, as we are likely to do under his lead."

"I shall try to do my whole duty, and I shall endeavor not to make any
sensation about it," replied Christy, as he turned from the second to
greet the third lieutenant, Mr. Drake, who had been his shipmate on
board of the Bellevite, and the commander of the Tallahatchie while he
was a passenger on board.

The ship's company had already been mustered on deck. They were dressed
in their best uniforms, and they were a fine-looking set of men. They
had all heard of Lieutenant Passford, and they were proud and happy to
serve under his command. Promptly at noon, as the church bells on shore
were striking the hour, Commander Passford mounted a dais, and his
commission was read to the ship's company. He then made a short speech
suited to the occasion, and ordered the colors to be run up to the peak.
The ship was then in commission, and she was to sail on the tide the
next day. The subordinate officers and seamen then gave three cheers,
in which every person seemed to put his whole heart.

Christy conducted Bertha to the captain's cabin, which had been
restored to its original condition and refurnished. A lunch was served
to the whole party under an awning on the quarter-deck. Mr. Drake, an
eye-witness and actor in the battle, fought it over for the benefit of
the ladies; and before night they all returned to Bonnydale, where it
required at least three rooms to accommodate them during the evening.




CHAPTER XXVII

CAPTAIN PASSFORD ALONE IN HIS GLORY


Christy Passford was stirring at an early hour the next morning, and
so was Bertha Pembroke; for the St. Regis was to sail that day, though
the tide did not serve till four in the afternoon. After breakfast
his father called him into the library, and closed the door. Captain
Passford had remained in the city the evening before till the last
train, and it was evident that he had something to say to his son.

"I have no information to give you this time, Christy, in regard to the
coming of blockade-runners or steamers for the Confederate navy," said
he. "But I have been instructed to use my own judgment in regard to what
I may say to you about your orders. Of course you have observed that the
blockading squadrons in the Gulf have been greatly reduced."

"Only the Bellevite and Holyoke remained off the entrance to Mobile
Bay," added Christy. "We have had a very quiet time of it since I joined
the Bellevite, and the action with the Tallahatchie was really the only
event of any great importance in which I have been engaged."

"The enemy and their British allies have been so unfortunate in the
Gulf that they have chosen a safer approach to the shores of the South.
Nearly all the blockade-runners at the present time go in at the Cape
Fear River, where the shoal water favors them. A class of steamers of
light draft and great speed are constructed expressly to go into
Wilmington. Over $65,000,000 have been invested in blockade-running;
and in spite of the capture of at least one a week by our ships, the
business appears to pay immense profits. The port of Charleston is
closed to them now, as well as many others."

"I have studied this locality of the coast at the mouth of the Cape Fear
River, and the blockade-runners certainly have their best chance there,"
said Christy.

"The whole attention of the government, so far as blockade-running is
concerned, has been directed to the approaches of Wilmington. Forts
Fisher, Caswell, and Smith afford abundant protection to the light draft
steamers as soon as they get into the shoal water where our gunboats as
a rule cannot follow them. The one thing we need down there is fast
steamers. It is a stormy coast, and our smaller gunboats cannot safely
lie off the coast."

"I have read that a single successful venture in this business sometimes
pays for the steamer many times over."

"That is quite true, and the business prospers, though there are
fifty or more Federal cruisers and gunboats patrolling the shore. Now,
Christy, you are to be sent to this locality with the St. Regis; but you
are to be in the outer circle of blockaders, so to speak, as your sealed
orders will inform you."

"Of course I shall obey my orders, whatever they are," added the
commander.

"I have nothing more to say, and you will regard what has passed between
you and me as entirely confidential," said Captain Passford, as he rose
to leave the library.

"By the way, father, what has become of Monsieur Gilfleur?" asked
Christy. "I have not seen him since my return."

"Just now he is working up a case of treason in Baltimore, though I
expected him home before this time," replied the captain.

"I am sorry I have not seen him, for he and I had become great friends
before we parted. I think he is in some respects a remarkable man."

"In his profession he is unexcelled; and what is more in that line, he
is honest and reliable."

"I learned all that of him while we were operating together. It is said,
and I suppose it is true, that about every one of the blockaders makes a
port at Halifax, the Bermudas, or Nassau, as much to learn the news and
obtain a pilot, as to replenish their coal and stores."

"That is unfortunately true; and the neutrality of these places is
strained to its utmost tension, to say nothing of its manifest
violations."

"I think if Monsieur Gilfleur and myself could make another visit to the
Bermudas and Nassau, we might pick up information enough to insure the
capture of many blockade-runners, and perhaps of an occasional
Confederate cruiser," said Christy, laughing as he spoke.

"That is not the sort of business for a lieutenant-commander in the
navy, my son; but I have thought of sending the detective on such a
mission since the remarkable success you and he had in your former
venture. But you escaped hanging or a Confederate prison only by the
skin of your teeth. The difficulty in another enterprise of that sort
would be for Mr. Gilfleur to put the information he obtained where it
would do the most good. If he wrote letters, they would betray him; and
if he went off in a Bahama boat, as he did before, we should have to
keep a steamer cruising in the vicinity of his field of operations to
meet him when he came off. I came to the conclusion that the scheme was
impracticable, for it was only a combination of favorable circumstances
that rendered your operations successful. I prefer to trust to the speed
of the St. Regis to enable you to accomplish the same results off the
coast," said Captain Passford, as they left the library.

"I should really like to see Monsieur, for he is a very agreeable
companion," replied Christy.

"He would be exceedingly pleased to meet you again, for he had become
very much attached to you."

After lunch the same party that had visited the St. Regis the day before
left on the train for New York, and proceeded to the navy yard from the
foot of Grand Street, for all of them wished to see Christy off. Captain
Passford, Junior, was received on board of his ship with all due form
and ceremony. Paul Vapoor had been to his home for a brief visit to his
mother and sisters; but he had gone to Bonnydale as early in the morning
as it was decent to do so, and was all devotion to Florry.

Mr. Baskirk, the executive officer, had the ship in first-rate order
when the commander went on board with his party; and as there was
nothing for him to do, Christy devoted himself to the entertainment of
his friends. The ladies with their escorts went all over the steamer
again; the commander and Paul opened their staterooms for their
examination, and Charley Graines showed them that of the first assistant
engineer in the steerage.

"But you have a whole cabin to yourself, Christy," said Bertha, after
she looked into all the other rooms.

"I have the honor to be the commander of the ship," replied Christy
lightly. "I have two state-rooms, so that if I had the happiness to
relieve a forlorn maiden from captivity on board of one of the enemy's
vessels, as I did in your case, Bertha, I should have a better apartment
to offer her than I had then."

The first half of the afternoon passed away all too soon for those who
were to sail on the tide, and those who were to return to Bonnydale.
The commander took leave of his parents, his sister, and Bertha in his
cabin, where Paul passed through the same ordeal with Miss Florry. The
navy-yard tender was alongside; and the ladies were assisted on board of
her by the officers, while the seamen under the direction of Mr.
Makepeace were heaving up the anchor.

"Cable up and down, sir," reported the second lieutenant.

This was the signal for the departure of the tender; and another hasty
adieu followed, when the commander and the chief engineer hastened to
the deck. The men forward had suspended their labor when the cable was
up and down. The commander gave the order to weigh the anchor. The tide
was still on the flood, and the head of the ship was pointed very nearly
in the direction she was to sail.

"Anchor aweigh, sir!" reported Mr. Makepeace.

"Strike one bell, Mr. Baskirk," said Christy; and the order was repeated
to the quartermaster who was conning the wheel.

The screw of the St. Regis began to turn, and she went ahead very
slowly. The tender was a short distance from her, and all the ladies
were waving their handkerchiefs with all their might; and their signals
were returned, not only by Christy and Paul, but by all the officers on
deck. The seamen could not comfortably "hold in," and they saluted the
tender with three rousing cheers, for they knew that the family of their
young commander were on board of her.

The little steamer followed the ship till she had passed the Battery,
a repetition of the former salute, and then the tender sheered off, and
went up North River, the ship proceeding on her course for the scene of
her future exploits. The parting of Christy with his father, mother, and
sister had been less sad than on former occasions; for they believed,
whether with good reason or not, that the son, brother, and lover was to
be exposed to less peril than usual.

Christy had received his sealed orders on board from an officer sent
specially to deliver them to him in person; and he was instructed to
open the envelope off Cape Henlopen. At six o'clock the St. Regis was
off Sandy Hook. Four bells, which was the signal to the engine room to
go ahead at full speed, had been sounded as soon as the ship had passed
through the Narrows.

After the young commander had taken his supper, solitary and alone in
his great cabin, he went on deck. No one shared his spacious apartment
with him, and he was literally alone in his glory. But he did not object
to his solitude, for he had enough to think of; and though he did not
betray it in his expression, he was in a state of excitement, for what
young fellow, even if "fully developed before he was twenty-one," could
have helped being exhilarated when he found himself in command of such
an exceptionally fine and fast ship as the St. Regis.

When he went on deck, for he seemed to need more air than usual to
support the immense amount of internal life that was stirring his being,
he met Paul Vapoor coming up from the ward room, where he messed with
seven other officers.

"I hope you are feeling very well, Captain Passford," said Paul, as he
touched his cap to the commander, for all familiarities were suspended
unless when they were alone; and habit generally banished them even
then.

"As well as usual, Mr. Vapoor," replied Christy. "How do you find the
engine?"

"In excellent condition, Captain. It was thoroughly overhauled at the
yard, boilers and machinery, and I have examined it down to the minutest
details."

"I have an idea that our speed will be more in demand than our fighting
strength on this cruise," added Christy.

"We are ready for speed in the engine room. The coal that remained on
board on the arrival of the ship at the yard was very bad; but it has
all been taken out, and our bunkers are filled with the best that could
be had, the master-machinist informed me yesterday," replied the chief
engineer. "I don't believe she could overhaul the Bellevite, for I am of
the opinion that she is the fastest sea-going steamer in the navy."

"I don't think we shall find any blockade-runner that can run away from
the Bellevite; for she has overhauled every one she chased off Mobile
Bay, and made a prize of her. I am to open my orders off Henlopen, and
then we shall know what our work is to be."

"About eight hours from Sandy Hook, as we are running now," added Paul.

"I am very impatient to read my orders, and I shall be called at one
o'clock for that purpose," added Christy, as he began to plank the deck
on the weather side.

The wind was from the north-west, and quite fresh. The men had had their
suppers, and he ordered Mr. Baskirk to make sail. The St. Regis was bark
rigged, and could spread a large surface of canvas. He desired to test
the qualities of his crew; and in a short time everything was drawing.
Christy "turned in" at nine o'clock; but he was excited, and he had not
slept a wink when he was called at the hour he had indicated.




CHAPTER XXVIII

OFF THE COAST OF NORTH CAROLINA


Having assured himself that the ship was fully up with Cape Henlopen,
Christy retired to his cabin, and still "alone in his glory," he broke
the seal of the official envelope. He was to cruise outside of the
blockaders, and report to the flag-officer when opportunity presented.
Just then it was believed that Richmond, which received all its foreign
supplies from Wilmington, could not long hold out if it was captured;
and the Secretary of the Navy was giving special attention to the forts
which protected it.

It was evident to the young commander that he was not to rust in
inactivity, as had been the case of late off Mobile Bay, and a wide
