give a wayside inn a week's notice if I mean to sleep there in April.
Nobody has had enough coal during the winter to keep fires going in
spare bedrooms. That front room was as chilly as a country church! You
won't feel so tired, Verity, when you're on your feet again, and it's
all downhill to Dropwick."

The Temperance Hotel, where the girls finally stayed their weary feet,
was quite modern and unromantic, though well aired and fairly
comfortable. Ingred, whom the fates had placed to sleep with Nora, had a
trying night, for her obstreperous bedfellow had a habit of flinging out
her arms, and of appropriating the larger half of the clothes, leaving
poor Ingred to wake shivering. Also, the bed sloped towards the middle,
so that both girls had to poise themselves on a kind of hillside, and
were constantly rolling down and colliding. These troubles, however,
were only incidental in the Pilgrimage, and certainly might have been
worse.

On comparing notes at breakfast nearly everybody had had similar
experiences. Miss Strong confessed to a patent mattress with a broken
spring jutting up in the center, round which she had been obliged to lie
in a curve. Linda and Francie had slept near the water-cistern, which
alarmed them with weird noises, and Bess and Kitty, trying to open their
window wider, had found it lacked sash-cords, and descended like a
guillotine, sending the prop that had upheld it, flying into the street.
Though they groused at the time, the girls laughed as they discussed
these details over the eggs and bacon. The sun was shining and they felt
rested, and quite ready once more to shoulder their kit and set out on
the march.

There was nothing of very great interest to see in Dropwick itself,
though it was a quaint enough old-fashioned market-town, with a
fifteenth-century church tower, and a few black and white houses. Miss
Strong decided not to waste any time there, but to push on as fast as
possible across the hills to Sudbury, where there was a fine
Romano-British villa that was well worth a visit. So the foss-way took
them up, and up, and up, through fir-woods where the new cones were
showing like candles on Christmas trees, and alongside a quarry where
they pounced upon some quite interesting fossils in the heaps of stones
by the road, and over a craggy weather-worn peak, where, again, they
caught the magnificent view of the valley and the river and hills
beyond. Then down again, through more fir-woods, where the timber was
being felled, and great tree-trunks lay piled in rows one above another,
and past banks that were a dream, with starry blackthorn blossom and
primroses growing beneath, to where the cross-roads met and the signpost
pointed an arm to Sudbury.

The Romans might take their roads straight as an arrow across moor and
hill, but they chose out the beauty spots of the land on which to build
their villas, and were careful to fix upon a southern aspect and shelter
from the prevailing winds. The remains of the old settlement lay behind
a farm, and had been carefully excavated by a local antiquarian society.
Visitors applied at the farmhouse, entered their names in a book, paid
their admission money, and were escorted round by a guide.

Time, and successive conquests, had demolished the greater part of the
villa, but its foundations and some of the old brick walls could be
plainly traced. The great bath, that indispensable feature of a Roman
establishment, could still be seen, with its beautiful tesselated
pavement, inlaid with mosaics of doves, cupids, and designs of fruit and
flowers. The heating system also, with the leaden pipes and remains of
furnaces, was a testimony to the civilization of the period, and the
amount of comfort that the legions brought with them into their foreign
exile. A large shed had been fitted up as a museum, and held a number of
objects that had been dug up during the excavations. The girls, poring
over the glass cases, looked with interest at a Roman lady's silver
hand-mirror, toilet pots, and tiny shears that must have been the early
substitute for scissors. More fascinating still were the toys from a
little child's grave, small glass bottles, roughly-made animals of clay,
and a carved object that no doubt had been at one time a treasured doll,
though now it was crumbling into dust.

Among the pile of broken statues or fragments of ornamental stonework in
the corner was a monumental tablet, cracked across in two places, but
pieced together for preservation with iron rivets. The inscription ran:

     "D.M. Simpliciae Florentinae Animae Innocentissimae quae vixit menses
     decem. Felicius Simplex Pater fecit. Leg. vi, V."

     (To the Divine Shades. To Simplicia Florentina, a most innocent
     soul, who lived ten months. Felicius Simplex of the Sixth Legion,
     the Victorious, the father, erected this.)

Some of the girls glanced at the tablet, and the English translation of
the inscription which lay near, and turned away without much notice. But
Ingred stood gazing at them with a catch in her throat. They brought a
whole pathetic human story to life again. She could picture the noble
Roman father, leader of the victorious legion, sent over from Italy and
making his home here in a conquered foreign land, as our officers do in
India, and bringing with him his lady with her Roman customs and her
slaves. Those few brief words--"a most innocent soul who lived ten
months"--told the tragedy of the cherished little daughter whose frail
life faded in the fogs of the British climate about eighteen hundred
years ago. Hearts are the same all the world over, and the pretty
dark-eyed Roman baby must have been laid to its rest with as much grief
and sadness as the fair-haired darlings whom British mothers sometimes
bury in Indian soil.

"It's a sweet name, too--Simplicia Florentina!" mused Ingred. "I wonder
what she would have grown up like. And what her history would have been!
I'd give worlds to know more about her!"

"Aren't you coming, Ingred?" called Verity from the doorway. "Miss
Strong says we ought to be getting on now."

Ingred brought her thoughts back with an effort to the twentieth
century, and joined the waiting party outside. Miss Strong was talking
to their guide, who was describing a short cut across the fields that
would save them several miles on their way to Pursborough.

Verity, after calling to her friend in the museum, had run out. Ingred
followed her, to find her with her arm locked closely through Bess's.
There was no reason why she should not display such a mark of affection,
but to Ingred it seemed little short of an insult to herself. Verity,
her particular chum, to have openly gone over to the enemy! She stared
at her in surprise. Verity did not appear to notice the stare, however,
and walked on quite calmly.

Miss Strong had decided that they should find a quiet place along the
lane where they could eat their lunch before beginning the second part
of their march. She fixed on a lovely spot with a high wooded bank at
the back and in front fields that sloped to the river. There were specks
of yellow in these fields, and Kitty who finished her sandwiches first,
ran to inspect nearer and reported cowslips. Instantly most of the girls
went scrambling over the stile.

Miss Strong, who had bought picture-postcards of the Roman villa, and
was addressing them with a stylo-pen, did not follow the exodus. She
called to Ingred, however, who was last.

"Warn the girls," she said, "not on any account to go into that meadow
where there is a horse with a young foal. The guide at the farm said it
is a savage beast and will attack people. Be sure to tell them _all_!"

"I'll run after them now," answered Ingred, calling "Cuckoo!" to attract
their attention.

She told Belle and Linda and Verity, who were near to the stile, and
Linda passed the news on to Francie and Kitty. Bess was quite a long
distance down the field, gathering blackthorn from the hedge.

"I'm not going to tear all that way after her!" thought Ingred crossly.
"Verity will be sure to tell her. They seem inseparable to-day. Besides
which nobody's particularly likely to go into that other meadow. There
are plenty of cowslips here."

It took Miss Strong a much longer time to write her postcards than she
had originally intended, and while she was thus employed her girls
spread themselves out in quest of flowers. It is always amazing when you
start rambling in company with others how quickly you can find yourself
alone. By the time Ingred had gathered a fragrant, sweet-smelling bunch
and looked round for somebody to admire it, her schoolmates were gone.
She hunted about for them, and noticed Verity's green jersey and Kitty's
brown tam-o'-shanter in the wood above. Surely they must all be up there
together.

She was just going to follow, when a qualm of conscience seized her. She
had not delivered Miss Strong's message to Bess, and it would perhaps be
as well to ascertain that the latter had not strayed unwarned into the
danger zone.

"It's not at all likely," Ingred kept repeating to herself, as she
walked briskly along the meadow to the fence. "I'm really only going on
a wild goose chase."

Likely or unlikely, it was the very thing which had happened. The
cowslips on the other side of the railings were larger and finer, and
Bess, having no fear of horses, had climbed over and wandered some way
down the field. Only about twenty yards from her the lanky foal was
gambolling round its mother, a big draught mare, cropping the grass
innocently enough at present, and apparently not perceiving trespassers.

If Bess could retreat quietly and unnoticed from the field all might be
well. Ingred did not dare to call for fear of attracting the mare's
attention. If Bess would only turn round she might wave to her. But Bess
kept her back to the fence and had no idea of danger. There was only one
course open to Ingred. She slipped over the railings and went along the
meadow to warn her schoolfellow. In a few quiet words she explained the
situation.

"Don't run," she whispered. "Let us walk back and perhaps it will take
no notice of us."

The girls went as softly as possible, looking over their shoulders every
now and then to see that all was safe. Of bulls they had a wholesome
terror, but they had had no previous experience of a savage horse.

They were about fifteen yards from the railings, when the mare, which
hitherto had been feeding quietly, raised her head and lumbered round.
She saw strangers in her territory; her primeval instinct was to protect
her foal, and she came tearing across the field with wild eyes and lip
turned back from gleaming teeth. The girls fled for their lives. It was
a question of which could reach the railings first, they or the
dangerous brute whose huge hoofs thundered behind them. Ingred, who was
the taller and the stronger of the two, seized Bess by the hand and
literally dragged her along. Together they tumbled over the fence
somehow and rolled down the bank into the safe shelter of some gorse
bushes. For a moment they were afraid the mare would leap after them,
but the height of the rails balked her; apparently she was satisfied
with routing the enemy and returned across the field to her foal. The
girls, with shaking knees, got up and hurried towards the lane where
they had left Miss Strong.

"You've saved my life, Ingred!" gasped Bess, as they went along.

"No, I haven't!" choked Ingred. "At least, it was my fault you ever went
into the field at all. Miss Strong told me to tell you the horse was
savage, and you were such a long way off picking cowslips that I didn't
trouble to go after you. I trusted to Verity telling you."

"Verity ran the other way with Kitty."

"I know. Well, at any rate, it was my fault and I'm ready to take the
blame. Precious row I shall get into with the Snark!"

"Why should we say anything about it?"

"Not say anything?"

"There's really no need. It's over and done with now. I don't want to
get you into a scrape. I vote we just keep it to ourselves."

Ingred paused, with her hand on the gate, and gazed with unaffected
astonishment at her companion.

"Bess Haselford, you're the biggest trump I've ever met! It's only one
girl in a thousand who'd want to cover up a thing like that. Most people
would make _such_ a tale of it, and pose as an injured martyr whom I'd
nearly murdered. I'm sure Francie would, or even Verity."

"You put yourself into danger to come and warn me!"

"Well, it was the least I could do!"

"Let's forget about it then. And don't tell any of the girls, in case
they blab. It would make Miss Strong so nervous, she'd be scared about
our going into any fields for ever afterwards."

"Right-o, I won't tell, but I shan't forget. As I said before, I think
you're the biggest trump on the face of the earth."

"Cuckoo!" rang out Linda's voice from the bank.

"Where are you girls?" shouted Miss Strong from the lane.

"Coming!" called Ingred, as she latched the gate and hurried with Bess
to rejoin the rest of the party.




CHAPTER XVIII

Bess at Home


The Pilgrims, after a glorious tramp down the dale of Beechcombe,
reached Pursborough without further adventure, and spent the night
there. They gave an hour next morning to inspecting the glorious old
church and the ruins of the castle, then once more resumed the Roman
road. It was the last day of their tour, so they made the best of it.
They explored some delightful woods, followed the course of a
fascinating stream, ate their lunch in a picturesque quarry, had an
early tea at a wayside inn which rivalled "The Pelican" in quaintness,
and finally reached Ribstang in time to catch the 5:20 train to
Grovebury. The conclusion of the excursion meant the close of the
holiday, for school would begin again on the following Monday. Everybody
had enjoyed it immensely, and everybody was only too sorry it was over.
To Ingred it marked an epoch. She had suddenly made friends with Bess
Haselford. Now she viewed Bess with unprejudiced eyes she realized what
an exceedingly nice and attractive girl she really was. The adventure in
the field had flung them together, and--much to the astonishment of the
others, who did not know their secret--they had walked the whole way
from Pursborough to Ribstang in each other's company.

"I can't make out Ingred!" declared Verity. "Here she's been abusing
Bess, and calling her a bounder, and now she's hanging on her arm! The
way some people turn round is really most extraordinary----"

"'There's naught so queer as folks!'" quoted Linda. "Glad Ingred's come
to her senses, at any rate. I always thought she was perfectly beastly
to Bess!"

"So she was. I wonder Bess will put up with her now. I'm sure I
wouldn't!"

Bess, however, was of a forgiving disposition, and let bygones be
bygones. It is the only plan at schools, for girls are generally so
frank in the nature of their remarks that if you begin to treasure up
the disagreeable things said to you, and let them rankle, you will
probably find yourself without a chum in the world. Though the fashion
may be for plain speaking, it is often a matter of mood, and the mate
who genuinely believes you a "blighter" one day, will claim you as a
"mascot" with equal persuasion on the next. It is all part of the
wholesome rough-and-tumble of your education, and proves of as much use
in training you and rounding your projecting corners as the lessons you
learn in your form. The girls thought Ingred's new infatuation would
soon wear off, but it had come to stay. She herself was quite surprised
at the force of the attraction. It was almost like falling in love. She
marched with Bess at drilling, chose her for her partner at tennis, and
would have changed desks to sit next to her, had not Miss Strong refused
permission. As a natural result of this new state of affairs came a shy
invitation from Bess asking Ingred to tea at Rotherwood. After the many
previous refusals she would hardly have ventured to give in but for
several hints which paved the way. Circumstances, however, alter cases,
and Ingred, who had declared that nothing should induce her to set foot
in her old home, was now all eagerness to go. She was delighted to find
that she was to be the only guest. She felt that on this particular
visit even Verity would be _de trop_.

On a certain Tuesday afternoon, therefore, with full permission from
Miss Burd, she absented herself from the hostel tea-table, and walked
home with Bess instead. It gave her quite a thrill to turn in at the
familiar gate of Rotherwood. The lawns were in beautiful order, and the
beds gay with tulips, aubrietias, forget-me-nots, and a lovely show of
hyacinths. So far from being neglected, the place seemed even better
kept than in the old days. The house, with its pretty modern
black-and-white front, its many gables, and its cheerful red-tiled roof,
looked the same as formerly; but indoors there were great changes. The
hall, which used to be Moorish, was now hung with tapestry, and
furnished in old oak; the drawing-room was yellow instead of blue, with
a big brocade-covered couch and a Chappell piano; the dining-room had
rows of book-cases and some good oil-paintings; the morning-room was a
cheerful chintz boudoir with a gilt mirror and Chippendale chairs; the
conservatory was full of choice flowers, and an aviary had been added to
it.

"Mother is so fond of birds," explained Bess. "They amuse her when her
head's bad and she doesn't care to see anybody. She's made most of them
wonderfully tame."

Mrs. Haselford proved to be a gentle pleasant lady who shook hands
kindly with Ingred, then excused herself on the score of ill-health, and
retired to her room, leaving the girls to have tea by themselves.

"Mother's never been really well for three years," said Bess. "Not since
Bert and Larry----"

She did not finish her sentence, but her eyes turned to the wall where
hung two portraits of lads in khaki. Ingred understood. She knew that
Bess had lost both brothers in the war, and she had heard that poor Mrs.
Haselford had shut herself up in her grief and refused all comfort,
sometimes even to the extent of remaining for days upstairs, and
neglecting the company of husband and child. Her attitude to Bess was
often peculiar, it was almost as if she resented her daughter being left
when her adored boys had been taken from her. Bess never knew how she
would be received, for sometimes her mother would seem unable to bear
her presence, and at other times would unreasonably chide her for
neglect. It began to dawn on Ingred how very lonely her friend must be.
She had secretly envied her the possession of Rotherwood, but now she
realized how little the house itself would mean without the happy home
life in which brothers and sister had borne their part.

"I'd rather have the bungalow with the family, than Rotherwood all
alone!" she ruminated. "As for Muvkins, she's one in a million. I
believe she'd be cheery in a coal cellar, so long as she'd a solitary
chick to keep under her wing. Why, if we'd lost _our_ boys, she'd have
been trying to make it up to Queenie and me for not having brothers. I
know her! That's her way!"

Bess had much to show to her visitor when tea in the dainty morning-room
was over. There were her books, and her photographs and postcard albums,
and all kinds of girlish possessions, and a cocker spaniel with three
puppies as fat as roly-poly puddings, and a fern-case opening out of one
of her bedroom windows, and a collection of pressed wild flowers, and a
green parroquet that would sit on her wrist, and allow her to stroke its
head, though it snapped at strangers. They had been working upwards
through the house, and finally Bess led the way to the top landing of
all. She paused for a moment before the door of an attic room.

"I expect you'll know this place!" she remarked shyly, ushering in her
guest.

Ingred looked round in amazement. It was a little sanctum which she and
Quenrede had shared in the old days as a kind of studio. Here they had
been allowed to try experiments in poker work, painting, fret-carving,
spatter-work, or any other operations which were considered too messy to
be performed in the school-room downstairs. They had loved their "den,"
as they called it, and had taken a particular pleasure in covering its
walls with pictures, cut, most of them, from magazines, and stuck on
with glue or paste. During the occupation of Rotherwood by the "Red
Cross," this room had been locked up, and Ingred had imagined that Mr.
Haselford would have had it papered when the rest of the house was
decorated. She was delighted to find it in this untouched condition. All
her dear former treasures adorned the walls, and she ran from one to
another rejoicing over them. There was even a further surprise. Years
ago an artist cousin had sketched her portrait in pastel crayons upon
the color-wash of the wall. It had been done as a mere artistic freak,
but like many such spontaneous drawings it had been an admirable
likeness and a very pretty picture. It bore her name, "Ingred," in
