isolation from the very first."

"Oh, yes!" said Effie, smiling; "but I dare say she is all right."

She shook hands with her new employers and left the house.

The gold was in her pocket. She felt that she had sold herself and her
mission in life for ten sovereigns. "It is the present need which makes
the thing so desperate," she said under her breath. "If George has drawn
all the money, they have absolutely nothing to live on; but more will
come in, and there's this to go on with. We'll manage somehow now."

She returned to the lodgings, but before she went upstairs she had an
interview with the landlady.

"What do you charge my mother for rent?" she asked.

"Well, Miss Staunton," exclaimed the woman, "with the dinners and one
thing and another, I am obliged to make it a pound a week."

"That is a great deal too much," said Effie. "I don't suppose it is too
much for your rooms, but it is more than we can afford just now. When we
first came to you, you agreed to let us the rooms without attendance for
fifteen shillings a week. We cannot by any possible management afford to
pay more."

"But Mrs. Staunton wished for attendance, miss--she said it made all the
difference; there was half a crown for attendance and half a crown extra
for kitchen fire."

"But the kitchen fire was included in the fifteen shillings a week."

"Then there wasn't late dinner."

"Surely there is no late dinner now?" exclaimed Effie.

"Oh, yes, miss; every evening Mr. Staunton requires a nice little bit of
dinner sent up when he comes home. You see, miss, it is quite impossible
for me to have extra fires without charging for them."

"Certainly. Well, I don't think there will be any extra dinner in
future. And now please tell me exactly how much is due to you."

"Four pounds, miss; but if I'm paid one, on account, I shan't mind
waiting. I'd be really sorry to dislodge such a nice lady as your
mother, Miss Staunton."

"Here is the money in full," said Effie. "Will you give me a receipt?"

"Oh, with pleasure, miss. Won't you sit down? I hope, Miss Staunton,
nothing will induce your good mother to move from here. I will do
everything in my power to make her comfortable."

"You must understand," said Effie, "that in future she only pays fifteen
shillings a week without extras. My sisters Agnes and Katie are quite
old enough to do all the waiting which my mother requires. In fact they
must do so, for we can't afford to pay a penny more."

"Am I to understand, miss, that there's no late dinner?"

"Certainly not."

"Very well; I am sure I'll do all in my power to oblige."

Effie left her, putting her receipt carefully in her pocket as she did
so. She went upstairs and entered the little sitting-room where her
mother was now pacing quickly and restlessly up and down. There was a
deep flush on her cheeks, and a look of despair in her eyes.

"Oh, Effie, you've come!" she exclaimed, the moment she saw her
daughter. "George has been in. There's something wrong, I know--I know
there is. He came in just for a minute and he kissed me, and said he
wasn't coming home to-night, and he--he looked _wild_. He stuffed a few
things into a bag, and said I wasn't to expect him back to-night. I
didn't dare ask him about the money. What--what can be the matter,
Effie?"




CHAPTER XXI.


Effie did all in her power to soothe her mother. It was past the hour
for her return to St. Joseph's, but under the present circumstances she
could not give this matter a thought. Mrs. Staunton was strung up to a
terrible condition of nervousness. She walked faster and faster about
the room; she scarcely spoke aloud, but muttered words under her breath
which no one could hear. At every footfall on the stairs she started.
Sometimes she went to the door and flung it open--sometimes she went to
the window and pressed her face against the glass. Darkness set in, and
the lamps were lit in the street. Katie went to the window to pull down
the blinds.

"No, don't touch them," said Mrs. Staunton fretfully--she still kept
staring out into the street. Presently she called Effie to her.

"Doesn't that man turning the corner look something like George?" she
exclaimed.

Effie looked eagerly.

"No, that's not George," she said.

"Agnes, you have better sight," called Mrs. Staunton to her next
daughter; "come and watch with me--we are sure to see him soon. It can't
be that he has gone away for the night--for the whole night. Isn't that
him? Look at that man,--that one crossing the road--that one in the
waterproof. Oh, how hard it is raining! If George is out much longer,
he'll be drenched to the skin. Aggie, look; and you, Katie, can't you
watch? Now, _that_ man, isn't that George?"

"No, no, mother!" answered the poor children, in affright.

Mrs. Staunton kept on making exclamations. Again and again she cried out
hopefully that surely George was coming now; but George himself never
really appeared. Effie knew that she would get into hopeless disgrace at
St. Joseph's. No matter! she could not leave her mother at such a
moment. Each instant she became more anxious about her. She called Agnes
aside, and told her that she had put a stop to the late dinner, and also
to the extra attendance, but as probably some dinner had been ordered
for that evening, she had better go down and bring it up, as Mrs.
Staunton must be forced to eat at any cost.

Agnes tripped out of the room, and presently returned with a couple of
pork chops and some baked potatoes. She flung them down on the table,
exclaiming that the tray was heavy. She looked cross, and evidently
seemed to think that Effie was making a great fuss over nothing.

"Why can't George be away for a single night without everyone getting
into such a state?" she murmured.

Effie took the tray from her and gave her a look of reproach. She laid
the cloth herself, and made the table look as pretty as she could. She
then went to her mother, drew her gently but firmly away from the
window, and, making her sit down, tried to coax her to eat.

Mrs. Staunton looked at the chops with dazed eyes.

"Those were for George," she exclaimed. "What a shame to bring them up
before he has come into the house! They'll be cold and sodden, and he
hates his food sodden. You don't suppose I'm going to touch my boy's
dinner? No, not I! Put the chops down in the fender, Aggie. When George
comes in, I always ring the bell twice. How careless of Mrs. Robinson!
Effie, my dear, I don't think we can stop with her if she treats us in
this fashion. It's perfectly disgraceful to cook George's food before he
is ready for it."

Agnes began to explain that George was not coming home, but Effie
silenced her with a look. She saw, to her horror, that her mother's mind
was beginning to wander. She was really expecting George--who had not
the faintest idea of coming back. Poor Effie saw there was nothing for
it but to humor her mother. She put the food inside the fender, and
then, going to a davenport in a corner of the room, wrote a hasty letter
to Dorothy Fraser.

"We're in great trouble," she wrote. "I know you can't come. I know it
is absolutely impossible for you to come, but neither can I go back to
St. Joseph's this evening. Please tell Sister Kate, make any excuse for
me you like--say anything that comes into your head. My career as a
nurse is ended."

A big tear dropped from Effie's eyes as she wrote these last words. She
folded up the letter and gave it to Agnes.

"Agnes," she said, "you must take this at once to St. Joseph's
Hospital."

"Oh, I don't know how to get there," said Agnes, "and I was never out so
late before in the evening."

"I am sorry to have to send you--stay, you had better take Kate with
you. It would be better for the two of you to be together. Put on your
hats and your warm jackets; don't be longer away than you can help--you
have just to give this note to the hall porter and come straight back.
You must take the red omnibus that goes along Oxford Street, and----"

Effie added a few more practical directions. Agnes' eyes sparkled at the
thought of a little variety in her dull life. Katie ran willingly into
her room to fetch her own and her sister's hats and jacket's. They were
dressed in a very short time. Effie heard them running downstairs, and
listened to the slam of the hall door. She had now set the irrevocable
seal to her own act. She had deliberately turned her back on the life
that she loved. She stood for a moment with a dizzy feeling in her
head; then, with a little prayer which she sadly needed, to help her,
she put aside all regret, and turned with a brave heart to face the dark
present and the gloomy future.

Mrs. Staunton stood near the window, with her back to her daughter.
Effie listened with a sick heart to her mutterings. She knew that her
mother could not possibly get better if she refused to eat.

She was wondering what to do, and how she could dare to leave her, when
a quick step was heard running up the stairs, and the next moment Fred
Lawson came in.

Effie never to her dying day forgot the feeling of relief, of almost
joy, which ran through her heart when she saw his clever, resolute face.
He came in, in his usual quick, brisk, determined way--stopped short a
little when he saw her, and then glanced significantly at her mother.

Mrs. Staunton had turned as eagerly as Effie when she heard the quick
footsteps. Now her face was an absolute blank--she had come a step
forward,--her hands suddenly fell to her sides.

"My mother is not well," said Effie. "She's upset."

"No, I'm not upset; you're greatly mistaken," said Mrs. Staunton. "Why
should I be upset? There's not a happier woman in Christendom than I am.
It's true my beloved husband has left me, but then I have got my
boy--there never was a braver boy. How do you do, Mr. Lawson? Pray
forgive me for not shaking hands with you when you came into the
room--the fact is, I have been expecting George. His dinner is in the
fender. The landlady did very wrong indeed to send it up before I rang
for it. I always ring twice for George's dinner, don't you understand?
It is a good plan. George likes his meals hot and tasty. No wonder--he
earns them; he is a dear, good, _clever_ fellow--he is getting a fine
salary. Did you happen to meet him on the stairs? Perhaps you passed
him--he is a little late, just a little late. Effie, can you tell me if
Mr. Lawson has good sight? If he has, perhaps he'll come and watch by
the window. I'm watching, but my eyes are a little weak at times. I
might not see George when he is really there. Will you come and see, Mr.
Lawson? He ought to be coming now, my dear boy,--my dearest,--my boy!"

Lawson gave Effie a glance. In a moment he read the true position. The
poor weak brain had suddenly given way. He went up gently to Mrs.
Staunton, and took one of her hot hands in his.

"When George comes in," he said, "I'll be here, and I'll tell him about
his dinner. I know he'll be late to-night, and you mustn't wait up for
him any longer. Come, Miss Effie will put you into bed. When you are in
bed I'll give you something to make you sleep. Come now, don't delay;
you're quite worn out. If you don't go to bed you'll be ill, and then
you'll be of no use to your son."

"Do you really think so?" said Mrs. Staunton. "Yes, I mustn't be ill;
George doesn't like it--it quite frets him. He is not like his dear
father. He wants a cheerful home--no wonder, he is young, dear lad, he
is young. Yes, I'll go to bed, and then I'll be all right in the
morning. Come, Effie, help your mother to bed."

Effie took the poor woman out of the room. They went into the little
bedroom. She helped her mother to undress. When she saw her lay her head
on the pillow, she went back to the sitting room, where Lawson was
quietly standing.

"I happened most fortunately," he said, the moment he saw her, "to have
some packets of bromide in my pocket. There is sal-volatile in the room.
I have made up a rather strong composing-draught for your mother. If she
takes it, she will sleep peacefully and will not be likely to wake until
the morning. Give it to her at once, and then come back to me--I have
something to tell you."

Effie's trembling knees could scarcely support her as she went back to
the next room.

"Has George come yet?" asked the mother.

"Not yet, mother; won't you take this medicine, please?"

"Yes, my love, yes. Effie, you are a very good girl--a great comfort to
me, my darling. I'm glad you never went to the hospital; it was a mad,
foolish scheme, and George never liked it. You are a great comfort to
me, and a great comfort to your dear brother. You'll be sure to give him
his dinner comfortably when he comes back, Effie?"

"Yes, mother, yes. Now do go to sleep, dear mother."

Mrs. Staunton drank off the medicine, laid her head on her pillow, and
closed her dim, dark eyes. Effie watched by her until she thought she
was dropping asleep. Pretty little Marjory was lying sound asleep in the
same bed. Phil opened his big eyes as his sister passed.

"Is anything the matter?" he whispered. "Is anything wrong with George?"

"Pray for him, Phil," said Effie, tears suddenly filling her eves.

"Yes, yes," said the little fellow. "I always do."

Effie went into the next room.

"You have plenty of pluck, haven't you?" said Lawson, when he saw her.

"I hope so--I had need to have."

"Yes, I know that. Well, that unfortunate boy has put his foot in it at
last,--he is in trouble,--detectives are after him."

"Detectives after George!" exclaimed Effie. "What can you possibly mean?
Oh, do tell me at once--don't leave me in suspense."

"Sit down and I will tell you. Try not to agitate yourself, try to
listen to me quietly. Remember that a brave woman can always control her
nerves."

Effie sat down when Lawson bade her. Something in his quiet but resolute
voice soothed her impatience; she looked up at him as he stood by the
mantelpiece, resting one arm on it.

"The facts are these," he began at once; "Staunton has been going wrong
for a long time----"

"I know it--I know it well," interrupted Effie.

"Yes, I feared that you knew it. Poor fellow, soon after his arrival in
London he got with bad companions. He has naturally extravagant
tastes--they introduced him to some of those gambling saloons. Given a
weak nature, the love of money for the pleasure it can give, a will
weakened with self-indulgence, and the result is easy to forecast.
George has been going from bad to worse for months past. He has
sometimes won considerable sums of money, and these successes have
excited him to try again--with this devil's luck, as the saying is. Of
late, however, that luck has turned against him, and the events which
took place to-day are only the natural consequences."

Effie rose slowly from her seat.

"Go on," she said, coming up to Lawson. "What took place to-day? Go on,
please,--I am quiet,--I am prepared for anything."

Lawson gave her a look of admiration.

"You are a brave girl," he said briefly. "The world would be a better
place if there were more like you in it. Well, what took place is this.
Staunton won heavily at cards the night before last. Not content with
his gains, however, he persevered until the luck turned against him.
Before he left the gambling saloon he had lost all his gains, and was in
debt fifty pounds. To meet that debt he drew your mother's money from
the bank yesterday morning."

"I know," said Effie, with white lips--"mother told me. She sent Agnes
to the bank to cash a small check. Agnes was told that George's account
was overdrawn. Yes, I know that. Is there more behind? Surely that must
be the worst."

"Alas! I wish it were. This morning the poor fellow, while engaged in
his duties at Gering's office, met with the temptation for which he was
so ripe. It was a horrible one. He knew that your mother had not a
penny. His feeling for her I need not enter upon. He found himself in
the room with an open till, and took fifty pounds out of it. Soon
afterwards, he made an excuse to leave the office. He wandered about all
day in an indescribable state of misery. At last he summoned courage to
go to the bank and deposit forty-five of the fifty pounds. He then
rushed home, and, packing his things, prepared to run away. He said he
was certain to be taken if he stayed, and simply could not bring himself
to face the risk. He went to Waterloo, and to his horror discovered that
he was watched. A man, undoubtedly a detective in plain clothes, was
following him from place to place. The man watched him take his ticket
for Southampton, and noticed the corner in which he deposited his bag in
a third-class carriage. George seemed to lose his head at this crisis.
He managed to elude the detective, slipped out of the station, took a
hansom and drove straight to my rooms. Luckily I was at home. He made a
clean breast of everything to me. He is in my rooms now, and safe for
the time being, for no one will think of looking for him there. I want
