
"What do you mean?"

"It is here."

"I don't understand."

"Look," cried the officer, nervously tearing away the wrappings and
holding up his precious burden.

The Major came to attention, his heels clicked together, his hand went
up.  He stared at the Eagle.

"_Vive l'Empereur_," he said.

"_Vive l'Empereur_," answered the other, but both of them spoke in
whispers, for there was no Emperor, and a mention of the name was
treason to the King.

"It is the same?" asked the Major, taking the precious emblem in his
hand and pressing it to his heart.

"The very same."

"But how?"

"The boy here and I marked the spot where it fell.  We took bearings,
as a sailor would say; we took them independently, and when we had a
chance to compare them we found that we agreed exactly.  When I was
released from prison and discharged from the hospital as a
convalescent, we went back to Arcis, to the bridge, to the river side.
The boy here is an expert swimmer.  The river was low.  He dove into
the icy waters again and again until he found it.  We were most
circumspect in our movements.  No one observed us.  I wrapped it up,
concealed it carefully, learned that the regiment was here, and I
surrender it into your hands."

"It is a shame," began Lestoype gloomily at last, laying the Eagle
gently down on his desk.

"What is a shame?"

"The order."

"What order?"

"The Eagles of all the regiments and ships are to be sent to Paris to
be destroyed."

"Impossible!"

"Nevertheless, it is true.  They have taken them wherever they could
lay hands on them.  It has almost caused a revolt."

"And are you going to send this Eagle to Paris?" asked Marteau
threateningly.  "This Eagle for which I fought, this Eagle which I
rescued from the Elster and the Aube, for which hundreds of brave men
have died, this Eagle which has been in the forefront of every battle
in which the regiment took part since the Emperor gave it into our
keeping before Ulm?"

"What can I do?"

"I will throw it into the Isere first.  I will destroy it myself before
that happens," cried Marteau, snatching it up and pressing it to his
heart.  "I have taken no oaths.  I am still the Emperor's man."

"Not so loud," said Lestoype warningly.  "The men of the regiment may
not all be true.  You may be overheard."

"You and all the others have taken the oath of allegiance to the King?"

"What else was there to do?  Soldiering is my trade.  They offered us
commissions; the Empire was dead; the Emperor banished.  It was a
living, at any rate."

"But I am free, I am not bound."

"You must, you will take the oath," urged Lestoype.

"How if he should come back?"

"He will not come back."

"Will he not?  It is whispered everywhere," said Marteau.  "I have not
passed an old soldier who did not voice the hope.  It's in the air.
'When the violets bloom,' they say.  Even the peasants whisper it.  The
imperial purple flower----  He will return."

"God grant it may be so."

"And we shall be ready for him, we who have not taken the oath, and
who----"

"I am afraid I shall be a forsworn man, in that case," said the
veteran, smiling grimly.  "Should the Emperor again set foot in France
his presence would absolve us from all vows.  I only serve under the
King's colors because no others fly in France."

"Be it so."

"And you will be with us again in the regiment?"

"How can I?"

"Be advised," said the old soldier, laying his hand upon the arm of the
younger, "we must keep together.  We must keep our regimental
organizations intact.  The army must be ready for him.  Take the oath
as well nigh every soldier high and low in France has done, and----"

"Well, I shall see.  Meanwhile, the Eagle there.  You won't give it up?"

"Give it up!" laughed Lestoype.  "I feel just as you do about it, but
we must conceal it.  The Seventh, Labedoyere's regiment, in garrison
here, concealed their Eagle.  At least it has not been found.  There
was a terrible to do about it."

"Do you vouch for the officer at the main gate?  I had to tell him in
order to be passed.  I know him but slightly."

"The Sub-Lieutenant Drehon."

"He is safe?"

"Beyond doubt.  Meanwhile, you require----"

"Everything," said Marteau simply.

"The King's paymasters are a long time in coming.  We are left to make
shift as best we can.  But I am not yet penniless," returned the old
Major.  He threw a purse on the table.  "You will be my guest.  With
these you can get proper clothes and uniform."

"And the boy?"

"I will turn him over to the men.  They will be glad to welcome him.
He should have the Legion of Honor for rescuing the Eagle.  But stop."

"What is it?"

"He won't talk?"

"I have tested that lad.  He will be as close-mouthed as the grave.
You understand, Pierre, you are not to say a word about the Eagle until
I give you leave," said Marteau to his young comrade.  "About our other
adventures you can tell."

"I understand.  Monsieur knows that I can be silent."

"I know.  Good-by.  I shall see you to-morrow.  Now," began Marteau, as
the orderly who had been summoned had taken Pierre away with
instructions to see that he was clothed and fed, "let me ask some
questions.  Who was in command of the regiment?"

"I was until yesterday."

"And yesterday?"

"The King sent down an old officer to take the command, a
Lieutenant-Colonel."

"And the Colonel?"

"Monsieur d'Artois."

"So that----"

"The Lieutenant-Colonel commands the regiment, which is now known as
the Regiment Dauphine, the Comte d'Artois' own," said the Major, with
fine scorn.  "What a name to take the place of the Fifth-of-the-Line,"
he added.

"And Monsieur d'Aumenier?"

"Oh, he seems harmless enough.  He is a trained soldier, too, of
royalist days before the Empire.  He even told me he had been at the
school at Brienne when the Emperor was a student there."

"And who is with him?"

"His niece, the Countess Laure d'Aumenier, engaged to that young
English officer."

"And what of him?"

"Well enough for an Englishman, I suppose," was the careless answer.
"We were paraded yesterday and the young Englishman inspected us, the
lady looking on.  Actually my gorge rose, as he handled our muskets,
criticized our drill.  I heard some of the old mustaches of the
regiment say they would like to put a bayonet through him, and, to be
frank, I should like it myself.  I fought against these English in
Spain.  There's no love lost between us."

"Did he disparage the regiment?"

"Oh, no, quite the contrary.  He was more than complimentary, but I
hate them.  His father is here, too."

"I see.  When is the marriage to take place?"

"How do I know?  I was surprised when the old Marquis volunteered any
information to the likes of me."

"I must see the Marquis at once; with your permission, of course."

"You have it," returned the other, smiling.  "You are not yet
reinstated in the regiment, and, so far as I am concerned, you are free
to go and come as you will."

"He is not here now, I believe?"

"No.  He turned over the command to me temporarily.  He is driving out
into the country, going out to the gap to reconnoiter for himself, I
take it, but he will be back before nightfall, and meanwhile you have
much to do.  We want to get you well fed, to get some good French wine
into you, to put the blood into your veins and color into your cheeks,
to give you a bath, to get you clothing--everything," said the generous
old veteran.




CHAPTER XVIII

ALMOST A GENTLEMAN

"Will you tell the Lieutenant-Colonel, the Marquis d'Aumenier, that an
officer returned from the wars desires to see him?" said Marteau to the
footman who answered the door at the Governor's palace.

"So many wandering officers want to see His Excellency," said the
servant superciliously, "that I have instructions to require further
enlightenment before I admit any to his presence."

"Say to your master," replied the other, his face flushing at the
insolence of the servant, "that one from the village of Aumenier craves
an audience on matters of great importance."

"And even that will scarcely be sufficient," began the lackey.

"Enough!" thundered Marteau.  "Carry my message to him instantly," he
said fiercely, "or I shall throw you aside and carry it myself."

The servant looked at him a moment, and not relishing what he saw,
turned on his heel and disappeared.

"His Excellency will see you, sir," he said, in a manner considerably
more respectful when he returned a few moments later.  "This way, sir.
His Excellency is in the drawing-room, having finished his dinner.
What name shall I announce?" he asked, his hand on the door.

"Announce no one," was the curt reply.  "Open the door.  I will make
myself known."

The lackey threw open the door.  Marteau entered the room and closed
the door behind him.  The drawing-room of the Governor's palace was
brilliantly illuminated.  The Governor was receiving the officers of
the garrison and the principal inhabitants of the city that night, but
it was yet early in the evening, and none of them had arrived.  The
young officer had purposely planned his visit at that hour, in order
that he might have a few moments' conversation with the Marquis before
the invited guests arrived.

There were five people gathered about the fireplace, all engrossed in
pleasant conversation apparently.  It was the second of March, and the
weather made the fire blazing on the hearth very welcome.  Four of the
five people in the room were men; the fifth person was a woman.  It was
she whose attention was first aroused by the sound of the closing of
the door.  She faced about, her glance fell upon the newcomer, a cup
which she held in her hand fell to the floor, the precious china
splintering into a thousand fragments, her face turned as white as the
lace of her low evening gown.

"Marteau!" she exclaimed in almost an agonized whisper.

"Mademoiselle," answered the soldier, bowing profoundly.

He was beautifully dressed in the nearest approach to the latest
fashion that the best tailor in Grenoble could offer--thanks to the
Major's purse--and, although his most becoming attire was not a
uniform, his every movement betrayed the soldier, as his every look
bespoke the man.

"And who have we here?" asked the oldest man of the group, the Marquis
d'Aumenier himself, the attention of all being attracted to the
newcomer by the crash of the broken china and the low exclamation of
the young woman which none had made out clearly.

"By gad!" bellowed out with tremendous voice a stout old man, whose red
face and heavy body contrasted surprisingly with the pale face, the
lean, thin figure of the old Marquis, "I am damned if it isn't the
young Frenchman that held the chateau with us.  Lad," he cried,
stepping forward and stretching out his hand, "I am glad to see you
alive.  I asked after you, as soon as I came back to France, but they
told me you were dead."

"On the contrary, as you see, sir, I am very much alive, and at Sir
Gervaise Yeovil's service as always," said Marteau, meeting the
Englishman's hand with his own, touched by the other's hearty greeting,
whose genuineness no one could doubt.  "And this gentleman?" he went
on, turning to a young replica of the older man, who had stepped to his
father's side.

"Is my son, Captain Frank Yeovil, of King George's Fifty-second Light
Infantry.  By gad, I am glad to have him make your acquaintance.  He is
going to marry the Marquis' niece here--your old friend--when they can
settle on a day.  You had thoughts in that direction yourself, I
remember," he went on, in his bluff way, "but I suppose you have got
bravely over them by now," he laughed.

"I have resigned myself to the inevitable, monsieur," answered Marteau
with a calmness that he did not feel.

He did not dare to look at the Countess Laure as he spoke.  He could
not have commanded himself if he had done so.  His lips were compressed
and his face was paler than before.  The girl saw it.  She had watched
him, fascinated.  The Englishman, young, frank, sunny-haired, gallant,
stepped up to him, shook him by his unwilling hand.

"I am glad to know you," he said.  "I have heard how you saved my
betrothed's life and honor, and held the chateau.  I have longed to
meet you, to thank you."

"And I you," said Marteau.  "You English are frank.  I shall be
likewise," he added.  "It was not thus I wanted to meet you, monsieur,
not in a drawing-room, in this peaceful dress, but--on the field."

"I understand," said the Englishman, sobered a little by the other's
seriousness.  "And if the war had continued perhaps we might have
settled the--er"--his eyes sought those of his fiancee, but she was not
looking at him--"our differences," he added, "in the old knightly way,
but now----"

"Now it is impossible," assented Marteau, "since my Emperor and I are
both defeated."

"Monsieur," broke in the high, rather sharp voice of the old Marquis,
"that is a title which is no longer current in France.  As loyal
subjects of, the King the word is banished--like the man."

"I am but new to France, Monsieur le Marquis, and have not yet learned
to avoid the ancient habit."

"And yet you are a Frenchman," commented the Marquis dryly.  "You said
you came from Aumenier.  I did not catch your name, sir?"

"Marteau, at your service."

"One of the loyal Marteaux?"

"The last one, sir."

"And pray why are you new to France?"
