Cortes actually surprised Narvaez in the town in which he had taken
refuge and seized him after an attack--a night surprise of bold and
audacious conception--by the two hundred and fifty against the twelve
hundred which was completely successful.  With Narvaez in Cortes's
hands all opposition ceased on the part of the men.  In one swoop
Narvaez lost power, position and one eye, which had been knocked out
during the contest, and Cortes found his following reinforced by so
great a number and quality that he had never dreamed of such a thing.

"You are, indeed, fortunate," said Narvaez to his conqueror, "in having
captured me."

"It is," said Cortes carelessly, "the least of the things I have done
in Mexico!"

While affairs were thus progressing favorably on the coast, the
smouldering rebellion had at last broken out in Mexico, and Cortes
received a message from Alvarado, bidding him return with all possible
speed.  There was not a braver soldier, a fiercer fighter, or a more
resolute man in the following of Cortes than Pedro de Alvarado.  When
that has been said, however, practically all has been said that can be
said in {176} his favor.  He was a rash, impetuous, reckless,
head-long, tactless, unscrupulous man, and brutal and cruel to a high
degree.

His suspicions that the Aztecs, led by Montezuma, were conspiring to
overwhelm his small force were aroused.  It is probable that there was
some truth in his apprehensions, although he could not point to
anything very definite upon which to base them.  He knew of but one way
to deal with such a situation--by brute force.  He waited until the
great May Festival of the Aztecs was being held, and then fell upon
them in the midst of their joyous play and slew six hundred, including
many of the noblest chiefs of the land.  The outbreak was instant and
universal.  The house of Ayxacatl was at once besieged, the influx of
provisions was stopped, and the pueblo was surrounded by vast numbers
of thoroughly enraged citizens.  Neither the Spaniards nor the allies
could leave the pueblo without being overwhelmed.  Alvarado at last
compelled Montezuma to show himself on the walls and bid the people
stop fighting, to enable him to strengthen his position and hold it
until the arrival of Cortes, and some fifteen hundred men, his own
force and that of Narvaez combined.

When the conqueror met Alvarado he upbraided him and told him that he
had behaved like a madman.  There was little or no provision.  Cortes
now made the mistake of sending Cuitlahua, the brother of Montezuma,
out into the city with instructions for him to have the markets opened
at once and secure provisions for the Spaniards and their horses.
Cuitlahua, being free, called the council of priests.  This council at
once deposed Montezuma and elected Cuitlahua {177} emperor and priest
in his place.  The revolution and the religion now had a head.

The next morning an attack of such force was delivered that many of
even the stoutest-hearted Spaniards quailed before it.  The slaughter
of the natives was terrific.  The Spanish cannon opened long lanes
through the crowded streets.  The Spanish horse sallied forth and
hacked and hewed broad pathways up the different avenues.  Still, the
attack was pressed and was as intrepid as if not a single Aztec had
died.  The roar that came up from every quarter of the city, from the
house tops, from the crowded streets, from the Temples, was in itself
enough to appall the bravest.


X. In God's Way

Finally Cortes resorted to Alvarado's expedient.  He compelled the
unhappy Montezuma to mount the walls of the palace and bid the people
disperse.  When he appeared in all his splendid panoply upon the roof
of the palace there was a strange silence.  He was no longer priest, he
was no longer emperor, he was no longer a power, he was no longer a
god, but some of the old divinity seemed to cling to him, to linger
around him still.  The situation was so tragic that even the meanest
soldier, Mexican or Spanish, felt its import.  A long time the Aztec
looked over his once smiling capital, and into the faces of his once
subordinate people.  Finally he began to address them.  He bade them
lay down their arms and disperse.

The people, led by the great lords and Montezuma's brother, Cuitlahua,
and his nephew, Guatemoc, answered with a roar of rage, and the roar
spread as the purport of the message was communicated to those {178}
further back.  Montezuma stood appalled.  The next instant a rain of
missiles was actually launched at him and the Spaniards who stood by
his side.  A stone hurled, it is said by young Guatemoc, struck him in
the forehead.  He reeled and fell.  With the bitter words: "Woman!
woman!" ringing in his ears, he was carried away by the Spaniards.  His
face, says Lew Wallace, was the face of a man "breaking because he was
in God's way!"  He lived a few days after that, but he refused to eat,
and repeatedly tore the bandages from his wounds until death put an end
to his miseries.  The stone that had struck him had broken his heart.
Neither Cortes nor Montezuma himself knew that he had been deposed.
Cortes and the principal Spaniards visited him and endeavoured to
console him, but he turned his face to the wall and would have none of
them.  It was said afterward that he became a Christian, but it is most
probably not true.  He died as he had lived.  Helps thus describes the
scene and the great Montezuma's end:

[Illustration: The Death of Montezuma.  From an old engraving.]

"He was surrounded by Spanish soldiers, and was at first received with
all respect and honor by his people.  When silence ensued, he addressed
them in very loving words, bidding them discontinue the attack, and
assuring them that the Spaniards would depart from Mexico.  It is not
probable that much of his discourse could have been heard by the raging
multitude.  But, on the other hand, he was able to hear what their
leaders had to say, as four of the chiefs approached near him, and with
tears addressed him, declaring their grief at his imprisonment.  They
told him that they had chosen his brother as their leader, that they
had vowed to their gods not to cease fighting {179} until the Spaniards
were all destroyed, and that each day they prayed to their gods to keep
him free and harmless.  They added, that when their designs were
accomplished, he should be much more their lord than heretofore, and
that he should then pardon them.  Amongst the crowd, however, were,
doubtless, men who viewed the conduct of Montezuma with intense
disgust, or who thought that they had already shown too much disrespect
toward him ever to be pardoned.  A shower of stones and arrows
interrupted the parley; the Spanish soldiers had ceased for the moment
to protect Montezuma with their shields; and he was severely wounded in
the head and in two other places.  The miserable monarch was borne
away, having received his death-stroke; but whether it came from the
wounds themselves, or from the indignity of being thus treated by his
people, remains a doubtful point.  It seems, however, that, to use some
emphatic words which have been employed upon a similar occasion: 'He
turned his face to the wall, and would be troubled no more.'

[Illustration: "He Defended Himself With His Terrible Spear"]

"It is remarkable that he did not die like a Christian,[6] and I think
this shows that he had more force of mind and purpose than the world
has generally been inclined to give him credit for.  To read
Montezuma's character rightly, at this distance of time, and amidst
such a wild perplexity of facts, would be very difficult, and is not
very important.  But one thing, {180} I think, is discernible, and that
is, that his manners were very gracious and graceful.  I dwell upon
this, because I conceive it was a characteristic of the race; and no
one will estimate this characteristic lightly, who has observed how
very rare, even in the centres of civilized life, it is to find people
of fine manners, so that in great capitals but very few persons can be
pointed out who are at all transcendent in this respect.  The gracious
delight which Montezuma had in giving was particularly noticeable; and
the impression which he made upon Bernal Diaz may be seen in the
narrative of this simple soldier, who never speaks of him otherwise as
'the great Montezuma'; and, upon the occasion of his death, remarks
that some of the Spanish soldiers who had known him mourned for him as
if he had been a father, 'and no wonder,' he adds, 'seeing that he was
so good.'"

Cortes sent out the body to the new king, and Montezuma was mourned
over by the Spaniards, to whom he had always been gracious, and
probably, by his own people; but little could be learned of what the
Mexicans thought, or did, upon the occasion, by the Spaniards, who only
saw that Montezuma's death made no difference in the fierceness of the
enemy's attack.

Meanwhile the situation of the Spaniards was indescribable.  There was
mutiny and rebellion among them.  The soldiers of Narvaez, who looked
for a pleasant promenade through a land of peace and plenty, were
appalled.  There was daily, desperate fighting.  The Mexicans had
manned the temple of the war-god which overlooked the Spanish pueblo,
and Cortes determined to capture it.  With a large body of chosen men
he attempted its escalade.  It was crowded to the very top with the
most resolute {181} Aztecs, and they fought for it with the courage of
fanaticism and despair itself.  The feather shields were no match for
the steel cuirasses.  The wooden clubs, stuck full of sharp pieces of
obsidian, could not compete on equal terms with the Toledo blades.
Step by step, terrace by terrace, the Spaniards fought their way to the
very top.  As if by mutual consent, the contests in the streets stopped
and all eyes were turned upon this battle in the air.

Arriving at the great plateau upon the crest, the Spaniards were met by
five hundred of the noblest Aztecs, who, animated by their priests,
made the last desperate stand for the altars of their gods.

  "And how can men die better,
  Than in facing fearful odds,
  For the ashes of their Fathers,
  And the temples of their Gods?"


In the course of the terrific conflict which ensued, two of the bravest
leaped upon Cortes, wrapped their arms around him, and attempted to
throw themselves off the top of the temple, devoting themselves to
death, if so be, they might compass their bold design.  It was on the
very verge of eternity that Cortes tore himself free from them.
Singled out for attack because of his position and because of his
fearlessness in battle, his life was saved again and again by his
followers, until it seemed to be miraculously preserved.

After a stupendous struggle the summit of the temple was carried.  Amid
the groans of the populace, the Spaniards tumbled down from its
resting-place the hideous image of the war-god, and completed in Aztec
eyes the desecration of the temple.  They were victorious, but they had
paid a price.  Dead Spaniards {182} dotted the terraces, the sunlight,
gleaming on their armor, picking them out amid the dark, naked bodies
of the Mexicans.  Of those who had survived the encounter, there was
scarcely one but had sustained one or more wounds, some of them fearful
in character.  The Mexicans had not died in vain.

Leaving a guard at the temple, Cortes came back to the garrison.  The
attack was resumed at once by the natives.  Attempts were made to burn
the thatched roofs of the pueblo.  A rain of missiles was poured upon
it.  The Spaniards made sally after sally, inflicting great slaughter,
but losing always a little themselves.  The Aztecs would sometimes
seize a Spaniard and bear him off alive to sacrifice him on some high
pyramid temple in full view of his wretched comrades below.  The
Spaniards fired cannon after cannon, but to no avail.  They were
starving, they were becoming sick, and they were covered with wounds;
their allies, who took part gallantly in all the hard fighting,
suffered frightful losses.  It was at last reluctantly agreed among the
leaders that their only salvation was the evacuation of the city.


XI. The Melancholy Night

Although the course thus thrust upon them was indeed a hard one, there
was nothing else to be done.  Sick, wounded, starving, dying, they
could by no means maintain themselves longer in the city.  Fight as
they might and would, the end would come speedily, and would mean
annihilation.  Happy in that event would be those who died upon the
field, for every living captive, whatever his condition, would be
reserved for that frightful sacrifice to the war-god, in which his
{183} body would be opened, and his reeking heart torn, almost while
still beating, from his breast.  To retreat was almost as dangerous as
it was to remain.  It was certain, however, that some would get through
in that attempt, although it was equally certain that many would not.

Cortes, mustering his soldiers and allies, after a day of
heart-breaking fighting, disclosed the situation to them in blunt
soldier-like words, although they all knew it as well as he, and then
the hasty preparations began.  A vast treasure had been amassed by the
Spaniards.  Making an effort to preserve the fifth portion of it, which
by law belonged to the King, Cortes threw open the treasure chamber and
bade the rest help themselves.  He cautioned them, however, that those
who went the lightest, would have the greatest prospects for escape, a
warning which many, especially among those who had come to the country
with Narvaez, chose to disregard.

The causeway along which they determined to fly and which connected
Mexico with the mainland was pierced at intervals to admit passage from
one portion of the lake to the other.  The bridges which usually
covered these openings had been taken away by the Aztecs.  Cortes
caused a temporary bridge or pontoon to be built which was to be
carried with the fugitives to enable them to pass the openings.

The night was the first of July, 1520.  It was pitch dark and a heavy
rain was falling.  The forces consisted of twelve hundred and fifty
Spaniards, of whom eighty were mounted, and six thousand Tlascalans.
They were divided into three divisions.  The advance was under the
command of Juan Valesquez, Cortes led the main body, and the rear was
put in the charge {184} of the rash, cruel, but heroic Alvarado.  The
less severely wounded were supported by their comrades, and those
unable to walk were carried on litters or mounted on horses.  Montezuma
had died the night before.  Any lingering hopes of being able to effect
peace through his influence had departed.  Leaving everything they
could not carry, the Spaniards, after prayer, confession and
absolution, threw open the gates,[7] and entered the city.

Midnight was approaching.  The streets and avenues were silent and
deserted.  The retreat proceeded cautiously for a little way,
unmolested, when suddenly a deep, booming sound roared like thunder
over the heads of the Spaniards, through the black night, filling their
hearts with alarm.  Cortes recognized it at once.  The Aztecs were
awake and ready.  The priests in the great teocallis, or temple
pyramids, were beating the great drum of the war-god, Huitzilopocahtli.
Lights appeared here and there in the town, the clashing of arms was
heard here and there on the broad avenues.  Under the lights farther up
the streets could be seen files of troops moving.  The hour was full of
portent.

Dragging their artillery, carrying their wounded, bearing their
treasure, the Spaniards and their allies passed rapidly through the
streets.  Before the advance reached the first opening in the causeway
it was already hotly engaged.  The water on either side of the
cause-way suddenly swarmed with canoes.  Spears, javelins, arrows,
heavy war-clubs with jagged pieces of obsidian were hurled upon the
Spaniards on the causeway.  In front of them, almost, it seemed, for
the whole length, the {185} Indians were massed.  Step by step, by the
hardest kind of hand-to-hand fighting, the Spaniards and their allies
arrived at the first opening.  Their loss had been frightful already.
They were surrounded and attacked from all sides.  Indians scrambled up
the low banks in the darkness, seized the feet of the flying Spaniards
and strove to draw them into the water.  Many a white man, many a
Tlascalan locked in the savage embrace of some heroic Aztec, stumbled
or was dragged into the lake and was drowned in the struggle.  The
frightened horses reared and plunged and created great confusion.  The
golden treasure with which many had loaded themselves proved a
frightful incumbrance.  Those who could do so, flung it away; those too
bitterly occupied in fighting for their lives could do little but
drive, thrust, hew, hack and struggle in the dark and slippery way.

But the army did advance.  Arriving at the brink of the first opening,
the bridge was brought up and the division began its passage.  It had
scarcely crossed the gap when under the pressure of tremendous fear,
the second division, in spite of all that could be done to refrain and
control them by Cortes and his officers--and there were no braver men
on earth--crowded on the frail bridge.  The structure which was
sufficiently strong for ordinary and orderly passage, gave way,
precipitating a great mass of Spaniards and Indians into the causeway.
Cortes with his own hands, assisted by a few of the cooler veterans,
tried to lift up the shattered remains of the bridge but was unable to
do anything with it.  It was ruined beyond repair, and sank into a
splintered mass of timber under the terrific pressure to which it had
been subjected.  A passage at that gap was afforded to those who came
{186} after because it was filled level with dead bodies of Spaniards,
Indians and horses, to say nothing of guns, baggage and equipment.

By this time the advance guard was again heavily engaged.  The
Spaniards and their allies staggered along the dyke, fighting
desperately all the time.  Velasquez, leading the advance division was
killed at the brink of the second opening.  The wretched fugitives were
driven headlong into the second opening which was soon choked with
horses and men as the first had been.  Over this living, dying bridge
the survivors madly ploughed.  Some of them led by Cortes himself found
a ford on the side.  Although they were cut down by the hundreds, there
seemed to be no end to the Aztecs.  The rain still fell.  The drum of
the war-god mingled with frightful peals of thunder, and the shrill
cries of the Mexicans rose higher and higher.  The Spaniards were sick,
wounded, beaten and terrified.  Only Cortes and his captains and a few
of his veterans preserved the slightest semblance of organization.

The third gap was passed by the same awful expedient as the other two
had been.  There was not a great distance from the third opening to the
mainland.  The few who had passed over rushed desperately for the
shore.  Way back in the rear, last of all, came Alvarado.  There was a
strange current in the lake, and as he stood all alone at the last
opening, confronting the pursuers, his horse having been killed under
him, a swift movement of the water swept away the gorged mass of
bodies.  Torches in the canoes enabled the Aztecs to recognize
Alvarado, Tonatiuh, the child of the sun.  His helmet had been knocked
off and his fair hair streamed over his shoulders.  He indeed would
{187} be a prize for their sacrifice, second only to Cortes himself.
With furious cries, the most reckless and intrepid leaped upon the dyke
and rushed at him.  At his feet lay his neglected lance.  Dropping his
sword, he seized his spear, swiftly plunged the point of it into the
sand at the bottom of the pass, and, weighted though he was with his
armor, and weak from his wounds and from the loss of blood, leaped to
safety on the other side.  To this day, this place of Alvarado's
marvelous leap is pointed out.  Like Ney, Alvarado was the last of that
grand army, and like the French commander, also, he might properly be
called the bravest of the brave.

