


CHAPTER XXV.

A REMARKABLE REVELATION.


Alarming news reached the Ruthven plantation that night. A large force
of Federal soldiers had loomed up in the vicinity, and the Confederate
army had been compelled to fall back to the mountains and to the valley
beyond.

"Our victory is swallowed up in defeat," said Marion, but even as she
spoke a soft look came into her eyes. Perhaps, if the Yankees were
coming again, she would see Harry Powell once more. Even though she did
not wish to acknowledge it to herself, Marion thought much of her
dashing cousin.

"What a man he is, compared with cowardly St. John!" she said to
herself. And then she prayed to Heaven that Harry might come out of the
war unharmed.

Marion's wish was gratified so far as seeing Harry Powell was concerned,
for the young surgeon dashed up on horseback early in the morning.

"I could not keep away," he said, after shaking hands with Mrs. Ruthven
and his cousin. "I heard that the fight was fierce in this neighborhood,
and I wanted to learn if you had suffered."

"We had a cannon ball go through the sitting room," answered Mrs.
Ruthven.

"And was anybody hurt?"

"One of the wounded soldiers was hit. He has now a high fever in
consequence."

"Thank God the cannon ball did not hit you or Marion!" ejaculated Harry
Powell, and gave Marion a look that made the girl blush deeply.
"Somebody said the Ruthven place had been on fire."

"That was at St. John's place," answered Marion. "But the fire was put
out before great damage was done."

"I am happy to see that you were not hurt, Harry," said Mrs. Ruthven.
"You must have been in peril many times."

"I was in peril, aunt, and I did not escape wholly. I was wounded in the
shoulder, although the hurt is of small consequence."

"I am glad that you escaped," cried Marion. And she gave him a look that
meant a good deal.

"Poor Colonel Stanton was not so fortunate," went on the young surgeon.
"He was shot through the breast, and now lies between life and death."

"Jack saw him shot, from a distance," said Mrs. Ruthven.

"Did he? And where is Jack now?"

"He has disappeared," and the lady of the plantation gave her nephew
some of the particulars.

Harry was invited into the house, and he remained to lunch, in the
meantime telling of the general progress of the war.

"Frankly, I wish it was at an end," he said. "I hate to see one section
of our glorious country fighting the other. It is not right."

During the talk it developed that Colonel Stanton was lying at a house
about half a mile distant, up the bay road.

"He acts very queerly," said Harry Powell, "just as if his wound had
affected his mind."

"Can we do anything for him?" asked Mrs. Ruthven.

"I do not know of anything now. But perhaps I'll think of something
later, aunt. I do not wish the colonel to suffer any more than is
necessary. He is a thorough gentleman."

"I feel you are right, Harry. He has given me an entirely different idea
of Yankees from what I had before," returned Mrs. Ruthven warmly.

The lady of the plantation became deeply interested in the wounded
colonel's case, and when the young surgeon went away she had one of the
negroes of the place hitch up a horse to the carriage and drive her over
to where the wounded officer lay.

The colonel was in something of a fever, and hardly recognized her. For
a long time he kept muttering to himself, but she could not catch his
words.

"The ship is doomed!" he cried suddenly. "We are going to pieces on the
rocks!" And then he began to speak of the army and of the terrible
battle through which he had gone.

"What can he mean by saying the ship is doomed?" was the question which
Mrs. Ruthven asked herself. "Can it be that he was once in a shipwreck?"

For a long while after this the colonel lay silent. Then he opened his
eyes and stared around wildly.

"All drowned, you say?" he exclaimed. "No! no! Laura must be saved! Save
my wife--never mind me! How high the waves are running! Where is the
child? Captain, why don't you put out to sea? Don't you see the rebels?
They are luring us to the coast! See, that rebel is stealing my child,
my darling Jack! Ha! we have struck, and I am drifting. Laura, where are
you? Save Jack! Look, look, they are retreating! The battle is won! Oh,
what a storm--can nothing be saved?" And then the poor man sank back,
completely exhausted.

Mrs. Ruthven drank in the spoken words like one in a dream. What was
this the wounded officer was saying? Something about a storm, about a
wife Laura, and a child named Jack!

"Can it be possible that he is speaking of our boy Jack?" she asked
herself, and then looked at the colonel's face more closely than ever.
The resemblance was more than striking, it was perfect. Give Jack that
heavy mustache and those wrinkles, and the faces would be exactly alike.

"He must be Jack's father!" she went on. "How wonderful! But what does
this mean? Why did he not claim Jack long ago?"

For over an hour she sat by the colonel's side, but he made no further
efforts to speak. In the meantime a surgeon came in to attend to the
officer's wound.

"If you can have him taken to my house, I will see to it that he has the
best of care," said Mrs. Ruthven.

"Why, are you not a Southern woman, madam?" questioned the surgeon, in
pardonable surprise.

"I am, but I know Colonel Stanton, and do not wish to see him suffer any
more than is necessary."

"He is a friend?"

"Something of a friend, yes."

"And who are you, if I may ask?"

"I am Mrs. Alice Ruthven, owner of the plantation half a mile from here.
Dr. Harry Powell, whom you may know, is my nephew."

"I know Dr. Powell well, and if he says it is all right, I'll have
Colonel Stanton removed to your home without delay."

"When will you see Dr. Powell?"

"To-day. This is not a nice place, and I would like to see the colonel
have better quarters."

A little later Mrs. Ruthven left and drove home with all speed.

"Marion, I have wonderful news!" she exclaimed, on entering the room
where the girl sat making bandages for the wounded soldiers.

"What is it, mamma; is Jack found?"

"No, but I am almost sure that I have found Jack's father?"

"Oh, mamma! Of course you don't mean that horrid Dr. Mackey?"

"No, I mean Colonel Stanton."

"Mamma!" And Marion leaped up, scattering the bandages in all
directions.

"Did you ever notice how much Jack and the colonel resembled each
other?"

"I did."

"The colonel is in a fever, and while I was there he cried out about a
shipwreck, and asked that his wife Laura and his son Jack be saved."

"Didn't you always think Jack's mother was named Laura?"

"I did--although I wasn't sure."

"But why didn't he come to claim Jack?"

"That's the mystery. I have asked that the colonel be brought here, and
as soon as he is well enough to stand being questioned I am going to
learn the truth of the matter."

"I hope he is Jack's father," murmured Marion. "But if so, what of Dr.
Mackey?"

"That's another mystery."

"He must know something of the colonel's past."

"Undoubtedly."

"I wonder if the two ever met in this vicinity?"

"There is no telling. I am impatient to question the colonel. But of
course nothing can be done until he is better and in his right mind."

That evening there was the rattle of wagon-wheels on the gravel road
leading up to the Ruthven mansion, and, looking out, Marion and her
mother saw an ambulance approaching. The colonel was inside, and they
hastened to prepare a bedroom for his accommodation.

"Is he better?" asked Mrs. Ruthven of the surgeon in charge.

"A trifle," was the answer. "What he needs is rest and quiet. He has a
strong constitution, and that is in his favor."

It did not take long to transfer Colonel Stanton to the bedchamber
prepared for his reception, and once he was in the house Mrs. Ruthven
did all in her power to make him comfortable. The ride had somewhat
exhausted the officer, and he slept heavily until far into the next
morning.




CHAPTER XXVI.

DR. MACKEY SHOWS HIS HAND.


"Well, what do these fellows intend to do with me, anyway?"

It was Jack who asked himself the question, as he sat up, after quite a
long sleep.

He was a close prisoner in a little cabin far up the mountain side. His
hands were bound tightly behind him and were made fast to a heavy wooden
stake driven into the hard mud flooring.

Night had come and gone, and all of the Confederates had left him. Now
it was almost night again.

"If they would only give me something to eat and to drink," he went on.
He was very dry, and his stomach was empty.

Half an hour later a footstep sounded outside, and Dr. Mackey appeared,
carrying a knapsack filled with provisions, and a canteen of water.

"Sorry I had to keep you waiting. Jack," he said, as he set the articles
down and proceeded to liberate our hero. "But I had the whole affair to
smooth over, and I had also to get Gendron out of the muss," and he
smiled grimly.

"Dr. Mackey, why do you treat me in this fashion?" demanded Jack.

"Because I want you to come to your senses and understand that I am your
father."

"Do you think you are treating me as a father should?"

"A son who will not obey must be made to obey. Here, I have brought you
something to eat and to drink. Fall to and make the most of it."

It would have been foolish to refuse the invitation, and our hero began
to eat without delay. The surgeon watched him curiously.

"Jack, don't you think you are acting the part of a fool?" said the man
presently.

"No, I do not."

"I offer you a name, a good home, and your share of a large fortune, and
yet you turn your back on me and my offers."

"Have you a large fortune coming to me?"

"There is a large fortune coming to both of us. You shall have your full
share of it--providing you will do as I wish."

"And what do you wish?"

"Well, in the first place, I wish you to let the world know that you are
fully satisfied that I am your father."

"And after that?"

"After that I will resign my commission as a surgeon in the Confederate
army and take the necessary steps to claim the fortune which awaits us."

"Why haven't you claimed the fortune before?"

"Because I had to prove that my wife had been drowned, and had also to
prove that you were either alive or dead. Had you been dead, I could
have taken the fortune for my own. But you are not dead, and so I am
willing you shall have your share."

"Where is this fortune?"

"Never mind about that now. I will give you my word that, if all goes
well, you shall have your full share."

"And how much will that be?"

"Not less than fifty or sixty thousand dollars. The whole fortune is
worth over a hundred thousand dollars."

It must be confessed that our hero was staggered for a moment. The sum
was certainly a large one--a good deal more than the Ruthven plantation
was worth.

"It's a lot of money," he said, at last.

"Indeed it is, my boy. We can be happy on that amount for the rest of
our lives."

"But you haven't proved to me that you are my father," went on Jack
abruptly.

The crafty face of the surgeon fell, and he bit his lip.

"What more proof do you require?" he said coldly. "Do you suppose I
would wish to divide that fortune with a stranger?"

"I presume not, nor would I wish to divide any fortune that was coming
to me with a stranger."

"Ha! what do you mean?" gasped the medical man.

"I mean just this: That fortune may be coming to me, and you may be
trying to gain possession of it by palming yourself off as my father."

The shot told, and Dr. Mackey staggered back and turned pale.

"Jack, you think you are smart, but you don't know what you are saying,"
he stormed.

"Perhaps I do, Dr. Mackey. One thing I do know--you are not to be
trusted."

"What? This to my face?"

"You took the part of Gendron, when you knew he was nothing but a
guerrilla and a horse-thief."

"I know nothing of the kind. Gendron has a good record behind him. He
was shot, and that may have hurt his brain."

"I don't believe that fairy tale. To my mind, you sided with him because
you were afraid he would expose you."

"Boy, you are growing more bold. Don't you realize that you are in my
power?"

"Am I?"

"Yes, you are--absolutely in my power. And you have got to do as I wish,
or you'll take the consequences."

As Dr. Mackey spoke, he began to walk up and down the cabin nervously.

"What do you mean by my taking the consequences?"

"You'll find that out later."

"Would you kill me?"

"I would make you mind me--as a son should."

"I would rather do without the fortune than have you for a father, Dr.
Mackey."

"Well, there is no love lost between us, when it comes to that, boy."

"Then you are willing to admit that you care more for the fortune than
you do for me?"

"Why shouldn't I--after the way you have acted toward me? No father
wishes a son who hates him."

"I will agree with you there," answered Jack slowly.

"If you don't wish to live with me, well and good--after we have our
money. You can take your share and I'll take mine--and that will be the
end of it."

"And you will let me return to the Ruthven plantation, if I wish?"

"Yes. But not until everything is settled."

"And what must I do to help settle it?"

"You must sign a paper acknowledging me as your father, and must bear
witness to the fact of your being wrecked on this shore, and that your
mother is dead. We will have to get Old Ben for another witness."

"And after that?"

"After that I will take the next step."

"You will not tell me more now?"

"No. I don't know whether I can trust you or not."

"But why this secrecy, if everything is aboveboard?"

"As I explained to Mrs. Ruthven, some distant relatives hold the fortune
now, and if they learn of what I am doing they will at once take steps
to head my claim off. I wish to spring a surprise on them."

"But if the claim is a just one, and half the property is coming to me,
you do not suppose I am going to tell them in advance of what you intend
to do."

"Boy, you do not understand such matters--you are not old enough,"
growled the surgeon. "Once more, and for the last time, will you do as I
wish you to?"

