the governor.' That is all.

"Now I am off for a tankard of spiced wine, which I think I have
earned well, for it is a good hour after my time of relief."

Then Philip heard his footsteps descending the stairs, while the
man who had relieved him walked briskly up and down in front of the
door. In a minute or two he stopped, then Philip turned with a
start from the window at which he was standing, as he heard through
the keyhole a loud whisper:

"Monsieur Philip, are you asleep? It is I!"

"Why, Pierre!" he exclaimed, running to the door and putting his
mouth to the keyhole; "how did you come here?"

"I will tell you that later, master. The thing is now to get you
out. The bolts here are easy enough to draw, but this lock puzzles
me. I have brought up two thin saws and an auger, and thought to
cut round it; but there is a plate of iron outside."

"And there is one inside too, Pierre. How about the hinges,
Pierre?"

"There is no doing anything with them, master. The ironwork goes
right across the door. There is nothing for it, but to cut right
round the iron plate."

"That won't take very long, if the saws are good, Pierre."

Philip heard a rasping sound and, in a short time, the auger passed
through the woodwork. Two other holes adjoining the first were soon
made, and then the end of a saw was pushed through.

"If you can make a hole large enough at the bottom of the plate,
Pierre, and pass me the other saw through, I can work that way to
meet you."

"It would take too long to make, sir. I have plenty of oil, and it
won't take me long to saw round the plate. I only brought the
second saw in case the first should break. But this oak is pretty
nearly as hard as iron."

It took over an hour's work before the cut was complete. When it
was nearly finished, Pierre said:

"Be ready to seize the piece that is cut out, as soon as I am
through with it, master; otherwise it may fall down, as the door
opens, and make a clatter that will be heard all over the castle."

As the last piece was sawn through Philip pressed the door and, as
it opened, seized the portion cut out, drew it backward, and laid
it gently on the stone floor. Then he rose, and grasped Pierre's
hand.

"My brave Pierre, you have accomplished what I thought was an
impossibility. Now, what is the next thing to be done?"

"The next thing is to unwind this rope from my body. It is lucky I
am so lean that it did not make me look bulky. It is not very
thick, but it is new and strong, and there are knots every two
feet. Roger is waiting for us below, in a boat."

"Where is Jacques?"

"Jacques has ridden off. He learned, before sunset, that orders had
been issued for the troops to assemble. He and Roger had taken the
four horses beyond the walls, an hour after you were arrested; and
had left them at a farmer's, a mile away. So he arranged with me
that he should follow the troop on foot; which he could do, as
there are footmen as well as horse in the party that has gone out.
Then, as soon as he discovered which way they were going, he would
slip off and make for the farmhouse and mount. If they were bound
for Nerac, he will wait for us at the point on the other side of
the river. If they follow the river down, he will ride at full
speed, make a circuit, and warn the queen of the danger. He will
have plenty of time to do that, as the column will have to move at
the pace of the infantry."

"That is a load off my mind, Pierre."

While they were speaking they had unwound the rope, fastened one
end to the battlement, and lowered the other down.

"I will go first, master. I am the lightest, and will steady the
rope for you, from below."

In two or three minutes Philip felt that the rope was no longer
tight, and at once swung himself over and lowered himself down. The
water washed the foot of the wall, and he stepped directly into the
boat; which Roger was keeping in its place with a pole, while
Pierre held the rope. An exclamation of thankfulness broke from the
two men, as his feet touched the gunwale of the boat; and then,
without a word, Roger began to pole the boat along against the
tide, keeping close to the foot of the wall.

Once fairly beyond the castle, the pole was laid in and the two men
took the oars, and the boat shot across the river. Then they rowed
up under the opposite bank, until a voice from above them said:

"Is all well--is Monsieur Philip with you?"

"All is well, Jacques," Philip exclaimed, delighted; for the fact
that his follower was there showed that the troops had gone in the
direction that did not threaten the safety of the queen.

They leapt ashore and pushed the boat off, to allow it to float
down with the stream.

It was a mile to the spot where the horses had been left. On the
way, Philip heard how his escape had been effected.

"I saw you go out from the town, monsieur; and could not, for the
life of me, make out what was going to happen. I did not know the
gentleman you were walking with, but I recognized the two in front
of you as the officers of the troop that had questioned us, near
Bazas. One of them was talking angrily to the other. As it seemed
to me that you were going willingly, and not as a prisoner; and
especially as you were going out of the town, I thought that it was
my business to wait until you returned.

"I saw, half an hour, later some horsemen coming up the street, and
someone said that it was the governor, who had been out with a
party. It gave me a bad turn, when I saw you walking as a prisoner
in the middle of them. I saw you glance at me, but of course made
no sign; and I followed until you entered the castle.

"When I was walking away, I saw a crowd. Pushing forward, I found
they were surrounding four soldiers who were carrying a body on
their shoulders, and made out at once it was the officer who had
been talking so angrily to his companion. Then I understood what
had puzzled me before, and what you had gone outside the walls for.

"The rest was easy to guess. The governor had come along, you had
been questioned, and had been arrested as a Huguenot. It was
evident that no time was to be lost and that, if you were to be got
out, it must be done quickly.

"I hurried away to the cabaret where Jacques and Roger were
drinking. We talked the matter over, and agreed that the first
thing was to get the four horses out of the town. So I went to the
inn where you had put up, said I was your servant, paid the
reckoning, and took away the horse. Then I got my own and joined
the other two, who were mounted and ready. They each took a horse
and rode off, settling to leave them at some farmhouse a short
distance away, explaining there that the town was so full they
could find no room for them.

"Directly they had started, I set off to have a look round the
castle. The great thing was to know where they had lodged you. If
it was in a cell looking outward, I thought that, knowing I should
be searching for you, you would make a signal. If I could see
nothing, I determined to accost some servant coming out from the
castle; to make acquaintance with him and, over a bottle of wine,
to find out in what part of the castle you were lodged.

"On the land side I could see nothing, and then went back and
waited till Jacques and Roger returned. Then we took a boat and, as
you know, rowed up; and I soon made out your cap outside the wall.

"Then, as we rowed back, we arranged matters. Jacques was to carry
out your former orders: find out about the movement of troops, and
warn the queen if danger threatened. Roger was to be at the foot of
the wall with a boat, as soon as it became dark. I was to undertake
to get you out.

"The first thing to do was to get a rope. This I carried to a quiet
place on the wall, knotted it, and put it round me under my
doublet. Then there was nothing to do but to wait. I went several
times to hear if Jacques had any news, and was glad when he told me
that most of the troops were ordered to be under arms, at eight
o'clock. This would make matters simpler for me for, with numbers
of people going in and coming out of the castle, it would be easy
to slip in unnoticed.

"As soon as it was dark, Jacques and I went down a lane; and he
gave me his steel cap and breast piece, and took my cap in
exchange. Then I went up towards the castle. The gates were open,
and I was told that they would not be closed until midnight; as so
many were coming out and going in, and there was no hostile force
anywhere in these parts. Presently, numbers of gentlemen began to
arrive with their retainers, and I soon went in with a party of
footmen.

"The courtyard was full of men, and I was not long before I found
the staircase leading up to the top of the wall, on the river side.
I went boldly up and, halfway, found a door partly open. Looking
in, I saw that it was evidently used by some gentlemen who had gone
down, in haste, to join the party below; so I shut the door and
waited. I heard the troops start and guessed, from the quiet that
followed, that the greater portion of the garrison had left.

"I felt pretty sure that there would be a sentry at your door, and
waited until the time I thought he would be expecting a relief.
Then I went up. He was in a mighty hurry to get down, and did not
stop to see who I was, or to ask any questions; which was well for
him, for I had my knife in my hand, and should have stabbed him
before he could utter a cry. Everything went off well, and you know
the rest, sir."

"You managed wonderfully, Pierre. I thought over every plan by
which you might aid me to escape, but I never thought of anything
so simple as this. Nor, indeed, did I see any possible way of your
freeing me.

"How are we going to get our horses? The farmer will think that we
are a party of thieves."

"They are in an open shed," Jacques said. "I told the farmer that
our reason for bringing them out of the town was that you might
have to start with orders, any time in the night; and that it would
be troublesome getting them out from town stables, and having the
gates opened for them to pass out; while, on foot, you could issue
from the postern without trouble. I paid him for the corn when I
left them."

The horses, indeed, were got out without any stir in the house
indicating that its occupants were awakened.

"Give me your sword, Pierre," Philip said, as he mounted. "I trust
that we shall meet with no enemies on the road; still we may do so,
and I should not like to be unarmed. You have your arquebus."

This had been brought in the boat by Roger, and on landing Pierre
had exchanged the steel cap and breast piece for his own cap.

The road to Villeneuve D'Agenois was a cross-country one, and would
be impossible to follow in the dark. Consequently, after keeping on
the main road for half an hour, they turned off a road to the
right, rode until they came to a wood, and there alighted.

"Shall I light a fire, sir?" Pierre asked.

"It is not worth while, Pierre. It must be getting on for midnight
now, and we must be in the saddle again, at daybreak. By this time
they have, no doubt, found that I have escaped. The first time they
send up a man to relieve you, the open door will be noticed. They
will certainly make no search tonight, and tomorrow they will have
something else to think about; for doubtless some spy at Nerac
will, as soon as the gates are open, take the news to the
governor's party that the queen has left."

Two hours' brisk ride, in the morning, took them within sight of
Villeneuve D'Agenois. Riding across the bridge over the river Lot,
he entered the town. The street was full of troops; and three
gentlemen, standing at the door of an inn, looked with suspicion on
the gay colouring of Philip's costume and, as he alighted, they
stepped forward to accost him.

"May I ask who you are, sir?" one said advancing; "and what is your
business here?"

"Certainly you may," Philip said, as he dismounted. "My name is
Philip Fletcher. I am here at the order of her majesty, the Queen
of Navarre; who, I trust, has arrived here safely."

"The queen arrived here three hours since, Monsieur Fletcher; and I
may say that she did you the honour to inquire, at once, if a
gentleman of your name had arrived."

"I should have met her at the river near Tonneins, but the governor
of Agen laid an embargo on me. Yet, thanks to these three faithful
fellows, I got safely out of his clutches."

"We shall march in an hour, Monsieur Fletcher and, as soon as the
queen is up, I will see that she is acquainted with your coming.

"Allow me to introduce myself, first--Gaston de Rebers. Breakfast
is ready in this cottage, and we were about to sit down when we saw
you riding up. I shall be glad if you will share it with us. These
are my comrades, Messieurs Duvivier, Harcourt, and Parolles."

He then called a sergeant.

"Sergeant, see that Monsieur Fletcher's servant and men-at-arms
have a good meal."

"I think they must want it," Philip said. "They have been so busy,
in my service, that I doubt if they have eaten since breakfast
yesterday. I myself supped well, thanks to the courtesy of Monsieur
D'Estanges, who was good enough to send up an excellent capon, and
a bottle of wine to my cell."

"You know Monsieur D'Estanges?" Gaston de Rebers asked courteously.
"He is a gentleman of high repute and, though connected with the
Guises, he is said to be opposed to them in their crusade against
us."

"I had only the honour of meeting him yesterday," Philip said, as
they sat down to table; "but he behaved like a true gentleman, and
did me the honour of being my second, in an unfortunate affair into
which I was forced."

"Who was your opponent, may I ask, sir?"

"Count Raoul de Fontaine."

"A doughty swordsman!" Gaston de Rebers exclaimed; "but one of our
bitterest opponents in this province. You are fortunate, indeed, to
have escaped without a serious wound; for he has been engaged in
many duels, and but few of his opponents have escaped with their
lives."

"He will neither persecute you, nor fight more duels," Philip said
quietly; "for I had the misfortune to kill him."

The others looked at him with astonishment.

"Do I understand rightly, Monsieur Fletcher, that you have slain
Raoul de Fontaine in a duel?"

"That is the case," Philip replied. "Monsieur D'Estanges, as I have
said, acted as my second. Count Louis de Fontaine acted for his
cousin."

"You will pardon my having asked you the question again," De Rebers
said; "but really, it seemed well-nigh impossible that a gentleman
who, as I take it, can yet be scarcely of age, should have slain
Raoul de Fontaine."

"I lack four years, yet, of being of age," Philip said; "for it
will be another month before I am seventeen. But I have had good
teachers, both English and French; and our games and exercises, at
school, naturally bring us forward, in point of strength and
stature, in comparison with your countrymen of the same age. Still,
doubtless, it was as much due to good fortune as to skill that I
gained my success.

"I assuredly had no desire to kill him; the less so because, to a
certain extent, the duel was of my making. There was, as it seemed
to me, no choice between fighting him, and being denounced by him
as a spy. Therefore when he accosted me roughly, I took the matter
up hotly, and there was nothing for it but an encounter. As I have
said, I meant only to wound him; but his skill and his impetuosity
were so great that I was forced, in self defence, to run him
through.

"After all, I gained nothing by the duel; for the governor, with a
troop of horse, came up just as it concluded, and as I could give
no satisfactory account of myself, I was hauled off a prisoner to
the castle."

"And how did you escape thence?" Gaston asked.

Philip gave an account of the manner in which his servant had
rescued him.

"Parbleu! You are fortunate in your servant! Would that so shrewd a
knave--

"But there, the trumpets are sounding. I will take you at once to
the queen, who is doubtless ready to mount."



Chapter 13: At Laville.


The queen was standing at the door of the house where she had lain
down for a few hours' rest, after her arrival. The prince was
standing beside her.

"Here is our English friend, mother," he exclaimed, running forward
to meet Philip.

"Welcome, Monsieur Fletcher. When we found that you were not here,
on our arrival last night, we feared that some evil had befallen
you."

"Monsieur Fletcher is well able to take care of himself, prince. He
has been having adventures enough," Gaston de Rebers said.

"You must tell me about them as we ride," the prince said. "I love
adventures, Monsieur Fletcher."

They had now reached the queen.

"I am glad to see you, Monsieur Fletcher. Of course, it was in one
way a relief to us, when we crossed the river and did not find you
there; for I was sure you would have been there to give us warning,
had there been danger on the way; but I thought you might come in
any case, and when we found that you had not arrived here before
us, I was afraid that something might have befallen you."

"I have had some slight troubles, your majesty; and to my great
regret, I was unable to meet you at the passage of the river. I
should have been here long before daylight, but we were unable to
find the road in the dark, and had to wait until we could inquire
the way."

"Monsieur Fletcher is pleased to say that he has had some slight
troubles, madame," Gaston said; "but as the troubles included the
slaying in a duel of Raoul de Fontaine, one of the bitterest
enemies of our faith, and moreover a noted duellist; and an escape
from the castle of Agen, where he was confined as a suspected
Huguenot and spy, the term slight does not very aptly describe
them."

"What!" A tall soldierly old man, standing next to the queen,
exclaimed. "Do you mean to say, De Rebers, that Monsieur Fletcher
has killed Raoul de Fontaine in a duel?

"If so, I congratulate your majesty. He was a bitter persecutor of
the Huguenots, and one of the hottest headed and most troublesome
nobles in the province. Moreover, he can put a hundred and fifty
men into the field; and although his cousin Louis, who is his heir,
is also Catholic, he is a man of very different kind, and is
honoured by Huguenot and Catholic alike. But how this gentleman
could have killed so notable a swordsman is more than I can
understand. He looks, if you will pardon my saying so, a mere
youth."

"He rode beside Francois de la Noue in the battle of Saint Denis,
seneschal," the queen said; "and as he was chosen by my cousin
Conde, and Admiral Coligny, for the difficult and dangerous
enterprise of carrying a communication to me, it is clear that,
whatever his years, he is well fitted to act a man's part."

"That is so," the seneschal said heartily. "I shall be glad to talk
to you again, sir; but at present, madame, it is time to mount. The
troops are mustering, and we have a long ride before us.

"If you will lead the way with the infantry at once, Monsieur de
Rebers, we will follow as soon as we are mounted. We must go your
pace, but as soon as we start I will send a party to ride a mile
ahead of you, and see that the roads are clear."

At starting, the queen rode with the prince and the seneschal at
the head of the mounted party, some two hundred and fifty strong;
and behind followed the noblemen and gentlemen who had come with
her, and those who had accompanied the seneschal. Philip, who knew
no one, rode near the rear of this train, behind which followed the
armed retainers.

In a short time a gentleman rode back through the party.

"Monsieur Fletcher," he said, when he reached Philip, "the prince
has asked me to say that it is his wish that you shall ride
forward, and accompany him."

Philip turned into the field, and rode to the head of the party.
The prince, who was looking round, at once reined in his horse and
took his place beside him.

"Now, Monsieur Philip, you must tell me all about it. I am tired of
hearing consultations about roads and Catholic forces. I want to
hear a full account of your adventures, just as you told me the
tale of your journey to Nerac."

During the course of the day, several parties of gentlemen joined
the little force. So well organized were the Huguenots that, during
the last two or three days, the news had passed from mouth to mouth
throughout the province for all to assemble, if possible, at points
indicated to them; and all knew the day on which the seneschal
would march north from Villeneuve. Yet so well was the secret kept,
that the Catholics remained in total ignorance of the movement.
Consequently, at every village there were accessions of force
awaiting the seneschal, and parties of from ten to a hundred rode
up and joined them on the march.

After marching twenty miles, they halted at the foot of a chain of
hills, their numbers having been increased during the day to over
twelve hundred men. The queen and her son found rough accommodation
in a small village, the rest bivouacked round it.

At midnight three hundred cavalry and two hundred footmen started
across the hills, so as to come down upon Bergerac and seize the
bridge across the Dordogne; then at daylight the rest of the force
marched. On reaching the river they found that the bridge had been
seized without resistance. Three hundred gentlemen and their
retainers, of the province of Perigord, had assembled within half a
mile of the other side of the bridge, and had joined the party as
they came down. A Catholic force of two hundred men, in the town,
had been taken by surprise and captured, for the most part in their
beds.

The queen had issued most stringent orders that there was to be no
unnecessary bloodshed; and the Catholic soldiers, having been
stripped of their arms and armour, which were divided among those
of the Huguenots who were ill provided, were allowed to depart
unharmed the next morning, some fifteen gentlemen being retained as
prisoners. Three hundred more Huguenots rode into Bergerac in the
course of the day.

The footmen marched forward in the afternoon, and were directed to
stop at a village, twelve miles on. As the next day's journey would
be a long one, the start was again made early; and late in the
afternoon the little army, which had been joined by two hundred
more in the course of the day, arrived within sight of Perigueux.
Five hundred horsemen had ridden forward, two hours before, to
secure the bridge.

The seneschal had, after occupying Bergerac, placed horsemen on all
the roads leading north, to prevent the news from spreading; and
Perigueux, a large and important town, was utterly unprepared for
the advent of an enemy. A few of the troops took up arms and made a
hasty resistance, but were speedily dispersed. The greater portion
fled, at the first alarm, to the castle, where D'Escars himself was
staying. He had, only two days before, sent off a despatch to the
court declaring that he had taken his measures so well that not a
Huguenot in the province would take up arms.

His force was still superior to that of the horsemen, but his
troops were disorganized; and many, in their flight, had left their
arms behind them, and he was therefore obliged to remain inactive
in the citadel; and his mortification and fury were complete, when
the seneschal's main body marched through the town and halted, for
the night, a league beyond it.

The next day they crossed the Dronne at Brantome, and then turned
to the west. The way was now open to them and, with two thousand
men, the seneschal felt capable of coping with any force that could
be got together to attack them. A halt was made for a day, to rest
the men and horses and, four days later, after crossing the
Perigord hills, and keeping ten miles south of Angouleme, they came
within sight of Cognac. Messages had already been sent on to
announce their coming and, five miles from the town, they were met
by the Prince of Conde and the Admiral.

"Your first message lifted a load from our minds, madame," the
Admiral said. "The last news I received of you was that you were
still at Nerac, and as an intercepted despatch informed us that
orders had been sent from the court for your immediate arrest, we
were in great uneasiness about you."

"We left Nerac just in time," the queen said; "for, as we have
learned, the governor of Agen, with a strong force, left that city
to effect our capture at the very hour that we started on our
flight."

"Did you know where you would find us, madame? We sent off a
message by trusty hands, but whether the gentleman reached you we
know not."

"Indeed he did, and has since rendered us good service; and Henri
here has taken so great a fancy to him that, since we left
Villeneuve, he has always ridden by his side."

After Conde had presented the gentlemen who had ridden out with him
to the queen, and the seneschal in turn had introduced the most
important nobles and gentlemen to the prince and Admiral, they
proceeded on their way.

"Have you taken Cognac, cousin?" the queen asked Conde.

"No, madame; the place still holds out. We have captured Saint Jean
d'Angely, but Cognac is obstinate, and we have no cannon with which
to batter its walls."

As soon, however, as the queen arrived at the camp, a summons was
sent in in her name and, influenced by this, and by the sight of
the reinforcements she had brought with her, Cognac at once
surrendered.

As soon as Philip rode into camp, he was greeted joyously by his
