muster round the royal standard, and how soon the king's forces would be
likely to meet the enemy.  This time to-morrow he would be with his men;
that is, provided the general permitted ten of them to return and
relieve guard here.  Supposing no one came!

At that moment Jupiter gave a very low growl, which made his master stop
short in his march and listen with all his ears.  For a long time not a
sound was audible, and then he fancied he could just detect the tramp of
a horse or horses in the far far distance.  But that seemed to die away,
and again all was utterly silent.

But once more, just as he was starting again on his walk, Jupiter
growled, and this time rose to his feet and came to his master's side.
Yes, it was the sound of horses somewhere; more than one, too.  With
straining ears and beating heart, the youth leant on his pike, and
listened.  The sound grew more and more distinct, and presently he could
tell that, whoever they were, they were galloping.  He ordered Jupiter
to lie down and be silent.  They were in the wood, somewhere.  Were they
bound for Singleton?  Presently he was able to distinguish voices, and a
minute afterwards it seemed as if every sound had ceased.

He stepped quietly, followed by Jupiter, from the east terrace to the
rampart over the great gate, where he was able to command as full a view
as the uncertain light would allow of the glade through the frees which
led to the castle.  But nothing could be seen.  As he watched, the
sounds commenced again, and this time he fancied he could detect a
rumbling noise as of a cart accompanying the horsemen.

It was now easy to tell the meaning of all these sounds.  A troop of
horsemen--he could not yet guess how many--were approaching Singleton
Towers; and bringing with them a gun!

The young laird's heart beat now in right earnest, but not with fear.
That had been left behind with the ghosts.  He forgot everything but the
defence of his castle and the glory of his clan; and waited eagerly for
the time of action.

The cavalcade made a halt about halfway through the wood, and in the
still night air, with the light breeze carrying it, Singleton could hear
the sound of voices as in hurried consultation.  Then a single horseman
approached; and before many minutes he could just discern in the dim
moonlight a form emerging from the wood and stealthily approaching the
castle.

"Let him come and spy," said Singleton, to himself.

"He will see the lights, and perhaps a few spear-heads on the walls--and
he'll report as much to his chief.  Ah!"

At that moment the clouds cleared away from the moon and clearly
revealed the intruder.  He was one of the Macfies, Singleton could see,
and fully armed.  He dismounted at the border of the wood, and advanced
cautiously on foot to the edge of the moat.  This he made no attempt to
cross, but made his observations from the far side.

Singleton, taking care not to be seen, crept back into the armoury, from
which he took a bugle.  Bringing it out into the terrace, he sounded a
few shrill notes; and then instantly seizing a lantern, ran hurriedly to
and fro with it on various parts of the battlements.  Then without
waiting a moment he took up a musket and fired it in the direction of
the scout, who, however, was by this time out of reach.

"There!" said Singleton, putting down his weapon; "that will satisfy
them we are on the alert, all of us, and ready for them!  Perhaps they
will think better of it, and turn tail."

No! in a few minutes the sound of the advancing troop again rose in the
night.  They came on at a trot, dragging their gun along with them.
Presently there was a gleam among the trees, and next moment some fifty
horsemen appeared in view, with a cannon in their midst, which, equally
to Singleton's satisfaction and surprise, they proceeded to get into
position at the very entrance to the wood.

It was on this spot, it will be remembered, that the young laird had
carefully levelled the gun that surmounted the great gate.  Everything
depended now on the skill with which he had aimed it.  He gave the foe a
minute or two to fix and point their weapon, and once more carefully
calculated the poise of his own.  Then, just as they were proceeding to
load, and the horsemen were preparing to follow up the attack on the
gate, he applied the match, and with a mighty roar the piece discharged.

It was an anxious moment while the smoke slowly cleared away.  When it
did he had the joy of beholding the enemy's gun on end and disabled, and
not only it, but at least three of the enemy themselves involved in the
same disaster.

He could not resist a triumphant cheer at this success, which was
promptly answered by a defiant shout from the enraged Macfies as they
set spurs to their horses and rushed towards the moat.

And now began the hard work of the night.  For the foe thought nothing
of such a narrow obstacle as a simple ditch.  Some swam it on horseback,
and some left their animals behind, but all--all except two whom
Singleton's trusty muskets had found out--crossed in safety.  The raid
they made on the great gate was something terrific, and Singleton's
heart trembled within him as he heard it creak before their united
weight.  But he worked away steadily at his post, always taking care not
to expose himself, yet never wasting a shot with a bad aim.

The enemy very soon quitted the gate, and took to the more formidable
work of attempting to scale the walls.  And here Singleton's power was
tried to the utmost.  For at one part the ground sloped a considerable
distance up one of the buttresses, which made the ascent from below
comparatively easy, and if only the Macfies had been suitably equipped
for an assault, they could not have failed to carry the place with ease.

But happily for Singleton, they had come very ill prepared, evidently
expecting to walk into a defenceless stronghold without a blow--and now
they were not only disappointed but disconcerted.

Yet there was no keeping them down eventually.  In vain Singleton plied
his weapon with deadly effect; in vain he dislodged and hurled down upon
them one of the massive coping stones of the east terrace.  As fast as
the foremost fell back dead or wounded, others swarmed up.  It was well
for Singleton no attempt was made on any other part but this assailable
buttress, and even this was scaled at last.

The young laird had stepped back hurriedly to load his weapon, when he
suddenly saw a head appear above the battlements; and next moment a
fierce Lowlander sprang on to the terrace.

With the butt end of his weapon Singleton felled him, while at the same
moment Jupiter flew at the throat of the man next to him who was also
springing on to the wall.

It was a narrow escape indeed; and but for the dog, the castle might
after all have been lost.  Once more the youth cleared the buttress, and
this time with such deadly effect, that the enemy halted a moment before
resuming the attack.  This short breathing space was unutterably
valuable to Singleton, for it gave him time not only to load several
muskets, but to bring one of the smaller cannon in position so as to
almost cover the weak point.

This precaution, however, as it turned out, was not requisite; for just
as the enemy were returning with redoubled fierceness and determination
to the attack, there was a shout from the wood, and a cry of "Singleton
to the rescue!"

Well did the young chief know that cry.  He was saved!  In another
moment the Macfies had too much to do to defend themselves from the
sudden attack in the rear to think of renewing the assault, and the
youth knew well enough how to make good use of the interval.  With a
loud cheer to his gallant clansmen, he kept up a dropping fire on the
enemy with musket and gun, until galled on both sides, they fairly took
to their heels and plunged once more into the moat.

How many came out of it and escaped, history does not record; but they
left of their number under the walls of Singleton Towers twenty men dead
or wounded.

It was a proud moment when the young laird flung open the great gate and
let his comrades in.  The leader of the party was Tam, who had implored
the general of the king's forces, whom fortunately they had met on the
way to the rendezvous, to be allowed to return, if only for a few hours,
to share his young laird's peril.  The request had been granted, and
with fifteen men the delighted Tam had spurred back to Singleton as fast
as their horses could carry them.  Falling unexpectedly on the enemy's
rear they had brought about the panic which saved the castle and rescued
the young chief from his perilous position.

This was the first but by no means the last fight in which the young
laird of Singleton bore a part.  He grew old in warfare, and ended his
days at last on the field of battle.  But to the day of his death this
memorable Night-Watch on Singleton Towers was ever the achievement about
which he liked best to be reminded.



CHAPTER NINE.

RUN TO EARTH.

Sub-Chapter I.

ON THE TRAIL.

Michael McCrane had bolted!

There was not a shadow of a doubt about it.  The moment I reached the
bank that eventful morning and saw the manager's desk open, and the tin
cash-box lying empty on the floor, I said at once to myself, "This is
McCrane's doing."

And as I and the messenger stood there, with dropped jaws, gaping at the
dismal scene, I hurriedly called up in my mind the incidents of the past
week, and, reading them in the light of this discovery, I was ready to
stake my reputation as a paying cashier that my fellow-clerk was a
robber and a fugitive.

McCrane had not been at our bank long; he had come to us from one of the
country branches, and, much to the disgust of some of us juniors, had
been placed over our heads as second paying cashier.  I was third paying
cashier, and from the moment I set eyes on my new colleague and superior
I felt that mischief was in the wind.

A mysterious, silent man of twenty-six was Michael McCrane; so silent
was he, indeed, that were it not for an occasional "How will you take
it?"

"Not endorsed."

"Next desk," ejaculated in the course of his daily duties, any one might
have supposed him dumb.  He held himself gloomily aloof from his fellow-
clerks.  None of us knew where he lived, or how he lived.  It was an
event to get a word out of him; wherever it was possible he answered by
signs or grimaces.  He glided into his place in the morning like a
ghost, and like a ghost he glided out at night and vanished.

More than that, his personal appearance was unsatisfactory.  He was
slovenly in figure and habits, with a stubbly beard and unkempt hair;
and although he had L150 a year his clothes were threadbare and shabby.
He seemed always hard up for money.  He did not go out, as most of us
did, in the middle of the day to get lunch, but fortified himself with
bread and cheese, which he brought in his pocket, and partook of
mysteriously behind the lid of his desk.

Now and then I had come upon him while he was deeply engaged in writing
what appeared to be private letters, and I could not help noticing that
on each occasion when thus interrupted he coloured up guiltily and hid
his letter hastily away in his blotting-paper.  And once or twice lately
mysterious parcels had been handed to him over the counter, which he had
received with a conscious air, hiding them away in his desk and carrying
them home under his coat at night.

I did not at all like these oddities, and, holding the position I did, I
had often debated with myself whether it was not my duty to take the
manager or head cashier into my confidence on the subject.  And yet
there had never till now occurred anything definite to take hold of, nor
was it till this October morning, when I saw the manager's desk broken
and the empty cash-box on the floor, that it came over me that McCrane
was even a worse fellow than I had taken him for.

He had been most mysterious about his holidays this year.  He was to
have taken them in May, among the first batch, but suddenly altered his
arrangements, giving no reason, and requesting to be allowed to go in
September.  September came, and still he clung to his desk.  Finally
another change was announced: McCrane would start for his fortnight's
holiday on the second Thursday of October.

These changes were all arranged so mysteriously, and with such an
unusual show of eagerness on McCrane's part, and as the time itself drew
near he exhibited such a mixture of self-satisfaction, concealment, and
uneasiness, that no one could fail to observe it.  Add to this that
during the last day or two he had made more than one mistake in his
addition, and had once received a reprimand from the manager for
inattention, at which he vaguely smiled--and you will hardly wonder that
my first words on that eventful morning--the first of his long-expected
holiday--were--

"Michael McCrane has bolted!"

The manager when he arrived took the same view as I did.

"I don't like this, Samuels," said he; "not at all, Samuels."

When Mr Trong called any one by his name twice in one sentence it was a
certain sign that he meant what he said.

"How much was there in the box?"  I inquired.

"L23 5 shillings 6 pence," said the manager, referring to his petty cash
account.  "There was one five-pound note, but I do not know the number;
the rest was cash."

The messenger was called in and deposed that Mr McCrane had stayed the
previous evening half an hour after every one else, to wind up, as he
said.  The witness stated that he heard him counting over some money,
and that when he left he had put out the gas in the office and given
him--the deponent--the key of his--the suspect's--own desk.

"Bring his book," said the manager.

I did so, and we examined it together.  The last page had not been added
up, and two of the lines had not been filled out with the amounts in the
money column.  Oddly enough, when the two cancelled cheques were looked
at they were found to amount to L21.

"We must go thoroughly into this," said the manager.  "It looks worse
and worse.  What's this?"

It was a torn piece of paper between two of the leaves of the book, part
of a memorandum in McCrane's handwriting.  It read thus:

[A scrap of paper is illustrated here.]

"What do you make of that?" asked the manager.  A light dawned on me.

"I wonder if it means Euston, 1:30?  Perhaps he's going by that train."

The manager looked at me, then at the clock, and then went to his desk
and took up a Bradshaw.

"1:30 is the train for Rugby, Lancaster, Fleetwood.  Samuels!"

"Sir," said I.

"You had better take a cab to Euston, you have just time.  If he is
there stop him, or else follow him, and bring him back.  If necessary,
get the police to help you, but if you can bring him back without, so
much the better.  I'm afraid the L23 is not all; it may turn out to be a
big robbery when we go through his book.  I must trust to your judgment.
Take some money with you, L20, in case of emergency.  Be quick or you
will be late.  Telegraph to me how you succeed."

It was a word and a blow.  A quarter of an hour later my hansom dashed
into the yard at Euston just as the warning bell for the 1:30 train was
sounding.

"Where for, sir?" asked a porter.  "Any luggage?"

I did not know where I was for, and I had no luggage.

I rushed on to the platform and looked anxiously up and down.  It was a
scene of confusion.  Groups of non-travellers round the carriage doors
were beginning to say a last good-bye to their friends inside.  Porters
were hurling their last truck-loads of luggage into the vans; the guard
was a quarter of the way down the train looking at the tickets; the
newspaper boys were flitting about shouting noisily and inarticulately;
and the usual crowd of "just-in-times" were rushing headlong out of the
booking-office and hurling themselves at the crowded train.

I was at a loss what to do.  It was impossible to say who was there and
who was not.  McCrane might be there or he might not.  What was the use
of my--

