on board the cruiser soon after, showed that her commander was eagerly
in pursuit of the strange vessel ahead, and the flash and report of a
couple of guns proved that he was again giving orders in his somewhat
peremptory style.

When daylight appeared, Captain Dunning was still on deck, and Glynn
Proctor stood by the wheel.  The post of the latter, however, was a
sinecure, as the wind had again fallen.  When the sun rose it revealed
the three vessels lying becalmed within a short distance of each other
and several miles off shore.

"So, so," exclaimed the captain, taking the glass and examining the
other vessels.  "I see it's all up with the slaver.  Serves him right;
don't it, Glynn?"

"It does," replied Glynn emphatically.  "I hope they will all be hanged.
Isn't that the usual way of serving these fellows out?"

"Well, not exactly, lad.  They don't go quite that length--more's the
pity; if they did, there would be less slave-trading; but the rascals
will lose both ship and cargo."

"I wonder," said Glynn, "how they can afford to carry on the trade when
they lose so many ships as I am told they do every year."

"You wouldn't wonder, boy, if you knew the enormous prices got for
slaves.  Why, the profits on one cargo, safely delivered, will more than
cover the loss of several vessels and cargoes.  You may depend on't they
would not carry it on if it did not pay."

"Humph!" ejaculated Glynn, giving the wheel a savage turn, as if to
express his thorough disapprobation of the slave-trade, and his extreme
disgust at not being able, by the strength of his own right arm, at once
to repress it.  "And who's to pay for our foretopsail-yard?" he
inquired, abruptly, as if desirous of changing the subject.

"Ourselves, I fear," replied the captain.  "We must take it
philosophically, and comfort ourselves with the fact that it _is_ the
foretopsail-yard, and not the bowsprit or the mainmast, that was carried
away.  It's not likely the captain of the cruiser will pay for it, at
any rate."

Captain Dunning was wrong.  That same morning he received a polite note
from the commander of the said cruiser, requesting the pleasure of his
company to dinner, in the event of the calm continuing, and assuring him
that the carpenter and the sail-maker of the man-of-war should be sent
on board his ship after breakfast to repair damages.  Captain Dunning,
therefore, like an honest, straightforward man as he was, admitted that
he had been hasty in his judgment, and stated to Glynn Proctor,
emphatically, that the commander of the _Firebrand_ was "a trump."



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

NEW SCENES--A FIGHT PREVENTED BY A WHALE--A STORM--BLOWN OFF THE
YARDARM--WRECK OF THE "RED ERIC".

Five weeks passed away, and really, when one comes to consider the
matter, it is surprising what a variety of events may be compressed into
five weeks; what an amount of space may be passed over, what an immense
change of scene and circumstance may be experienced in that
comparatively short period of time.

Men and women who remain quietly at home do not, perhaps, fully realise
this fact.  Five weeks to them does not usually seem either very long or
very short.  But let those quiet ones travel; let them rush away
headlong, by the aid of wind and steam, to the distant and wonderful
parts of this wonderful world of ours, and, ten to one, they will
afterwards tell you that the most wonderful discovery they had made
during their travels, is the fact that a miniature lifetime (apparently)
can be compressed into five weeks.

Five weeks passed away, and in the course of that time the
foretopsail-yard of the _Red Eric_ had been repaired; the _Red Eric_
herself had passed from equatorial into southern seas; Alice Dunning had
become very sea-sick, which caused her to look uncommonly green in the
face, and had got well again, which caused her to become fresh and rosy
as the early morning; Jacko had thoroughly established his reputation as
the most arrant and accomplished thief that ever went to sea: King
Bumble had been maligned and abused again and again, and over again,
despite his protestations of innocence, by grim-faced Tarquin, the
steward, for having done the deeds which were afterwards discovered to
have been committed by Jacko; fat little Gurney had sung innumerable
songs of his own composing, in which he was ably supported by Glynn
Proctor; Dr Hopley had examined, phrenologically, all the heads on
board, with the exception of that of Tarquin, who would not submit to
the operation on any account, and had shot, and skinned, and stuffed a
variety of curious sea-birds, and caught a number of remarkable
sea-fish, and had microscopically examined--to the immense interest of
Ailie, and consequently of the captain--a great many surprising
animalcules, called _Medusae_, which possessed the most watery and the
thinnest possible bodies, yet which had the power of emitting a
beautiful phosphoric light at night, so as to cause the whole ocean
sometimes to glow as if with liquid fire; Phil Briant had cracked more
jokes, good, bad, and indifferent, than would serve to fill a whole
volume of closely-printed pages, and had told more stories than would be
believed by most people; Tim Rokens and the other harpooners had, with
the assistance of the various boats' crews, slain and captured several
large whales, and Nikel Sling had prepared, and assisted to consume, as
many breakfasts, dinners, and suppers as there are days in the period of
time above referred to;--in short, those five weeks, which we thus
dismiss in five minutes, might, if enlarged upon, be expanded into
material to fill five volumes such as this, which would probably take
about five years to write--another reason for cutting this matter short.
All this shows how much may be compressed into little space, how much
may be done and seen in little time, and, therefore, how much value men
ought to attach to little things.

Five weeks passed away, as we have already remarked, and at the end of
that time the _Red Eric_ found herself, one beautiful sunny afternoon,
becalmed on the breast of the wide ocean with a strange vessel, also a
whaler, a few miles distant from her, and a couple of sperm-whales
sporting playfully about midway between the two ships.  Jim Scroggles on
that particular afternoon found himself in the crow's-nest at the
masthead, roaring "Thar she blows!" with a degree of energy so appalling
that one was almost tempted to believe that that long-legged individual
had made up his mind to compress his life into one grand but brief
minute, and totally exhaust his powers of soul and body in the
reiterated vociferation of that one faculty of the sperm-whale.
Allowance must be made for Jim, seeing that this was the first time he
had been fortunate enough to "raise the oil" since he became a whaler.

The usual scene of bustle and excitement immediately ensued.  The men
sprang to their appointed places in a moment; the tubs, harpoons,
etcetera, were got ready, and in a few minutes the three boats were
leaping over the smooth swell towards the fish.

While this was taking place on board the _Red Eric_, a precisely similar
scene occurred on board the other whale-ship, and a race now ensued
between the boats of the two ships, for each knew well that the first
boat that harpooned either of the whales claimed it.

"Give way, my lads," whispered Captain Dunning eagerly, as he watched
the other boats; "we shall be first--we shall be first; only bend your
backs."

The men needed not to be urged; they were quite as anxious as their
commander to win the races and bent their backs, as he expressed it,
until the oars seemed about to break.  Glynn sat on the after thwart,
and did good service on this occasion.

It soon became evident that the affair would be decided by the boats of
the two captains, both of which took the lead of the others, but as they
were advancing in opposite directions it was difficult to tell which was
the fleeter of the two.  When the excitement of the race was at its
height the whales went down, and the men lay on their oars to wait until
they should rise again.  They lay in anxious suspense for about a
minute, when the crew of Captain Dunning's boat was startled by the
sudden apparition of a waterspout close to them, by which they were
completely drenched.  It was immediately followed by the appearance of
the huge blunt head of one of the whales, which rose like an enormous
rock out of the sea close to the starboard-quarter.

The sight was received with a loud shout, and Tim Rokens leaped up and
grasped a harpoon, but the whale sheered off.  A spare harpoon lay on
the stern-sheets close to Glynn, who dropped his oar and seized it.
Almost without knowing what he was about, he hurled it with tremendous
force at the monster's neck, into which it penetrated deeply.  The
harpoon fortunately happened to be attached to a large buoy, called by
whalers a drogue, which was jerked out of the boat like a cannon-shot as
the whale went down, carrying harpoon and drogue along with it.

"Well done, lad," cried the captain, in great delight, "you've made a
noble beginning!  Now, lads, pull gently ahead, she won't go far with
such an ornament as that dangling at her neck.  A capital dart! couldn't
have done it half so well myself, even in my young days!"

Glynn felt somewhat elated at this unexpected piece of success; to do
him justice, however, he took it modestly.  In a few minutes the whale
rose, but it had changed its course while under water, and now appeared
close to the leading boat of the other ship.

By the laws of the whale-fishery, no boat of one vessel has a right to
touch a whale that has been struck by the boat of another vessel, so
long as the harpoon holds fast and the rope remains unbroken, or so long
as the float to which the harpoon is connected remains attached.
Nevertheless, in defiance of this well-known law, the boat belonging to
the captain of the strange ship gave chase, and succeeded in making fast
to the whale.

To describe the indignation of Captain Dunning and his men on witnessing
this act is impossible.  The former roared rather than shouted, "Give
way, lads!" and the latter bent their backs as if they meant to pull the
boat bodily out of the water, and up into the atmosphere.  Meanwhile all
the other boats were in hot pursuit of the second whale, which had led
them a considerable distance away from the first.

"What do you mean by striking that fish?" shouted Captain Dunning, when,
after a hard pull, he came up with the boat, the crew of which had just
succeeded in thrusting a lance deep into a mortal part of the huge
animal, which soon after rolled over, and lay extended on the waves.

"What right have you to ask?" replied the captain of the strange ship,
an ill-favoured, powerful man, whose countenance was sufficient to
condemn him in any society, save that of ruffians.  "Don't you see your
drogue has broke loose?"

"I see nothing of the sort.  It's fast at this moment; so you'll be good
enough to cut loose and take yourself off as fast as you please."

To this the other made no reply, but, turning to his men, said: "Make
fast there, lads; signal the other boats, and pull away for the ship;
look sharp, you lubbers."

"Och! captain dear," muttered Phil Briant, baring both arms up to the
shoulders, "only give the word; _do_, now!"

Captain Dunning, who was already boiling with rage, needed no
encouragement to make an immediate attack on the stranger, neither did
his men require an order; they plunged their oars into the water, ran
right into the other boat, sprang to their feet, seized lances,
harpoons, and knives, and in another moment would have been engaged in a
deadly struggle had not an unforeseen event occurred to prevent the
fray.  This was the partial recovery of the whale, which, apparently
resolved to make one final struggle for life, turned over and over,
lashed the sea into foam, and churned it up with the blood which spouted
in thick streams from its numerous wounds.

Both boats were in imminent danger, and the men sprang to their oars in
order to pull out of the range of the monster's dying struggles.  In
this effort the strange boat was successful, but that of Captain Dunning
fared ill.  A heavy blow from the whale's tail broke it in two, and
hurled it into the air, whence the crew descended, amid a mass of
harpoons, lances, oars, and cordage, into the blood-stained water.

The fish sheered away for some distance, dragging the other boat along
with it, and then rolled over quite dead.  Fortunately not one of the
crew of the capsized boat was hurt.  All of them succeeded in reaching
and clinging to the shattered hull of their boat; but there they were
destined to remain a considerable time, as the boat of the stranger,
having secured the dead fish, proceeded leisurely to tow it towards
their ship, without paying the slightest attention to the shouts of
their late enemies.

A change had now come over the face of the sky.  Clouds began to gather
on the horizon, and a few light puffs of air swept over the sea, which
enabled the strange vessel to bear down on her boat, and take the whale
in tow.  It also enabled the _Red Eric_ to beat up, but more slowly,
towards the spot where their disabled boat lay, and rescue their
comrades from their awkward position.  It was some time before the boats
were all gathered together.  When this was accomplished the night had
set in and the stranger had made off with her ill-gotten prize, the
other whale having sounded, and the chase being abandoned.

"Now, of all the disgustin' things that ever happened to me, this is the
worst," remarked Captain Dunning, in a very sulky tone of voice, as he
descended to the cabin to change his garments, Ailie having preceded him
in order to lay out dry clothes.

"Oh! my darling papa, what a fright I got," she exclaimed, running up
and hugging him, wet as he was, for the seventh time, despite his
efforts to keep her off.  "I was looking through the spy-glass at the
time it happened, and when I saw you all thrown into the air I cried--
oh!  I can't tell you how I cried."

"You don't need to tell me, Ailie, my pet, for your red, swelled-up eyes
speak for themselves.  But go, you puss, and change your own frock.
You've made it as wet as my coat, nearly; besides, I can't undress, you
know, while you stand there."

Ailie said, "I'm so very, very thankful," and then giving her father one
concluding hug, which completely saturated the frock, went to her own
cabin.

Meanwhile the crew of the captain's boat were busy in the forecastle
stripping off their wet garments, and relating their adventures to the
men of the other boats, who, until they reached the ship, had been
utterly ignorant of what had passed.

It is curious that Tim Rokens should open the conversation with much the
same sentiment, if not exactly the same phrase, as that expressed by the
captain.

"Now boys," said he, slapping his wet limbs, "I'll tell ye wot it is, of
all the aggrawations as has happened to me in my life, this is out o'
sight the wust.  To think o' losin' that there whale, the very biggest I
ever saw--"

"Ah!  Rokens, man," interrupted Glynn, as he pulled off his jacket, "the
loss is greater to me than to you, for that was my _first_ whale!"

"True, boy," replied the harpooner, in a tone of evidently genuine
sympathy; "I feel for ye.  I knows how I should ha' taken on if it had
happened to me.  But cheer up, lad; you know the old proverb, `There's
as good fish in the sea as ever came out o't.'  You'll be the death o'
many sich yet, I'll bet my best iron."

"Sure, the wust of it all is, that we don't know who was the big thief
as got that fish away with him," said Phil Briant, with a rueful
countenance.

"Don't we, though!" cried Gurney, who had been in the mate's boat; "I
axed one o' the men o' the stranger's boats--for we run up close
alongside durin' the chase--and he told me as how she was the
_Termagant_ of New York; so we can be down on 'em yet, if we live long
enough."

"Humph!" observed Rokens; "and d'ye suppose he'd give ye the right
name?"

"He'd no reason to do otherwise.  He didn't know of the dispute between
the other boats."

"There's truth in that," remarked Glynn, as he prepared to go on deck;
"but it may be a year or more before we foregather.  No, I give up all
claim to my first fish from this date."

"All hands ahoy!" shouted the mate; "tumble up there!  Reef topsails!
Look alive!"

The men ran hastily on deck, completing their buttoning and belting as
they went, and found that something very like a storm was brewing.  As
yet the breeze was moderate, and the sea not very high, but the night
was pitchy dark, and a hot oppressive atmosphere boded no improvement in
the weather.

"Lay out there, some of you, and close reef the topsails," cried the
mate, as the men ran to their several posts.

The ship was running at the time under a comparatively small amount of
canvas; for, as their object was merely to cruise about in those seas in
search of whales, and they had no particular course to steer, it was
usual to run at night under easy sail, and sometimes to lay-to.  It was
fortunate that such was the case on the present occasion; for it
happened that the storm which was about to burst on them came with
appalling suddenness and fury.  The wind tore up the sea as if it had
been a mass of white feathers, and scattered it high in air.  The
mizzen-topsail was blown to ribbons, and it seemed as if the other sails
were about to share the same fate.  The ship flew from billow to billow,
after recovering from the first rude shock, as if she were but a dark
cloud on the sea, and the spray flew high over her masts, drenching the
men on the topsail-yards while they laboured to reef the sails.

"We shall have to take down these t'gallant-masts, Mr Millons," said
the captain, as he stood by the weather-bulwarks holding on to a
belaying-pin to prevent his being washed away.

"Shall I give the order, sir?" inquired the first mate.

"You may," replied the captain.

Just as the mate turned to obey, a shriek was heard high above the
whistling of the fierce wind.

"Did you hear that?" said the captain anxiously.

"I did," replied the mate.  "I fear--I trust--"

The remainder of the sentence was either suppressed, or the howling of
the wind prevented its being heard.

Just then a flash of lightning lit up the scene, and a terrific crash of
thunder seemed to rend the sky.  The flash was momentary, but it served
to reveal the men on the yards distinctly.  They had succeeded in
close-reefing the topsails, and were hurrying down the rigging.

The mate came close to the captain's side and said, "Did you see, sir,
the way them men on the mainyard were scramblin' down?"

The captain had not time to reply ere a shout, "Man overboard!" was
heard faintly in the midst of the storm, and in another instant some of
the men rushed aft with frantic haste, shouting that one of their number
had been blown off the yard into the sea.

"Down your helm," roared the captain; "stand-by to lower away the
boats."

The usual prompt "Ay, ay, sir," was given, but before the men could
reach their places a heavy sea struck the vessel amidships, poured
several tons of water on the decks, and washed all the loose gear
