fine night."

This reply seeming to imply that Dominick had come to the reef alone--
perhaps in the dinghy--emboldened the men; some of them laughed.

"Well, I confess to being a little surprised, sir," replied the mate,
"for it so happened that we were preparing something in the nature of a
surprise for you and the rest of the settlers."

"Yes, I see," returned Dominick, in the same pleasant tone.  "You've
managed to get the ship off the ledge in a very creditable manner, and
you mean to take her into the lagoon and cast anchor off the
settlement?"

Again the men laughed lightly.

"No, sir, we don't," broke in Hugh Morris at this point, "we intend to
take her in quite the opposite direction, and clear off to sea with
her."

"Oh no, you don't, Hugh," returned Dominick, with an agreeable smile,
which was a little perplexing as well as exasperating.  "You are going
into the lagoon; you know you are, and I have come to help you."

"But I say we are _not_!" retorted Morris, in rising wrath, "and what's
more, you'll have to go along with us, now that you've had the ill-luck
to fall in with us."

"Quite right, Hugh; didn't I _say_ that I came off on purpose to go
along with you?"

As he spoke there was heard a rushing sound of feet and a number of dark
forms were seen approaching from the bushes.

"Betrayed!" shouted Malines.  "Jump in, lads, and shove off!"

He sprang forward, but was instantly arrested by the muzzle of a
revolver within a foot of his head.

"It's of no use, boys," said Dominick, laying his hand on the bow of the
boat.  "You'll have to enter it as dead men if you do so without my
permission."

Had the men been armed it might have gone hard with Dominick at that
moment, but so sure had they been of accomplishing their purpose
unmolested, that the idea of arming had never crossed their minds.
Before they could recover from the surprise or decide what to do, the
armed squad was upon them.

"Halt! boys," cried Joe Binney, when close to the boat.  "Now, look 'ee
here.  It warn't o' my seekin' that I was made prime minister, but now
that it's bin done I'll stick to it an' do my duty.  If ye knock under
like good boys I'll recommend ye to the queen's marcy.  If not I'll have
'ee strung up, every man jack of 'ee.  Moreover, the first man as
disobeys my orders I'll blow his brains out.  Now, jump aboard, boys
(turning to his own men), an' keep your revolvers handy.  You lads as
wanted to run away will follow."

The mixture of humour and resolution in Joe's manner, coupled with his
well-known decision of character and his commanding size, had its
effect.  The squad instantly jumped into the boat, and the conspirators
meekly followed without a word.  They saw--as Hugh afterwards expressed
it--that the game was up, and made up their minds to submit to the
inevitable.

The conspirators were ordered to take the oars.  Afterwards they were
made to work the ship round into the channel leading to the lagoon,
while their armed friends mounted guard over them.

It was daybreak when the ship sailed calmly over the lagoon towards
Silver Bay.

"Och! man," said Teddy Malone, in a low voice, to Jabez Jenkins, who
stood near him, "why did ye want to run away wid the owld ship?  It wor
a sneakin' sort o' thing, warn't it, seein' that the poor little
childers, an' the women, depind so much on what's inside of her?"

"To tell 'ee the truth, Teddy," replied the man, an improved expression
coming suddenly over his face, "I ain't sorry that we've bin stopped in
this business, and, wot's more, I believe that most of us ain't sorry.
We was more than half led into it, d'ee see, by lies as to what the
leaders was goin' to do, an' arterwards we didn't like to draw back."

"I'm sorry for yez," returned Malone, "for I'm afeared we'll have to
skrag the wan half of ye to keep the other half in order.  In a spik an'
span noo settlement, where ivvery wan thinks he may do as he likes, the
laws has to be pritty stiff.  We've wan comfort, howivver--the quane is
marciful."

The Irishman was right in both his views on this subject, as the sequel
will show.

Great was the surprise and joy among the settlers that morning when the
fine ship in which they had traversed the ocean sailed grandly over the
lagoon, and let go her anchor in Silver Bay.  Some viewed her as a means
of continuing the voyage, and escaping from a secluded life, of which
they were beginning to tire.  Others thought of her as a means of
reopening intercourse with home, while not a few thought only of the
convenience of having her and her useful cargo so near to them.

But great was their surprise when Malines, Morris, Jabez, and the rest
of them were landed with their hands bound behind their backs; and still
greater was that surprise when, in open court, that is, in the midst of
the entire colony in the open air, these men were charged with their
crime.

A regular criminal court was instituted on the spot, as regular, at
least, as was possible, considering the almost total ignorance of all
concerned in regard to matters of law.  Queen Pauline appointed Dr
Marsh to be judge, he being supposed to be the best acquainted with, or
least ignorant of, legal matters and forms.  A jury of twelve men were
selected by lot, and little Buxley was appointed public prosecutor.  In
justice to the prisoners it was thought that they ought to have an
advocate to defend them, but as no one would undertake the duty, that
also was settled by lot, and the lot fell upon Redding, who, being a
gentle and meek man, was perhaps best suited for it.

We may not go into the details of this celebrated trial, which lasted
the greater part of the day, and was watched with intense eagerness by
the entire population, including some of the older children, who had
become impressed with the delightfully-horrible idea that a hanging or
shooting, if not flaying and roasting, of some of the criminals would be
the certain result.  Suffice it to say that there was grievous
irregularity in the proceedings: the public prosecutor not only proved
the guilt of the men, but in the fervour of his indignation suggested
the nature of their punishment; the jury not only listened to the facts
of the case, but commented on them freely throughout, and, usurping the
judge's office, pronounced sentence on the criminals three or four times
over; while the judge himself had the greatest possible difficulty in
keeping anything like order all round.

The only man who performed his duty calmly was Redding, who, in a speech
that quite surprised and transfixed the hearers, sought to point out
that the men on trial had not actually committed the crime, with which
they had been charged, that of seizing the ship, but had only
contemplated it, as had been alleged, though even that had not been
clearly proved; that, supposing the crime to have been committed, it was
a first offence, and that justice should always be tempered with mercy,
as was taught in that best of all law-books, the Bible.

The pleading of this man had considerable effect, but it could not turn
the tide of feeling in favour of the principal prisoners for more than
one reason.  They had been domineering, turbulent fellows all along;
they had meditated a crime which would have robbed the settlers of many
of the necessaries and all the luxuries of life, and this displayed a
meanness of spirit which, they thought, deserved severe punishment.

Accordingly, after they had been pronounced guilty by the unanimous
voice of the jury, and after the judge had consulted earnestly with some
members of the privy council, Malines and Morris were condemned to a
fortnight's imprisonment on short allowance of the poorest food, and the
other criminals to the same for a week.

When Malines had been seized and bound on board the ship, he had
submitted, partly from prudence, and partly from a belief that the whole
affair was a sort of half joke but when he found himself rebound, after
the trial, and cast with his companions into a solid wooden building
with a strong door and no window, which had been erected as a sort of
fortress in which to put the women and children in case of attack by the
savages, and there provided with maize and water for food and straw for
bed, he began to realise the fact that he had indeed fallen into the
hands of resolute men and under the power of law.

"I wouldn't mind it so much if they'd only not cut off our baccy," he
groaned, on the afternoon of the following day, after a prolonged fit of
sullen silence.

"After all it sarves us right," growled Hugh Morris.

"Speak for yourself," said Jabez Jenkins sulkily.

"That's just what I do," retorted Hugh.

"Hear, hear!" from some of the others.

What this conversation might have grown to no one can tell, for it was
interrupted by the opening of the prison door and the entrance of a
party of armed men.

"I am directed," said Otto, who was in command of the party, "to bring
you fellows before the queen, so, come along."

Half amused by and half contemptuous of the leader, who gave his orders
as if he were a powerful giant, the prisoners rose and marched out.

While this scene was taking place in the jail, the widow Lynch was
holding a private interview with the queen in the palace.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

SHOWS HOW THE QUEEN CONDUCTED HERSELF IN TRYING CIRCUMSTANCES, AND WAS
FINALLY DETHRONED.

"Now, darlin'," said Mrs Lynch to Queen Pauline, as she sat on the side
of her bed looking contemplatively at the floor, "thim rascals'll be in
the Hall in two minits, so take me advice and give them more nor they've
got."

"But my object in sending for them is not to add to their punishment,"
said the queen.

"More's the pity, for they need it, an' the Coort was too tinder wi'
them intirely.  Two weeks! why, two months would do them more good.
Anyhow, see that ye give them a fearful blowin' up."

"I'll do what I can for them," returned Pina, with a pleasant laugh, as
she rose and passed into the Audience Hall, where the prisoners and as
many of the settlers as could find room were already gathered.

Here a slight change of feeling seemed to have taken place in the
people.  Perhaps the sight of Hugh and Malines--two men who had, up till
that time, carried matters with rather a high hand--bound, humbled,
helpless, and with bits of straw which had been given them as bedding
sticking to their garments, induced a touch of pity.  At all events,
there was none of that riotous demand for vengeance which had
characterised them when under the influence of excitement at the trial.
Evidently a slight reaction in favour of the culprits had set in, and
the entrance of the queen, therefore, took place in solemn silence, no
one knowing why she had sent for the men or what were her intentions.
Poor Pauline was much embarrassed by the silence, and by the situation,
in which she found herself.  Being a girl of mind, and not a mere human
machine made and content to run always on beaten paths, she had resolved
to try an experiment, and braced herself to the duty.

It was by no means a new experiment; on the contrary, it was older than
this world's history, though new to Pauline in the particular
circumstances--being an application of the law of mercy.

"My friends," said Pina, in a somewhat tremulous voice, which however
became firmer as she proceeded, "this is the first trial that has taken
place in our little colony, and as crime must be firmly repressed--"

("Punished, my dear--putt it stronger!" came in a whisper from the side
door, where widow Lynch was listening; but, fortunately, none of the
audience heard her.)

"I feel," continued Pauline, taking no notice of the advice, "that it
becomes me, as your chosen queen, to do what I think will be best for
the interests of the community."

"Hear, hear!" exclaimed some of the audience; but they gave no further
expression to their feelings, being still uncertain as to the queen's
leanings.

"No doubt," continued Pina, trying, not quite successfully, to swallow
the lump in her throat, "the punishment which you have awarded these men
is in strict accordance with your ideas of justice, and, being utterly
ignorant of law, I will not presume to doubt the wisdom of your
decision; nor would I interfere, either by increasing or decreasing the
punishment, did I not feel that this case is peculiar, very peculiar.
It is, as I have said, the beginning of crime in our kingdom, and little
beginnings, you all know, often lead to great results.  A small leak may
sink a ship.  Then, in the second place, this is the first offence
committed by these men, and first offences require peculiar treatment--"

("That's so, my dear--_powerful_ treatment.  Give it 'em hot!" inaudibly
whispered the widow.)

"Turning to that Book," continued Pauline, "which shall be my guide in
every act of life, I find that God `delighteth in mercy.'  Can I go
wrong in following humbly in His footsteps?  I think not.  Therefore, I
venture to exercise the privilege of my position, and extend mercy to
these men.  The law has been vindicated by their trial and condemnation.
I now, in accordance with constitutional right, bestow on them a free
pardon."

This, being rapidly uttered, quite took the people by surprise, and
caused them to burst into a ringing cheer, above which the no longer
inaudible voice of the widow was heard to exclaim--

"Free parding, indeed!" in tones of indignant contempt, as she shut the
door with a bang and retired in disgust from the scene.

"I do not know," said the queen, when silence was restored, "on what
particular officer of my household," (a confused little smile and blush
here), "falls the duty of setting crim--I mean _forgiven_ men free, so I
now order the prime minister to cut their bonds."

Amid some laughter, Joe readily drew forth an enormous clasp-knife and
obeyed this command.  Then the queen, stepping forward, held out her
hand with a bright smile to Hugh Morris.  None but an utterly abandoned
wretch could have resisted that.  Hugh gave in at once--seized the hand,
and not only shook it, but kissed it heartily.  So did Malines, and so
did the others, and then they all dispersed--Teddy Malone signalling his
exit with a cheer and a shout to the following effect--

"Hooroo! boys--she's ivvery inch a quane, an' two or three eighths
over--cut an' dry, ready-made, hot off the irons!  We're in luck--eh!
boys, aren't we?"

The latter remark was made, with a hearty slap on the back, to little
Buxley, who, turning at once and grasping Malone in his arms, went in
for a vigorous wrestle by way of relieving his feelings.

Whatever may be thought of this matter by men deep in the learning of
human law, we feel bound to put on record that this plan of Queen
Pauline the First proved a great success, for, from that day forward,
Malines and Morris and all the other conspirators became excellent
members of the community--gave up all ideas of piracy on the high seas,
set to work like men to fence in their properties, cultivate their
farms, prosecute their fisheries, and otherwise to make themselves
useful.  Another result was that Silver Bay Settlement began to
flourish.

Similar results usually happen when men give up quarrelling and take to
working.  The schoolroom was soon finished.  The queen had her Bible
classes--plenty of Bibles having been found in the ship--and Dominick
even went the length of venturing to conduct special services on
Sundays.

But, strange to say, the more things prospered on the island, the more
pensive became the queen, as well as Otto and his brother.  It was not
so with Dr Marsh, however.  Some unknown influence seemed to keep him
always in a hearty frame of mind.

"I can't help it, Dom," said the queen, as she walked on the white shore
of Silver Bay one evening while the sun was descending in a golden
blaze, "I can't bear to think of them."

Poor Pauline's mind was running on a cheery bald little old gentleman in
Java, and a mild little spectacled old lady, with knitting proclivities,
in England, whose chief solace, in a humble way, was an elderly female
cat.

"Am I _never_ to see them again?" she added, as she sat down on a coral
rock, buried her fair face in her hands, and wept.

Dominick tried to comfort her, but in vain.

"It's all very well what you say, Dom, but here we are settling down as
if we meant to stay for ever.  Even Otto talks less than he used to
about Robinson Crusoe, and no ships ever come near us, and the sailors
don't want to quit the islands, so we can't even use the ship we have
got, and--and--O darling mother! and dear, _dear_ papa!"

If Queen Pina, who broke down at this point, had only known that, about
the time she was speaking, the _dear_ papa was running for his life,
covered with mud from head to foot, in the midst of thunder and fire and
smoke, she might have mingled horror with loving emphasis as she
mentioned his name.

At the time of which we write, the island of Java, in the Malay
Archipelago, was convulsed by one of those tremendous earthquakes which
