
He raised his head, stammered as if attempting to say more, then,
lifting both arms aloft, while the outspread fingers clutched the air,
uttered an appalling cry, and fell flat on the ground.

"Not too late for revenge," muttered the officer commanding the
detachment.  "Dress his wounds as quickly as may be, Mr Childers."

He gave the necessary orders to get ready.  In a few minutes the horses
were saddled, and I had done what I could for the wounded man.

"You know the village he came from, and the way to it?" asked the
commanding officer of Petroff.

"Yes, sir, I know it well."

"Take the man up behind you, then, and lead the way."

The troop mounted, and a few minutes later we were galloping over a wide
plain, on the eastern verge of which the light of the new day was slowly
dawning.

An hour's ride brought us to the village.  We could see the smoke of the
still burning cottages as we advanced, and were prepared for a sad
spectacle of one of the effects of war; but what we beheld on entering
far surpassed our expectations.  Harvests trampled down or burned were
bad enough, so were burning cottages, battered-in doors, and smashed
windows, but these things were nothing to the sight of dead men and
women scattered about the streets.  The men were not men of war; their
peasant garbs bespoke them men of peace.  Gallantly had they fought,
however, in defence of hearth and home, but all in vain.  The trained
miscreants who had attacked them form a part of the Turkish army, which
receives no pay, and is therefore virtually told that, after fighting,
their recognised duty is to pillage.  But the brutes had done more than
this.  As we trotted through the little hamlet, which was peopled only
by the dead, we observed that most of the men had been more or less
mutilated, some in a very horrible manner, and the poor fellow who had
escaped said that this had been done while the men were alive.

Dismounting, we examined some of the cottages, and there beheld sights
at the mere recollection of which I shudder.  In one I saw women and
children heaped together, with their limbs cut and garments torn off,
while their long hair lay tossed about on the bloody floors.  In
another, which was on fire, I could see the limbs of corpses that were
being roasted, or had already been burnt to cinders.

Not one soul in that village was left alive.  How many had escaped we
could not ascertain, for the wounded man had fallen into such a state of
wild horror that he could not be got to understand or answer questions.
At one cottage door which we came to he stood with clasped hands gazing
at the dead inside, like one petrified.  Some one touched him on the
shoulder, when we were ready to leave the place, but he merely muttered,
"My home!"

As we could do no good there, and were anxious to pursue the fiends who
had left such desolation behind them, we again urged the man to come
with us, but he refused.  On our attempting to use gentle force, he
started suddenly, drew a knife from his girdle, and plunging it into his
heart, fell dead on his own threshold.

It was with a sense of relief, as if we had been delivered from a dark
oppressive dungeon, that we galloped out of the village, and followed
the tracks of the Bashi-Bazouks, which were luckily visible on the
plain.  Soon we traced them to a road that led towards the mountainous
country.  There was no other road there, and as this one had neither
fork nor diverging path, we had no difficulty in following them up.

It was night, however, before we came upon further traces of them,--
several fires where they had stopped to cook some food.  As the sky was
clear, we pushed on all that night.

Shortly after dawn we reached a sequestered dell.  The road being curved
at the place, we came on it suddenly, and here, under the bushes, we
discovered the lair of the Bashi-Bazouks.

They kept no guard, apparently, but the sound of our approach had roused
them, for, as we galloped into the dell, some were seen running to catch
their horses, others, scarcely awake, were wildly buckling on their
swords, while a few were creeping from under the low booths of brushwood
they had set up to shelter them.

The scene that followed was brief but terrible.  Our men, some of whom
were lancers, some dragoons, charged them in all directions with yells
of execration.  Here I saw one wretch thrust through with a lance,
doubling backward in his death-agony as he fell; there, another turned
fiercely, and fired his pistol full at the dragoon who charged him, but
missed, and was cleft next moment to the chin.  In another place a
wretched man had dropped on his knees, and, while in a supplicating
attitude, was run through the neck by a lancer.  But, to say truth,
little quarter was asked by these Bashi-Bazouks, and none was granted.
They fought on foot, fiercely, with spear and pistol and short sword.
It seemed to me as if some of my conceptions of hell were being
realised: rapid shots; fire and smoke; imprecations, shouts, and yells,
with looks of fiercest passion and deadly hate; shrieks of mortal pain;
blood spouting in thick fountains from sudden wounds; men lying in
horrible, almost grotesque, contortions, or writhing on the ground in
throes of agony.

"O God!" thought I, "and all this is done for the amelioration of the
condition of the Christians in Turkey!"

"Ha! ha-a!" shouted a voice near me, as if in mockery of my thought.  It
was more like that of a fiend than a man.  I turned quickly.  It was
Andre Yanovitch, his young and handsome face distorted with a look of
furious triumph as he wiped his bloody sword after killing the last of
the Bashi-Bazouks who had failed to escape into the neighbouring woods.
"_These_ brutes at least won't have another chance of drawing blood from
women and children," he cried, sheathing his sword with a clang, and
trotting towards his comrades, who were already mustering at the bottom
of the dell, the skirmish being over.

The smooth-faced, tender-hearted youth, with the lock of auburn hair in
his bosom, had fairly begun his education in the art of war.  His young
heart was bursting and his young blood boiling with the tumultuous
emotions caused by a combination of pity and revenge.

The scout also galloped past to rejoin our party.  I noticed in the
_melee_ that his sword-sweep had been even more terrible and deadly than
that of Andre, but he had done his fearful work in comparative silence,
with knitted brows, compressed lips, and clenched teeth.  He was a
full-grown man, the other a mere boy.  Besides, Dobri Petroff had been
born and bred in a land of rampant tyranny, and had learned, naturally
bold and independent though he was, at all times to hold himself, and
all his powers, well in hand.

Little did the scout imagine that, while he was thus inflicting
well-deserved punishment on the Turkish Bashi-Bazouks, the Cossacks of
Russia had, about the same time, made demands on the men of his own
village, who, resisting, were put to the sword, and many of them
massacred.  Strong in the belief that the country which had taken up
arms for the deliverance of Bulgaria would be able to fulfil its
engagements, and afford secure protection to the inhabitants of Yenilik,
and, among them, to his wife and little ones, Dobri Petroff went on his
way with a comparatively easy mind.

It was evening when we reached another village, where the people had
been visited by a body of Russian irregular horse, who had murdered some
of them, and carried off whatever they required.

Putting up at the little hostelry of the place, I felt too much fatigued
to talk over recent events with Nicholas, and was glad to retire to a
small room, where, stretched on a wooden bench, with a greatcoat for a
pillow, I soon forgot the sorrows and sufferings of Bulgaria in profound
slumber.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

SIMTOVA--NEW VIEWS OF WAR--LANCEY GOES TO THE FRONT, AND SEES SERVICE,
AND GETS A SCARE.

Shortly afterwards our detachment reached the headquarters of General
Gourko, who, with that celebrated Russian general, Skobeleff the
younger, was pressing towards the Balkans.

Here changes took place which very materially altered my experiences.

Nicholas Naranovitsch was transferred to the staff of General Skobeleff.
Petroff was sent to act the part of guide and scout to the division,
and I, although anxious to obtain employment at the front, was obliged
to content myself with an appointment to the army hospitals at Sistova.

As it turned out, this post enabled me to understand more of the true
nature of war than if I had remained with the army, and, as I afterwards
had considerable experience in the field, the appointment proved to be
advantageous, though at the time I regarded it as a disappointment.

When I had been some weeks at Sistova I wrote a letter to my mother,
which, as it gives a fair account of the impressions made at the time, I
cannot do better than transcribe:--

  "Dearest Mother,--I have been in the hospitals now for some weeks, and
  it is not possible for you to conceive, or me to convey, an adequate
  description of the horrible effects of this most hideous war.  My
  opinions on war--always, as you know, strong--have been greatly
  strengthened; also modified.  Your heart would bleed for the poor
  wounded men if you saw them.  They are sent to us in crowds daily,
  direct from the battle-fields.  An ordinary hospital, with its clean
  beds, and its sufferers warmly housed and well cared for, with which
  you are familiar enough, gives no idea of an army hospital in time of
  war.

  "The men come in, or are carried in, begrimed with powder, smoke, and
  dust; with broken limbs and gaping wounds, mortifying and almost unfit
  for inspection or handling until cleansed by the application of
  Lister's carbolic acid spray.  Some of these have dragged themselves
  hither on foot from that awful Shipka Pass--a seven days' journey,--
  and are in such an abject state of exhaustion that their recovery is
  usually impossible.  Yet some do recover.  Some men seem very hard to
  kill.  On the other hand, I have seen some men whose hold on life was
  so feeble as to make it difficult to say which of their comparatively
  slight wounds had caused death.

  "I am now, alas! familiar with death and wounds and human agony in
  every form.  Day and night I am engaged in dressing, operating, and
  tending generally.  The same may be said of all connected with the
  hospital.  The doctors under Professor Wahl are untiring in their
  work.  The Protestant sisters of mercy, chiefly Germans, and the
  `Sanitaires,' who take the weary night-watches, are quite worn out,
  for the number of sick and wounded who pour in on us has far exceeded
  the computations formed.  Everything in this war has been
  under-estimated.  What do you think of this fact--within the last
  fifty days 15,000 men have been killed, and 40,000 sick and wounded
  sent to Russian hospitals?  This speaks to 55,000 Russian homes
  plunged into mourning,--to say nothing of similar losses, if not
  greater, by the Turks,--a heavy price to pay for improving the
  condition of Bulgaria,--isn't it?

  "There is a strong feeling in my mind that this is a war of
  extermination.  `No quarter' is too frequently the cry on either side.
  I do not say that the Russians mean it to be so, but when
  Bashi-Bazouks torture their prisoners in cold blood, and show fiendish
  delight in the most diabolical acts of cruelty, even going the length
  of roasting people alive, is it strange that a brutalising effect is
  produced on the Russians, and that they retaliate in a somewhat
  similar spirit at times?  The truth is, mother, that one of the direct
  and most powerful effects of war is to dehumanise, and check the
  influence of, the good men engaged, while it affords a splendid
  opportunity to the vicious and brutal to give the rein to their
  passions, and work their will with impunity.

  "But, while this is so with the combatants, many of those outside the
  ring are stirred to pity and to noble deeds.  Witness the
  self-sacrificing labours of the volunteer heroes and heroines who do
  their work in an hospital such as this, and the generous deeds evoked
  from the peoples of other lands, such as the sending of two splendid
  and completely equipped ambulance trains of twenty-five carriages
  each, by the Berlin Central Committee of the International Association
  for the Relief of Sick and Wounded Soldiers in the field, the
  thousands of pounds that have been contributed by the Russians for the
  comfort of their sick and wounded, and the thousands contributed by
  England for that fund which embraces in its sympathies both Russian
  and Turk.  It seems to me that a great moral war is going on just
  now--a war between philanthropy and selfishness; but I grieve to say
  that while the former saves its thousands, the latter slays its tens
  of thousands.  Glorious though the result of our labours is, it is as
  nothing compared with the torrent of evil which has called us out, and
  the conclusion which has been forced upon me is, that we should--every
  one of us, man, woman, and child--hold and pertinaciously enforce the
  precept that war among civilised nations is outrageous and
  intolerable.  Of course we cannot avoid it sometimes.  If a man _will_
  insist on fighting _me_, I have no resource left but to fight _him_;
  but for two CIVILISED nations to go to war for the settlement of a
  dispute is an unreasonable and childish and silly as it would be for
  two gentlemen, who should differ in opinion, to step into the middle
  of a peaceful drawing-room, button up their coats, turn up their
  wristbands, and proceed to batter each other's eyes and noses,
  regardless of ladies, children, and valuables.  War would be a
  contemptible farce if it were not a tremendous tragedy."

My mother's reply to this letter was characteristic and brief.

  "My dear Jeff," she wrote, "in regard to your strictures on war I have
  only to say that I agree with you, as I have always done on all
  points, heart and soul.  Don't forget to keep your feet dry when
  sleeping out at nights, and never omit to take the globules."

While I was busy at Sistova--too busy with the pressing duties of my
post to think much of absent friends, my poor servant Lancey was going
through a series of experiences still more strange and trying than my
own.

As I have said, he had been appointed by Sanda Pasha to a post in
connection with a Turkish ambulance corps.  He was on his way to the
front, when the detachment with which he travelled met with a reverse
which materially affected his fortunes for some time after.

There were two Turkish soldiers with whom Lancey was thrown much in
contact, and with whom he had become very intimate.  There was nothing
very particular in the appearance of the two men, except that they
formed contrasts, one being tall and thin, the other short and thick.
Both were comrades and bosom friends, and both took a strong fancy to
their English comrade.  Lancey had also taken a fancy to them.  It was,
in short, the old story of "kindred souls," and, despite the fact that
these Turks were to Lancey "furriners" and "unbelievers," while he was
to them a "giaour," they felt strong human sympathies which drew them
powerfully together.  The name of the thick little man was Ali Bobo,
that of the tall comrade Eskiwin.

That these two loved each other intensely, although Turks, was the first
thing that touched Lancey's feelings.  On discovering that Ali Bobo
happened to have dwelt for a long time with an English merchant in
Constantinople, and could speak a little of something that was
understood to be English, he became intimate and communicative.

Not more tender was the love of David and Jonathan than was that of
Eskiwin and Ali Bobo.  As the screw to the nut, so fitted the one to the
other.  Eskiwin was grave, his friend was funny.  Ali Bobo was smart,
his comrade was slow.  They never clashed.  Jacob Lancey, being quiet
and sedate, observed the two, admired each, philosophised on both and
gained their esteem.  Their friendship, alas! was of short duration.

"You's goodish sorro man," said Ali Bobo to Lancey one evening, as they
sat over the camp-fire smoking their pipes in concert.

Lancey made no reply, but nodded his head as if in approval of the
sentiment.

"Heskiwin, 'e's a good un too, hain't 'e, Bobo?" asked Lancey, pointing
with his thumb to the tall Turk, who sat cross-legged beside him smoking
a chibouk.

Ali Bobo smiled in the way that a man does when he thinks a great deal
more than he chooses to express.

At that moment the officer in command of the detachment galloped
furiously into the camp with the information that the Russians were upon
them!

Instantly all was uproar, and a scramble to get out of the way.
Eskiwin, however, was an exception.  He was a man of quiet promptitude.
Deliberately dropping his pipe, he rose and saddled his horse, while his
more excitable comrades were struggling hurriedly, and therefore slowly,
with the buckles of their harness.  Ali Bobo was not less cool, though
more active.  Lancey chanced to break his stirrup-leather in mounting.

"I say, Bobo," he called to his stout little friend, who was near, "lend
a 'and, like a good fellow.  This brute won't stand still.  Give us a
leg."

The little Turk put his hand on Lancey's instep and hoisted him into the
saddle.  Next moment the whole party was in full retreat.  Not a moment
too soon either.  A scattering volley from the Russians, who were coming
on in force, quickened their movements.

The faint moonlight enabled the Turks to distance their pursuers, and
soon the chase appeared to be given up.  Still, most of the detachment
continued its headlong retreat for a considerable time.

Suddenly Eskiwin observed that Ali Bobo swayed from side to side as he
rode, and then fell heavily to the ground.  He pulled up at once and
