I had not told the story, and was there and then called upon to do so--
which I did, much to the gratification of the company.

"Why don't you bring this mysterious Mr Smith down to show to us one
evening?" asked Whipcord.  "We're always hearing about him.  I'd like to
see him, wouldn't you, Twins?"

"Very," replied Abel, who evidently had been thinking of something else.

"I'm not sure," said I, "whether he'd come out.  I don't think he cares
much about visiting."

"I hope he doesn't think it's wrong to visit," said the Field-Marshal.

"No, not that," said I, sorry I had embarked on the subject; "but
somehow he doesn't get on, I think, in company."

"I should rather say he doesn't!" said Crow--"at any rate, at Hawk
Street, for a more stuck-up, disagreeable, self-righteous prig I never
saw."

"I think," said Hawkesbury, mildly, "you judge him rather hardly, Crow.
Some of us thought the same at school; but I really think he means
well."

"Yes," said I, ready to follow up this lead, "his manner's against him,
perhaps, but he's a very good fellow at bottom."

"Besides," said Hawkesbury, "he really has had great disadvantages.  He
has no friend at all in London, except Batchelor."

This was flattering, certainly, and naturally enough I looked sheepish.

"I beg your pardon," said Hawkesbury, suddenly perceiving his error, "I
meant that he has very few friends at all; isn't that so, Batchelor?"

"Yes," said I, "very few."

"Wasn't he in a grocer's shop, or some place of the kind, before he came
to us?" asked Doubleday.

"Yes," I answered.

"No wonder he's a rough lot," said Whipcord.  "I should have thought his
governor might have done better for him than that."

"But," I said, feeling flurried by all this, and hardly knowing what I
said, "he hasn't got a father--that is--I mean--"

"What do you mean?" asked Flanagan.

I was in a dreadful plight.  Every one must have seen by my confusion
that I was in a fix, and how was I to get out of it?

"Eh, what about his father?" demanded Doubleday.

"Oh," said I, "he's living abroad."

"Where, Botany Bay?" asked Daly, with a laugh.

I felt my face grow scarlet, and my whole manner utterly confused and
guilty-looking, as I pretended not to hear the question, and turned to
speak to Crow about some other matter.  But my assailants were too quick
for me.  My manner had roused their curiosity and excited their
suspicions, and I was not to be let off.

"Eh?  Is that where he resides?" again demanded Daly.

"I really can't say where he lives," I replied, abruptly, and in a tone
so unlike my ordinary voice that I hardly recognised it myself.

I was conscious of a startled look on the faces of one or two of the
company as I said this, and of a low whistle from Crow.

What had I done?

"I don't think," said Hawkesbury, with his usual smile, "your friend
Smith would be grateful to you, Batchelor, for letting the cat out of
the bag like this."

"What cat?"  I exclaimed, in an agitated voice.  "You are all mistaken,
indeed you are.  Smith's father is not a--I mean he's merely away for
his health, I assure you."

"Rather a lingering illness," drily replied the Field-marshal, amid
general laughter, "if it's kept him abroad all these years."

"If you will take my advice, Batchelor," said Hawkesbury, "you'll be
careful how you tell everybody a thing like this.  It's not a pleasant
sort of thing to be known of a fellow."

"Indeed, indeed," I cried once more, almost beside myself with terror
and rage, "you're all wrong.  I wish I'd said nothing about it.  Won't
you believe me?"

"Delighted," said Whipcord, who with every one else had been enjoying my
dismay, and laughing at my efforts to extricate myself.  "You say
Smith's governor is a--"

"No--it's false.  I was telling a lie!"  I cried, in tones of misery
which any ordinary mortal would have pitied.  "I don't know what he is.
I never heard of him.  Indeed, indeed, I was only speaking in fun."

Thus wildly did I hope by a shield of lies to hide the secret which I
had--by my manner more than my words--betrayed.

"I'm afraid, Batchelor," said Hawkesbury, with a grave but sweet smile,
"you either are not telling quite the truth, or you are speaking in fun
about a very serious matter."

"Oh yes, you're right," I cried; "I've been telling lies; upon my honour
I have."

"Upon his honour he's been telling lies," said Daly.  "The fellow _will_
have his joke.  Never saw such a joker in all my days."

I would fain have rushed from the place, but I dared not.  Every word I
said involved me deeper, and yet I could not leave them all like this
without one effort at least either to recover my secret--Jack's secret--
or else to appeal to their confidence and generosity.

It was evident they were not disposed to believe anything I told them,
except the one hideous fact.  And that, though I had not uttered it in
so many words, every one believed from my lips as if I had been
inspired.

I sat in abject misery while the meal lasted, listening to the brutal
jests made at the cost of my absent friend, and knowing that I was
responsible for them all.

Directly supper was over I appealed to Doubleday.

"I do hope you won't say anything about this at the office, Doubleday,"
I said, imploringly.  "It would be such a dreadful thing for it to get
out."

"Then it is true?" demanded Doubleday.

"No--that is--I--I--don't know," responded I, "but oh! don't say
anything about it."

"Bless me, if you don't know," said he, "why do you make such a fuss?
Take my advice, young un, and don't say any more about it to any one.
You've done very well so far, and if you want the fellows to forget all
about it you'd better not remind them of it so much."

"But, Doubleday," I implored once more, "out of friendship for me--"

"Out of friendship for you let me offer you a cigar," said Doubleday.
"Now you fellows, what's it to be--whist, nap, poker, or what?"

I turned in despair to Hawkesbury.

"Please, Hawkesbury," I said, "promise to say nothing about it at the
office.  I would be so grateful if you would."

"Then," said Hawkesbury, asking the same question as Doubleday had just
asked, "it is true?"

I dared not say "Yes," and to say "No" would, I knew, be useless.

"Oh, please don't ask me," I said, only "promise--do, Hawkesbury."

Hawkesbury smiled most sweetly.

"Really," he said, "one would think it was such a nice subject that a
fellow would like to talk about it!"

"Then you won't!"  I cried, ready to jump at the least encouragement;
"oh, thanks, Hawkesbury!"

This was the only comfort I could get.  Crow laughed at me when I
appealed to him; and the other fellows reminded me that as they had not
the pleasure of knowing my pet gaol-bird they were afraid they couldn't
tell him what I had done, much as they would like.

Flanagan alone treated it seriously.

"Batchelor," said he, "I never believed you were such a fool.  Can't you
see you're only making things worse by your fuss?  Why can't you hold
your tongue?  Smith has little enough to thank you for as it is."

He had indeed!  As I walked home that evening, I felt as if I would
never dare to look him in the face again.

It was late when I reached Beadle Square.  Jack had returned before me,
and was fast asleep in bed.  A candle burned beside him, and on the
counterpane, as if dropped from his hand, lay a book--a Roman History.

I groaned as I looked at him, and envied him his quiet sleep, the reward
of honest work and a good conscience.  I crept into bed that night as
silently as I could, for fear of waking him.

The next few days I was on thorns.  I dreaded to be alone with Jack, and
still more dreaded to be by when the fellows were--now an ordinary
pastime--chaffing him at the office.  It was like living on a volcano
which might at any moment explode.  However, the days went on, and my
fears did not come to pass.  The fellows had either forgotten all about
it, or, more likely, their sense of honour prevented them from making it
known.  I was devoutly thankful, of course, and by every means in my
power endeavoured to show it.  I made myself as agreeable as possible to
my comrades, and bore all their chaff and persecution with the utmost
good-humour, and went out of my way to secure and retain their good
graces.

Of course I could not do this without in a way defying Jack's influence.
Though he had never once taken me to task in so many words, I knew well
enough he considered I was wasting my time and money in this perpetual
round of festivities.  But I had to take the risk of that.  After all, I
was playing to shield him.  If he only knew all, he would be grateful to
me, I reflected, rather than offended.

He could not help noticing my altered manner, and of course put it down
to anything but its true cause.  He thought I was offended with him for
not encouraging my extravagances, and that the great intimacy with
Doubleday and Hawkesbury and Crow was meant to show him that I was
independent of him.

However, he made one brave effort to pull me up.

"Fred," said he, thoughtfully, one evening, as we walked home--"Fred,
what are you going to do about your debts?"

"Oh, pay them some day, I suppose," I said, shortly.

"When will that be?" he continued, quietly, not noticing my manner.

"I really can't say," I replied, not liking to be thus questioned.

"Do you know how much you owe?" he asked.

"Really, Jack, you take a great interest in my debts!"

"I do," he replied, solemnly, and with the air of a fellow who had made
up his mind to go through with an unpleasant duty.

"Well," I said, warming up rather, "I fancy I can look after them quite
as well by myself."

"I'm afraid I am offending you," said Jack, looking straight at me, "but
I don't think you do look after them properly."

"What do you mean?"  I demanded.

"I mean," said Jack, with his arm still in mine, "that you are head over
ears in debt, and that, instead of paying off, you are spending your
money in other ways.  And I don't think it's right, Fred."

"Upon my word, Jack," I said, "it's quite new for you to lecture me like
this, and I don't like it.  What business is it of yours, I should like
to know?"

"You are my friend," he said, quietly.

I drew my arm roughly from his.

"If you are mine," said I, "when I want your advice I'll ask it."

He looked at me a moment doubtfully with his big eyes.  Then he said, "I
was afraid of this; we never quarrelled before, Fred."

"And we shouldn't quarrel now," I cried, "if you'd mind your own
business."

"It is my business," he persisted--doggedly, as I thought.

"What's your business?"  I demanded, with rising rage.

"To beg you not to be a fool," he replied, steadily.

My temper had already gone.  My self-control now deserted me as I
stopped abruptly, and turned to him.

"Your business!"  I exclaimed, bitterly.

"Yes, Fred, my business," he said, quietly, with a touch of sadness in
his tone.

"Then let me tell you," I exclaimed, forgetting everything but my
resentment, "I don't intend to be told my duty _by you of all people_!"

It was enough.  He knew the meaning of those cowardly words.  His face
turned suddenly pale, and his eyes dropped, as with a half-groan he
started to walk slowly on.

I would have given worlds to recall the words--worlds to be able to
seize his arm and beg his forgiveness.  But my wicked vanity kept me
back, and I let him go on alone.  Then I followed.  It was the first of
many, many sad, solitary walks for me.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

HOW A DOOR CLOSED BETWEEN MY FRIEND SMITH AND ME.

If any one had told me a month before that I should quarrel with my
friend Smith, I should have laughed at the bare idea.  But now the
impossible thing had happened.

That night as I lay awake in my bed I felt that I had not a friend in
the world.  I had wounded, in the cruellest way, the only true friend I
ever had, and now I was to suffer for it.  The words had come hastily
and thoughtlessly, but they had come; and Jack, I knew, regarded me as a
coward and a brute.

The next day we scarcely spoke a word to one another, and when we did it
was in so constrained a manner that it would have been more comfortable
had we remained silent.  We walked to and from the office by separate
ways, and during the mid-day half-hour we lunched for the first time at
different eating-houses.

I longed to explain--to beg his pardon.  But he was so stiff and distant
in his manner that I could not venture to approach him.  Once I did try,
but he saw me coming and, I fancied, turned on his heel before I got up.

What was I to do?  If this was to last, I should be miserable for ever.
Yet how could it end?  Would I write him a letter, or would I get some
one to plead my cause for me?  Or would I let him see how wretched I
was, and work on his feelings that way?  It was all my fault, I knew.
Yet he might have come out a little and made a reconciliation easy.
Surely if he had really been my friend, thought I, he would not be so
quick to cast me off, and judge me by one or two hasty words!

What between an evil conscience, vexation, and disappointment, I was
that day about the most miserable fellow alive.  The fellows at the
office all noticed and added to my discomfort by ostentatiously
condoling with me.

"Poor old chap!" said Doubleday; "he's been letting you have it, has he?
Awful shame."

"As if a fellow mayn't get screwed without his interfering," laughed
Crow.

"It's nothing of the sort," said I, as usual taking in earnest what was
meant as a jest; "I was never screwed."

Crow's only answer was a whistle, which greatly amused all the others.

"Never mind," said Doubleday, "come along with us to-night, old man;
we've got a little spree on, haven't we, Crow?  We're going to get tea
and shrimps at the Magpie, and then going in a body to the Serio-Comics,
and finish up with a supper somewhere or other.  Going to make a regular
night of it.  Come along."

"I don't want to," I said; "besides, I can't afford it."

"Afford your great-grandmother!  Why, a fellow who can entertain the
whole lot of us as you did can't be so very hard up, can he, Wallop?  So
come, none of your gammon.  You're coming with us to-night, my boy, and
old Bull's-eye can sit and scowl at himself in the looking-glass if he
likes."

I went with them, glad enough to get anywhere out of Jack's sight.  We
had a "rollicking evening," as the fellows called it; which meant that
after a noisy and extravagant tea at the Magpie we adjourned in a body
to the performance, where we made quite as much noise as the rest of the
audience put together, after which we finished up with a fish supper of
Doubleday's ordering, at a restaurant, the bill for which came to two
shillings a head.

I was not in a condition to enjoy myself.  The thought of Jack haunted
me all the evening and made me miserable.  I fancied him walking back
from Hawk Street alone.  He would stop to talk to Billy, I knew, and
then he would go on to Beadle Square and bury himself in his book till
bedtime.  Would he ever think of me?  Why, even the little shoeblack was
more to him now than I was.

I got home late--so late that Mrs Nash protested angrily, and
threatened to stand my irregularities no longer.  Jack was not asleep
when I entered the room, but at sight of me he turned over in his bed
and drew the clothes round him.  I was angry and miserable and made no
attempt to speak to him.  But I could not sleep.  The spirit seemed to
have gone out of my life in London, and I dreaded to-morrow as much as
ever I had hated to-day.

I rose early in the morning, and after a hurried breakfast started from
the house before Jack came down.  At least I could take refuge in my
work at the office.

I had the place to myself for quite half an hour, when Hawkesbury
arrived.

"Well, Batchelor," said he, "you are industrious.  I thought I should be
first to-day, but you are before me.  Where's your friend Smith?"

"I don't know," I said, hurriedly.

"I'm afraid," said Hawkesbury, with his sweet smile, "you and Smith
haven't been getting on well lately.  I noticed yesterday you never
spoke to one another."

"I'm not obliged to speak to him," I growled.

"Certainly not.  In fact I think it's very kind indeed of you to make
him your friend under the circumstances."

Of course I knew what these last words meant.  A day or two ago they
would have terrified me; but now in my mortified state of mind they
didn't even offend me.

"Jack and I always got on well," I said, "until he began to interfere
with my affairs.  I didn't like that."

"Of course not; nobody does.  But then you know he has always been a
sort of guardian to you."

"He was never anything of the sort," I retorted.

"Well," said Hawkesbury, pleasantly, but with a touch of melancholy in
his voice, "I never like to see old friends fall out.  Would you like me
to speak to him and try to make it up?"

"Certainly not," I exclaimed.  "If I want it, I can do that myself."

"What can he do himself?" cried Doubleday, entering at this moment with
Crow and Wallop, and one or two others of last night's party.  "Was the
young un saying he could find his way home by himself after that supper
last night, eh?  My eye, that's a good 'un, isn't it, Crow?"

"Nice gratitude," cried Crow, "after our carrying him home and propping
him up against his own front door."

"I wonder what his friend Smith thought of it?" said Wallop; "he must
have been shocked."

"When you fellows have done," I said, who had felt bound to submit to
all this with the best grace I could, "I'll get on with my work."

"What a joker the fellow is!" said Doubleday.  "One would think he was
always at his work."

"I want to work now," I said.  "I do indeed."

"Do you indeed?" said Doubleday, mocking my tones and making a low bow.

"Since when did you take a fancy for hard labour?"

"Hard labour?"

At that moment the door opened and Jack Smith entered.

I could notice the quick start he gave as the words fell suddenly on his
ear.  He gave one scared look round the office, and then went quietly to
his desk.

At the sight of him there was an abrupt silence amongst us.  Crow and
Wallop stopped short in the middle of their exclamation.  Hawkesbury and
I buried ourselves in our work, and Doubleday, standing before the fire,
began to whistle softly.

Could anything have happened more awkwardly and suspiciously?  Jack must
certainly believe we were all talking about him, and the ill-fated word
he had overheard would naturally suggest to him--

"When you've done laughing, young Batchelor," said Doubleday, stopping
short in his whistling, "we'll get to work."

This unexpected remark, which of course was a delicate way of calling
everybody's attention to my rueful countenance, served to put all the
rest of the company except myself at their ease, and Mr Barnacle's
entrance a minute afterwards put an end for the time to any further
conversation.

But the day dragged on miserably.  What must Jack think of me?  He would
be sure to believe the worst of me, and it was impossible for me to
explain.

"After all," I thought, "if he does choose to form wrong conclusions,
why should I afflict myself?  No one was even speaking of him when he
entered the office.  What business of mine is it to put him right?"

And then, as usual, I forgot all about the injury I had done him, all my
treachery, all my meanness, and instead felt rather aggrieved, and
persuaded myself it was I, not he, who was the injured person.

At dinner-time I ostentatiously went out arm-in-arm with Hawkesbury, and
when on returning I met Smith on the stairs I brushed past him as if I
had not seen him.

That afternoon I was called upon unexpectedly to go down to the docks to
see after the shipment of some goods.  I was relieved to have the excuse
for being alone and getting away from the unpleasant surroundings of
Hawk Street.

It was late in the afternoon when I returned, so late that I almost
expected the fellows would some of them have left for the day.  But as I
entered the office I noticed they were all there, and became aware that
something unusual was taking place.  From the loud tones of the speakers
I concluded the partners had left for the day.

At first I could not tell whether it was a joke or a quarrel that was
being enacted; but it soon began to dawn on me.  Jack Smith was being
set on by the others.

What his offence had been I could not quite gather, though I believe it
consisted in his insisting on using the ledger he was at work on till
the actual hour for ceasing work arrived, while Harris, who was
responsible for the locking-up of the books, and who wanted this evening
to go half an hour earlier, was demanding that he should give it up now.

"I must finish these accounts to-night," said Jack.

"I tell you I'm not going to be kept here half an hour just to please
you," replied Harris.

"We're not supposed to stop work till seven," said Jack; "that's the
time we always work to when Mr Barnacle is here.  And it's only half-
past six now."

"What business of yours is it when we're supposed to work to, Mr Prig?"
demanded Harris, savagely.  "You're under my orders here, and you'll do
what I tell you."

"I'm under Mr Barnacle's orders," said Jack, going on with his writing.

"You mean to say you're not going to do what I tell you?" asked Harris,
in a rage.

"I'm going to do what's right--that's all," said Smith, quietly.

"Right!  You humbug!  You're a nice respectable fellow to talk about
right to us, Mr Gaol-bird!  As if we didn't know who you are!  You son
of a thief and swindler!  Right, indeed!  We don't want to hear about
right from you!"

Jack gave one startled, scared, upward look as he spoke; but it was
turned not to the speaker, but to me.  I shall never forget that look.
I could have sunk into the earth with shame and misery as I encountered
it.

He closed the ledger, and with white face and quivering lips took his
hat and walked silently from the office.

To me his manner was more terrible than if he had broken out into
torrents of passion and abuse.  At the sight of his face that moment my
treachery and sin appeared suddenly in their true light before my eyes.
I had been false to my best friend, and more than false.

Who could tell if I had not ruined him?  Vain and selfish fool that I
had been!  Always thinking what others would think of me, and never how
best I could help him in his gallant struggle against his evil destiny.

I rushed wildly from the office after him, and overtook him on the
stairs.

"Oh, Jack," I cried, "it really wasn't my--oh!  I'm so dreadfully sorry,
Jack!  If you'll only let me explain, I can--"

He was gone.  The door shut-to suddenly in my face, leaving me alone
with my misery, and shutting out my one hope of recovering my only
friend.

I returned miserable to the office--miserable and savage.  Though I knew
I had only myself to blame for what had happened, I was fain to vent my
anger on the cowardly set who had used my secret against my friend.  But
when I tried to speak the words would not come.  I locked up my desk
dejectedly, and without a word to any one, and heedless of the looks and
titters that followed me, walked from the place.

Half way down the street I became aware of a footstep following
hurriedly, as if to overtake me.  Could it be Jack?  Was there yet a
chance?  No, it was Hawkesbury.

"Oh, Batchelor," he said, "I am so sorry.  It's most unfortunate the way
it came out, isn't it?"

I made no answer, and drew my arm out of his.

"Harris is such a short-tempered fellow," he went on, not noticing my
manner, "but I never thought he would go as far as he did.  I assure
you, Batchelor, when I heard it, I felt quite as sorry as you did."

"I should like to know who told Harris about it," I said.  "I didn't."

"Didn't you?  Wasn't he there that evening you told all the rest of us?
To be sure he wasn't.  He must have heard the others speaking about it."
