hyena.

There is still another "brown hyena," which differs altogether from this
one, and is an inhabitant of the Great Desert.  He is shorter-haired and
of uniform brown colour, but like the rest in habits and general
character.  No doubt, when the central parts of Africa have been
thoroughly explored, several species of hyena will be added to the list
of those already known.

The habits of the hyenas are not unlike those of the larger wolves.
They dwell in caves, of clefts of rocks.  Some of them use the burrows
of other animals for their lair, which they can enlarge for themselves--
as they are provided with burrowing claws.

They are not tree-climbers, as their claws are not sufficiently
retractile for that.  It is in their teeth their main dependence lies,
and in the great strength of their jaws.

Hyenas are solitary animals, though often troops of them are seen
together, attracted by the common prey.  A dozen or more will meet over
a carcass, but each goes his own way on leaving it.  They are extremely
voracious; will eat up almost anything--even scraps of leather or old
shoes!  Bones they break and swallow as though these were pieces of
tender flesh.  They are bold, particularly with the poor natives, who do
not hunt them with a view to extermination.  They enter the miserable
kraals of the natives, and often carry off their children.  It is
positively true that hundreds of children have been destroyed by hyenas
in Southern Africa!

It is difficult for you to comprehend why this is permitted--why there
is not a war of extermination carried on against the hyenas, until these
brutes are driven out of the land.  You cannot comprehend such a state
of things, because you do not take into account the difference between
savage and civilised existence.  You will suppose that human life in
Africa is held of far less value than it is in England; but if you
thoroughly understood political science, you would discover that many a
law of civilised life calls for its victims in far greater numbers than
do the hyenas.  The empty review, the idle court fete, the reception of
an emperor, all require, as their natural sequence, the sacrifice of
many lives!



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

A HOUSE AMONG THE TREE-TOPS.

Von Bloom now reflected that the hyenas were likely to prove a great
pest to him.  No meat, nor anything, would be safe from them--even his
very children would be in danger, if left alone in the camp; and no
doubt he would often be compelled to leave them, as he would require the
older ones upon his hunting excursions.

There were other animals to be dreaded still more than the hyenas.  Even
during that night they had heard the roaring of lions down by the vley;
and when it was morning, the spoor showed that several of these animals
had drunk at the water.

How could he leave little Truey--his dear little Truey--or Jan, who was
not a bit bigger--how could he leave them in an open camp while such
monsters were roving about?  He could not think of doing so.

He reflected what course he should pursue.  At first he thought of
putting up a house.  That would necessarily be a work of time.  There
was no good building material convenient.  A stone house would cost a
great deal of labour--as the stones would have to be carried nearly a
mile, and in their hands too.  That would never do, as Von Bloom might
only remain a short while at that place.  He might not find many
elephants there, and of course would be under the necessity of going
elsewhere.

Why not build a log-house? you will say.  That would not be so much of a
job, as part of the country was well wooded, and they had an axe.

True, part of the country was wooded, but in a particular manner.  With
the exception of the nwana-trees, that stood at long distances apart--
and regularly, as if they had been planted--there was nothing that
deserved the name of timber.  All the rest was mere "bush,"--a thorny
jungle of mimosas, euphorbias, arborescent aloes, strelitzias, and the
horrid zamia plants, beautiful enough to the eye, but of no utility
whatever in the building of a house.  The nwanas, of course, were too
large for house-logs.  To have felled one of them would have been a task
equal almost to the building of a house; and to have made planks of them
would have required a steam saw-mill.  A log-house was not to be thought
of either.

Now a frail structure of poles and thatch would not have given
sufficient security.  An angry rhinoceros, or elephant, would level such
a house to the ground in a few moments.

Suppose, too, that there were _man-eaters_ in the neighbourhood.
Swartboy believed that there were, and that that region was notorious
for them.  As it was not far from Swartboy's native country, Von Bloom,
who had reason to believe what the Bushman told him, was inclined to
credit this.  What protection would a frail house afford against the
_man-eater_?  Not much, indeed.

Von Bloom was puzzled and perplexed.  He could not commence his hunting
excursions until this question was settled.  Some place must be
prepared, where the children would be safe during his absence.

While revolving the subject in his mind, he happened to cast his eyes
upward among the branches of the nwana-tree.  All at once his attention
became fixed upon those huge limbs, for they had awakened within him a
strange memory.  He remembered having heard that, in some parts of the
country, and perhaps not very far from where he then was, the natives
_live in trees_.  That sometimes a whole tribe, of fifty or more, make
their home in a single tree; and do so to secure themselves against
savage beasts, and sometimes equally savage men.  That they build their
houses upon platforms, which they erect upon the horizontal branches;
and that they ascend by means of ladders, which are drawn up after them
at night when they go to rest.

All this Von Bloom had heard, and all of it is positively true.  Of
course the reflection occurred to him, why could _he_ not do the same?
Why could he not build a house in the gigantic nwana?  That would give
him all the security he desired.  There they could all sleep with
perfect confidence of safety.  There, on going out to hunt, he could
leave the children, with the certainty of finding them on his return.
An admirable idea!--how about its practicability?

He began to consider this.  If he only had planks to make a staging or
platform, the rest would be easy.  Any slight roof would be sufficient
up there.  The leaves almost formed a roof.  But the flooring--this was
the difficulty.  Where were planks to be got?  Nowhere, in that
neighbourhood.

His eye, at that moment, chanced to fall upon the wagon.  Ha! there were
planks there.  But to break up his beautiful wagon?  No--no--no!  Such a
thing was not to be thought of.

But stay! there was no need to _break_ it up--no need to knock out a
single nail.  It would serve every purpose without breaking a splinter
off it.  The fine vehicle was made to take to pieces, and put up again
at will.

He could take it to pieces.  The broad bottom alone should remain whole.
That of itself would be the platform.  Hurrah!

The field-cornet, excited with the development of this fine plan, now
communicated it to the others.  All agreed that it was just the thing;
and as the day was before them, they made no more ado, but set about
carrying out the design.

A ladder thirty feet long had first to be constructed.  This occupied a
good while; but at length a stout rough article was knocked up, which
served the purpose admirably.  It gave them access to the lowermost
limb; and from this they could construct steps to all the others.

Von Bloom ascended, and after careful examination chose the site of the
platform.  This was to rest upon two strong horizontal limbs of equal
height, and diverging very gradually from each other.  The quantity of
thick branches in the great tree afforded him a choice.

The wagon was now taken to pieces--a work of only a few minutes--and the
first thing hauled up was the bottom.  This was no slight performance,
and required all the strength of the camp.  Strong "rheims" were
attached to one end, and these were passed over a limb of the tree,
still higher up than those on which the staging was to rest.  One stood
above to guide the huge piece of plank-work, while all the rest exerted
their strength upon the ropes below.  Even little Jan pulled with all
his might--though a single pound avoirdupois weight would have been
about the measure of _his_ strength.

The piece was hoisted up, until it rested beautifully upon the
supporting limbs; and then a cheer rose from below, and was answered by
Swartboy among the branches.

The heaviest part of the work was over.  The boxing of the wagon was
passed up, piece by piece, and set in its place just as before.  Some
branches were lopped off to make room for the cap-tent, and then it was
also hauled up, and mounted.

By the time the sun set, everything was in its place; and the aerial
house was ready for sleeping in.  In fact, that very night they slept in
it, or, as Hans jocularly termed it, they all went to "roost."

But they did not consider their new habitation quite complete as yet.
Next day they continued to labour upon it.  By means of long poles they
extended their platform from the wagon quite up to the trunk of the
tree, so as to give them a broad terrace to move about upon.

The poles were fast wattled together by rods of the beautiful
weeping-willow (_Salix Babylonica_), which is a native of these parts,
and several trees of which grew by the side of the vley.  Upon the top
of all, they laid a thick coating of clay, obtained from the edge of the
lake; so that, if need be, they could actually kindle a fire, and took
their suppers in the tree.

To make a still finer flooring, they procured a quantity of the material
of which the ant-hills are composed; which, being of a glutinous nature,
makes a mortar almost as binding as Roman cement.

After the main building had been finished off, Swartboy erected a
platform for himself, and one for Totty in another part of the ample
nwana.  Above each of these platforms he had constructed a roof or
screen, to shelter their occupants from rain or dew.

There was something odd in the appearance of these two screens, each of
which was about the size of an ordinary umbrella.  Their oddity
consisted in the fact that they were _ears of the elephant_!



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

THE BATTLE OF THE WILD PEACOCKS.

There was no longer anything to hinder the field-cornet from commencing
the real business of his new life, viz. the hunting of the elephant.  He
resolved, therefore, to begin at once; for until he should succeed in
"bagging" a few of these giant animals, he was not easy in his mind.  He
might not be able to kill a single one; and then what would become of
all his grand hopes and calculations?  They would end in disappointment,
and he should find himself in as bad a condition as ever.  Indeed worse:
for to fail in any undertaking is not only to lose time, but energy of
mind.  Success begets genius, courage, and self-reliance--all of which
contribute to new successes; while failure intimidates and leads to
despair.  In a psychological point of view it is a dangerous thing to
fail in any undertaking; and, therefore, before undertaking anything,
one should be well assured of its being possible and practicable.

Now Von Bloom was not sure that the great design he had formed was
practicable.  But in this case, he had no choice.  No other means of
livelihood was open to him just then; and he had resolved to make trial
of this.  He had faith in his calculations, and he had also good reason
to hope he would succeed; but the thing was yet untried.  No wonder he
was in haste to begin the business--in haste to know what were his
chances of success.

By early day, therefore, he was up and out.  Hendrik and Swartboy only
accompanied him, for he could not yet bring himself to leave the
children with no other protection than Totty--almost as much a child as
themselves.  Hans, therefore, remained by the camp.

At first the hunters followed the little rivulet that ran from the
spring and vley.  They did so, because in this direction there was more
"bush;" and they knew that elephants would be more likely to be found in
woods than in open places.  Indeed, it was only near the banks of the
stream that any great quantity of wood was to be seen.  A broad belt of
jungle extended upon each side of it.  After that, there were straggling
groves and clumps; and then came the open plains, almost treeless,
though covered with a rich carpet of grass for some distance farther.
To this succeeded the wild karoo, stretching eastward and westward
beyond the reach of vision.  Along the north, as already mentioned,
trended the line of "bluffs;" and beyond these there was nothing but the
parched and waterless desert.  To the south there lay the only thing
that could be called "woods;" and although such a low jungle could lay
no claim to the title of "forest," it was, nevertheless, a likely enough
haunt for elephants.

The trees consisted chiefly of mimosas--of several species; upon the
leaves, roots, and tender shoots of which the great ruminant loves to
browse.  There were some "cameel-doorn" trees, with their shady
umbrella-like tops.  But above all rose the massive heads of the nwanas,
giving a peculiar character to the landscape.

The hunters noticed, as they went on, that the channel of the rivulet
became wider and larger and that at times--no doubt after great rains--a
large quantity of water must have run in its bed, forming a considerable
river.  But as the channel grew larger, the reverse was the case with
the quantity of running water.  The farther down they proceeded this
became less and less; until, at the distance of a mile from camp, the
current ceased altogether.

For half-a-mile farther on they found water in stagnant pools, but none
running.  The wide, dry channel, however, continued on as before; and
the "bush" extended on both sides without interruption, so thick that
they could only make way by keeping in the channel itself.

As they walked along, several kinds of small game were started.  Hendrik
would gladly have taken a shot at some of these, but his father would
not permit him to fire just then.  It might frighten away the great
"game" they were in search of, and which they might fall in with at any
moment.  On their return Hendrik might do his best; and then the
field-cornet intended to assist him in procuring an antelope, as there
was no fresh venison in the camp.  This, however, was a consideration of
secondary importance, and the first thing to be done was to try and get
a pair of tusks.

There was no objection to Swartboy using his bow, as that silent weapon
would cause no alarm.  Swartboy had been taken along to carry the axe
and other implements, as well as to assist in the hunt.  Of course he
had brought his bow and quiver with him; and he was constantly on the
watch for something at which to let fly on of his little poisoned
arrows.

He found a mark at length worthy of his attention.  On crossing the
plain to avoid a large bend in the channel, they came upon a glade or
opening of considerable size, and in the middle of this glade a huge
bird appeared standing erect.  "An ostrich!" exclaimed Hendrik.  "No,"
replied Swartboy; "um ar da pauw."

"Yes," said Von Bloom, confirming Swartboy's statement, "it is the
pauw."

Now a "pauw" in the Dutch language is a "peacock."  But there are no
peacocks in Africa.  The peacock in its wild state inhabits only
Southern Asia and the islands of the Indian Archipelago.  The bird they
saw, then, could not be a peacock.

Neither was it one.  And yet it bore some resemblance to a peacock, with
its long heavy tail and wings speckled and ocellated in a very striking
manner, and something like the "marbled" feathers that adorn the
peacock's back.  It had none of the brilliant colours, however, of that
proudest of birds, though it was quite as stately, and much larger and
taller.  In fact, its great height and erect attitude was why Hendrik at
first glance had taken it for an ostrich.  It was neither peacock nor
ostrich, but belonging to a different genus from either--to the genus
_Otis_ or bustard.  It was the great bustard of South Africa--the _Otis
kori_--called "pauw" by the Dutch colonists, on account of its ocellated
plumage and other points of resemblance to the Indian peacock.

Now Swartboy, as well as Von Bloom, knew that the pauw was one of the
most delicious of fowls for the table.  But they knew at the same time
that it was one of the shyest of birds,--so shy that it is very
difficult to get even a long shot at one.  How, then, was it to be
approached within range of the Bushman's arrow?  That was the point to
be considered.

Where it stood, it was full two hundred yards from them; and had it
perceived them, it would soon have widened that distance, by running off
two hundred more.  I say _running_ off, for birds of the bustard family
rarely take to wing, but use their long legs to escape from an enemy.
On this account they are often hunted by dogs, and caught after a severe
chase.  Although but poor flyers, they are splendid runners,--swift
almost as the ostrich itself.

The pauw, however, had not observed the hunters as yet.  They had caught
a glimpse of it, before appearing out of the bushes, and had halted as
soon as they saw it.
