forward and sat down in a semicircle before Mrs Stoutley.

"It han't got no natur--it's unnateral altogether," said the Captain,
who had just heard it briefly stated by the Count.

"Hallo! are you appointed public prosecutor?" demanded Lewis.

"Yes, I am," retorted the Captain, "I've appinted myself public
persecuter, Lord Advocate, Lord High Commissioner to the Woolsack, an'
any other legal an' illegal character ye choose to name.  So you clap a
stopper on yer muzzle, youngster, while I state the case.  Here is Mrs
Stoutley, my lords, ladies, and gentlemen, who says that climbin', an'
gaugin', and glaciers is foolish and useless.  That's two counts which
the Count here (nothin' personal meant) says the prisoner was guilty of.
We'll go in an' win on the last count, for if these things ain't
useless, d'ee see, they can't be foolish.  Well, the question is,
`Guilty or not guilty?'"

"Guilty!" replied Mrs Stoutley, with an amused smile.

"Hear! hear!" from Slingsby.

"Silence in the Court!" from Lewis.

"I'm afraid," said the Professor, "that our forms of legal procedure are
somewhat irregular."

"Never mind that, Professor," said the Captain, "you go ahead an' prove
the prisoner wrong.  Take the wind out of her sails if 'ee can."

The Professor smiled blandly, and began in jest; but his enthusiastic
spirit and love of abstract truth soon made him argue in earnest.

"Oh, that's all very well," said Mrs Stoutley, interrupting him, "but
what possible use can there be in knowing the rate of speed at which a
glacier flows?  What does it matter whether it flows six, or sixty, or
six hundred feet in a day?"

"Matter!" cried Lewis, before the Professor could reply, "why, it
matters very much indeed.  I can prove it.  Our excellent guide Antoine
told me of a man who fell into a crevasse high up on the Glacier des
Bossons, and was of course lost; but about forty years afterwards the
part of the glacier into which he fell had descended into the valley,
and the body of the man was found--at least portions of it were found
here and there.  This, as you are all aware, is a well-known fact.  Bear
in mind, in connection with this, that all glaciers do not travel at the
same rate, nor all parts of a glacier at an equal rate.  Now, suppose
that you were to lose a gold watch or a diamond ring in a crevasse, the
value of which might be incalculable in consequence of being a gift from
some beloved one, would it not be a matter of the last importance to
know exactly the rate at which the said crevasse travelled, so that you
or your grandchildren might return at the precise time and claim the
property?"

"Don't talk nonsense, Lewie," said his mother.

"No doubt," said the Professor, laughing, "my young friend's
illustration is to the point, and I fear that I cannot give you anything
more definite to prove the value of glacial measurements and
observations.  I must rest my proof on the abstract truth that _all_
knowledge is desirable, and ought to be sought after for its own sake,
as being the means whereby we shall come better to know the good and
wise Creator, `whom to know,' as His own Word says, `is life eternal'
But I can give you distinct proof, in a somewhat analogous case, of good
resulting from knowledge which was eagerly pursued and acquired without
the searcher having the slightest idea as to the use to which his
knowledge would be ultimately put.  You have doubtless heard of Captain
Maury, of the United States Navy?"

"Oh yes," replied Mrs Stoutley, "he who writes that charming book, the
Physical Geography of the Sea, or some such title.  My son is a great
admirer of that work.  I tried to read it to please him, but I must
confess that I could not go far into it.  It seemed to me an endless and
useless search after currents of wind and water."

"I see you must have missed the very illustrations which I am about to
cite, for they are given in his book--one of the most interesting I ever
read, and not the less interesting that its author distinguishes a
connection between the Creator's Word and His works.  You know that
Captain Maury's investigations of currents of wind and water were
conducted wisely, and on a vast scale.  Nautical men of many nations
sent in their `logs' to him, and he patiently collected and collated all
the facts observed in all parts of the ocean."

"Yes, and quite useless knowledge, it appears to me," said Mrs
Stoutley.

"Well, we shall see," returned the Professor.  "There was once a
terrible storm on the Atlantic, and a vessel with troops on board was so
disabled as to be left at last a helpless log upon the sea.  She was
passed by other vessels, but these could render no assistance, owing to
the raging storm.  They, however, took note of the latitude and
longitude of the wreck, and reported her on arriving at New York.  A
rescue-ship was at once ordered to search for her, but, before sailing,
Captain Maury was applied to for instructions how they should proceed.
The man of science was seated in his study, had probably scarce observed
the storm, and knew nothing about the wreck save her position, as
observed at a certain date.  Why, therefore, we might ask; apply to him?
Just because he sat at the fountain-head of such knowledge as was
needed.  He had long studied, and well knew, the currents of the ocean,
their direction and their rate of progress at specified times and
particular places.  He prepared a chart and marked a spot at, or near
which, the wreck, he said, would probably be found.  The wreck _was_
found--not indeed by the rescue-ship, but by another vessel, _at the
very spot indicated_--and the surviving crew and troops were saved.  So,
in like manner, the study of truth regarding currents of air has led us
to knowledge which enables mariners to escape the Atlantic
Sargasso-sea--"

"Ha! the Doldrums," growled Captain Wopper, as if he had a special and
bitter hatred of that sea.  "Yes, the Doldrums, or Sargasso-sea, where
ships used to be detained by long, vexatious calms, and islands of
floating sea-weed, but which now we escape, because studious men have
pointed out, that by sailing to one side of that sea you can get into
favourable breezes, avoid the calm regions, and thus save much time."

"Now, Madame," said Captain Wopper, "are you convinced?"

"Not quite," replied Mrs Stoutley, with a baffled look; "but, I
suppose, on the strength of this, and similar reasons, you intend to
ascend Mont Blanc to-morrow?"

"We do," said the Professor.  "I intend to go for the purpose of
attempting to fix a thermometer on the summit, in order to ascertain, if
possible, the winter temperature."

"And pray, for what purpose?" said Mrs Stoutley with a touch of
sarcasm, "does Dr Lawrence intend to go?"

"For the purpose of seeing the magnificent view, and of testing the
lungs and muscles, which are now, I think, sufficiently trained to
enable me to make the ascent with ease," replied the doctor, promptly.

"_I_ go to assist the Professor," said Captain Wopper.

"And I," said Lewis, "intend to go for fun; so you see, mother, as our
reasons are all good, you had better go to bed, for it's getting late."

Mrs Stoutley accepted the suggestion, delivered a yawn into her
pocket-handkerchief, and retired, as she remarked, to ascend Mont Blanc
in dreams, and thus have all the pleasure without the bodily fatigue.

We are on the sides of the mountain monarch now, slowly wending our way
through the sable fringe of pines that ornaments the skirt of his white
mantle.  We tramp along very slowly, for Antoine Grennon is in front and
won't allow us to go faster.  To the impatient and youthful spirits of
Lawrence and Lewis, the pace appears ridiculously slow, and the latter
does not hesitate to make audible reference in his best French to the
progress of snails, but Antoine is deaf to such references.  One might
fancy that he did not understand bad French, but for the momentary
twinkle in his earnest eyes.  But nothing will induce him to mend his
pace, for well does he know that the ascent of Mont Blanc is no trifle;
that even trained lungs and muscles are pretty severely taxed before the
fifteen thousand seven hundred and eighty feet of perpendicular height
above the sea-level is placed below the soles of the feet.  He knows,
also, from long experience, that he who would climb a mountain well, and
use his strength to advantage, must begin with a slow, leisurely pace,
as if he were merely out for a saunter, yet must progress with steady,
persevering regularity.  He knows, too, that young blood is prone to
breast a mountain with head erect and spanking action, and to descend
with woeful countenance and limp limbs.  It must be restrained, and
Antoine does his duty.

The ascent of Mont Blanc cannot be accomplished in one day.  It is
therefore necessary to sleep at a place named the Grands Mulets, from
which a fresh start is made for the summit at the earliest hours of
morning on the second day.  Towards this resting-place our travellers
now directed their steps.

The party consisted of the Professor, Captain Wopper, Lewis, Lawrence,
and Slingsby, headed by their trusty guide, besides three porters with
knapsacks containing food, wine, etcetera.  One of these latter was the
chamois-hunter, Baptist Le Croix.  He brought up the rear of the party,
and all proceeded in single file, each, like the North American Indian,
treading in his predecessor's footsteps.

Passing from the dark fringe of pines they emerged upon a more open
country where the royal robe was wrought with larch and hazel, bilberry,
and varied underwood, and speckled with rhododendrons and other flowers
on a ground of rich brown, green, and grey.  Steadily upwards, over the
Glacier des Bossons, they went, with airy cloudlets floating around
them, with the summit at which they aimed, the Dome du Gouter, and the
Aiguille du Gouter in front, luring them on, and other giant Aiguilles
around watching them.  Several hours of steady climbing brought them to
the Pierre l'Echelle, where they were furnished with woollen leggings to
protect their legs from the snow.  Here also they procured a ladder and
began the tedious work of traversing the glaciers.  Hitherto their route
had lain chiefly on solid ground--over grassy slopes and along rocky
paths.  It was now to be confined almost entirely to the ice, which they
found to be cut up in all directions with fissures, so that great
caution was needed in crossing crevasses and creeping round slippery
ridges, and progress was for some time very slow.

Coming to one of the crevasses which was too wide to leap, the ladder
was put in requisition.  The iron spikes with which one end of it was
shod were driven firmly into the ice at one side of the chasm and the
other end rested on the opposite side.

Antoine crossed first and then held out his hand to the Professor, who
followed, but the man of science was an expert ice-man, and in another
moment stood at the guide's side without having required assistance.
Not so Captain Wopper.

"I'm not exactly a feather," he said, looking with a doubtful expression
at the frail bridge.

"It bore me well enough, Captain," said the Professor with a smile.

"That's just what it didn't," replied the Captain, "it seemed to me to
bend too much under you; besides, although I'm bound to admit that
you're a good lump of a man, Professor, I suspect there's a couple of
stones more on me than on you.  If it was only a rope, now, such as I've
bin used to, I'd go at it at once, but--"

"It is quite strong enough," said the guide confidently.

"Well, here goes," returned the mariner, "but if it gives way, Antoine,
I'll have you hanged for murder."

Uttering this threat he crossed in safety, the others followed, and the
party advanced over a part of the glacier which was rugged with mounds,
towers, obelisks, and pyramids of ice.  For some time nothing serious
interrupted their progress until they came to another wide crevasse,
when it was found, to the guide's indignation, that the ladder had been
purposely left behind by the porter to whom it had been intrusted, he
being under the impression that it would not be further required.

"Blockhead!" cried the Professor, whose enthusiastic spirit was easily
roused to indignation, "it was your duty to carry it till ordered to lay
it down.  You were hired to act, sir, not to think.  Obedience is the
highest virtue of a servant!  Shall we send him back for it?" he said,
turning to Antoine with a flushed countenance.

"Not now, Monsieur," answered the guide, "it would create needless
delay.  We shall try to work round the crevasse."

This they did by following its edge until they found a part where
crossing was possible, though attended with considerable danger in
consequence of the wedge-like and crumbling nature of the ice.

Hoping that such a difficulty would not occur again they pushed on, but
had not gone far when another, and still more impassable, fissure
presented itself.

"How provoking, couldn't we jump it?" said Lewis, looking inquiringly
into the dark-blue depths.

"Pr'aps _you_ might, youngster, with your half fledged spider-legs,"
said the Captain, "but you'll not catch fourteen-stun-six goin' over
_that_ with its own free will.  What's to be done now, Antoine?"

The guide, after looking at the crevasse for a few minutes, said that
the next thing to be done was to look for a snow-bridge, which he had no
doubt would be found somewhere.  In search of this he scattered the
whole party, and in a few minutes a loud shout from the chamois-hunter
told that he had been successful.  The members of the party at once
converged towards him, but found that the success was only partial.  He
had indeed found a part of the crevasse, which, during some of the wild
storms so frequent on the mountain, had been bridged over by a
snow-wreath, but the central part of the bridge had given way, and it
was thus divided by a gap of about a foot wide.  This would have been
but a small and insignificant step to take had the substance been solid,
but although the ice on one side was strong the opposite edge was
comparatively soft snow, and not much more than a foot thick.  The
chamois-hunter, being the lightest of the party, was called to the front
and ordered to test the strength of the frail bridge, if bridge it could
be called.

"Why, he might as well try to step on a bit of sea-foam," said the
Captain in surprise.

Lawrence, Lewis, and Slingsby, having as yet had no experience of such
places, expressed, or held a similar opinion, but the Professor bade
them wait and see.

Baptist, throwing off his pack, and fastening a rope round his waist,
which his comrades held, advanced to the extreme edge of the ice, and
with his long-handled axe, gently patted the snow on the opposite side.
The surface yielded, and it seemed as if even that small weight would
break the lump _off_, but the operation consolidated the mass in a few
minutes, by reason of what the Professor termed "regelation."  He then
stepped tenderly on it, crossed over, and drew the rope after him.
Antoine followed next, and in a few minutes the whole party was safe on
the other side.

"Dr Lawrence," said Slingsby, in a low grave tone, as they walked along
after this, "if we ever see Chamouni again I shall be surprised."

"Indeed?" returned Lawrence, with a short laugh, "I don't take quite so
gloomy a view of our case.  Don't you think that the free and easy,
quiet look of our guide and porters indicates that such work looks more
dangerous than it really is?"

"I don't know that," said the artist, shaking his head, "when men get
thoroughly accustomed to danger they become foolhardy, and don't realise
it.  I think it sheer madness to cross such places."

Lewis, who overheard the conversation, could scarce refrain from a burst
of laughter.

"Upon my word, Slingsby," said he, "such observations come strangely
from the lips of a man, who only a day or two ago was caught sketching
on a snow-wreath over the edge of a crevasse."

"Ah, but I didn't know it," retorted the other, "and even if I _had_
known it, the ledge of snow was immensely stronger than that on which we
have just stood."

At this point the conversation was interrupted by the guide stopping and
saying that it was now necessary to tie the party together.

They had reached those higher parts of the glacier where snow frequently
falls and covers, to some extent the narrower crevasses, thus, by
concealing them, rendering them extremely dangerous traps.  It therefore
became necessary to attach the various members of the party together by
means of a rope, which, passing round their waists, with a few feet
between each, enabled them to rescue any one who should chance to break
through.

Thus, in a string, they advanced, and had scarcely proceeded a hundred
yards when a surprised "hallo!" from Captain Wopper arrested them.  He
had sunk up to the knees in snow.  A "hallo!" of alarm instantly
succeeded.  He was waist deep.  A stentorian yell followed:

"Ho! hallo! hi!--avast!  Hold on there abaft!  My legs are waublin' in
nothin'!"

His great weight had indeed nearly plunged him into a hidden crevasse,
over which those who preceded him had passed in safety.  If the Captain
had stood alone that crevasse would certainly have been his grave, but
his friends held him tight, and in a few seconds he was dragged out of
danger.

"Well, well," he said, wiping some large drops of perspiration from his
brow, as he stood on the other side of the chasm, "land-lubbers talk
about seafarin' men havin' nothin' but a plank between them an' death,
but to my thinkin' the rottenest plank that ever was launched is
absolute safety compared to `a snow-wreath.'"

"Ah!  Captain," said the Professor, laughing, "you think so just now
because you're not used to it.  In a few weeks you'll hold a different
opinion."

"May be so," replied the Captain quietly, "but it don't feel so--heave
ahead, my hearties!"

Thus encouraged the party proceeded with caution, the guide sounding the
snow at each step with his long axe-handle as he moved in advance.

Slowly they mounted higher and higher, occasionally meeting with, but
always overcoming, difficulties, until towards evening they reached the
little log cabin on the Grands Mulets, not sorry to find in it a
sufficient though humble resting-place for the night.

Here they proceeded to make themselves comfortable.  Some firewood had
been carried up by the porters, with which a fire was kindled, wet
garments were hung up to dry, and hot coffee was prepared, while the sun
sank in a gorgeous world of amber and crimson fire.

