he desires can be obtained without, and he determines to seek it by
adopting the opposite course.

"My poor fellow," he says, "you look distressed--as if you had just come
from off a toilsome journey.  Here, take a taste of something to
recuperate your strength; then you can let me know what you've got to
say.  I presume you've some communication to make to me, as the military
commandant of the district.  Night or day, I am always ready to give a
hearing to those who bring information that concerns the welfare of the
State."

While speaking the colonel has poured out a glass of the distilled
mezcal juice.  This the peon takes from his hand, and, nothing loth,
spills the liquor between his two rows of white glittering teeth.

Upon his stomach, late unused to it, the fiery spirit produce! an effect
almost instantaneous; and the moment after he becomes freely
communicative--if not so disposed before.  But he has been; therefore
the disclosures that follow are less due to the alcohol than to a
passion every whit as inflammatory.  He is acting under the stimulus of
a revenge, terrible and long restrained.

"I've missed you from about here, Manuel," says the colonel, in kindly
tones, making his approaches with skill.  "Where have you been all this
while, my good man?"

"With my master," is the peon's reply.

"Ah, indeed!  I thought your master had gone clear out of the country?"

"Out of the settled part of it only, senor."

"Oh! he is still, then, within Mexican territory!  I am glad to hear
that.  I was very sorry to think we'd lost such a good citizen and
patriot as Don Valerian Miranda.  True, he and I differ in our views as
regards government; but that's nothing, you know, Manuel.  Men may be
bitter political enemies, yet very good friends.  By-the-way, where is
the colonel now?"

Despite his apparent stolidity, the Indian is not so stupid as to be
misled by talk like this.  With a full knowledge of the situation--
forced upon him by various events--the badinage of the brilliant
_militario_ does not for a moment blind him.  Circumstances have given
him enough insight into Uraga's character and position to know that the
tatter's motives should somewhat resemble his own.  He has long been
aware that the Lancer colonel is in love with his young mistress, as
much as he himself with her maid.  Without this knowledge he might not
have been there--at least, not with so confident an expectation of
success in the design that has brought him hither.  For design he has,
deep, deadly, and traitorous.

Despite the influence of the aguardiente, fast loosening his tongue, he
is yet somewhat cautious in his communications; and not until Uraga
repeats the question does he make answer to it.  Then comes the
response, slowly and reluctantly, as if from one of his long-suffering
race, who has discovered a mine of precious metal, and is being put to
the torture to "denounce" it.

"Senor coronel," he says, "how much will your excellency give to know
where my master now is?  I have heard that there's a large bounty
offered for Don Valerian's head."

"That is an affair that concerns the State.  For myself, I've nothing
personally to do with it.  Still, as an officer of the Government, it is
my duty to take what steps I can towards making your master a prisoner.
I think I may promise a good reward to anyone who, by giving
information, would enable me to arrest a fugitive rebel and bring him
before the bar of justice.  Can you do that?"

"Well, your excellency, that will depend.  I'm only a poor man, and need
money to live upon.  Don Valerian is my master, and if anything were to
happen to him I should lose my situation.  What am I to do?"

"Oh, you'd easily get another, and better.  A man of your strength-- By
the way, talking of strength, my good Manuel, you don't seem to have
quite recovered from your journey, which must have been long and
fatiguing.  Take another _copita_; you're in need of it; 'twill do you
good."

Pressure of this sort put upon an Indian, be he _bravo_ or _manso_, is
rarely resisted.  Nor is it in Manuel's case.  He readily yields to it,
and tosses off another glass of the aguardiente.

Before the strong alcohol can have fairly filtered down into his stomach
its fumes ascend to his skull.

The cowed, cautious manner--a marked characteristic of his race--now
forsakes him; the check-strings of his tongue become relaxed, and, with
nothing before his mind save his scheme of vengeance, and that of
securing Conchita, he betrays the whole secret of Colonel Miranda's
escape--the story of his retreat across the Staked Plain, and his
residence in the lone valley.

When he further informs Uraga about the two guests who have strayed to
this solitary spot, and, despite his maudlin talk, minutely describes
the men, his listener utters a loud cry, accompanied by a gesture of
such violence as to overturn the table, sending bottle and glasses over
the floor.

He does not stay to see the damage righted, but with a shout that
reverberates throughout the whole house, summons his adjutant, and also
the corporal of his guard.

"_Cabo_!" he cries, addressing himself to the latter in a tone at once
vociferous and commanding; "take this man to the guard-house!  And see
you keep him there, so that he may be forthcoming when wanted.  Take
heed to hold him safe.  If he be missing, you shall be shot ten minutes
after I receive the report of it.  You have the word of Gil Uraga for
that."

From the way the corporal makes prisoner the surprised peon, almost
throttling him, it is evident he does not intend running any risk of
being shot for letting the latter escape.  The Indian appears suddenly
sobered by the rough treatment he is receiving.  But he is too much
astonished to find speech for protest.  Mute, and without offering the
slightest resistance, he is dragged out through the open doorway, to all
appearance more dead than alive.

"Come, Roblez!" hails his superior officer, as soon as the door has
closed behind the guard corporal and his captive, "Drink with me!
Drink!  First to revenge!  I haven't had it yet, as I'd thought; that
has all to be gone over again.  But it's sure now--surer than ever.
After, we shall drink to success in love.  Mine is not hopeless, yet.
Lost! she is found again--found!  Ah, my darling Adela!" he exclaims,
staggering towards the portrait, and in tipsy glee contemplating it,
"you thought to escape me; but no.  No one can get away from Gil Uraga--
friend, sweetheart, or enemy.  You shall yet be enfolded in these arms;
if not as my wife, my--_margarita_!"



CHAPTER FORTY ONE.

AN EARTHLY PARADISE.

  "Oh that the desert were my dwelling-place,
  With one fair spirit for my monitor!
  That I might all forget the human race,
  And, hating no one, love but only her.
  Ye elements, in whose ennobling stir
  I feel myself exalted, can ye not
  Accord me such a being?  Do I err
  In deeming such inhabit many a spot--
  Though with them to converse can rarely be our lot."

Oft during his sojourn in the sequestered valley do these lines occur to
the young prairie merchant.  And vividly; for, in very truth, he has
realised the aspiration of the poet.

But, though dwelling in a desert, far different is the scene habitually
before his eyes.  From the front of the humble chalet that has so
opportunely afforded him a shelter, seated under the spreading branches
of a pecan-tree, he can look on a landscape lovely as ever opened to the
eyes of man--almost as that closed against our first parents when
expelled from Paradise.  Above he beholds a sapphire sky, scarce ever
shadowed by a cloud; a sun whose fierce, fervid beams become softened as
they fall amid the foliage of evergreen oaks; among clustering groves
that show all the varied tints of verdure, disporting upon green glassy
glades, and glinting into arbours overshadowed by the sassafras laurel,
the Osage orange, and the wild China-tree, laced together by a trellis
of grape vines.  A lake in the centre of this luxurious vegetation,
placid as sleep itself, only stirred by the webbed feet of waterfowl, or
the wings of dipping swallows, with above and below a brawling rivulet,
here and there showing cascades like the tails of white horses, or the
skirts of ballroom belles floating through waltz or gallopade.

In correspondence with these fair sights are the sounds heard.  By day
the cooing of doves, the soft tones of the golden oriole, and the lively
chatter of the red cardinal; by night the booming note of the bull-bat,
the sonorous call of the trumpeter swan, and that lay far excelling
all--the clear song of the polyglot thrush, the famed mocking-bird of
America.

No wonder the invalid, recovering from his illness, after the long dark
spell that has obscured his intellect, wrapping his soul, as it were, in
a shroud--no wonder he fancies the scene to be a sort of Paradise,
worthy of being inhabited by Peris.  One is there he deems fair as Houri
or Peri, unsurpassed by any ideal of Hindoo or Persian fable--Adela
Miranda.  In her he beholds beauty of a type striking as rare; not
common anywhere, and only seen among women in whose veins courses the
blue blood of Andalusia--a beauty perhaps not in accordance with the
standard of taste acknowledged in the icy northland.  The _vigolite_
upon her upper lip might look a little bizarre in an assemblage of Saxon
dames, just as her sprightly spirit would offend the sentiment of a
strait-laced Puritanism.

It has no such effect upon Frank Hamersley.  The child of a land above
all others free from conventionalism, with a nature attuned to the
picturesque, these peculiarities, while piquing his fancy, have fixed
his admiration.  Long before leaving his sick couch there has been but
one world for him--that where dwells Adela Miranda; but one being in
it--herself.

Surely it was decreed by fate that these two should love one another!
Surely for them was there a marriage in heaven!  Else why brought
together in such a strange place and by such a singular chain of
circumstances?

For himself, Hamersley thinks of this--builds hopes upon it deeming it
an omen.

Another often occurs to him, also looking like fate.  He remembers that
portrait on the wall at Albuquerque, and how it had predisposed him in
favour of the original.  The features of Spano-Mexican type--so unlike
those he had been accustomed to in his own country--had vividly
impressed him.  Gazing upon it he had almost felt love for the likeness.
Then the description of the young girl given by her brother, with the
incidents that led to friendly relations between him and Colonel
Miranda, all had contributed to sow the seed of a tender sentiment in
the heart of the young Kentuckian.  It had not died out.  Neither time
nor absence had obliterated it.  Far off--even when occupied with the
pressing claims of business--that portrait-face had often appeared upon
the retina of his memory, and often also in the visions of dreamland.
Now that he has looked upon it in reality--sees it in all its blazing
beauty, surrounded by scenes picturesque as its own expression, amid
incidents romantic as his fancy could conjure up--now that he knows it
as the face of her who has saved his life, is it any wonder the slight,
tender sentiment first kindled by the painted picture should become
stronger at the sight of the living original?

It has done this--become a passion that pervade his soul, filling his
whole heart.  All the more from its being the first he has ever felt--
the first love of his life.  And for this also all the more does he
tremble as he thinks of the possibility of its being unreciprocated.

He has been calculating the chances in his favour every hour since
consciousness returned to him.  And from some words heard in that very
hour has he derived greater pleasure, and draws more hope than from
aught that has occurred since.  Constantly does he recall that
soliloquy, speech spoken under the impression that it did not reach his
ears.

There has been nothing afterwards--neither word nor deed--to give him
proof he is beloved.  The lady has been a tender nurse--a hostess
apparently solicitous for the happiness of her guest--nothing more.
Were the words she had so thoughtlessly spoken unfelt, and without any
particular meaning?  Or was the speech but an allusion, born from the
still lingering distemper of his brain?

He yearns to know the truth.  Every hour that he remains ignorant of it,
he is in torture equalling that of Tantalus.  Yet he fears to ask, lest
in the answer he may have a painful revelation.

He almost envies Walt Wilder his commonplace love, its easy conquest,
and somewhat grotesque declaration.  He wishes he could propose with
like freedom, and receive a similar response.  His comrade's success
should embolden him; but does not.  There is no parallelism between the
parties.

Thus he delays seeking the knowledge he most desires to possess, through
fear it may afflict him.  Not from any lack of opportunity.  Since
almost all the time is he left alone with her he so worships.  Nothing
stands in his way--no zealous watchfulness of a brother.  Don Valerian
neglects every step of fraternal duty--if to take such ever occurred to
him.  His time is fully occupied in roving around the valley, or making
more distant excursions, in the companionship of the _ci-devant_ Ranger,
who narrates to him a strange chapter in the life-lore of the prairies.

When Walt chances to be indoors, he has companion of his own, which
hinder him from too frequently intruding upon his comrade.  Enough for
him the company of Conchita.

Hamersley has equally as little to dread the intrusion of Don Prospero.
Absorbed in his favourite study of Nature, the ex-army surgeon passes
most of his hours in communion with her.  More than half the day is he
out of doors, chasing lizards into their crevices among the rocks,
impaling insects on the spikes of the wild maguey plant, or plucking
such flowers as seem new to the classified list of the botanist.  In
these tranquil pursuits he is perhaps happier than all around--even
those whose hearts throb with that supreme passion, full of sweetness,
but too often bringing bitterness.

So ever near the shrine of his adoration, having it all to himself,
Hamersley worships on, but in silence.



CHAPTER FORTY TWO.

A DANGEROUS DESIGN.

At length the day, the hour, is at hand when the young Kentuckian
purposes taking departure.  He does not anticipate this with pleasure.
On the contrary, the prospect gives him pain.  In that sequestered spot
he could linger long--for ever, if Adela Miranda were to be with him.
He is leaving it with reluctance, and would stay longer now, but that he
is stirred by a sense of duty.  He has to seek justice for the
assassination of his teamsters, and, if possible, punish their
assassins.  To obtain this he intends going on to the Del Norte--if need
be, to Albuquerque itself.  The information given by the ex-commandant,
with all the suspicious circumstances attending, have determined him how
to act.  He intends calling Uraga to account; but not by the honourable
action of a duel, but in a court of justice, if such can be found in New
Mexico.

"If it turns out as we have been conjecturing," he says, in conversation
with Miranda, "I shall seek the scoundrel in his own stronghold.  If he
be not there, I shall follow him elsewhere--ay, all over Mexico."

"Hyar's one'll be wi' ye in that chase," cries the ex-Ranger, coming up
at the moment.  "Yis, Frank, go wi' ye to the heart o' Mexiko, plum
centre; to the halls o' the Montezoomas, if ye like, enywhar to be in at
the death o' a skunk like that."

"Surely, Colonel Miranda," continues Hamersley, gratified, though not
carried away by his old comrade's enthusiastic offer of assistance,
"surely there is law in your land sufficient to give redress for such an
outrage as that."

"My dear Don Francisco," replies the Mexican, tranquilly twirling a
cigarrito between his fingers, "there is law for those who have the
power and money to obtain it.  In New Mexico, as you must yourself know,
might makes right; and never more than at this present time.  Don Manuel
Armijo is once more the governor of my unfortunate fatherland.  When I
tell you that he rose to his present position by just such a crime as
that we've been speaking of, you may then understand the sort of law
administered under his rule.  Manuel Armijo was a shepherd, employed on
one occasion to drive a flock of thirty thousand sheep--the property of
his employer, the Senor Chavez--to the market Chihuahua.  While crossing
the Jornado del Muerte, he and one or two confederates, whom he had put
up to his plan, disguised themselves as Apache Indians, attacked their
fellow sheep-drivers, murdered them, and made themselves masters of the
flock.  Then pulling the plumes from their heads, and washing the paint
off their faces, they drove their muttons to a different market, sold
them, and returned to Chavez to tell a tale of Indian spoliation, and
how they themselves had just escaped with their scalps.  This is the
true history of General Don Manuel Armijo, Governor of New Mexico; at
least that of his first beginnings.  With such and many similar deeds
since, is it likely he would look with any other than a lenient eye on
the doings of Gil Urago, his imitator?  No, senor, not even if you could
prove the present commandant of Albuquerque, in full, open court, to
have been the individual who robbed yourself and murdered your men."

"I shall try, for all that," rejoins Hamersley, his heart wrung with
sorrow at the remembrance of his slaughtered comrades, and bursting with
the bitter thought of justice thus likely to be obstructed.  "Don't
suppose Colonel Miranda, that I intend resting my cause on the clemency
of Don Manuel Armijo, or any chance of right to be expected at his
hands.  There's a wide stretch of desert between the United States and
Mexico, but not wide enough to hinder the American eagle from flapping
its wings across, and giving protection to all who have a right to claim
it, even to a poor prairie trader.  A thousand thanks, Colonel Miranda.
I owe you that for twice saving my life, and now for setting me on the
track of him who has twice endangered it.  No use your trying to
dissuade me.  I shall go in search of this _forban_ direct to the valley
of the Del Norte.  Don't fear that I shall fail in obtaining justice,
whatever Don Manuel Armijo may do to defeat it."

"Well, if you are determined I shall not hold out against you.  Only I
fear your errand may be fruitless, if not worse.  The two mules are at
your service, and you can leave them at a place I shall indicate.  When
Manuel returns I shall send him to bring them back."

"Possibly I may bring them myself.  I do not intend making stay in New
Mexico; only long enough to communicate with the American Consul at
Santa Fe, and take some preliminary steps for the end in view.  Then I
shall return to the--States to lay the whole affair before our
Government."

"And you think of coming this way?"

"Walt, here, has been making explorations down the stream that runs
through this valley; he has no doubt about its being one of the heads of
the Red River of Louisiana, if not the Texan Brazos.  By keeping down it
we can reach the frontier settlements of Texas, then on to the States."

"I'm glad you intend returning this way.  It will give us the pleasure
of soon again seeing you."

"Colonel Miranda," rejoins Hamersley, in a tone that tells of something
on his mind, a proposition he would make to his host, and feels delicacy
in declaring it, "in coming back by the Llano Estacado I have another
object in view besides the idea of a direct route."

"What other object, _amago mio_?"

"The hope of inducing you to accompany me to the States--you and yours."

"Senor Don Francisco, 'tis exceedingly kind of you.  But the period of
our banishment may not be long.  I've had late news from our friends,
telling me things are taking a turn and the political wheel must soon
make another revolution, the present party going below.  Then I get back
to my country, returning triumphant.  Meanwhile we are happy enough
here, and I think safe."

"In the last I disagree with you.  I'm sorry to say, but have reasons.
Now that I know the real character of this ruffian Uraga--his deeds
actually done, and others we suspect--he's just the man who'll leave no
stone unturned to discover your hiding place.  He has more than one
motive for doing so, but one that will move him to follow you here into
the desert--aye, to the uttermost end of the earth!"

The motive in the speaker's mind is Uraga's desire to possess Adela.

After a pause, this though: passing him, he adds,--

"No, Don Valerian, you are not safe here."

Then, continuing,--

"How know you that your servant Manuel has not been recognised while
executing some of those errands on which you've sent him; or that the
man himself may not turn traitor?  I confess, from what I've seen of the
fellow, he has not favourably impressed me."

The words make an impression upon Miranda anything but pleasant.  It is
not the first time for him to have the thought suggested by them.  More
than once has he entertained suspicions about the peon's fidelity.  It
is possible the man might prove traitor; if not then, at some future
time--aye, and probable, too, considering the reward offered for the
exile's head.

Miranda, knowing and now thinking of it, admits the justice of his
friend's fear.  More; he sees cause for raising alarm.  So does Don
Prospero, who, at the moment coming up, takes part in the conference.

It ends in the refugees resolving to stay in the valley till Hamersley
and Walt can return to them; then to forsake that asylum, no longer
deemed safe, and retire to one certainly so--the land over which waves a
flag powerful to protect its citizens and give the same to their
friends--the Star-spangled Banner.



CHAPTER FORTY THREE.

THE LAST APPEAL.

"I have news for you, _nina_."

It is Colonel Miranda speaking to his sister, shortly after the
conversation reported.

"What news, Valerian?"

"Well, there are two sorts of them."

"Both good, I hope."

"Not altogether; one will be pleasant to you, the other, perhaps, a
little painful."

"In that case they should neutralise one another; anyhow, let me hear
them."

"I shall tell the pleasant ones first.  We shall soon have an
opportunity of leaving this lonely place."

"Do you call that good news?  I rather think it the reverse.  What will
the bad be?"

"But, dear Adela, our life here, away from all society, has been a harsh
experience--to you a terrible one."

"In that, _hermano mio_, you're mistaken.  You know I don't care a straw
for what the world calls society--never did.  I prefer being free from
its stupid restraints and silly conventionalities.  Give me Nature for
my companion--ay, in her wildest scenes and most surly moods."

"Surely you've had both to a surfeit."

"Nothing of the kind; I'm not tired of Nature yet.  I have never been
happier than in this wilderness home.  How different from my convent
school--my prison, I should rather call it!  Oh, it is charming! and if
I were to have my way, it should never come to an end.  But why do you
talk of leaving this place?  Do you suppose the troubles are over, and
we can return safely?  I don't wish to go there, brother.  After what
has happened, I hate New Mexico, and would prefer staying in the Llano
Estacado."

