returned home.

"There they are at last!" exclaimed Victor, with sparkling eyes, "the
elms on the knoll.  D'ye see them, Tony?  I do believe I see the
smoking-box.  But for the bushes we might see the chimneys of Willow
Creek."

Tony's excitement was great, but the effect of his late training was
seen in the suppression of all feeling, save that which escaped through
the eyes.  Paint and charcoal concealed the flush on his cheeks
effectually.

"Tonyquat sees," he replied.

Victor received this with a loud laugh, but Tony, although annoyed, did
not lose his dignity, which the red man in the stern of the canoe
observed with a look of pride and satisfaction.

Michel Rollin, in the other canoe, close alongside, was observed to hold
up his hand.

"Hush!" he said, turning his head as if to listen.  "I do hear
someting--someting not meloderous."

"Is it melliferous, then?" asked Vic, with a smile.

But Rollin made no reply.  He was far from jesting, poor fellow, at that
moment.  The thought of his old mother and grandfather, and fears as to
their fate, weighed heavily on his heart, and took all the fun out of
him.

"It sounds like pigs," said Ian.

"Oui.  Dey be killin' porkers," said Rollin, with a nod, as he dipped
his paddle again and pushed on.

As they drew near, the excitement of the voyagers increased, so did
their surprise at the prolonged and furious shrieking.  Gradually the
vigour of their strokes was strengthened, until they advanced at racing
speed.  Finally, they swept round the corner of the old house at Willow
Creek, and burst upon the gaze of its inhabitants, while Peegwish and
the pig were at the height of their struggles.

Mrs Ravenshaw chanced to be the first to observe them.

"Ian Macdonald!" she shouted, for his form in the bow of the leading
canoe was the most conspicuous.

"Victor!" cried the sisters, with a scream that quite eclipsed the pig.

They rushed to another window, under which the canoes were pulled up.

"Oh!  Victor, Victor," cried Mrs Ravenshaw, with a deadly faintness at
her heart; "you haven't found--"

"Mother!" cried Tony, casting off his Indian reserve and starting up
with a hysterical shout, "Mother!"

"Tony!" exclaimed everybody in the same breath, for they all knew his
voice, though they did not believe their eyes.

It was only four feet or so from the canoe to the window.  Mrs
Ravenshaw leaned over and seized Tony's uplifted hands.  Elsie and Cora
lent assistance.  A light vault, and Tony went in at the window, from
which immediately issued half-stifled cries of joy.  At that moment
Peegwish uttered a terrible roar, as he fell back into the room with the
broken line in his hand, accidentally driving Wildcat into a corner.  A
last supreme effort had been made by the pig.  He had broken the hook,
and went off with a final shriek of triumph.

Thus, amid an appropriate whirlwind of confusion, noise, and disaster,
was the long-lost Tony restored to his mother's arms!

Seated calmly in the stern of his canoe, Petawanaquat observed the scene
with a look of profound gravity.  His revenge was complete!  He had
returned to his enemy the boy of whom he had become so fond that he felt
as though Tony really were his own son.  He had bowed his head to the
dictates of an enlightened conscience.  He had returned good for evil.
A certain feeling of deep happiness pervaded the red man's heart, but it
was accompanied, nevertheless, by a vague sense of bereavement and
sadness which he could not shake off just then.

Quite as calmly and as gravely sat Ian Macdonald.  His eyes once more
beheld Elsie, the angel of his dreams, but he had no right to look upon
her now with the old feelings.  Her troth was plighted to Lambert.  It
might be that they were already married! though he could not bring
himself to believe that; besides, he argued, hoping against hope, if
such were the case, Elsie would not be living with her father's family.
No, she was not yet married, he felt sure of that; but what mattered it?
A girl whose heart was true as steel could never be won from the man to
whom she had freely given herself.  No, there was no hope; and poor Ian
sat there in silent despair, with no sign, however, of the bitter
thoughts within on his grave, thoughtful countenance.

Not less gravely sat Michel Rollin in the stern of his canoe.  No sense
of the ludicrous was left in his anxious brain.  He had but one idea,
and that was--old Liz!  With some impatience he waited until the ladies
inside the house were able to answer his queries about his mother.  No
sooner did he obtain all the information they possessed than he
transferred Meekeye to her husband's canoe, and set off alone in the
other to search for the lost hut--as Winklemann had done before him.

Meanwhile the remainder of the party were soon assembled in the family
room on the upper floor, doing justice to an excellent meal, of which
most of them stood much in need.

"Let me wash that horrid stuff off your face, darling, before you sit
down," said Miss Trim to Tony.

The boy was about to comply, but respect for the feelings of his Indian
father caused him to hesitate.  Perhaps the memory of ancient rebellion
was roused by the old familiar voice, as he replied--

"Tonyquat loves his war-paint.  It does not spoil his appetite."

It was clear from a twinkle in Tony's eye, and a slight motion in his
otherwise grave face, that, although this style of language now came
quite naturally to him, he was keeping it up to a large extent on
purpose.

"Tonyquat!" exclaimed Mrs Ravenshaw, aghast with surprise, "what does
the child mean?"

"I'll say Tony, mother, if you like it better," he said, taking his
mother's hand.

"He's become a redskin," said Victor, half-amused, half-anxious.

"Tony," said Miss Trim, whose heart yearned towards her old but almost
unrecognisable pupil, "don't you remember how we used to do lessons
together and play sometimes?"

"And fight?" added Cora, with a glance at Ian, which caused Elsie to
laugh.

"Tonyquat does not forget," replied the boy, with profound gravity.  "He
remembers the lessons and the punishments.  He also remembers dancing on
the teacher's bonnet and scratching the teacher's nose!"

This was received with a shout of delighted laughter, for in it the
spirit of the ancient Tony was recognised.

But Ian Macdonald did not laugh.  He scarcely spoke except when spoken
to.  He seemed to have no appetite, and his face was so pale from his
long illness that he had quite the air of a sick man.

"Come, Ian, why don't you eat?  Why, you look as white as you did after
the grizzly had clawed you all over."

This remark, and the bear-claw collar on the youth's neck, drew forth a
question or two, but Ian was modest.  He could not be induced to talk of
his adventure, even when pressed to do so by Elsie.

"Come, then, if _you_ won't tell it I will," said Victor; and thereupon
he gave a glowing account of the great fight with the bear, the
triumphant victory, and the long illness, which had well-nigh terminated
fatally.

"But why did you not help him in the hunt?" asked Elsie of Victor, in a
tone of reproach.

"Because he wouldn't let us; the reason why is best known to himself.
Perhaps native obstinacy had to do with it."

"It was a passing fancy; a foolish one, perhaps, or a touch of vanity,"
said Ian, with a smile, "but it is past now, and I have paid for it.--
Did you make fast the canoe?" he added, turning abruptly to the Indian,
who was seated on his buffalo robe by the stove.

Without waiting for an answer he rose and descended the staircase to the
passage, where poor Miss Trim had nearly met a watery grave.

Here the canoe was floating, and here he found one of the domestics.

"Has the wedding come off yet?" he asked in a low, but careless, tone,
as he stooped to examine the fastening of the canoe.

"What wedding?" said the domestic, with a look of surprise.

"Why, the wedding of Mr Ravenshaw's daughter."

"Oh no, Mr Ian.  It would be a strange time for a wedding.  But it's
all fixed to come off whenever the flood goes down.  And she do seem
happy about it.  You see, sir, they was throw'd a good deal together
here of late, so it was sort of natural they should make it up, and the
master he is quite willin'."

This was enough.  Ian Macdonald returned to the room above with the
quiet air of a thoughtful schoolmaster and the callous solidity of a
human petrifaction.  Duty and death were the prominent ideas stamped
upon his soul.  He would not become reckless or rebellious.  He would go
through life doing his duty, and, when the time came, he would die!

They were talking, of course, about the flood when he returned and sat
down.

Elsie was speaking.  Ian was immediately fascinated as he listened to
her telling Victor, with graphic power, some details of the great
disaster--how dwellings and barns and stores had been swept away, and
property wrecked everywhere, though, through the mercy of God, no lives
had been lost.  All this, and a great deal more, did Elsie and Cora and
Mrs Ravenshaw dilate upon, until Ian almost forgot his resolve.

Suddenly he remembered it.  He also remembered that his father's house
still existed, though it was tenantless, his father and Miss Martha
having gone up to see friends at the Mountain.

"Come, Vic," he exclaimed, starting up, "I must go home.  The old place
may be forsaken, but it is not the less congenial on that account.
Come."

Victor at once complied; they descended to the canoe, pushed out from
the passage, and soon crossed the flood to Angus Macdonald's dwelling.



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

THE "IMPOSSIBLE" ACCOMPLISHED.

And _what_ a dwelling Angus Macdonald's house had become!

"What a home-coming!" exclaimed Ian, thinking, in the bitterness of his
soul, of Elsie as well as the house.

"It's awful!" said Victor, with a sympathetic glance at his friend.

The desolation was indeed complete--symbolic, Ian thought, of the
condition of his own heart.  Besides having eight or ten feet of water
on its walls, all the lower rooms were utterly wrecked.  A heavy log,
ready for the saw-pit, had come down with the torrent, and, taking upon
it the duties of a battering-ram, had charged the parlour window.  Not
only did it carry this bodily into the room, but it forced it into the
passage beyond, where it jammed and stuck fast.  The butt of this log,
projecting several feet from the window, had intercepted straw and hay
to such an extent that a miniature stack was formed, in which all sorts
of light articles of furniture and debris had been caught.  With the
stubborn determination of a Celt, Angus had refused to remove his main
door, which faced up stream.  The result was that the flood removed it
for him with a degree of violence that had induced Miss Martha to
exclaim, "The house is goin' at last!" to which Angus had replied
doggedly.

"Let it go.  It will hef to go some day, whatever."  But the house had
not gone.  It was only, as we have said, the main door which went, and
was hurled through the passage into the kitchen, where it charged the
back door, wrenched it off, and accompanied it to Lake Winnipeg with a
tail of miscellaneous cooking utensils.  Only shreds of the back windows
remained hanging by twisted hinges to the frames, telling with mute
eloquence of heroic resistance to the last gasp.  Whatever had not been
removed by Angus from the ground-floor of his house had been swept out
at the windows and doorways, as with the besom of destruction.

Paddling in through the front door, the two friends disembarked from
their canoe on the staircase, and ascended to the upper floor.  Here
everything betokened a hurried departure.  Furniture was strewn about in
disorder; articles of clothing were scattered broadcast, as if Miss
Martha and her maid had been summoned to sudden departure, and had
rummaged recklessly for their most cherished possessions.  In the
principal bedroom, on the best bed, stood Beauty in her native
ugliness--the only living thing left to do the honours of the house.

"What a brute!" exclaimed Victor.

He seized a saucepan that stood handy, and hurled it at her.  Beauty was
equal to the emergency; she leaped up, allowed the pan to pass under
her, fled shrieking through the window, and took refuge on the top of
the house.

"I'm glad you missed her, Vic," said Ian, in a slightly reproachful
tone; "she's an old friend of the family, and a harmless thing."

"Miss Trim would not agree with you in your opinion of her," returned
Victor, with a laugh; "but I'm also glad I missed her.  It was a sudden
impulse that I couldn't resist, and you know a fellow is scarcely
accountable for his impulses."

"True; not for his impulses, but he is very accountable for actions
resulting from impulse.  If you had killed Beauty I should have had an
irresistible impulse to pitch you over the window.  If I were to do so
in such circumstances would you hold me unaccountable?"

"I'm not sure," said Victor, with a grim smile.  "But we'll change the
subject; I don't like argument when I'm likely to get the worst of it.
It's plain that you can do no good here, I therefore propose that we
return to Willow Creek, take the small boat, and go up to the Mountain
to see father, taking Tony and Petawanaquat along with us."

Ian shook his head with an expression of sadness that surprised his
friend.

"No, Vic, no; my work with you in search of your brother is done, my
father's home now claims my chief care.  You are wrong in saying I can
do no good here; look round at the wreck and mess.  There is much to be
done.  Now I tell you what I'll do.  I'll remain here all day and all
night too.  You will return home and send me the little punt, if it can
be spared, for I shall have to row to the outhouses a good deal, and
round the house too.  As you see, nothing can be done without a craft of
some sort.  Send Peegwish with it, without Wildcat, she would only be in
the way."

Victor tried to induce his friend to change his mind, but Ian was
immoveable.  He therefore returned to Willow Creek in the canoe, and
sent Peegwish back with the punt--a tub-like little boat, with two small
oars or sculls.

Left alone, Ian Macdonald leaned on the sill of a window in the gable of
the house, from which he could see the house at Willow Creek, and sighed
deeply.  "So then," he thought, "all my hopes are blighted; my air
castles are knocked down, my bear-hunting has been in vain; Elsie is
engaged to Louis Lambert!"

There was no bitterness in his heart now, only a feeling of profound
loneliness.  As he raised himself with another sigh, the top of the
window tipped off his cap, which fell into the water.  He cared little
for the loss, but stood watching the cap as it floated slowly away with
the current, and compared its receding form with his dwindling joys.
The current, which was not strong there, carried the cap straight to the
knoll several hundred yards off, on which stood the smoking-box of old
Sam Ravenshaw, and stranded it there.

The incident turned the poor youth's mind back to brighter days and
other scenes, especially to the last conversation which he had held with
the owner of the smoking-box.  He was mentally enacting that scene over
again when Peegwish pulled up to the house and passed under the window.

"Come along, you old savage," said Ian, with a good-humoured nod; "I
want your help.  Go round to the front and shove into the passage.  The
doorway's wide enough."

Peegwish, who was fond of Ian, replied to the nod with a hideous smile.
In a few minutes the two were busily engaged in collecting loose
articles and bringing things in general into order.

While thus engaged they were interrupted by Beauty cackling and
screaming with tremendous violence.  She was evidently in distress.
Running up a ladder leading to the garret, Ian found that the creature
had forced her way through a hole in the roof, and entangled herself in
a mass of cordage thrown in a heap along with several stout ropes, or
cables, which Angus had recently bought with the intention of rigging
out a sloop with which to traverse the great Lake Winnipeg.  Setting the
hen free, Ian returned to his work.

A few minutes later he was again arrested suddenly, but not by Beauty
this time.  He became aware of a peculiar sensation which caused a
slight throbbing of his heart, and clearly proved that, although
lacerated, or even severely crushed, that organ was not quite broken!

He looked round at Peegwish, and beheld that savage glaring, as if
transfixed, with mouth and eyes equally wide open.

"Did you feel _that_, Peegwish?"

Yes, Peegwish had felt "that," and said so in an awful whisper without
moving.

"Surely--no, it cannot have been the--"

He stopped short.  There was a low, grinding sound, accompanied by a
strange tremor in the planks on which they stood, as if the house were
gradually coming alive!  There could be no mistake.  The flood had risen
sufficiently to float the house, and it was beginning to slide from its
foundations!

"Peegwish," he said, quickly dropping the things with which he had been
busy, "is there a stout rope anywhere?  Oh, yes; I forgot," he added,
springing towards the attic.  "Blessings on you, Beauty, for having
guided me here!"

In a few seconds a stout rope or cable was procured.  The end of this
Ian ran out at the main doorway, round through the parlour window, and
tied it in a trice.  The other end he coiled in the punt, and soon made
it fast to a stout elm, under whose grateful shade Angus Macdonald had
enjoyed many a pipe and Martha many a cup of tea in other days.  The
tree bent slowly forward; the thick rope became rigid.  Ian and Peegwish
sat in the boat anxiously looking on.

In that moment of enforced inaction Ian conceived an idea!  Thought is
quick, quicker than light, which, we believe, has reached the maximum of
"express speed" in material things.  By intermittent flashes, so rapid
that it resembled a stream of sparks, the whole plan rushed through his
mind, from conception to completion.  We can only give a suggestive
outline, as follows.  The knoll, the smoking-box, the smoker, his words,
"Mark what I say.  I will sell this knoll to your father, and give my
daughter to you, when you take that house, and with your own unaided
hands place it on this knoll!"  The impossible had, in the wondrous
course of recent events, come just within the verge of possibility--a
stout arm, a strong will, coupled with a high flood--"There is a tide in
the affairs of men, which, taken at the flood,"--immortal and
_prophetic_ bard!  There could be no chance of Elsie now, but even to
win the right to claim her if she had been willing was better than
nothing.  In any case old Angus and the knoll would be united!

"Peegwish!" shouted Ian, turning on the unfortunate ex-brewer with a
flushed face and blazing eyes that caused him to shrink in alarm, "can
you sit still and _do nothing_?"

"Eh?" exclaimed Peegwish, in surprise.

"Bah!" said Ian, seizing the sculls.

The punt whirled round, leaped over the water, dashed through the
doorway, and went crashing into the staircase.  Before Peegwish could
pick himself up, Ian had vanished up the stairs.  The savage found him a
moment later wildly selecting a rope from the heap that lay on the floor
of the attic.  As Peegwish entered, Ian suddenly turned on him with a
gaze of increased intensity.  Had the young man gone mad?  Peegwish felt
very uncomfortable.  He had some reason to!  Another thought had flashed
into Ian's mind--the words "your own unaided hands" troubled him.
Peegwish could be kept out of the boat, but he could not be kept from
rendering aid of some sort, in some way or other.  There was but one
resource.

Ian sprang on Peegwish like a lion.  The savage was both bold and
strong, but he was elderly, and Ian was young and bolder; besides, he
had the unusual strength of a half-madman at that moment.  Down went the
ex-brewer.  He struggled hard.  Ian crushed him in his arms, raised him,
