to the far-off lands has not been very successful.  These men want
something that they do not understand; that they could not see if it was
before them; that they cannot describe when they talk about it, and that
they could not lay hold of if they had it."

"Yes, father," sighed Chingatok, "it is as I told you--nothing; only the
Nort Pole--a mere name."

A new light seemed to break in on Chingatok as he said this, for he
added quickly, "But, father, a name is _something_--my name, Chingatok,
is something, yet it is nothing.  You cannot see it, you do not lay hold
of it, yet it is there."

"Toohoo! my son, that is so, no doubt, but your name describes _you_,
and you are something.  No one ever goes to a far-off land to search for
a _name_.  If this Nort Pole is only a name and not a _thing_, how can
it _be_?" exclaimed the old man, turning on his heel and marching off in
a paroxysm of metaphysical disgust.

He appeared to change his mind, however, for, turning abruptly back, he
said to Anders, "Tell these strangers that I am glad to see them; that a
house and food shall be given to them, and that they are welcome to
Poloe.  Perhaps their land--the far-off land--is a poor one; they may
not have enough to eat.  If so, they may stay in this rich land of mine
to hunt and fish as long as they please.  But tell them that the Eskimos
love wise men, and do not care for foolishness.  They must not talk any
more about this search after nothing--this Nort Pole--this nonsense--
huk!"

Having delivered himself of these sentiments with much dignity, the old
man again turned on his heel with a regal wave of the hand, and marched
up to his hut.

"That must be the King of Poloe," whispered Captain Vane to Leo,
endeavouring to suppress a smile at the concluding caution, as they
followed Anders and one of the natives to the hut set apart for them.

The Captain was only half right.  Amalatok was indeed the chief of the
island, but the respect and deference shown to him by the tribe were
owing more to the man's age and personal worth, than to his rank.  He
had succeeded his father as chief of the tribe, and, during a long life,
had led his people in council, at the hunt, and in war, with consummate
ability and success.  Although old, he still held the reins of power,
chiefly because his eldest son and rightful successor--Chingatok's elder
brother--was a weak-minded man of little capacity and somewhat malignant
disposition.  If our giant had been his eldest, he would have resigned
cheerfully long ago.  As it was, he did not see his way to change the
customs of the land, though he could not tell when, or by whom, or under
what circumstances, the order of succession had been established.
Probably, like many other antiquated customs, it had been originally the
result of despotism on the part of men in power, and of stupid
acquiescence on the part of an unthinking people.

On reaching his hut the old chief sat down, and, leaning carelessly
against the wall, he toyed with a bit of walrus rib, as an Englishman
might with a pair of nut-crackers at dessert.

"Why did you bring these barbarians here?"

"I did not bring them, father, they brought me," said the son with a
deprecating glance.

"Huk!" exclaimed the chief, after which he added, "hum!"

It was evident that he had received new light, and was meditating
thereon.

"My son," continued Amalatok, "these Kablunets seem to be stout-bodied
fellows; can they fight--are they brave?"

"They are brave, father, very brave.  Even the little one, whom they
call Bunjay, is brave--also, he is funny.  I have never seen the
Kablunets fight with men, but they fight well with the bear and the
walrus and the ice.  They are not such fools as you seem to think.
True, about this nothing--this Nort Pole--they are quite mad, but in
other matters they are very wise and knowing, as you shall see before
long."

"Good, good," remarked the old chief, flinging the walrus rib at an
intrusive dog with signal success, "I am glad to hear you say that,
because I may want their help."

Amalatok showed one symptom of true greatness--a readiness to divest
himself of prejudice.

"For what do you require their help, father?" asked Chingatok.

Instead of answering, the old chief wrenched off another walrus rib from
its native backbone, and began to gnaw it growlingly, as if it were his
enemy and he a dog.

"My father is disturbed in his mind," said the giant in a sympathising
tone.

Even a less observant man than Chingatok might have seen that the old
chief was not only disturbed in mind, but also in body, for his features
twitched convulsively, and his face grew red as he thought of his
wrongs.

"Listen," said Amalatok, flinging the rib at another intrusive dog,
again with success, and laying his hand impressively on his son's arm.
"My enemy, Grabantak--that bellowing walrus, that sly seal, that
empty-skulled puffin, that porpoise, cormorant, narwhal--s-s-sus!"

The old man set his teeth and hissed.

"Well, my father?"

"It is not well, my son.  It is all ill.  That marrowless bear is
stirring up his people, and there is no doubt that we shall soon be
again engaged in a bloody--a _useless_ war."

"What is it all about, father?"

"About!--about nothing."

"Huk! about Nort Pole--nothing," murmured Chingatok--his thoughts
diverted by the word.

"No, it is worse than Nort Pole, worse than nothing," returned the chief
sternly; "it is a small island--very small--so small that a seal would
not have it for a breathing-place.  Nothing on it; no moss, no grass.
Birds won't stay there--only fly over it and wink with contempt.  Yet
Grabantak says he must have it--it is within the bounds of _his_ land!"

"Well, let him have it, if it be so worthless," said Chingatok, mildly.

"Let him have it!" shouted the chief, starting up with such violence as
to overturn the cooking-lamp--to which he paid no regard whatever--and
striding about the small hut savagely, "no, never!  I will fight him to
the last gasp; kill all his men; slay his women; drown his children;
level his huts; burn up his meat--"

Amalatok paused and glared, apparently uncertain about the propriety of
wasting good meat.  The pause gave his wrath time to cool.

"At all events," he continued, sitting down again and wrenching off
another rib, "we must call a council and have a talk, for we may expect
him soon.  When you arrived we took you for our enemies."

"And you were ready for us," said Chingatok, with an approving smile.

"Huk!" returned the chief with a responsive nod.  "Go, Chingatok, call a
council of my braves for to--night, and see that these miserable
starving Kablunets have enough of blubber wherewith to stuff
themselves."

Our giant did not deem it worth while to explain to his rather petulant
father that the Englishmen were the reverse of starving, but he felt the
importance of raising them in the old chief's opinion without delay, and
took measures accordingly.

"Blackbeard," he said, entering the Captain's hut and sitting down with
a troubled air, "my father does not think much of you.  Tell him that,
Unders."

"I understand you well enough, Chingatok; go on, and let me know why the
old man does not think well of me."

"He thinks you are a fool," returned the plain spoken Eskimo.

"H'm!  I'm not altogether surprised at that, lad.  I've sometimes
thought so myself.  Well, I suppose you've come to give me some good
advice to make me wiser--eh!  Chingatok?"

"Yes, that is what I come for.  Do what I tell you, and my father will
begin to think you wise."

"Ah, yes, the old story," remarked Benjy, who was an amused listener--
for his father translated in a low tone for the benefit of his
companions as the conversation proceeded--"the same here as everywhere--
Do as I tell you and all will be well!"

"Hold your tongue, Ben," whispered Alf.

"Well, what am I to do?" asked the Captain.

"Invite my father to a feast," said Chingatok eagerly, "and me too, and
my mother too; also my wife, and some of the braves with their wives.
And you must give us biskit an'--what do you call that brown stuff?"

"Coffee," suggested the Captain.

"Yes, cuffy, also tee, and shoogre, and seal st- ate--what?"

"Steak--eh?"

"Yes, stik, and cook them all in the strange lamp.  You must ask us to
see the feast cooked, and then we will eat it."

It will be observed that when Chingatok interpolated English words in
his discourse his pronunciation was not perfect.

"Well, you are the coolest fellow I've met with for many a day!  To
order a feast, invite yourself to it, name the rest of the company, as
well as the victuals, and insist on seeing the cooking of the same,"
said the Captain in English; then, in Eskimo,--"Well, Chingatok, I will
do as you wish.  When would you like supper?"

"Now," replied the giant, with decision.

"You hear, Butterface," said the Captain when he had translated, "go to
work and get your pots and pans ready.  See that you put your best foot
foremost.  It will be a turning-point, this feast, I see."

Need we say that the feast was a great success?  The wives, highly
pleased at the attention paid them by the strangers, were won over at
once.  The whole party, when assembled in the hut, watched with the most
indescribable astonishment the proceedings of the negro--himself a
living miracle--as he manipulated a machine which, in separate
compartments, cooked steaks and boiled tea, coffee, or anything else, by
means of a spirit lamp in a few minutes.  On first tasting the hot
liquids they looked at each other suspiciously; then as the sugar
tickled their palates, they smiled, tilted their pannikins, drained them
to the dregs, and asked for more!

The feast lasted long, and was highly appreciated.  When the company
retired--which did not happen until the Captain declared he had nothing
more to give them, and turned the cooking apparatus upside down to prove
what he said--there was not a man or woman among them who did not hold
and even loudly assert that the Kablunets were wise men.

After the feast the council of war was held and the strangers were
allowed to be present.  There was a great deal of talk--probably some of
it was not much to the point, but there was no interruption or
undignified confusion.  There was a peace-party, of course, and a
war-party, but the latter prevailed.  It too often does so in human
affairs.  Chingatok was understood to favour the peace-party, but as his
sire was on the other side, respect kept him tongue-tied.

"These Eskimos reverence age and are respectful to women," whispered Leo
to Alf, "so we may not call them savages."

The old chief spoke last, summing up the arguments, as it were, on both
sides, and giving his reasons for favouring war.

"The island is of no use," he said; "it is not worth a seal's nose, yet
Grabantak wishes to tear it from us--us who have possessed it since the
forgotten times.  Why is this? because he wishes to insult us," ("huk!"
from the audience).  "Shall we submit to insult? shall we sit down like
frightened birds and see the black-livered cormorant steal what is ours?
shall the courage of the Poloes be questioned by all the surrounding
tribes?  Never! while we have knives in our boots and spears in our
hands.  We will fight till we conquer or till we are all dead--till our
wives are husbandless and our children fatherless, and all our stores of
meat and oil are gone!"  ("huk! huk!") "Then shall it be said by
surrounding tribes, `Behold! how brave were the Poloes! they died and
left their wives and little children to perish, or mourn in slavery,
rather than submit to insult!'"

The "huks" that greeted the conclusion of the speech were so loud and
numerous that the unfortunate peace-makers were forced to hide their
diminished heads.

Thus did Amalatok resolve to go to war for "worse than Nort Pole--for
nothing"--rather than submit to insult!  (See Note 1.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  It may not be inappropriate here to point out that Eskimo
savages are sometimes equalled, if not surpassed, in this respect, by
civilised and even Christian nations.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE EFFECT OF PERSUASION ON DIVERSE CHARACTERS.

The warlike tendencies of Grabantak, the northern savage, had the effect
of compelling Captain Vane and his party to delay for a considerable
time their efforts to reach the Pole.  This was all the more distressing
that they had by that time approached so very near to it.  A carefully
made observation placed the island of Poloe in latitude 88 degrees 30
minutes 10 seconds, about 90 geographical, or 104 English statute miles
from the Pole.

There was no help for it, however.  To have ventured on Grabantak's
territory while war was impending would have been to court destruction.
Captain Vane saw therefore that the only way of advancing his own cause
was to promote peace between the tribes.  With a view to this he sought
an interview with the old chief Amalatok.

"Why do you wish to go to war?" he asked.

"I do not wish to go to war," answered the chief, frowning fiercely.

"Why do you go then?" said the Captain in a soothing tone, for he was
very anxious not to rouse the chief's anger; but he was unsuccessful,
for the question seemed to set the old man on fire.  He started up,
grinding his teeth and striding about his hut, knocking over pots, oil
cans, and cooking-lamps somewhat like that famous bull which got into a
china shop.  Finding the space too small for him he suddenly dropped on
his knees, crept through the low entrance, sprang up, and began to
stride about more comfortably.

The open air calmed him a little.  He ceased to grind his teeth, and
stopping in front of the Captain, who had followed him, said in a low
growl, "Do you think I will submit to insult?"

"Some men have occasionally done so with advantage," answered the
Captain.

"Kablunets may do so, Eskimos _never_!" returned the old man, resuming
his hurried walk to and fro, and the grinding of his teeth again.

"If Amalatok were to kill all his enemies--all the men, women and
children," said the Captain, raising a fierce gleam of satisfaction in
the old man's face at the mere suggestion, "and if he were to knock down
all their huts, and burn up all their kayaks and oomiaks, the insult
would still remain, because an insult can only be wiped out by one's
enemy confessing his sin and repenting."

For a few seconds Amalatok stood silent; his eyes fixed on the ground as
if he were puzzled.

"The white man is right," he said at length, "but if I killed them all I
should be avenged."

"Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord," leaped naturally to the Captain's
mind; but, reflecting that the man before him was a heathen who would
not admit the value of the quotation, he paused a moment or two.

"And what," he then said, "if Grabantak should kill Amalatok and all his
men, and carry away the women and children into slavery, would the
insult be wiped out in that case?  Would it not rather be deepened?"

"True, it would; but then we should all be dead--we should not care."

"The _men_ would all be dead, truly," returned the Captain, "but perhaps
the women and children left behind might care.  They would also suffer."

"Go, go," said the Eskimo chief, losing temper as he lost ground in the
argument; "what can Kablunets know about such matters?  You tell me you
are men of peace; that your religion is a religion of peace.  Of course,
then, you understand nothing about war.  Go, I have been insulted, and I
_must_ fight."

Seeing that it would be fruitless talking to the old chief while he was
in this frame of mind, Captain Vane left him and returned to his own
hut, where he found Chingatok and Leo engaged in earnest conversation--
Alf and Benjy being silent listeners.

"I'm glad you've come, uncle," said Leo, making room for him on the turf
seat, "because Chingatok and I are discussing the subject of war; and--"

"A strange coincidence," interrupted the Captain.  "I have just been
discussing the same subject with old Amalatok.  I hope that in showing
the evils of war you are coming better speed with the son than I did
with the father."

"As to that," said Leo, "I have no difficulty in showing Chingatok the
evils of war.  He sees them clearly enough already.  The trouble I have
with him is to explain the Bible on that subject.  You see he has got a
very troublesome inquiring sort of mind, and ever since I have told him
that the Bible is the Word of God he won't listen to my explanations
about anything.  He said to me in the quietest way possible, just now,
`Why do you give me _your_ reasons when you tell me the Great Spirit has
given His?  I want to know what _He_ says.'  Well, now, you know, it is
puzzling to be brought to book like that, and I doubt if Anders
translates well.  You understand and speak the language, uncle, better
than he does, I think, so I want you to help me."

"I'll try, Leo, though I am ashamed to say I am not so well read in the
Word myself as I ought to be.  What does Chingatok want to know?"

"He wants to _reconcile_ things, of course.  That is always the way.
Now I told him that the Great Spirit is good, and does not wish men to
go to war, and that He has written for us a law, namely, that we should
`live peaceably with all men.'  Chingatok liked this very much, but then
I had told him before, that the Great Spirit had told His ancient people
the Jews to go and fight His enemies, and take possession of their
lands.  Now he regards this as a contradiction.  He says--How can a man
live peaceably with all men, and at the same time go to war with some
men, kill them, and take their lands?"

"Ah!  Leo, my boy, your difficulty in answering the Eskimo lies in your
