
"This is a nice sample, Gerald, of Bob's thoughtfulness.

"Well, give me the letter. Perhaps he writes saying you had better
be sent home, by the first chance that offers itself."

Bob's face fell. He had, indeed, himself had some misgiving, ever
since the troubles began, that his uncle might be writing to that
effect.

"Well, look here, Carrie," he said, "here is the letter; but I
think you had better not open it, till I have started on this
cruise. Of course, if he says I must go back, I must; but I may as
well have this trip, first."

Carrie laughed.

"What do you think, Gerald, shall I leave it till Bob has gone?"

"No, open it at once, Carrie. If he does say, 'send Bob on by the
first vessel,' there is not likely to be one before he goes in the
Antelope. Besides, that is all the more reason why he should go for
a cruise, before he starts back for that grimy old place in Philpot
Lane. We may as well see what the old gentleman says."

"I won't open mine till you have read yours, Carrie," Bob said. "I
mean to go the cruise, anyhow; but if he says I must go after that,
I will go. If he had been the old bear I used to think him, I would
not mind it a snap; but he has been so kind that I shall certainly
do what he wants."

Bob sat, with his hands deep in his pockets, watching his sister's
face with the deepest anxiety as she glanced through the letter;
Gerald standing by, and looking over her shoulder.

Illustration: 'The old gentleman is a brick,' exclaimed Gerald.

"The old gentleman is a brick!" Gerald, who was the first to arrive
at the end, exclaimed. "I wish I had had such a sensible old
relative, myself, but--barring an aunt who kept three parrots and a
cat, and who put more store on the smallest of them than she did on
me--never a relative did I have, in the world."

"Oh, tell me that afterwards!" Bob broke in.

"Do tell me what uncle says, Carrie."

His sister turned to the beginning again and read aloud:

"My dear niece--"

"Where does he write from?" Bob interrupted. "Is it from Philpot
Lane, or from somewhere else?"

"He writes from Matlock, Derbyshire."

"That is all right," Bob said. "I thought, by what Gerald said, he
could not have written from Philpot Lane."

"My dear niece," Carrie began again, "I duly received your letter,
saying that Bob had arrived out safely; and also his more lengthy
epistle, giving an account of the incidents of the voyage. I should
be glad if you would impress upon him the necessity of being more
particular in his punctuation, as also in the crossing of his t's
and the dotting of his i's. I have also received your letter
bearing date June 1st; and note, with great satisfaction, your
statement that he has been most assiduous in his studies, and that
he is already able to converse with some fluency in Spanish.

"Since that time the state of affairs between the two countries has
much occupied my attention--both from its commercial aspect, which
is serious, and in connection with Bob. As the issue of a
declaration of war is hourly expected, as I write, the period of
uncertainty may be considered as over, and the two countries may be
looked upon as at war. I have reason to congratulate myself upon
having followed the advice of my correspondent, and of having laid
in a very large supply of Spanish wine; from which I shall, under
the circumstances, reap considerable profits. I have naturally been
debating, with myself, whether to send for Bob to return to
England; or to proceed to Lisbon, and thence to Oporto, to the care
of my correspondent there. I have consulted in this matter my
junior partner, Mr. Medlin, who is staying with me here for a few
days; and I am glad to say that his opinion coincides with that at
which I had finally arrived--namely, to allow him to remain with
you.

"His conduct when with me, and the perseverance with which--as you
report--he is pursuing his studies, has shown me that he will not
be found wanting in business qualities, when he enters the firm. I
am, therefore, all the more willing that he should use the
intervening time in qualifying himself, generally, for a good
position in the city of London; especially for that of the head of
a firm in the wine trade, in which an acquaintance with the world,
and the manners of a gentleman, if not of a man of fashion--a
matter in which my firm has been very deficient, heretofore--are
specially valuable. It is probable, from what I hear, that
Gibraltar will be besieged; and the event is likely to be a
memorable one. It will be of advantage to him, and give him a
certain standing, to have been present on such an occasion.

"And if he evinces any desire to place any services he is able to
render, either as a volunteer or otherwise, at the disposal of the
military authorities--and I learn, from Mr. Medlin, that it is by
no means unusual for the civil inhabitants of a besieged town to be
called upon, to aid in its defence--I should recommend that you
should place no obstacle in his way. As a lad of spirit, he would
naturally be glad of any opportunity to distinguish himself. I
gathered, from him, that one of his schoolfellows was serving as a
midshipman in a ship of war that would, not improbably, be
stationed at Gibraltar; and Bob would naturally dislike remaining
inactive, when his schoolfellow, and many other lads of the same
age, were playing men's parts in an historical event of such
importance. Therefore you will fully understand that you have my
sanction, beforehand, to agree with any desire he should express in
this direction, if it seems reasonable and proper to you and
Captain O'Halloran.

"As it is probable that the prices of food, and other articles,
will be extremely high during the siege, I have written, by this
mail, to Messieurs James and William Johnston, merchants of
Gibraltar--with whom I have had several transactions--authorizing
them to honour drafts duly drawn by Captain O'Halloran, upon me, to
the extent of 500 pounds; such sum being, of course, additional to
the allowance agreed upon between us for the maintenance and
education of your brother.

"I remain, my dear niece, your affectionate uncle, John Bale."

"Now I call that being a jewel of an uncle," Captain O'Halloran
said, while Bob was loud in his exclamations of pleasure.

"Now you see what you brought on yourself, Bob, by your
forgetfulness. Here we have had all the trouble in life to get
Carrie to agree to your going while, had she read this letter
first, she would not have had a leg to stand upon--at least,
metaphorically speaking; practically, no one would doubt it, for a
minute."

"Practically, you are a goose, Gerald; metaphorically, uncle is an
angel. But I am very, very glad. That has relieved me from the
responsibility, altogether; and you know, at heart, I am just as
willing that Bob should enjoy himself as you are.

"Now, what does your uncle say to you, Bob?"

Bob opened and read his uncle's letter, and then handed it to his
sister.

"It is just the same sort of thing, Carrie. I can see Mr. Medlin's
hand in it, everywhere. He says that, for the time, I must regard
my connection with the firm as of secondary importance; and take
any opportunity that offers to show the spirit of an English
gentleman, by doing all in my power to uphold the dignity of the
British flag; and taking any becoming part that may offer, in the
defence of the town. Of course he says he has heard, with pleasure,
of my progress in Spanish; and that he and his junior partner look
forward, with satisfaction, to the time when I shall enter the
firm.'

"My dear Carrie," Captain O'Halloran said, "I will get a bottle of
champagne from the mess; and this evening, at supper, we will drink
your excellent uncle's health, with all the honours. I will ask
Teddy Burke to come up and join us."

"Then I think, Gerald," his wife said, smiling, "that as Captain
Lockett will be here, too, one bottle of champagne will not go very
far."

"I put it tentatively, my dear; We will say two bottles, and we
will make the first inroad on our poultry yard. We had twenty eggs,
this morning; and the woman downstairs reports that two of the hens
want to sit, though how they explained the matter to her is more
than I know; anyhow, we can afford a couple of chickens."

It was a very jovial supper, especially as it was known that the
news of the proclamation of war had been brought in, by the ship
that had arrived that morning.

"By the way, Mrs. O'Halloran," Captain Lockett said, "I have a
consignment for you. I will land it, the first thing in the
morning, for I shall sail in the evening. We are to get our letters
of marque, authorizing the capture of Spanish vessels, at ten
o'clock in the morning."

"What is the consignment, captain?"

"It is from Mr. Bale, madam. I saw him in town, a week before I
sailed, and told him I was likely to come on here, direct; and he
sent off at once three cases of champagne, and six dozen of port,
directed to you; and an eighteen gallon cask of Irish whisky, for
Captain O'Halloran."

"My dear," Captain O'Halloran said solemnly, "I believe that you
expressed, today, the opinion that your uncle was, metaphorically,
an angel. I beg that the word metaphorically be omitted. If there
was ever an angel in a pigtail, and a stiff cravat, that angel is
Mr. John Bale, of Philpot Lane."

"It is very good of him," Carrie agreed. "We could have done very
well without the whisky, but the port wine and the champagne may be
very useful, if this siege is going to be the terrible thing you
all seem to fancy."

"A drop of the craytur is not to be despised, Mrs. O'Halloran," Dr.
Burke said; "taken with plenty of water it is a fine digestive and,
when we run short of wine and beer, you will not be despising it,
yourself."

"I did not know, Teddy Burke, that you had any experience,
whatever, of whisky mixed with plenty of water."

"You are too hard on me, altogether," the doctor laughed. "There is
no soberer man in the regiment than your humble servant."

"Well, it will do you all good, if you get on short allowance of
wine, for a time. I can't think why men want to sit, after dinner,
and drink bottle after bottle of port wine. It is all very well to
say that everyone does it, but that is a very poor excuse. Why
should they do it? Women don't do it, and I don't see why men
should. I hope the time will come when it is considered just as
disgraceful, for a man to drink, as it is for a woman.

"And now, Captain Lockett, about Bob. What time must he be on
board?"

"He must be on board before gunfire, Mrs. O'Halloran, unless you
get a special order from the town major. I was obliged to get one,
myself, for this evening. The orders are strict, now; all the gates
are closed at gunfire."

"Yes, and mighty strict they are," Captain O'Halloran said. "There
was Major Corcoran, of the 72nd, and the doctor of the regiment
were out fishing yesterday; and the wind fell, and the gun went
just as they were landing, and divil a bit could they get in. The
major is a peppery little man, and I would have given anything to
have seen him. One of the Hanoverian regiments furnished the guard,
at the water batteries; and the sentry told him, if he came a foot
nearer in the boat they would fire and, in the end, he and the
doctor had to cover themselves up with a sail, and lie there all
night. I hear the major went to lodge a complaint, when he landed;
but of course the men were only doing their duty, and I hear Eliott
gave him a wigging, for endeavouring to make them disobey orders."

"I will be on board before gunfire, Captain Lockett. There is no
fear of my missing it."

"How long do you expect to be away, Captain Lockett?" Mrs.
O'Halloran asked.

"That depends on how we get on. If we are lucky, and pick up a
number of prizes, we may bring them in in a week; if not we may be
three weeks, especially if this calm weather lasts."

"I am sure I hope you won't be too lucky, at first, captain," Bob
put in. "I don't want the cruise to finish in a week."

"Oh, I sha'n't consider the cruise is finished, merely because we
come in, Bob!" the captain said. "We shall be going out again, and
only put in here to bring in our prizes. The cruise will last as
long as Captain O'Halloran and your sister will allow you to remain
on board.

"I expect that I shall be able to make you very useful. I shall put
you down in the ship's books as third mate. You won't be able to
draw prize money, as an officer, because the number of officers
entitled to prize money was entered when the crew signed articles;
but if I put you down as supercargo you will share, with the men,
in any prizes we take while you are away with us."

"That will be jolly, captain; not because of the money, you know,
but because it will give one more interest in the cruise. Besides,
I shall like something to do."

"Oh, I will give you something to do! I shall put you in Joe's
watch, and then you will learn something. It is always as well to
pick up knowledge, when you get a chance; and if we do take any
prizes it will be your duty, as supercargo, to take an inventory of
what they have on board."

The next morning Bob packed his trunks, the first thing; then he
went round to the professor's, and told him that he was going away,
for a fortnight or so, for a cruise; then he went down to the port,
and met Joe Lockett when he landed, and brought him up to
breakfast, as had been arranged with the captain the night before.
After that, he went with him up the Rock to look at the
Spaniards--whose tents were a good deal more numerous than they had
been, and who were still at work, arming the forts.

"If I were the general," Joe said, "I would go out at night, with
two or three regiments, and spike all those guns, and blow up the
forts. The Dons wouldn't be expecting it; and it would be a good
beginning, and would put the men in high spirits.

"Do you see, the Spanish fleet has drifted away almost out of
sight, to the east. I thought what it would be, at sunset
yesterday, when I saw that they did not enter the bay; for the
current would be sure to drive them away, if the wind didn't spring
up.

"Well, I hope we shall get a little, this evening. And now I must
be going down, for there is a good deal to do, before we sail."



Chapter 10: A Cruise In A Privateer.


Bob was on board the Antelope a quarter of an hour before gunfire.
No movement was made until after sunset, for some of the gunboats
over at Algeciras might have put out, had they seen any
preparations for making sail; but as soon as it became dark the
anchor was hove, the sails dropped and sheeted home, and the brig
began to move slowly through the water. As she breasted Europa
Point, her course was altered to east by north, and the Rock faded
from sight in the darkness.

The first mate was on watch, and Bob walked up and down the deck
with him.

"There is no occasion for you to keep up," Joe Lockett said. "You
may just as well turn."

"Oh no, I mean to keep the watch with you!" Bob said. "The captain
said that I was to be in your watch, and I want you to treat me
just the same way as if I were a midshipman under you."

"Well, if you were a midshipman, there wouldn't be anything for you
to do, now: still, if you like to keep up, of course you can do so.
I shall be glad of your company, and you will help keep a sharp
lookout for ships."

"There is no chance of our coming across any Spanish traders
tonight, I suppose, Joe?"

"Not in the least. They would keep a deal farther out than we
shall, if they were bound either for Algeciras or through the
Straits. We are not likely to meet anything, till we get near
Malaga. After that, of course, we shall be in the line of coasters.
There are Almeria, and Cartagena, and Alicante, and a score of
small ports between Alicante and Valencia."

"We don't seem to be going through the water very fast, Joe."

"No, not more than two or two and a half knots an hour. However, we
are in no hurry. With a light wind like this, we don't want to get
too close to the shore, or we might have some of their gunboats
coming out after us. I expect that in the morning, if the wind
holds light, the captain will take in our upper sails, and just
drift along. Then, after it gets dark, he will clap on everything;
and run in so as to strike the coast a few miles above Malaga. Then
we will take in sail, and anchor as close in as we dare. Anything
coming along, then, will take us for a craft that has come out from
Malaga."

At midnight the second mate, whose name was Crofts, came up to
relieve watch; and Bob, who was beginning to feel very sleepy, was
by no means sorry to turn in. It hardly seemed to him that he had
closed an eye, when he was aroused by a knocking at the cabin door.

"It's two bells, sir, and Mr. Lockett says you are to turn out."

Bob hurried on his things and went up, knowing that he was an hour
late.

"I thought you wanted to keep watch, Bob. You ought to have been on
deck at eight bells."

"So I should have been, if I had been woke," Bob said, indignantly.
"I am not accustomed to wake up, just after I go to sleep. It
doesn't seem to me that I have been in bed five minutes. If you
wake me, tomorrow morning, you will see I will be up, sharp enough.

"There is hardly any wind."

"No, we have been only crawling along all night. There is Gib, you
see, behind us."

"Why, it doesn't look ten miles off," Bob said, in surprise.

"It is twice that. It is two or three and twenty, I should say.

"Now, the best thing you can do is to go down to the waist, slip
off your togs, and have a few buckets of water poured over you.
That will wake you up, and you will feel ever so much more
comfortable, afterwards. I have just told the steward to make us a
couple of cups of coffee. They will be ready by the time you have
had your wash."

Bob followed the advice and, after a bath, a cup of coffee, and a
biscuit, he no longer felt the effects from the shortness of the
night. The sun had already risen, and there was not a cloud upon
the sky.

"What are those, over there?" he asked, pointing to the southeast.
"They look like sails."

"They are sails. They are the upper sails of the Spanish fleet. I
expect they are trying to work back into the bay again, but they
won't do it, unless they get more wind. You see, I have taken the
topgallant sails off the brig, so as not to be seen.

"There is the Spanish coast, you see, twelve or fourteen miles
away, to port. If you like, you can take the glass and go up into
the maintop, and see if you can make anything out on shore."

Bob came down in half an hour.

"There are some fishing boats," he said, "at least, they look like
fishing boats, close inshore, just abreast of us."

"Yes, there are two or three little rivers on this side of Malaga.
There is not water in them for craft of any size, but the fishing
boats use them. There is a heavy swell sets in here, when the wind
is from the east with a bit south in it, and they run up there for
shelter."

Captain Lockett now came up on deck.

"Good morning, Bob! I did not see you here, when watch was
changed."

"No, sir, I wasn't woke; but I mean to be up another morning."

"That is right, Bob. Joe and I agreed to give you an extra hour,
this morning. Four hours are very short measure, to one who is not
accustomed to it; but you will soon find that you can turn in and
get a sleep, when your watch is over, whatever the time of day."

"It seems to me that this watch has the worst of it, Captain
Lockett. We had from eight to twelve, and now from four to eight;
and the other had only four hours on deck."

"Yours is considered the best watch, Bob. The middle watch, as the
one that comes on at twelve o'clock is called, is always the most
disliked. You see, at eight bells you go off and have your
breakfast comfortably, and can then turn in till twelve o'clock;
and you can get another caulk, from five or six till eight in the
evening. Of course, if there is anything to do, bad weather or
anything of that sort, both watches are on deck, all day."

"Well, I am almost sure I should like the other watch best," Bob
said.

"You are wrong, lad, especially in summer. You see, it is not
fairly dark till nine, and you wouldn't turn in till ten, anyhow;
so that, really, you are only kept two hours out of your bunk, at
that watch. It is getting light when you come up, at four; and at
five we begin to wash decks, and there is plenty to occupy you, so
that it doesn't seem long till eight bells. The others have to turn
out at twelve o'clock, just when they are most sleepy; and to be on
watch for the four dark hours, and then go down just as it is
getting light.

"On a cold night in winter, in the channel, I think perhaps the
advantage is the other way. But, in fact, men get so accustomed to
the four hours in, and the four hours out, that it makes very
little difference to them how it goes."

All day the brig kept on the same course, moving very slowly
through the water, and passing the coast as much by aid of the
current as by that of her sails.

"We are pretty well off Malaga," Captain Lockett said, in the
afternoon. "If there had been any wind, we should have had a chance
of picking up something making from there to the Straits; but there
is no chance of that, today. People like making quick voyages, when
there is a risk of falling in with an enemy; and they won't be
putting out from port until there is some change in the weather.
However, it looks to me as if there is a chance of a little breeze,
from the south, when the sun goes down. I have seen a flaw or two
on the water, that way."

"Yes, it seems to me darker over there," the mate said. "I will go
up and have a look round.

