was considered one of the best messages sent to Congress in many years.
It touched upon general conditions in our country, spoke for
improvements in the army and the navy, called for closer attention to
civil service reform, for a correction of the faults in the post-office
system, and for a clean administration in the Philippines, Hawaii, and
Porto Rico. It spoke of several great needs of the government, and added
that the Gold Standard Act had been found timely and judicious.

"President Roosevelt is all right," was the general comment, after the
message had been printed in the various papers of our country. "He is
looking ahead, and he knows exactly what this country wants and needs.
We are prosperous now, and if we want to continue so, we must keep our
hands on the plough, and not look backward."

The first break in the old Cabinet occurred on December 17, when
Postmaster General Charles E. Smith resigned. His place was immediately
filled by the appointment of Henry C. Payne, of Wisconsin. Soon after
this Secretary Gage of the Treasury resigned, and his place was filled
by former governor Leslie M. Shaw, of Iowa.

For a long time there had been before the American people various
suggestions to build a canal across Central America, to join the
Atlantic and the Pacific oceans, so that the ships wanting to go from
one body of water to the other would not have to take the long and
expensive trip around Cape Horn.

In years gone by the French had also contemplated such a canal, and had
even gone to work at the Isthmus of Panama, making an elaborate survey
and doing not a little digging. But the work was beyond them, and the
French Canal Company soon ran out of funds and went into the hands of a
receiver.

"We ought to take hold and dig a canal," was heard on all sides in the
United States. But where to dig the canal was a question. Some said the
Isthmus of Panama was the best place, while others preferred a route
through Nicaragua. The discussion waxed very warm, and at last a
Commission was appointed to go over both routes and find out which would
be the more satisfactory from every point of view.

The Commission was not very long in reaching a decision. The Panama
Canal Company was willing to sell out all its interest in the work
already done for forty millions of dollars, and it was recommended that
the United States accept this offer. President Roosevelt received the
report, and lost no time in submitting it to Congress.

At the beginning of the new year, 1902, there was a grand ball at the
White House, attended by a large gathering of people, including many of
the foreign representatives accredited to Washington. The occasion was
the introduction into society of Miss Alice Roosevelt, and the affair
was a most pleasing one from beginning to end.

One of the President's sons, Theodore Roosevelt, Jr., had been sent to a
boarding school at Groton, Massachusetts. Early in February he was taken
down with a cold that developed into pneumonia. It looked as if the
youth might die, and both Mrs. Roosevelt and the President lost no time
in leaving Washington and going to his bedside. The sympathy of the
whole country was with the anxious parents, and when it was announced
that the crisis had been passed in safety there was much relief in all
quarters.

Before this illness occurred there came to the Roosevelts an invitation
which pleased them, and especially Miss Alice, not a little. The German
Emperor William was having a yacht built in this country, at Shooter's
Island. He sent his brother, Prince Henry of Prussia, over to attend the
launching, and requested Miss Roosevelt to christen the yacht, which
was to be called the _Meteor_.

The arrival of Prince Henry was made a gala day by many who wished to
see the friendship between the United States and Germany more firmly
cemented than ever, and the royal visitor was treated with every
consideration wherever he went. From New York he journeyed to
Washington, where he dined with the President. He returned to New York
with President Roosevelt and with Miss Roosevelt, and on February 25 the
launching occurred, in the presence of thousands of people and a great
many craft of all sorts. Miss Roosevelt performed the christening in
appropriate style, and this was followed by music from a band and the
blowing of hundreds of steam whistles. After these ceremonies were over,
there followed an elaborate dinner given by the mayor of New York, and
then the Prince started on a tour of the country lasting two weeks. His
visit made a good impression wherever he went, and he was universally
put down as a right good fellow.

It was about this time that President Roosevelt showed he was not to be
led altogether by what his party did. So far he had not vetoed any
measures sent to him for his signature. Now, however, a bill came to him
touching the desertion of a sailor in the navy. Congress was willing to
strike the black record of the sailor from the books, but President
Roosevelt would not have it.

"The sailor did wrong," he said. "He knew what he was doing, too. The
record against him must stand." And he vetoed the bill. On the other
hand he was prompt to recognize real worth in those who had served the
government, and when over two hundred private pension bills came before
him for his approval, he signed them without a murmur.

The people of Charleston, South Carolina, had been arranging for a long
time to hold an exposition which should set forth the real advance and
worth of the leading southern industries. This exposition was now open
to the public, and President Roosevelt and his wife were invited to
attend the exhibit. With so much southern blood in his veins, the
President could not think of refusing, and he and Mrs. Roosevelt
visited the exposition early in April.

It was a gala day at Charleston, and the President and Mrs. Roosevelt
were received with every honor due their rank, and with great personal
consideration. Governor McSweeney of the state was assisted by Governor
Aycock, of North Carolina, in receiving President Roosevelt.

A stirring patriotic speech was made by the President during his visit,
and a feature of the trip was the presentation of a sword to Major Micah
Jenkins of the Rough Riders. A great number of President Roosevelt's
former troopers were present, and all were glad, as of old, to crowd
around and take him by the hand.




CHAPTER XXVII

DESTRUCTION OF ST. PIERRE--AMERICAN AID--THE GREAT COAL
STRIKE--PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT ENDS THE DIFFICULTY--TOUR THROUGH NEW
ENGLAND--THE TROLLEY ACCIDENT IN THE BERKSHIRES--A PROVIDENTIAL ESCAPE
FROM DEATH


During the summer of 1902 two matters of great importance occurred in
which the whole people of our nation were deeply interested.

Early in May occurred tremendous volcanic eruptions on the islands of
Martinique and St. Vincent. At the former island, Mont Pelee threw such
a rain of fire upon the town of St. Pierre that the entire place, with
about thirty thousand people, was wiped out of existence in a minute. At
other points the eruptions were not so bad, yet hundreds lost their
lives, and all of the islands of the Lesser Antilles were thrown into a
state bordering upon panic.

It was felt that something must be done, and at once, for the sufferers,
and a large fund for relief was gathered, of which the Americans
contributed their full share. The volcanic disturbances continued for
some time, and as it was thought they might also cover certain portions
of Central America, nothing was done further concerning a canal to unite
the two oceans.

The other event of importance was the strike of thousands upon thousands
of coal-miners, working in Pennsylvania and other states. The miners did
not think they were being treated rightly and went out in a body, and
for many weeks not a pound of coal of any kind was mined. This produced
a double hardship, for people could get no coal either for the fall or
winter, and the miners were, in some cases, reduced almost to the verge
of starvation. Neither the workmen nor the operators of the mines would
give in, and soon there was more or less violence, and some soldiers had
to be called out in an effort to preserve order.

As matters went from bad to worse, and it looked as if the entire
eastern section of our country would have to go without coal for the
winter, there were loud demands that the government take hold of the
difficulty and settle the matter, if not in one way, then in another.

At last, early in October, the whole country was aroused, for it was
felt that with no coal a winter of untold suffering stared the people in
the face. President Roosevelt held a conference at Washington with the
mine operators and the representatives of the miners.

"We must get together, gentlemen," said he. "The country cannot do
without coal, and you must supply it to us." And he laid down the law in
a manner not to be misunderstood.

Another conference followed, and then a third, and at last the coal
operators asked the President to appoint a Commission to decide upon the
points in dispute. To this the representative of the mine workers
agreed, and as a result a Commission was appointed by President
Roosevelt, which was to settle all points in dispute, and by its
decision each side was to abide. In the meantime, while the Commission
was at work, the mine workers were to resume their labors. The mines
were thereupon once more put in operation, after a strike lasting over
five months. This is the greatest coal strike known in American history,
and it is not likely that the people at large will ever again permit
themselves to suffer for the want of coal as they did during that fall
and the winter which followed.

Early in June occurred the centennial celebration of the founding of the
United States Military Academy at West Point. The occasion was made one
of great interest, and among the many distinguished visitors were
President Roosevelt and General Miles, head of our army at that time.
The President reviewed the cadets and made a speech to them,
complimenting them on their truly excellent showing as soldiers.

Although very busy with matters of state, President Roosevelt received
an urgent call to deliver a Fourth of July oration at Pittsburg. He
consented, and spoke to a vast assemblage on the rights and duties of
American citizens.

To remain in Washington during the hot summer months was out of the
question with President Roosevelt and his family, and early in the
season he removed to Oyster Bay, there to enjoy himself as best he might
during the short time allowed him for recreation.

That the business of the administration might not be too seriously
interrupted, he hired a few rooms over a bank building in the village of
Oyster Bay, and these were fitted up for himself and his several
secretaries and assistants. To the bank building he rode or drove every
day, spending an hour or more over the routine work required. By this
means undesirable visitors were kept away from his private residence,
and he was permitted to enjoy himself as he pleased in company with his
family.

While Mr. Roosevelt was summering at Oyster Bay, it was arranged that he
should make a short tour through New England, to last from August 22 to
September 3. The trip covered every New England State, and was one of
great pleasure to the President until the last day. Everywhere he went
he was greeted by enthusiastic crowds, and, of course, had to make one
of his characteristic speeches, accompanied by a great deal of
hand-shaking.

On the last day of the trip he was at Dalton, Massachusetts, the home of
Governor Crane. It had been planned to drive from Dalton to Lenox, a
beautiful spot, adjoining Laurel Lake, where are located the summer
homes of many American millionnaires.

The trip was begun without a thought of what was to follow. In the
party, besides President Roosevelt, were Governor Crane, Secretary
Cortelyou (afterward made a member of the Cabinet), United States Secret
Service officer William Craig, and the driver of the carriage. It may be
mentioned here that William Craig was detailed as a special guard for
the President, and had been with him since the tour was begun.

There are a number of trolley lines in this section of Massachusetts,
all centring in Pittsfield. As the mass of the people were very anxious
to see President Roosevelt, the trolleys going to the points where he
would pass were crowded, and the cars were run with more than usual
speed.

As the carriage containing the President and his companions attempted to
cross the trolley tracks a car came bounding along at a rapid rate of
speed. There seemed to be no time in which to stop the car, and in an
instant the long and heavy affair crashed into the carriage with all
force, hurling the occupants to the street in all directions. The Secret
Service officer, William Craig, was instantly killed, and the driver of
the carriage was seriously hurt.

There was immediate and great excitement, and for the time being it was
feared that President Roosevelt had been seriously injured. He had been
struck a sharp blow on the leg, and had fallen on his face, cutting it
not a little. The shock was a severe one, but in a little while he was
himself once more, although his face was much swollen. Later still a
small abscess formed on the injured limb, but this was skilfully treated
by his physician, and soon disappeared. The others in the carriage
escaped with but a few bruises and a general shaking-up.

The result of this accident, small as it was to the President
personally, showed well how firmly he was seated in the affection of his
fellow-citizens. From all over the country, as well as from his friends
in foreign climes, telegrams of congratulation came pouring in.
Everybody was glad that he had escaped, and everybody wished to show how
he felt over the affair.

"President Roosevelt was much affected by the messages received," said
one who was in a position to know. "It showed him that his friends were
in every walk of life, from the highest to the lowest. Had he met death,
as did the Secret Service officer detailed to guard over him, the shock
to the people, coming so soon after the assassination of President
McKinley, would have been tremendous."

The President had already been persuaded to consent to a short trip to
the South, from September 5 to 10, and then a trip to the West, lasting
until September 19, or longer. The trips came to an end on September 23,
in Indiana, because of the abscess on the lower limb already mentioned,
yet on November 19 he was given a grand reception by the people of
Memphis, Tennessee, who flocked around him and were glad to see him as
well as ever.

"We are so glad you escaped from that trolley accident!" was heard a
hundred times.

"We can't afford to lose you, Mr. President," said others. "Really good
men are too scarce." And then a cheer would go up for "The hero of San
Juan Hill!"

His speeches on these trips were largely about the trusts and monopolies
that are trying to control various industries of our country. It is an
intricate subject, yet it can be said that Mr. Roosevelt understands it
as well as any one, and is laboring hard to do what is right and best,
both for the consumer and the capitalist.

Congress had, some time before, voted a large sum for the extension and
improvement of the White House, and while Mr. Roosevelt and his family
were at Oyster Bay these improvements were begun. They continued during
the fall, and the President made his temporary home at a private
residence in the capital city. Here it was he was treated for his
wounded limb, and here he ended the coal strike, as already chronicled.




CHAPTER XXVIII

NEW OFFICES AT THE WHITE HOUSE--SENDS A WIRELESS MESSAGE TO KING EDWARD
OF ENGLAND--END OF THE TROUBLE IN VENEZUELA--THE CANADIAN BOUNDARY
DISPUTE--BEGINNING OF A TRIP TO THE WEST--IN YELLOWSTONE PARK


The end of the year found President Roosevelt in the best of health,
despite the accident some weeks previous. The improvements at the White
House were now complete, and the family of the Chief Magistrate took
possession. A separate set of offices for the President and his Cabinet
had been built at the western end of the executive mansion, and the
rooms formerly used for this purpose were turned into living apartments.
The changes made have been approved by many who have seen them, and they
have wondered why the alterations were not made a long time ago.

On December 1, Congress assembled for a new session, and on the day
following the President's message was read. It was a masterly state
paper, dealing with the trust question, our relations with the new
government of Cuba (for the island was now free, just as we had meant it
to be when the war with Spain started), the creation of a new department
of Commerce and Labor, needs of the army and navy, and the all-important
matter of how the Philippines should be governed. It may be added here
that not long after this a Department of Commerce and Labor was created
by Congress, and Mr. George B. Cortelyou, the secretary to the
President, became its first official head. When Mr. Cortelyou left his
post as secretary, Mr. William Loeb, Jr., who had been the President's
private secretary for some time, became the regular first secretary to
the Chief Magistrate, a place he occupies to-day.

Just about this time there was considerable trouble in Indianola,
Mississippi. A colored young lady had been appointed postmistress, and
the people in that vicinity refused to recognize her. The Post-Office
Department did what it could in the matter, and then referred the case
to the President.

[Illustration: THE WHITE HOUSE, SHOWING NEW OFFICES.]

"As she has been regularly appointed, the people will have to accept
her," said Mr. Roosevelt. And when there was more trouble, he sent
forward an order that the post-office be shut up entirely. This was
done, and for a long time the people of that vicinity had to get their
mail elsewhere, a great inconvenience to them.

On January 1, 1903, the new cable to the Hawaiian Islands was completed,
and President Roosevelt received a message from Governor Dole, and sent
a reply to the same. About two weeks later the President sent a
wireless, or rather cableless, message to King Edward of England. This
helped to mark the beginning of a new era in message-sending which may
cause great changes in the transmission of messages in the future.

For some time past there had been a small-sized war going on in
Venezuela, South America, between that nation on one hand and England,
Germany, and Italy on the other. This war had caused much disturbance to
American trade. Pressure was brought to bear upon the several nations
through President Roosevelt, and at last it was agreed to leave matters
to be settled by arbitration at The Hague. The agreements to this end
were signed at Washington, much to the President's satisfaction. All
trouble then ceased, and American commerce was resumed as before.

For many years there had been a dispute between the United States and
Canada, regarding a certain boundary line. This country claimed a long
strip of territory next to the sea, near the seaports of Dyea and
Skagway, and Canada claimed that this strip, about thirty miles in
width, belonged to her domain.

There had been endless disputes about the claim, and considerable local
trouble, especially during the rush to the Klondike after gold.

Many Americans contended that we had absolute right to the territory,
