ashore," I added.

I stated the plan and the objections to Vallington.

"Let us face the music like men," said he, decidedly.

"I think that is the better way," I continued to Bob. "So far as we
have done wrong, let us acknowledge the corn, and take the
consequences."

Bob Hale assented, overcoming his modesty with an effort, and I headed
the Adieno for the steamboat pier. I think we all felt a little
bashful about landing in the presence of so many people. The students
were directed to make no noisy demonstrations of any kind, and to
repair directly to the school-room of the Institute, where Mr.
Parasyte would soon find us, and where we hoped to make a final
adjustment of all the difficulties.

As we approached the pier, the boat was "slowed down," and the fasts
got ready for landing; and other work was done as regularly and
properly as though we were all old steamboat men. At the regular time,
I stopped her wheels, and she ran her bow up gently to the wharf, and
the line was thrown ashore. A couple of turns of the wheels backward
brought the Adieno to a stand-still, and our cruise was ended.
Vallington let off steam, and we formed in a body, intending to march
ashore as compactly as possible, in order to feel the full force of
the bond of association.

With Vallington at the head of the procession, we landed. Some of the
crowd hooted at us, others laughed, and a few steamboat owners berated
us roundly. We heeded none of them, but made our way through the mob,
up the pier. Before we reached the street, it suddenly occurred to me
that I had left the Splash made fast to the stern of the steamer. I
had forgotten her in the exciting whirl of events. When I told Bob
Hale and Tom Rush that I must return for my boat, they volunteered to
accompany me.

"Robert," said a stern voice, as we moved down the wharf.

We halted, and Bob's father confronted him.

"What does all this mean?" demanded Mr. Hale. "Are you one of those
who ran away with the steamer?"

"I am, sir," replied Bob, squarely, but with due humility.

Mr. Hale bit his lips with chagrin. Probably he had hoped that his son
was not one of the reckless fellows who had taken possession of the
Adieno. But Bob was a noble fellow, and seldom gave his father any
cause to complain of his conduct,--so seldom that he appeared to be
appalled at the magnitude of the present offence.

"Robert was opposed to taking the steamer from the first," I
interposed, hoping to save him from some portion of his father's
displeasure.

"I went with the rest of the fellows, and I am willing to bear my
share of the blame."

"What does all this mean? What possessed you to do such a thing?"
asked Mr. Hale.

"We could not endure the injustice of Mr. Parasyte any longer; that
was the beginning of it. And when he came in the steamer to Pine
Island, and took away our provisions, we ran off with the steamer
rather than be starved out," answered Bob.

"What business had you on Pine Island?"

"We have been breaking away."

"Breaking away! I should think you had! Were you concerned in these
disgraceful proceedings, Robert?"

"I was, sir. I am willing to own that I have done wrong."

Mr. Hale's stern look softened down, and I ventured to ask him to take
a seat in my boat, and go over to the Institute, where he would have
an opportunity to hear the whole story of the "breaking away," and
judge for himself. During this conversation, a crowd had gathered
around us, curious to know what had happened; and the charge we made
against Mr. Parasyte was publicly proclaimed. Mr. Hale accepted my
invitation, and we shoved off from the Adieno just as the Champion
came up to the pier.

"Stop them! Stop them!" shouted the captain of the Adieno, as I was
hoisting the jib.

No one ventured to stop a boat in which Mr. Hale, the most important
person in the county, was seated.

"We want those boys!" called the angry captain again. "They are the
ones who ran off with the boat."

"Captain Woelkers," said Mr. Hale, mildly.

"Ah, Mr. Hale!" exclaimed the captain, as he recognized the principal
owner of the steamer he commanded.

"By whose authority did you take the Adieno to Pine Island to-day?"

"Mr. Parasyte wanted her, and I let him have her," stammered the
captain.

"Did you consult the agent?"

"No, sir; he was not at home."

"Do you generally leave your boat with steam up without an engineer?"

"I never did before, but we needed every man to bring off the things
on the island," replied Captain Woelkers, his confusion crimsoning his
face.

"It appears that you have used the boat without authority, and
permitted her to be taken from you by a parcel of boys. I will see you
at my house this evening. You may fill away, Ernest, if you are
ready."

Mr. Hale did not say another word, and I ran the Splash over to the
Institute pier. I landed my passengers, and we all walked up to the
school-room, where the rebels had by this time assembled.

"Henry Vallington, I am sorry to see you engaged in such a disgraceful
affair as this," said Mr. Hale, when he met our leader.

"I am very glad you have come, sir, for I feel that we need counsel,"
replied Vallington. "Perhaps you will not consider the affair so
disgraceful, after you have heard the whole truth."

"Nothing can justify your conduct in running away with the steamer. It
is a miracle that you were not blown up, or sunk in the lake."

Vallington handed our distinguished guest one of the circulars he had
procured at the printer's on his way up to the Institute, the "copy"
of which had been given out before the "breaking away."




CHAPTER XXVI.

IN WHICH ERNEST FINDS A CHANGE IN THE MANAGEMENT OF THE INSTITUTE.


Mr. Hale put on his spectacles and read the circular, which had been
carefully prepared by several of the best scholars in the school; but
he was already familiar with the facts it contained. He knew that Mr.
Parasyte was a tyrant, and that he was very unpopular with the boys.
It was a fact that only a few of the students remained at the
Institute for any considerable length of time, and that its numbers
had never equalled its capacity.

He had hardly finished reading the circular before Mr. Parasyte,
followed by Poodles, Pearl, and the rest of the deserters, entered the
hall. All of them had been passengers on the Champion, and of course
they didn't feel very good after being beaten by the Adieno. Mr. Hale
was evidently glad to see the principal of the academy, for he did
not seem to know what to do after he had finished the circular.

"I am glad you have come, Mr. Parasyte," said he; "it seems these boys
have been running away with one of our steamers."

"They have; and I hope you will punish the ringleaders as they
deserve," replied Mr. Parasyte, wiping his brow, as he was wont to do
when excited.

"My son is one of them," added Mr. Hale, with a smile.

"Not one of the ringleaders, sir--by no means. Thornton, Rush, and
Vallington are the leaders in this enterprise."

"No more than myself, father. I have done as much as they have, and I
am willing to bear my share of the blame," said Bob.

The boys clapped their hands at this interposition. Bob was not a
fellow to shirk when the time of settlement came.

"My boy behaves like a man, and I honor him for that," replied Mr.
Hale, proudly; "but he shall be punished if the others are. Mr.
Parasyte, things seem to be at rather loose ends in the Institute just
now."

"Yes, sir; I am sorry to say they are. One bad boy can stir up a
whirlwind of mischief," answered Mr. Parasyte, looking at me.

"These boys seem to be pretty well agreed in this matter."

"But this trouble has all been made by one boy--and that one is Ernest
Thornton. I expelled him once; but out of regard for his uncle, to
whom I am under great obligations, I reversed my sentence, and
endeavored to reduce him to proper subjection."

"Have you seen this paper, Mr. Parasyte?" continued the visitor,
handing him the circular. "It seems to be signed by nearly all the
students in the Institute."

Mr. Parasyte took the printed document, and proceeded to read it. When
he had gone far enough to comprehend the nature of the paper, he
turned red; and when he came to the long array of signatures, he
became very pale.

"May I inquire the object of this paper?" demanded the principal, with
quivering lips.

"I'm sure I don't know. I never saw or heard of it till I entered
this room," replied Mr. Hale "I see that it is addressed to the
parents of the students."

"I need not say that the statements contained in this circular are,
without a single exception, infamous falsehoods and slanders. I think
you know me well enough, Mr. Hale, to understand that justice and
fairness have always characterized my dealings with my pupils."

Mr. Hale did not so understand it. He knew that the reverse of this
statement was the truth. Mr. Parasyte then insisted on relating the
facts connected with the "breaking away." He told the story of my
misconduct, as he termed it, and embellished it with sundry flourishes
about his own impartiality and magnanimity. He said that after it had
been fairly proved that I had assaulted my schoolmate, in
consideration of my previous good conduct, he had only required that I
should apologize in private to the one I had injured. Forbearance
could extend no farther than this; but I had even refused to make this
slight reparation for the offence I had committed. Then I had openly
disobeyed and insulted him in the presence of the whole school.

"Of course, after this," continued Mr. Parasyte, "I could do nothing
more for him. My gentleness was not appreciated; my leniency was
despised. My mistake was in treating him too kindly--in not resorting
to the strong arm in the beginning. Then, as I might have expected of
such an obdurate boy, I was subjected to a personal assault."

"But all the boys seemed to be on his side," said the matter-of-fact
Mr. Hale.

"Very true. Thornton keeps a boat, and almost any boy may be bought or
sold with a boat. He has sailed them on the lake, and won them by his
arts."

"Isn't it possible that there was some mistake in the matter of the
quarrel between Thornton and Poodles?"

"It is quite impossible that there should have been any mistake,"
replied Mr. Parasyte, with a look of injured innocence. "I
investigated the matter very carefully and impartially."

"I should really like to hear what the boys have to say about it,"
added Mr. Hale.

"It would be useless for you to talk with them, and it would be an
insult to me for you to do so. Do you doubt my word, Mr. Hale? Do you
think I have not told you the truth?" said the principal, rather
warmly.

"But there may be some mistake."

"I have said that it was quite impossible there should be any
mistake."

"Have you any objections to my asking the boys a few questions, Mr.
Parasyte?"

"Certainly I have. I am not willing to be arraigned and tried before
my own school."

"O, very well!" exclaimed Mr. Hale, nodding his head significantly;
and without saying anything more, he left the school-room.

The students felt that they had a friend in Mr. Hale, and even did not
fear a prosecution for running away with the steamer. We judged that
the captain of the Adieno would have to bear all the blame of that
occurrence.

"What are these circulars for?" demanded Mr. Parasyte, when the
visitor had departed. "Vallington, as the ringleader in this
conspiracy, I call upon you for an answer."

"Those whose names are signed to the paper intend to send them to
their parents."

"They do--do they?" exclaimed the principal, with compressed lips.
"Are you aware that published slanders of this kind subject those who
utter them to a severe penalty?"

"We can prove all we assert, and should be glad of an opportunity to
do so," replied Vallington, firmly.

"There is not a word of truth in the paper," added Mr. Parasyte,
wiping his brow.

He walked up and down the platform two or three times in silence. With
him the case was desperate. He knew not what to do. He had learned
that the students would not be browbeaten or bullied.

"Scholars," said he, at last, "I think we are all too much fatigued
and excited to consider this difficult problem this afternoon. In
spite of the ill treatment I have received at your hands, I am still
your friend, as I have always been. By and by you will see that you
have done wrong. To-morrow morning, if you will meet at the usual
hour in the school-room, I shall have a proposition to make, which I
am confident will restore peace to the Parkville Liberal Institute.
You are dismissed now, for the day."

Mr. Parasyte left the hall, and we held a meeting there on our own
account. If the principal did not know what to do, we were no better
off, and we finally separated without any fixed plans. We agreed to
meet in the school-room in the morning, though we all doubted whether
Mr. Parasyte would have any proposition to submit. The students
decided not to send the circulars to their parents until the next day.

We wanted advice, and our hope was with Mr. Hale. At Vallington's
suggestion, half a dozen of us were appointed a committee to wait upon
him. He had expressed a desire to hear "the other side" of the case.
We went to Mr. Hale's house, and found there Mr. Hardy, the assistant
teacher, who had been discharged. We told our story, and related the
facts as they occurred. Mr. Hardy said nothing in our presence, and we
left him with Mr. Hale, who, we afterwards learned, had sent for him.

Bob invited me to spend the night with him, and having no home now, I
was glad to accept. After supper, I was called into the library, and
questioned at great length by Mr. Hale and Mr. Hardy in regard to the
affairs of the Institute. While we were thus engaged, Bob was sent to
deliver several notes to prominent and wealthy men in the place. At
seven o'clock there were not less than half a dozen of the "heavy men"
of Parkville in the library.

Of course Bob and I did not know what was going on, but we were
confident that the affairs of the Institute were under discussion. At
a later hour, Mr. Hale and another gentleman drove off, in a buggy,
towards the cottage of my uncle, where I heard one of them say they
were going. Bob and I went to bed, tired out, and did not ascertain
what had been done by the gentlemen who assembled that evening.

At nine o'clock in the forenoon of the next day, the students were all
in their seats, in the school-room; but Mr. Parasyte did not appear.
It was reported that there were half a dozen gentlemen with him in his
office, and that my uncle Amos was one of them. I was astonished at
this intelligence. I subsequently heard that he was there on business,
and hardly spoke a word during a long and stormy interview between Mr.
Parasyte and his visitors.

The clock on the school-house struck ten, and still Mr. Parasyte did
not come. It was deeply impressed upon our minds that something was
about to happen, and we waited with intense anxiety for the event. At
half past eleven o'clock, Mr. Parasyte entered the school-room. He
looked sad and subdued, and his coming was the signal for a breathless
silence among the boys. It was evident that he had a proposition to
make.

"Young gentlemen, I appear before you now for the last time," said he.

He paused, and his words made a tremendous sensation, though, I am
happy to say, there was no demonstration of any kind. We looked upon
him as a fallen man.

"I have sold the Parkville Liberal Institute to a company composed of
the citizens of this town, who have made me an offer for the property,
so liberal that I could not afford to refuse it. Until about a week
ago, my relations with the students have been exceedingly pleasant. I
shall not allude to recent events. I take my leave with many regrets,
and I sincerely desire that prosperity and happiness may attend you in
the future. Good by."

"Good by," replied a large number of the boys, and Mr. Parasyte bowed
and left the room.

As he went out at one door, the "company" entered at another. Mr. Hale
went upon the platform, and repeated what Mr. Parasyte had told us,
that the Institute had been purchased by a number of the citizens of
Parkville, and in future its affairs would be managed by a board of
trustees, of which he had the honor to be chairman. The trustees had
just appointed Mr. Hardy as principal,--here he was interrupted by a
spontaneous burst of cheers,--and the school would be reorganized by
him in the afternoon. The "boarders" were requested to write to their
parents and guardians, informing them of the change.

Mr. Hale dismissed the students, after he had assured them that the
domestic part of the establishment would remain as before. The boys
went out upon the play ground, and gave three rousing cheers for the
new company, trustees, and principal. I went home to dinner with Bob,
and learned that the purchase of the Institute had been contemplated
for some months, by prominent citizens, who were aware that the school
was badly managed. They acted, many of them, simply as business men,
for the interests of the town. The Institute was "running down," and
they had taken this step to build it up. They knew that Mr. Hardy was
a true man and a good teacher, and as he was popular among the boys,
he was promptly elected principal.

Mr. Hale told Bob and me that the conduct of the students in "breaking
away" was strongly condemned by the gentlemen who had discussed the
affair, and he by no means approved of it himself; but the injustice
of Mr. Parasyte had provoked them to such a degree that the
misdemeanor was palliated, if not excused, and it was deemed best to
say nothing about it. The mortgage which my uncle held was paid, and
he had fled the instant the business was finished.

Mr. Parasyte had long and obstinately refused to sell the property,
even for a third more than its actual value; but finally, convinced
that the Institute would not succeed under his administration, he had
yielded the point. The next day he left Parkville, with his family,
"bag and baggage;" and so disagreeable was he to me, that I hoped I
never should see his face again.

In the afternoon we went to school, and Mr. Hardy appeared upon the
platform. We attempted to cheer him, but he silenced us. He made quite
a speech, in which, however, he did not allude to recent events, and
in half an hour the students were all at work on the old track. While
I was in school that afternoon for the last time, as I believed, I
received a note from my uncle. It was as brief as his speech. "If you
wish to return to your home, you may." This, with the signature, was
all it contained. I went home that night, but my uncle did not see
me--would not see me.

I went to school as usual for several months, until the following
