captives who were spending the first minutes of the new day in singing
praise to God.

The three comrades listened with rapt attention, for although the words
were unintelligible, with the exception of the name of Jesus, the air
was quite familiar, being one of those in which English-speaking
Christians are wont to sing praise all the world over.

When the hymn ceased one of the voices was raised in a reverent and
continuous tone, which was obviously the voice of prayer.

Just as the petition was concluded the sun found a loop-hole in the
prison, and poured a flood of light into it which partly illumined the
dark corner, and revealed two men seated on the ground with their backs
against the wall.  They were fine-looking men, nearly naked, and joined
together by means of a ponderous piece of iron above two feet long, with
a heavy ring at either end which encircled their necks.  The rings were
so thick that their ends must have been forced together with
sledge-hammer and anvil after being put round the men's necks, and then
overlapped and riveted.  Thus it became impossible to free them from
their fetters except by the slow and laborious process of cutting them
through with a file.  Several old and healed-up sores on the necks and
collar-bones of both men indicated that they and their harsh couplings
had been acquainted for a long time, and one or two inflamed spots told
all too clearly that they had not yet become quite reconciled.  _See
Note 1_.

"Now isn't that awful," said John Hockins in a low voice with a sort of
choke in it, "to think that these poor fellows--wi' that horrible thing
that can't be much under thirty pounds weight on their necks, an' that
must ha' bin there for months if not for years--are singin' an' prayin'
to the Almighty, an' here am I, John Hockins, with little or nothin' to
complain of as yet, haven't given so much as a thought to--"

The choke got the better of our sailor at this point, and he became
suddenly silent.

"Das so!" burst in Ebony, with extreme energy.  "I's wid you dere!  I
tell you what it is, 'Ockins, dem brown niggers is true Kistians, an' we
white folks is nuffin but hipperkrits."

"I hope we're not quite so bad as _that_, Ebony," said Mark, with a sad
smile.  "Nevertheless, Hockins is right--we are far behind these poor
fellows in submission and gratitude to our Maker."

While he spoke the heavy door of the prison opened, and a jailor entered
with two large basins of boiled rice.  The largest he put on the ground
before our three travellers, the other in front of the coupled men, and
then retired without a word.

"Well, thank God for this, anyhow," said Mark, taking up one of the
three spoons which lay on the rice and going to work with a will.

"Just so," responded the seaman.  "I'm thankful too, and quite ready for
grub."

"Curious ting, 'Ockins," remarked Ebony, "dat your happytite an' mine
seems to be allers in de same state--sharp!"

The seaman's appetite was indeed so sharp that he did not vouchsafe a
reply.  The prisoners in the dark corner seemed much in the same
condition, but their anxiety to begin did not prevent their shutting
their eyes for a few seconds and obviously asking a blessing on their
meal.  Hockins observed the act, and there passed over his soul another
wave of self-condemnation, which was indicated by a deprecatory shake of
his rugged head.

Observing it, Ebony paused a moment and said--

"You's an awrful sinner, 'Ockins!"

"True, Ebony."

"Das jist what I is too.  Quite as bad as you.  P'r'aps wuss!"

"I shouldn't wonder if you are," rejoined the seaman, recovering his
spirits somewhat under the stimulating influence of rice.  The recovery
was not, however, sufficient to induce further conversation at the time,
for they continued after that to eat in silence.

They had scarcely finished when the jailor returned to remove the dish,
which he did without word or ceremony, and so quickly that Ebony had to
make a sudden scoop at the last mouthful; he secured it, filled his
mouth with it, and then flung the spoon at the retiring jailor.

"That was not wise," said Mark, smiling in spite of himself at the
tremendous pout of indignation on the negro's face; "the man has us in
his power, and may make us very uncomfortable if we insult him."

"Das true, massa," said Ebony, in sudden penitence, "but if dere's one
thing I can't stand, it's havin' my wittles took away afore I'm done wid
'em."

"You'll have to larn to stand it, boy," said Hockins, "else you'll have
your life took away, which'll be wuss."

The probability of this latter event occurring was so great that it
checked the rise of spirits which the rice had caused to set in.

"What d'ee think they'll do to us, sir?" asked the sailor, in a tone
which showed that he looked up to the young doctor for counsel in
difficulty.  The feeling that, in virtue of his education and training,
he ought to be in some sort an example and guide to his comrades in
misfortune, did much to make Mark shake off his despondency and pluck up
heart.

"God knows, Hockins, what they will do," he said.  "If they were a more
civilised people we might expect to be let off easily for so slight an
offence as rescuing a supposed criminal, but you remember that Ravonino
once said, when telling us stories round the camp-fire, that
interference with what they call the course of justice is considered a
very serious offence.  Besides, the Queen being in a very bad mood just
now, and we being Christians, it is likely we shall be peculiarly
offensive to her.  I fear that banishment is the least we may count on."

"It's a hard case to be punished for bein' Christians, when we hardly
deserve the name.  I can't help wonderin'," said the seaman, "that Lovey
should have bolted as he did an' left us in the lurch.  He might at
least have taken his risk along with us.  Anyhow, he could have spoke up
for us, knowin' both lingos.  Of course it was nat'ral that, poor Mamba
should look after number one, seem that he was in no way beholden to us;
but Lovey was our guide, an' pledged to stand by us."

"I can't help thinking," said Mark, "that you do injustice to Laihova.
He is not the man to forsake a comrade in distress."

"That was my own opinion," returned the sailor, "till I seed him go slap
through yon port-hole like a harlequin."

"P'r'aps he tink he kin do us more service w'en free dan as a prisoner,"
suggested Ebony.

"There's somethin' in that," returned Hockins, lifting his hand to
stroke his beard, as was his wont when thoughtful.  He lifted it,
however, with some difficulty, owing to the heavy chain.

They were still engaged in conversation about their prospects when the
prison-door again opened, and two men were ushered in.  Both wore white
lambas over their other garments.  One was tall and very dark.  The
other was comparatively slender, and not so tall as his companion.  For
a moment the strangers stood contemplating the prisoners, and Mark's
attention was riveted on the smaller man, for he felt that his somewhat
light-coloured and pleasant features were not unfamiliar to him, though
he could not call to mind where or when he had seen him.  Suddenly it
flashed across him that this was the very man to whose assistance he had
gone, and whose wounds he had bound up, soon after his arrival in the
island.

With a smile of recognition, Mark rose and extended his hand as far as
his chain permitted.  The young native stepped forward, grasped the
hand, and pressed it warmly.  Then he looked round at his tall
companion, and spoke to him in his own tongue, whereupon the tall man
advanced a step, and said in remarkably bad English--

"You save me frind life one taime ago.  Ver' good--him now _you_ save."

"Thank him for that promise," said Mark, greatly relieved to find at
least one friend among the natives in his hour of need.

"But," continued the Interpreter, "you muss not nottice me frind nowhar.
Unerstand?"

"Oh yes, I think I do," returned Mark, with an intelligent look.  "I
suppose he does not wish people to think that he is helping or favouring
us?"

"That's him! you's got it!" replied the Interpreter, quite pleased
apparently with his success in the use of English.

"My!" murmured Ebony to Hockins in an undertone, "if I couldn't spoke
better English dan dat I'd swaller my tongue!"

"Well--good-boy," said the Interpreter, holding out his hand, which Mark
grasped and shook smilingly, as he replied, "Thank you, I'm glad you
think I'm a good-boy."

"No, no--not that!" exclaimed the Interpreter, "good _day_, not good
_boy_; good-night, good morning!  We goes out, me an' me frind.  Him's
name Ravelo."

Again Ravelo shook hands with Mark, despite the rattling chain, nodded
pleasantly to him, after the English fashion, and took his departure
with his tall friend.

"Well now, I do think," remarked Hockins, when the door had closed
behind them, "that Rav--Rave-what's-his-name might have took notice of
me too as an old friend that helped to do him service."

"Hm! he seemed to forgit _me_ altogidder," remarked the negro,
pathetically.  "Dere's nuffin so bad as ingratitood--'cept lockjaw: das
a little wuss."

"What d'ee mean by lockjaw bein' wuss?" demanded Hockins.

"W'y, don't you see?  Ingratitood don't _feel_ `thankee,' w'ereas
lockjaw not on'y don't feel but don't even _say_ `thankee.'"

A sudden tumult outside the prison here interrupted them.  Evidently a
crowd approached.  In a few minutes it halted before the door, which was
flung open, and four prisoners were thrust in, followed by several
strong guards and the execrations of the crowd.  The door was smartly
slammed in the faces of the yelling people, and the guards proceeded to
chain the prisoners.

They were all young men, and Mark Breezy and his friends had no doubt,
from their gentle expression and upright bearing, that they were not
criminals but condemned Christians.

Three of them were quickly chained to the wall, but the third was thrown
on his back, and a complex chain was put on his neck and limbs, in such
a way that, when drawn tight, it forced his body into a position that
must have caused him severe pain.  No word or cry escaped him, however,
only an irrepressible groan when he was thrust into a corner and left in
that state of torture.

The horror of Mark and his comrades on seeing this done in cold blood
cannot be described.  To hear or read of torture is bad enough, but to
see it actually applied is immeasurably worse--to note the glance of
terror and to hear the slight sound of the wrenched joints and stretched
sinews, followed by the deep groan and the upward glare of agony!

With a bursting cry of rage, Hockins, forgetting his situation, sprang
towards the torturers, was checked by his fetters, and fell with a heavy
clang and clatter on the floor.  Even the cruel guards started aside in
momentary alarm, and then with a contemptuous laugh passed out.

Hockins had barely recovered his footing, and managed to restrain his
feelings a little, when the door was again opened and the Interpreter
re-entered with the jailor.

"I come--break chains," said the former.

He pointed to the chains which bound our travellers.  They were quickly
removed by two under-jailors and their chief.

"Now--com vis me."

To the surprise of the Interpreter, Mark Breezy crossed his arms over
his breast, and firmly said--"No!"  Swiftly understanding his motive,
our seaman and Ebony followed suit with an equally emphatic, "No!"

The Interpreter looked at them in puzzled surprise.

"See," said Mark, pointing to the tortured man in the corner, "we refuse
to move a step till that poor fellow's chains are eased off."

For a moment the Interpreter's look of surprise increased; then an
indescribable smile lit up his swarthy features as he turned to the
jailor and spoke a few words.  The man went immediately to the curled-up
wretch in the corner and relaxed his chains so that he was enabled to
give vent to a great sigh of relief.  Hockins and Ebony uttered sighs of
sympathy almost as loud, and Mark, turning to the Interpreter, said,
with some emotion, "Thank you!  God bless you!  Now we will follow."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The fetters here described may be seen in the Museum of the
London Missionary Society in Blomfield Street, London, along with an
interesting collection of Malagasy relics.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

MAMBA IS SUCCOURED BY ONE OF THE "ANCIENT SOOT," AND FULFILS HIS
MYSTERIOUS MISSION.

When Laihova and Mamba took the reckless "headers" which we have
described in a former chapter, they tumbled into a court-yard which was
used as a sort of workshop.  Fortunately for them the owner of the house
was not a man of orderly habits.  He was rather addicted to let rubbish
lie till stern necessity forced him to clear it away.  Hence he left
heaps of dust, shavings, and other things to accumulate in heaps.  One
such heap happened to lie directly under the window, through which the
adventurous men plunged, so that, to their immense satisfaction, and
even surprise, they came down soft and arose unhurt.

Instantly they slipped into an outhouse, and there held hurried converse
in low tones.

"What will you do now?" asked Laihova.

"I will remain where I am till night-fall, for I dare not show myself
all bruised like this.  When it is dark I will slip out and continue my
journey to the coast."

"To Tamatave?" asked Laihova, naming the chief seaport on the eastern
side of Madagascar.

"Yes, to Tamatave."

"Do you go there to trade?"

"No.  I go on important business."

It was evident that, whatever his business might be, Mamba, for reasons
best known to himself, resolved to keep his own counsel.  Seeing this,
his friend said--

"Well, I go to the eastward also, for Ravoninohitriniony awaits me
there; but I fear that our English friends will be thrown into prison."

"Do you think so?" asked Mamba, anxiously.  "If you think I can be
helpful I will give up my important business and remain with you."

"You cannot help us much, I think.  Perhaps your presence may be a
danger instead of a help.  Besides, I have friends here who have power.
And have we not God to direct us in all things?  No, brother, as your
business is important, go."

Mamba was evidently much relieved by this reply, and his friend saw
clearly that he had intended to make a great personal sacrifice when he
offered to remain.

"But now I must myself go forth without delay," continued Laihova.  "I
am not well-known here, and, once clear of this house, can walk openly
and without much risk out of the city.  Whatever befalls the Englishmen,
Ravoninohitriniony and I will help and pray for them."

Another minute and he was gone.  Passing the gates without arousing
suspicion, he was soon walking rapidly towards the forest in which his
friend Ravonino lay concealed.

Meanwhile, Mamba hid himself behind some bags of grain in the outhouse
until night-fall, when he sallied boldly forth and made his way to the
house of a friend, who, although not a Christian, was too fond of him to
refuse him shelter.

This friend was a man of rank and ancient family.  The soot hung in long
strings from his roof-tree.  He was one of "the ancient soot!"

The houses in the city are usually without ceiling--open to the
ridge-pole, though there is sometimes an upper chamber occupying part of
the space, which is reached by a ladder.  There are no chimneys,
therefore, and smoke from the wood and grass fires settles upon the
rafters in great quantities inside.  As it is never cleared away, the
soot of course accumulates in course of time and hangs down in long
pendants.  So far from considering this objectionable, the Malagasy have
come to regard it with pride; for, as each man owns his own house, the
great accumulations of soot have come to be regarded as evidence of the
family having occupied the dwelling from ancient times.  Hence the "old
families" are sometimes complimented by the sovereign, in proclamations,
by being styled "the ancient soot!"

The particular Ancient Soot who accorded hospitality that night to Mamba
was much surprised, but very glad, to see him.  "Have you arrived?" he
asked, with a good deal of ceremonial gesticulation.

"I have arrived," answered Mamba.

"Safely and well, I hope."

"Safely and well," replied Mamba--ceremonially of course, for in reality
he had barely arrived with life, and certainly not with a sound skin.

"Come in, then," said the Ancient Soot.  "And how are you?  I hope it is
well with you.  Behold, spread a mat for him, there, one of you.  And is
it well with you?"

"Well indeed," said Mamba once again, falsely but ceremonially.

"May you live to grow old!" resumed Soot.  "And you have arrived safely?
Come in.  Where are you going?"

"I'm going yonder--westward," replied Mamba, with charming conventional
vagueness, as he sat down on the mat.

"But it appears to me," said Ancient Soot, passing from the region of
compliment into that of fact, and looking somewhat closely at his
friend, "it seems to me that you have been hurt."

Mamba now explained the exact state of the case, said that he required a
good long rest, after that a hearty meal, then a lamba and a little
money, for he had been despoiled of everything he had possessed by the
