Reverend Jedediah Morse who was not only popular with his congregation
but was the personal friend of General Washington and other great men
of his time. His mother was the daughter of a Judge, and her
grandfather had been president of Princeton college, so the baby who
was born on that April day had a rich inheritance of good blood and
love of education.

He was christened with the names of his father, grandfather and
great-grandfather, but the name was too long for daily use, so he was
called "Finley" at home, and in college was given the name of
"Geography" Morse.

His birth must have interested a large number of friends, for many
letters of congratulation were sent to the proud parents and to others
who knew them well. Dr. Belknap of Boston wrote to a friend in New
York:

    "Congratulate the Monmouth Judge (Mr. Breese) on the birth of a
    grandson. Next Sunday he is to be loaded with names, not quite as
    many as the Spanish Ambassador who signed the treaty of peace in
    1783, but only _four_! He may have the sagacity of a Jewish Rabbi,
    or the profundity of a Calvin, or the sublimity of a Homer for
    aught I know. But time will bring forth all things."

An interesting forecast, that, of the future of Finley Morse! He grew
to be a perfectly normal small boy who kept his mother very busy
looking after him, but was no more lively and mischievous than other
boys of his age. Here is a quaint little note to him from his father's
friend, Mr. Wells, written when Finley was only two years old:

    "My dear Little Boy,

    As a small testimony of my respect and obligation to your excellent
    Parents and of my love to you I send you with this six (6) English
    Guineas. They are pretty playthings, and in the country I came from
    many people are fond of them. Your Papa will let you look at them,
    and then he will take care of them, and by the time you are grown
    up to be a Man, they will, under Papa's wise management increase to
    twice their present number. With wishing you may never be in want
    of such playthings and yet never too fond of them, I remain your
    affectionate friend

    Wm. M. Wells.

    July 2, 1793."

When he was four years old Finley was sent to a school for very little
children, kept by "Old Ma'am Rand". She was lame and could not walk
across the room, but she kept a rattan rod by her side long enough to
reach any naughty pupil in the room, and the children were much afraid
of having this happen.

One day the teacher discovered Finley at the back of the room, busy
"drawing" a picture of her with a sharp brass pin on the shiny wooden
lid of a chest.

"Bring it to me!" commanded the old lady, and the boy came slowly
forward, pin in hand. When he was near enough to reach, Old Ma'am Rand
gripped him firmly and pinned him to her dress with the big pin. He
struggled so hard that he got away and ran screaming to the end of the
room with a piece of the old lady's dress that had been torn in the
struggle, hanging on his sleeve.

But evidently he and his teacher were really good friends, for he
stayed in her class until he was seven years old. Then he went to a
preparatory school in Andover, Mass., and from there to Phillips
Academy, also in Andover, where he was prepared for Yale college.

The following is the only letter preserved that was written by him at
that early date, from the preparatory school.

    "Dear Papa,--I hope you are well and I will thank you if you will
    send me up some quils. Give my love to mama and _Nancy_ and my
    little brothers; pleas to kis them for me and send me up some very
    good paper to write to you.

    I have as many blackberries as I want I go and pick them myself.

    SAMUEL FINLEY BREESE MORSE
             YOUR SON.
               1799."

Finley was never much interested in his studies, but liked better to
read books on whatever subject caught his fancy. "Plutarch's Lives" was
one of his favorites, and it gave him the ambition to become famous,
although exactly how to achieve his purpose he did not then see. But he
kept on reading, and studying and when he was thirteen he wrote a
sketch of Demosthenes and sent it to his father, who was so pleased
with it that he laid it away among his treasures.

The letters written to him by his father were very different from those
written by fathers of today. Here is part of one:

    "My dear Son--You do not write to me as often as you ought. In your
    next you must assign some reason for this neglect. Possibly I have
    not received all of your letters. Nothing will improve you in
    epistolary writing as practice. Take great pains with your letters.
    Avoid vulgar phrases. Study to have your ideas pertinent and
    correct, and clothe them in easy and grammatical dress. Pay
    attention to your spelling, pointing, the use of capitals, to your
    handwriting. After a little practice these things will become
    natural and you will thus acquire a habit of writing correctly and
    well. General Washington was a remarkable instance of what I have
    now recommended to you. His letters are a perfect model for
    epistolary writers.... I will show you some of his letters when I
    have the pleasure of seeing you next vacation and when I shall
    expect to find you much improved.

    Your natural disposition, my dear son, renders it proper for me
    earnestly to recommend you to attend to one thing at a time. It is
    impossible that you can do two things well at the same time, and I
    would therefore never have you attempt it. Never undertake to do
    what ought not to be done, and then whatever you undertake,
    endeavor to do it in the best manner.... Steady and undissipated
    attention to one object is a sure mark of genius, as hurry, bustle
    and agitation are the never failing symptoms of a weak and
    frivolous mind. I expect you to read this letter over several
    times, that you may retain its contents in your memory."

Whether the ten year old boy appreciated this fine letter is open to
doubt, but he certainly acted on its advice, for so good was his record
for scholarship that when he was only fourteen years old he was ready
to leave the preparatory school and become a college student.

A year later, in the fall of 1805 he left home and took the trip to New
Haven, where he entered the freshman class at Yale. An amusing incident
of his early college days is given in this letter. He says:

    "We had a new affair here a few days ago. The college cooks were
    arraigned before a tribunal of the students. We found two of the
    worst of them guilty of several charges, such as being insolent to
    the students, not exerting themselves to cook clean for us, in
    _concealing pies_ which belonged to the students, having suppers at
    midnight and inviting all their neighbors and friends to sup with
    them at the expense of the students, and this not once in a while
    but every night.... The fault is not so much in the food as in the
    cooking, for our bill-of-fare has been in the following way:
    Chocolate, coffee and hashed meat every morning, at noon, various;
    roast beef twice a week, pudding three times, and turkeys and geese
    on an average once a fortnight; baked beans occasionally; Christmas
    and other merry days, turkeys, pie and puddings as many as we wish
    for.... I ought to have added that in future we are to have
    beefsteaks and toast twice a week, before this the cooks were too
    lazy to cook them. I will inform you of the result of the affair as
    soon as it is completed."

Then as now, "eats" formed a vastly important part of boys' life, it
seems.

At that time Jeremiah Day was teacher of natural philosophy at Yale,
and Prof. Silliman, of chemistry, and to these men young Morse owed
much of his later achievement. One day in class Prof. Day told his
pupils to all join hands while a student touched the pole of an
electric battery. At once a shock was felt down the long line of boys.
Morse described it as being like "a slight blow across the shoulders".
This experiment showed the pupils the wonderful speed at which
electricity travels. Another day the laboratory was darkened and a
current of electricity passed through a row of metal blocks placed at a
short distance apart, while the boys in awed silence watched the white
light flash between the links of the chain and the blocks.

So interested did Finley become in experiments along that line, that
when at vacation time he found he could not afford to take the trip
home, he was not much disappointed, but spent his time making tests in
the laboratory. That his problems were much the same as those of young
men of today is shown by this letter to his father. He says:

    "I find it impossible to live in college without spending money. At
    one time a letter is to be paid for, then comes up a great tax from
    the class or society, which keeps me constantly running after
    money.... The amount of my expenses for the last term was fifteen
    dollars expended in the following manner:

    Postage                        $ 2.05
    Oil                               .50
    Taxes, fines, etc                3.00
    Oysters                           .50
    Washbowl                          .37-1/2
    Skillet                           .33
    Axe, $1.33; Catalogues, 12c      1.45
    Powder and shots                 1.12
    Cakes, etc. etc. etc.            1.75
    Wine, Thanks Day                  .20
    Toll on bridge                    .15
    Grinding axe                      .08
    Museum                            .25
    Poor man                          .14
    Carriage for trunk               1.00
    Pitcher                           .41
    Sharpening skates                 .37-1/2
    Circ. Library                     .25
    Post Papers                       .57
    Lent, never to be returned        .25
                                   ----------
                                   $14.75
    Paid for cutting wood             .25
                                   ----------
                                   $15.00"

Surely it would do the college boy of today good to read that list of
expenses. It might be a revelation to him.

A postscript to the letter adds, "The students are very fond of raising
balloons at present. I will (with your leave) when I return home, make
one. They are pleasant sights."

At that time, he was as much interested in drawing as he was in
electrical experiments, and could get a remarkable likeness of anyone
who would pose for him. As there were no photographs in those days, his
portraits were in great demand, and needing money, to help with his
expenses he began to paint miniatures to order, his price being five
dollars for those painted on ivory, and one dollar for profiles, and he
says, "Everybody is ready to engage me at that price."

When his college course was at an end Finley wished to take up painting
for a profession, but of this his parents did not approve, so for a
short time he was apprenticed to a bookshop-keeper, but was so unhappy
that Dr. and Mrs. Morse finally decided to let him become an artist,
and when he was nineteen years old he went to Europe with the
well-known artist, Washington Allston, to study art. In London he met
Benjamin West, the famous painter, to whom Morse "a young pilgrim from
the United States, modest and gentle, with his foot not yet on the
first rung of the ladder of fame" made a great appeal, and West took
the youth under his personal supervision, and felt enormous pride in
his progress, for Finley's picture of the dying Hercules at the Royal
Academy exhibition was named as one of the twelve best among two
thousand exhibited, and his cast of Hercules took the gold medal at the
Adelphi Society of Fine Arts.

Back again in America after four years abroad, young Morse had years of
struggle ahead, but with undaunted courage continued to work, and at
last, despite all obstacles won success as an artist. But of that no
more in this brief sketch which has to do with the Inventor.

We have seen the child in school, the boy in college, the budding
artist in his training, have watched him painting and making electrical
experiments with equal enthusiasm, and now he is no longer a boy, but
Morse, the man, when on that April day in 1832 we find him on the deck
of the packet-ship _Sully_. There, alone with the mighty influences of
Nature and his new idea, he is working out the first crude principles
of the Telegraph system which in after years was to be such a
revolutionizing factor in civilization and commerce.

Came years of struggle against what seemed to be overwhelming
obstacles, but Morse was equal to the emergencies of the case and we
have one more glimpse of him as the man who succeeded.

After twelve years of hard work to achieve his ends, a bill was passed
by the Senate appropriating thirty thousand dollars for testing the
Morse Telegraph. A young woman, Miss Ellsworth, had the good fortune to
carry the news to Mr. Morse, who was so overjoyed that he could
scarcely find his voice to thank her. When at last he spoke, it was to
promise that she should choose the first message to be sent across the
wires of his Telegraph.

A glimpse of his achievement--at its crowning moment of success.

The Assembly room of the United States Supreme Court with one of the
Morse Telegraph instruments installed in it. A group of distinguished
officers and private individuals, waiting with intense interest to see
the invention tested.

With perfect calmness the Inventor took his seat at the instrument,
laid his hands on the key-board now familiar to us all, and in the
Morse code sent the message chosen by Miss Ellsworth. Slowly--steadily,
successfully he wrote the chosen words,--

    "WHAT HATH GOD WROUGHT"

The message was instantaneously received in Baltimore by a Mr. Vail who
did not know beforehand what message was to be sent. He returned it
immediately to Washington, so that within a single moment those
inspired words were flashed back and forth through a circuit of eighty
miles.--The Telegraph system had begun to work!

A great American by inheritance, and by achievement, we do Samuel
Finley Breese Morse homage, for his ideals are those for which our
forefathers gave their lives. When that first message flashed over the
wires to Baltimore and back, the Inventor said humbly and reverently,
"The message baptizes the Telegraph with the name of its author,--for
that author is God."




DAVID FARRAGUT:

The Boy Midshipman


It was a day in late October, in the year 1812. Down the Delaware
River, came slowly sailing the frigate _Essex_, which was one of a
fleet being sent to cruise along the Atlantic coast for the protection
of American vessels from their English enemies, for 1812 was the year
when the war between England and America was declared, and for this
reason.

England had for a long time been at war with France. Any vessel going
to or from a French port was liable to be attacked by an English
man-of-war, and the English government even claimed the right to search
American vessels to see whether any English sailors were on board. And
worse than that, many American sailors were accused, and falsely, of
being English deserters and were taken from their own vessels and
forced to serve on English ships. All attempts of America to adjust
this matter peacefully were refused, and in 1812 America was obliged to
declare war against Great Britain, and in consequence a squadron was
fitted out to cruise along the Atlantic coast, to protect American
vessels from the English.

The _Essex_ was in command of Captain Porter, and as she was not ready
