popular in the county, and although rumours of coming trouble were rife
about them, yet their friends and well-wishers augured happy results
from this present gaiety.

But why was not the Squire present, and why was Mrs. Lorrimer absent?

Molly, who made the gentlest of shepherdesses, came up as these remarks
passed the good people's lips. She stopped to speak to an old friend of
her mother's.

"I'm so glad you were able to come," she said; "and how sweet your
children look."

"It was very kind of you to ask us, my dear," responded this lady, "and
the sight is a charming one--quite charming; but I am sorry to miss your
mother."

"Mother is in London at present; she is away on special business. She is
ever so sorry to be absent to-night."

"And the Squire, is he quite well?"

"Yes, thank you. He is in London with mother."

At this moment a brownie with a hot face and looking rather
uncomfortable in his brown-velvet tights, accompanied by the most
spiritual-looking fairy it was possible to see, revolved slowly round in
the mazes of the waltz.

The brownie's honest face was raised to Molly's; his brown eyes were
full of a question; the fairy by his side had a far-away look. They both
floated away.

"Oh, what a charming little pair," said Mrs. Fortescue, Molly's friend.
"Do you know who they are, Miss Lorrimer?"

"That poor, hot brownie is my brother, Boris," exclaimed Molly; "and
that little girl is Nell, my sister."

The lady sat down again; and, Molly's partner coming up to claim her,
she joined in the dance, and forgot the question in Boris's eyes.

There was a commotion near the entrance door. Hester was seen to move
hastily forward. There was a call for Nan, who, accompanied by her
partner, Little Boy Blue, rushed quickly across the room, and the next
moment a tall, aristocratic-looking man was seen moving up the ball-room
with Hester's hand on his arm. Sir John Thornton had kept his word. He
had returned in time if not for the whole of Nan's birthday, at least
to see it out.

The matrons who sat about the room remarked on his appearance, and said
that they had never seen him look better, younger, or more cheerful.
They said what an admirable thing it was for Sir John to have Hester at
home; and, as Sir John himself was the best possible company in society,
he soon made his presence agreeably felt all over the room. In the
Squire's absence he naturally took the part of host; and no one could be
a more polished or charming host than he.

One of the many delightful features of this great fancy ball was the
presents which the fairy queen was to bestow upon her many subjects at
the end of the festivities. These presents lay piled up in comical
shapes all round her, and helped to form some of the billowy clouds on
which she was supposed to be resting. The poor little fairy queen
certainly looked most charming, and when the moment came for giving away
the presents, she would enjoy herself to the full; but just now she
could not help envying those fairies and brownies, who could jump about
and skip and dance and have a very good time, without being in quite
such a grand position as she was. On the queen fairy's head rested a
spangled crown of light texture. She felt it almost heavy just now, and
murmured to herself in a sentimental voice, "Uneasy lies the head that
wears a crown."

Boris, with his eyes still full of that unanswered question, came near
and looked at her.

"Are you having an awfully dull time, Nonie?" he asked.

"Oh, it's all right," said Nora, who would have scorned to complain.

"You're going to give us our presents by-and-by."

"Yes."

"You'll feel jolly and hop o' my thumb, won't you?"

"Oh, I'll feel nothing special," replied Nora, who did not wish to
encourage this brownie in his efforts after familiarity.

"How hot you look, Boris," she said, with a slight laugh.

"Hot?" echoed Boris. "I'm boiling. It's these abominations of tights.
Nonie, I'd like to tell you something; it's very important, very."

"You can't possibly tell it to me now, Boris," replied Nora; "don't
attempt to come too near, disarranging my clouds. Oh, what a naughty,
troublesome boy you are; you have trodden upon that piece of white
tarlatan, and it has all got out of shape. Do run away; do leave me
alone."

Boris scampered off; he had suddenly caught a glimpse of the round,
smooth face of the shepherdess, Molly, in the distance. If he could only
catch her up, she would allow him to whisper in her ear. Nora was always
rather a cross patch, but Molly was kind. Molly would be interested,
even though she was a shepherdess. He trod on some long trains as he
skimmed by. People called him a tiresome child and an awkward little
worry, but he did not heed them; he was gaining on Molly, and Molly
would be sure to listen to him. Everything would be all right when Molly
knew. Now, he had all but reached her, but no, how tiresome--how more
than tiresome--a shepherd came up and held out his crook to Molly, who
held out hers to him, and then they joined hands, and then they danced
away, away, away, far, very far from Boris and his question.

He turned round and stamped his pointed shoe in his vexation.

Nell suddenly came up and touched him.

"Did you find Molly? Have you told her?" she asked.

"No, I can't get to her," replied Boris; "she's dancing over there with
that horrid shepherd; he's only Hugh Pierson, and he doesn't look a bit
well. Let's dance by ourselves, Nell; let's forget; 'twasn't nothing but
nonsense, I'm sure."

"I can't forget," replied Nell.

"Well, aren't you a little bit hungry? There's lobster and pink
champagne in the supper-room. I'm going in for some; I heard Hugh
Pierson say it was ripping; come and let's have some."

"I couldn't touch any," said Nell with a little shudder of disgust.

Boris looked at her and gave vent to the faintest of sighs.

"While I'm having my lobster, you could eat a jelly, couldn't you?" he
said in the most insinuating of whispers.

"No, I couldn't; I couldn't touch anything. Go and eat if you want to,
and then come back to me here. I'm going to stand by that window;
perhaps he'll come back and take another peep."

"It couldn't have been him, Nell; you know it couldn't; he's away in
London, you know."

"I tell you it was him."

"Has he brought back my dove, do you think?"

"No, no; who cares about a dove just now?"

"Nell, I really do care, and my cage is most beautiful and clean. I put
in fresh seed and water only this morning; wasn't it lucky?"

"Well, the dove hasn't come," said Nell; "you know it was 'perhaps'
about the dove, and about the pony, and about all the jolly
things--you're always forgetting that it was 'perhaps.' There, go and
eat your lobster, and come back to me when you have done; don't drink
too much champagne, or maybe you'll turn giddy. I'll wait here by this
window."

Boris, looking decidedly depressed, hesitated for a moment; then seeing
that Nell was resolute, he decided that, even if disappointment were in
store, he could all the rest of his life reflect that he had sat up late
and eaten lobster salad for supper. He accordingly sidled away in the
direction of the supper-room, and Nell, with a light movement, sprang on
one of the benches and then into the deep recess of a window. Here, with
her cloudy hair all about her, her little face as white as her dress,
her eyes big and spiritual in the trouble which vaguely stirred her
sensitive soul, she looked out into the night. Her large wings shielded
her little form, and nobody noticed that one fairy was not joining in
the revels.

"I did see him," murmured Nell; "I saw his face just for a minute; he
pressed it up against the pane and looked in; his hair was all ruffled,
and his eyes, his eyes--oh, the thought of his eyes makes me ache so
badly. Why doesn't he come in? What is he doing out in the garden? I
know he has come back. I know he's not in London; he has come back and
he is in the garden, and we are all so jolly, and he so sad. What is the
matter? Oh, I know quite well; it's _perhaps_; and the pony, and the
dove, and the rabbits have not come home. Wings--I thought I'd be so
happy when I had wings, but I'm just mis'ribble I'm just mis'ribble."

There was a little noise behind Nell; she turned her head to see Boris
scrambling up into the seat by her side.

"I had two plates of salad," he began; "'twasn't so very nice, not so
nice as--why, what's the matter, Nell?"

"Come," said Nell, taking his hand, "quick, jump down, he's under the
oak tree, just where the shadow is thickest; I saw him move; that's him;
let's go to him, Boris; take my hand; let's run to him."

Boris's hot hand clutched Nell's. They ran quickly along by the
comparatively empty space near the wall, reached the entrance, and flew
swiftly across the moonlit grass.




CHAPTER XVII.

FAIRY AND BROWNIE.


Perhaps it was not the first time that the moon had looked down on a
fairy and a brownie running across that old, old lawn. No one could say
anything for certain on this point. We all of us have a sort of undying
belief in fairies, so perhaps they did exist once, before our hearts had
grown too cold and our natures too worldly to understand them. Children
know most about them, but even children don't quite believe in them now,
in the good old-fashioned way of long ago.

A very pretty fairy and brownie were out now. The moon silvered Nell's
wings and put a sort of unearthly radiance into her hair, and Boris,
with his bright locks standing almost upright on his head, in his
quaint little costume, with his upturned toes and ruffled hands, looked
quite like a true denizen of fairy land. Certain it is that the man who
stood under the shadow of the oak gave a perceptible start when he saw
the fairy and brownie. For a moment the old belief of his early
childhood flashed through his brain, then he recognised Nell and Boris,
and coming to meet them, he took a hand of each.

"What is it, father?" exclaimed Boris; "what are you standing out of
doors for? I know it's a very warm night, but we want you dreadfully,
dreadfully, in the house."

Boris rubbed himself against his father's knee as he spoke. Nell
clutched Squire Lorrimer's other hand, and raising it to her lips,
kissed it passionately. Nell did not speak at all.

"Come in, father, come in," repeated Boris; "and where's mother, and
what are you doing out here under the oak tree?"

"Looking at you little people; you make a gay sight," said the Squire.

In spite of himself, his voice was quite hollow.

"But why don't you come in?"

"I'm not coming in; I'm going back to London again to-night."

"Why, father?" asked Nell, opening her lips for the first time, and
looking at him with great intentness.

The Squire stooped and lifted Nell into his arms.

"I did not want you to see me," he said. "I knew you were having your
big party to-night, and I had to come to the Towers on--on business.
What are you trembling for, Nell? You ought not to be out; you must run
back to the house at once; why, you are cold, child."

"I'm _not_ cold, and I _will_ stay and kiss you."

Nell's arms were pressed tightly round the Squire's neck. Her little
soft lips pressed kiss after kiss on his somewhat grisly cheek.

Boris, standing on the ground, and looking up at Nell in her fathers
arms, thoroughly realised for the first time that he had gone to useless
trouble in cleaning the dove's cage.

"Now, Nell, you must be sensible," said her father. "I was obliged to
come to the Towers to-night to--to fetch something. I knew from Molly's
letters that you were going to have a big ball. I thought I'd like to
see how the ball-room looked. We have not had a ball, a very big ball,
in that room since the days of my great-grandmother. My grandmother has
told me about that ball, and about the very window where my
great-grandfather stood when he asked my great-grandmother to be his
wife. He asked her to marry him at that ball, so of course she never
could forget it; and the story of the green dress she wore--apple
green--with her golden locks falling over her shoulders, and the story
of the window where he proposed to her, have been handed down in the
family ever since. To-night, in that same window, the little
great-great-grandchild sat, and looked out, and I saw her; now, you must
run back, Nell. Boris, you run back, too; run and enjoy yourselves; be
happy--God, God bless you."

"Why don't you come in, father?" asked Boris.

Nell felt as if she could not say a word. There was so much meaning in
fathers words; there was so much that he said with his eyes, and with
the tight pressure of his arms, which the rather commonplace words he
uttered seemed to have nothing to do with. Nell understood, and her
heart ached so, she seemed to be turned dumb.

The Squire put Nell firmly on the grass.

"Run in, both of you," he said. "I must go back to the railway station
at once, or I shall miss my train. I am returning to town to-night. Say
nothing of this to anyone until the ball is over, then you may tell
Molly, if you like, that she will probably see her mother to-morrow.
Good night, chicks."

"Won't we see you to-morrow, father?"

But the Squire's only reply was to stride softly away under the trees.

"Why, he's gone," exclaimed Boris with a little cry.

"Yes. Didn't you know he was going, Boris? What is the use of making a
fuss?" said Nell. She found she could speak quite well again now. "Take
my hand and come back to the house; let's do what he said."

"Do you think he's put out about anything?" asked Boris. "He seemed
dumpy, like; I couldn't say anything about the dove; I knew it hadn't
come. Do you think father was sad about anything, Nell?"

"He didn't say he was, did he?" asked Nell.

"No."

"Well, let's come back and dance, or people will miss us. Father said we
weren't to say anything until the ball was over, and then only to
Molly."

"But if Molly goes back to the Grange?"

"She mustn't; she must stay here. I'll dance with you now, Boris, if you
like."

The time had sped faster than the children had any idea of while they
were out. But the dancing still continued and went on until a late hour.
Then the moment when expectation must yield to a delightful reality
arrived. Towards the end of one of the prettiest figures of the
cotillion, the fairies and brownies assumed new characters. Either a
fairy or a brownie conducted one of the many personages who figured in
the fancy ball up to the fairy queen, who, assisted by a number of
satellites, bestowed upon each a gift carefully selected in advance to
meet the requirements of the special child in question. Each child was
expected to drop on one knee to receive the fairy queen's benediction
with her gift; they then filed one by one into the supper-room, where
