This decided the natives.  They were now outnumbered and surrounded.
The principal chief, therefore, advanced towards Bumpus with a piece of
native cloth tied to the end of his war-club, which he brandished
furiously by way of making it plain that his object was not war, but
peace!

Naturally enough, the seaman misinterpreted the signal, and there is no
doubt that he would have planted his knuckles on the bridge of the nose
of that swarthy cannibal had not Henry Stuart made use of his
extraordinary powers of speed.  He darted forward, overtook Jo, and,
grasping him round the neck with both arms, shouted--

"It's a flag of truce, man!"

"You don't say so? well, who'd ha' thought it.  It don't look like one,
so it don't."

With this remark, Jo subsided into a peaceable man.  Pulling a quid out
of his pocket, he thrust it into his cheek, and, crossing his arms on
his breast, listened patiently--though not profitably, seeing that he
did not understand a word--to the dialogue that followed.

It will be remembered that poor Mr Mason, after being saved by Henry,
was taken into the gig of the _Talisman_ and put ashore.  After the two
vessels had disappeared, as has been already described, Henry at once
led his party towards the native village, knowing that Ole Thorwald
would require support, all the more that the ship had failed to fulfil
her part in the combined movement.

As the almost heartbroken father had no power to render farther aid to
his lost child, he suffered himself to be led, in a half-bewildered
state, along with the attacking party under his young friend.  He was
now brought forward to parley with the native chief.

The missionary's manner and aspect at once changed.  In the hope of
advancing the cause of his Master, he forgot, or at least restrained,
his own grief for a time.

"What would the chief say to the Christians?" he began, on being
confronted with the savage and some of his warriors who crowded round
him.

"That he wishes to have done with war," replied the man.

"That is a good wish, but why did the chief begin war?"

"Keona began it!" said the savage, angrily.  "We thought our wars with
the Christians were going to stop.  But Keona is bad.  He put the war
spirit into my people."

Mr Mason knew this to be true.

"Then," said he, "Keona deserves punishment."

"Let him die," answered the chief, and an exclamation of assent broke
from the other natives.  Keona himself, happening to be there, became
pale and looked anxious, but remained where he stood nevertheless, with
his arms crossed on his dark breast.  A bandage of native cloth was tied
round his wounded arm.  Without saying a word, he undid this, tore it
off; and allowed the blood to ooze from the re-opened wound.

It was a silent appeal to the feelings and the sense of justice of his
comrades, and created a visible impression in his favour.

"That wound was received by one who would have been a murderer!" said
Mr Mason, observing the effect of this action.

"He struck me!" cried Keona, fiercely.

"He struck you in defending his own home against a cowardly attack,"
answered the missionary.

At this point Ole Thorwald saw fit to interfere.  Seeing that the
natives were beginning to argue the case, and knowing that no good could
come from such a course, he quietly observed:--

"There will be neither wife nor child in this place if I do but hold up
my hand."

The missionary and his party did not, of course, understand this
allusion, but they understood the result, for the savages at once
dropped their tones, and the chief sued earnestly for peace.

"Chiefs and warriors," said Mr Mason, raising his hand impressively, "I
am a man of peace, and I serve the Prince of peace.  To stop this war is
what I desire most earnestly, and I desire above all things that you and
I might henceforth live in friendship, serving the same God and Saviour,
whose name is Jesus Christ.  But your ways are not like our ways.  If I
leave you now, I fear you will soon find another occasion to renew the
war, as you have often done before.  I have you in my power now.  If you
were to fight with us we could easily beat you, because we are stronger
in numbers and well armed.  Yes, I have you in my power, and, with the
blessing of my God, I will keep you in my power _for ever_!"

There was a visible fall in the countenances of the savages, who
regarded this strange announcement as their death-warrant.  Some of them
even grasped their clubs and looked fiercely at their enemies, but a
glance from Ole Thorwald quieted these restive spirits.

"Now, chiefs and warriors, I have two intentions in regard to you,"
continued Mr Mason.  "The one is that you shall take your clubs,
spears, and other weapons, and lay them in a pile on this mound, after
which I will make you march unarmed before us half way to our
settlement.  From that point you shall return to your homes.  Thus you
shall be deprived of the power of treacherously breaking that peace
which you know in your hearts you would break if you could.

"My second intention is that the whole of your tribe--men, women, and
children--shall now assemble at the foot of this mound and hear what I
have got to say to you.  The first part of this plan I shall carry out
by force, if need be.--But for the second part--_I must have your own
consent_.  I may not force you to listen if you are not willing to
hear."

At the mention of the women and children being required to assemble
along with them, the natives pricked up their ears, and, as a matter of
course, they willingly agreed to listen to all that the missionary had
to say to them.

This being settled, and the natives knowing, from former experience,
that the Christians never broke faith with them, they advanced to the
mound pointed out and threw down their arms.  A strong guard was placed
over these; the troops of the settlement were disposed in such a manner
as to prevent the possibility of their being recovered, and then the
women and children were set free.

It was a noisy and remarkable meeting that which took place between the
men and women of the tribe on this occasion; but soon surprise and
expectation began to take the place of all other feelings as the strange
intentions of the missionary were spoken of, and in a very short time
Mr Mason had a large and most attentive congregation.

Never before had the missionary secured such an opportunity!  His
eccentric method of obtaining a hearing had succeeded beyond his
expectations.  With a heart overflowing with gratitude to God he stood
up and began to preach the Gospel.

Mr Mason was not only eccentric, but able and wise.  He made the most
of his opportunity.  He gave them a _very_ long sermon that day; but he
knew that the savages were not used to sermons, and that they would not
think it long!  His text was a double one--"The soul that sinneth it
shall die," and "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be
saved."

He preached that day as a man might who speaks to his hearers for the
first and last time, and, in telling of the goodness, the mercy, and the
love of God, the bitter grief of his own heart was sensibly abated.

After his discourse was over and prayer had been offered up, the savage
warriors were silently formed into a band and marched off in front of
the Christians to the spot where Mr Mason had promised to set them
free.  They shewed no disinclination to go.  They believed in the good
faith of their captors.  The missionary had, indeed, got them into his
power that day.  Some of them he had secured _for ever_!



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

SORROW AND SYMPATHY--THE WIDOW BECOMES A PLEADER, AND HER SON ENGAGES IN
A SINGLE COMBAT.

There are times in the life of every one when the heart seems unable to
bear the load of sorrow and suffering that is laid upon it;--times when
the anguish of the soul is such that the fair world around seems
enshrouded with gloom, when the bright sun itself appears to shine in
mockery, and when the smitten heart refuses to be comforted.

Such a time was it with poor Frederick Mason when, after his return to
Sandy Cove, he stood alone, amid the blackened ruins of his former home,
gazing at the spot which he knew, from the charred remnants as well as
its position, was the site of the room which had once been occupied by
his lost child.

It was night when he stood there.  The silence was profound, for the
people of the settlement sympathised so deeply with their beloved
pastor's grief that even the ordinary hum of life appeared to be hushed,
except now and then when a low wail would break out and float away on
the night wind.  These sounds of woe were full of meaning.  They told
that there were other mourners there that night--that the recent battle
had not been fought without producing some of the usual bitter fruits of
war.  Beloved, but dead and mangled forms, lay in more than one hut in
Sandy Cove.

Motionless--hopeless--the missionary stood amid the charred beams and
ashes, until the words "Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will
deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me," descended on his soul like
sunshine upon ice.  A suppressed cry burst from his lips, and, falling
on his knees, he poured forth his soul in prayer.

While he was yet on his knees, a cry of anguish arose from one of the
huts at the foot of the hill.  It died away in a low, heart-broken wail.
Mr Mason knew its meaning well.  That cry had a special significance
to him.  It spoke reproachfully.  It said, "There is comfort for _you_,
for where life is there is hope; but here there is _death_."

Again the word of God came to his memory, "Weep with them that weep."
Starting up hastily, the missionary sprang over the black beams, and
hurried down the hill, entered the village, and spent the greater part
of the remainder of that night in comforting the bereaved and the
wounded.

The cause of the pastor's grief was not removed thereby, but the sorrow
itself was lightened by sympathy, and when he returned at a late hour to
his temporary home, hope had begun to arise within his breast.

The widow's cottage afforded him shelter.  When he entered it Harry and
his mother were seated near a small table on which supper was spread for
their expected guest.

"Tom Armstrong will recover," said the missionary, seating himself
opposite the widow and speaking in a hurried excited tone.  "His wound
is a bad one given by a war-club, but I think it is not dangerous.  I
wish I could say as much for poor Simon.  If he had been attended to
sooner he might have lived, but so much blood has been already lost that
there is now no hope.  Alas! for his little boy.  He will be an orphan
soon.  Poor Harry's wife is distracted with grief.  Her young husband's
body is so disfigured with cuts and bruises that it is dreadful to look
upon, yet she will not leave the room in which it lies, nor cease to
embrace and cling to the mangled corpse.  Poor, poor Lucy! she will have
to be comforted.  At present she must be left with God.  No human
sympathy can avail just now, but she must be comforted when she will
permit any one to speak to her.  You will go to her to-morrow, Mrs
Stuart, won't you?"

As this was Mr Mason's first meeting with the widow since the Sunday
morning when the village was attacked, his words and manner shewed that
he dreaded any allusion to his own loss.  The widow saw and understood
this, but she had consolation for him as well as for others, and would
not allow him to have his way.

"But what of Alice?" she said, earnestly.  "You do not mention her.
Henry has told me all.  Have you nothing to say about yourself--about
Alice?"

"Oh! what can I say?" cried the pastor, clasping his hands, while a deep
sob almost choked him.

"Can you not say that she is in the hands of God--of a loving _Father_?"
said Mrs Stuart, tenderly.

"Yes, yes, I can say that--I--have said that, but--but--"

"I know what you would say," interrupted the widow, "you would tell me
that she is in the hands of pirates, ruthless villains who fear neither
God nor man, and that, unless a miracle is wrought in her behalf,
nothing can save her--"

"Oh! spare me, Mary; why do you harrow my broken heart with such a
picture?" cried Mr Mason, rising and pacing the room with quick
unsteady steps, while with both hands on his head he seemed to attempt
to crush down the thoughts that burned up his brain.

"I speak thus," said the widow, with an earnestness of tone and manner
that almost startled her hearers, "because I wish to comfort you.
Alice, you tell me, is on board the _Foam_--"

"On board the _pirate schooner_!" cried Henry almost fiercely, for the
youth, although as much distressed as Mr Mason, was not so resigned as
he, and his spirit chafed at the thought of having been deceived so
terribly by the pirate.

"She is on board the _Foam_," repeated the widow in a tone so stern that
her hearers looked at her in surprise.  "And is therefore in the hands
of Gascoyne, who will not injure a hair of her head.  I tell you, Mr
Mason, that she is _perfectly safe_ in the hands of Gascoyne."

"Of the pirate Durward!" said Henry, in a deep angry voice.

"What ground have you for saying so?" asked the widow, quickly.  "You
only know him as Gascoyne the sandal-wood trader, the captain of the
_Foam_.  He has been suspected, it is true, but suspicion is not proof.
His schooner has been fired into by a war vessel, he has returned the
fire--any passionate man might be tempted to do that.  His men have
carried off some of our dear ones.  That was _their_ doing--not his.  He
knew nothing of it."

"Mother, mother," cried Henry, entreatingly, "don't stand up in that way
for a pirate; I can't bear to hear it.  Did he not himself describe the
pirate schooner's appearance in this room, and when he was attacked by
the _Talisman_ did he not shew out in his true colours, thereby proving
that he is Durward the pirate?"

The widow's face grew pale and her voice trembled as she replied, like
one who sought to convince herself rather than her hearer, "That is not
_positive_ proof, Henry.  Gascoyne may have had some good reason for
deceiving you all in this way.  His description of the pirate may have
been a false one.  We cannot tell.  You know he was anxious to prevent
Captain Montague from impressing his men."

"And would proclaiming himself a pirate be a good way of accomplishing
that end, mother?"

"Mary," said Mr Mason solemnly, as he seated himself at the table and
looked earnestly in the widow's face.  "Your knowledge of this man and
your manner of speaking about him surprises me.  I have long thought
that you were not acting wisely in permitting Gascoyne to be so
intimate; for, whatever he may in reality be, he is a suspicious
character, to say the best of him; and although _I_ know that you think
you are right in encouraging his visits, other people do not know that;
they may judge you harshly.  I do not wish to pry into secrets--but you
have sought to comfort me by bidding me have perfect confidence in this
man.  I _must_ ask what knowledge you have of him.  How far are you
aware of his character and employment?  How do you know that he is so
trustworthy?"

An expression of deep grief rested on the widow's countenance as she
replied in a sad voice--"I _know_ that you may trust Gascoyne with your
child.  He is my oldest friend.  I have known him since we were
children.  He saved my father's life long, long ago, and helped to
support my mother in her last years.  Would you have me to forget all
this because men say that he is a pirate?"

"Why, mother," cried Henry, "if you know so much about him you _must_
know that, whatever he was in time past, he is the pirate Durward now."

"I do _not_ know that he is the pirate Durward!" said the widow in a
voice and with a look so decided that Henry was silenced and sorely
perplexed--yet much relieved, for he knew that his mother would rather
die than tell a deliberate falsehood.

The missionary was also comforted, for although his judgment told him
that the grounds of hope thus held out to him were very insufficient, he
was impressed by the thoroughly confident tone of the widow and felt
relieved in spite of himself.

Soon after this conversation was concluded the household retired to
rest.

Next morning Henry was awakened out of a deep sleep by the sound of
subdued voices in the room underneath his own.  At first he paid no
attention to these, supposing that, as it was broad daylight, some of
their native servants were moving about.

But presently the sound of his mother's voice induced him to listen more
attentively.  Then a voice replied, so low that he could with difficulty
hear it at all.  Its strength increased, however, and at last it broke
forth in deep bass tones.

Henry sprang up and threw on his clothes.  As he was thus engaged the
front door of the house opened; and the speakers went out.  A few
seconds sufficed for the youth to finish dressing; then, seizing a
pistol, he hurried out of the house.  Looking quickly round he just
caught sight of the skirts of a woman's dress as they disappeared
through the doorway of a hut which had been formerly inhabited by a poor
native who had subsisted on the widow's bounty until he died.  The door
was shut immediately after.

Going swiftly but cautiously round by a back way, Henry approached the
hut.  Strange and conflicting feelings filled his breast.  A blush of
deep shame and self-abhorrence mantled on his cheek when it flashed
across him that he was about to play the spy on his own mother.  But
there was no mistaking Gascoyne's voice.

How the supposed pirate had got there, and wherefore he was there, were
matters that he did not think of or care about at that moment.  There he
was, so the young man resolved to secure him and hand him over to
justices.

Henry was too honourable to listen secretly to a conversation, whatever
it might be, that was not intended for his ears.  He resolved merely to
peep in at one of the many chinks in the log hut for one moment to
satisfy himself that Gascoyne really was there, and to observe his
position.  But as the latter now thought himself beyond the hearing of
any one, he spoke in unguarded tones, and Henry heard a few words in
spite of himself.

Looking through a chink in the wall at the end of the hut, he beheld the
stalwart form of the sandalwood trader standing on the hearth of the
hut, which was almost unfurnished--a stool, a bench, an old chest, a
table, and a chair, being all that it contained.  His mother was seated
at the table with her hands clasped before her, looking up at her
companion.

"Oh! why run so great a risk as this?" said she, earnestly.

"I was born to run risks, I believe," replied Gascoyne, in a sad low
voice.  "It matters not.  My being on the island is the result of
Manton's villainy--my being here is for poor Henry's sake and your own,
as well as for the sake of Alice the missionary's child.  You have been
upright, Mary, and kind, and true as steel ever since I knew you.  But
for that I should have been lost long ago--"
