  | z        | z-one, z-est                  |
  | zh, z    | a-z'-ure, sei-z'-ure          |
  +----------+-------------------------------+


                _III. Aspirates._

  +--------------+-------------------------+
  |  f           | f-i-fe, o-ff            |
  |  h           | h-at, h-ome             |
  |  k           | k-ite, k-ill            |
  |  p           | p-i-pe, to-p            |
  |  s           | s-un, s-ame             |
  |  t           | t-en-t, t-ar-t          |
  |  ch          | ch-ur-ch, ch-ild        |
  |  sh          | sh-all, wi-sh           |
  |  th          | th-in, th-ree           |
  |  wh          | wh-ere, wh-y            |
  +--------------+-------------------------+

NOTE.--The foregoing forty-four sounds are those most employed in the
English language. Some of these sounds are represented by other
letters, as shown in the following:


                     #IV.--Table of Equivalents.#

                 [Dictionary Work--Metcalf & DeGarmo.]

CHAR.    EQUIV.
[=e] = [=i]
[~e] = [~i] = u
[=a] = [e=]
   a = e
   o = [a:] (_broad a_)
[o:] = [=oo] = [u:]
[)i] = [)y]
[)u] = [.o]

[)o] = [a.]
[o.] = [)oo] = [u.]
[=i] = [=y]
  oi = oy
  ou = ow
[=u] = ew

CHAR.     EQUIV.
   j = [.g] (soft)
   g = [=g] (hard)
   z = [[s.]=]
   k = [-c] = [-c]h
   f = ph
   s = c (_cedilla c_)
  sh = ch
[n=] = ng
   x = ks
[x=] = gz

COGNATE sounds are such as are produced by the same organs of speech
in a similar position. The cognates are in pairs, as follows:
_Vowels_: [=a] [)e], [=e] [)i], a [)a], ae [.a], [a:] [)o], u [)u],
[=o][=o] [)oo]; _consonants_: g' k, b p, d t, j ch, th th, v f, z s.


                           #[Second Month.]#

                               LETTERS.

A LETTER is a mark or character used to represent a sound,--usually an
elementary sound.

An ALPHABET is an orderly arrangement of all the letters of a
language.

The NUMBER OF LETTERS in the different alphabets vary, as follows:
English 26, Arabic 28, French 25, German 26, Greek 24, Hebrew 22,
Italian 21, Russian 33, Spanish 27, Sanskrit 49. The Chinese have no
alphabet, but about 20,000 syllabic characters.

The POWER OF A LETTER is the elementary sound for which it stands.

LETTERS AS TO FORM are either script or print.

There are many different STYLES OF LETTERS; as, Roman, Italic, Old
English, and Script.

As to SIZE letters are both capital and lower case.


                           #[Third Month.]#

                                VOWELS.

A VOWEL sound is a free and uninterrupted sound of the voice. The
vowel sounds are formed by the voice modified, but not interrupted, by
the various positions of the tongue and lips.

A CONSONANT sound is an articulate sound made by the obstructed voice,
and which in utterance is usually combined with a vowel sound.

There is no absolute division between vowels and consonants. Certain
vowels are so open as to be only vowels, certain consonants are so
close as to be only consonants; but there are yet others which have
the value now of vowels and now of consonants; as, _i_, _u_, _w_, and
_y_.

"_Y_ as a vowel is a substitute for _i_, and _i_ is a consonant as a
substitute for _y_. _W_ and _y_ are vowels: (1) When they end words or
syllables, (2) when they are not followed by a vowel in the same
syllable, (3) when they are followed by a silent vowel in the same
syllable. _W_ and _y_ are consonants when they begin words or
syllables and are immediately followed by a vowel. _I_ is a consonant
when it represents the consonant _y_, as in _alien_. _U_ is a
consonant when it represents the consonant _w_, as in _quick_,
_language_."--_Irish's Orthography._

A DIPHTHONG is produced by running together two vowel sounds in the
same syllable.

A diphthong is PROPER if both the vowels are sounded; as _o_ and _i_
in _boil_.

An IMPROPER DIPHTHONG or DIGRAPH is merely a collection of two vowels
in the same syllable, of which only one is sounded; as in _rain_,
_teach_.

The diphthongs in the following words are all that are in common use,
viz.: t_oi_l, t_oy_, s_ou_nd, c_ow_, p_ea_l, _oi_l, _au_dible,
_aw_ning, s_ay_, s_ei_ne, p_eo_ple, f_eu_d, ob_ey_, esch_ew_,
bel_ie_ve, l_oa_n, h_oe_, h_ue_, j_ui_ce. Of these _oi_, _oy_, _ou_,
and _ow_ are the only _proper_ diphthongs.

A TRIPHTHONG is produced by running together three vowel sounds in the
same syllable.

A triphthong is PROPER if all three of the vowels are sounded. (But
there are no proper triphthongs that I know of.)

A triphthong is IMPROPER or is called a TRIGRAPH if one or two of the
three vowels is silent; as in ad_ieu_, b_eau_ty.


                           #[Fourth Month.]#

                              CONSONANTS.

CONSONANTS are divided on three different bases; as follows:

I. MUTES and SEMIVOWELS.

The mutes represent an explosive sound, and are so called because the
mouth organs are closed just before the sound is uttered and the voice
is momentarily _mute_.

The four subvocals _b_, _d_, _j_, _g_, and their cognates, _p_, _t_,
_ch_, and _k_, are generally classed as mutes. Pronounce them and see
if they do not represent _explosive_ sounds.

All other consonants are _semivowels_, and are pronounced with a
_continuous_ sound. The sound may be continued so long as the breath
lasts; but in the case of mutes the sound must stop with the explosive
utterance.

II. The SUBVOCALS and ASPIRATES are shown in the vertical columns of
the table below. The subvocals are sometimes called _voice_ consonants
and the aspirates _breath_ consonants. These are fit terms, for they
indicate the basis of classification.

III. LABIALS, LINGUA-DENTALS, and PALATALS constitute a classification
of the consonants with respect to the place of formation. Bead the
table from left to right. The _lips_ have most to do with making the
labial sounds; the lingua-dentals are formed at the point of the
_tongue_ in contact with the _teeth_, the palatals between the tongue
and hard and soft _palate_.


                 #Consonant Table.#

          #Subvocals.#    #Aspirates.#
          (Voice.)              (Breath.)
Labials. {   b                        p
(Lips.)  {   v                        f
         {   w                        wh
         {   m

Lingua-  {   d                        t
Dentals. {   z                        s
(Point of{   th (sonant) (non-sonant) th
tongue.) {   l
         {   n
         {   r

Palatals.{   zh                       sh
(Between {   j                        ch
tongue   {   g                        k
and      {   y
palate.) {   h
         {   ng




                             EIGHTH YEAR.

                           #[First Month.]#

                              SYLLABLES.

SYLLABLE literally means _taken together_.

A SPOKEN SYLLABLE is an elementary sound, or a combination of
elementary sounds, uttered _together_, or with a single impulse of the
voice. It constitutes a word or a part of a word.

A WRITTEN or printed syllable is a part of a word separated from the
rest, and capable of pronunciation by a single impulse of the voice.

As to where a word shall be divided in making it into syllables
depends upon the PURPOSE OF SYLLABICATION. When the purpose is to show
the derivation the division is made with reference to the component
parts (roots, prefixes, and suffixes); but if the purpose is to
indicate correct pronunciation, the result may be very different. For
illustration, the following words are divided, first, to show
derivation: abs-tract, bene-vol-ent, pre-de-cess-or, e-duc-ate,
phon-o-typ-y, pro-gress, e-lig-ible; and, second, to indicate correct
pronunciation: ab-stract, be-nev-o-lent, pred-e-ces-sor, ed-u-cate,
pho-not-y-py, prog-ress, el-i-gi-ble.

While in the illustrations here given the syllables formed for one
purpose are very different from those formed for the other, yet in the
majority of words the resulting syllables are the same whether divided
for one purpose or for the other.

In the United States the prevailing purpose of syllabication is to
indicate pronunciation.

The ULTIMATE syllable of a word is the last (_ultimus_ = last); the
PENULTIMATE is next to the last (_pen_ = almost); the ANTEPENULTIMATE
is the third from the last (literally, _before almost_ the _last_);
the PREANTEPENULTIMATE is the fourth from the last (literally,
_before_ the one that is _before_ the one _almost last_).


                           #[Second Month.]#

                                ACCENT.

ACCENT is stress of voice on a particular syllable in pronouncing a
word.

In long words two, and sometimes three, syllables are accented. But
one syllable is always accented more strongly than the others are. The
stronger accent is called the PRIMARY accent, the weaker is called the
SECONDARY. Thus, in _am' mu ni' tion_ the primary accent falls on the
third syllable and the secondary on the first.

The "PRINCIPLES" which govern the placing of accent are complicated.
The International Dictionary says there are no principles by which to
determine the accent in English. Another high authority says: "All
attempts to assign rules for the place of the accent in English only
serve to render the subject hopelessly intricate and confounded."

There are, however, certain _tendencies_ which mature pupils might
profitably consider, but the limited scope of this book will not
permit me to attempt to set them forth.

In the words of the following list the accent changes with a change of
meaning. When nouns or adjectives these words are accented on the
first syllable; when verbs, on the second:

abstract
accent
compound
conflict
concert
contract
contrast
converse
convict
desert
escort
export
ferment
forecast
frequent
incense
insult
permit
prefix
present
produce
project
record
survey


                           #[Third Month.]#

                                WORDS.

A WORD is a sign of an idea. It may be either spoken or written.

A PRIMITIVE, OR ROOT, word is one not derived from any other word of
the language; as, _fix_, _strike_, _man_.

A DERIVATIVE is a word formed from a primitive by changing it
internally, or by adding a prefix or suffix; as, _men_, _suffix_,
_strikers_.

A SIMPLE WORD is a single word. It may be either primitive or
derivative.

A COMPOUND WORD is a combination of two or more simple words; as,
buck-saw, well-behaved, school-room.

A word of one syllable is a _monosyllable_ (mono = one); of two
syllables, a _dissyllable_ (dis = two); of three syllables, a
_trisyllable_ (tri = three); of three or more syllables, a
_polysyllable_ (poly = many).

The ROOT of a word is its fundamental or elementary part which carries
the primitive notion or significance with it, without prefix or
suffix; as, _ge_ (earth), _graph_ (write), _vol_ (wish).

