travel, but they believed that it was all down-hill work now; and as
they had still nearly two months of summer before them, they doubted not
being able to accomplish the voyage in good time.

On they floated down-stream, feasting their eyes as they went--for the
scenery of the Elk valley is of a most picturesque and pleasing
character; and the broad bosom of the stream itself, studded with wooded
islands, looked to our travellers more like a continuation of lakes than
a running river.  Now they glided along without using an oar, borne
onward by the current; then they would take a spell at the paddles,
while the beautiful Canadian boat-song could be heard as it came from
the tiny craft, and the appropriate chorus "Row, brothers, row!" echoed
from the adjacent shores.  No part of their journey was more pleasant
than while descending the romantic Elk.

They found plenty of fresh provisions, both in the stream itself and on
its banks.  They caught salmon in the water, and the silver-coloured
hyodon, known among the voyageurs by the name of "Dore."  They shot both
ducks and geese, and roast-duck or goose had become an everyday dinner
with them.  Of the geese there were several species.  There were
"snow-geese," so called from their beautiful white plumage; and
"laughing geese," that derive their name from the circumstance that
their call resembles the laugh of a man.  The Indians decoy these by
striking their open hand repeatedly over the mouth while uttering the
syllable "wah."  They also saw the "Brent goose," a well-known species,
and the "Canada goose," which is the _wild goose par excellence_.
Another species resembling the latter, called the "barnacle goose," was
seen by our travellers.  Besides these, Lucien informed them that there
were several other smaller kinds that inhabit the northern countries of
America.  These valuable birds are objects of great interest to the
people of the fur countries for months in the year.  Whole tribes of
Indians look to them as a means of support.

With regard to ducks, there was one species which our travellers had not
yet met with, and for which they were every day upon the look-out.  This
was the far-famed "canvass-back," so justly celebrated among the
epicures of America.  None of them had ever eaten of it, as it is not
known in Louisiana, but only upon the Atlantic coast of the United
States.  Norman, however, had heard of its existence in the Rocky
Mountains--where it is said to breed--as well as in other parts of the
fur countries, and they were in hopes that they might fall in with it
upon the waters of the Athabasca.  Lucien was, of course, well
acquainted with its "biography," and could have recognised one at sight;
and as they glided along he volunteered to give his companions some
information, not only about this particular species, but about the whole
genus of these interesting birds.

"The canvass-back," began he, "is perhaps the most celebrated and
highly-prized of all the ducks, on account of the exquisite flavour of
its flesh--which is thought by some epicures to be superior to that of
all other birds.  It is not a large duck--rarely weighing over three
pounds--and its plumage is far from equalling in beauty that of many
other species.  It has a red or chestnut-coloured head, a shining black
breast, while the greater part of its body is of a greyish colour; but
upon close examination this grey is found to be produced by a whitish
ground minutely mottled with zig-zag black lines.  I believe it is this
mottling, combined with the colour, which somewhat resembles the
appearance and texture of ship's canvass, that has given the bird its
trivial name; but there is some obscurity about the origin of this.  In
colour, however, it so nearly resembles the `pochard,' or `red-head' of
Europe, and its near congener the red-head (_Anas ferina_) of America,
that at a distance it is difficult to distinguish them from each other.
The last-mentioned species is always found associated with the
canvass-backs, and are even sold for the latter in the markets of New
York and Philadelphia.  A naturalist, however, can easily distinguish
them by their bills and eyes.  The canvass-back has red eyes, with a
greenish black bill, nearly straight; while the eyes of the red-head are
of an orange yellow, its bill bluish and concave along the upper ridge.

"The canvass-back is known in natural history as _Anas valisneria_, and
this specific name is given to it because it feeds upon the roots of an
aquatic plant, a species of `tape-grass,' or `eel-grass;' but
botanically called `_Valisneria_,' after the Italian botanist, Antonio
Valisneri.  This grass grows in slow-flowing streams, and also on shoals
by the seaside--where the water, from the influx of rivers, is only
brackish.  The water where it grows is usually three to five feet in
depth, and the plant itself rises above the surface to the height of two
feet or more, with grass-like leaves of a deep green colour.  Its roots
are white and succulent, and bear some resemblance to celery--hence the
plant is known among the duck-hunters as `wild celery.'  It is upon
these roots the canvass-back almost exclusively feeds, and they give to
the flesh of these birds its peculiar and pleasant flavour.  Wherever
the valisneria grows in quantity, as in the Chesapeake Bay and some
rivers, like the Hudson, there the canvass-backs resort, and are rarely
seen elsewhere.  They do not eat the leaves but only the white soft
roots, which they dive for and pluck up with great dexterity.  The
leaves when stripped of the root are suffered to float off upon the
surface of the water; and where the ducks have been feeding, large
quantities of them, under the name of `grass wrack,' are thrown by the
wind and tide upon the adjacent shores.

"Shooting the canvass-backs is a source of profit to hundreds of gunners
who live around the Chesapeake Bay, as these birds command a high price
in the markets of the American cities.  Disputes have arisen between the
fowlers of different States around the Bay about the right of shooting
upon it; and vessels full of armed men--ready to make war upon one
another--have gone out on this account.  But the government of these
States succeeded in settling the matter peacefully, and to the
satisfaction of all parties."

The canoe at this moment shot round a bend, and a long smooth expanse of
the river appeared before the eyes of our voyageurs.  They could see
that upon one side another stream ran in, with a very sluggish current;
and around the mouth of this, and for a good stretch below it, there
appeared a green sedge-like water-grass, or rushes.  Near the border of
this sedge, and in a part of it that was thin, a flock of wild fowl was
diving and feeding.  They were small, and evidently ducks; but the
distance was yet too great for the boys to make out to what species they
belonged.  A single large swan--a trumpeter--was upon the water, between
the shore and the ducks, and was gradually making towards the latter.
Francois immediately loaded one of his barrels with swan, or rather
"buck" shot, and Basil looked to his rifle.  The ducks were not thought
of--the trumpeter was to be the game.  Lucien took out his telescope,
and commenced observing the flock.  They had not intended to use any
precaution in approaching the birds, as they were not extremely anxious
about getting a shot, and were permitting the canoe to glide gently
towards them.  An exclamation from Lucien, however, caused them to
change their tactics.  He directed them suddenly to "hold water" and
stop the canoe, at the same time telling them that the birds ahead were
the very sort about which they had been conversing--the "canvass-backs."
He had no doubt of it, judging from their colour, size, and peculiar
movements.

The announcement produced a new excitement.  All four were desirous not
only of shooting, but of _eating_, a canvass-back; and arrangements were
set about to effect the former.  It was known to all that the
canvass-backs are among the shyest of water-fowl, so much so that it is
difficult to approach them unless under cover.  While feeding, it is
said, they keep sentinels on the look-out.  Whether this be true or not,
it is certain that they never all dive together, some always remaining
above water, and apparently watching while the others are under.  A plan
to get near them was necessary, and one was suggested by Norman, which
was to tie bushes around the sides of the canoe, so as to hide both the
vessel and those in it.  This plan was at once adopted--the canoe was
paddled up to the bank--thick bushes were cut, and tied along the
gunwale; and then our voyageurs climbed in, and laying themselves as low
as possible, commenced paddling gently downward in the direction of the
ducks.  The rifles were laid aside, as they could be of little service
with such game.  Francois' double-barrel was the arm upon which
dependence was now placed; and Francois himself leaned forward in the
bow in order to be ready, while the others attended to the guidance of
the vessel.  The buck-shot had been drawn out, and a smaller kind
substituted.  The swan was no longer cared for or even thought of.

In about a quarter of an hour's time, the canoe, gliding silently along
the edge of the sedge--which was the wild celery (_Valisneria
spiralis_)--came near the place where the ducks were; and the boys,
peeping through the leafy screen, could now see the birds plainly.  They
saw that they were not all canvass-backs, but that three distinct kinds
of ducks were feeding together.  One sort was the canvass-backs
themselves, and a second kind very much resembled them, except that they
were a size smaller.  These were the "red-heads" or "pochards."  The
third species was different from either.  They had also heads of a
reddish colour, but of a brighter red, and marked by a white band that
ran from the root of the bill over the crown.  This mark enabled Lucien
at once to tell the species.  They were widgeons (_Anas Americana_); but
the most singular thing that was now observed by our voyageurs was the
terms upon which these three kinds of birds lived with each other.  It
appeared that the widgeon obtained its food by a regular system of
robbery and plunder perpetrated upon the community of the canvass-backs.
The latter, as Lucien had said, feeds upon the roots of the valisneria;
but for these it is obliged to dive to the depth of four or five feet,
and also to spend some time at the bottom while plucking them up.  Now
the widgeon is as fond of the "celery" as the canvass-back, but the
former is not a diver--in fact, never goes under water except when
washing itself or in play, and it has therefore no means of procuring
the desired roots.  Mark, then, the plan that it takes to effect this
end.  Seated as near as is safe to the canvass-back, it waits until the
latter makes his _somersault_ and goes down.  It (the widgeon) then
darts forward so as to be sufficiently close, and, pausing again, scans
the surface with eager eye.  It can tell where the other is at work, as
the blades of the plant at which it is tugging are seen to move above
the water.  These at length disappear, pulled down as the plant is
dragged from its root, and almost at the same instant the canvass-back
comes up holding the root between his mandibles.  But the widgeon is
ready for him.  He has calculated the exact spot where the other will
rise; and, before the latter can open his eyes or get them clear of the
water, the widgeon darts forward, snatches the luscious morsel from his
bill, and makes off with it.  Conflicts sometimes ensue; but the
widgeon, knowing himself to be the lesser and weaker bird, never stands
to give battle, but secures his prize through his superior agility.  On
the other hand, the canvass-back rarely attempts to follow him, as he
knows that the other is swifter upon the water than he.  He only looks
after his lost root with an air of chagrin, and then, reflecting that
there is "plenty more where it came from," kicks up its heels, and once
more plunges to the bottom.

The red-head rarely interferes with either, as he is contented to feed
upon the leaves and stalks, at all times floating in plenty upon the
surface.

As the canoe glided near, those on board watched these curious
manoeuvres of the birds with feelings of interest.  They saw, moreover,
that the "trumpeter" had arrived among them, and the ducks seemed to
take no notice of him.  Lucien was struck with something unusual in the
appearance of the swan.  Its plumage seemed ruffled and on end, and it
glided along in a stiff and unnatural manner.  It moved its neck neither
to one side nor the other, but held its head bent forward, until its
bill almost touched the water, in the attitude that these birds adopt
when feeding upon something near the surface.  Lucien said nothing to
his companions, as they were all silent, lest they might frighten the
ducks; but Basil and Norman had also remarked the strange look and
conduct of the trumpeter.  Francois' eyes were bent only upon the ducks,
and he did not heed the other.

As they came closer, first Lucien, and then Basil and Norman, saw
something else that puzzled them.  Whenever the swan approached any of
the ducks, these were observed to disappear under the water.  At first,
the boys thought that they merely dived to get out of his way, but it
was not exactly in the same manner as the others were diving for the
roots.  Moreover, none of those that went down in the neighbourhood of
the swan were seen to come up again!

There was something very odd in all this, and the three boys, thinking
so at the same time, were about to communicate their thoughts to one
another, when the double crack of Francois' gun drove the thing, for a
moment, out of their heads; and they all looked over the bushes to see
how many canvass-backs had been killed.  Several were seen dead or
fluttering along the surface; but no one counted them, for a strange,
and even terrible, object now presented itself to the astonished senses
of all.  If the conduct of the swan had been odd before, it was now
doubly so.  Instead of flying off after the shot, as all expected it
would do, it was now seen to dance and plunge about on the water,
uttering loud screams, that resembled the human voice far more than any
other sounds!  Then it rose as if pitched into the air, and fell on its
back some distance off; while in its place was seen a dark, round object
moving through the water, as if making for the bank, and uttering, as it
went, the same hideous human-like screams!

This dark object was no other than the poll of a human being; and the
river shallowing towards the bank, it rose higher and higher above the
water, until the boys could distinguish the glistening neck and naked
shoulders of a red and brawny Indian!  All was now explained.  The
Indian had been duck-hunting, and had used the stuffed skin of the swan
as his disguise; and hence the puzzling motions of the bird.  He had not
noticed the canoe--concealed as it was--until the loud crack of
Francois' gun had startled him from his work.  This, and the heads and
white faces of the boys peeping over the bushes, had frightened him,
even more than he had them.  Perhaps they were the first white faces he
had ever seen.  But, whether or not, sadly frightened he was; for, on
reaching the bank, he did not stop, but ran off into the woods, howling
and yelling as if Old Nick had been after him: and no doubt he believed
that such was the case.

The travellers picked up the swan-skin out of curiosity; and, in
addition to the ducks which Francois had killed, they found nearly a
score of these birds, which the Indian had dropped in his fright, and
that had afterwards risen to the surface.  These were strung together,
and all had their necks broken.

After getting them aboard, the canoe was cleared of the bushes; and the
paddles being once more called into service, the little craft shot
down-stream like an arrow.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

THE DUCKS OF AMERICA.

Lucien now continued his "monograph" of the American ducks.

"There are," said he, "more than two dozen species of ducks on the
waters of North America.  These the systematists have divided into no
less than _eighteen genera_!  Why it would be more easy to learn all
that ever was known about all the ducks in creation, than to remember
the eighteen generic names which these gentlemen have invented and put
forward.  Moreover, the habits of any two species of these ducks are
more similar than those of any two kinds of dogs.  Why then, I should
ask--why this complication?  It is true that the ducks do not resemble
each other in every thing.  Some species are fonder of water than
others.  Some feed entirely upon vegetable substances; others upon small
fish, insects, crustacea, etcetera.  Some live entirely in the sea;
others make their home in the freshwater lakes and rivers, while many
species dwell indifferently, either in salt or fresh waters.  Some love
the open wave; others the sedgy marsh; while one or two species roost
upon trees, and build their nests in the hollow trunks.  Notwithstanding
all this, there is such a similarity in the appearance and habits of the
different species, that I think the systematists have improved but
little, if anything, upon the simple arrangement of the true naturalist
Wilson, who--poor Scotch _emigre_ as he was, with an empty purse and a
loaded gun--has collected more original information about the birds of
America than all that have followed him.  He described the ducks of
America under the single genus _Anas_; and, in my opinion, described
them in a more intelligent and intelligible manner than any one has done
since his time--not even excepting another great and true naturalist,
whose career has been longer, more successful, and happier; and whose
fame, in consequence of his better fortune, has become, perhaps, higher
and more extended.

"The water-fowl of America," continued Lucien--"I mean the swans, geese,
and ducks, are of great importance in the fur countries where we are now
travelling.  At certain seasons of the year, in many parts, they furnish
almost the only article of food that can be procured.  They are all
migratory--that is, when the lakes and rivers of these regions become
frozen over in the winter they all migrate southward, but return again
to breed and spend the summer.  They do this, perhaps, because these
wild territories afford them a better security during the season of
incubation, and afterwards of moulting.  It is not very certain,
however, that this is the reason, and for my part I am inclined to think
not, for there are also wild, uninhabited territories enough in southern
latitudes, and yet they forsake these and migrate north in the spring.
`Their arrival in the fur countries,' writes a distinguished naturalist,
`marks the commencement of spring, and diffuses as much joy among the
wandering hunters of the Arctic regions, as the harvest or vintage
excites in more genial climes.'  Both by the Indians and hunters in the
employ of the Hudson's Bay Company swans, geese, and ducks, are
