feet, with his mouth full of fried fish.

"You! you and Bennington's son are going to divide it between you!"

"Its no such thing," protested Stumpy. "I wish we were, though."

"Do you say you are not?"

"I do say so! Leopold thinks the money belongs to the heirs of the man
who buried it on the beach; and he is going to try to find them."

"That alters the case," replied the squire, more mildly. "I hope the
man's heirs will get the money for it belongs to them."

"I hope everybody will get what belongs to him," said Stumpy; but the
remark was too indefinite to be appreciated by his amiable grandfather.

"You have no right to a dollar of this money, Stumpy; and if you touch
it, I want you to understand that it will be stealing."

"I have nothing to do with the money. Le Bennington found it, and he
knows what to do with it. If he chooses to give me some of it, I will
take it fast enough."

Squire Moses and Ethan were both satisfied, so far as Stumpy was
concerned; and they were rejoiced to know that Leopold intended to keep
the gold until he could find the heirs of the man who had committed it
to the sand.

"Susan," said Squire Moses, as he turned to depart, "I told you that you
might stay in this house till the first of August; and so you may; but I
am going to foreclose the mortgage right off, so that I can get legal
possession sooner. It won't make any difference to you."

The old miser did not wait to hear any reply to this announcement; but
the tears dropped from the widow's eyes as the door closed upon the hard
old man. The squire and Ethan walked down to the main street, talking
with every one they met about the treasure, protesting that it ought to
be kept for the heirs of the rightful owner, and manufacturing public
sentiment which should compel the landlord of the Sea Cliff House and
his son to pursue this course. It is true that the people of Rockhaven
were very much surprised to hear Squire Moses and his son preaching such
a doctrine; but they were willing to accept it, for it seemed to be just
and right that the heirs should have what plainly belonged to them.

Unknown to them, and not yet with the entire approbation of his father,
Leopold was their ally in directing public sentiment. After dinner, the
parlor of the Sea Cliff House was filled by the New Yorkers and others
who desired to hear the narrative of the finding of the hidden treasure.
Leopold, in his best clothes, washed, dressed, and combed for a great
occasion, appeared at the door of the parlor with Harvey Barth's diary
in his hand. Stumpy, who had come over to see him in regard to the
exciting topic, followed him, and took a back seat in one corner of the
room. The money-digger was not a little abashed when he saw so many
pairs of eyes directed towards him; but he commenced his story, and soon
recovered his self-possession. He began with the wreck of the Waldo, for
the New Yorkers knew little or nothing of this exciting event. He then
came to the appearance of Harvey Barth at the Cliff House, and detailed
all the incidents relating to the diary, the visit of Miss Sarah
Liverage, and the finding of the journal when the chimney was pulled
down.

Leopold stated he had read only those portions of the diary which
related to the treasure; and then he read the description from the book
of the burying of the gold in the thunder and lightning. He had dug the
beach all over, under the instruction of the nurse; and he had been
unable to find the bag even after he read the journal, until he went
down to High Rock in a thunder shower. Then, for the first time, he
could distinguish Coffin Rock. Thus guided, he had found the treasure.

Leopold then gave his views in regard to the ownership of the gold, and
declared that he intended to keep the money in his uncle's safe till he
had seen the owners of the Waldo, and they had sent to Havana. This
statement to the astonishment and confusion of the money-digger, was
followed by hearty applause, in which even the ladies joined. Public
sentiment in the parlor earnestly indorsed his views.

"Leopold reads very well," said Mr. Hamilton; "and as we desire to rest
for an hour or two, I suggest that he read the diary to us from the time
the Waldo left Havana."

This suggestion was warmly applauded, and verbally seconded by half a
dozen of the party. Leopold consented under this pressure, and read for
a full hour, till he came to the afternoon of the day on which the brig
was lost; in a word, till he came to what Harvey Barth had just written
when Wallbridge came to the galley to light his pipe, as recorded in the
first chapter of this story. The steward did not believe the passenger's
name was Wallbridge, as written on the Waldo's papers. He did not see
what he had changed his name for, and hoped he hadn't done anything
wrong.

"'He gave his name as J. Wallbridge,' Leopold read from the diary; 'but
that was not the name I found on the paper in his state-room, when I
made up his bed on the day we sailed from Havana, though the initials
were the same. Then he lent me his Bible to read one day, and this other
name was written on it in forty places, wherever there was any blank
paper. I wanted to borrow the Bible again, but he would not lend it to
me; and I thought he remembered about his name being written in it so
many times. I saw the same name stamped on a white shirt of his, which
he hung up to air on deck to-day. The name was not J. Wallbridge either;
it was Joel Wormbury.'"

"My father!" shouted Stumpy, springing to his feet.




CHAPTER XVI.

GOLD AND BILLS.


Stumpy was an excited young man. He had come into the parlor on the
invitation of Leopold, and had very modestly coiled himself away in the
most obscure corner of the room. He was very much interested in the
reading of Harvey Barth's diary, and especially in regard to the
mysterious passenger. When Leopold read the name of "Joel Wormbury," he
could no longer contain himself. He leaped from his corner, and shouted
as though he had been hailing the Rosabel half a mile off.

"My father!" repeated he; and all eyes were fixed upon him.

Stumpy was excited, not so much, we must do him the justice to say,
because there was money involved in the fact, as because the name and
memory of his father were dear to him.

"That man was Stumpy's father as true as the world!" said Mr.
Bennington.

"It is a very remarkable affair," added Mr. Hamilton. "Such things don't
often happen."

"But I haven't the slightest doubt that this Wallbridge was Joel
Wormbury," replied the landlord.

"I'm sure of it," exclaimed Stumpy. "I know all about that Bible; I've
seen it twenty times; and mother always used to put it into father's
chest when he was going away fishing."

"I don't know about that, Stumpy," interposed Mr. Bennington, with a
smile of incredulity; "I'm afraid it won't hold water."

"What's the reason it won't?" demanded Stumpy, who was entirely
satisfied in regard to the identity of the sacred volume. "I used to
carry it to Sunday school sometimes; and I've seen my father's name
written in forty places in it, wherever there was a page or part of a
page not printed on, just as Harvey Barth says in his diary. I don't
believe there is any mistake about that."

"But the writer of this journal appears to have been considerably
exercised about the passenger's change of name," said Mr. Hamilton,
before the landlord had an opportunity to explain why he doubted the
truth of the statement in regard to the Bible. "Harvey Barth hoped Mr.
Wallbridge had not done anything wrong."

"He hadn't done anything wrong," protested Stumpy, warmly.

"Why should he change his name, then?" asked the ex-congressman. "For
the fact that he did so appears to be well established."

"There was a reason for it," replied the landlord, "though as Stumpy
says, Joel Wormbury had done nothing wrong. Joel was attacked by a man
in liquor, and in self-defence he struck the assailant on the head with
a bottle, and supposed that he had killed him. He left Rockhaven in a
great hurry, in order to escape the consequences. He did not even go to
his house before he left town, afraid, perhaps, of finding a constable
there waiting for him. He went off in such a hurry, that I don't believe
he thought to take his Bible with him."

The landlord bestowed a smiling glance upon Stumpy, satisfied that he
had as completely demolished the Bible argument as though he had been a
practised theologian.

"If my mother was only here, she could tell you all about that," said
Stumpy.

"Do you think he went home for the Bible before he left?" asked Mr.
Bennington.

"I know he didn't."

"Where did he get the Bible, then?" asked the landlord.

"I'll tell you; and I won't say a word that I can't prove," replied
Stumpy, warmly.

"You are not among enemies, or those who are at all inclined to doubt
your word, young man," added Mr. Hamilton.

"I'll tell you about it, then; but I wish my mother was here, with the
letters my father wrote to her."

"We are willing to believe all you say, Stumpy," said the landlord.

"You thought that what I said would not hold water, just now."

"But I explained why I thought so."

"And the doubt was certainly a reasonable one," added the merchant; "now
we only wait for you to remove it."

"I will do that and I can prove all I say by my father's last letter to
my mother, which is post-marked at Gloucester, Mass., in which he told
all about the fight, and gave the reasons why he cleared out."

In answer to a question asked by one of the ladies, Stumpy related more
fully the particulars of Joel Wormbury's departure from Rockhaven.

"About six months before my father went off for the last time, he
returned to Gloucester from a fishing trip to the Georges," continued
Stumpy. "He expected to go again in a few weeks; so he left his chest in
Gloucester. His Bible was in that chest; but, as he found work coopering
at home, he did not go again till he left after the fight. In his letter
to my mother, he said he had got his chest, and that he had the Bible
all right. He wrote, too, that he meant to read it more than he had ever
done before, and not use it to scribble in. That was the last letter we
ever got from father. We heard that he had gone out to attend to the
trawls, and was lost in a fog, not being able to find his way back to
the vessel. Of course we hadn't any doubt that he was dead, after we
got a letter from the captain of the schooner in which my father sailed.
That's all I know about it."

"But how came he in Havana?" asked Mr. Hamilton.

"That's more than I know, sir," answered Stumpy.

"Harvey Barth could not have known anything about Joel Wormbury," added
Leopold; "and he wrote his diary, it appears on the very day the Waldo
was lost."

"There can be no doubt that Wallbridge and Joel Wormbury were one and
the same person," said Mr. Hamilton. "The name which Harvey Barth found
on the paper, the initials, on his valise, the name on the shirt, and
written forty times in the Bible, fully establish the fact in my mind."

"And in mine, too," said Leopold. "Stumpy, the gold is yours, and I will
give it to you whenever you are ready to take it."

"This is a go!" exclaimed Stumpy, with a broad grin on his brown face.
"We need the money bad enough; and my mother will jump up six feet when
she hears the news. Somebody else won't feel good about it, I'll bet."

Stumpy did not explain to whom the last remark related; but he
experienced the most lively satisfaction when he thought of the pleasure
it would afford him to see his mother tender the seven hundred dollars
in payment of the mortgage note. It occurred to him then that the
business ought not to be postponed a single day, for Squire Moses had
announced his intention of foreclosing the mortgage at once.

"How much money is there in the bag?" asked the merchant.

"Twelve hundred dollars in gold," replied Leopold; "and the diary says
Joel Wormbury saved it in two years from his earnings in Cuba."

"Joel was an industrious and prudent man," added the landlord.

"It is very fortunate that the hidden treasure fell into honest hands,"
continued Mr. Hamilton, turning to Leopold; whereupon all the company
clapped their hands, and the skipper of the Rosabel blushed like a
school-girl.

"He's a noble fellow!" exclaimed Miss Rosabel.

"A pious swell," added Charley Redmond, with a sneer.

The business of the meeting having been thus happily accomplished, the
occupants of the parlor departed.

"Come Stumpy, I want to hand the money over to you," said Leopold.

"I don't want it now," replied Stumpy. "I shouldn't dare to take it into
the house, for fear my beloved grandad should steal it. I think he would
find some way to do it, without calling the deed by any hard name."

"What are you going to do with the gold, Stumpy?" asked Mr. Hamilton.

"Hand it over to my mother. Squire Moses is going to foreclose the
mortgage on the house we live in right off. I want to head him off on
that before night."

"But gold, you know, is worth a large premium just now. I saw by my
paper which came to-day that it was 208 in New York," continued the
merchant.

"I'll go and tell my mother about it," said Stumpy, moving off.

"Stop a moment, my boy," interposed Mr. Hamilton. "If you are going to
pay off the mortgage you should do so in currency, not in gold. I will
buy your coin, and assist you in this business."

"Thank you, sir," replied Stumpy, warmly.

"I will pay you the market rate for your gold, whatever the papers
report it to be for to-day."

Mr. Hamilton was certainly very kind; and Stumpy felt that, with such a
powerful friend, he had the weather-gage of his avaricious grandfather.
Leopold led the way to the shop of his uncle, and the New York merchant
joined them.

"I want the gold, uncle," said Leopold.

"What for you want him?" demanded Herr Schlager.

"I have found the owner."

"_Donner and blitz!_ Den he is no more your golt."

"No, uncle; but I feel better in handing it over to Stumpy than I should
in spending it myself," laughed Leopold.

"_Himmel!_ Stumpy!"

"Yes Stumpy." And the money-digger briefly stated the facts which had
been discovered.

"_Donner and blitz!_ I'm glad for der poy, but sorry for you," added the
watch-maker, as he took from the safe the shot-bag containing the
treasure.

"Take it, Stumpy. It is yours," said Leopold. "Open it."

"I can't exactly believe in this thing yet, Le," replied Stumpy, as,
with trembling hand, he cut the red tape, and demolished the sacred seal
of Herr Schlager.

Turning the bag over, he poured the gold out upon the counter. The money
was American coin, which Joel Wormbury had probably purchased in Havana,
to avoid the necessity of exchanging it after his return to Rockhaven.
Mr. Hamilton counted the money, and found that Harvey Barth's statement
was again correct.

"Now figure it up, my boy. Then we will finish this transaction at
once," said the merchant. "I shall not be able to pay you in full for it
to-day; but I have credits in Belfast and Rockland, and you shall have
the whole of it by to-morrow night for we intend to cross the bay in the
Orion to-morrow."

Leopold and Stumpy both did the sum, multiplying twelve hundred by two
hundred and eight, and pointing off two decimals in the product.

"Twenty-four hundred and ninety-six dollars!" exclaimed Leopold.

"That's what I make it," added Stumpy, "What a pile of money!"

Mr. Hamilton, who had left New York prepared to pay the heavy expenses
of his yacht excursion, counted off twelve one hundred dollar bills,
which he handed to Stumpy.

"I will give you my note for the balance," said the merchant.

"Creation!" cried Stumpy, looking the bills over, his eyes dilated till
they were nearly as big as saucers--small saucers. "Here's more money
than I ever saw!"

Mr. Hamilton wrote the note, and gave it to Stumpy. It was made payable
to the order of Sarah Wormbury.

"But I don't want all this money. I don't know what to do with it,"
exclaimed Stumpy, embarrassed by his sudden riches.

"You shall have the rest to-morrow night," added Mr. Hamilton.

"I would rather not have it just yet."

"As you please. If I retain it, I shall pay you interest," replied the
merchant.

"Interest! Hold on, now, hold on, all!" almost shouted Stumpy, turning
from the bills which still lay on the counter, and looking Leopold
square in the face. "I'm a hog! I'm a pig, just out of the sty!"

"What's the matter now?" demanded Mr. Hamilton, laughing heartily at the
odd manner of Stumpy.

"Here I've been thinking of myself and my folks all the time! Here I've
been thinking of what I should do with all this money, and never had a
thought of Le, who found it, and kept it for me and my folks. I'll do
the fair thing Le."

"What do you mean?" asked the merchant.

"I shall divy with Le; I shall give him at least five hundred.

"Not a cent," protested Leopold.

"You bet!" added Stumpy. "I've been thinking all the time about getting
my mother out of trouble, and only just now it comes into my head that
Le's father is in hot water. I'll tell you what we'll do, Le: I'll give
you five hundred--"

[Illustration: STUMPY POURING OUT THE GOLD. Page 302.]

"No, you won't! not a cent," said, Leopold, decidedly. "I should feel as
though I had been paid for being honest."

"I hope he won't take any part of the money which your father earned,
and kept sacredly for his family," interposed Mr. Hamilton. "I grant
that he deserves it."

"Not a cent," repeated Leopold.

"I never should have got a dollar of it, if it hadn't been for him,"
Stumpy argued.
