
"What you hear is the rise of our pitch," explained Dick.

"I should think it was the rise of something," grumbled Mr.
Crowninshield.

"We are running up our meters in order to catch the higher tuned
waves," Bob added. "That is part of the bedlam."

"And the rest?"

"It is static interference."

"What's that?"

"Well, static is the big bugbear of radio," answered Bob, pausing a
moment in regulating his tuner and detector. "It is caused by stray
waves moving in various directions through the atmosphere, and by
electrical conditions. It is the defect all wireless people have to
fight. Sometimes it is worse than others and unfortunately to-night it
promises to be pretty bad. You see it has been a close, heavy day and
no doubt thunderstorms are in the air. A thunderstorm will kick up no
end of a rumpus with wireless."

"But we haven't had any thunderstorm," Nancy called above the hubbub.

"No, but somebody else's thunderstorm would bother us almost as
much," Bob explained good-humoredly.

"Never mind the thunderstorms now," put in Mr. Crowninshield. "Aren't
we going to hear anything but this whistling and groaning? Whee! There
it goes again. It is for all the world like a chorus of cats."

"It is more like a siren horn tooting up and down," laughed Nancy.

A spluttering crackle blotted out the wail.

"You would think they were frying doughnuts," grinned Dick, "wouldn't
you?"

"And you really believe a thunderstorm would cause a noise like this?"
queried Mrs. Crowninshield incredulously.

"It might. We have no way of knowing exactly what is raising the
trouble."

"Do you mean to say that a storm that wasn't round here at all
could----" burst out Jerry, then stopped embarrassed.

"Indeed it could," replied Bob, answering the unfinished question.
"You see thunderstorms cause powerful electrical waves that affect
apparatus miles and miles distant. Of course such waves vary in length
but nevertheless they act on all aerials to a greater or less degree.
Then, too, the atmospheric conditions are never quite identical,
changing with the hour of the day, the season of the year, and local
weather disturbances. Fortunately, since the air is positively
electrified and the earth negatively, certain of these differences are
remedied by the aerial that connects the two, the current discharges
partially seeping off through the ground. Sometimes, however, in spite
of every device used, such currents are strong enough to cause a roar
in the receiver. In addition there is the interference from other
radio stations which are busy transmitting messages, and although
there are rules that aim to reduce this annoyance, it is, to a certain
extent, always to be reckoned with."

"I should think somebody ought to invent something to prevent such
troubles," declared Nancy.

"Why don't you, Sis?" asked Dick wickedly.

"But it is terrible to have the air so full of noise," continued the
girl, as she made a little face at her brother. "I've always thought
of the air as being still."

"It is still in a general sense," smiled Bob. "It is only when the
amplifier of the wireless magnifies the sounds that we realize how
many of them our ears fail to hear."

"It's a downright mercy they do!" exclaimed Jerry.

"You're right there, Jerry!" agreed Mr. Crowninshield.

"But how do messages come through such a chaos?" Dick inquired.

"Sometimes they don't," laughed Bob. "But nine cases out of ten they
do because there are ways of combating static interference. You can,
for instance, tune your apparatus to a higher or lower pitch and
thereby escape from the zone where the noise is. That whine you hear
is produced by my turning the tuning knob and increasing our range of
meters. Already with the higher vibration you will notice the hubbub
has lessened."

"Yes, things are ever so much clearer," agreed a chorus of voices.

"That is one way, then, out of the difficulty. There are, in addition,
other mechanical means that can be resorted to when you learn more
about handling the outfit. Suffice it to say that in a general way
whatever tends toward inertia, or a lack of electrical activity,
decreases static interference."

There was a pause in which above the crackling and the wailing of the
instrument a faint sound became audible.

"Gee! Did you hear that?" cried Walter.

"Hush!"

"But I heard a voice quite distinctly."

"Keep still, can't you?" Dick remarked unceremoniously.

Then plainly into the room came the words:

"Station (WGI) Amrad Medford Hillside, Mass. 360 meters. Stand by for
Boston Police reports."

"That is the police news," whispered Dick to Nancy. "Among other
things it gives the automobiles that are lost, their numbers, and a
description of each."

"Want to hear it?" asked Bob of his audience.

"Not unless they can tell us they have found Lola," responded Mr.
Crowninshield promptly.

"Oh, no," his wife hastened to add, "let's not listen to a long
string of crimes. Goodness knows there are enough of them to read in
the papers."

She shook her head warningly at Bob and motioned toward her husband.

"I'd rather hear some music," put in Nancy. "Can't we?"

There was an ascending wail from the tuner.

"Ain't that a band?" cried Jerry excitedly.

"It's an orchestra!" Nancy ejaculated in the same breath.

"It's gone!"

"We'll get it again," was Bob's confident answer as he twirled the
knobs of both tuner and detector.

"There it is!" burst out Jerry. "It's a brass band, as I live!"

"Where do you suppose it is?" speculated Mrs. Crowninshield.

"Pittsburgh or Chicago; or perhaps Newark."

"Not Chicago--out West! You're fooling," observed Jerry with scorn.

"Indeed I'm not. Wait and you'll hear in a few moments exactly who it
was."

"I'll not believe it unless I do," the old man announced, with a zest
that provoked a general laugh.

"What time is it? Can any one tell?" asked Bob.

"What difference does that make," Walter inquired.

"It will give us a cue as to who it is," was the explanation. "All
these broadcasting stations have certain hours for their programs."

"I've seen those lists published in the papers, but I never took any
stock in them," growled Jerry.

"You'll have to now, Jerry," said Nancy mischievously.

She saw him scratch his head.

"Well, I dunno," was his laconic reply. "The whole thing beats me. If
that band was in Chicago----"

"Hush!"

The crash of instruments had come to an end and over the wire in
accents unmistakably distinct came the words:

"Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company KYW Chicago,
Illinois. Stand by fifteen minutes for----" but the rest of the
sentence was lost, for with a mighty slap of his knees Jerry roared:

"It was in Chicago--that band! Well, I'll be buttered!"

Overwhelmed the Cape Codder had risen to his feet.

"Chicago! Pittsburgh! Medford! My eye, but this will do me to talk
about until the day of my death. It don't seem possible; I'm beat if
it does."

Helplessly he dropped back into his chair again, silenced by very
wonder.

In the meantime out of the wailing and whining and piping the sharp,
clear-cut click of a telegraph instrument could be discerned.

"That's the Morse code," explained Bob. "Some commercial station is
sending a message. It seems to be about a shipment of lumber and
isn't particularly interesting."

"I suppose you can read it," said Dick enviously.

"Naturally. That is part of my job, you know."

"What is a commercial station?" inquired the still bewildered Jerry.

"A station that sends only messages for the general public. Probably
this load of lumber started out of port without the captain of the
ship having the least idea in the world where he was to market it. In
the interval since it left, however, the company's shore agents have
secured a customer for it, perhaps in New Bedford, Boston, Providence,
or some other coast city and they are now notifying the ship where to
deliver it. Such an arrangement is quite common nowadays. Were the
captain obliged to hold his cargo in port until he had a purchaser, as
was the usual rule in the past, he would be wasting much precious
time. By this method he can set forth the moment the vessel is loaded
and during his voyage let his managers search for buyers. In all
probability by the time he nears New England harbors his wares will be
sold and orders sent him where to deposit them."

"That's a neat little scheme!" observed Walter.

But poor Jerry was too much overcome by the marvels he had witnessed
to comment on this added miracle. All he could do was to reiterate
feebly: "It beats me--hanged if it don't!"




CHAPTER XVII

THE LAWS OF THE AIR


Morning found Mr. Crowninshield in no more tractable a mood. Even
before Bob could reach his post at the wireless station and adjust his
double head receiver to his ears his employer came briskly across the
grass with his after-breakfast cigar between his lips.

"Well," began he, when he was within calling distance, "any news yet?"

"I'm afraid not yet, sir. It is still early."

The great man took out his watch.

"Isn't it almost time for O'Connel to signal?"

"It is nearing the time."

"I wonder if he will have any tidings for us?"

"I certainly hope so." The wish was uttered with deep sincerity. A
speculation was forming in the young operator's mind as to how he was
going to pacify the irascible gentleman before him should no tidings
come.

"Since I'm here I believe I'll drop down and wait until you get into
touch with the _Siren_."

"It is liable to be quite a little while. Sometimes there is delay."

"No matter. I've nothing especial to do to-day."

With sinking heart Bob turned away and began to fuss with his oil can
and a bit of cotton waste.

"As you will, sir," was all he said.

"You think, don't you, that we will hear something definite this
morning?"

"There is no telling."

"No, of course not. Nevertheless O'Connel can at least let us know
whether Lola is worse or better."

"Yes, we ought to ascertain that."

"He wouldn't be such an idiot as to stand by and see the dog die,
would he?"

"One never can predict just what another person will do. However, I
feel sure you can trust O'Connel. I never knew him to bungle anything
yet."

With that comfort Mr. Crowninshield was obliged to content himself.

Notwithstanding it, however, he began to pace nervously back and
forth, and every time there was a sound in the room he would whisk
about with the quick remark:

"Didn't you hear something?"

But although he fretted and fumed, strolled out the door and in again,
no amount of impatience appeared to hurry matters.

Even Bob began to lose his poise and fear no message was coming when
suddenly the well-known signal came and the familiar clockwork began
to be clicked off.

"Is it he?" demanded Mr. Crowninshield in a tense whisper.

Bob nodded.

On clicked the code. Then suddenly it stopped and the man who was
watching saw the operator raise the discs of rubber from his ears and
shake himself free of his metal trappings.

"Well?" inquired Mr. Crowninshield in quick staccato.

"It was O'Connel. All he said was: _Wait developments._"

"Not a word about Lola?"

"No, sir."

"Not a reference of any sort?"

"That was all."

"But that is no kind of a message," announced the exasperated owner of
Surfside. "Why, it might mean almost anything."

"It sounds hopeful to me."

"I don't see any hope in it," was the despondent answer.

"It least it gives us to understand that something is brewing."

"But why couldn't he have told us more?"

"Perhaps he did not dare to. They may have begun to suspect he was
sending private messages."

"Humph! I had not thought of that."

"Or possibly he may have been in a rush. He sent the letters at a
tremendous pace--so fast that I had to race him. It seemed as if he
was afraid he might not be able to get the message through."

"You didn't answer anything, I suppose."

"Only my signal to let him know I was listening."

"Then you think there is nothing more to be done at present but sit
right here and see what happens?"

"I do not see how we can do anything else."

"It's frightfully annoying."

"Yes. Nevertheless it is our only course."

"You've no inkling whether the developments he mentioned are to be
soon or not?"

"Not the ghost of an idea."

"Then there is nothing for it but to hold on right here a while
longer, I'm afraid. And since we are all to be tied to the spot you
may as well come up to the house later and give Dick his usual radio
lesson."

"Very well, sir."

With a curt nod the financier went out the door and after seeing that
everything was right Bob locked up the building and followed him.

He found the little group assembled in the lee of the awnings waiting
for him. Mr. Crowninshield was there, too, gnawing fiercely at a fresh
cigar.

"I hear you have had a message, Bob," Mrs. Crowninshield said as he
approached.

"Yes; a rather hopeful one, I think."

"I'm so excited! We all are. What do you suppose is in the wind?"

"I've no idea. Something good, I hope."

"Is that Morse code hard to learn?" inquired Nancy.

"The Morse Continental? That depends on what you consider hard,"
smiled Bob. "If your memory is good and you are quick at catching
sounds it ought not to be very awful. Numberless persons do learn it."

"Of course sending messages after you have the code learned cannot be
so bad, for you can take your own time," Dick put in. "It is receiving
them that would fuss me."

"We'll fix you up with a buzzer and let you and Walter practice later
if you want a try."

"Could you?" asked Dick eagerly.

"Sure! Moreover, there are phonograph records made on purpose to be
used by beginners. Perhaps your father will get you some of those. It
is a fine way to learn, training your ear to the sounds and giving you
lots of practice."

"What a bully scheme!"

"It is a good proof of how one science can help another, isn't it?"
observed Mrs. Crowninshield.

"I suppose transmitting is a great deal harder than receiving anyhow,
isn't it?" pursued Dick.

"Well, of course there is more to it. In the rough it is merely the
reverse of receiving; but in reality to project a message through the
air requires a more elaborate outfit."

"But you said our wireless would send as well as receive."
