filled with wheat and barley, and scatter them in a heap on the floor.

The prince hardly knew where to begin, and indeed if he had had a
thousand people to help him, and a week to do it in, he could never have
finished his task. So he flung himself on the ground in despair, and
covered his face with his hands.

While he lay thus, a wood-pigeon flew in through the window.

'Why are you weeping, noble prince?' asked the wood-pigeon.

'How can I help weeping at the task set me by the king. For he says, if
I fail to do it, I shall die a horrible death.'

'Oh, there is really nothing to cry about,' answered the wood-pigeon
soothingly. 'I am the king of the wood-pigeons, whose life you spared
when you were hungry. And now I will repay my debt, as I promised.' So
saying he flew out of the window, leaving the prince with some hope in
his heart.

In a few minutes he returned, followed by a cloud of wood-pigeons, so
dense that it seemed to fill the room. Their king showed them what they
had to do, and they set to work so hard that the grain was sorted into
two heaps long before the council was over. When the king came back
he could not believe his eyes; but search as he might through the
two heaps, he could not find any barley among the wheat, or any wheat
amongst the barley. So he praised the prince for his industry and
cleverness, and made him his steward at once.

This made the two soldiers more envious still, and they began to hatch
another plot.

'Your Majesty,' they said to the king, one day, as he was standing on
the steps of the palace, 'that fellow has been boasting again, that if
he had the care of your treasures not so much as a gold pin should ever
be lost. Put this vain fellow to the proof, we pray you, and throw the
ring from the princess's finger into the brook, and bid him find it. We
shall soon see what his talk is worth.'

And the foolish king listened to them, and ordered the prince to be
brought before him.

'My son,' he said, 'I have heard that you have declared that if I made
you keeper of my treasures you would never lose so much as a gold pin.
Now, in order to prove the truth of your words, I am going to throw the
ring from the princess's finger into the brook, and if you do not find
it before I come back from council, you will have to die a horrible
death.'

It was no use denying that he had said anything of the kind. The king
did not believe him; in fact he paid no attention at all, and hurried
off, leaving the poor boy speechless with despair in the corner.
However, he soon remembered that though it was very unlikely that he
should find the ring in the brook, it was impossible that he should find
it by staying in the palace.

For some time the prince wandered up and down peering into the bottom of
the stream, but though the water was very clear, nothing could he see of
the ring. At length he gave it up in despair, and throwing himself down
at the foot of the tree, he wept bitterly.

'What is the matter, dear prince?' said a voice just above him, and
raising his head, he saw the wild duck.

'The king of this country declares I must die a horrible death if I
cannot find the princess's ring which he has thrown into the brook,'
answered the prince.

'Oh, you must not vex yourself about that, for I can help you,' replied
the bird. 'I am the king of the wild ducks, whose life you spared,
and now it is my turn to save yours.' Then he flew away, and in a few
minutes a great flock of wild ducks were swimming all up and down the
stream looking with all their might, and long before the king came back
from his council there it was, safe on the grass beside the prince.

At this sight the king was yet more astonished at the cleverness of his
steward, and at once promoted him to be the keeper of his jewels.

Now you would have thought that by this time the king would have been
satisfied with the prince, and would have left him alone; but people's
natures are very hard to change, and when the two envious soldiers
came to him with a new falsehood, he was as ready to listen to them as
before.

'Gracious Majesty,' said they, 'the youth whom you have made keeper of
your jewels has declared to us that a child shall be born in the palace
this night, which will be able to speak every language in the world and
to play every instrument of music. Is he then become a prophet, or a
magician, that he should know things which have not yet come to pass?'

At these words the king became more angry than ever. He had tried to
learn magic himself, but somehow or other his spells would never work,
and he was furious to hear that the prince claimed a power that he did
not possess. Stammering with rage, he ordered the youth to be brought
before him, and vowed that unless this miracle was accomplished he would
have the prince dragged at a horse's tail until he was dead.

In spite of what the soldiers had said, the boy knew no more magic than
the king did, and his task seemed more hopeless than before. He lay
weeping in the chamber which he was forbidden to leave, when suddenly he
heard a sharp tapping at the window, and, looking up, he beheld a stork.

'What makes you so sad, prince?' asked he.

'Someone has told the king that I have prophesied that a child shall be
born this night in the palace, who can speak all the languages in the
world and play every musical instrument. I am no magician to bring these
things to pass, but he says that if it does not happen he will have me
dragged through the city at a horse's tail till I die.'

'Do not trouble yourself,' answered the stork. 'I will manage to find
such a child, for I am the king of the storks whose life you spared, and
now I can repay you for it.'

The stork flew away and soon returned carrying in his beak a baby
wrapped in swaddling clothes, and laid it down near a lute. In an
instant the baby stretched out its little hands and began to play a tune
so beautiful that even the prince forgot his sorrows as he listened.
Then he was given a flute and a zither, but he was just as well able
to draw music from them; and the prince, whose courage was gradually
rising, spoke to him in all the languages he knew. The baby answered him
in all, and no one could have told which was his native tongue!

The next morning the king went straight to the prince's room, and saw
with his own eyes the wonders that baby could do. 'If your magic can
produce such a baby,' he said, 'you must be greater than any wizard that
ever lived, and shall have my daughter in marriage.' And, being a king,
and therefore accustomed to have everything the moment he wanted it,
he commanded the ceremony to be performed without delay, and a splendid
feast to be made for the bride and bridegroom. When it was over, he said
to the prince:

'Now that you are really my son, tell me by what arts you were able to
fulfil the tasks I set you?'

'My noble father-in-law,' answered the prince, 'I am ignorant of all
spells and arts. But somehow I have always managed to escape the death
which has threatened me.' And he told the king how he had been forced to
run away from his stepfather, and how he had spared the three birds, and
had joined the two soldiers, who had from envy done their utmost to ruin
him.

The king was rejoiced in his heart that his daughter had married a
prince, and not a common man, and he chased the two soldiers away with
whips, and told them that if they ever dared to show their faces across
the borders of his kingdom, they should die the same death he had
prepared for the prince.

[From Ungarische Mahrchen]




Tritill, Litill, And The Birds

Once upon a time there lived a princess who was so beautiful and so good
that everybody loved her. Her father could hardly bear her out of his
sight, and he almost died of grief when, one day, she disappeared, and
though the whole kingdom was searched through and through, she could
not be found in any corner of it. In despair, the king ordered a
proclamation to be made that whoever could bring her back to the palace
should have her for his wife. This made the young men start afresh on
the search, but they were no more successful than before, and returned
sorrowfully to their homes.

Now there dwelt, not far from the palace, an old man who had three sons.
The two eldest were allowed by their parents to do just as they liked,
but the youngest was always obliged to give way to his brothers. When
they were all grown up, the eldest told his father that he was tired
of leading such a quiet life, and that he meant to go away and see the
world.

The old people were very unhappy at the thought that they must part with
him, but they said nothing, and began to collect all that he would
want for his travels, and were careful to add a pair of new boots. When
everything was ready, he bade them farewell, and started merrily on his
way.

For some miles his road lay through a wood, and when he left it he
suddenly came out on a bare hillside. Here he sat down to rest, and
pulling out his wallet prepared to eat his dinner.

He had only eaten a few mouthfuls when an old man badly dressed passed
by, and seeing the food, asked if the young man could not spare him a
little.

'Not I, indeed!' answered he; 'why I have scarcely enough for myself. If
you want food you must earn it.' And the beggar went on.

After the young man had finished his dinner he rose and walked on for
several hours, till he reached a second hill, where he threw himself
down on the grass, and took some bread and milk from his wallet. While
he was eating and drinking, there came by an old man, yet more wretched
than the first, and begged for a few mouthfuls. But instead of food he
only got hard words, and limped sadly away.

Towards evening the young man reached an open space in the wood, and by
this time he thought he would like some supper. The birds saw the food,
and flew round his head in numbers hoping for some crumbs, but he threw
stones at them, and frightened them off. Then he began to wonder where
he should sleep. Not in the open space he was in, for that was bare and
cold, and though he had walked a long way that day, and was tired, he
dragged himself up, and went on seeking for a shelter.

At length he saw a deep sort of hole or cave under a great rock, and
as it seemed quite empty, he went in, and lay down in a corner. About
midnight he was awakened by a noise, and peeping out he beheld a
terrible ogress approaching. He implored her not to hurt him, but to
let him stay there for the rest of the night, to which she consented, on
condition that he should spend the next day in doing any task which she
might choose to set him. To this the young man willingly agreed, and
turned over and went to sleep again. In the morning, the ogress bade him
sweep the dust out of the cave, and to have it clean before her return
in the evening, otherwise it would be the worse for him. Then she left
the cave.

The young man took the spade, and began to clean the floor of the cave,
but try as he would to move it the dirt still stuck to its place. He
soon gave up the task, and sat sulkily in the corner, wondering what
punishment the ogress would find for him, and why she had set him to do
such an impossible thing.

He had not long to wait, after the ogress came home, before he knew what
his punishment was to be! She just gave one look at the floor of the
cave, then dealt him a blow on the head which cracked his skull, and
there was an end of him.

Meanwhile his next brother grew tired of staying at home, and let his
parents have no rest till they had consented that he also should be
given some food and some new boots, and go out to see the world. On his
road, he also met the two old beggars, who prayed for a little of his
bread and milk, but this young man had never been taught to help other
people, and had made it a rule through his life to keep all he had to
himself. So he turned a deaf ear and finished his dinner.

By-and-by he, too, came to the cave, and was bidden by the ogress to
clean the floor, but he was no more successful than his brother, and his
fate was the same.

Anyone would have thought that when the old people had only one son left
that at least they would have been kind to him, even if they did not
love him. But for some reason they could hardly bear the sight of him,
though he tried much harder to make them comfortable than his brothers
had ever done. So when he asked their leave to go out into the world
they gave it at once, and seemed quite glad to be rid of him. They felt
it was quite generous of them to provide him with a pair of new boots
and some bread and milk for his journey.

Besides the pleasure of seeing the world, the youth was very anxious to
discover what had become of his brothers, and he determined to trace, as
far as he could, the way that they must have gone. He followed the road
that led from his father's cottage to the hill, where he sat down to
rest, saying to himself: 'I am sure my brothers must have stopped here,
and I will do the same.'

He was hungry as well as tired, and took out some of the food his
parents had given him. He was just going to begin to eat when the old
man appeared, and asked if he could not spare him a little. The young
man at once broke off some of the bread, begging the old man to sit down
beside him, and treating him as if he was an old friend. At last the
stranger rose, and said to him: 'If ever you are in trouble call me, and
I will help you. My name is Tritill.' Then he vanished, and the young
man could not tell where he had gone.

However, he felt he had now rested long enough, and that he had better
be going his way. At the next hill he met with the second old man, and
to him also he gave food and drink. And when this old man had finished
he said, like the first: 'If you ever want help in the smallest thing
call to me. My name is Litill.'

The young man walked on till he reached the open space in the wood,
where he stopped for dinner. In a moment all the birds in the world
seemed flying round his head, and he crumbled some of his bread for
them and watched them as they darted down to pick it up. When they had
cleared off every crumb the largest bird with the gayest plumage said to
him: 'If you are in trouble and need help say, "My birds, come to me!"
and we will come.' Then they flew away.

Towards evening the young man reached the cave where his brothers had
met their deaths, and, like them, he thought it would be a good place
to sleep in. Looking round, he saw some pieces of the dead men's clothes
and of their bones. The sight made him shiver, but he would not move
away, and resolved to await the return of the ogress, for such he knew
she must be.

Very soon she came striding in, and he asked politely if she would give
him a night's lodging. She answered as before, that he might stay on
condition that he should do any work that she might set him to next
morning. So the bargain being concluded, the young man curled himself up
in his corner and went to sleep.

The dirt lay thicker than ever on the floor of the cave when the young
man took the spade and began his work. He could not clear it any more
than his brothers had done, and at last the spade itself stuck in
the earth so that he could not pull it out. The youth stared at it
in despair, then the old beggar's words flashed into his mind, and he
cried: 'Tritill, Tritill, come and help me!'

And Tritill stood beside him and asked what he wanted. The youth told
him all his story, and when he had finished, the old man said: 'Spade
and shovel do your duty,' and they danced about the cave till, in a
short time, there was not a speck of dust left on the floor. As soon as
it was quite clean Tritill went his way.

With a light heart the young man awaited the return of the ogress. When
she came in she looked carefully round, and then said to him: 'You did
not do that quite alone. However, as the floor is clean I will leave
your head on.'

The following morning the ogress told the young man that he must take
all the feathers out of her pillows and spread them to dry in the sun.
But if one feather was missing when she came back at night his head
should pay for it.'

The young man fetched the pillows, and shook out all the feathers, and
oh! what quantities of them there were! He was thinking to himself,
as he spread them out carefully, how lucky it was that the sun was so
bright and that there was no wind, when suddenly a breeze sprang up,
and in a moment the feathers were dancing high in the air. At first the
youth tried to collect them again, but he soon found that it was no use,
and he cried in despair: 'Tritill, Litill, and all my birds, come and
help me!'

He had hardly said the words when there they all were; and when the
birds had brought all the feathers back again, Tritill, and Litill, and
he, put them away in the pillows, as the ogress had bidden him. But one
little feather they kept out, and told the young man that if the ogress
missed it he was to thrust it up her nose. Then they all vanished,
Tritill, Litill, and the birds.

Directly the ogress returned home she flung herself with all her weight
on the bed, and the whole cave quivered under her. The pillows were soft
and full instead of being empty, which surprised her, but that did not
content her. She got up, shook out the pillow-cases one by one, and
began to count the feathers that were in each. 'If one is missing I will
have your head,' said she, and at that the young man drew the feather
from his pocket and thrust it up her nose, crying 'If you want your
feather, here it is.'

'You did not sort those feathers alone,' answered the ogress calmly;
'however, this time I will let that pass.'

That night the young man slept soundly in his corner, and in the morning
the ogress told him that his work that day would be to slay one of her
