"'Now, den, folks en fr'en's, sence you shove it on me, de shortes' way
is de bes' way. Brer Coon, we bin good fr'en's a mighty long time; how
much er dish yer meat ought a fibble[38] ole man lak me ter take?' sezee.

"Brer Wolf talk mighty lovin'. Brer Coon snuff de a'r, en 'low:

"'I 'speck you better take one er de fo'-quarters, Brer Wolf,' sezee.

"Brer Wolf look lak he 'stonish'. He lif' up he han's, en 'low:

"'Law, Brer Coon, I tuck you ter be my fr'en', dat I did. Man w'at talk
lak dat ain't got no feelin' fer me. Hit make me feel mighty lonesome,'
sezee.

"Den Brer Wolf tu'n 'roun' en talk mighty lovin' ter Brer Mink:--

"'Brer Mink, many's de day you bin a-knowin' me; how much er dish yer
meat you 'speck oughter fall ter my sheer?' sezee.

"Brer Mink sorter study, en den he 'low:--

"'Bein' ez you er sech a nice man, Brer Wolf, I 'speck you oughter take
one er de fo'-quarters, en a right smart hunk off'n de bulge er de
neck,' sezee.

"Brer Wolf holler out, he did:--

"'Go 'way, Brer Mink! Go 'way! You ain't no 'quaintance er mine!'

"Den ole Brer Wolf tu'n 'roun' ter Brer 'Possum en talk lovin':

"'Brer 'Possum, I done bin tuck wid a likin' fer you long time 'fo' dis.
Look at me, en den look at my fambly, en den tell me, ef you be so good,
how much er dish yer meat gwine ter fall ter my sheer.'

"Brer 'Possum, he look 'roun', he did, en grin, en he up'n 'low:

"'Take half, Brer Wolf, take half!'

"Den ole Brer Wolf holler out:--

"'Shoo, Brer 'Possum! I like you no mo'.'

"Den Brer Wolf tu'n to Brer Tarrypin, en Brer Tarrypin say Brer Wolf
oughter take all 'cep' one er de behime quarters, en den Brer Wolf 'low
dat Brer Tarrypin ain't no fr'en' ter him. Den he up'n ax Brer Rabbit,
en Brer Rabbit, he tuck'n 'spon', he did:--

"'Gentermuns all! you see Brer Wolf chillun? Well, dey er all monst'us
hongry, en Brer Wolf hongry hisse'f. Now I puts dis plan straight at
you: less we all let Brer Wolf have de fus' pass at Big-Money; less tie
'im on dar, en le'm eat much ez he wanter, en den we kin pick de bones,'
sezee.

"'Youer my pardner, Brer Rabbit!' sez Brer Wolf, sezee; 'youer my
honey-pardner!'

"Dey all 'gree ter dis plan, mo' 'speshually ole Brer Wolf, so den dey
tuck'n tie 'im onter Big-Money. Dey tie 'im on dar, dey did, en den ole
Brer Wolf look all 'roun' en wunk at de yuthers. Brer Rabbit, he tuck'n
wunk back, en den Brer Wolf retch down en bite Big-Money on de back er
de neck. Co'se, w'en he do dis, Big-Money bleedz ter flinch; let 'lone
dat, she bleedz ter jump. Brer Wolf holler out:--

"'Ow! Run yer somebody! Take me off! She ain't dead! O Lordy! I feel 'er
move!'

Brer Rabbit holler back:--

"'Nummine de flinchin', Brer Wolf. She done dead; I done year 'er
sesso[39] 'erse'f. She dead, sho'. Bite er ag'in, Brer Wolf, bite 'er
ag'in!'

"Brer Rabbit talk so stiff, hit sorter tuck de chill off'n Brer Wolf, en
he dipt down en bit ole Big-Money ag'in. Wid dat, she 'gun ter move off,
en Brer Wolf he holler des lak de woods done kotch a-fier:--

"'Ow! O Lordy! Ontie me, Brer Rabbit, ontie me! She ain't dead! Ow! Run
yer, Brer Rabbit, en ontie me!'

"Brer Rabbit, he holler back:--

"'She er sho'ly dead, Brer Wolf! Nail 'er, Brer Wolf! Bite 'er! gnyaw
'er!'

"Brer Wolf keep on bitin', en Big-Money keep on movin' off. Bimeby, she
git ter de bank er de river, en she fall in--_cumberjoom!_--en dat 'uz
de las' er Brer Wolf."

"What did Brother Rabbit do?" the little boy asked, after a while.

"Well," responded Uncle Remus, in the tone of one anxious to dispose of
a disagreeable matter as pleasantly as possible, "you know w'at kinder
man Brer Rabbit is. He des went off some'rs by he own-alone se'f en tuck
a big laugh."


FOOTNOTES:

[36] Let us; let's; less.

[37] G hard.

[38] Feeble.

[39] Say so.




XXXVII

BRER RABBIT AND THE MOSQUITOES


The next night Daddy Jack was still away when the little boy went to see
Uncle Remus, and the child asked about him.

"Bless yo' soul, honey! don't ax me 'bout Brer Jack. He look lak he
mighty ole en trimbly, but he mighty peart nigger, mon. He look lak he
shufflin' 'long, but dat ole nigger gits over groun', sho'. Forty year
ergo, maybe I mought er kep' up wid 'im, but I let you know Brer Jack is
away 'head er me. He mos' sho'ly is."

"Why, he's older than you are, Uncle Remus!" the child exclaimed.

"Dat w'at I year tell. Seem lak hit mighty kuse, but sho' ez youer bawn
Brer Jack is a heap mo' pearter nigger dan w'at ole Remus is. He little,
yit he mighty hard. Dat's Brer Jack, up en down."

Uncle Remus paused and reflected a moment. Then he went on:--

"Talkin' 'bout Brer Jack put me in min' 'bout a tale w'ich she sho'ly
mus' er happen down dar in dat ar country whar Brer Jack come fum, en it
sorter ketch me in de neighborhoods er de 'stonishment 'kaze he ain't
done up'n tell it. I 'speck it done wuk loose fum Brer Jack 'membunce."

"What tale was that, Uncle Remus?"

"Seem lak dat one time w'en eve'ything en eve'ybody was runnin' 'long
des lak dey bin had waggin grease 'pun um, ole Brer Wolf"--

The little boy laughed incredulously and Uncle Remus paused and frowned
heavily.

"Why, Uncle Remus! how did Brother Wolf get away from Mammy-Bammy
Big-Money?"

The old man's frown deepened and his voice was full of anger as he
replied:--

"Now, den, is I'm de tale, er is de tale me? Tell me dat! Is I'm de
tale, er is de tale me? Well, den, ef I ain't de tale en de tale ain't
me, den how come you wanter take'n rake me over de coals fer?"

"Well, Uncle Remus, you know what you said. You said that was the end of
Brother Wolf."

"I bleedz ter 'spute dat," exclaimed Uncle Remus, with the air of one
performing a painful duty; "I bleedz ter 'spute it. Dat w'at de tale
say. Ole Remus is one nigger en de tale, hit's a n'er nigger. Yit I
ain't got no time fer ter set back yer en fetch out de oggyments."

Here the old man paused, closed his eyes, leaned back in his chair, and
sighed. After a while he said, in a gentle tone:--

"So den, Brer Wolf done dead, en yer I wuz runnin' on des same lak he
wuz done 'live. Well! well! well!"

Uncle Remus stole a glance at the little boy, and immediately relented.

"Yit," he went on, "ef I'm ain't de tale en de tale ain't me, hit ain't
skacely make no diffunce whe'er Brer Wolf dead er whe'er he's a
high-primin' 'roun' bodder'n 'longer de yuther creeturs. Dead er no
dead, dey wuz one time w'en Brer Wolf live in de swamp down dar in dat
ar country whar Brer Jack come fum, en, mo'n dat, he had a mighty likely
gal. Look lak all de yuther creeturs wuz atter 'er. Dey 'ud go down dar
ter Brer Wolf house, dey would, en dey 'ud set up en court de gal, en
'joy deyse'f.

"Hit went on dis a-way twel atter w'ile de skeeters 'gun ter git
monst'us bad. Brer Fox, he went flyin' 'roun' Miss Wolf, en he sot dar,
he did, en run on wid 'er en fight skeeters des es big ez life en
twice-t ez natchul. Las' Brer Wolf, he tuck'n kotch Brer Fox slappin' en
fightin' at he skeeters. Wid dat he tuck'n tuck Brer Fox by de off year
en led 'im out ter de front gate, en w'en he git dar, he 'low, he did,
dat no man w'at can't put up wid skeeters ain't gwine ter come
a-courtin' his gal.

"Den Brer Coon, he come flyin' 'roun' de gal, but he ain't bin dar no
time skacely 'fo' he 'gun ter knock at de skeeters; en no sooner is he
done dis dan Brer Wolf show 'im de do'. Brer Mink, he come en try he
han', yit he bleedz ter fight de skeeters, en Brer Wolf ax 'im out.

"Hit went on dis a-way twel bimeby all de creeturs bin flyin' 'roun'
Brer Wolf's gal 'ceppin' it's ole Brer Rabbit, en w'en he year w'at
kinder treatments de yuther creeturs bin ketchin' he 'low ter hisse'f
dat he b'leeve in he soul he mus' go down ter Brer Wolf house en set de
gal out one whet ef it's de las' ack.

"No sooner say, no sooner do. Off he put, en 't wa'n't long 'fo' he fine
hisse'f knockin' at Brer Wolf front do'. Ole Sis Wolf, she tuck'n put
down 'er knittin' en she up'n low, she did:--

"'Who dat?'

"De gal, she 'uz stannin' up 'fo' de lookin'-glass sorter primpin', en
she choke back a giggle, she did, en 'low:--

"'Sh-h-h! My goodness, mammy! dat's Mr. Rabbit. I year de gals say he's
a mighty prop-en-tickler[40] gentermun, en I des hope you ain't gwine ter
set dar en run on lak you mos' allers does w'en I got comp'ny 'bout how
much soap-grease you done save up en how many kitten de ole cat got. I
gits right 'shame' sometimes, dat I does!'"

The little boy looked astonished.

"Did she talk that way to her mamma?" he asked.

"_Shoo_, chile! 'Mungs' all de creeturs dey ain't no mo' kuse creeturs
dan de gals. Ole ez I is, ef I wuz ter start in dis minnit fer ter tell
you how kuse de gals is, en de Lord wuz ter spar' me plum twel I git
done, yo' head 'ud be gray, en Remus 'ud be des twice-t ez ole ez w'at
he is right now."

"Well, what did her mamma say, Uncle Remus?"

"Ole Sis Wolf, she sot dar, she did, en settle 'er cap on 'er head, en
snicker, en look at de gal lak she monst'us proud. De gal, she tuck'n
shuck 'erse'f 'fo' de lookin'-glass a time er two, en den she tipt ter
de do' en open' it little ways en peep out des lak she skeer'd some un
gwine ter hit 'er a clip side de head. Dar stood ole Brer Rabbit lookin'
des ez slick ez a race-hoss. De gal, she tuck'n laff, she did, en
holler:--

"'W'y law, maw! hit's Mr. Rabbit, en yer we bin 'fraid it 'uz some 'un
w'at ain't got no business 'roun' yer!'

"Ole Sis Wolf she look over 'er specks, en snicker, en den she up'n
'low:--

"'Well, don't keep 'im stannin' out dar all night. Ax 'im in, fer
goodness sake.'

"Den de gal, she tuck'n drap 'er hankcher, en Brer Rabbit, he dipt down
en grab it en pass it ter 'er wid a bow, en de gal say she much 'blige,
'kaze dat 'uz mo' den Mr. Fox 'ud er done, en den she ax Brer Rabbit how
he come on, en Brer Rabbit 'low he right peart, en den he ax 'er
wharbouts 'er daddy, en ole Sis Wolf 'low she go fine 'im.

"'T wa'n't long 'fo' Brer Rabbit year Brer Wolf stompin' de mud off'n he
foots in de back po'ch, en den bimeby in he come. Dey shuck han's, dey
did, en Brer Rabbit say dat w'en he go callin' on he 'quaintunce, hit
ain't feel natchul 'ceppin' de man er de house settin' 'roun' some'rs.

"'Ef he don't talk none,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'he kin des set up
ag'in' de chimbly-jam en keep time by noddin'.'

"But ole Brer Wolf, he one er deze yer kinder mens w'at got de
whimzies,[41] en he up'n 'low dat he don't let hisse'f git ter noddin'
front er comp'ny. Dey run on dis a-way twel bimeby Brer Rabbit year de
skeeters come zoonin' 'roun', en claimin' kin wid 'im."

The little boy laughed; but Uncle Remus was very serious.

"Co'se dey claim kin wid 'im. Dey claims kin wid folks yit, let 'lone
Brer Rabbit. Manys en manys de time w'en I year um sailin' 'roun' en
singin' out '_Cousin! Cousin!'_ en I let you know, honey, de skeeters is
mighty close kin w'en dey gits ter be yo' cousin.

"Brer Rabbit, he year um zoonin'," the old man continued, "en he know he
got ter do some mighty nice talkin', so he up'n ax fer drink er water.
De gal, she tuck'n fotch it.

"'Mighty nice water, Brer Wolf.' (_De skeeters dey zoon._)[42]

"'Some say it too full er wiggletails,[43] Brer Rabbit.' (_De skeeters,
dey zoon en dey zoon._)

"'Mighty nice place you got, Brer Wolf.' (_Skeeters dey zoon._)

"'Some say it too low in de swamp, Brer Rabbit.' (_Skeeters dey zoon en
dey zoon._)

"Dey zoon so bad," said Uncle Remus, drawing a long breath, "dat Brer
Rabbit 'gun ter git skeer'd, en w'en dat creetur git skeer'd, he min'
wuk lak one er deze yer flutter-mills. Bimeby, he 'low:--

"'Went ter town t'er day, en dar I seed a sight w'at I never 'speckted
ter see.'

"'W'at dat, Brer Rabbit?'

"'Spotted hoss, Brer Wolf.'

"'_No_, Brer Rabbit!'

"'I mos' sho'ly seed 'im, Brer Wolf.'

"Brer Wolf, he scratch he head, en de gal she hilt up 'er han's en make
great 'miration 'bout de spotted hoss. (_De skeeters dey zoon, en dey
keep on zoonin'._) Brer Rabbit, he talk on, he did:--

"''T wa'n't des one spotted hoss, Brer Wolf, 't wuz a whole team er
spotted hosses, en dey went gallin'-up[44] des lak de yuther hosses,'
sezee. 'Let 'lone dat, Brer Wolf, my grandaddy wuz spotted,' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee.

"Gal, she squeal en holler out:--

"'W'y, Brer Rabbit! ain't you 'shame' yo'se'f fer ter be talkin' dat
a-way, en 'bout yo' own-'lone blood kin too?'

"'Hit's de naked trufe I'm a-ginin'[45] un you,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee.
(_Skeeter zoon en come closeter._)

"Brer Wolf 'low 'Well--well--well!' Ole Sis Wolf, she 'low 'Tooby
sho'ly, tooby sho'ly!' (_Skeeter zoon en come nigher en nigher._) Brer
Rabbit 'low:--

"'Yasser! Des ez sho' ez youer settin' dar, my grandaddy wuz spotted.
Spotted all over. (_Skeeter come zoonin' up en light on Brer Rabbit
jaw._) He wuz dat. He had er great big spot right yer!'"

Here Uncle Remus raised his hand and struck himself a resounding slap on
the side of the face where the mosquito was supposed to be, and
continued:--

"No sooner is he do dis dan ne'r skeeter come zoonin' 'roun' en light on
Brer Rabbit leg. Brer Rabbit, he talk, en he talk:--

"'Po' ole grandaddy! I boun' he make you laff, he look so funny wid all
dem spots en speckles. He had spot on de side er de head, whar I done
show you, en den he had n'er big spot right yer on de leg,' sezee."

Uncle Remus slapped himself on the leg below the knee, and was
apparently so serious about it that the little boy laughed loudly. The
old man went on:--

"Skeeter zoon en light 'twix' Brer Rabbit shoulder-blades. Den he
talk:--

"'B'leeve me er not b'leeve me ef you min' to, but my grandaddy had a
big black spot up yer on he back w'ich look lak saddle-mark.'

"_Blip Brer Rabbit tuck hisse'f on de back!_

"Skeeter sail 'roun' en zoon en light down yer beyan de hip-bone. He
say he grandaddy got spot down dar.

"_Blip he tuck hisse'f beyan de hip-bone._

"Hit keep on dis a-way," continued Uncle Remus, who had given vigorous
illustrations of Brer Rabbit's method of killing mosquitoes while
pretending to tell a story, "twel bimeby ole Brer Wolf en ole Sis Wolf
dey lissen at Brer Rabbit twel dey 'gun ter nod, en den ole Brer Rabbit
en de gal dey sot up dar en kill skeeters right erlong."

"Did he marry Brother Wolf's daughter?" asked the little boy.

"I year talk," replied Uncle Remus, "dat Brer Wolf sont Brer Rabbit wud
nex' day dat he kin git de gal by gwine atter 'er, but I ain't never
year talk 'bout Brer Rabbit gwine. De day atterwuds wuz mighty long
time, en by den Brer Rabbit moughter had some yuther projick on
han'."[46]


FOOTNOTES:

[40] Proper and particular.

[41] In these latter days a man with the whimzies, or whimsies, is known
simply as a crank.

[42] The information in parentheses is imparted in a low, impressive,
confidential tone.

[43] Is it necessary to say that the wiggletail is the embryo mosquito?

[44] Galloping.

[45] G hard as in give.

[46] This story, the funniest and most characteristic of all the negro
legends, cannot be satisfactorily told on paper. It is full of action,
and all the interest centres in the gestures and grimaces that must
accompany an explanation of Brother Rabbit's method of disposing of the
mosquitoes. The story was first called to my attention by Mr. Marion
Erwin, of Savannah, and it is properly a coast legend, but I have heard
it told by three Middle Georgia negroes.


XXXVIII

THE PIMMERLY PLUM


One night, when the little boy had grown tired of waiting for a story,
he looked at Uncle Remus and said:--

"I wonder what ever became of old Brother Tarrypin."

Uncle Remus gave a sudden start, glanced all around the cabin, and then
broke into a laugh that ended in a yell like a view-halloo.

"Well, well, well! How de name er goodness come you ter know w'at
runnin' on in my min', honey? Mon, you skeer'd me; you sho'ly did; en
w'en I git skeer'd I bleedz ter holler. Let 'lone dat, ef I keep on
gittin' skeerder en skeerder, you better gimme room, 'kaze ef I can't
git 'way fum dar somebody gwine ter git hurted, en deyer gwine ter git
hurted bad. I tell you dat right pine-blank.[47]

"Ole Brer Tarrypin!" continued Uncle Remus in a tone of exultation. "Ole
Brer Tarrypin! Now, who bin year tell er de beat er dat? Dar you sets
studyin' 'bout ole Brer Tarrypin, en yer I sets studyin' 'bout ole Brer
Tarrypin. Hit make me feel so kuse dat little mo' en I'd 'a' draw'd my
Rabbit-foot en shuck it at you."

The little boy was delighted when Uncle Remus went off into these
rhapsodies. However nonsensical they might seem to others, to the child
they were positively thrilling, and he listened with rapt attention,
scarcely daring to stir.

"Ole Brer Tarrypin? Well, well, well!--

    "'_Wen in he prime
    He tuck he time!_'

"Dat w'at make he hol' he age so good. Dey tells me dat somebody 'cross
dar in Jasper county tuck'n kotch a Tarrypin w'ich he got marks cut in
he back dat 'uz put dar 'fo' our folks went fer ter git revengeance in
de Moccasin war. Dar whar yo' Unk' Jeems bin," Uncle Remus explained,
noticing the little boy's look of astonishment.

"Oh!" exclaimed the child, "that was the Mexican war."

"Well," responded Uncle Remus, closing his eyes with a sigh, "I ain't
one er deze yer kinder folks w'at choke deyse'f wid names. One name
ain't got none de 'vantage er no yuther name. En ef de Tarrypin got de
marks on 'im, hit don't make no diffunce whe'er yo' Unk' Jeems
Abercrombie git his revengeance out'n de Moccasin folks, er whe'er he
got it out'n de Mackersons."

"Mexicans, Uncle Remus."

"Tooby sho', honey; let it go at dat. But don't less pester ole Brer
Tarrypin wid it, 'kaze he done b'long ter a tribe all by he own-'lone
