"The neighbors would talk," protested Pelatiah, who was half inclined to
accept his wife's view, but was more sensitive to the criticism of the
community in which he lived.

"Let 'em talk!" said his more independent helpmate. "It isn't right that
this boy should use up the property that we have scraped together for
his cousin Jonathan."

"We must keep him for a while, Hannah; but I'll get rid of him as soon I
can consistently."

With this Mrs. Kavanagh had to be satisfied; but, during her nephew's
stay of two months in the farm-house, she contrived to make him
uncomfortable by harsh criticisms of his dead father, whom he had
tenderly loved.

"You must have lived very extravagant," she said, "or your father would
have left a handsome property."

"I don't think we did, Aunt Hannah."

"You father kept a carriage,--didn't he?"

"Yes; he had considerable riding to do."

"How much help did he keep?"

"Only one servant in the kitchen, and a stable-boy."

"There was no need of a boy. You could have done the work in the
stable."

"I was kept at school."

"Oh, of course!" sneered his aunt. "You must be brought up as a young
gentleman. Our Jonathan never had any such chances, and now you're
livin' on him, or about the same. I suppose you kept an extravagant
table too. What did you generally have for breakfast?"

So Aunt Hannah continued her catechising, much to Frank's discomfort.
She commented severely upon the wastefulness of always having pastry for
dinner.

"We can't afford it," she said, emphatically; "but then again we don't
mean to have our Jonathan beholden to anybody in case your uncle and I
are cast off sudden. What did you have for dinner on Sunday?"

"Meat and pudding and ice-cream,--that is, in warm weather."

"Ice-cream!" ejaculated Aunt Hannah, holding up both hands. "No wonder
your father didn't leave nothin'. Why, we don't have ice-cream more'n
once a year, and now we can't afford to have it at all, since we've got
another mouth to feed."

"I am sorry that you have to stint yourself on my account," replied
Frank, feeling rather uncomfortable.

"I suppose it's our cross," said Mrs. Kavanagh, gloomily; "but it does
seem hard that we can't profit by our prudence because of your father's
wasteful extravagance."

Such remarks were very disagreeable to our young hero, and it was hard
for him to hear his father so criticised. He supposed they must have
lived extravagantly, since it was so constantly charged by those about
him, and he felt puzzled to account for his father's leaving nothing.
When, after two months, his uncle and aunt, who had deliberated upon
what was best to be done, proposed to him to go to New York and try to
earn his own living, he caught at the idea. He knew that he might suffer
hardships in the new life that awaited him, but if he could support
himself in any way he would escape from the cruel taunts to which he was
now forced to listen every day. How he reached the city, and how he
succeeded, my readers know. We now come to the trunk, which, some time
after its reception, Frank set about examining.

He found it was filled with clothing belonging to his father. Though a
part were in good condition it seemed doubtful whether they would be of
much service to him. It occurred to him to examine the pockets of the
coats. In one he found a common yellow envelope, bearing his father's
name. Opening it, he found, to his great astonishment, that it was a
certificate of railroad stock, setting forth his father's ownership of
one hundred shares of the capital stock of the said railway.

Our hero was greatly excited by his discovery. This, then, was the form
in which his father had invested his savings. What the shares were worth
he had no idea; but he rejoiced chiefly because now he could defend his
father from the charge of recklessly spending his entire income, and
saving nothing. He resolved, as soon as he could find time, to visit a
Wall-street broker, by whom he had occasionally been employed, and
inquire the value of the stock. Two days afterwards the opportunity
came, and he availed himself of it at once.

"Can you tell me the value of these shares, Mr. Glynn?" he asked.

"They are quoted to-day at one hundred and ten," answered the broker,
referring to a list of the day's stock quotations.

"Do you mean that each share is worth a hundred and ten dollars?" asked
Frank, in excitement.

"Certainly."

"Then the whole are worth five thousand five hundred dollars?"

"Rather more; for the last semi-annual dividend has not been collected.
To whom do they belong?"

"They did belong to my father. Now I suppose they are mine."

"Has your father's estate been administered upon?"

"Yes; but these shares had not then been found."

"Then some legal steps will be necessary before you can take possession,
and dispose of them. I will give you the address of a good lawyer, and
advise you to consult him at once."

Frank did so, and the lawyer wrote to Uncle Pelatiah to acquaint him
with the discovery. The news created great excitement at the farm.

"Why, Frank's a rich boy!" ejaculated Aunt Hannah.

"And my brother wasn't so foolishly extravagant as we supposed."

"That may be; but with his salary we could have saved more."

"Perhaps we might; but these shares are worth almost six thousand
dollars. That's a good deal of money, Hannah."

"So it is, Pelatiah. I'll tell you what we'd better do."

"What?"

"Invite Frank to come back and board with us. He can afford to pay
handsome board, and it seems better that the money should go to us than
a stranger."

"Just so, Hannah. He could board with us, and go to school."

"You'd better write and invite him to come. I allus liked the boy, and
if we could have afforded it, I'd have been in favor of keepin' him for
nothing."

"So would I," said his uncle; and he probably believed it, though after
what had happened it will be rather difficult for the reader to credit
it.

The letter was written, but Frank had no desire to return to the old
farm, and the society of his uncle's family.

"I have got used to the city," he wrote, "and have made a good many
friends here. I don't know yet whether I shall take a business position,
or go to school; but, if the latter, the schools here are better than in
the country. I hope to come and see you before long; but, I would prefer
to live in New York."

"He's gettin' uppish," said Aunt Hannah, who was considerably
disappointed, for she had made up her mind just how much they could
venture to charge for board, and how this would increase their annual
savings.

"I suppose it's natural for a boy to prefer the city," said his uncle.

"If the boy has a chance to handle his money there won't be much of it
left by the time he's twenty-one," said Aunt Hannah. "You ought to be
his guardian."

"He has the right to choose his own guardian," said Uncle Pelatiah.
"He'll take some city man likely."

Frank did, in fact, select the lawyer, having learned that he was a man
of high reputation for integrity. He offered it to Mr. Bowen; but that
gentleman, while congratulating his young friend upon his greatly
improved prospects, said that he was a man of books rather than of
business, and would prefer that some other person be selected.

The next thing was to resign his place as telegraph boy.

"We are sorry to lose you," said the superintendent. "Your are one of
our best boys. Do you wish to go at once?"

"No, sir; I will stay till the end of the month."

"Very well. We shall be glad to have you."

Three weeks yet remained till the close of the month. It was not long,
but before the time had passed Frank found himself in a very unpleasant
predicament, from no fault of his own, but in consequence of the enmity
of the clerk whom he had been instrumental in displacing.




CHAPTER XXVI.

A TRAP, AND WHO FELL INTO IT.


No one rejoiced more sincerely at Frank's good luck than Mrs. Vivian.
Her interest in our hero had increased, and while at first she regarded
herself as his patroness she had come now to look upon him as a member
of the family. Fred had already returned, and Frank, bearing in mind
that he had only been invited to remain during his absence, proposed to
find another home, but Mrs. Vivian would not hear of it.

"No," she said, "Fred needs a young companion, and I prefer you to any
one I know of."

As Fred was of his mother's opinion, Frank readily agreed to stay. He
occupied a room adjoining the one assigned to Fred, and during his hours
of leisure the two were constantly together.

"I shall be glad when you leave the telegraph office," said Fred. "Then
we can be together more."

"You may get tired of me."

"If I do I will let you know."

Two days afterwards Frank was riding down town in a Sixth-avenue car.
Until he had taken his seat he was not aware that James Haynes was a
passenger. When a lady who sat between them got out, Haynes moved up, so
as to sit next to our hero.

"I see you are still in the telegraph service," he said.

"Yes, sir," answered Frank, briefly.

"I wonder Mr. Hartley didn't offer you a permanent position in his
employ," said Haynes, with a sneer. "Spies are useful sometimes."

"He may give me a position sometime," said Frank, not regarding the
sneer.

"You earned it," said Haynes, unpleasantly.

"Thank you," said Frank, knowing that Haynes would be provoked by his
appearing to accept the compliment in good faith.

Haynes scowled, but said no more. He drew a morning paper from his
pocket, and appeared to be absorbed in reading it.

At Canal street Frank rose to leave the car. He had not yet reached the
door, when Haynes sprang to his feet, followed him quickly, and,
grasping him by the arm, said, "Not so fast young man! Give me back my
pocket-book."

Frank was struck with amazement.

"What do you mean?" he asked, indignantly.

"I mean that you have relieved me of my pocket-book. Gentlemen," turning
to his fellow-passengers, "I demand that this boy be searched."

"You can search me if you like," said Frank. "You know very well that
your accusation is false."

"I shall be satisfied if you produce what is in your pockets."

"That's fair," said a passenger.

Our hero thrust his hand into his pocket. To his dismay he drew out a
Russia-leather pocket-book, of which he knew nothing.

"That is my pocket-book, gentlemen," said Haynes, triumphantly. "I can
tell you exactly what is in it. You will find two five-dollar bills, a
two and a one. Be kind enough to examine it, sir."

The pocket-book was examined, and, of course, Haynes was correct.

Suspicious glances were directed at poor Frank. Innocent as he was, he
was so overwhelmed by the suddenness of the charge, and the apparent
proof of it, that he looked confused and embarrassed.

"You are beginning early, my boy," said a tall gentleman, in a white
cravat,--a clergyman. "It is well that you are checked in the beginning
of a guilty career."

"Sir," said Frank, "I am as innocent as you are. This man is my enemy,
and he must have put the pocket-book in my pocket. He threatened some
time since to get me into a scrape."

"That story is rather too thin," said Haynes, looking around him with a
sneer. "You won't find any one here quite verdant enough to believe
it."

"There you are mistaken," said a gentleman who was seated directly
opposite to Haynes and Frank. "_I_ believe it."

Haynes scowled at him malignantly.

"I really don't think it very important what you believe, sir. The boy
is evidently a professional thief, and you may belong to the same gang
for aught I know. I propose to give him in charge to the next policeman
we meet."

"Do so," said the stranger, coolly. "I shall be present at his trial,
and offer some important testimony."

"Indeed!" said Haynes, uneasily. "May I ask what it is?"

"Certainly. _I saw you thrust the wallet into the boy's pocket!_ Of that
I am willing to make oath."

James Haynes turned pale. There was a sudden change in public opinion.
It was he who now had become an object of suspicion.

"Young man," said the clergyman, solemnly, "what could have induced you
to enter into such a wicked conspiracy against the poor boy?"

"Mind your own business!" said Haynes, rudely. "It is a lie."

"It is the truth," said the volunteer witness, calmly.

Here a policeman became visible from the car-window, leisurely walking
his beat on the western sidewalk.

"There's a policeman," said Frank's new friend. "Call him, and have the
boy arrested."

"He would be cleared by false testimony," said Haynes, sullenly. "I have
my money back, and will let him go."

"Then," said the stranger, rising, and displaying the badge of a
detective, "I shall arrest you on a charge of conspiracy."

Haynes was fairly caught in his own trap.

"This is a put-up job, gentlemen," he said. "Am I to be robbed first,
and arrested afterwards for exposing the thief?"

He looked about him appealingly; but in vain. Public sentiment was
wholly against him now.

"O you ould villain!" said a stout Irish woman, "to try to ruin the
poor b'ye. Hangin's too good for you."

This was rather an extreme sentiment; but Haynes saw that he was in
peril. He gave an unexpected spring, and, reaching the platform, sprang
out, running up a side street.

"Do you know him?" asked the detective of Frank.

"Yes, sir."

"How do you account for his hostility to you?"

Frank briefly recounted the story already known to the reader.

"He can easily be found then."

"I hope you will not arrest him, sir," said Frank. "He has been pretty
