ought to go into a town until it's all over."

"I have no one to go to," the girl said simply. "My father bought this
place and moved here from Georgia only six years ago, and all my friends
are in that State. Except our neighbors round here I do not know a soul
in Tennessee. Besides, what can I do in a town? We can manage here,
because we have a few fowls, and some of our neighbors last spring
plowed an acre or two of ground and planted corn for us, and I have a
little money left for buying other things; but it would not last us a
month if we went into a town. No, I have nothing to do but to stay here
until you drive the Yankees back. I will willingly take you down to the
boat to-night. Chloe can come with us and keep me company on the way
back. Of course it would not be safe to cross in the daytime."

"I thank you greatly, Miss Kingston, and shall always remember your
kindness. Now, when I finish my meal I will go out and join my boy, and
will come for you at eight o'clock; it will be quite dark then."

"Why should you not stay here till then, Mr. Wingfield? It is very
unlikely that any one will come along."

"It is unlikely, but it is quite possible," Vincent replied, "and were I
caught here by Mullens, the consequence would be very serious to you as
well as to myself. No, I could not think of doing that. I will go out,
and come back at eight o'clock. I shall not be far away; but if any one
should come and inquire, you can honestly say that you do not know where
I am."

"I have two revolvers here, sir; in fact I have three. I always keep one
loaded, for there is never any saying whether it may not be wanted; the
other two I picked up last spring. There was a fight about a quarter of
a mile from here and after it was over and they had moved away, for the
Confederates won that time and chased them back toward Nashville, I went
out with Chloe with some water and bandages to see if we could do
anything for the wounded. We were at work there till evening, and I
think we did some good. As we were coming back I saw something in a low
bush, and going there found a Yankee officer and his horse both lying
dead; they had been killed by a shell, I should think. Stooping over to
see if he was quite dead I saw a revolver in his belt and another in the
holster of his saddle, so I took them out and brought them home,
thinking I might give them to some of our men, for we were then, as we
have always been, very short of arms; but I never had an opportunity of
giving them away, and I am very glad now that I have not. Here they are,
sir, and two packets of cartridges, for they are of the same size as
those of the pistol my father gave me when he went away. You are
heartily welcome to them."

"Thank you extremely," Vincent said, as he took the pistols and placed
the packets of ammunition in his pocket. "We cut two heavy sticks the
night we left Nashville so as to be able to make something of a fight;
but with these weapons we shall feel a match for any small parties we
may meet. Then at eight o'clock I will come back again."

"I shall be ready," the girl said; "but I wish you would have stopped,
there are so many things I want to ask you about, and these Yankee
papers, which are all we see now, are full of lies."

"They exaggerate their successes and to some extent conceal their
defeats," Vincent said; "but I do not think it is the fault of the
newspapers, whose correspondents do seem to me to try and tell the truth
to their readers, but of the official despatches of the generals. The
newspapers tone matters down, no doubt, because they consider it
necessary to keep up the public spirit; but at times they speak out
pretty strongly too. I am quite as sorry to leave as you can be that I
should go, Miss Kingston, but I am quite sure that it is very much the
wisest thing for me to do. By the way, if I should not be here by
half-past eight I shall not come at all, and you will know that
something has occurred to alter our plans. I trust there is no chance of
anything doing so, but it is as well to arrange so that you should not
sit up expecting me. Should I not come back you will know that I shall
be always grateful to you for your kindness, and that when this war is
over, if I am alive, I will come back and thank you personally."

"Good-by till this evening!" the girl said. "I will not even let myself
think that anything can occur to prevent your return."

"Golly, Massa Vincent, what a time you hab been!" Dan said when Vincent
rejoined him. "Dis child began to tink dat somefing had gone wrong, and
was going in anoder five minutes to knock at do door to ask what dey had
done to you."

"It is all right, Dan, I have had breakfast, and have brought some for
you; here is some bread and bacon and a bottle of coffee."

"Dat good, massa; my teeth go chatter chatter wid sleeping in dese damp
woods; dat coffee do me good, sah. After dat I shall feel fit for
anyting."


CHAPTER XII. THE BUSHWHACKERS.

"By the way, Dan," Vincent said when the negro had finished his meal,
"we have not talked over that matter of my clothes. I can't imagine how
that letter saying that one of us was disguised as a minister and would
have a negro servant came to be written. Did you ever tell the people
you lodged with anything about the disguise?"

"No, sah, neber said one word to dem about it; dey know nothing
whatsoeber. De way me do wid your letter was dis. Me go outside town and
wait for long time. At last saw black fellow coming along. Me say to
him, 'Can you read?' and he said as he could. I said 'I got a letter, I
want to read him, I gib you a quarter to read him to me;' so he said
yes, and he read de letter. He a long time of making it out, because he
read print but not read writing well. He spell it out word by word, but
I don't tink he understand dat it come from prison, only dat it come
from some one who wanted some rope and a turn-screw. Me do just de same
way wid de second letter. As for de clothes, me buy dem dat day, make
dem up in bundle, and not go back to lodging at all. Me not know how any
one could know dat I buy dat minister clothes for you, sah. Me told de
storekeeper dat dey was for cousin of mine, who preach to de colored
folk, and dat I send him suit as present. Onless dat man follow me and
watch me all de time till we go off together, sah, me no see how de
debbil he guess about it."

"That's quite impossible, Dan; it never could have been that way. It is
very strange, for it would really seem that no one but you and I and the
other two officers could possibly know about it."

"Perhaps one of dem want to do you bad turn, massa, and write so as to
get you caught and shut up again."

Vincent started at the suggestion. Was it possible that Jackson could
have done him this bad turn after his having aided him to make his
escape It would be a villainous trick; but then he had always thought
him capable of villainous tricks, and it was only the fact that they
were thrown together in prison that had induced him to make up his
quarrel with him; but though Jackson had accepted his advances, it was
probable enough that he had retained his bad feeling against him, and
had determined, if possible, to have his revenge on the first
opportunity.

"The scoundrel," he said to himself, "after my getting him free, to
inform against me! Of course I have no proof of it, but I have not the
least doubt that it was him. If we ever meet again, Mr. Jackson, I will
have it out with you."

"You got two pistols, sah," Dan said presently. "How you get dem?"

"The lady of that house gave them to me, Dan; they are one for you and
one for me."

"Dis chile no want him, sah; not know what to do wid him. Go off and
shoot myself, for sure."

"Well, I don't suppose you would do much good with it, Dan. As I am a
good shot, perhaps I had better keep them both. You might load them for
me as I fire them."

"Berry well, sah; you show me how to load, me load."

Vincent showed Dan how to extricate the discharged cartridge-cases and
to put in fresh ones, and after a quarter of an hour's practice Dan was
able to do this with some speed.

"When we going on, sah?" he said as, having learned the lesson, he
handed the pistol back to Vincent.

"We are not going on until the evening, Dan. When it gets dark the lady
is going to take us to a place where there is a boat hidden, and we
shall then be able to cross the river."

"Den I will hab a sleep, sah. Noting like sleeping when there is a
chance."

"I believe you could sleep three-quarters of your time, Dan. However,
you may as well sleep now if you can, for there will be nothing to do
till night."

Vincent went back to the edge of the wood, and sat down where he could
command a view of the cottage. The country was for the most part covered
with wood, for it was but thinly inhabited except in the neighborhood of
the main roads. Few of the farmers had cleared more than half their
ground; many only a few acres. The patch, in which the house with its
little clump of trees stood nearly in the center, was of some forty or
fifty acres in extent, and though now rank with weeds, had evidently
been carefully cultivated, for all the stumps had been removed, and the
fence round it was of a stronger and neater character than that which
most of the cultivators deemed sufficient.

Presently he heard the sound of horses' feet in the forest behind him,
and he made his way back to a road which ran along a hundred yards from
the edge of the wood. He reached it before the horsemen came up, and lay
down in the underwood a few yards back. In a short time two horsemen
came along at a walking pace.

"I call this a fool's errand altogether," one of them said in a
grumbling tone. "We don't know that they have headed this way; and if
they have, we might search these woods for a month without finding
them."

"That's so," the other said; "but Mullens has set his heart on it, and
we must try for another day or two. My idea is that when the fellow
heard what sort of a chap Mullens was, he took the hack train that night
and went up north again."

Vincent heard no more, but it was enough to show him that a sharp hunt
was being kept up for him; and although he had no fear of being caught
in the woods, he was well pleased at the thought that he would soon be
across the water and beyond the reach of his enemy. He went back again
to the edge of the clearing and resumed his watch. It was just getting
dusk, and he was about to join Dan when he saw a party of twelve men
ride out from the other side of the wood and make toward the house.
Filled with a vague alarm that possibly some one might have caught sight
of him and his follower on the previous day, and might, on being
questioned by the searchers, have given them a clew as to the direction
in which they were going, Vincent hurried to the spot where he left Dan.
The negro jumped up as he approached.

"Me awake long time, sah. Began to wonder where you had got to."

"Take your stick and come along, Dan, as fast as you can."

Without another word Vincent led the way along the edge of the wood to
the point where the clump of trees at the back of the house hid it from
his view.

"Now, Dan, stoop low and get across to those trees."

Greatly astonished at what was happening, but having implicit faith in
his master, Dan followed without a question.

It was but ten minutes since Vincent had seen the horsemen, but the
darkness had closed in rapidly, and he had little fear of his approach
being seen. He made his way through the trees, and crept up to the
house, and then kept close along it until he reached the front. There
stood the horses, with the bridles thrown over their neck. The riders
were all inside the house.

"Look here, Dan," he whispered, "you keep here perfectly quiet until I
join you again or you hear a pistol-shot. If you do hear a shot, rush at
the horses with your stick and drive them off at full gallop. Drive them
right into the woods if you can and then lie quiet there till you hear
me whistle for you. If you don't hear my whistle you will know that
something has happened to me, and then you must make your way home as
well as you can."

"Oh, Master Vincent," Dan began; but Vincent stopped him.

"It's no use talking, Dan; you must do as I order you. I hope all will
be well; but it must be done anyhow."

"Let me come and load your pistol and fight with you, sah."

"You can do more good by stampeding the horses, Dan. Perhaps, after all,
there will be no trouble."

So saying, leaving Dan with the tears running down his cheeks, Vincent
went to the back of the house and tried the door there. It was fastened.
Then he went to the other side; and here, the light streaming through
the window, which was open, and the sound of loud voices, showed him the
room where the party were. He crept cautiously up and looked in. Mullens
was standing facing Lucy Kingston; the rest of the men were standing
behind him. The girl was as pale as death, but was quiet and composed.

"Now," Mullens said, "I ask you for the last time. You have admitted
that a man has been here to-day, and that you gave him food. You say he
is not in the house; and as we have searched it pretty thoroughly, we
know that's right enough. You say you don't know where he is, and that
may be true enough in a sense; but I have asked you whether he is coming
back again, and you won't answer me. I just give you three seconds;" and
he held out his arm with a pistol in it. "One!" As the word "Two" left
his lips, a pistol cracked, and Mullens fell back with a bullet in his
forehead.

At the same time Vincent shouted at the top of his voice, "Come on,
lads; wipe 'em out altogether. Don't let one of them escape." As he
spoke he discharged his pistol rapidly into the midst of the men, who
were for the moment too taken by surprise to move, and every shot took
effect upon them. At the same moment there was a great shouting outside,
and the trampling of horses' feet. One or two of the men hastily
returned Vincent's fire, but the rest made a violent rush to the door.
Several fell over the bodies of their comrades, and Vincent had emptied
one of his revolvers and fired three shots with the second before the
last of those able to escape did so. Five bodies remained on the floor.
As they were still seven to one against him, Vincent ran to the corner
of the house, prepared to shoot them as they came round; but the
ruffians were too scared to think of anything but escape, and they could
be heard running and shouting across the fields.

Vincent ran into the house. He had seen Lucy Kingston fall prostrate at
the same instant as the ruffian facing her. Strung up to the highest
tension, and expecting in another second to be shot, the crack of
Vincent's pistol had brought her down as surely as the bullet of Mullens
would have done. Even in the excitement of firing, Vincent felt thankful
when he saw her fall, and knew that she was safe from the bullets flying
about. When he entered the room he found the old negress lying beside
her, and thought at first that she had fallen in the fray. He found that
she was not only alive, but unhurt, having, the instant she saw her
young mistress fall, thrown herself upon her to protect her from harm.

"Am dey all gone, sah?" she asked, as Vincent somewhat roughly pulled
her off the girl's body.

"They have all gone, Chloe; but I do not know how soon they may be back
again. Get your mistress round as soon as you can. I am sure that she
has only fainted, for she fell the instant I fired, before another
pistol had gone off."

Leaving the old woman to bring Miss Kingston round, he reloaded his
pistols and went to the door. In a few minutes the sound of horses
galloping was heard.

"Halt, or I fire!" he shouted.

"Don't shoot, sah! Don't shoot! It am me!" and Dan rode up, holding a
second horse by the bridle. "I thought I might as well get two ob dem,
so I jump on de back ob one and get hold ob anoder bridle while I was
waiting to hear your pistol fire. Den de moment I heard dat I set de
oders off, and chased dem to de corner where de gate was where dey came
in at, and along de road for half a mile; dey so frightened dey not stop
for a long time to come. Den I turn into de wood and went through de
trees, so as not to meet dem fellows, and lifted two of de bars of the
fence, and here I am. You are not hurt, massa?"

"My left arm is broken, I think, Dan; but that is of no consequence. I
have shot five of these fellows--their leader among them--and I expect
three of the others have got a bullet somewhere or other in them. There
was such a crowd round the door that I don't think one shot missed. It
was well I thought of stampeding the horses; that gave them a greater
fright than my pistols. No doubt they thought that there was a party of
our bushwhackers upon them. Now, Dan, you keep watch, and let me know if
you see any signs of their returning. I think they are too shaken up to
want any more fighting; but as there are seven of them, and they may
guess there are only two or three of us, it is possible they may try
again."

"Me don't tink dey try any more, sah. Anyhow, I look out sharp." So
saying, Dan, fastening up one of the horses, rode the other in a circle
round and round the house and little plantation, so that it would not be
possible for any one to cross the clearing without being seen. Vincent
returned to the house, and found Miss Kingston just recovering
consciousness. She sat upon the ground in a confused way.

"What has happened, nurse?"

"Never mind at present, dearie. Juss you keep yourself quiet, and drink
a little water."

The girl mechanically obeyed. The minute she put down the glass her eye
fell upon Vincent, who was standing near the door.

"Oh! I remember now!" she said, starting up. "Those men were here and
they were going to shoot me. One--two--and then he fired, and it seemed
that I fell dead. Am I not wounded?"

"He never fired at all, Miss Kingston; he will never fire again. I shot
him as he said 'two,' and no doubt the shock of the sudden shot caused
you to faint dead away. You fell the same instant that he did."

"But where are the others?" the girl said with a shudder. "How imprudent
of you to come here! I hoped you had seen them coming toward the house."

"I did see them, Miss Kingston, and that was the reason I came. I was
afraid they might try rough measures to learn from you where I was
hidden. I arrived at the window just as the scoundrel was pointing his
pistol toward you, and then there was no time to give myself up, and I
had nothing to do for it but to put a bullet through his head in order
to save you. Then I opened fire upon the rest, and my boy drove off
their horses. They were seized with a panic and bolted, thinking they
were surrounded. Of course I kept up my fire, and there are four of them
in the next room besides their captain. And now, if you please, I will
get you, in the first place, to bind my arm tightly across my chest, for
one of their bullets hit me in the left shoulder, and has, I fancy,
broken it."

The girl gave an exclamation of dismay.

"Do not be alarmed, Miss Kingston; a broken shoulder is not a very
serious matter, only I would rather it had not happened just at the
present moment; there are more important affairs in hand. The question
is, What is to become of you? It is quite impossible that you should
stay here after what has happened. Those scoundrels are sure to come
back again."

"What am I to do, Chloe?" the girl asked in perplexity. "I am sure we
cannot stay here. We must find our way through the woods to Nashville,
and I must try and get something to do there."

"There is another way, Miss Kingston, if you like to try it," Vincent
said. "Of course it would be toilsome and unpleasant, but I do not think
it would be dangerous, for even if we got caught there would be no fear
of your receiving any injury from the Federal troops. My proposal is
that you and Chloe should go with us. If we get safely through the
Federal lines I will escort you to Georgia and place you with your
friends there."

The girl looked doubtful for a moment, and then she shook her head.

"I could not think of that, sir. It would be difficult enough for you to
get through the enemy by yourselves It would add terribly to your danger
to have us with you."

"I do not think so," Vincent replied. "Two men would be sure to be
questioned and suspected, but a party like ours would be far less likely
to excite suspicion. Every foot we get south we shall find ourselves
more and more among people who are friendly to us, and although they
might be afraid to give shelter to men, they would not refuse to take
women in. I really think, Miss Kingston, that this plan is the best. In
the first place it would be a dangerous journey for you through the
woods to Nashville and if you fall into the hands of any of those
ruffians who have been here you may expect no mercy. At Nashville you
will have great difficulty in obtaining employment of any kind and even
suppose you went further north your position as a friendless girl would
be a most painful one. As to your staying here that is plainly out of
the question. I think that there is no time to lose in making a
decision. Those fellows may go to the camp at the bridge, give their
account of the affair, declare they have been attacked by a party of
Confederate sympathizers, and return here with a troop of horse."

"What do you say, Chloe?" Lucy asked.

"I'se ready to go wid you whereber you like, Miss Lucy; but I do tink
dat in times like dis dat a young gal is best wid her own folk. It may
be hard work getting across, but as to danger dar can't be much more
danger than dar has been in stopping along here, so it seems to me best
to do as dis young officer says."

"Very well, then, I will, sir. We will go under your protection, and
will give you as little trouble as we can. We will be ready in five
minutes. Now, Chloe, let us put a few things together. The fewer the
better. Just a small bundle which we can carry in our hands."

In a few minutes they returned to the room, Chloe carrying a large
basket, and looking somewhat ruffled.

"Chloe is a little upset," the girl said, smiling, "because I won't put
my best things on; and the leaving her Sunday gown behind is a sore
trouble to her."
