
"Never mind, Malone," returned the other, who was evidently the better
educated of the two. "As we had to make ourselves scarce in the city
this was as good a place to come to as any."

"Don't you think they'll look for us here?"

"Why should they? We were sharp enough not to leave any trail behind--at
least, I was."

"Reckon I was just as sharp, Caven."

"You had to be--otherwise you would have been nabbed." Gaff Caven
chuckled to himself. "We outwitted them nicely, I must say. We deserve
credit."

"I've spent more than half of what I got out of the deal," went on Pat
Malone, for such was the full name of one of the speakers.

"I've spent more than that. But never mind, my boy, fortune will favor
us again in the near future."

A crash of thunder drowned out the conversation following, and Joe
hurried back to where he had left Ned.

"Well, have you found out who they are?" demanded the rich youth,
impatiently.

"No, Ned, but I am sure of one thing."

"What is that?"

"They are two bad men."

"What makes you think that?"

"They said something about having to get out of the city, and one spoke
about being nabbed. Evidently they went away to avoid arrest."

At this announcement Ned Talmadge whistled softly to himself.

"Phew! What shall we do about it?" he asked, with a look of concern on
his usually passive face.

Joe shrugged his shoulders.

"I don't know what to do."

"Let us listen to what they have to say. Maybe we'll strike some clew to
what they have been doing."

"Would that be fair--to play the eaves-dropper?"

"Certainly--if they are evildoers. Anybody who has done wrong ought to
be locked up for it," went on Ned boldly.

With caution the two boys made their way to the narrow window, and Ned
looked in as Joe had done. The backs of the two men were still towards
the opening, so the lads were not discovered.

"What is this new game?" they heard the man called Malone ask, after a
peal of thunder had rolled away among the mountains.

"It's the old game of a sick miner with some valuable stocks to sell,"
answered Gaff Caven.

"Have you got the stocks?"

"To be sure--one thousand shares of the Blue Bell Mine, of Montana, said
to be worth exactly fifty thousand dollars."

"Phew! You're flying high, Gaff!" laughed Pat Malone.

"And why not, so long as I sell the stocks?"

"What did they cost you?"

"Well, they didn't cost me fifty thousand dollars," and Gaff Caven
closed one eye suggestively.

"You bet they didn't! More than likely they didn't cost you fifty
dollars."

"What, such elegantly engraved stocks as those?"

"Pooh! I can buy a bushel-basket full of worthless stocks for a dollar,"
came from Pat Malone. "But that isn't here nor there. I go into the deal
if you give me my fair share of the earnings."

"I'll give you one-third, Pat, and that's a fair share, I think."

"Why not make it half?"

"Because I'll do the most of the work. It's no easy matter to find a
victim." And Gaff Caven laughed broadly. He had a good-appearing face,
but his eyes were small and not to be trusted.

"All right, I'll go in for a third then. But how soon is the excitement
to begin?"

"Oh, in a week or so. I've got the advertisements in the papers
already."

"Not in New York?"

"No, it's Philadelphia this time. Perhaps I'll land one of our Quaker
friends."

"Don't be so sure. The Quakers may be slow but they generally know what
they are doing."

More thunder interrupted the conversation at this point, and when it
was resumed the two men talked in such low tones that only an occasional
word could be caught by the two boys.

"They surely must be rascals," remarked Ned, in a whisper. "I'm half of
a mind to have them locked up."

"That's easier said than done," answered Joe. "Besides, we haven't any
positive proofs against them."

The wind was now rising, and it soon blew so furiously that the two boys
were forced to seek the shelter of the woodshed, since they did not
deem it wise to enter the lodge so long as the two men were inside. They
waited in the shed for fully half an hour, when, as suddenly as it had
begun, the storm let up and the sun began to peep forth from between the
scattering clouds.

"Now we can go home if we wish," said Joe. "But for my part, I'd like to
stay and see what those men do, and where they go to."

"Yes, let us stay by all means," answered the rich youth.

They waited a few minutes longer and then Ned suggested that they look
into the window of the lodge once more. The hermit's boy was willing,
and they approached the larger building with caution.

Much to their astonishment the two strangers had disappeared.

"Hullo! what do you make of that?" cried Ned, in amazement.

"Perhaps they are in one of the other rooms," suggested Joe.

At the risk of being caught, they entered the lodge and looked into one
room after another. Every apartment was vacant, and they now saw that
the fire in the fireplace had been stamped out.

"They must have left while we were in the woodshed," said Ned.

"Maybe they are out on the lake," answered the hermit's boy, and he ran
down to the water's edge, followed by his companion. But though they
looked in every direction, not a craft of any kind was to be seen.

"Joe, they didn't take to the water, consequently they must have left by
one of the mountain paths."

"That is true, and if they did they'll have no nice time in getting
through. All the bushes are sopping wet, and the mud is very slippery in
places."

They walked to the rear of the lodge and soon found the footprints of
the two strangers. They led through the bushes and were lost at a small
brook that ran into the lake.

"There is no use of our trying to follow this any further," said Joe.
"You'll get your clothing covered with water and mud."

"I don't intend to follow," answered Ned. "Just the same, I should like
to know more about those fellows."

"I wish I had seen their faces."

"Yes, it's a pity we didn't get a better look at them. But I'd know
their voices."

By the time they gave up the hunt the sun was shining brightly. Both
walked to where the boat had been left, and Joe turned the craft over
so that the water might run out. Then he mopped off the seats as best he
could.

Ned wanted to go directly home, and he and Joe rowed the craft in the
direction of Riverside. As they passed along the lake shore the hermit's
boy noted that several trees had been struck by lightning.

"I'm glad the lightning didn't strike the lodge while we were there,"
said he.

"It was certainly a severe storm while it lasted, Joe. By the way, shall
I say anything about those two men?"

"Perhaps it won't do any harm to tell your father, Ned."

"Very well, I'll do it."

Soon Riverside was reached, and having paid for the fish and the outing,
Ned Talmadge walked in the direction of his residence. Joe shoved off
from the tiny dock and struck out for his home. He did not dream of the
calamity that awaited him there.



CHAPTER III.


A HOME IN RUINS.


As Joe rowed toward his home on the mountain side, a good mile from
Riverside, he could not help but think of the two mysterious men and of
what they had said.

"They were certainly rascals," he mused. "And from their talk they
must have come from New York and are now going to try some game in
Philadelphia."

The hermit's boy was tired out by the day's outing, yet he pulled a
fairly quick stroke and it was not long before he reached the dock at
which he and Hiram Bodley were in the habit of leaving their boat. He
cleaned the craft out, hid the oars in the usual place, and then,
with his fishing lines in one hand and a good sized fish in the other,
started up the trail leading to the place that he called home.

"What a place to come to, alongside of the one Ned lives in," he said to
himself. "I suppose the Talmadges think this is a regular hovel. I
wish we could afford something better,--or at least live in town. It's
lonesome here with nobody but old Uncle Hiram around."

As Joe neared the cabin something seemed to come over him and, for some
reason he could not understand, he felt very much depressed in spirits.
He quickened his pace, until a turn of the trail brought the homestead
into view.

A cry of alarm broke from his lips and with good reason. The little
shelter had stood close to a large hemlock tree. The lightning had
struck the tree, causing it to topple ever. In falling, it had landed
fairly and squarely upon the cabin, smashing it completely. One corner
of the cabin was in ashes, but the heavy rain had probably extinguished
the conflagration.

"Uncle Hiram!" cried the boy, as soon as he recovered from his
amazement. "Uncle Hiram, where are you?"

There was no answer to this call and for the moment Joe's heart seemed
to stop beating. Was the old hermit under that pile of ruins? If so it
was more than likely he was dead.

Dropping his fish and his lines, the youth sprang to the front of the
cabin. The door had fallen to the ground and before him was a mass of
wreckage with a small hollow near the bottom. He dropped on his knees
and peered inside.

"Uncle Hiram!" he called again.

There was no answer, and he listened with bated breath. Then he fancied
he heard a groan, coming from the rear of what was left of the cabin.
He ran around to that point and pulled aside some boards and a broken
window sash.

"Uncle Hiram, are you here?"

"Joe!" came in a low voice, full of pain. The man tried to say more but
could not.

Hauling aside some more boards, Joe now beheld the hermit, lying flat on
his back, with a heavy beam resting on his chest. He was also suffering
from a cut on the forehead and from a broken ankle.

"This is too bad, Uncle Hiram!" he said, in a trembling voice. "I'll get
you out just as soon as I can."

"Be--be careful, Joe--I--I--my ribs must be broken," gasped the hermit.

"I'll be careful," answered the boy, and began to pull aside one board
after another. Then he tugged away at the beam but could not budge it.

"Raise it up Joe--it--is--crushing the life ou--out of me," said the
hermit faintly.

"I'll pry it up," answered the boy, and ran off to get a block of
wood. Then he procured a stout pole and with this raised the heavy beam
several inches.

"Can you crawl out, Uncle Hiram?"

There was no answer, and Joe saw that the man had fainted from
exhaustion. Fixing the pole so it could not slip, he caught hold of the
hermit and dragged him to a place of safety.

Joe had never had to care for a hurt person before and he scarcely knew
how to proceed. He laid the hermit on the grass and washed his face with
water. Soon Hiram Bodley opened his eyes once more.

"My chest!" he groaned. "All of my ribs must be broken! And my ankle is
broken, too!" And he groaned again.

"I had better get a doctor, Uncle Hiram."

"A doctor can't help me."

"Perhaps he can."

"I haven't any faith in doctors. A doctor operated on my mother and
killed her."

"But Doctor Gardner is a nice man. He will do all he can for you, I am
sure," urged Joe.

"Well, Dr. Gardner is a good fellow I admit. If you--can--can get
him--I'll--I'll--" The sufferer tried to go on but could not.

"I think I can get him. But I hate to leave you alone." And Joe stared
around helplessly. He wished he had Ned with him.

"Never mind--give me a drink--then go," answered Hiram Bodley. He had
often taken Doctor Gardner out to hunt with him and liked the physician
not a little.

Inside of five minutes Joe was on the way to the doctor's residence,
which was on the outskirts of Riverside. He had left the hermit as
comfortable as possible, on a mattress and covered with a cloth to keep
off the night air,--for it was now growing late and the sun had set
behind the mountains.

Tired though he was the boy pulled with might and main, and so reached
the dock of the physician's home in a short space of time. Running up
the walk of the neatly-kept garden, he mounted the piazza and rang the
bell several times.

"What's the matter?" asked Doctor Gardner, who came himself to answer
the summons.

"Our cabin is in ruins, because of the storm, and Mr. Bodley is badly
hurt," answered Joe, and related some of the particulars.

"This is certainly too bad, my boy," said the physician. "I'll come at
once and do what I can for him."

He ran for a case of instruments and also for some medicines, and then
followed Joe back to the boat.

"You act as if you were tired," said the doctor, after he had watched
Joe at the oars for several minutes.

"I am tired, sir--I've been rowing a good deal to-day. But I guess I can
make it."

"Let me row," said the physician, and took the oars. He was a fine
oarsman, and the trip was made in half the time it would have taken Joe
to cover the distance.

At the dock there was a lantern, used by Joe and the hermit when they
went fishing at night. This was lit, and the two hurried up the trail to
the wreck of the cabin.

Hiram Bodley was resting where Joe had left him. He was breathing with
difficulty and did not at first recognize the doctor.

"Take it off!" he murmured. "Take it off! It is--is crushing th--the
life out of--of me!"

"Mr. Bodley--Hiram, don't you know me?" asked Doctor Gardner, kindly.

"Oh! So it's you? I guess you can't do much, doctor, can you? I--I'm
done for!" And a spasm of pain crossed the sufferer's face.

"While there is life there is hope," answered the physician,
noncommittally. He recognized at once that Hiram Bodley's condition was
critical.

"He'll get over it, won't he?" questioned Joe, quickly.

The doctor did not answer, but turned to do what he could for the
hurt man. He felt of his chest and listened to his breathing, and then
administered some medicine.

