been driven to believe that Cecily's aversion to him was real, and not
merely the defence of maiden coyness. If she hated him so intensely that
she would rather write that note on the blackboard than sit with him,
what use was it to sigh like a furnace longer for her? Mr. Perkins had
blighted love's young dream for Cyrus with a killing frost. Thenceforth
sweet Cecily kept the noiseless tenor of her way unvexed by the
attentions of enamoured swains.




CHAPTER XVI. AUNT UNA'S STORY


Felicity, and Cecily, Dan, Felix, Sara Ray and I were sitting one
evening on the mossy stones in Uncle Roger's hill pasture, where we had
sat the morning the Story Girl told us the tale of the Wedding Veil of
the Proud Princess. But it was evening now and the valley beneath us was
brimmed up with the glow of the afterlight. Behind us, two tall, shapely
spruce trees rose up against the sunset, and through the dark oriel of
their sundered branches an evening star looked down. We sat on a little
strip of emerald grassland and before us was a sloping meadow all white
with daisies.

We were waiting for Peter and the Story Girl. Peter had gone to Markdale
after dinner to spend the afternoon with his reunited parents because
it was his birthday. He had left us grimly determined to confess to his
father the dark secret of his Presbyterianism, and we were anxious to
know what the result had been. The Story Girl had gone that morning
with Miss Reade to visit the latter's home near Charlottetown, and we
expected soon to see her coming gaily along over the fields from the
Armstrong place.

Presently Peter came jauntily stepping along the field path up the hill.

"Hasn't Peter got tall?" said Cecily.

"Peter is growing to be a very fine looking boy," decreed Felicity.

"I notice he's got ever so much handsomer since his father came home,"
said Dan, with a killing sarcasm that was wholly lost on Felicity, who
gravely responded that she supposed it was because Peter felt so much
freer from care and responsibility.

"What luck, Peter?" yelled Dan, as soon as Peter was within earshot.

"Everything's all right," he shouted jubilantly. "I told father right
off, licketty-split, as soon as I got home," he added when he reached
us. "I was anxious to have it over with. I says, solemn-like, 'Dad,
there's something I've got to tell you, and I don't know how you'll take
it, but it can't be helped,' I says. Dad looked pretty sober, and he
says, says he, 'What have you been up to, Peter? Don't be afraid to tell
me. I've been forgiven to seventy times seven, so surely I can forgive a
little, too?' 'Well,' I says, desperate-like, 'the truth is, father, I'm
a Presbyterian. I made up my mind last summer, the time of the Judgment
Day, that I'd be a Presbyterian, and I've got to stick to it. I'm sorry
I can't be a Methodist, like you and mother and Aunt Jane, but I can't
and that's all there is to it,' I says. Then I waited, scared-like. But
father, he just looked relieved and he says, says he, 'Goodness, boy,
you can be a Presbyterian or anything else you like, so long as it's
Protestant. I'm not caring,' he says. 'The main thing is that you must
be good and do what's right.' I tell you," concluded Peter emphatically,
"father is a Christian all right."

"Well, I suppose your mind will be at rest now," said Felicity. "What's
that you have in your buttonhole?"

"That's a four-leaved clover," answered Peter exultantly. "That means
good luck for the summer. I found it in Markdale. There ain't much
clover in Carlisle this year of any kind of leaf. The crop is going to
be a failure. Your Uncle Roger says it's because there ain't enough
old maids in Carlisle. There's lots of them in Markdale, and that's the
reason, he says, why they always have such good clover crops there."

"What on earth have old maids to do with it?" cried Cecily.

"I don't believe they've a single thing to do with it, but Mr. Roger
says they have, and he says a man called Darwin proved it. This is the
rigmarole he got off to me the other day. The clover crop depends on
there being plenty of bumble-bees, because they are the only insects
with tongues long enough to--to--fer--fertilize--I think he called it
the blossoms. But mice eat bumble-bees and cats eat mice and old maids
keep cats. So your Uncle Roger says the more old maids the more cats,
and the more cats the fewer field-mice, and the fewer field-mice the
more bumble-bees, and the more bumble-bees the better clover crops."

"So don't worry if you do get to be old maids, girls," said Dan.
"Remember, you'll be helping the clover crops."

"I never heard such stuff as you boys talk," said Felicity, "and Uncle
Roger is no better."

"There comes the Story Girl," cried Cecily eagerly. "Now we'll hear all
about Beautiful Alice's home."

The Story Girl was bombarded with eager questions as soon as she
arrived. Miss Reade's home was a dream of a place, it appeared. The
house was just covered with ivy and there was a most delightful old
garden--"and," added the Story Girl, with the joy of a connoisseur who
has found a rare gem, "the sweetest little story connected with it. And
I saw the hero of the story too."

"Where was the heroine?" queried Cecily.

"She is dead."

"Oh, of course she'd have to die," exclaimed Dan in disgust. "I'd like a
story where somebody lived once in awhile."

"I've told you heaps of stories where people lived," retorted the Story
Girl. "If this heroine hadn't died there wouldn't have been any story.
She was Miss Reade's aunt and her name was Una, and I believe she must
have been just like Miss Reade herself. Miss Reade told me all about
her. When we went into the garden I saw in one corner of it an old stone
bench arched over by a couple of pear trees and all grown about with
grass and violets. And an old man was sitting on it--a bent old man with
long, snow-white hair and beautiful sad blue eyes. He seemed very lonely
and sorrowful and I wondered that Miss Reade didn't speak to him. But
she never let on she saw him and took me away to another part of the
garden. After awhile he got up and went away and then Miss Reade said,
'Come over to Aunt Una's seat and I will tell you about her and her
lover--that man who has just gone out.'

"'Oh, isn't he too old for a lover?' I said.

"Beautiful Alice laughed and said it was forty years since he had been
her Aunt Una's lover. He had been a tall, handsome young man then, and
her Aunt Una was a beautiful girl of nineteen.

"We went over and sat down and Miss Reade told me all about her. She
said that when she was a child she had heard much of her Aunt Una--that
she seemed to have been one of those people who are not soon forgotten,
whose personality seems to linger about the scenes of their lives long
after they have passed away."

"What is a personality? Is it another word for ghost?" asked Peter.

"No," said the Story Girl shortly. "I can't stop in a story to explain
words."

"I don't believe you know what it is yourself," said Felicity.

The Story Girl picked up her hat, which she had thrown down on the
grass, and placed it defiantly on her brown curls.

"I'm going in," she announced. "I have to help Aunt Olivia ice a cake
tonight, and you all seem more interested in dictionaries than stories."

"That's not fair," I exclaimed. "Dan and Felix and Sara Ray and Cecily
and I have never said a word. It's mean to punish us for what Peter and
Felicity did. We want to hear the rest of the story. Never mind what a
personality is but go on--and, Peter, you young ass, keep still."

"I only wanted to know," muttered Peter sulkily.

"I DO know what personality is, but it's hard to explain," said the
Story Girl, relenting. "It's what makes you different from Dan, Peter,
and me different from Felicity or Cecily. Miss Reade's Aunt Una had a
personality that was very uncommon. And she was beautiful, too, with
white skin and night-black eyes and hair--a 'moonlight beauty,' Miss
Reade called it. She used to keep a kind of a diary, and Miss Reade's
mother used to read parts of it to her. She wrote verses in it and they
were lovely; and she wrote descriptions of the old garden which she
loved very much. Miss Reade said that everything in the garden, plot
or shrub or tree, recalled to her mind some phrase or verse of her
Aunt Una's, so that the whole place seemed full of her, and her memory
haunted the walks like a faint, sweet perfume.

"Una had, as I've told you, a lover; and they were to have been married
on her twentieth birthday. Her wedding dress was to have been a gown of
white brocade with purple violets in it. But a little while before it
she took ill with fever and died; and she was buried on her birthday
instead of being married. It was just in the time of opening roses. Her
lover has been faithful to her ever since; he has never married, and
every June, on her birthday, he makes a pilgrimage to the old garden and
sits for a long time in silence on the bench where he used to woo her
on crimson eves and moonlight nights of long ago. Miss Reade says she
always loves to see him sitting there because it gives her such a deep
and lasting sense of the beauty and strength of love which can thus
outlive time and death. And sometimes, she says, it gives her a little
eerie feeling, too, as if her Aunt Una were really sitting there beside
him, keeping tryst, although she has been in her grave for forty years."

"It would be real romantic to die young and have your lover make a
pilgrimage to your garden every year," reflected Sara Ray.

"It would be more comfortable to go on living and get married to him,"
said Felicity. "Mother says all those sentimental ideas are bosh and I
expect they are. It's a wonder Beautiful Alice hasn't a beau herself.
She is so pretty and lady-like."

"The Carlisle fellows all say she is too stuck up," said Dan.

"There's nobody in Carlisle half good enough for her," cried the Story
Girl, "except--ex-cept--"

"Except who?" asked Felix.

"Never mind," said the Story Girl mysteriously.




CHAPTER XVII. AUNT OLIVIA'S WEDDING


What a delightful, old-fashioned, wholesome excitement there was about
Aunt Olivia's wedding! The Monday and Tuesday preceding it we did not go
to school at all, but were all kept home to do chores and run errands.
The cooking and decorating and arranging that went on those two days
was amazing, and Felicity was so happy over it all that she did not even
quarrel with Dan--though she narrowly escaped it when he told her that
the Governor's wife was coming to the wedding.

"Mind you have some of her favourite rusks for her," he said.

"I guess," said Felicity with dignity, "that Aunt Olivia's wedding
supper will be good enough for even a Governor's wife."

"I s'pose none of us except the Story Girl will get to the first table,"
said Felix, rather gloomily.

"Never mind," comforted Felicity. "There's a whole turkey to be kept for
us, and a freezerful of ice cream. Cecily and I are going to wait on the
tables, and we'll put away a little of everything that's extra nice for
our suppers."

"I do so want to have my supper with you," sighed Sara Ray, "but I
s'pose ma will drag me with her wherever she goes. She won't trust me
out of her sight a minute the whole evening--I know she won't."

"I'll get Aunt Olivia to ask her to let you have your supper with us,"
said Cecily. "She can't refuse the bride's request."

"You don't know all ma can do," returned Sara darkly. "No, I feel that
I'll have to eat my supper with her. But I suppose I ought to be very
thankful I'm to get to the wedding at all, and that ma did get me a
new white dress for it. Even yet I'm so scared something will happen to
prevent me from getting to it."

Monday evening shrouded itself in clouds, and all night long the voice
of the wind answered to the voice of the rain. Tuesday the downpour
continued. We were quite frantic about it. Suppose it kept on raining
over Wednesday! Aunt Olivia couldn't be married in the orchard then.
That would be too bad, especially when the late apple tree had most
obligingly kept its store of blossom until after all the other trees had
faded and then burst lavishly into bloom for Aunt Olivia's wedding. That
apple tree was always very late in blooming, and this year it was a week
later than usual. It was a sight to see--a great tree-pyramid with high,
far-spreading boughs, over which a wealth of rosy snow seemed to have
been flung. Never had bride a more magnificent canopy.

To our rapture, however, it cleared up beautifully Tuesday evening,
and the sun, before setting in purple pomp, poured a flood of wonderful
radiance over the whole great, green, diamond-dripping world, promising
a fair morrow. Uncle Alec drove off to the station through it to bring
home the bridegroom and his best man. Dan was full of a wild idea that
we should all meet them at the gate, armed with cowbells and tin-pans,
and "charivari" them up the lane. Peter sided with him, but the rest of
us voted down the suggestion.

"Do you want Dr. Seton to think we are a pack of wild Indians?" asked
Felicity severely. "A nice opinion he'd have of our manners!"

"Well, it's the only chance we'll have to chivaree them," grumbled Dan.
"Aunt Olivia wouldn't mind. SHE can take a joke."

"Ma would kill you if you did such a thing," warned Felicity. "Dr. Seton
lives in Halifax and they NEVER chivaree people there. He would think it
very vulgar."

"Then he should have stayed in Halifax and got married there," retorted
Dan, sulkily.

We were very curious to see our uncle-elect. When he came and Uncle
Alec took him into the parlour, we were all crowded into the dark corner
behind the stairs to peep at him. Then we fled to the moonlight world
outside and discussed him at the dairy.

"He's bald," said Cecily disappointedly.

"And RATHER short and stout," said Felicity.

"He's forty, if he's a day," said Dan.

"Never you mind," cried the Story Girl loyally, "Aunt Olivia loves him
with all her heart."

"And more than that, he's got lots of money," added Felicity.

"Well, he may be all right," said Peter, "but it's my opinion that your
Aunt Olivia could have done just as well on the Island."

"YOUR opinion doesn't matter very much to our family," said Felicity
crushingly.

But when we made the acquaintance of Dr. Seton next morning we liked him
enormously, and voted him a jolly good fellow. Even Peter remarked aside
to me that he guessed Miss Olivia hadn't made much of a mistake after
all, though it was plain he thought she was running a risk in not
sticking to the Island. The girls had not much time to discuss him with
us. They were all exceedingly busy and whisked about at such a rate
that they seemed to possess the power of being in half a dozen places
at once. The importance of Felicity was quite terrible. But after dinner
came a lull.

"Thank goodness, everything is ready at last," breathed Felicity
devoutly, as we foregathered for a brief space in the fir wood. "We've
nothing more to do now but get dressed. It's really a serious thing to
have a wedding in the family."

"I have a note from Sara Ray," said Cecily. "Judy Pineau brought it up
