However, enough cattle were left to make the young man rich, and he and
his wife lived happily together, except that every now and then the girl
vanished from his sight, and never told him where she had been. For
a long time he kept silence about it; but one day, when he had been
complaining of her absence, she said to him: 'Dear husband, I am bound
to go, even against my will, and there is only one way to stop me. Drive
a nail into the threshold, and then I can never pass in or out.'

And so he did.

[Lapplandische Mahrchen.]




How Some Wild Animals Became Tame Ones



Once upon a time there lived a miller who was so rich that, when he was
going to be married, he asked to the feast not only his own friends but
also the wild animals who dwelt in the hills and woods round about. The
chief of the bears, the wolves, the foxes, the horses, the cows, the
goats, the sheep, and the reindeer, all received invitations; and as
they were not accustomed to weddings they were greatly pleased and
flattered, and sent back messages in the politest language that they
would certainly be there.

The first to start on the morning of the wedding-day was the bear, who
always liked to be punctual; and, besides, he had a long way to go, and
his hair, being so thick and rough, needed a good brushing before it was
fit to be seen at a party. However, he took care to awaken very early,
and set off down the road with a light heart. Before he had walked very
far he met a boy who came whistling along, hitting at the tops of the
flowers with a stick.

'Where are you going?' said he, looking at the bear in surprise, for he
was an old acquaintance, and not generally so smart.

'Oh, just to the miller's marriage,' answered the bear carelessly. 'Of
course, I would much rather stay at home, but the miller was so anxious
I should be there that I really could not refuse.'

'Don't go, don't go!' cried the boy. 'If you do you will never come
back! You have got the most beautiful skin in the world--just the kind
that everyone is wanting, and they will be sure to kill you and strip
you of it.'

'I had not thought of that,' said the bear, whose face turned white,
only nobody could see it. 'If you are certain that they would be so
wicked--but perhaps you are jealous because nobody has invited you?'

'Oh, nonsense!' replied the boy angrily, 'do as you see. It is your
skin, and not mine; I don't care what becomes of it!' And he walked
quickly on with his head in the air.

The bear waited until he was out of sight, and then followed him slowly,
for he felt in his heart that the boy's advice was good, though he was
too proud to say so.

The boy soon grew tired of walking along the road, and turned off into
the woods, where there were bushes he could jump and streams he could
wade; but he had not gone far before he met the wolf.

'Where are you going?' asked he, for it was not the first time he had
seen him.

'Oh, just to the miller's marriage,' answered the wolf, as the bear had
done before him. 'It is rather tiresome, of course--weddings are always
so stupid; but still one must be good-natured!'

'Don't go!' said the boy again. 'Your skin is so thick and warm, and
winter is not far off now. They will kill you, and strip it from you.'

The wolf's jaw dropped in astonishment and terror. 'Do you really think
that would happen?' he gasped.

'Yes, to be sure, I do,' answered the boy. 'But it is your affair, not
mine. So good-morning,' and on he went. The wolf stood still for a few
minutes, for he was trembling all over, and then crept quietly back to
his cave.

Next the boy met the fox, whose lovely coat of silvery grey was shining
in the sun.

'You look very fine!' said the boy, stopping to admire him, 'are you
going to the miller's wedding too?'

'Yes,' answered the fox; 'it is a long journey to take for such a thing
as that, but you know what the miller's friends are like--so dull and
heavy! It is only kind to go and amuse them a little.'

'You poor fellow,' said the boy pityingly. 'Take my advice and stay
at home. If you once enter the miller's gate his dogs will tear you in
pieces.'

'Ah, well, such things have occurred, I know,' replied the fox gravely.
And without saying any more he trotted off the way he had come.

His tail had scarcely disappeared, when a great noise of crashing
branches was heard, and up bounded the horse, his black skin glistening
like satin.

'Good-morning,' he called to the boy as he galloped past, 'I can't wait
to talk to you now. I have promised the miller to be present at his
wedding-feast, and they won't sit down till I come.'

'Stop! stop!' cried the boy after him, and there was something in his
voice that made the horse pull up. 'What is the matter?' asked he.

'You don't know what you are doing,' said the boy. 'If once you go there
you will never gallop through these woods any more. You are stronger
than many men, but they will catch you and put ropes round you, and you
will have to work and to serve them all the days of your life.'

The horse threw back his head at these words, and laughed scornfully.

'Yes, I am stronger than many men,' answered he, 'and all the ropes in
the world would not hold me. Let them bind me as fast as they will, I
can always break loose, and return to the forest and freedom.'

And with this proud speech he gave a whisk of his long tail, and
galloped away faster than before.

But when he reached the miller's house everything happened as the boy
had said. While he was looking at the guests and thinking how much
handsomer and stronger he was than any of them, a rope was suddenly
flung over his head, and he was thrown down and a bit thrust between his
teeth. Then, in spite of his struggles, he was dragged to a stable, and
shut up for several days without any food, till his spirit was broken
and his coat had lost its gloss. After that he was harnessed to a
plough, and had plenty of time to remember all he had lost through not
listening to the counsel of the boy.

When the horse had turned a deaf ear to his words the boy wandered idly
along, sometimes gathering wild strawberries from a bank, and sometimes
plucking wild cherries from a tree, till he reached a clearing in
the middle of the forest. Crossing this open space was a beautiful
milk-white cow with a wreath of flowers round her neck.

'Good-morning,' she said pleasantly, as she came up to the place where
the boy was standing.

'Good-morning,' he returned. 'Where are you going in such a hurry?'

'To the miller's wedding; I am rather late already, for the wreath took
such a long time to make, so I can't stop.'

'Don't go,' said the boy earnestly;' when once they have tasted your
milk they will never let you leave them, and you will have to serve them
all the days of your life.'

'Oh, nonsense; what do you know about it?' answered the cow, who always
thought she was wiser than other people. 'Why, I can run twice as fast
as any of them! I should like to see anybody try to keep me against my
will.' And, without even a polite bow, she went on her way, feeling very
much offended.

But everything turned out just as the boy had said. The company had
all heard of the fame of the cow's milk, and persuaded her to give them
some, and then her doom was sealed. A crowd gathered round her, and held
her horns so that she could not use them, and, like the horse, she was
shut in the stable, and only let out in the mornings, when a long rope
was tied round her head, and she was fastened to a stake in a grassy
meadow.

And so it happened to the goat and to the sheep.

Last of all came the reindeer, looking as he always did, as if some
serious business was on hand.

'Where are you going?' asked the boy, who by this time was tired of wild
cherries, and was thinking of his dinner.

'I am invited to the wedding,' answered the reindeer, 'and the miller
has begged me on no account to fail him.'

'O fool!' cried the boy, 'have you no sense at all? Don't you know that
when you get there they will hold you fast, for neither beast nor bird
is as strong or as swift as you?'

'That is exactly why I am quite safe,' replied the reindeer. 'I am so
strong that no one can bind me, and so swift that not even an arrow can
catch me. So, goodbye for the present, you will soon see me back.'

But none of the animals that went to the miller's wedding ever came
back. And because they were self-willed and conceited, and would not
listen to good advice, they and their children have been the servants of
men to this very day.

[Lapplandische Mahrchen.]




Fortune and the Wood-Cutter



Several hundreds of years ago there lived in a forest a wood-cutter and
his wife and children. He was very poor, having only his axe to depend
upon, and two mules to carry the wood he cut to the neighbouring town;
but he worked hard, and was always out of bed by five o'clock, summer
and winter.

This went on for twenty years, and though his sons were now grown
up, and went with their father to the forest, everything seemed to
go against them, and they remained as poor as ever. In the end the
wood-cutter lost heart, and said to himself:

'What is the good of working like this if I never am a penny the richer
at the end? I shall go to the forest no more! And perhaps, if I take to
my bed, and do not run after Fortune, one day she may come to me.'

So the next morning he did not get up, and when six o'clock struck, his
wife, who had been cleaning the house, went to see what was the matter.

'Are you ill?' she asked wonderingly, surprised at not finding him
dressed. 'The cock has crowed ever so often. It is high time for you to
get up.'

'Why should I get up?' asked the man, without moving.

'Why? to go to the forest, of course.'

'Yes; and when I have toiled all day I hardly earn enough to give us one
meal.'

'But what can we do, my poor husband?' said she. 'It is just a trick of
Fortune's, who would never smile upon us.'

'Well, I have had my fill of Fortune's tricks,' cried he. 'If she wants
me she can find me here. But I have done with the wood for ever.'

'My dear husband, grief has driven you mad! Do you think Fortune will
come to anybody who does not go after her? Dress yourself, and saddle
the mules, and begin your work. Do you know that there is not a morsel
of bread in the house?'

'I don't care if there isn't, and I am not going to the forest. It is no
use your talking; nothing will make me change my mind.'

The distracted wife begged and implored in vain; her husband persisted
in staying in bed, and at last, in despair, she left him and went back
to her work.

An hour or two later a man from the nearest village knocked at her door,
and when she opened it, he said to her: 'Good-morning, mother. I have
got a job to do, and I want to know if your husband will lend me your
mules, as I see he is not using them, and can lend me a hand himself?'

'He is upstairs; you had better ask him,' answered the woman. And the
man went up, and repeated his request.

'I am sorry, neighbour, but I have sworn not to leave my bed, and
nothing will make me break my vow.'

'Well, then, will you lend me your two mules? I will pay you something
for them.'

'Certainly, neighbour. Take them and welcome.'

So the man left the house, and leading the mules from the stable, placed
two sacks on their back, and drove them to a field where he had found
a hidden treasure. He filled the sacks with the money, though he knew
perfectly well that it belonged to the sultan, and was driving them
quietly home again, when he saw two soldiers coming along the road. Now
the man was aware that if he was caught he would be condemned to death,
so he fled back into the forest. The mules, left to themselves, took the
path that led to their master's stable.

The wood-cutter's wife was looking out of the window when the mules drew
up before the door, so heavily laden that they almost sank under their
burdens. She lost no time in calling her husband, who was still lying in
bed.

'Quick! quick! get up as fast as you can. Our two mules have returned
with sacks on their backs, so heavily laden with something or other that
the poor beasts can hardly stand up.'

'Wife, I have told you a dozen times already that I am not going to get
up. Why can't you leave me in peace?'

As she found she could get no help from her husband the woman took a
large knife and cut the cords which bound the sacks on to the animals'
backs. They fell at once to the ground, and out poured a rain of gold
pieces, till the little court-yard shone like the sun.

'A treasure!' gasped the woman, as soon as she could speak from
surprise. 'A treasure!' And she ran off to tell her husband.

'Get up! get up!' she cried. 'You were quite right not to go to the
forest, and to await Fortune in your bed; she has come at last! Our
mules have returned home laden with all the gold in the world, and it is
now lying in the court. No one in the whole country can be as rich as we
are!'

In an instant the wood-cutter was on his feet, and running to the court,
where he paused dazzled by the glitter of the coins which lay around
him.

'You see, my dear wife, that I was right,' he said at last. 'Fortune
is so capricious, you can never count on her. Run after her, and she is
sure to fly from you; stay still, and she is sure to come.'

[Traditions Populaires de l'Asie Mineure.]




The Enchanted Head



Once upon a time an old woman lived in a small cottage near the sea with
her two daughters. They were very poor, and the girls seldom left the
house, as they worked all day long making veils for the ladies to wear
over their faces, and every morning, when the veils were finished, the
other took them over the bridge and sold them in the city. Then she
bought the food that they needed for the day, and returned home to do
her share of veil-making.

One morning the old woman rose even earlier than usual, and set off
for the city with her wares. She was just crossing the bridge when,
suddenly, she knocked up against a human head, which she had never
seen there before. The woman started back in horror; but what was her
surprise when the head spoke, exactly as if it had a body joined on to
it.

'Take me with you, good mother!' it said imploringly; 'take me with you
back to your house.'

At the sound of these words the poor woman nearly went mad with terror.
Have that horrible thing always at home? Never! never! And she turned
and ran back as fast as she could, not knowing that the head was
jumping, dancing, and rolling after her. But when she reached her own
door it bounded in before her, and stopped in front of the fire, begging
and praying to be allowed to stay.

All that day there was no food in the house, for the veils had not been
sold, and they had no money to buy anything with. So they all sat silent
at their work, inwardly cursing the head which was the cause of their
misfortunes.

When evening came, and there was no sign of supper, the head spoke, for
