pursed-up mouth. Only in his blue eyes was a twinkle that would have
made any man who designed getting the better of him in a bargain think
twice before he made the attempt.

It was easily seen that Eric must have inherited his personal beauty and
distinction of form from his mother, whose picture hung on the dark wall
between the windows. She had died while still young, when Eric was a boy
of ten. During her lifetime she had been the object of the passionate
devotion of both her husband and son; and the fine, strong, sweet face
of the picture was a testimony that she had been worthy of their love
and reverence. The same face, cast in a masculine mold, was repeated in
Eric; the chestnut hair grew off his forehead in the same way; his eyes
were like hers, and in his grave moods they held a similar expression,
half brooding, half tender, in their depths.

Mr. Marshall was very proud of his son's success in college, but he had
no intention of letting him see it. He loved this boy of his, with the
dead mother's eyes, better than anything on earth, and all his hopes and
ambitions were bound up in him.

"Well, that fuss is over, thank goodness," he said testily, as he
dropped into his favourite chair.

"Didn't you find the programme interesting?" asked Eric absently.

"Most of it was tommyrot," said his father. "The only things I liked
were Charlie's Latin prayer and those pretty little girls trotting up
to get their diplomas. Latin IS the language for praying in, I do
believe,--at least, when a man has a voice like Old Charlie's. There was
such a sonorous roll to the words that the mere sound of them made me
feel like getting down on my marrow bones. And then those girls were as
pretty as pinks, now weren't they? Agnes was the finest-looking of the
lot in my opinion. I hope it's true that you're courting her, Eric?"

"Confound it, father," said Eric, half irritably, half laughingly, "have
you and David Baker entered into a conspiracy to hound me into matrimony
whether I will or no?"

"I've never said a word to David Baker on such a subject," protested Mr.
Marshall.

"Well, you are just as bad as he is. He hectored me all the way home
from the college on the subject. But why are you in such a hurry to have
me married, dad?"

"Because I want a homemaker in this house as soon as may be. There has
never been one since your mother died. I am tired of housekeepers. And I
want to see your children at my knees before I die, Eric, and I'm an old
man now."

"Well, your wish is natural, father," said Eric gently, with a glance at
his mother's picture. "But I can't rush out and marry somebody off-hand,
can I? And I fear it wouldn't exactly do to advertise for a wife, even
in these days of commercial enterprise."

"Isn't there ANYBODY you're fond of?" queried Mr. Marshall, with the
patient air of a man who overlooks the frivolous jests of youth.

"No. I never yet saw the woman who could make my heart beat any faster."

"I don't know what you young men are made of nowadays," growled his
father. "I was in love half a dozen times before I was your age."

"You might have been 'in love.' But you never LOVED any woman until you
met my mother. I know that, father. And it didn't happen till you were
pretty well on in life either."

"You're too hard to please. That's what's the matter, that's what's the
matter!"

"Perhaps I am. When a man has had a mother like mine his standard of
womanly sweetness is apt to be pitched pretty high. Let's drop the
subject, father. Here, I want you to read this letter--it's from Larry."

"Humph!" grunted Mr. Marshall, when he had finished with it. "So Larry's
knocked out at last--always thought he would be--always expected it.
Sorry, too. He was a decent fellow. Well, are you going?"

"Yes, I think so, if you don't object."

"You'll have a pretty monotonous time of it, judging from his account of
Lindsay."

"Probably. But I am not going over in search of excitement. I'm going to
oblige Larry and have a look at the Island."

"Well, it's worth looking at, some parts of the year," conceded Mr.
Marshall. "When I'm on Prince Edward Island in the summer I always
understand an old Scotch Islander I met once in Winnipeg. He was always
talking of 'the Island.' Somebody once asked him, 'What island do you
mean?' He simply LOOKED at that ignorant man. Then he said, 'Why, Prince
Edward Island, mon. WHAT OTHER ISLAND IS THERE?' Go if you'd like to.
You need a rest after the grind of examinations before settling down to
business. And mind you don't get into any mischief, young sir."

"Not much likelihood of that in a place like Lindsay, I fancy," laughed
Eric.

"Probably the devil finds as much mischief for idle hands in Lindsay as
anywhere else. The worst tragedy I ever heard of happened on a backwoods
farm, fifteen miles from a railroad and five from a store. However, I
expect your mother's son to behave himself in the fear of God and man.
In all likelihood the worst thing that will happen to you over there
will be that some misguided woman will put you to sleep in a spare room
bed. And if that does happen may the Lord have mercy on your soul!"



CHAPTER III. THE MASTER OF LINDSAY SCHOOL

One evening, a month later, Eric Marshall came out of the old,
white-washed schoolhouse at Lindsay, and locked the door--which was
carved over with initials innumerable, and built of double plank in
order that it might withstand all the assaults and batteries to which it
might be subjected.

Eric's pupils had gone home an hour before, but he had stayed to solve
some algebra problems, and correct some Latin exercises for his advanced
students.

The sun was slanting in warm yellow lines through the thick grove of
maples to the west of the building, and the dim green air beneath them
burst into golden bloom. A couple of sheep were nibbling the lush grass
in a far corner of the play-ground; a cow-bell, somewhere in the maple
woods, tinkled faintly and musically, on the still crystal air, which,
in spite of its blandness, still retained a touch of the wholesome
austerity and poignancy of a Canadian spring. The whole world seemed to
have fallen, for the time being, into a pleasant untroubled dream.

The scene was very peaceful and pastoral--almost too much so, the young
man thought, with a shrug of his shoulders, as he stood in the worn
steps and gazed about him. How was he going to put in a whole month
here, he wondered, with a little smile at his own expense.

"Father would chuckle if he knew I was sick of it already," he thought,
as he walked across the play-ground to the long red road that ran past
the school. "Well, one week is ended, at any rate. I've earned my own
living for five whole days, and that is something I could never say
before in all my twenty-four years of existence. It is an exhilarating
thought. But teaching the Lindsay district school is distinctly NOT
exhilarating--at least in such a well-behaved school as this, where
the pupils are so painfully good that I haven't even the traditional
excitement of thrashing obstreperous bad boys. Everything seems to go by
clock work in Lindsay educational institution. Larry must certainly have
possessed a marked gift for organizing and drilling. I feel as if I
were merely a big cog in an orderly machine that ran itself. However, I
understand that there are some pupils who haven't shown up yet, and who,
according to all reports, have not yet had the old Adam totally drilled
out of them. They may make things more interesting. Also a few
more compositions, such as John Reid's, would furnish some spice to
professional life."

Eric's laughter wakened the echoes as he swung into the road down the
long sloping hill. He had given his fourth grade pupils their own choice
of subjects in the composition class that morning, and John Reid, a
sober, matter-of-fact little urchin, with not the slightest embryonic
development of a sense of humour, had, acting upon the whispered
suggestion of a roguish desk-mate, elected to write upon "Courting." His
opening sentence made Eric's face twitch mutinously whenever he recalled
it during the day. "Courting is a very pleasant thing which a great many
people go too far with."

The distant hills and wooded uplands were tremulous and aerial in
delicate spring-time gauzes of pearl and purple. The young, green-leafed
maples crowded thickly to the very edge of the road on either side, but
beyond them were emerald fields basking in sunshine, over which cloud
shadows rolled, broadened, and vanished. Far below the fields a calm
ocean slept bluely, and sighed in its sleep, with the murmur that rings
for ever in the ear of those whose good fortune it is to have been born
within the sound of it.

Now and then Eric met some callow, check-shirted, bare-legged lad on
horseback, or a shrewd-faced farmer in a cart, who nodded and called out
cheerily, "Howdy, Master?" A young girl, with a rosy, oval face, dimpled
cheeks, and pretty dark eyes filled with shy coquetry, passed him,
looking as if she would not be at all averse to a better acquaintance
with the new teacher.

Half way down the hill Eric met a shambling, old gray horse drawing an
express wagon which had seen better days. The driver was a woman: she
appeared to be one of those drab-tinted individuals who can never have
felt a rosy emotion in all their lives. She stopped her horse, and
beckoned Eric over to her with the knobby handle of a faded and bony
umbrella.

"Reckon you're the new Master, ain't you?" she asked.

Eric admitted that he was.

"Well, I'm glad to see you," she said, offering him a hand in a much
darned cotton glove that had once been black.

"I was right sorry to see Mr. West go, for he was a right good teacher,
and as harmless, inoffensive a creetur as ever lived. But I always told
him every time I laid eyes on him that he was in consumption, if ever
a man was. YOU look real healthy--though you can't aways tell by looks,
either. I had a brother complected like you, but he was killed in a
railroad accident out west when he was real young.

"I've got a boy I'll be sending to school to you next week. He'd oughter
gone this week, but I had to keep him home to help me put the pertaters
in; for his father won't work and doesn't work and can't be made to
work.

"Sandy--his full name is Edward Alexander--called after both his
grandfathers--hates the idee of going to school worse 'n pisen--always
did. But go he shall, for I'm determined he's got to have more larning
hammered into his head yet. I reckon you'll have trouble with him,
Master, for he's as stupid as an owl, and as stubborn as Solomon's mule.
But mind this, Master, I'll back you up. You just lick Sandy good and
plenty when he needs it, and send me a scrape of the pen home with him,
and I'll give him another dose.

"There's people that always sides in with their young ones when there's
any rumpus kicked up in the school, but I don't hold to that, and never
did. You can depend on Rebecca Reid every time, Master."

"Thank you. I am sure I can," said Eric, in his most winning tones.

He kept his face straight until it was safe to relax, and Mrs. Reid
drove on with a soft feeling in her leathery old heart, which had been
so toughened by long endurance of poverty and toil, and a husband who
wouldn't work and couldn't be made to work, that it was no longer a very
susceptible organ where members of the opposite sex were concerned.

Mrs. Reid reflected that this young man had a way with him.

Eric already knew most of the Lindsay folks by sight; but at the foot of
the hill he met two people, a man and a boy, whom he did not know. They
were sitting in a shabby, old-fashioned wagon, and were watering their
horse at the brook, which gurgled limpidly under the little plank bridge
in the hollow.

Eric surveyed them with some curiosity. They did not look in the least
like the ordinary run of Lindsay people. The boy, in particular, had
a distinctly foreign appearance, in spite of the gingham shirt and
homespun trousers, which seemed to be the regulation, work-a-day outfit
for the Lindsay farmer lads. He had a lithe, supple body, with sloping
shoulders, and a lean, satiny brown throat above his open shirt collar.
His head was covered with thick, silky, black curls, and the hand that
hung down by the side of the wagon was unusually long and slender. His
face was richly, though somewhat heavily featured, olive tinted, save
for the cheeks, which had a dusky crimson bloom. His mouth was as red
and beguiling as a girl's, and his eyes were large, bold and black. All
in all, he was a strikingly handsome fellow; but the expression of his
face was sullen, and he somehow gave Eric the impression of a sinuous,
feline creature basking in lazy grace, but ever ready for an unexpected
spring.

The other occupant of the wagon was a man between sixty-five and
seventy, with iron-gray hair, a long, full, gray beard, a harsh-featured
face, and deep-set hazel eyes under bushy, bristling brows. He was
evidently tall, with a spare, ungainly figure, and stooping shoulders.
His mouth was close-lipped and relentless, and did not look as if it
had ever smiled. Indeed, the idea of smiling could not be connected with
this man--it was utterly incongruous. Yet there was nothing repellent
about his face; and there was something in it that compelled Eric's
attention.

He rather prided himself on being a student of physiognomy, and he felt
quite sure that this man was no ordinary Lindsay farmer of the genial,
garrulous type with which he was familiar.

Long after the old wagon, with its oddly assorted pair, had gone
lumbering up the hill, Eric found himself thinking of the stern, heavy
browed man and the black-eyed, red-lipped boy.



CHAPTER IV. A TEA TABLE CONVERSATION

The Williamson place, where Eric boarded, was on the crest of the
succeeding hill. He liked it as well as Larry West had prophesied that
he would. The Williamsons, as well as the rest of the Lindsay people,
took it for granted that he was a poor college student working his way
through as Larry West had been doing. Eric did not disturb this belief,
although he said nothing to contribute to it.

The Williamsons were at tea in the kitchen when Eric went in. Mrs.
Williamson was the "saint in spectacles and calico" which Larry West had
termed her. Eric liked her greatly. She was a slight, gray-haired woman,
with a thin, sweet, high-bred face, deeply lined with the records of
outlived pain. She talked little as a rule; but, in the pungent country
phrase she never spoke but she said something. The one thing that
constantly puzzled Eric was how such a woman ever came to marry Robert
Williamson.

She smiled in a motherly fashion at Eric, as he hung his hat on the
white-washed wall and took his place at the table. Outside of the
window behind him was a birch grove which, in the westering sun, was
a tremulous splendour, with a sea of undergrowth wavered into golden
billows by every passing wind.

Old Robert Williamson sat opposite him, on a bench. He was a small, lean
old man, half lost in loose clothes that seemed far too large for him.
When he spoke his voice was as thin and squeaky as he appeared to be
himself.

The other end of the bench was occupied by Timothy, sleek and
complacent, with a snowy breast and white paws. After old Robert had
taken a mouthful of anything he gave a piece to Timothy, who ate it
daintily and purred resonant gratitude.

"You see we're busy waiting for you, Master," said old Robert. "You're
late this evening. Keep any of the youngsters in? That's a foolish way
of punishing them, as hard on yourself as on them. One teacher we had
four years ago used to lock them in and go home. Then he'd go back in
an hour and let them out--if they were there. They weren't always. Tom
Ferguson kicked the panels out of the old door once and got out that
way. We put a new door of double plank in that they couldn't kick out."

"I stayed in the schoolroom to do some work," said Eric briefly.

"Well, you've missed Alexander Tracy. He was here to find out if you
could play checkers, and, when I told him you could, he left word for
you to go up and have a game some evening soon. Don't beat him too
often, even if you can. You'll need to stand in with him, I tell you,
Master, for he's got a son that may brew trouble for you when he starts
in to go to school. Seth Tracy's a young imp, and he'd far sooner be in
mischief than eat. He tries to run on every new teacher and he's run
two clean out of the school. But he met his match in Mr. West. William
Tracy's boys now--you won't have a scrap of bother with THEM. They're
always good because their mother tells them every Sunday that they'll
go straight to hell if they don't behave in school. It's effective. Take
some preserve, Master. You know we don't help things here the way Mrs.
Adam Scott does when she has boarders, 'I s'pose you don't want any of
this--nor you--nor you?' Mother, Aleck says old George Wright is having
the time of his life. His wife has gone to Charlottetown to visit her
sister and he is his own boss for the first time since he was married,
forty years ago. He's on a regular orgy, Aleck says. He smokes in the
parlour and sits up till eleven o'clock reading dime novels."

"Perhaps I met Mr. Tracy," said Eric. "Is he a tall man, with gray hair
and a dark, stern face?"

"No, he's a round, jolly fellow, is Aleck, and he stopped growing pretty
much before he'd ever begun. I reckon the man you mean is Thomas Gordon.
I seen him driving down the road too. HE won't be troubling you with
invitations up, small fear of it. The Gordons ain't sociable, to say the
least of it. No, sir! Mother, pass the biscuits to the Master."

"Who was the young fellow he had with him?" asked Eric curiously.

"Neil--Neil Gordon."

"That is a Scotchy name for such a face and eyes. I should rather have
expected Guiseppe or Angelo. The boy looks like an Italian."

"Well, now, you know, Master, I reckon it's likely he does, seeing
that that's exactly what he is. You've hit the nail square on the head.
Italyun, yes, sir! Rather too much so, I'm thinking, for decent folks'
taste."

"How has it happened that an Italian boy with a Scotch name is living in
a place like Lindsay?"

"Well, Master, it was this way. About twenty-two years ago--WAS it
twenty-two, Mother or twenty-four? Yes, it was twenty-two--'twas the
same year our Jim was born and he'd have been twenty-two if he'd lived,
poor little fellow. Well, Master, twenty-two years ago a couple of
Italian pack peddlers came along and called at the Gordon place. The
country was swarming with them then. I useter set the dog on one every
day on an average.

"Well, these peddlers were man and wife, and the woman took sick up
there at the Gordon place, and Janet Gordon took her in and nursed her.
A baby was born the next day, and the woman died. Then the first thing
anybody knew the father skipped clean out, pack and all, and was never
seen or heard tell of afterwards. The Gordons were left with the fine
youngster to their hands. Folks advised them to send him to the Orphan
Asylum, and 'twould have been the wisest plan, but the Gordons were
never fond of taking advice. Old James Gordon was living then, Thomas
and Janet's father, and he said he would never turn a child out of his
door. He was a masterful old man and liked to be boss. Folks used to say
he had a grudge against the sun 'cause it rose and set without his
say so. Anyhow, they kept the baby. They called him Neil and had him
baptized same as any Christian child. He's always lived there. They
did well enough by him. He was sent to school and taken to church and
treated like one of themselves. Some folks think they made too much of
him. It doesn't always do with that kind, for 'what's bred in bone
is mighty apt to come out in flesh,' if 'taint kept down pretty well.
Neil's smart and a great worker, they tell me. But folks hereabouts
don't like him. They say he ain't to be trusted further'n you can see
him, if as far. It's certain he's awful hot tempered, and one time when
he was going to school he near about killed a boy he'd took a spite
to--choked him till he was black in the face and Neil had to be dragged
off."

"Well now, father, you know they teased him terrible," protested Mrs.
Williamson. "The poor boy had a real hard time when he went to school,
Master. The other children were always casting things up to him and
calling him names."

"Oh, I daresay they tormented him a lot," admitted her husband. "He's
a great hand at the fiddle and likes company. He goes to the harbour a
good deal. But they say he takes sulky spells when he hasn't a word
to throw to a dog. 'Twouldn't be any wonder, living with the Gordons.
They're all as queer as Dick's hat-band."

"Father, you shouldn't talk so about your neighbours," said his wife
rebukingly.

"Well now, Mother, you know they are, if you'd only speak up honest. But
you're like old Aunt Nancy Scott, you never say anything uncharitable
except in the way of business. You know the Gordons ain't like other
people and never were and never will be. They're about the only queer
folks we have in Lindsay, Master, except old Peter Cook, who keeps
twenty-five cats. Lord, Master, think of it! What chanct would a poor
mouse have? None of the rest of us are queer, leastwise, we hain't found
it out if we are. But, then, we're mighty uninteresting, I'm bound to
admit that."

"Where do the Gordons live?" asked Eric, who had grown used to holding
fast to a given point of inquiry through all the bewildering mazes of
old Robert's conversation.

"Away up yander, half a mile in from Radnor road, with a thick spruce
wood atween them and all the rest of the world. They never go away
anywheres, except to church--they never miss that--and nobody goes
there. There's just old Thomas, and his sister Janet, and a niece of
theirs, and this here Neil we've been talking about. They're a queer,
dour, cranky lot, and I WILL say it, Mother. There, give your old man a
cup of tea and never mind the way his tongue runs on. Speaking of tea,
do you know Mrs. Adam Palmer and Mrs. Jim Martin took tea together at
Foster Reid's last Wednesday afternoon?"

"No, why, I thought they were on bad terms," said Mrs. Williamson,
betraying a little feminine curiosity.

"So they are, so they are. But they both happened to visit Mrs. Foster
the same afternoon and neither would leave because that would be
knuckling down to the other. So they stuck it out, on opposite sides
of the parlour. Mrs. Foster says she never spent such an uncomfortable
afternoon in all her life before. She would talk a spell to one and then
t'other. And they kept talking TO Mrs. Foster and AT each other. Mrs.
Foster says she really thought she'd have to keep them all night, for
neither would start to go home afore the other. Finally Jim Martin came
in to look for his wife, 'cause he thought she must have got stuck
in the marsh, and that solved the problem. Master, you ain't eating
anything. Don't mind my stopping; I was at it half an hour afore you
come, and anyway I'm in a hurry. My hired boy went home to-day. He heard
the rooster crow at twelve last night and he's gone home to see which of
his family is dead. He knows one of 'em is. He heard a rooster crow in
the middle of the night onct afore and the next day he got word that his
second cousin down at Souris was dead. Mother, if the Master don't want
any more tea, ain't there some cream for Timothy?"



CHAPTER V. A PHANTOM OF DELIGHT

Shortly before sunset that evening Eric went for a walk. When he did not
go to the shore he liked to indulge in long tramps through the Lindsay
fields and woods, in the mellowness of "the sweet 'o the year." Most of
the Lindsay houses were built along the main road, which ran parallel to
the shore, or about the stores at "The Corner." The farms ran back from
them into solitudes of woods and pasture lands.

Eric struck southwest from the Williamson homestead, in a direction
he had not hitherto explored, and walked briskly along, enjoying the
witchery of the season all about him in earth and air and sky. He felt
it and loved it and yielded to it, as anyone of clean life and sane
pulses must do.

The spruce wood in which he presently found himself was smitten through
with arrows of ruby light from the setting sun. He went through it,
walking up a long, purple aisle where the wood-floor was brown and
elastic under his feet, and came out beyond it on a scene which
surprised him.
