two years' child.

"I tied him--he's here somewhere--with the ponies," stammered Bab,
in sudden dismay, for no sign of a dog appeared as her eyes roved
wildly to and fro.

Ben whistled, called and searched in vain, till one of the lounging men
said, lazily,

"If you are looking after the big poodle you'd better go outside; I saw
him trotting off with another dog."

Away rushed Ben, with Bab following, regardless of the rain, for both
felt that a great misfortune had befallen them. But, long before this,
Sancho had vanished, and no one minded his indignant howls as he was
driven off in a covered cart.

"If he is lost I'll never forgive you; never, never, never!" and Ben
found it impossible to resist giving Bab several hard shakes, which made
her yellow braids fly up and down like pump handles.

"I'm dreadful sorry. He'll come back--you said he always did," pleaded
Bab, quite crushed by her own afflictions, and rather scared to see Ben
look so fierce, for he seldom lost his temper or was rough with the
little girls.

"If he doesn't come back, don't you speak to me for a year.  Now, I'm
going home." And, feeling that words were powerless to express his
emotions, Ben walked away, looking as grim as a small boy could.

A more unhappy little lass is seldom to be found than Bab was, as she
pattered after him, splashing recklessly through the puddles, and
getting as wet and muddy as possible, as a sort of penance for her sins.
For a mile or two she trudged stoutly along, while Ben marched before in
solemn silence, which soon became both impressive and oppressive because
so unusual, and such a proof of his deep displeasure. Penitent Bab
longed for just one word, one sign of relenting; and when none came, she
began to wonder how she could possibly bear it if he kept his dreadful
threat and did not speak to her for a whole year.

But presently her own discomfort absorbed her, for her feet were wet and
cold as well as very tired; pop-corn and peanuts were not particularly
nourishing food; and hunger made her feel faint; excitement was a new
thing, and now that it was over she longed to lie down and go to sleep;
then the long walk with a circus at the end seemed a very different
affair from the homeward trip with a distracted mother awaiting her. The
shower had subsided into a dreary drizzle, a chilly east wind blew up,
the hilly road seemed to lengthen before the weary feet, and the mute,
blue flannel figure going on so fast with never a look or sound, added
the last touch to Bab's remorseful anguish.

Wagons passed, but all were full, and no one offered a ride. Men and
boys went by with rough jokes on the forlorn pair, for rain soon made
them look like young tramps. But there was no brave Sancho to resent the
impertinence, and this fact was sadly brought to both their minds by the
appearance of a great Newfoundland dog who came trotting after a
carriage. The good creature stopped to say a friendly word in his dumb
fashion, looking up at Bab with benevolent eyes, and poking his nose
into Ben's hand before he bounded away with his plumy tail curled over
his back.

Ben started as the cold nose touched his fingers, gave the soft head a
lingering pat, and watched the dog out of sight through a thicker mist
than any the rain made. But Bab broke down; for the wistful look of the
creature's eyes reminded her of lost Sancho, and she sobbed quietly as
she glanced back longing to see the dear old fellow jogging along in the
rear.

Ben heard the piteous sound and took a sly peep over his shoulder,
seeing such a mournful spectacle that he felt appeased, saying to
himself as if to excuse his late sternness,--

"She is a naughty girl, but I guess she is about sorry enough now.  When
we get to that sign-post I'll speak to her, only I won't forgive her
till Sanch comes back."

But he was better than his word; for, just before the post was reached,
Bab, blinded by tears, tripped over the root of a tree, and, rolling
down the bank, landed in a bed of wet nettles. Ben had her out in a
jiffy, and vainly tried to comfort her; but she was past any consolation
he could offer, and roared dismally as she wrung her tingling hands,
with great drops running over her cheeks almost as fast as the muddy
little rills ran down the road.

"Oh dear, oh dear! I'm all stinged up, and I want my supper; and my feet
ache, and I'm cold, and every thing is so horrid!" wailed the poor child
lying on the grass, such a miserable little wet bunch that the sternest
parent would have melted at the sight.

"Don't cry so, Babby; I was real cross, and I'm sorry.  I'll forgive you
right away now, and never shake you any more," cried Ben, so full of
pity for her tribulations that he forgot his own, like a generous little
man.

"Shake me again, if you want to; I know I was very bad to tag and lose
Sanch. I never will any more, and I'm so sorry, I don't know what to
do," answered Bab, completely bowed down by this magnanimity.

"Never mind; you just wipe up your face and come along, and we'll tell
Ma all about it, and she'll fix us as nice as can be. I shouldn't wonder
if Sanch got home now before we did," said Ben, cheering himself as well
as her by the fond hope.

"I don't believe I ever shall.  I'm so tired my legs won't go, and the
water in my boots makes them feel dreadfully. I wish that boy would
wheel me a piece. Don't you s'pose he would? asked Bab, wearily picking
herself up as a tall lad trundling a barrow came out of a yard near by.

"Hullo, Joslyn!" said Ben, recognizing the boy as one of the "hill
fellows" who came to town Saturday nights for play or business.

"Hullo, Brown!" responded the other, arresting his squeaking progress
with signs of surprise at the moist tableau before him.

"Where goin'?" asked Ben with masculine brevity.

"Got to carry this home, hang the old thing."

"Where to?"

"Batchelor's, down yonder," and the boy pointed to a farm-house at the
foot of the next hill.

"Goin' that way, take it right along."

"What for?" questioned the prudent youth, distrusting such unusual
neighborliness.

"She's tired, wants a ride; I'll leave it all right, true as I live and
breathe," explained Ben, half ashamed yet anxious to get his little
responsibility home as soon as possible, for mishaps seemed to thicken.

"Ho, you couldn't cart her all that way! she's most as heavy as a bag of
meal," jeered the taller lad, amused at the proposition.

"I'm stronger than most fellers of my size. Try, if I ain't," and Ben
squared off in such scientific style that Joslyn responded with sudden
amiability,--

"All right, let's see you do it."

Bab huddled into her new equipage without the least fear, and Ben
trundled her off at a good pace, while the boy retired to the shelter of
a barn to watch their progress, glad to be rid of an irksome errand.

At first, all went well, for the way was down hill, and the wheel
squeaked briskly round and round; Bab smiled gratefully upon her bearer,
and Ben "went in on his muscle with a will," as he expressed it. But
presently the road grew sandy, began to ascend, and the load seemed to
grow heavier with every step.

"I'll get out now.  It's real nice, but I guess I am too heavy," said
Bab, as the face before her got redder and redder, and the breath began
to come in puffs.

"Sit still. He said I couldn't.  I'm not going to give in with him
looking on," panted Ben, and he pushed gallantly up the rise, over the
grassy lawn to the side gate of the Batchelors' door-yard, with his head
down, teeth set, and every muscle of his slender body braced to the
task.

"Did ever ye see the like of that now?  Ah, ha!

    "The streets were so wide, and the lanes were so narry,
     He brought his wife home on a little wheelbarry,"

sung a voice with an accent which made Ben drop his load and push back
his hat, to see Pat's red head looking over the fence.

To have his enemy behold him then and there was the last bitter drop in
poor Ben's cup of humiliation. A shrill approving whistle from the hill
was some comfort, however, and gave him spirit to help Bab out with
composure, though his hands were blistered and he had hardly breath
enough to issue the Command,--

"Go along home, and don't mind him."

"Nice childer, ye are, runnin' off this way, settin' the women
distracted, and me wastin' me time comin' after ye when I'd be milkin'
airly so I'd get a bit of pleasure the day," grumbled Pat, coming up to
untie the Duke, whose Roman nose Ben had already recognized, as well as
the roomy chaise standing before the door.

"Did Billy tell you about us?" asked Bab, gladly following toward this
welcome refuge.

"Faith he did, and the Squire sent me to fetch ye home quiet and aisy.
When ye found me, I'd jist stopped here to borry a light for me pipe. Up
wid ye, b'y, and not be wastin' me time stramashin' after a spalpeen
that I'd like to lay me whip over," said Pat, gruffly, as Ben came
along, having left the barrow in the shed.

"Don't you wish you could?  You needn't wait for me; I'll come when I'm
ready," answered Ben dodging round the chaise, bound not to mind Pat, if
he spent the night by the road-side in consequence.

"Bedad, and I won't then.  It's lively ye are; but four legs is better
than two, as ye'll find this night, me young man."

With that he whipped up and was off before Bab could say a word to
persuade Ben to humble himself for the sake of a ride. She lamented and
Pat chuckled, both forgetting what an agile monkey the boy was, and as
neither looked back, they were unaware Master Ben was hanging on behind
among the straps and springs, making derisive grimaces at his
unconscious foe through the little glass in the leathern back.

At the lodge gate Ben jumped down to run before with whoops of naughty
satisfaction, which brought the anxious waiters to the door in a flock;
so Pat could only shake his fist at the exulting little rascal as he
drove away, leaving the wanderers to be welcomed as warmly as if they
were a pair of model children.

Mrs. Moss had not been very much troubled after all; for Cy had told her
that Bab went after Ben, and Billy had lately reported her safe arrival
among them, so, mother-like, she fed, dried, and warmed the runaways,
before she scolded them.

Even then, the lecture was a mild one, for when they tried to tell the
adventures which to them seemed so exciting, not to say tragical, the
effect astonished them immensely, as their audience went into gales of
laughter, especially at the wheelbarrow episode, which Bab insisted on
telling, with grateful minuteness, to Ben's confusion. Thorny shouted,
and even tender-hearted Betty forgot her tears over the lost dog to
join in the familiar melody when Bab mimicked Pat's quotation from
Mother Goose.

"We must not laugh any more, or these naughty children will think they
have done something very clever in running away," said Miss Celia, when
the fun subsided, adding, soberly, "I am displeased, but I will say
nothing, for I think Ben is already punished enough."

"Guess I am," muttered Ben, with a choke in his voice as he glanced
toward the empty mat where a dear curly bunch used to be with a bright
eye twinkling out of the middle of it.



CHAPTER XV

BEN'S RIDE

Great was the mourning for Sancho, because his talents and virtues made
him universally admired and beloved. Miss Celia advertised, Thorny
offered rewards, and even surly Pat kept a sharp look-out for poodle
dogs when he went to market; but no Sancho or any trace of him appeared.
Ben was inconsolable, and sternly said it served Bab right when the
dogwood poison affected both face and hands. Poor Bab thought so, too,
and dared ask no sympathy from him, though Thorny eagerly prescribed
plantain leaves, and Betty kept her supplied with an endless succession
of them steeped in cream and pitying tears. This treatment was so
successful that the patient soon took her place in society as well as
ever, but for Ben's affliction there was no cure, and the boy really
suffered in his spirits.

"I don't think it's fair that I should have so much trouble,--first
losing father and then Sanch. If it wasn't for Lita and Miss Celia, I
don't believe I could stand it," he said, one day, in a fit of despair,
about a week after the sad event.

"Oh, come now, don't give up so, old fellow.  We'll find him if he s
alive, and if he isn't I'll try and get you another as good," answered
Thorny, with a friendly slap on the shoulder, as Ben sat disconsolately
among the beans he had been hoeing.

"As if there ever could be another half as good!" cried Ben, indignant
at the idea; "or as if I'd ever try to fill his place with the best and
biggest dog that ever wagged a tail! No, sir, there's only one Sanch in
all the world, and if I can't have him I'll never have a dog again."

"Try some other sort of pet, then.  You may have any of mine you like.
Have the peacocks; do now," urged Thorny, full of boyish sympathy and
good-will.

"They are dreadful pretty, but I don't seem to care about em, thank
you," replied the mourner.

"Have the rabbits, all of them," which was a handsome offer on Thorny's
part, for there were a dozen at least.

"They don't love a fellow as a dog does; all they care for is stuff to
eat and dirt to burrow in. I'm sick of rabbits." And well he might be,
for he had had the charge of them ever since they came, and any boy who
has ever kept bunnies knows what a care they are.

"So am I! Guess we'll have an auction and sell out.  Would Jack be a
comfort to you? If he will, you may have him. I'm so well now, I can
walk, or ride anything," added Thorny, in a burst of generosity.

"Jack couldn't be with me always, as Sanch was, and I couldn't keep him
if I had him."

Ben tried to be grateful, but nothing short of Lita would have healed
his wounded heart, and she was not Thorny's to give, or he would
probably have offered her to his afflicted friend.

"Well, no, you couldn't take Jack to bed with you, or keep him up in
your room, and I'm afraid he Would never learn to do any thing clever. I
do wish I had something you wanted, I'd so love to give it to you."

He spoke so heartily and was so kind that Ben looked up, feeling that he
had given him one of the sweetest things in the world--friendship; he
wanted to tell him so, but did not know how to do it, so caught up his
hoe and fell to work, saying, in a tone Thorny understood better than
words,--

"You are real good to me-never mind, I won't worry about it; only it
seems extra hard coming so soon after the other--"

He stopped there, and a bright drop fell on the bean leaves, to shine
like dew till Ben saw clearly enough to bury it out of sight in a great
flurry.

"By Jove! I'll find that dog, if he is out of the ground. Keep your
spirits up, my lad, and we'll have the dear old fellow back yet."
