
Loristan bent his head.

Then he mentioned the name of another street in another place--and
Marco sketched again.  This time it was the peasant with the simple
face.  The Prince bowed again.  Then Loristan gave another name, and
after that another and another; and Marco did his work until it was at
an end, and Lazarus stood near with a handful of sketches which he had
silently taken charge of as each was laid aside.

"You would know these faces wheresoever you saw them?" said the Prince.
"If you passed one in Bond Street or in the Marylebone Road, you would
recognize it at once?"

"As I know yours, sir," Marco answered.

Then followed a number of questions.  Loristan asked them as he had
often asked them before.  They were questions as to the height and
build of the originals of the pictures, of the color of their hair and
eyes, and the order of their complexions. Marco answered them all.  He
knew all but the names of these people, and it was plainly not
necessary that he should know them, as his father had never uttered
them.

After this questioning was at an end the Prince pointed to The Rat who
had leaned on his crutches against the wall, his eyes fiercely eager
like a ferret's.

"And he?" the Prince said.  "What can he do?"

"Let me try," said The Rat.  "Marco knows."

Marco looked at his father.

"May I help him to show you?" he asked.

"Yes," Loristan answered, and then, as he turned to the Prince, he said
again in his low voice:  "HE IS ONE OF US."

Then Marco began a new form of the game.  He held up one of the
pictured faces before The Rat, and The Rat named at once the city and
place connected with it, he detailed the color of eyes and hair, the
height, the build, all the personal details as Marco himself had
detailed them.  To these he added descriptions of the cities, and
points concerning the police system, the palaces, the people.  His face
twisted itself, his eyes burned, his voice shook, but he was amazing in
his readiness of reply and his exactness of memory.

"I can't draw," he said at the end.  "But I can remember.  I didn't
want any one to be bothered with thinking I was trying to learn it.  So
only Marco knew."

This he said to Loristan with appeal in his voice.

"It was he who invented 'the game,'" said Loristan.  "I showed you his
strange maps and plans."

"It is a good game," the Prince answered in the manner of a man
extraordinarily interested and impressed.  "They know it well. They can
be trusted."

"No such thing has ever been done before," Loristan said.  "It is as
new as it is daring and simple."

"Therein lies its safety," the Prince answered.

"Perhaps only boyhood," said Loristan, "could have dared to imagine it."

"The Prince thanks you," he said after a few more words spoken aside to
his visitor.  "We both thank you.  You may go back to your beds."

And the boys went.



XIX

"THAT IS ONE!"

A week had not passed before Marco brought to The Rat in their bedroom
an envelope containing a number of slips of paper on each of which was
written something.

"This is another part of the game," he said gravely.  "Let us sit down
together by the table and study it."

They sat down and examined what was written on the slips.  At the head
of each was the name of one of the places with which Marco had
connected a face he had sketched.  Below were clear and concise
directions as to how it was to be reached and the words to be said when
each individual was encountered.

"This person is to be found at his stall in the market," was written of
the vacant-faced peasant.  "You will first attract his attention by
asking the price of something.  When he is looking at you, touch your
left thumb lightly with the forefinger of your right hand.  Then utter
in a low distinct tone the words 'The Lamp is lighted.'  That is all
you are to do."

Sometimes the directions were not quite so simple, but they were all
instructions of the same order.  The originals of the sketches were to
be sought out--always with precaution which should conceal that they
were being sought at all, and always in such a manner as would cause an
encounter to appear to be mere chance.  Then certain words were to be
uttered, but always without attracting the attention of any bystander
or passer-by.

The boys worked at their task through the entire day.  They
concentrated all their powers upon it.  They wrote and re-wrote--they
repeated to each other what they committed to memory as if it were a
lesson.  Marco worked with the greater ease and more rapidly, because
exercise of this order had been his practice and entertainment from his
babyhood.  The Rat, however, almost kept pace with him, as he had been
born with a phenomenal memory and his eagerness and desire were a fury.

But throughout the entire day neither of them once referred to what
they were doing as anything but "the game."

At night, it is true, each found himself lying awake and thinking.  It
was The Rat who broke the silence from his sofa.

"It is what the messengers of the Secret Party would be ordered to do
when they were sent out to give the Sign for the Rising," he said.  "I
made that up the first day I invented the party, didn't I?"

"Yes," answered Marco.

After a third day's concentration they knew by heart everything given
to them to learn.  That night Loristan put them through an examination.

"Can you write these things?" he asked, after each had repeated them
and emerged safely from all cross-questioning.

Each boy wrote them correctly from memory.

"Write yours in French--in German--in Russian--in Samavian," Loristan
said to Marco.

"All you have told me to do and to learn is part of myself, Father,"
Marco said in the end.  "It is part of me, as if it were my hand or my
eyes--or my heart."

"I believe that is true," answered Loristan.

He was pale that night and there was a shadow on his face.  His eyes
held a great longing as they rested on Marco.  It was a yearning which
had a sort of dread in it.

Lazarus also did not seem quite himself.  He was red instead of pale,
and his movements were uncertain and restless.  He cleared his throat
nervously at intervals and more than once left his chair as if to look
for something.

It was almost midnight when Loristan, standing near Marco, put his arm
round his shoulders.

"The Game"--he began, and then was silent a few moments while Marco
felt his arm tighten its hold.  Both Marco and The Rat felt a hard
quick beat in their breasts, and, because of this and because the pause
seemed long, Marco spoke.

"The Game--yes, Father?" he said.

"The Game is about to give you work to do--both of you," Loristan
answered.

Lazarus cleared his throat and walked to the easel in the corner of the
room.  But he only changed the position of a piece of drawing-paper on
it and then came back.

"In two days you are to go to Paris--as you," to The Rat, "planned in
the game."

"As I planned?"  The Rat barely breathed the words.

"Yes," answered Loristan.  "The instructions you have learned you will
carry out.  There is no more to be done than to manage to approach
certain persons closely enough to be able to utter certain words to
them."

"Only two young strollers whom no man could suspect," put in Lazarus in
an astonishingly rough and shaky voice.  "They could pass near the
Emperor himself without danger.  The young Master--"  his voice became
so hoarse that he was obligated to clear it loudly--"the young Master
must carry himself less finely.  It would be well to shuffle a little
and slouch as if he were of the common people."

"Yes," said The Rat hastily.  "He must do that.  I can teach him.  He
holds his head and his shoulders like a gentleman.  He must look like a
street lad."

"I will look like one," said Marco, with determination.

"I will trust you to remind him," Loristan said to The Rat, and he said
it with gravity.  "That will be your charge."

As he lay upon his pillow that night, it seemed to Marco as if a load
had lifted itself from his heart.  It was the load of uncertainty and
longing.  He had so long borne the pain of feeling that he was too
young to be allowed to serve in any way. His dreams had never been wild
ones--they had in fact always been boyish and modest, howsoever
romantic.  But now no dream which could have passed through his brain
would have seemed so wonderful as this--that the hour had come--the
hour had come--and that he, Marco, was to be its messenger.  He was to
do no dramatic deed and be announced by no flourish of heralds.  No one
would know what he did.  What he achieved could only be attained if he
remained obscure and unknown and seemed to every one only a common
ordinary boy who knew nothing whatever of important things.  But his
father had given to him a gift so splendid that he trembled with awe
and joy as he thought of it.  The Game had become real.  He and The Rat
were to carry with them The Sign, and it would be like carrying a tiny
lamp to set aflame lights which would blaze from one mountain-top to
another until half the world seemed on fire.

As he had awakened out of his sleep when Lazarus touched him, so he
awakened in the middle of the night again.  But he was not aroused by a
touch.  When he opened his eyes he knew it was a look which had
penetrated his sleep--a look in the eyes of his father who was standing
by his side.  In the road outside there was the utter silence he had
noticed the night of the Prince's first  visit--the only light was that
of the lamp in the street, but he could see Loristan's face clearly
enough to know that the mere intensity of his gaze had awakened him.
The Rat was sleeping profoundly.  Loristan spoke in Samavian and under
his breath.

"Beloved one," he said.  "You are very young.  Because I am your
father--just at this hour I can feel nothing else.  I have trained you
for this through all the years of your life.  I am proud of your young
maturity and strength but--Beloved--you are a child!  Can I do this
thing!"

For the moment, his face and his voice were scarcely like his own.

He kneeled by the bedside, and, as he did it, Marco half sitting up
caught his hand and held it hard against his breast.

"Father, I know!" he cried under his breath also.  "It is true.  I am a
child but am I not a man also?  You yourself said it.  I always knew
that you were teaching me to be one--for some reason.  It was my secret
that I knew it.  I learned well because I never forgot it.  And I
learned.  Did I not?"

He was so eager that he looked more like a boy than ever.  But his
young strength and courage were splendid to see.  Loristan knew him
through and through and read every boyish thought of his.

"Yes," he answered slowly.  "You did your part--and now if I--drew
back--you would feel that I HAD FAILED YOU--FAILED YOU."

"You!" Marco breathed it proudly.  "You COULD not fail even the weakest
thing in the world."

There was a moment's silence in which the two pairs of eyes dwelt on
each other with the deepest meaning, and then Loristan rose to his feet.

"The end will be all that our hearts most wish," he said. "To-morrow
you may begin the new part of 'the Game.'  You may go to Paris."

       *       *       *       *       *

When the train which was to meet the boat that crossed from Dover to
Calais steamed out of the noisy Charing Cross Station, it carried in a
third-class carriage two shabby boys.  One of them would have been a
handsome lad if he had not carried himself slouchingly and walked with
a street lad's careless shuffling gait.  The other was a cripple who
moved slowly, and apparently with difficulty, on crutches.  There was
nothing remarkable or picturesque enough about them to attract
attention.  They sat in the corner of the carriage and neither talked
much nor seemed to be particularly interested in the journey or each
other.  When they went on board the steamer, they were soon lost among
the commoner passengers and in fact found for themselves a secluded
place which was not advantageous enough to be wanted by any one else.

"What can such a poor-looking pair of lads be going to Paris for?" some
one asked his companion.

"Not for pleasure, certainly; perhaps to get work," was the casual
answer.

In the evening they reached Paris, and Marco led the way to a small
cafe in a side-street where they got some cheap food.  In the same
side-street they found a bed they could share for the night in a tiny
room over a baker's shop.

The Rat was too much excited to be ready to go to bed early.  He begged
Marco to guide him about the brilliant streets.  They went slowly along
the broad Avenue des Champs Elysees under the lights glittering among
the horse-chestnut trees.  The Rat's sharp eyes took it all in--the
light of the cafes among the embowering trees, the many carriages
rolling by, the people who loitered and laughed or sat at little tables
drinking wine and listening to music, the broad stream of life which
flowed on to the Arc de Triomphe and back again.

"It's brighter and clearer than London," he said to Marco. "The people
look as if they were having more fun than they do in England."

The Place de la Concorde spreading its stately spaces--a world of
illumination, movement, and majestic beauty--held him as though by a
fascination.  He wanted to stand and stare at it, first from one point
of view and then from another.  It was bigger and more wonderful than
he had been able to picture it when Marco had described it to him and
told him of the part it had played in the days of the French Revolution
when the guillotine had stood in it and the tumbrils had emptied
themselves at the foot of its steps.

He stood near the Obelisk a long time without speaking.

"I can see it all happening," he said at last, and he pulled Marco away.

Before they returned home, they found their way to a large house which
stood in a courtyard.  In the iron work of the handsome gates which
shut it in was wrought a gilded coronet.  The gates were closed and the
house was not brightly lighted.

They walked past it and round it without speaking, but, when they
neared the entrance for the second time, The Rat said in a low tone:

"She is five feet seven, has black hair, a nose with a high bridge, her
eyebrows are black and almost meet across it, she has a pale olive skin
and holds her head proudly."

"That is the one," Marco answered.

They were a week in Paris and each day passed this big house. There
were certain hours when great ladies were more likely to go out and
come in than they were at others.  Marco knew this, and they managed to
be within sight of the house or to pass it at these hours.  For two
days they saw no sign of the person they wished to see, but one morning
the gates were thrown open and they saw flowers and palms being taken
in.

"She has been away and is coming back," said Marco.  The next day they
passed three times--once at the hour when fashionable women drive out
to do their shopping, once at the time when afternoon visiting is most
likely to begin, and once when the streets were brilliant with lights
and the carriages had begun to roll by to dinner-parties and theaters.

Then, as they stood at a little distance from the iron gates, a
carriage drove through them and stopped before the big open door which
was thrown open by two tall footmen in splendid livery.

"She is coming out," said The Rat.

They would be able to see her plainly when she came, because the lights
over the entrance were so bright.

Marco slipped from under his coat sleeve a carefully made sketch.

He looked at it and The Rat looked at it.

A footman stood erect on each side of the open door.  The footman who
sat with the coachman had got down and was waiting by the carriage.
Marco and The Rat glanced again with furtive haste at the sketch.  A
handsome woman appeared upon the threshold.  She paused and gave some
order to the footman who stood on the right. Then she came out in the
full light and got into the carriage which drove out of the courtyard
and quite near the place where the two boys waited.

When it was gone, Marco drew a long breath as he tore the sketch into
very small pieces indeed.  He did not throw them away but put them into
his pocket.

The Rat drew a long breath also.

"Yes," he said positively.

"Yes," said Marco.

When they were safely shut up in their room over the baker's shop, they
discussed the chances of their being able to pass her in such a way as
would seem accidental.  Two common boys could not enter the courtyard.
There was a back entrance for tradespeople and messengers.  When she
drove, she would always enter her carriage from the same place.  Unless
she sometimes walked, they could not approach her.  What should be
done?  The thing was difficult.  After they had talked some time, The
Rat sat and gnawed his nails.

