would stop near it and look up and shake his head, and puff at his pipe
very hard, and after a while walk mournfully back again.

This went on for two or three weeks before any new idea came to him.
Being slow and ponderous, it always took him a long time to reach a
new idea. As a rule, he did not like new ideas, but preferred old ones.
After two or three weeks, however, during which, instead of getting
better, matters really grew worse, a novel plan slowly and deliberately
dawned upon him. He would go to see Dick. He smoked a great many pipes
before he arrived at the conclusion, but finally he did arrive at it. He
would go to see Dick. He knew all about Dick. Cedric had told him, and
his idea was that perhaps Dick might be some comfort to him in the way
of talking things over.

So one day when Dick was very hard at work blacking a customer's boots,
a short, stout man with a heavy face and a bald head stopped on the
pavement and stared for two or three minutes at the bootblack's sign,
which read:

"PROFESSOR DICK TIPTON CAN'T BE BEAT."


He stared at it so long that Dick began to take a lively interest in
him, and when he had put the finishing touch to his customer's boots, he
said:

"Want a shine, sir?"

The stout man came forward deliberately and put his foot on the rest.

"Yes," he said.

Then when Dick fell to work, the stout man looked from Dick to the sign
and from the sign to Dick.

"Where did you get that?" he asked.

"From a friend o' mine," said Dick,--"a little feller. He guv' me the
whole outfit. He was the best little feller ye ever saw. He's in England
now. Gone to be one o' them lords."

"Lord--Lord--" asked Mr. Hobbs, with ponderous slowness, "Lord
Fauntleroy--Goin' to be Earl of Dorincourt?"

Dick almost dropped his brush.

"Why, boss!" he exclaimed, "d' ye know him yerself?"

"I've known him," answered Mr. Hobbs, wiping his warm forehead, "ever
since he was born. We was lifetime acquaintances--that's what WE was."

It really made him feel quite agitated to speak of it. He pulled the
splendid gold watch out of his pocket and opened it, and showed the
inside of the case to Dick.

"'When this you see, remember me,'" he read. "That was his parting
keepsake to me. 'I don't want you to forget me'--those was his words--I'd
ha' remembered him," he went on, shaking his head, "if he hadn't given
me a thing an' I hadn't seen hide nor hair on him again. He was a
companion as ANY man would remember."

"He was the nicest little feller I ever see," said Dick. "An' as to
sand--I never seen so much sand to a little feller. I thought a heap
o' him, I did,--an' we was friends, too--we was sort o' chums from the
fust, that little young un an' me. I grabbed his ball from under a stage
fur him, an' he never forgot it; an' he'd come down here, he would,
with his mother or his nuss and he'd holler: 'Hello, Dick!' at me,
as friendly as if he was six feet high, when he warn't knee high to a
grasshopper, and was dressed in gal's clo'es. He was a gay little chap,
and when you was down on your luck, it did you good to talk to him."

"That's so," said Mr. Hobbs. "It was a pity to make a earl out of HIM.
He would have SHONE in the grocery business--or dry goods either; he
would have SHONE!" And he shook his head with deeper regret than ever.

It proved that they had so much to say to each other that it was not
possible to say it all at one time, and so it was agreed that the next
night Dick should make a visit to the store and keep Mr. Hobbs company.
The plan pleased Dick well enough. He had been a street waif nearly
all his life, but he had never been a bad boy, and he had always had a
private yearning for a more respectable kind of existence. Since he had
been in business for himself, he had made enough money to enable him to
sleep under a roof instead of out in the streets, and he had begun to
hope he might reach even a higher plane, in time. So, to be invited to
call on a stout, respectable man who owned a corner store, and even had
a horse and wagon, seemed to him quite an event.

"Do you know anything about earls and castles?" Mr. Hobbs inquired. "I'd
like to know more of the particklars."

"There's a story about some on 'em in the Penny Story Gazette," said
Dick. "It's called the 'Crime of a Coronet; or, The Revenge of the
Countess May.' It's a boss thing, too. Some of us boys 're takin' it to
read."

"Bring it up when you come," said Mr. Hobbs, "an' I'll pay for it. Bring
all you can find that have any earls in 'em. If there aren't earls,
markises'll do, or dooks--though HE never made mention of any dooks or
markises. We did go over coronets a little, but I never happened to see
any. I guess they don't keep 'em 'round here."

"Tiffany 'd have 'em if anybody did," said Dick, "but I don't know as
I'd know one if I saw it."

Mr. Hobbs did not explain that he would not have known one if he saw it.
He merely shook his head ponderously.

"I s'pose there is very little call for 'em," he said, and that ended
the matter.

This was the beginning of quite a substantial friendship. When Dick went
up to the store, Mr. Hobbs received him with great hospitality. He gave
him a chair tilted against the door, near a barrel of apples, and after
his young visitor was seated, he made a jerk at them with the hand in
which he held his pipe, saying:

"Help yerself."

Then he looked at the story papers, and after that they read and
discussed the British aristocracy; and Mr. Hobbs smoked his pipe very
hard and shook his head a great deal. He shook it most when he pointed
out the high stool with the marks on its legs.

"There's his very kicks," he said impressively; "his very kicks. I sit
and look at 'em by the hour. This is a world of ups an' it's a world of
downs. Why, he'd set there, an' eat crackers out of a box, an' apples
out of a barrel, an' pitch his cores into the street; an' now he's a
lord a-livin' in a castle. Them's a lord's kicks; they'll be a earl's
kicks some day. Sometimes I says to myself, says I, 'Well, I'll be
jiggered!'"

He seemed to derive a great deal of comfort from his reflections and
Dick's visit. Before Dick went home, they had a supper in the small
back-room; they had crackers and cheese and sardines, and other canned
things out of the store, and Mr. Hobbs solemnly opened two bottles of
ginger ale, and pouring out two glasses, proposed a toast.

"Here's to HIM!" he said, lifting his glass, "an' may he teach 'em a
lesson--earls an' markises an' dooks an' all!"

After that night, the two saw each other often, and Mr. Hobbs was much
more comfortable and less desolate. They read the Penny Story Gazette,
and many other interesting things, and gained a knowledge of the habits
of the nobility and gentry which would have surprised those despised
classes if they had realized it. One day Mr. Hobbs made a pilgrimage
to a book store down town, for the express purpose of adding to their
library. He went to the clerk and leaned over the counter to speak to
him.

"I want," he said, "a book about earls."

"What!" exclaimed the clerk.

"A book," repeated the grocery-man, "about earls."

"I'm afraid," said the clerk, looking rather queer, "that we haven't
what you want."

"Haven't?" said Mr. Hobbs, anxiously. "Well, say markises then--or
dooks."

"I know of no such book," answered the clerk.

Mr. Hobbs was much disturbed. He looked down on the floor,--then he
looked up.

"None about female earls?" he inquired.

"I'm afraid not," said the clerk with a smile.

"Well," exclaimed Mr. Hobbs, "I'll be jiggered!"

He was just going out of the store, when the clerk called him back and
asked him if a story in which the nobility were chief characters would
do. Mr. Hobbs said it would--if he could not get an entire volume
devoted to earls. So the clerk sold him a book called "The Tower of
London," written by Mr. Harrison Ainsworth, and he carried it home.

When Dick came they began to read it. It was a very wonderful and
exciting book, and the scene was laid in the reign of the famous English
queen who is called by some people Bloody Mary. And as Mr. Hobbs heard
of Queen Mary's deeds and the habit she had of chopping people's heads
off, putting them to the torture, and burning them alive, he became very
much excited. He took his pipe out of his mouth and stared at Dick, and
at last he was obliged to mop the perspiration from his brow with his
red pocket handkerchief.

"Why, he ain't safe!" he said. "He ain't safe! If the women folks can
sit up on their thrones an' give the word for things like that to be
done, who's to know what's happening to him this very minute? He's no
more safe than nothing! Just let a woman like that get mad, an' no one's
safe!"

"Well," said Dick, though he looked rather anxious himself; "ye see
this 'ere un isn't the one that's bossin' things now. I know her name's
Victory, an' this un here in the book, her name's Mary."

"So it is," said Mr. Hobbs, still mopping his forehead; "so it is. An'
the newspapers are not sayin' anything about any racks, thumb-screws,
or stake-burnin's,--but still it doesn't seem as if 't was safe for him
over there with those queer folks. Why, they tell me they don't keep the
Fourth o' July!"

He was privately uneasy for several days; and it was not until he
received Fauntleroy's letter and had read it several times, both to
himself and to Dick, and had also read the letter Dick got about the
same time, that he became composed again.

But they both found great pleasure in their letters. They read and
re-read them, and talked them over and enjoyed every word of them. And
they spent days over the answers they sent and read them over almost as
often as the letters they had received.

It was rather a labor for Dick to write his. All his knowledge of
reading and writing he had gained during a few months, when he had lived
with his elder brother, and had gone to a night-school; but, being a
sharp boy, he had made the most of that brief education, and had spelled
out things in newspapers since then, and practiced writing with bits of
chalk on pavements or walls or fences. He told Mr. Hobbs all about his
life and about his elder brother, who had been rather good to him after
their mother died, when Dick was quite a little fellow. Their father had
died some time before. The brother's name was Ben, and he had taken
care of Dick as well as he could, until the boy was old enough to sell
newspapers and run errands. They had lived together, and as he grew
older Ben had managed to get along until he had quite a decent place in
a store.

"And then," exclaimed Dick with disgust, "blest if he didn't go an'
marry a gal! Just went and got spoony an' hadn't any more sense left!
Married her, an' set up housekeepin' in two back rooms. An' a hefty un
she was,--a regular tiger-cat. She'd tear things to pieces when she got
mad,--and she was mad ALL the time. Had a baby just like her,--yell day
'n' night! An' if I didn't have to 'tend it! an' when it screamed, she'd
fire things at me. She fired a plate at me one day, an' hit the baby--
cut its chin. Doctor said he'd carry the mark till he died. A nice
mother she was! Crackey! but didn't we have a time--Ben 'n' mehself 'n'
the young un. She was mad at Ben because he didn't make money faster;
'n' at last he went out West with a man to set up a cattle ranch. An'
hadn't been gone a week 'fore one night, I got home from sellin' my
papers, 'n' the rooms wus locked up 'n' empty, 'n' the woman o' the
house, she told me Minna 'd gone--shown a clean pair o' heels. Some un
else said she'd gone across the water to be nuss to a lady as had a
little baby, too. Never heard a word of her since--nuther has Ben. If
I'd ha' bin him, I wouldn't ha' fretted a bit--'n' I guess he didn't.
But he thought a heap o' her at the start. Tell you, he was spoons on
her. She was a daisy-lookin' gal, too, when she was dressed up 'n' not
mad. She'd big black eyes 'n' black hair down to her knees; she'd make
it into a rope as big as your arm, and twist it 'round 'n' 'round her
head; 'n' I tell you her eyes 'd snap! Folks used to say she was part
_I_tali-un--said her mother or father 'd come from there, 'n' it made
her queer. I tell ye, she was one of 'em--she was!"

He often told Mr. Hobbs stories of her and of his brother Ben, who,
since his going out West, had written once or twice to Dick.

Ben's luck had not been good, and he had wandered from place to place;
but at last he had settled on a ranch in California, where he was at
work at the time when Dick became acquainted with Mr. Hobbs.

"That gal," said Dick one day, "she took all the grit out o' him. I
couldn't help feelin' sorry for him sometimes."

They were sitting in the store door-way together, and Mr. Hobbs was
filling his pipe.

"He oughtn't to 've married," he said solemnly, as he rose to get a
match. "Women--I never could see any use in 'em myself."

As he took the match from its box, he stopped and looked down on the
counter.

"Why!" he said, "if here isn't a letter! I didn't see it before. The
postman must have laid it down when I wasn't noticin', or the newspaper
slipped over it."

He picked it up and looked at it carefully.

"It's from HIM!" he exclaimed. "That's the very one it's from!"

He forgot his pipe altogether. He went back to his chair quite excited
and took his pocket-knife and opened the envelope.

"I wonder what news there is this time," he said.

And then he unfolded the letter and read as follows:

"DORINCOURT CASTLE" My dear Mr. Hobbs

"I write this in a great hury becaus i have something curous to tell you
i know you will be very mutch suprised my dear frend when i tel you. It
is all a mistake and i am not a lord and i shall not have to be an earl
there is a lady whitch was marid to my uncle bevis who is dead and she
has a little boy and he is lord fauntleroy becaus that is the way it is
in England the earls eldest sons little boy is the earl if every
body else is dead i mean if his farther and grandfarther are dead my
grandfarther is not dead but my uncle bevis is and so his boy is lord
Fauntleroy and i am not becaus my papa was the youngest son and my name
is Cedric Errol like it was when i was in New York and all the things
will belong to the other boy i thought at first i should have to give
him my pony and cart but my grandfarther says i need not my grandfarther
is very sorry and i think he does not like the lady but preaps he thinks
dearest and i are sorry because i shall not be an earl i would like to
be an earl now better than i thout i would at first becaus this is a
beautifle castle and i like every body so and when you are rich you can
do so many things i am not rich now becaus when your papa is only the
youngest son he is not very rich i am going to learn to work so that
i can take care of dearest i have been asking Wilkins about grooming
horses preaps i might be a groom or a coachman. The lady brought her
little boy to the castle and my grandfarther and Mr. Havisham talked to
her i think she was angry she talked loud and my grandfarther was angry
too i never saw him angry before i wish it did not make them all mad i
thort i would tell you and Dick right away becaus you would be intrusted
so no more at present with love from

"your old frend

"CEDRIC ERROL (Not lord Fauntleroy)."


Mr. Hobbs fell back in his chair, the letter dropped on his knee, his
pen-knife slipped to the floor, and so did the envelope.

"Well!" he ejaculated, "I am jiggered!"

He was so dumfounded that he actually changed his exclamation. It had
always been his habit to say, "I WILL be jiggered," but this time he
said, "I AM jiggered." Perhaps he really WAS jiggered. There is no
knowing.

"Well," said Dick, "the whole thing's bust up, hasn't it?"

"Bust!" said Mr. Hobbs. "It's my opinion it's a put-up job o' the
British ristycrats to rob him of his rights because he's an American.
They've had a spite agin us ever since the Revolution, an' they're
takin' it out on him. I told you he wasn't safe, an' see what's
happened! Like as not, the whole gover'ment's got together to rob him of
