better."

The prospect of the ride completely mollified Bridget, and by the time
they reached home she fairly radiated good nature.

"Your ideas of time are somewhat peculiar, Grace," remarked her mother
as Grace entered the living room, where her mother and father sat
reading. "If Bridget had not been with you I should have been most
uneasy."

But Grace was too full of her news to make other answer than cry out:

"Oh, mother, we found it! We did, truly!"

"What is the child talking about?" asked her father. And then Grace
launched forth with an account of her night's doings.

"Well, I never!" was all Mr. Harlowe could find words for when his
daughter had finished.

"What shall I do with you, Grace?" said her mother in despair. "You will
be injured or killed yet, in some of your mad excursions."

"Trust to me to land right side up with care," answered Grace
cheerfully.

"I'll call at the police station early to-morrow morning and have the
chief send some one up to that old house," said Mr. Harlowe. "From what
you heard the thief say, he must have a confederate. Perhaps the chief's
men will get both of them."

"Perhaps so," replied Grace, but she had a shrewd idea as to who the
confederate might be, and felt that if her suppositions were correct
there was not much chance of his incriminating himself.




CHAPTER XXII

GRACE AND ELEANOR MAKE A FORMAL CALL


Before recess the next day the news that Grace Harlowe and Eleanor
Savelli had been seen in earnest conversation together traveled like
wild fire around the study hall. The members of the Phi Sigma Tau could
scarcely believe their eyes, and when at recess they sought for
enlightenment, Grace would give them no satisfaction save that she and
Eleanor had really become friendly again.

"I love you all dearly, but I can't tell you about it yet, so please
don't ask me. When I do tell you, you'll understand and be as glad as I
am," she informed them affectionately, and with this they were obliged
to content themselves.

At one o'clock that afternoon Grace was summoned from the study hall,
and her friends' curiosity went up to the highest pitch and did not in
the least abate when Eleanor Savelli was also excused and hurriedly
followed Grace out.

"This must mean that they have caught him," said Eleanor, as she and
Grace turned their steps in the direction of the police station.

Grace nodded silently. Her mind was busy with Marian's problem. She must
get back the money that Henry Hammond had wheedled Marian into giving
him. If the stranger had been apprehended and if Hammond were really his
confederate, then the stranger might, under cross-examination, betray
Hammond, who would at once be arrested.

Now that Eleanor had become her friend, Grace knew that she would never
expose Marian in class meeting, but even with this menace removed, still
nothing could disguise the fact that the judge's gift could not be
honestly accounted for.

Grace believed that Henry Hammond had appropriated the money for his own
use. She did not place any dependence in his story of having lost it
through speculation. She therefore resolved that he should return it if
she could devise any means of making him do so, without subjecting him
to public exposure.

For Marian's sake, she would refrain from carrying the matter into
court, and she reluctantly decided to say nothing about the meeting
between Hammond and the prisoner that she had witnessed at the station
on the night of her return from New York.

Eleanor's surmise proved to be correct. At the door of the station
house, Grace's father awaited them, and they were conducted into the
court room, where the first thing that caught Grace's attention was the
eyes of the prisoner, that glared ferociously at her.

"So you're the fresh kid that got me jugged, are you!" he snarled with a
menacing gesture. "I'd like to get my hands on you for a couple of
minutes."

"Silence!" roared Chief Burroughs.

Then the examination began. The strong box had been turned over to the
police that morning by Miss Nevin, to be held as proof against the
thief.

Grace identified the man as the one she had seen tampering with the lock
the previous night, repeating what she had heard him say as he left the
old house. She then told her story of the removal of the box, which was
corroborated by Eleanor and John, the coachman.

"This is not the first time this man and I have met," declared Grace at
the conclusion of her testimony. Then she related the incident of the
train to the chief, while the prisoner glowered at her as though he
would enjoy tearing her in pieces.

When examined, he gave his name as Jones, denied ever having seen Grace
before, but under rigid cross-examination finally admitted the truth of
her story, and that he had been in Oakdale on the previous Thanksgiving
and had assisted in the theft of the strong box. He had left for New
York the following morning, supposing that his confederate would have no
trouble in unlocking the box.

"Why did you leave Oakdale?" questioned Chief Burroughs.

"Robbing kids was too small business for me," growled the man. "We heard
this was a rich town, but when we got here I sized it up, and it didn't
look good to me. So I beat it for New York the next day."

But no amount of grilling could induce him to reveal the identity of his
partner.

"He's too good a pal to squeal on. Nothing doing in that line," was the
unvarying answer.

When questioned as to his second visit to Oakdale, he said that his
partner had been unable to open the strong box, and after looking about
for some safe hiding place, had accidentally discovered the secret
recess in the cupboard, while prowling about the haunted house.

This had seemed an ideal place of concealment, and he had secretly
conveyed the box there until the prisoner, who was an expert cracksman,
should be on hand to open it.

"And was that your sole object in coming to Oakdale?" was the chief's
sharp query.

"Of course," replied the prisoner.

But the chief shook his head. "There is a good deal more back of this.
You have not answered truthfully. Your real motive for coming here was
robbery."

Grace and Eleanor were not detained throughout the entire examination.
After giving their testimony, they were allowed to go. Once they were
fairly outside the police station, Grace took Eleanor by the arm and
said:

"Eleanor, I have a call to make, and I wish you to go with me. We
haven't a moment to spare, for the First National Bank closes at three,
and it's a quarter after two now."

"I am very glad to hear that useful and interesting fact about the First
National Bank. Are you going to deposit money there!" asked Eleanor,
laughing.

"No," answered Grace mysteriously. "I am going to draw money from there
after I have called upon a certain person."

"But what have I to do with it!" questioned Eleanor.

"Come with me and see," Grace replied. "After we have succeeded in our
undertaking, I'll answer any questions you may ask. I warn you, however,
that the call I am about to make is not a friendly one. Are you willing
to stand by me through what may be a rather disagreeable scene?"

"I certainly am," replied Eleanor emphatically. "You ought to know from
past experiences that disagreeable scenes are my forte."

"I know that I'd rather have you with me on this expedition than any one
else I know," responded Grace. "You are not easily intimidated."

The two girls by this time had left Main Street and turned into Putnam
Square.

"Grace," said Eleanor suddenly. "I believe I can guess the place you are
headed for. You are going to Henry Hammond's office, aren't you?"

"Yes," said Grace, surprised at the accuracy of Eleanor's guess, "I am."

"And you are going there about the money that he stole from Marian. Am I
right!"

"You are," answered Grace truthfully. "But how did you know?"

"Because," said Eleanor quietly, "I intended going there myself."

"Then you think that----" began Grace.

"I think that Henry Hammond is a thief and an impostor," finished
Eleanor. "He tried to interest Aunt Margaret in some real estate, and
called at 'Heartsease' on two different occasions. She is a very shrewd
business woman and he couldn't fool her in the least. Both times he
called he kept looking about him all the time, as though he were trying
to see whether we had any valuables. He raved over the house, and hinted
to be shown through it, but we weren't so foolish.

"When Chief Burroughs was questioning the prisoner to-day about his
confederate, it suddenly flashed across me that it might be this man
Hammond. He appeared here for the first time on the night of the bazaar
and--"

"Eleanor," exclaimed Grace, "you've missed your vocation. You should
have been a detective. I believe what you say to be the truth and have
thought so for some time. We can hardly denounce Henry Hammond upon
suspicion, but we can scare him and make him give back the class money.
Perhaps we are defeating the ends of justice by not telling what we
suspect, but if we have him arrested on suspicion, then the only way we
can get back our money is to publicly charge him with extorting it from
Marian. Think what a disgrace that would be for her in her graduating
year, too," Grace added. "She would feel too ashamed to ever again face
her best friends."

"I have thought of all that, too, and now that we are both of the same
mind, let's on to victory," said Eleanor.

The two girls paused and shook hands as they entered the building in
which Henry Hammond had his office, then mounted the stairs with the
full determination of winning in their cause.

"Good afternoon, Mr. Hammond," called Eleanor, as she opened the door
and walked serenely in, followed by Grace.

Henry Hammond started nervously up from his desk at the sound of her
voice. The bland smile with which he greeted her changed to a frown as
his eyes rested upon Grace, and he saluted her coldly.

"I am, indeed, honored, this afternoon," he said with sarcasm. "Miss
Harlowe has never before visited my office."

"We had a few minutes to spare and thought we'd run in and tell you the
news," replied Grace sweetly. "We have just come from the police
station."

"Rather a peculiar place for two High School girls to visit, isn't it!"
asked the man with a suspicion of a sneer.

"Yes, but we were the heroines in an adventure last night," replied
Grace evenly. "We found the bazaar money that was stolen last
Thanksgiving."

"What!" exploded Hammond. Then trying to conceal his agitation, he said
with affected carelessness, "I believe I do remember something about
that robbery."

"I was sure that you would," returned Grace, looking squarely at him.
"That was the night of the day you came to Oakdale, was it not?"

"I really can't recollect the exact date," murmured Hammond.

"One of the thieves was caught to-day, at the old haunted house, where
he had hidden the box," volunteered Eleanor.

A grayish pallor overspread Hammond's face. With a desperate effort at
self-control, he said:

"Ah, there was more than one, then!"

"Oh, yes," declared Grace cheerfully. "There were two in it. The other
will probably be apprehended soon. The prisoner hasn't revealed his
identity, as yet. The funny thing is that I had seen the prisoner
before. On the train that we took from New York, after seeing Anne
Pierson in the play, I saw this same man try to steal a watch and chain
from an old gentleman, who would not believe me when I warned him of his
danger."

"When we finally reached Oakdale," continued Grace, "I watched to see if
he got off the train, and he did. We saw a man meet him at the station,
who--"

Henry Hammond sprang up and seizing his hat, said harshly, "I hope you
young ladies will excuse me, what you have told me is so interesting
that I believe I shall go over to the station house and get all the
details. Will you remain until I return?" He fumbled in a drawer of his
desk, and both girls saw him take out a bankbook.

"Thank you," said Grace politely. "We can't stay, but before we go we
should like to have you write us a check for the five hundred dollars
that Marian Barber foolishly loaned you. You see she had no right to do
so. Besides, she is still a minor. If you do it at once we can cash it
to-day. It is now fifteen minutes of three. I'll call the bank and tell
them that I am coming. But first I must send a message to my father."

With these words, Grace walked to the telephone without giving Hammond
time to answer. "Give me Main 268a, please," she said. With a bound he
sprang to the door, but it closed in his face, and he heard the turn of
the key in the lock, just as Grace calmly called, "Hello, is this Chief
Burroughs? Is my father there?" Then she answered, "You say he is there?
Well, this is his daughter, Grace. Please tell him that Miss Savelli and
I are just about to leave Mr. Hammond's office, and wish him to meet us
outside."

Hammond sprang toward Grace, but instantly realizing that it would be
folly to molest her, drew back, scowling savagely.

Grace hung up the receiver and rang again. This time she called the
bank, asking for the president. "Is this Mr. Furlow?" she said. "This is
Grace Harlowe. I am at the office of Mr. Henry Hammond, who is about to
write my father a check for five hundred dollars, which he wishes to
cash before the bank closes. It is now ten minutes of three. He will be
there inside of seven minutes. Thank you. Good-bye."

"Now," she commanded, turning to Hammond, the expression of whose face
was a combination of baffled rage, disappointment and fear, "write the
check."

With a muttered imprecation he went to his desk, jerked out a checkbook
and wrote the desired check.

"To whom shall I make it payable?" he muttered.

"To Thomas G. Harlowe," replied Grace composedly.

Inserting her father's name, he fairly flung the check in her face, and
strode to the door.

"Open this door," he commanded.

There was no response.

"You may open the door, Eleanor," called Grace. "Mr. Hammond is ready to
go now."

The key turned in the lock. With a savage jerk, Henry Hammond flung open
the door, and brushing Eleanor aside, bolted for the stairway.

Five seconds later the two girls reached the sidewalk and found Mr.
Harlowe waiting for them.

"Father, dear," exclaimed Grace. "Here is a check for five hundred
dollars, made payable to you by Mr. Henry Hammond. You have five minutes
in which to cash it, before the bank closes. I'll tell you the story of
it later. I haven't time now."
