"But you needn't try to make us believe you can chloroform a cat,"
laughed Anne.

"It was all the fault of the knothole," protested Phil.

"It was a good thing the knothole was there," said Aunt Jamesina rather
severely. "Kittens HAVE to be drowned, I admit, or the world would be
overrun. But no decent, grown-up cat should be done to death--unless he
sucks eggs."

"You wouldn't have thought Rusty very decent if you'd seen him when he
came here," said Stella. "He positively looked like the Old Nick."

"I don't believe Old Nick can be so very, ugly" said Aunt Jamesina
reflectively. "He wouldn't do so much harm if he was. _I_ always think
of him as a rather handsome gentleman."




Chapter XVII

A Letter from Davy


"It's beginning to snow, girls," said Phil, coming in one November
evening, "and there are the loveliest little stars and crosses all over
the garden walk. I never noticed before what exquisite things snowflakes
really are. One has time to notice things like that in the simple life.
Bless you all for permitting me to live it. It's really delightful to
feel worried because butter has gone up five cents a pound."

"Has it?" demanded Stella, who kept the household accounts.

"It has--and here's your butter. I'm getting quite expert at marketing.
It's better fun than flirting," concluded Phil gravely.

"Everything is going up scandalously," sighed Stella.

"Never mind. Thank goodness air and salvation are still free," said Aunt
Jamesina.

"And so is laughter," added Anne. "There's no tax on it yet and that is
well, because you're all going to laugh presently. I'm going to read
you Davy's letter. His spelling has improved immensely this past year,
though he is not strong on apostrophes, and he certainly possesses
the gift of writing an interesting letter. Listen and laugh, before we
settle down to the evening's study-grind."

"Dear Anne," ran Davy's letter, "I take my pen to tell you that we are
all pretty well and hope this will find you the same. It's snowing some
today and Marilla says the old woman in the sky is shaking her feather
beds. Is the old woman in the sky God's wife, Anne? I want to know.

"Mrs. Lynde has been real sick but she is better now. She fell down the
cellar stairs last week. When she fell she grabbed hold of the shelf
with all the milk pails and stewpans on it, and it gave way and went
down with her and made a splendid crash. Marilla thought it was an
earthquake at first.

"One of the stewpans was all dinged up and Mrs. Lynde straned her ribs.
The doctor came and gave her medicine to rub on her ribs but she didn't
under stand him and took it all inside instead. The doctor said it was
a wonder it dident kill her but it dident and it cured her ribs and Mrs.
Lynde says doctors dont know much anyhow. But we couldent fix up the
stewpan. Marilla had to throw it out. Thanksgiving was last week. There
was no school and we had a great dinner. I et mince pie and rost turkey
and frut cake and donuts and cheese and jam and choklut cake. Marilla
said I'd die but I dident. Dora had earake after it, only it wasent in
her ears it was in her stummick. I dident have earake anywhere.

"Our new teacher is a man. He does things for jokes. Last week he made
all us third-class boys write a composishun on what kind of a wife we'd
like to have and the girls on what kind of a husband. He laughed fit to
kill when he read them. This was mine. I thought youd like to see it.

"'The kind of a wife I'd like to Have.

"'She must have good manners and get my meals on time and do what I tell
her and always be very polite to me. She must be fifteen yers old. She
must be good to the poor and keep her house tidy and be good tempered
and go to church regularly. She must be very handsome and have curly
hair. If I get a wife that is just what I like Ill be an awful good
husband to her. I think a woman ought to be awful good to her husband.
Some poor women haven't any husbands.

"'THE END.'"


"I was at Mrs. Isaac Wrights funeral at White Sands last week. The
husband of the corpse felt real sorry. Mrs. Lynde says Mrs. Wrights
grandfather stole a sheep but Marilla says we mustent speak ill of the
dead. Why mustent we, Anne? I want to know. It's pretty safe, ain't it?

"Mrs. Lynde was awful mad the other day because I asked her if she was
alive in Noah's time. I dident mean to hurt her feelings. I just wanted
to know. Was she, Anne?

"Mr. Harrison wanted to get rid of his dog. So he hunged him once but he
come to life and scooted for the barn while Mr. Harrison was digging the
grave, so he hunged him again and he stayed dead that time. Mr. Harrison
has a new man working for him. He's awful okward. Mr. Harrison says he
is left handed in both his feet. Mr. Barry's hired man is lazy. Mrs.
Barry says that but Mr. Barry says he aint lazy exactly only he thinks
it easier to pray for things than to work for them.

"Mrs. Harmon Andrews prize pig that she talked so much of died in a fit.
Mrs. Lynde says it was a judgment on her for pride. But I think it
was hard on the pig. Milty Boulter has been sick. The doctor gave
him medicine and it tasted horrid. I offered to take it for him for a
quarter but the Boulters are so mean. Milty says he'd rather take it
himself and save his money. I asked Mrs. Boulter how a person would go
about catching a man and she got awful mad and said she dident know,
shed never chased men.

"The A.V.I.S. is going to paint the hall again. They're tired of having
it blue.

"The new minister was here to tea last night. He took three pieces of
pie. If I did that Mrs. Lynde would call me piggy. And he et fast and
took big bites and Marilla is always telling me not to do that. Why can
ministers do what boys can't? I want to know.

"I haven't any more news. Here are six kisses. xxxxxx. Dora sends one.
Heres hers. x.

"Your loving friend DAVID KEITH"


"P.S. Anne, who was the devils father? I want to know."




Chapter XVIII

Miss Josephine Remembers the Anne-girl


When Christmas holidays came the girls of Patty's Place scattered to
their respective homes, but Aunt Jamesina elected to stay where she was.

"I couldn't go to any of the places I've been invited and take those
three cats," she said. "And I'm not going to leave the poor creatures
here alone for nearly three weeks. If we had any decent neighbors who
would feed them I might, but there's nothing except millionaires on this
street. So I'll stay here and keep Patty's Place warm for you."

Anne went home with the usual joyous anticipations--which were not
wholly fulfilled. She found Avonlea in the grip of such an early, cold,
and stormy winter as even the "oldest inhabitant" could not recall.
Green Gables was literally hemmed in by huge drifts. Almost every day of
that ill-starred vacation it stormed fiercely; and even on fine days it
drifted unceasingly. No sooner were the roads broken than they filled
in again. It was almost impossible to stir out. The A.V.I.S. tried, on
three evenings, to have a party in honor of the college students, and on
each evening the storm was so wild that nobody could go, so they gave up
the attempt in despair. Anne, despite her love of and loyalty to Green
Gables, could not help thinking longingly of Patty's Place, its cosy
open fire, Aunt Jamesina's mirthful eyes, the three cats, the merry
chatter of the girls, the pleasantness of Friday evenings when college
friends dropped in to talk of grave and gay.

Anne was lonely; Diana, during the whole of the holidays, was imprisoned
at home with a bad attack of bronchitis. She could not come to Green
Gables and it was rarely Anne could get to Orchard Slope, for the old
way through the Haunted Wood was impassable with drifts, and the long
way over the frozen Lake of Shining Waters was almost as bad. Ruby
Gillis was sleeping in the white-heaped graveyard; Jane Andrews was
teaching a school on western prairies. Gilbert, to be sure, was still
faithful, and waded up to Green Gables every possible evening. But
Gilbert's visits were not what they once were. Anne almost dreaded them.
It was very disconcerting to look up in the midst of a sudden silence
and find Gilbert's hazel eyes fixed upon her with a quite unmistakable
expression in their grave depths; and it was still more disconcerting
to find herself blushing hotly and uncomfortably under his gaze, just as
if--just as if--well, it was very embarrassing. Anne wished herself back
at Patty's Place, where there was always somebody else about to take the
edge off a delicate situation. At Green Gables Marilla went promptly to
Mrs. Lynde's domain when Gilbert came and insisted on taking the twins
with her. The significance of this was unmistakable and Anne was in a
helpless fury over it.

Davy, however, was perfectly happy. He reveled in getting out in the
morning and shoveling out the paths to the well and henhouse. He gloried
in the Christmas-tide delicacies which Marilla and Mrs. Lynde vied with
each other in preparing for Anne, and he was reading an enthralling
tale, in a school library book, of a wonderful hero who seemed blessed
with a miraculous faculty for getting into scrapes from which he was
usually delivered by an earthquake or a volcanic explosion, which blew
him high and dry out of his troubles, landed him in a fortune, and
closed the story with proper ECLAT.

"I tell you it's a bully story, Anne," he said ecstatically. "I'd ever
so much rather read it than the Bible."

"Would you?" smiled Anne.

Davy peered curiously at her.

"You don't seem a bit shocked, Anne. Mrs. Lynde was awful shocked when I
said it to her."

"No, I'm not shocked, Davy. I think it's quite natural that a
nine-year-old boy would sooner read an adventure story than the Bible.
But when you are older I hope and think that you will realize what a
wonderful book the Bible is."

"Oh, I think some parts of it are fine," conceded Davy. "That story
about Joseph now--it's bully. But if I'd been Joseph _I_ wouldn't have
forgive the brothers. No, siree, Anne. I'd have cut all their heads off.
Mrs. Lynde was awful mad when I said that and shut the Bible up and said
she'd never read me any more of it if I talked like that. So I don't
talk now when she reads it Sunday afternoons; I just think things and
say them to Milty Boulter next day in school. I told Milty the story
about Elisha and the bears and it scared him so he's never made fun of
Mr. Harrison's bald head once. Are there any bears on P.E. Island, Anne?
I want to know."

"Not nowadays," said Anne, absently, as the wind blew a scud of snow
against the window. "Oh, dear, will it ever stop storming."

"God knows," said Davy airily, preparing to resume his reading.

Anne WAS shocked this time.

"Davy!" she exclaimed reproachfully.

"Mrs. Lynde says that," protested Davy. "One night last week Marilla
said 'Will Ludovic Speed and Theodora Dix EVER get married?" and Mrs.
Lynde said, "'God knows'--just like that."

"Well, it wasn't right for her to say it," said Anne, promptly deciding
upon which horn of this dilemma to empale herself. "It isn't right for
anybody to take that name in vain or speak it lightly, Davy. Don't ever
do it again."

"Not if I say it slow and solemn, like the minister?" queried Davy
gravely.

"No, not even then."

"Well, I won't. Ludovic Speed and Theodora Dix live in Middle Grafton
and Mrs. Rachel says he has been courting her for a hundred years. Won't
they soon be too old to get married, Anne? I hope Gilbert won't court
YOU that long. When are you going to be married, Anne? Mrs. Lynde says
it's a sure thing."

"Mrs. Lynde is a--" began Anne hotly; then stopped. "Awful old gossip,"
completed Davy calmly. "That's what every one calls her. But is it a
sure thing, Anne? I want to know."

"You're a very silly little boy, Davy," said Anne, stalking haughtily
out of the room. The kitchen was deserted and she sat down by the window
in the fast falling wintry twilight. The sun had set and the wind had
died down. A pale chilly moon looked out behind a bank of purple clouds
in the west. The sky faded out, but the strip of yellow along the
western horizon grew brighter and fiercer, as if all the stray gleams
of light were concentrating in one spot; the distant hills, rimmed with
priest-like firs, stood out in dark distinctness against it. Anne looked
across the still, white fields, cold and lifeless in the harsh light of
that grim sunset, and sighed. She was very lonely; and she was sad at
heart; for she was wondering if she would be able to return to Redmond
next year. It did not seem likely. The only scholarship possible in the
Sophomore year was a very small affair. She would not take Marilla's
money; and there seemed little prospect of being able to earn enough in
the summer vacation.

"I suppose I'll just have to drop out next year," she thought drearily,
"and teach a district school again until I earn enough to finish my
course. And by that time all my old class will have graduated and
Patty's Place will be out of the question. But there! I'm not going to
be a coward. I'm thankful I can earn my way through if necessary."

"Here's Mr. Harrison wading up the lane," announced Davy, running out.
"I hope he's brought the mail. It's three days since we got it. I want
to see what them pesky Grits are doing. I'm a Conservative, Anne. And I
tell you, you have to keep your eye on them Grits."

Mr. Harrison had brought the mail, and merry letters from Stella and
Priscilla and Phil soon dissipated Anne's blues. Aunt Jamesina, too, had
written, saying that she was keeping the hearth-fire alight, and that
the cats were all well, and the house plants doing fine.

"The weather has been real cold," she wrote, "so I let the cats sleep
in the house--Rusty and Joseph on the sofa in the living-room, and the
Sarah-cat on the foot of my bed. It's real company to hear her purring
when I wake up in the night and think of my poor daughter in the foreign
field. If it was anywhere but in India I wouldn't worry, but they say
the snakes out there are terrible. It takes all the Sarah-cats's purring
to drive away the thought of those snakes. I have enough faith for
everything but the snakes. I can't think why Providence ever made them.
Sometimes I don't think He did. I'm inclined to believe the Old Harry
had a hand in making THEM."

Anne had left a thin, typewritten communication till the last, thinking
it unimportant. When she had read it she sat very still, with tears in
her eyes.

"What is the matter, Anne?" asked Marilla.

"Miss Josephine Barry is dead," said Anne, in a low tone.

"So she has gone at last," said Marilla. "Well, she has been sick for
over a year, and the Barrys have been expecting to hear of her death any
time. It is well she is at rest for she has suffered dreadfully, Anne.
She was always kind to you."

"She has been kind to the last, Marilla. This letter is from her lawyer.
She has left me a thousand dollars in her will."

