
"He may do so and welcome," answered Mr. Talmadge.

The letter was dispatched the next day and our hero waited anxiously for
the reply. It came five days later and was as follows:

"Your letter of inquiry received. There was a William A. Bodley in this
township twelve years ago. He sold his farm to a man named Augustus
Greggs and then disappeared. Before he sold out he lost his wife and
several children by sickness. Nobody here seems to know what became of
him.

"Joseph Korn."

"That is short and to the point," said Mr. Talmadge, "but it is
not satisfying. It does not state if this William A. Bodley had any
relatives so far as known."

"I guess the authorities did not want to bother about the matter," said
Joe.

"Why don't you visit Millville, Joe?" questioned Ned.

"I was thinking I could do that. It wouldn't cost a fortune, and I've
got that hundred dollars in gold to fall back on, besides my regular
savings."

"You might learn something to your advantage," came from Mr. Talmadge.
"I think it would be money well spent."

"Father, can't I go with Joe?" asked Ned.

"No, Ned, you must attend to your school duties."

"Then, Joe, you must send me full particulars by mail," said the rich
boy.

"Of course I'll do that, Ned," replied our hero.

It was arranged that Joe should leave Riverside on Monday and Ned went
to the depot to see him off.

"I wish you the best of luck, Joe!" called out Ned, as the train left
the station. "I don't know of a fellow who deserves better luck than you
do!"



CHAPTER XXV.


JOE VISITS CHICAGO.


Joe found Millville a sleepy town of three or four hundred inhabitants.
There was one main street containing two blocks of stores, a blacksmith
shop, a creamery and two churches.

When he stepped off the train our hero was eyed sharply by the loungers
about the platform.

"Anything I can' do for you?" asked one of the men, the driver of the
local stage.

"Will you tell me where Mr. Joseph Korn lives?"

"Joe lives up in the brown house yonder. But he ain't home now. He's
doing a job of carpentering."

"Can you tell me where?"

"Up to the Widow Fallow's place. Take you there for ten cents."

"Very well," and our hero jumped into the rickety turnout which went by
the name of the Millville stage.

The drive was not a long one and soon they came to a halt in front of
a residence where a man wearing a carpenter's apron was mending a
broken-down porch.

"There's Joe," said the stage driver, laconically.

The man looked up in wonder when Joe approached him. He dropped his
hammer and stood with his arms on his hips.

"This is Mr. Joseph Korn, I believe?"

"That's me, young man."

"I am Joe Bodley. You wrote to Mr. Talmadge, of Riverside, a few days
ago. I came on to find out what I could about a Mr. William A. Bodley
who used to live here."

"Oh, yes! Well, young man, I can't tell you much more 'n I did in that
letter. Bodley sold out, house, goods and everything, and left for parts
unknown."

"Did he have any relatives around here?"

"Not when he left. He had a wife and three children--a girl and two
boys--but they died."

"Did you ever hear of any relatives coming to see him--a man named Hiram
Bodley?"

"Not me--but Augustus Greggs--who bought his farm--might know about it."

"I'll take you to the Greggs' farm for ten cents," put in the stage
driver.

Again a bargain was struck, and a drive of ten minutes brought them to
the farm, located on the outskirts of Millville. They found the farm
owner at work by his wood pile, sawing wood. He was a pleasant appearing
individual.

"Come into the house," he said putting down his saw. "I'm glad to
see you," and when our hero had entered the little farmhouse he was
introduced to Mrs. Greggs and two grown-up sons, all of whom made him
feel thoroughly at home.

"To tell the truth," said Mr. Greggs, "I did not know William Bodley
very well. I came here looking for a farm and heard this was for sale,
and struck a bargain with him."

"Was he alone at that time?" questioned Joe.

"He was, and his trouble seemed to have made him a bit queer--not but
what he knew what he was doing."

"Did you learn anything about his family?"

"He had lost his wife and two children by disease. What had happened
to the other child was something of a mystery. I rather supposed it had
died while away from home, but I was not sure."

"Have you any idea at all what became of William Bodley?"

"Not exactly. Once I met a man in Pittsburg who had met a man of that
name in Idaho, among the mines. Both of us wondered if that William A.
Bodley was the same that I had bought my farm from."

"Did he say what part of Idaho?"

"He did, but I have forgotten now. Do you think he was a relative of
yours?"

"I don't know what to think. It may be that he was my father.

"Your father?"

"Yes," and Joe told his story and mentioned the documents found in the
blue tin box.

"It does look as if he might be your father," said Augustus Greggs.
"Maybe you're the child that was away from home at the time his other
children and his wife died."

"Do you think anybody else in this village would know anything more
about this William Bodley?"

"No, I don't. But it won't do any harm to ask around. That stage
driver knows all the old inhabitants. Perhaps some of them can tell you
something worth while."

Upon urgent invitation, Joe took dinner at the Greggs' farm and then set
out to visit a number of folks who had lived in Millville and vicinity
for many years. All remembered William A. Bodley and his family, but not
one could tell what had become of the man after he had sold out and gone
away.

"Maybe you had better advertise for him," suggested one man.

"It will cost a good deal to advertise all over the United States,"
replied Joe; "and for all I know he may be dead or out of the country."

Joe remained in Millville two days and then took the train back to the
East. Ned was the first to greet him on his return to Riverside.

"What luck?" he asked, anxiously.

"None whatever," was the sober answer.

"Oh, Joe, that's too bad!"

"I am afraid I am stumped, Ned."

They walked to the Talmadge mansion, and that evening talked the matter
over with Ned's father.

"I will arrange to have an advertisement inserted in a leading paper of
each of our big cities," said Mr. Talmadge. "That will cost something,
but not a fortune."

"You must let me pay for it," said our hero.

"No, Joe, you can put this down to Ned's credit--you two are such good
chums," and Mr. Talmadge smiled quietly.

The advertisements were sent out the following day, through an
advertising agent, and all waited for over two weeks for some reply, but
none came.

"It's no use," said Joe, and it must be admitted that he was much
downcast.

In the meantime he had seen Andrew Mallison and the hotel man said he
would willingly hire him for the summer as soon as the season opened,
and also give Frank Randolph a situation.

"You had better be my guest until that time," said Ned to our hero, when
he heard of this.

"Thank you, Ned, but I don't wish to remain idle so long."

The very next mail after this talk brought news for our hero. A letter
came from Maurice Vane, asking him if he wished to go to Montana.

"I am now certain that that mine is valuable," wrote the gentleman. "I
am going to start West next Monday. If you wish to go with me I will pay
your fare and allow you a salary of ten dollars per week to start on. I
think later on, I will have a good opening for you."

"That settles it, I am going West!" cried Joe, as he showed the letter
to his chum.

"Well, I don't blame you," was the reply. "I know just how nice it is
out there. You'll be sure to get along."

Before going to bed Joe wired his acceptance of the offer, and in the
morning received a telegram from Maurice Vane, asking him to go to
Chicago, to the Palmer House.

"That settles it, I'm off," said our hero, and bought a ticket for the
great city by the lakes without delay. Then he said good-bye to the
Talmadges and the Gussings, and boarded the train at sundown.

Joe was now getting used to traveling and no longer felt green and out
of place. He had engaged a berth, and took his ease until it was time
to go to bed. Arriving at Chicago he made his way without delay to the
Palmer House.

He found the hotel crowded and had some difficulty in getting a room.
Mr. Maurice Vane had not yet arrived.

"I guess I'll leave a note for him," thought our hero, and sauntered
into the reading-room to pen the communication.

While Joe was writing, two men came into the room and sat down behind a
pillar that was close at hand. They were in earnest conversation and he
could not help but catch what was said.

"You say he is coming West?" said one of the pair.

"Yes,--he started yesterday."

"And he has found out that the mine is really valuable?"

"I think so. Anyway he is quite excited about it. He sent a telegram to
that boy, too."

"The hotel boy you mean?"

"Yes."

So the talk ran on and Joe at length got up to take a look at the two
men. They were Gaff Caven and Pat Malone. At once our hero drew out of
sight again.

"How can you get the best of Vane, Gaff?" asked Malone, after a pause.

"There is but one way, Malone."

"And that is?"

"Can I trust you?"

"Haven't you trusted me before?"

"We must--" Caven paused. "We won't talk about it in this public place.
Come to my room and I'll lay my plan before you."

Then the two arose and left the reading-room as rapidly as they had
entered it.



CHAPTER XXVI.


HOW A SATCHEL DISAPPEARED.


"They certainly mean mischief," Joe told himself, after the two men had
vanished. He saw them enter an elevator, but did not know at what floor
they alighted.

Looking over the hotel register he was unable to find the names of
either Caven or Malone, or even Ball. Evidently the rascals were
traveling under other names now.

"They'll bear watching," he concluded. "I must put Mr. Vane on guard as
soon as he comes in."

He gave up the idea of leaving a note and took his station in the
corridor of the hotel. After waiting about two hours he saw a well-known
form approaching, dress-suit case in hand.

"Mr. Vane!"

"Oh, Joe, so you're here already! I'm glad I won't have to wait for
you."

"I'm afraid you won't be able to get a room, Mr. Vane. But you can have
mine."

"I telegraphed ahead for a room, Joe."

"Do you know that your enemies are here?" went on our hero.

"My enemies?"

"Gaff Caven and Pat Malone. But they are traveling under other names."

"Have they seen you?"

"I think not, sir."

Mr. Vane soon had his room assigned to him and he and our hero passed
up in the elevator. As soon as they were in the apartment by themselves,
Joe related what he had seen and heard.

"They are certainly on my trail," mused Maurice Vane. "And they must
have kept pretty close or they wouldn't know that I had asked you to
accompany me."

"They have some plot, Mr. Vane."

"Have you any idea what it is?"

"No, sir, excepting that they are going to try to do you out of your
interest in that mine."

Maurice Vane and Joe talked the matter over for an hour, but without
satisfaction. Then they went to the dining room for something to eat.

"We start for Montana in the morning," said the gentleman. "I think the
quicker I get on the ground the better it will be for me."

Although Maurice Vane and Joe did not know it, both were shadowed by
Caven and Malone. The two rascals had disguised themselves by donning
false beards and putting on spectacles.

"They leave in the morning," said Caven. "Malone, we must get tickets
for the same train, and, if possible, the same sleeping car."

"It's dangerous work," grumbled Pat Malone.

"If you want to back out, say so, and I'll go it alone."

"I don't want to back out. But we must be careful."

"I'll be careful, don't fear," answered the leader of the evil pair.

At the ticket office of the hotel, Maurice Vane procured the necessary
tickets and sleeper accommodations to the town of Golden Pass, Idaho. He
did not notice that he was watched. A moment later Gaff Caven stepped up
to the desk.

"I want a couple of tickets to Golden Pass, too," he said, carelessly.

"Yes, sir."

"Let me see, what sleeper did that other gentleman take?"

"Number 2, sir--berths 7 and 8."
