a light.  He frowned when he saw her; he had always resented her
sitting up for him.  He sat down by the stove and took off his
boots, while Eunice got a lunch for him.  After he had eaten it
in silence he made no move to go to bed.  A chill, premonitory
fear crept over Eunice.  It did not surprise her at all when
Christopher finally said, abruptly, "Eunice, I've a notion to get
married this spring."

Eunice clasped her hands together under the table.  It was what
she had been expecting.  She said so, in a monotonous voice.

"We must make some arrangement for--for you, Eunice," Christopher
went on, in a hurried, hesitant way, keeping his eyes riveted
doggedly on his plate.  "Victoria doesn't exactly like--well, she
thinks it's better for young married folks to begin life by
themselves, and I guess she's about right.  You wouldn't find it
comfortable, anyhow, having to step back to second place after
being mistress here so long."

Eunice tried to speak, but only an indistinct murmur came from
her bloodless lips.  The sound made Christopher look up.
Something in her face irritated him.  He pushed back his chair
impatiently.

"Now, Eunice, don't go taking on.  It won't be any use.  Look at
this business in a sensible way.  I'm fond of you, and all that,
but a man is bound to consider his wife first.  I'll provide for
you comfortably."

"Do you mean to say that your wife is going to turn me out?"
Eunice gasped, rather than spoke, the words.

Christopher drew his reddish brows together.

"I just mean that Victoria says she won't marry me if she has to
live with you.  She's afraid of you.  I told her you wouldn't
interfere with her, but she wasn't satisfied.  It's your own
fault, Eunice.  You've always been so queer and close that people
think you're an awful crank.  Victoria's young and lively, and
you and she wouldn't get on at all.  There isn't any question of
turning you out.  I'll build a little house for you somewhere,
and you'll be a great deal better off there than you would be
here.  So don't make a fuss."

Eunice did not look as if she were going to make a fuss.  She sat
as if turned to stone, her hands lying palm upward in her lap.
Christopher got up, hugely relieved that the dreaded explanation
was over.

"Guess I'll go to bed.  You'd better have gone long ago.  It's
all nonsense, this waiting up for me."

When he had gone Eunice drew a long, sobbing breath and looked
about her like a dazed soul.  All the sorrow of her life was as
nothing to the desolation that assailed her now.

She rose and, with uncertain footsteps, passed out through the
hall and into the room where her mother died.  She had always
kept it locked and undisturbed; it was arranged just as Naomi
Holland had left it.  Eunice tottered to the bed and sat down on
it.

She recalled the promise she had made to her mother in that very
room.  Was the power to keep it to be wrested from her?  Was she
to be driven from her home and parted from the only creature she
had on earth to love?  And would Christopher allow it, after all
her sacrifices for him?  Aye, that he would!  He cared more for
that black-eyed, waxen-faced girl at the old Pye place than for
his own kin.  Eunice put her hands over her dry, burning eyes and
groaned aloud.


Caroline Holland had her hour of triumph over Eunice when she
heard it all.  To one of her nature there was no pleasure so
sweet as that of saying, "I told you so."  Having said it,
however, she offered Eunice a home.  Electa Holland was dead, and
Eunice might fill her place very acceptably, if she would.

"You can't go off and live by yourself," Caroline told her.
"It's all nonsense to talk of such a thing.  We will give you a
home, if Christopher is going to turn you out.  You were always a
fool, Eunice, to pet and pamper him as you've done.  This is the
thanks you get for it--turned out like a dog for his fine wife's
whim!  I only wish your mother was alive!"

It was probably the first time Caroline had ever wished this.
She had flown at Christopher like a fury about the matter, and
had been rudely insulted for her pains.  Christopher had told her
to mind her own business.

When Caroline cooled down she made some arrangements with him, to
all of which Eunice listlessly assented.  She did not care what
became of her.  When Christopher Holland brought Victoria as
mistress to the house where his mother had toiled, and suffered,
and ruled with her rod of iron, Eunice was gone.  In Charles
Holland's household she took Electa's place--an unpaid upper
servant.

Charles and Caroline were kind enough to her, and there was
plenty to do.  For five years her dull, colorless life went on,
during which time she never crossed the threshold of the house
where Victoria Holland ruled with a sway as absolute as Naomi's
had been.  Caroline's curiosity led her, after her first anger
had cooled, to make occasional calls, the observations of which
she faithfully reported to Eunice.  The latter never betrayed any
interest in them, save once.  This was when Caroline came home
full of the news that Victoria had had the room where Naomi died
opened up, and showily furnished as a parlor.  Then Eunice's
sallow face crimsoned, and her eyes flashed, over the
desecration.  But no word of comment or complaint ever crossed
her lips.

She knew, as every one else knew, that the glamor soon went from
Christopher Holland's married life.  The marriage proved an
unhappy one.  Not unnaturally, although unjustly, Eunice blamed
Victoria for this, and hated her more than ever for it.

Christopher seldom came to Charles' house.  Possibly he felt
ashamed.  He had grown into a morose, silent man, at home and
abroad.  It was said he had gone back to his old drinking habits.

One fall Victoria Holland went to town to visit her married
sister.  She took their only child with her.  In her absence
Christopher kept house for himself.

It was a fall long remembered in Avonlea.  With the dropping of
the leaves, and the shortening of the dreary days, the shadow of
a fear fell over the land.  Charles Holland brought the fateful
news home one night.

"There's smallpox in Charlottetown--five or six cases.  Came in
one of the vessels.  There was a concert, and a sailor from one
of the ships was there, and took sick the next day."

This was alarming enough.  Charlottetown was not so very far away
and considerable traffic went on between it and the north shore
districts.

When Caroline recounted the concert story to Christopher the next
morning his ruddy face turned quite pale.  He opened his lips as
if to speak, then closed them again.  They were sitting in the
kitchen; Caroline had run over to return some tea she had
borrowed, and, incidentally, to see what she could of Victoria's
housekeeping in her absence.  Her eyes had been busy while her
tongue ran on, so she did not notice the man's pallor and
silence.

"How long does it take for smallpox to develop after one has been
exposed to it?" he asked abruptly, when Caroline rose to go.

"Ten to fourteen days, I calc'late," was her answer.  "I must see
about having the girls vaccinated right off.  It'll likely
spread.  When do you expect Victoria home?"

"When she's ready to come, whenever that will be," was the gruff
response.

A week later Caroline said to Eunice, "Whatever's got
Christopher?  He hasn't been out anywhere for ages--just hangs
round home the whole time.  It's something new for him.  I s'pose
the place is so quiet, now Madam Victoria's away, that he can
find some rest for his soul.  I believe I'll run over after
milking and see how he's getting on.  You might as well come,
too, Eunice."

Eunice shook her head.  She had all her mother's obstinacy, and
darken Victoria's door she would not.  She went on patiently
darning socks, sitting at the west window, which was her favorite
position--perhaps because she could look from it across the
sloping field and past the crescent curve of maple grove to her
lost home.

After milking, Caroline threw a shawl over her head and ran
across the field.  The house looked lonely and deserted.  As she
fumbled at the latch of the gate the kitchen door opened, and
Christopher Holland appeared on the threshold.

"Don't come any farther," he called.

Caroline fell back in blank astonishment.  Was this some more of
Victoria's work?

"I ain't an agent for the smallpox," she called back viciously.

Christopher did not heed her.

"Will you go home and ask uncle if he'll go, or send for Doctor
Spencer?  He's the smallpox doctor.  I'm sick."

Caroline felt a thrill of dismay and fear.  She faltered a few
steps backward.

"Sick?  What's the matter with you?"

"I was in Charlottetown that night, and went to the concert.
That sailor sat right beside me.  I thought at the time he looked
sick.  It was just twelve days ago.  I've felt bad all day
yesterday and to-day.  Send for the doctor.  Don't come near the
house, or let any one else come near."

He went in and shut the door.  Caroline stood for a few moments
in an almost ludicrous panic.  Then she turned and ran, as if for
her life, across the field.  Eunice saw her coming and met her at
the door.

"Mercy on us!" gasped Caroline.  "Christopher's sick and he
thinks he's got the smallpox.  Where's Charles?"

Eunice tottered back against the door.  Her hand went up to her
side in a way that had been getting very common with her of late.
Even in the midst of her excitement Caroline noticed it.

"Eunice, what makes you do that every time anything startles
you?" she asked sharply.  "Is it anything about your heart?"

"I don't--know.  A little pain--it's gone now.  Did you say that
Christopher has--the smallpox?"

"Well, he says so himself, and it's more than likely, considering
the circumstances.  I declare, I never got such a turn in my
life.  It's a dreadful thing.  I must find Charles at
once--there'll be a hundred things to do."

Eunice hardly heard her.  Her mind was centered upon one idea.
Christopher was ill--alone--she must go to him.  It did not
matter what his disease was.  When Caroline came in from her
breathless expedition to the barn, she found Eunice standing by
the table, with her hat and shawl on, tying up a parcel.

"Eunice!  Where on earth are you going?"

"Over home," said Eunice.  "If Christopher is going to be ill he
must be nursed, and I'm the one to do it.  He ought to be seen to
right away."

"Eunice Carr!  Have you gone clean out of your senses?  It's the
smallpox--the smallpox!  If he's got it he'll have to be taken
to the smallpox hospital in town.  You shan't stir a step to go
to that house!"

"I will."  Eunice faced her excited aunt quietly.  The odd
resemblance to her mother, which only came out in moments of
great tension, was plainly visible.  "He shan't go to the
hospital--they never get proper attention there.  You needn't try
to stop me.  It won't put you or your family in any danger."

Caroline fell helplessly into a chair.  She felt that it would be
of no use to argue with a woman so determined.  She wished
Charles was there.  But Charles had already gone, post-haste, for
the doctor.

With a firm step, Eunice went across the field foot-path she had
not trodden for so long.  She felt no fear--rather a sort of
elation.  Christopher needed her once more; the interloper who
had come between them was not there.  As she walked through the
frosty twilight she thought of the promise made to Naomi Holland,
years ago.


Christopher saw her coming and waved her back.

"Don't come any nearer, Eunice.  Didn't Caroline tell you?  I'm
taking smallpox."

Eunice did not pause.  She went boldly through the yard and up
the porch steps.  He retreated before her and held the door.

"Eunice, you're crazy, girl!  Go home, before it's too late."

Eunice pushed open the door resolutely and went in.

"It's too late now.  I'm here, and I mean to stay and nurse you,
if it's the smallpox you've got.  Maybe it's not.  Just now, when
a person has a finger-ache, he thinks it's smallpox.  Anyhow,
whatever it is, you ought to be in bed and looked after.  You'll
catch cold.  Let me get a light and have a look at you."

Christopher had sunk into a chair.  His natural selfishness
reasserted itself, and he made no further effort to dissuade
Eunice.  She got a lamp and set it on the table by him, while she
scrutinized his face closely.

"You look feverish.  What do you feel like?  When did you take
sick?"

"Yesterday afternoon.  I have chills and hot spells and pains in
my back.  Eunice, do you think it's really smallpox?  And will I
die?"

He caught her hands, and looked imploringly up at her, as a child
might have done.  Eunice felt a wave of love and tenderness sweep
warmly over her starved heart.

"Don't worry.  Lots of people recover from smallpox if they're
properly nursed, and you'll be that, for I'll see to it.  Charles
has gone for the doctor, and we'll know when he comes.  You must
go straight to bed."

She took off her hat and shawl, and hung them up.  She felt as
much at home as if she had never been away.  She had got back to
her kingdom, and there was none to dispute it with her.  When Dr.
Spencer and old Giles Blewett, who had had smallpox in his youth,
came, two hours later, they found Eunice in serene charge.  The
house was in order and reeking of disinfectants.  Victoria's fine
furniture and fixings were being bundled out of the parlor.
There was no bedroom downstairs, and, if Christopher was going to
be ill, he must be installed there.

The doctor looked grave.

"I don't like it," he said, "but I'm not quite sure yet.  If it
is smallpox the eruption will probably be out by morning.  I must
admit he has most of the symptoms.  Will you have him taken to
the hospital?"

"No," said Eunice, decisively.  "I'll nurse him myself.  I'm not
afraid and I'm well and strong."

"Very well.  You've been vaccinated lately?"

"Yes."

"Well, nothing more can be done at present.  You may as well lie
down for a while and save your strength."

But Eunice could not do that.  There was too much to attend to.
She went out to the hall and threw up the window.  Down below, at
a safe distance, Charles Holland was waiting.  The cold wind blew
up to Eunice the odor of the disinfectants with which he had
steeped himself.

"What does the doctor say?" he shouted.

"He thinks it's the smallpox.  Have you sent word to Victoria?"

"Yes, Jim Blewett drove into town and told her.  She'll stay with
her sister till it is over.  Of course it's the best thing for
her to do.  She's terribly frightened."

Eunice's lip curled contemptuously.  To her, a wife who could
desert her husband, no matter what disease he had, was an
incomprehensible creature.  But it was better so; she would have
Christopher all to herself.

The night was long and wearisome, but the morning came all too
soon for the dread certainty it brought.  The doctor pronounced
the case smallpox.  Eunice had hoped against hope, but now,
knowing the worst, she was very calm and resolute.

By noon the fateful yellow flag was flying over the house, and
all arrangements had been made.  Caroline was to do the necessary
cooking, and Charles was to bring the food and leave it in the
yard.  Old Giles Blewett was to come every day and attend to the
stock, as well as help Eunice with the sick man; and the long,
hard fight with death began.

It was a hard fight, indeed.  Christopher Holland, in the
clutches of the loathsome disease, was an object from which his
nearest and dearest might have been pardoned for shrinking.  But
Eunice never faltered; she never left her post.  Sometimes she
dozed in a chair by the bed, but she never lay down.  Her
endurance was something wonderful, her patience and tenderness
almost superhuman.  To and fro she went, in noiseless ministry,
as the long, dreadful days wore away, with a quiet smile on her
lips, and in her dark, sorrowful eyes the rapt look of a pictured
saint in some dim cathedral niche.  For her there was no world
outside the bare room where lay the repulsive object she loved.

One day the doctor looked very grave.  He had grown well-hardened
to pitiful scenes in his life-time; but he shrunk from telling
Eunice that her brother could not live.  He had never seen such
devotion as hers.  It seemed brutal to tell her that it had been
in vain.

But Eunice had seen it for herself.  She took it very calmly, the
doctor thought.  And she had her reward at last--such as it was.
She thought it amply sufficient.

One night Christopher Holland opened his swollen eyes as she bent
over him.  They were alone in the old house.  It was raining
outside, and the drops rattled noisily on the panes.

Christopher smiled at his sister with parched lips, and put out a
feeble hand toward her.

"Eunice," he said faintly, "you've been the best sister ever a
man had.  I haven't treated you right; but you've stood by me to
the last.  Tell Victoria--tell her--to be good to you--"

His voice died away into an inarticulate murmur.  Eunice Carr was
alone with her dead.

They buried Christopher Holland in haste and privacy the next
day.  The doctor disinfected the house, and Eunice was to stay
there alone until it might be safe to make other arrangements.
She had not shed a tear; the doctor thought she was a rather odd
person, but he had a great admiration for her.  He told her she
was the best nurse he had ever seen.  To Eunice, praise or blame
mattered nothing.  Something in her life had snapped--some vital
interest had departed.  She wondered how she could live through
the dreary, coming years.

Late that night she went into the room where her mother and
brother had died.  The window was open and the cold, pure air was
grateful to her after the drug-laden atmosphere she had breathed
so long.  She knelt down by the stripped bed.

"Mother," she said aloud, "I have kept my promise."

When she tried to rise, long after, she staggered and fell across
the bed, with her hand pressed on her heart.  Old Giles Blewett
found her there in the morning.  There was a smile on her face.



XIII. THE CONSCIENCE CASE OF DAVID BELL

Eben Bell came in with an armful of wood and banged it cheerfully
down in the box behind the glowing Waterloo stove, which was
coloring the heart of the little kitchen's gloom with tremulous,
rose-red whirls of light.

"There, sis, that's the last chore on my list.  Bob's milking.
Nothing more for me to do but put on my white collar for meeting.
Avonlea is more than lively since the evangelist came, ain't it,
though!"

Mollie Bell nodded. She was curling her hair before the tiny
mirror that hung on the whitewashed wall and distorted her round,
pink-and-white face into a grotesque caricature.

"Wonder who'll stand up to-night," said Eben reflectively,
sitting down on the edge of the wood-box.  "There ain't many
sinners left in Avonlea--only a few hardened chaps like myself."
