
"It won't hurt so much always, Anne."

"The thought that it may stop hurting sometimes hurts me worse than all
else, Marilla."

"Yes, I know, I've felt that too, about other things.  But we all love
you, Anne.  Captain Jim has been up every day to ask for you--and Mrs.
Moore haunts the place--and Miss Bryant spends most of her time, I
think, cooking up nice things for you.  Susan doesn't like it very
well.  She thinks she can cook as well as Miss Bryant."

"Dear Susan!  Oh, everybody has been so dear and good and lovely to me,
Marilla.  I'm not ungrateful--and perhaps--when this horrible ache
grows a little less--I'll find that I can go on living."



CHAPTER 20

LOST MARGARET

Anne found that she could go on living; the day came when she even
smiled again over one of Miss Cornelia's speeches.  But there was
something in the smile that had never been in Anne's smile before and
would never be absent from it again.

On the first day she was able to go for a drive Gilbert took her down
to Four Winds Point, and left her there while he rowed over the channel
to see a patient at the fishing village.  A rollicking wind was
scudding across the harbor and the dunes, whipping the water into
white-caps and washing the sandshore with long lines of silvery
breakers.

"I'm real proud to see you here again, Mistress Blythe," said Captain
Jim.  "Sit down--sit down.  I'm afeared it's mighty dusty here
today--but there's no need of looking at dust when you can look at such
scenery, is there?"

"I don't mind the dust," said Anne, "but Gilbert says I must keep in
the open air.  I think I'll go and sit on the rocks down there."

"Would you like company or would you rather be alone?"

"If by company you mean yours I'd much rather have it than be alone,"
said Anne, smiling.  Then she sighed.  She had never before minded
being alone.  Now she dreaded it.  When she was alone now she felt so
dreadfully alone.

"Here's a nice little spot where the wind can't get at you," said
Captain Jim, when they reached the rocks.  "I often sit here.  It's a
great place jest to sit and dream."

"Oh--dreams," sighed Anne.  "I can't dream now, Captain Jim--I'm done
with dreams."

"Oh, no, you're not, Mistress Blythe--oh, no, you're not," said Captain
Jim meditatively.  "I know how you feel jest now--but if you keep on
living you'll get glad again, and the first thing you know you'll be
dreaming again--thank the good Lord for it!  If it wasn't for our
dreams they might as well bury us.  How'd we stand living if it wasn't
for our dream of immortality?  And that's a dream that's BOUND to come
true, Mistress Blythe.  You'll see your little Joyce again some day."

"But she won't be my baby," said Anne, with trembling lips.  "Oh, she
may be, as Longfellow says, 'a fair maiden clothed with celestial
grace'--but she'll be a stranger to me."

"God will manage better'n THAT, I believe," said Captain Jim.

They were both silent for a little time.  Then Captain Jim said very
softly:

"Mistress Blythe, may I tell you about lost Margaret?"

"Of course," said Anne gently.  She did not know who "lost Margaret"
was, but she felt that she was going to hear the romance of Captain
Jim's life.

"I've often wanted to tell you about her," Captain Jim went on.

"Do you know why, Mistress Blythe?  It's because I want somebody to
remember and think of her sometime after I'm gone.  I can't bear that
her name should be forgotten by all living souls.  And now nobody
remembers lost Margaret but me."

Then Captain Jim told the story--an old, old forgotten story, for it
was over fifty years since Margaret had fallen asleep one day in her
father's dory and drifted--or so it was supposed, for nothing was ever
certainly known as to her fate--out of the channel, beyond the bar, to
perish in the black thundersquall which had come up so suddenly that
long-ago summer afternoon.  But to Captain Jim those fifty years were
but as yesterday when it is past.

"I walked the shore for months after that," he said sadly, "looking to
find her dear, sweet little body; but the sea never give her back to
me.  But I'll find her sometime, Mistress Blythe--I'll find her
sometime.  She's waiting for me.  I wish I could tell you jest how she
looked, but I can't.  I've seen a fine, silvery mist hanging over the
bar at sunrise that seemed like her--and then again I've seen a white
birch in the woods back yander that made me think of her.  She had
pale, brown hair and a little white, sweet face, and long slender
fingers like yours, Mistress Blythe, only browner, for she was a shore
girl.  Sometimes I wake up in the night and hear the sea calling to me
in the old way, and it seems as if lost Margaret called in it.  And
when there's a storm and the waves are sobbing and moaning I hear her
lamenting among them.  And when they laugh on a gay day it's HER
laugh--lost Margaret's sweet, roguish, little laugh.  The sea took her
from me, but some day I'll find her.  Mistress Blythe.  It can't keep
us apart forever."

"I am glad you have told me about her," said Anne.  "I have often
wondered why you had lived all your life alone."

"I couldn't ever care for anyone else.  Lost Margaret took my heart
with her--out there," said the old lover, who had been faithful for
fifty years to his drowned sweetheart.  "You won't mind if I talk a
good deal about her, will you, Mistress Blythe?  It's a pleasure to
me--for all the pain went out of her memory years ago and jest left its
blessing.  I know you'll never forget her, Mistress Blythe.  And if the
years, as I hope, bring other little folks to your home, I want you to
promise me that you'll tell THEM the story of lost Margaret, so that
her name won't be forgotten among humankind."



CHAPTER 21

BARRIERS SWEPT AWAY

 "Anne," said Leslie, breaking abruptly a short
silence, "you don't know how GOOD it is to be sitting here with you
again--working--and talking--and being silent together."

They were sitting among the blue-eyed grasses on the bank of the brook
in Anne's garden.  The water sparkled and crooned past them; the
birches threw dappled shadows over them; roses bloomed along the walks.
The sun was beginning to be low, and the air was full of woven music.
There was one music of the wind in the firs behind the house, and
another of the waves on the bar, and still another from the distant
bell of the church near which the wee, white lady slept.  Anne loved
that bell, though it brought sorrowful thoughts now.

She looked curiously at Leslie, who had thrown down her sewing and
spoken with a lack of restraint that was very unusual with her.

"On that horrible night when you were so ill," Leslie went on, "I kept
thinking that perhaps we'd have no more talks and walks and WORKS
together.  And I realised just what your friendship had come to mean to
me--just what YOU meant--and just what a hateful little beast I had
been."

"Leslie!  Leslie!  I never allow anyone to call my friends names."

"It's true.  That's exactly what I am--a hateful little beast. There's
something I've GOT to tell you, Anne.  I suppose it will make you
despise me, but I MUST confess it.  Anne, there have been times this
past winter and spring when I have HATED you."

"I KNEW it," said Anne calmly.

"You KNEW it?"

"Yes, I saw it in your eyes."

"And yet you went on liking me and being my friend."

"Well, it was only now and then you hated me, Leslie.  Between times
you loved me, I think."

"I certainly did.  But that other horrid feeling was always there,
spoiling it, back in my heart.  I kept it down--sometimes I forgot
it--but sometimes it would surge up and take possession of me.  I hated
you because I ENVIED you--oh, I was sick with envy of you at times.
You had a dear little home--and love--and happiness--and glad
dreams--everything I wanted--and never had--and never could have.  Oh,
never could have!  THAT was what stung.  I wouldn't have envied you, if
I had had any HOPE that life would ever be different for me.  But I
hadn't--I hadn't--and it didn't seem FAIR.  It made me rebellious--and
it hurt me--and so I hated you at times.  Oh, I was so ashamed of
it--I'm dying of shame now--but I couldn't conquer it.

"That night, when I was afraid you mightn't live--I thought I was going
to be punished for my wickedness--and I loved you so then.  Anne, Anne,
I never had anything to love since my mother died, except Dick's old
dog--and it's so dreadful to have nothing to love--life is so
EMPTY--and there's NOTHING worse than emptiness--and I might have loved
you so much--and that horrible thing had spoiled it--"

Leslie was trembling and growing almost incoherent with the violence of
her emotion.

"Don't, Leslie," implored Anne, "oh, don't.  I understand--don't talk
of it any more."

"I must--I must.  When I knew you were going to live I vowed that I
would tell you as soon as you were well--that I wouldn't go on
accepting your friendship and companionship without telling you how
unworthy I was of it.  And I've been so afraid--it would turn you
against me."

"You needn't fear that, Leslie."

"Oh, I'm so glad--so glad, Anne."  Leslie clasped her brown,
work-hardened hands tightly together to still their shaking.  "But I
want to tell you everything, now I've begun.  You don't remember the
first time I saw you, I suppose--it wasn't that night on the shore--"

"No, it was the night Gilbert and I came home.  You were driving your
geese down the hill.  I should think I DO remember it!  I thought you
were so beautiful--I longed for weeks after to find out who you were."

"I knew who YOU were, although I had never seen either of you before.
I had heard of the new doctor and his bride who were coming to live in
Miss Russell's little house.  I--I hated you that very moment, Anne."

"I felt the resentment in your eyes--then I doubted--I thought I must
be mistaken--because WHY should it be?"

"It was because you looked so happy.  Oh, you'll agree with me now that
I AM a hateful beast--to hate another woman just because she was
happy,--and when her happiness didn't take anything from me!  That was
why I never went to see you.  I knew quite well I ought to go--even our
simple Four Winds customs demanded that.  But I couldn't.  I used to
watch you from my window--I could see you and your husband strolling
about your garden in the evening--or you running down the poplar lane
to meet him.  And it hurt me.  And yet in another way I wanted to go
over.  I felt that, if I were not so miserable, I could have liked you
and found in you what I've never had in my life--an intimate, REAL
friend of my own age.  And then you remember that night at the shore?
You were afraid I would think you crazy.  You must have thought _I_
was."

"No, but I couldn't understand you, Leslie.  One moment you drew me to
you--the next you pushed me back."

"I was very unhappy that evening.  I had had a hard day.  Dick had been
very--very hard to manage that day.  Generally he is quite good-natured
and easily controlled, you know, Anne.  But some days he is very
different.  I was so heartsick--I ran away to the shore as soon as he
went to sleep.  It was my only refuge.  I sat there thinking of how my
poor father had ended his life, and wondering if I wouldn't be driven
to it some day.  Oh, my heart was full of black thoughts!  And then you
came dancing along the cove like a glad, light-hearted child.  I--I
hated you more then than I've ever done since.  And yet I craved your
friendship.  The one feeling swayed me one moment; the other feeling
the next.  When I got home that night I cried for shame of what you
must think of me.  But it's always been just the same when I came over
here.  Sometimes I'd be happy and enjoy my visit.  And at other times
that hideous feeling would mar it all.  There were times when
everything about you and your house hurt me.  You had so many dear
little things I couldn't have.  Do you know--it's ridiculous--but I had
an especial spite at those china dogs of yours.  There were times when
I wanted to catch up Gog and Magog and bang their pert black noses
together!  Oh, you smile, Anne--but it was never funny to me.  I would
come here and see you and Gilbert with your books and your flowers, and
your household gods, and your little family jokes--and your love for
each other showing in every look and word, even when you didn't know
it--and I would go home to--you know what I went home to!  Oh, Anne, I
don't believe I'm jealous and envious by nature.  When I was a girl I
lacked many things my schoolmates had, but I never cared--I never
disliked them for it.  But I seem to have grown so hateful--"

"Leslie, dearest, stop blaming yourself.  You are NOT hateful or
jealous or envious.  The life you have to live has warped you a little,
perhaps-but it would have ruined a nature less fine and noble than
yours.  I'm letting you tell me all this because I believe it's better
for you to talk it out and rid your soul of it.  But don't blame
yourself any more."

"Well, I won't.  I just wanted you to know me as I am.  That time you
told me of your darling hope for the spring was the worst of all, Anne.
I shall never forgive myself for the way I behaved then.  I repented it
with tears.  And I DID put many a tender and loving thought of you into
the little dress I made.  But I might have known that anything I made
could only be a shroud in the end."

"Now, Leslie, that IS bitter and morbid--put such thoughts away.

"I was so glad when you brought the little dress; and since I had to
lose little Joyce I like to think that the dress she wore was the one
you made for her when you let yourself love me."

"Anne, do you know, I believe I shall always love you after this.  I
don't think I'll ever feel that dreadful way about you again.  Talking
it all out seems to have done away with it, somehow.  It's very
strange--and I thought it so real and bitter.  It's like opening the
door of a dark room to show some hideous creature you've believed to be
there--and when the light streams in your monster turns out to have
been just a shadow, vanishing when the light comes.  It will never come
between us again."

"No, we are real friends now, Leslie, and I am very glad."

"I hope you won't misunderstand me if I say something else.  Anne, I
was grieved to the core of my heart when you lost your baby; and if I
could have saved her for you by cutting off one of my hands I would
have done it.  But your sorrow has brought us closer together.  Your
perfect happiness isn't a barrier any longer.  Oh, don't misunderstand,
dearest--I'm NOT glad that your happiness isn't perfect any longer--I
can say that sincerely; but since it isn't, there isn't such a gulf
between us."

"I DO understand that, too, Leslie.  Now, we'll just shut up the past
and forget what was unpleasant in it.  It's all going to be different.
We're both of the race of Joseph now.  I think you've been
wonderful--wonderful.  And, Leslie, I can't help believing that life
has something good and beautiful for you yet."

