doors of the house shut and bolted. When she saw that he had done this,
she said:

'Very well, dear husband, I shall do what you wish, and remain where I
am.'

So her husband believed that it was all right, and that she had thought
better of it, and had got over her mad impulse to obey the voice. But a
few minutes later she made a sudden dash for one of the doors, opened it
and darted out, followed by her husband. He caught her by the fur
coat, and begged and implored her not to go, for if she did she
would certainly never return. She said nothing, but let her arms fall
backwards, and suddenly bending herself forward, she slipped out of the
coat, leaving it in her husband's hands. He, poor man, seemed turned to
stone as he gazed after her hurrying away from him, and calling at the
top of her voice, as she ran:

'I am coming! I am coming!'

When she was quite out of sight her husband recovered his wits and went
back into his house, murmuring:

'If she is so foolish as to wish to die, I can't help it. I warned
and implored her to pay no heed to that voice, however loudly it might
call.'

Well, days and weeks and months and years passed, and nothing happened
to disturb the peace of the household. But one day the man was at the
barber's as usual, being shaved. The shop was full of people, and
his chin had just been covered with a lather of soap, when, suddenly
starting up from the chair, he called out in a loud voice:

'I won't come, do you hear? I won't come!'

The barber and the other people in the shop listened to him with
amazement. But again looking towards the door, he exclaimed:

'I tell you, once and for all, I do not mean to come, so go away.'

And a few minutes later he called out again:

'Go away, I tell you, or it will be the worse for you. You may call as
much as you like but you will never get me to come.'

And he got so angry that you might have thought that some one was
actually standing at the door, tormenting him. At last he jumped up, and
caught the razor out of the barber's hand, exclaiming:

'Give me that razor, and I'll teach him to let people alone for the
future.'

And he rushed out of the house as if he were running after some one,
whom no one else saw. The barber, determined not to lose his razor,
pursued the man, and they both continued running at full speed till they
had got well out of the town, when all of a sudden the man fell head
foremost down a precipice, and never was seen again. So he too, like the
others, had been forced against his will to follow the voice that called
him.

The barber, who went home whistling and congratulating himself on the
escape he had made, described what had happened, and it was noised
abroad in the country that the people who had gone away, and had never
returned, had all fallen into that pit; for till then they had never
known what had happened to those who had heard the voice and obeyed its
call.

But when crowds of people went out from the town to examine the
ill-fated pit that had swallowed up such numbers, and yet never seemed
to be full, they could discover nothing. All that they could see was a
vast plain, that looked as if it had been there since the beginning of
the world. And from that time the people of the country began to die
like ordinary mortals all the world over.(13)

(13) Roumanian Tales from the German of Mite Thremnitz.




THE SIX SILLIES

ONCE upon a time there was a young girl who reached the age of
thirty-seven without ever having had a lover, for she was so foolish
that no one wanted to marry her.

One day, however, a young man arrived to pay his addresses to her, and
her mother, beaming with joy, sent her daughter down to the cellar to
draw a jug of beer.

As the girl never came back the mother went down to see what had become
of her, and found her sitting on the stairs, her head in her hands,
while by her side the beer was running all over the floor, as she
had forgotten to close the tap. 'What are you doing there?' asked the
mother.

'I was thinking what I shall call my first child after I am married to
that young man. All the names in the calendar are taken already.'

The mother sat down on the staircase beside her daughter and said, 'I
will think about it with you, my dear.'

The father who had stayed upstairs with the young man was surprised that
neither his wife nor his daughter came back, and in his turn went down
to look for them. He found them both sitting on the stairs, while beside
them the beer was running all over the ground from the tap, which was
wide open.

'What are you doing there? The beer is running all over the cellar.'

'We were thinking what we should call the children that our daughter
will have when she marries that young man. All the names in the calendar
are taken already.'

'Well,' said the father, 'I will think about it with you.'

As neither mother nor daughter nor father came upstairs again, the lover
grew impatient, and went down into the cellar to see what they could all
be doing. He found them all three sitting on the stairs, while beside
them the beer was running all over the ground from the tap, which was
wide open.

'What in the world are you all doing that you don't come upstairs, and
that you let the beer run all over the cellar?'

'Yes, I know, my boy,' said the father, 'but if you marry our daughter
what shall you call your children? All the names in the calendar are
taken.'

When the young man heard this answer he replied:

'Well! good-bye, I am going away. When I shall have found three people
sillier than you I will come back and marry your daughter.'

So he continued his journey, and after walking a long way he reached an
orchard. Then he saw some people knocking down walnuts, and trying to
throw them into a cart with a fork.

'What are you doing there?' he asked.

'We want to load the cart with our walnuts, but we can't manage to do
it.'

The lover advised them to get a basket and to put the walnuts in it, so
as to turn them into the cart.

'Well,' he said to himself, 'I have already found someone more foolish
than those three.'

So he went on his way, and by-and-by he came to a wood. There he saw a
man who wanted to give his pig some acorns to eat, and was trying with
all his might to make him climb up the oak-tree.

'What are you doing, my good man?' asked he.

'I want to make my pig eat some acorns, and I can't get him to go up the
tree.'

'If you were to climb up and shake down the acorns the pig would pick
them up.'

'Oh, I never thought of that.'

'Here is the second idiot,' said the lover to himself.

Some way farther along the road he came upon a man who had never worn
any trousers, and who was trying to put on a pair. So he had fastened
them to a tree and was jumping with all his might up in the air so that
he should hit the two legs of the trousers as he came down.

'It would be much better if you held them in your hands,' said the young
man, 'and then put your legs one after the other in each hole.'

'Dear me to be sure! You are sharper than I am, for that never occurred
to me.'

And having found three people more foolish than his bride, or her father
or her mother, the lover went back to marry the young lady.

And in course of time they had a great many children.

Story from Hainaut.

(M. Lemoine. La Tradition. No, 34,)




KARI WOODENGOWN

THERE was once upon a time a King who had become a widower. His Queen
had left one daughter behind her, and she was so wise and so pretty that
it was impossible for any one to be wiser or prettier. For a long time
the King went sorrowing for his wife, for he had loved her exceedingly;
but at last he grew tired of living alone, and married a Queen who was
a widow, and she also had a daughter, who was just as ill-favoured
and wicked as the other was good and beautiful. The stepmother and her
daughter were envious of the King's daughter because she was so pretty,
but so long as the King was at home they dared do her no harm, because
his love for her was so great.

Then there came a time when he made war on another King and went away to
fight, and then the new Queen thought that she could do what she liked;
so she both hungered and beat the King's daughter and chased her about
into every corner. At last she thought that everything was too good for
her, and set her to work to look after the cattle. So she went about
with the cattle, and herded them in the woods and in the fields. Of food
she got little or none, and grew pale and thin, and was nearly always
weeping and sad. Among the herd there was a great blue bull, which
always kept itself very smart and sleek, and often came to the King's
daughter and let her stroke him. So one day, when she was again sitting
crying and sorrowing, the Bull came up to her and asked why she was
always so full of care? She made no answer, but continued to weep.

'Well,' said the Bull, 'I know what it is, though you will not tell
me; you are weeping because the Queen is unkind to you, and because she
wants to starve you to death. But you need be under no concern about
food, for in my left ear there lies a cloth, and if you will but take it
and spread it out, you can have as many dishes as you like.'

So she did this, and took the cloth and spread it out upon the grass,
and then it was covered with the daintiest dishes that any one could
desire, and there was wine, and mead, and cake. And now she became brisk
and well again, and grew so rosy, and plump, and fair that the Queen
and her scraggy daughter turned blue and white with vexation at it. The
Queen could not imagine how her step-daughter could look so well on such
bad food, so she ordered one of her handmaidens to follow her into the
wood and watch her, and see how it was, for she thought that some of the
servants must be giving her food. So the maid followed her into the wood
and watched, and saw how the step-daughter took the cloth out of the
Blue Bull's ear, and spread it out, and how the cloth was then covered
with the most delicate dishes, which the step-daughter ate and regaled
herself with. So the waiting-maid went home and told the Queen.

And now the King came home, and he had conquered the other King with
whom he had been at war. So there was great gladness in the palace,
but no one was more glad than the King's daughter. The Queen, however,
pretended to be ill, and gave the doctor much money to say that she
would never be well again unless she had some of the flesh of the Blue
Bull to eat. Both the King's daughter and the people in the palace asked
the doctor if there were no other means of saving her, and begged for
the Bull's life, for they were all fond of him, and they all declared
that there was no such Bull in the whole country; but it was all in
vain, he was to be killed, and should be killed, and nothing else would
serve. When the King's daughter heard it she was full of sorrow, and
went down to the byre to the Bull. He too was standing there hanging his
head, and looking so downcast that she fell a-weeping over him.

'What are you weeping for?' said the Bull.

So she told him that the King had come home again, and that the Queen
had pretended to be ill, and that she had made the doctor say that she
could never be well again unless some of the flesh of the Blue Bull was
given her to eat, and that now he was to be killed.

'When once they have taken my life they will soon kill you also,'
said the Bull. 'If you are of the same mind with me, we will take our
departure this very night.'

The King's daughter thought that it was bad to go and leave her father,
but that it was worse still to be in the same house with the Queen, so
she promised the Bull that she would come.

At night, when all the others had gone to bed, the King's daughter stole
softly down to the byre to the Bull, and he took her on his back and
got out of the courtyard as quickly as he could. So at cock-crow next
morning, when the people came to kill the Bull, he was gone, and when
the King got up and asked for his daughter she was gone too. He sent
forth messengers to all parts of the kingdom to search for them, and
published his loss in all the parish churches, but there was no one who
had seen anything of them.

In the meantime the Bull travelled through many lands with the King's
daughter on his back, and one day they came to a great copper-wood,
where the trees, and the branches, and the leaves, and the flowers, and
everything else was of copper.

But before they entered the wood the Bull said to the King's daughter:

'When we enter into this wood, you must take the greatest care not to
touch a leaf of it, or all will be over both with me and with you, for a
Troll with three heads, who is the owner of the wood, lives here.'

So she said she would be on her guard, and not touch anything. And she
was very careful, and bent herself out of the way of the branches, and
put them aside with her hands; but it was so thickly wooded that it was
all but impossible to get forward, and do what she might, she somehow or
other tore off a leaf which got into her hand.

'Oh! oh! What have you done now?' said the Bull. 'It will now cost us a
battle for life or death; but do be careful to keep the leaf.'

Very soon afterwards they came to the end of the wood, and the Troll
with three heads came rushing up to them.

'Who is that who is touching my wood?' said the Troll.

'The wood is just as much mine as yours!' said the Bull.

'We shall have a tussle for that!' shrieked the Troll.

'That may be,' said the Bull.

So they rushed on each other and fought, and as for the Bull he butted
and kicked with all the strength of his body, but the Troll fought quite
as well as he did, and the whole day went by before the Bull put an end
to him, and then he himself was so full of wounds and so worn out that
he was scarcely able to move. So they had to wait a day, and the Bull
told the King's daughter to take the horn of ointment which hung at the
Troll's belt, and rub him with it; then he was himself again, and the
next day they set off once more. And now they journeyed on for many,
many days, and then after a long, long time they came to a silver
wood. The trees, and the boughs, and the leaves, and the flowers, and
everything else was of silver.

Before the Bull went into the wood, he said to the King's daughter:
'When we enter into this wood you must, for Heaven's sake, be very
careful not to touch anything at all, and not to pluck off even so much
as one leaf, or else all will be over both with you and with me. A Troll
with six heads lives here, who is the owner of the wood, and I do not
think I should be able to overcome him.'

'Yes,' said the King's daughter, 'I will take good care not to touch
what you do not wish me to touch.'

But when they got into the wood it was so crowded, and the trees so
close together, that they could scarcely get forward. She was as careful
as she could be, and bent aside to get out of the way of the branches,
and thrust them away from before her with her hands; but every instant
a branch struck against her eyes, and in spite of all her care, she
happened to pull off one leaf.

'Oh! oh! What have you done now?' said the Bull. It will now cost us a
battle for life or death, for this Troll has six heads and is twice as
strong as the other, but do be careful to keep the leaf.'

Just as he said this came the Troll. 'Who is that who is touching my
wood?' he said.

'It is just as much mine as yours!'

'We shall have a tussle for that!' screamed the Troll.

'That may be,' said the Bull, and rushed at the Troll, and gored out his
eyes, and drove his horns right through him so that his entrails gushed
out, but the Troll fought just as well as he did, and it was three whole
days before the Bull got the life out of him. But the Bull was then so
weak and worn out that it was only with pain and effort that he could
move, and so covered with wounds that the blood streamed from him. So he
told the King's daughter to take the horn of ointment that was hanging
at the Troll's belt, and anoint him with it. She did this, and then he
came to himself again, but they had to stay there and rest for a week
before the Bull was able to go any farther.

At last they set forth on their way again, but the Bull was still weak,
and at first could not go quickly. The King's daughter wished to spare
him, and said that she was so young and light of foot that she would
willingly walk, but he would not give her leave to do that, and she was
forced to seat herself on his back again. So they travelled for a long
time, and through many lands, and the King's daughter did not at all
know where he was taking her, but after a long, long time they came to a
gold wood. It was so golden that the gold dripped off it, and the trees,
and the branches, and the flowers, and the leaves were all of pure gold.
Here all happened just as it had happened in the copper wood and silver
wood. The Bull told the King's daughter that on no account was she to
touch it, for there was a Troll with nine heads who was the owner, and
that he was much larger and stronger than both the others put together,
and that he did not believe that he could overcome him. So she said that
she would take great care not to touch anything, and he should see that
she did. But when they got into the wood it was still thicker than the
silver wood, and the farther they got into it the worse it grew. The
wood became thicker and thicker, and closer and closer, and at last she
thought there was no way whatsoever by which they could get forward; she
was so terrified lest she should break anything off, that she sat and
twisted, and turned herself on this side and on that, to get out of the
way of the branches, and pushed them away from her with her hands, but
every moment they struck against her eyes, so that she could not see
what she was clutching at, and before she knew what she was doing she
had a golden apple in her hands. She was now in such terror that she
began to cry, and wanted to throw it away, but the Bull said that she
was to keep it, and take the greatest care of it, and comforted her as
well as he could, but he believed that it would be a hard struggle, and
he doubted whether it would go well with him.

Just then the Troll with nine heads came, and he was so frightful that
the King's daughter scarcely dared to look at him

'Who is this who is breaking my wood?' he screamed

'It is as much mine as yours!' said the Bull.

'We shall have a tussle for that!' screamed the Troll.

'That may be,' said the Bull; so they rushed at each other, and fought,
and it was such a dreadful sight that the King's daughter very nearly
swooned. The Bull gored the Troll's eyes out and ran his horns right
through him, but the Troll fought as well as he did, and when the Bull
had gored one head to death the other heads breathed life into it again,
so it was a whole week before the Bull was able to kill him. But then he
himself was so worn out and weak that he could not move at all. His
body was all one wound, and he could not even so much as tell the King's
daughter to take the horn of ointment out of the Troll's belt and rub
him with it. She did this without being told; so he came to himself
again, but he had to lie there for three weeks and rest before he was in
a state to move.

Then they journeyed onwards by degrees, for the Bull said that they had
still a little farther to go, and in this way they crossed many high
hills and thick woods. This lasted for a while, and then they came upon
the fells.

'Do you see anything?' asked the Bull.

'No, I see nothing but the sky above and the wild fell side,' said the
King's daughter.

Then they climbed up higher, and the fell grew more level, so that they
could see farther around them.

'Do you see anything now?' said the Bull.

'Yes, I see a small castle, far, far away,' said the Princess.

'It is not so very little after all,' said the Bull.

After a long, long time they came to a high hill, where there was a
precipitous wall of rock.

'Do you see nothing now?' said the Bull.

'Yes, now I see the castle quite near, and now it is much, much larger,'
said the King's daughter.

'Thither shall you go,' said the Bull; 'immediately below the castle
there is a pig-sty, where you shall dwell. When you get there, you will
find a wooden gown which you are to put on, and then go to the castle
and say that you are called Kari Woodengown, and that you are seeking a
place. But now you must take out your little knife and cut off my head
with it, and then you must flay me and roll up my hide and put it there
under the rock, and beneath the hide you must lay the copper leaf, and
the silver leaf, and the golden apple. Close beside the rock a stick is
standing, and when you want me for anything you have only to knock at
the wall of rock with that.'

At first she would not do it, but when the Bull said that this was the
only reward that he would have for what he had done for her, she could
do no otherwise. So though she thought it very cruel, she slaved on and
cut at the great animal with the knife till she had cut off his head and
hide, and then she folded up the hide and laid it beneath the mountain
wall, and put the copper leaf, and the silver leaf, and the golden apple
inside it.

When she had done that she went away to the pig-sty, but all the way as
she went she wept, and was very sorrowful. Then she put on the wooden
gown, and walked to the King's palace. When she got there she went
into the kitchen and begged for a place, saying that her name was Kari
Woodengown.

The cook told her that she might have a place and leave to stay there
at once and wash up, for the girl who had done that before had just gone
away. 'And as soon as you get tired of being here you will take yourself
off too,' said he.

'No,' said she, 'that I shall certainly not.'

And then she washed up, and did it very tidily.

On Sunday some strangers were coming to the King's palace, so Kari
begged to have leave to carry up the water for the Prince's bath, but
the others laughed at her and said, 'What do you want there? Do you
think the Prince will ever look at such a fright as you?'

She would not give it up, however, but went on begging until at last
she got leave. When she was going upstairs her wooden gown made such a
clatter that the Prince came out and said, 'What sort of a creature may
you be?'

'I was to take this water to you,' said Kari.

'Do you suppose that I will have any water that you bring?' said the
Prince, and emptied it over her.

She had to bear that, but then she asked permission to go to church. She
got that, for the church was very near. But first she went to the rock
and knocked at it with the stick which was standing there, as the
Bull had told her to do. Instantly a man came forth and asked what she
wanted. The King's daughter said that she had got leave to go to church
and listen to the priest, but that she had no clothes to go in. So he
brought her a gown that was as bright as the copper wood, and she got
a horse and saddle too from him. When she reached the church she was so
