
He began to think now that it might be well to revive the combination.
There was some doubt, however, as to how Philip would receive the
proposal.

He looked at his young partner and was not much encouraged. He felt that
he must conciliate him.

"Mr. de Gray," he began.

"Call me Gray. My name is not de Gray."

"Well, Mr. Gray, then. I hope you don't have any hard feelings."

"About what?" inquired Philip, surveying the professor curiously.

"About--the past," stammered the professor.

"You mean about your running off with my money?" returned Philip
plainly.

Professor Riccabocca winced. He did not quite like this form of
statement. "I am afraid you misjudge me," he said, rather confused.

"I shall be glad to listen to any explanation you have to offer," said
our hero.

"I will explain it all to you, in time," said the professor, recovering
his old assurance. "In the meantime, I have a proposition to make to
you."

"What is it?"

"Suppose we give an entertainment in Knoxville--on the same terms as the
last."

"I shouldn't think you would like to appear before an audience here,
Professor Riccabocca."

"Why not?"

"Before night everybody will have heard of your running away with the
proceeds of the last concert."

"Public men are always misjudged. They must expect it," said the
professor, with the air of a martyr.

"I should think you would be more afraid of being justly judged."

"Mr. Gray," said the professor, "I have done wrong, I admit; but it was
under the influence of neuralgia. When I have a neuralgic headache, I am
not myself. I do things which, in a normal condition, I should not dream
of. I am the victim of a terrible physical malady."

Philip did not believe a word of this, but he felt amused at the
professor's singular excuse.

"Come, Mr. Gray, what do you say?"

"I think I must decline," returned Philip.

But here Professor Riccabocca received unexpected help.

Mr. Perry, the landlord, who had listened to the colloquy, approached
the two speakers and said:

"Gentlemen, I have a proposal to make to you both."

Both Philip and the professor looked up, with interest.

"Some of the young men in the village," said the landlord, "have formed
a literary club, meeting weekly. They have hired and furnished a room
over one of our stores, provided it with, games and subscribed for a few
periodicals. They find, however, that the outlay has been greater
than they anticipated and are in debt. I have been talking with
the secretary, and he thinks he would like to engage you to give an
entertainment, the proceeds, beyond a fixed sum, to go to the benefit of
the club. What do you say?"

"When is it proposed to have the entertainment?" asked Philip.

"I suppose we should have to name to-morrow evening, in order to
advertise it sufficiently."

"I am willing to make any engagement that will suit the club," said
Philip.

"And I, too," said Professor Riccabocca.

"The secretary authorizes me to offer you ten dollars each, and to pay
your hotel expenses in the meantime," said Mr. Perry.

"That is satisfactory," said our hero.

"I agree," said the professor.

"Then I will at once notify the secretary, and he will take steps to
advertise the entertainment."

Ten dollars was a small sum compared with what Philip had obtained for
his evening in Wilkesville, but a week since he would have regarded it
as very large for one week's work. He felt that it was for his interest
to accept the proposal.

He secretly resolved that if the entertainment should not prove as
successful as was anticipated, he would give up a part of the sum which
was promised him for his services.

Professor Riccabocca assented the more readily to the proposal, because
he thought it might enable him again to form a business alliance with
our hero, from whom his conduct had estranged him.

"Suppose we take a room together, Mr. de Gray," he said, with an
ingratiating smile.

"Gray, if you please, professor. I don't like sailing under false
colors."

"Excuse me; the force of habit, you know. Well, do you agree?"

"The professor has more assurance than any man I ever heard of," thought
Philip. "You must excuse me, professor," he said. "After what has
happened, I should feel safer in a room by myself."

"Why will you dwell upon the past, Mr. Gray?" said the professor
reproachfully.

"Because I am prudent, and learn from experience," answered Philip.

"I assure you, you will have nothing to complain of," said Riccabocca
earnestly. "If we are together, we can consult about the program."

"We shall have plenty of time to do that during the day, professor."

"Then you don't care to room with me?" said Riccabocca, looking
disappointed.

"No, I don't."

"What are you afraid of?"

"I am afraid you might have an attack of neuralgic headache during the
night," said Philip, laughing.

Professor Riccabocca saw that it would be of no use for him to press the
request, and allowed himself to be conducted to the same room which he
had so unceremoniously left a short time before.

During the afternoon, Philip had a call from John Turner, the secretary
of the Young Men's Club. He was a pleasant, straightforward young man,
of perhaps twenty.

"We are very much obliged to you, Mr. Gray," he said, "for kindly
consenting to play for our benefit."

"It is for my interest," said Philip frankly. "I may as well remain here
and earn ten dollars as to be idle."

"But you made a great deal more, I understand, in Wilkesville?"

"Yes; but I might not be as fortunate here. I had not intended to appear
here at all, and should not have done so unless you had invited me. How
many have you in your club?"

"Only about twenty-five, so far, and some of us are not able to pay
much."

"How long has your club been formed?" asked Philip.

"Only about three months. We wanted a place where we could meet together
socially in the evening, and have a good time. Before, we had only the
stores and barrooms to go to, and there we were tempted to drink. Our
club was started in the interests of temperance, and we can see already
that it is exerting a good influence."

"Then I am very glad to assist you," said Philip cordially.

"You must come round and see our room. Are you at leisure now?"

"Yes, Mr. Turner."

Philip accompanied his new friend to the neatly furnished room leased by
the society. He was so well pleased with its appearance that he thought
he should himself like to belong to such an association, whenever he
found a permanent home. At present he was only a wanderer.

"Our debt is thirty-four dollars," said the secretary. "You may not
think it large, but it's large for us."

"I hope our entertainment will enable you to clear it off."

"If it should it will give us new courage."

On the evening of the next day Philip and the professor entered the hall
engaged for the entertainment, and took seats on the platform.

The hall was well filled, the scale of prices being the same as at
Wilkesville.

"Mr. Gray," whispered the secretary joyfully, "it is a great success!
After paying all bills the club will clear fifty dollars."

"I am delighted to hear it," said Philip.

The professor commenced the entertainment, and was followed by Philip.

As Philip began to play his attention was drawn to three persons who
were entering the hall.

These were a lady, a little girl, and a stout gentleman, in whom Philip,
almost petrified with amazement, recognized his old acquaintance, Squire
Pope, of Norton, who had shown himself so anxious to provide him a home
in the poor-house.



CHAPTER XXXV. SQUIRE POPE IS AMAZED.



Though Philip did not know it, it chanced that Squire Pope's only
sister, Mrs. Cunningham, lived in Knoxville. She was a widow, fairly
well off, with a young daughter, Carrie--a girl of twelve. Squire Pope
had long thought of visiting his sister, and happening about this time
to have a little business in a town near-by, he decided to carry out
his long-deferred plan. He arrived by the afternoon train, in time for
supper.

"I am glad you are here to-night, brother," said Mrs. Cunningham.

"Why particularly to-night, Sister Ellen?" asked the squire.

"Because there is to be an entertainment for the benefit of the Young
Men's Literary Club. It is expected to be very interesting."

"What sort of an entertainment, Ellen?" asked the squire.

"The celebrated elocutionist, Professor Riccabocca, is to give some
readings--"

"Riccabocca!" repeated the squire, in a musing tone. "I can't say I ever
heard of him."

"Nor I; but I hear he's very celebrated."

"Is there anything else?"

"Yes, there's a young musician going to play. He is said to be
wonderful. He plays on the violin."

"He's a very handsome boy," said Carrie enthusiastically. "He's staying
at the hotel. I saw him this afternoon when I was passing."

"So he's good-looking, is he, Carrie?" asked the squire, laughing.

"He's ever so good-looking," answered Carrie emphatically.

"Then we must certainly go, for Carrie's sake," said the squire.

Squire Pope had not the slightest idea that the young musician, about
whom his niece spoke so enthusiastically, was the boy whom he had so
recently persecuted.

If Carrie had mentioned his name, the secret would have been out, but
she had not yet heard it.

In honor of her brother's arrival, Mrs. Cunningham prepared a more
elaborate supper than usual, and to this it was owing that the three
entered the hall late, just as Philip was about to commence playing.

The squire and his companions were obliged to take seats some distance
away from the platform, and as his eyesight was poor, he didn't
immediately recognize as an old acquaintance the boy who was standing
before the audience with his violin in his hand.

"That's he! That's the young violin-player!" whispered Carrie, in a tone
of delight. "Isn't he handsome, uncle!"

"Wait till I get my glasses on," said the squire, fumbling in his pocket
for his spectacle-case.

Adjusting his glasses, Squire Pope directed a glance at the stage. He
instantly recognized Philip, and his surprise was boundless. He gave a
sudden start.

"By gracious, I couldn't have believed it!" he ejaculated.

"Couldn't have believed what, brother?" asked Mrs. Cunningham.

"I know that boy!" he said, in a tone of excitement.

"You know him, uncle?" said Carrie, delighted. "Then you must introduce
me to him. I want to meet him ever so much. Where did you ever see him?"

"Where did I see him? I'm his guardian. He ran away from me a little
more than a week since, and I never knew where he went."

"You the guardian of the wonderful boy-player?" said Carrie, astonished.
"Isn't it strange?"

"His father died a short time since and left him in my care," said the
squire, not scrupling to make a misstatement. "But I'll tell you more
about it when the performance is over."

When Philip first saw Squire Pope entering the hall it disconcerted him,
but he reflected that the squire really had no authority over him, and
consequently he had nothing to fear from him.

Should his pretended guardian make any effort to recover him, he was
resolved to make a desperate resistance, and even, if necessary, to
invoke the help of the law.

Meanwhile, his pride stimulated him to play his best, and the hearty
applause of the audience when he had finished his piece encouraged him.

As he was bowing his thanks he could not help directing a triumphant
glance at Squire Pope, who was carefully scrutinizing him through his
gold-bowed spectacles.

He was glad that the squire had a chance to see for himself that he was
well able to make his own way, with the help of the violin of which the
Norton official had attempted to deprive him.

In truth, Squire Pope, who knew little of Philip's playing, except that
he did play, was amazed to find him so proficient. Instead, however, of
concluding that a boy so gifted was abundantly able to "paddle his own
canoe," as the saying is, he was the more resolved to carry him back to
Norton, and to take into his own care any the boy might have earned. In
the middle of the entertainment was a recess of ten minutes, which most
of the audience spent in conversation.

Miss Carrie began again to speak of Philip.

"Oh,--uncle," she said, "I'm so glad you know that lovely boy-player! He
is earning lots of money."

"Is he!" asked the squire, pricking up his ears. "Who told you so?"

"One of the young men that belongs to the club told me they were to pay
him ten dollars for playing to-night."

"Ten dollars!" ejaculated the squire, in amazement. "I don't believe it!
It's ridiculous!"

"Oh, yes, it is true!" said Mrs. Cunningham. "John Turner told Carrie;
and he is secretary, and ought to know."

"That isn't all," continued Carrie. "Mr. Turner says it is very kind of
Mr. Gray--"

"Mr. Gray!" repeated the squire, amused.

"Well, Philip, then. I suppose you call him Philip, as you are his
guardian."

"Well, what were you going to say?"

"Mr. Turner says that it is very kind of Philip to play for so little,
for he made a good deal more money by his entertainment in Wilkesville."

"Did he give a concert in Wilkesville?" asked the squire quickly.

"Yes, he and the professor. He was liked very much there."

"And you heard that he made a good deal of money there?"

"Yes; lots of it."

"Then," thought the squire, "he must have considerable money with him.
As his guardian I ought to have the care of it. He's a boy, and isn't
fit to have the charge of money. It's very lucky I came here just as I
did. It's my duty, as his guardian, to look after him."

The squire determined to seek an interview with our hero as soon as the
entertainment was over.



CHAPTER XXXVI. THE PRETENDED GUARDIAN.



Philip played with excellent effect, and his efforts were received with
as much favor at Knoxville as at Wilkesville. He was twice encored, and
at the end of each of his selections he was greeted with applause.

As for Professor Riccabocca, people hardly knew what to make of him.
He was as eccentric and extravagant as ever, and his recitations were
received with good-natured amusement. He didn't lack for applause,
however. There were some boys on the front seats who applauded him,
just for the fun of it. Though the applause was ironical, the professor
persuaded himself that it was genuine, and posed before the audience at
each outburst, with his hand on his heart, and his head bent so far over
that he seemed likely to lose his balance.

"We are making a grand success, Mr. Gray," he said, during the interval
of ten minutes already referred to. "Did you notice how they applauded
me?"

"Yes," answered Philip, with a smile.

"They evidently appreciate true genius. It reminds me of the ovation
they gave me at Cincinnati last winter."

"Does it?" asked Philip, still smiling.

"Yes. I was a great favorite in that intellectual city. By the way, I
noticed that they seemed well pleased with your playing also."

This he said carelessly, as if Philip's applause was not to be compared
to his.

"Yes, they treat me very kindly," answered Philip.

"You are fortunate in having me to introduce you to the public," said
the professor emphatically. "The name of Riccabocca is so well known,
that it is of great advantage to you."

The professor deluded himself with the idea that he was a great
elocutionist, and that the public rated him as highly as he did himself.
