"Look at us," cried Ben, throwing back his head to see her eyes. "Do we
act as if we had been talked over?"

At that, Polly burst into a merry laugh; and the others joining, Mother
Pepper laughing as heartily as the rest, the big room became the
jolliest place imaginable.

"No, I don't really think you do," said Mrs. Pepper, wiping her eyes.

"Dear me!" cried Jasper, putting his head in the doorway, "what good
fun is going on? I'm not going to be left out."

"Come in, Jasper," they all called.

"And we've a piece of news that will make your hair stand on end," said
Joel gaily.

"Joe, don't announce it so," cried Polly in dismay, who dearly enjoyed
being elegant. "Ben must tell it; he is the oldest."

"No, no; let Polly," protested Ben.

"Polly shall," said Jasper, hurrying in to stand the picture of
patience before the group. "Hurry, do, for I must say my curiosity is
hard to keep within bounds."

So Polly was gently pushed into the center of the circle. "Go on," said
Joel, "and hurry up, or I shall tell myself."

"Jasper," said Polly, her breath coming fast, "oh! you can't think; we
are so glad"--But she got no further, for Phronsie, rushing out of
Mother Pepper's arms, piped out suddenly:

"Dr. Fisher is coming here to live always and forever, and I'm going to
ride in his gig, and Mamsie likes him, and I'm going to call him
father; now, Jasper, I told you!"

"I should think you did," exclaimed Ben.

"Whew!" cried Jasper, "that is a piece of news all in one breath. Well,
Mrs. Pepper, I'm glad of it, too. I congratulate you." With that, he
marched up to her, Phronsie hanging to his arm, and shook her hand
heartily.

And in two days everybody in the King set knew that the mother of the
five little Peppers was going to be married.

"I should think you'd want to be condoled with, Ben," said Pickering
Dodge, clapping him on the shoulder as he rushed down the aisle of the
store occupied by Cabot & Van Meter.

"Halloo!" said Ben, "can't stop," rushing past.

"I suppose not," said Pickering carelessly, and striding after, "so
I'll whisper my gentle congratulations in your ear 'on the wing.' But
I'm awfully sorry for you, Ben," he added, as he came up to him.

"You needn't be," said Ben brightly, "we are all as glad as can be."

"Sweet innocent, you don't know a stepfather," said Pickering
lugubriously.

"I know Dr. Fisher," said Ben, "that's enough."

"Well, when you want comfort, come to me," said Pickering, "or your
uncle!"

"Don't you fill Ben's ears with your foolishness," said the Senior
Partner, coming out of the counting-room. "Take yourself off,
Pickering; you're hindering Ben."

Pickering laughed. "I'm caught in the very act. Now, Ben, remember I'm
your friend when you get into trouble with your dear pa. Good-by,
Uncle," with a bright nod, and a lazy shake of his long figure. "Trade
always demoralizes me. I'll get back to my books," and he vanished as
quickly as he came.

"Back to your books," said his uncle grimly, "hum, I wish you would.
See here, Ben," he put a controlling hand on the boy's shoulder, "one
word with you," marching him into the private office of the firm.
"Don't you follow Pickering too closely, my boy," he said abruptly;
"he's a good lad in the main, but if he is my nephew, I must give you
warning. He's losing ground."

Ben lifted his head in sudden alarm. "Oh! I hope not, sir," he said.

"It's a fact. Master Nelson says he could be first scholar in the
grammar, but for the last six months he's failed steadily. There's no
particular reason, only ambition's gone. And when you say that, you
mean there's a general collapse of all my hopes concerning him."

"Oh! no, sir," Ben kept on protesting, his ruddy cheek losing its
color. "He'll take hold by and by and give a pull at his books again."

"It isn't a pull now and then that gets a man up hill," observed Mr.
Cabot, leaning back in his revolving chair to look into the blue eyes,
"that you know as well as I. Now, Ben, I'm not going to see you throw
away your prospects, too. Don't let him influence you in the wrong way.
He's bright and attractive, but don't pay attention to his ridicule of
good things."

"I've a mother," said Ben proudly, "and I don't believe any boy could
say much to me, that I'd think of twice, if she didn't like it."

"You always tell her everything, do you, Ben?" asked Mr. Cabot with a
curious glance.

"I should think so, sir," said Ben, with a short laugh.

"You'll do, then," said Mr. Cabot, bringing his palm down on a pile of
unread letters awaiting him. "Go ahead. I don't promise anything, but I
will say this. If you work on as you have done these two years since
you came in here as errand boy, Ben, I'll make you a power in the
house. Understand I don't expect you to do brilliant things; that isn't
in your line. You will be a success only as a steady, faithful worker.
But keep at it, and hang on to Cabot & Van Meter, and we'll hang on to
you."




XIV

MAMSIE'S WEDDING


"Polly," said Dr. Fisher, coming suddenly out of a corner of the
library as she ran around the portiere folds, "you are sure you are
willing--are willing it should go on?"

The little man peered at her anxiously through his big glasses, and he
looked so exactly as he did on that morning so long ago when Polly's
eyes were at their worst, that she could do nothing but gaze
speechlessly into his face.

"I see you don't consider it quite best, child," said the little doctor
brokenly, "but you are trying with your good heart, to make it so.
Don't be afraid; it is not too late to end it all."

"I was thinking," cried Polly with a gasp, "how good you were to me,
when you saved my eyes, and how you kept Joel from dying of the
measles. Oh! I couldn't speak--but I love you so."

She threw her young arms around him. "Papa Fisher--for you are almost
my father now--I am the very, very happiest girl because you are going
to live here, and now I can show you just how much I really and truly
love you."

The little man beamed at her. Then he took off his spectacles, wiped
them, and clapped them into place again. "You see, Polly," he said
deliberately, "it was impossible to see your mother and not love her.
She has had--well, there, child, I cannot bear to talk about it," and
he walked to the window, blew his nose violently on an immense
pocket-handkerchief, leaving the words poised in mid-air.

"It was the greatest trial of my life that I couldn't show her then
when she was struggling so bravely to keep the wolf from the door, how
I felt. But my hands were tied, child," he added, coming back, his
usual self again. "Now I can make her, she says, happy, that is, if you
children like it. Just think, Polly, she said happy! It's stupendous,
but she said so, Polly, she really did!"

He folded his hands and looked at her in astonishment, behind which
shone an intense gratification, that lighted up his plain little face
till he seemed to grow younger every instant.

"Indeed she did!" repeated Polly like a bird, and laughing merrily.
"Oh, Papa Fisher! you ought to hear Mamsie sing. She doesn't know I'm
hearing her, but she sings at her work now."

"Does she?" cried the doctor radiantly. "Well, Polly, we must see that
she sings every day, after this."

"Yes, let us," cried Polly, clasping his hand; "we will."

"And," proceeded the doctor, "after the wedding is over--I It really
dread the wedding, Polly--but after that is over, I do believe we shall
all be comfortable together!"

Polly gave a little cry of delight. Then she said, "You needn't dread
the wedding one bit, Papa Fisher. There will be only the people that we
love, and who love us--Grandpapa promised that."

"But that will make it very big," said Dr. Fisher, with round eyes and
a small shiver he could not suppress.

"Oh, no!" said Polly cheerily, "sixty-five friends; that's all we are
going to ask; Mamsie and I made out the list last night."

"Sixty-five people!" exclaimed Dr. Fisher in dismay. "Oh! isn't is
possible to be married without sixty-five friends to stare at you?"

"Oh! that's not many," said Polly; "sixty-five is the very smallest
number that we could manage. We've been over the list ever so many
times, and struck out quantities of names. You see, everybody loves
Mamsie, and they'll want to see her married."

"I know--I know," assented the doctor, "but that makes one hundred and
thirty eyes. Did you ever think of that, Polly?"

Polly burst into such a laugh that Jasper popped in, and after him,
Phronsie, and a general hilarity now reigning, the dreaded wedding
preparations soon sank away from the doctor's perturbed vision.

But they went on merrily nevertheless. All over the old stone mansion
there were hints of the on-coming festivities; and though all signs of
it were tucked away from the little doctor on his occasional visits,
the smothered excitement flamed afresh immediately his departure became
an assured thing. Everybody had the wildest plans for the occasion; it
appearing impossible to do enough for the one who had stood at the helm
for five long years, and who was to be reigning housekeeper for as much
longer as her services were needed.

And Dr. Fisher never knew how perilously near he had been to the verge
of brilliant evening festivities, in the midst of which he was to be
ushered into matrimony.

For Polly had suddenly waked one morning, to find herself, not
"famous," but alive with the sense of being--as her mother had so often
expressed it--"Mamsie's little right-hand woman."

"It will be much better to have everything plain," said Polly,
communing with herself, as she turned on her pillow. "Mamsie has always
been without show, of any kind, and so," but here Polly's heart stood
still. Dearly she loved the bright, conspicuous accompaniments to the
wedding whereby Mr. King was determined to show his respect for the
family under his care. And her soul secretly longed for the five
hundred guests named on a list of the old gentleman's drawing up. And
the feast and the lights, and the pretty dresses, and the dancing party
for the young people to follow. For Mr. King had announced himself as
about to usher in the brightest of days for the young Peppers to
remember.

"Besides it brings our new physician into notice," he would answer when
any faint protest was made. "And we shall all have reason to be
immensely proud of him, I tell you!"

"Oh, dear!" cried Polly, burrowing deeper within the pillow folds, "why
aren't pleasant things best to do? Why, I wonder!"

Cherry, twittering in the window, chirped something vague and
unsatisfactory. Polly brought up her brown head suddenly and laughed.

"Nonsense! our happiness doesn't depend upon a lot of people coming
together to help it along. Mamsie's face, whenever Grandpapa plans all
this magnificence, is enough to make me feel wretched at the thought of
it. Dear Mamsie! she's afraid of ingratitude if she doesn't try to like
it. She shall have the little morning wedding with a few people around,
and the gray silk gown instead of the lavender one Grandpapa wants her
to wear, for Mamsie always knows just what is right."

With that, Polly sprang out of bed, and rushed at her toilet, and after
breakfast she quietly captured Mr. King on the edge of some other
extravagant plan, and led him into the library.

"Everything is going on finely, Polly," he cried in elation. "Ring for
Thomas, child; stay, I'll do it myself. I shall go in an hour to give
my orders for the wedding supper."

"Grandpapa," cried Polly, turning quite pale, and laying a quick,
detaining hand on his arm, "oh! do wait, dear Grandpapa, I have
something to say."

"Well, child," but he still retained his hand on the cord.

"Oh, Grandpapa!" how could she say it! But she must. "Mamsie will be
ever so much happier if the wedding might be a quiet one. She really
would, Grandpapa."

"No doubt Mrs. Pepper finds it a little hard to adjust her ideas to the
large affair," said the old gentleman, considerably disturbed, and by
no means relinquishing the bell-cord, "but it is due to you children to
have a bright time, and I must see that you all have it. That is my
affair," and this time the cord was pulled, and the bell rang a loud,
insistent message.

Polly stood still in despair. "Grandpapa," she said distinctly, finding
it hard to proceed, with his face before her, "we children do not want
the large party; that is I do not."

It was all out at last.

"Stuff and nonsense!" exclaimed Mr. King sharply, for his surprise was
too great to allow of composure, "who has been putting this idea into
your head? Your mother couldn't have done it, for she promised it
should all be as you young people wanted."

"Mamsie never said a word," cried Polly, recovering herself as she saw
a chance to make things right for Mother Pepper; "it all came to me,
Grandpapa, all alone by myself. Oh! I hate the big display!" she
declared with sudden vehemence, astonishing herself with the repulsion
that now seized her.

"Hoity toity!" exclaimed Mr. King, "it's not quite the thing, Polly, my
child, to express yourself so decidedly, considering your years."

"Grandpapa," cried Polly, with a sudden rush of tears, "forgive me, do;
I did not mean to be so naughty. I did not, dear Grandpapa." She looked
like Phronsie now, and the old gentleman's heart melted. "But I am
quite sure that none of us children would be a bit happy not to have it
as Mamsie would like."

"Well, but I am not sure that the others wouldn't like it," said Mr.
King persistently.

"Ben wouldn't," said Polly triumphantly, "I know, for he all along
shrank from the big party."

"Oh! well, Ben, I suppose, would object somewhat," conceded the old
gentleman slowly.

"And Davie," cried Polly eagerly; "Oh, Grandpapa! David would much
prefer the morning wedding and the plain things."

"But how about Joel and Phronsie?" interrupted Mr. King, utterly
ignoring Davie's claims to be heard. "Ah! Polly, my dear, until you
tell me that they will prefer to give up the fine party, you mustn't
expect me to pay any attention to what you say. It's due to Phronsie
