"Eight miles away there is a mining camp and store. I ride over there
once a week or oftener, and bring home what I need."

"What is the name of the camp?"

"Deer Creek. I will point out to Herbert, before I leave you, the bridle
path leading to it."

"Thank you. It will be a great advantage to us to know just how to
live."

With Herbert's help an appetizing repast was prepared, of which all
three partook with keen zest.

The next day Falkland took leave of them, and Melville and his boy
companion were left to settle down in their new home.




CHAPTER XXX. A TERRIBLE MOMENT.



Melville's purchase comprised not only the cottage, but its contents,
pictures and books included. This was fortunate, for though Herbert,
who was strong, and fond of outdoor sports, such as hunting and fishing,
could have contented himself, Melville was easily fatigued, and spent at
least half of the day in the cabin. The books, most of which were new to
him, were a great and unfailing resource.

Among the articles which Falkland left behind him were two guns, of
which Herbert and Melville made frequent use. Herbert had a natural
taste for hunting, though, at home, having no gun of his own, he had
not been able to gratify his taste as much as he desired. Often after
breakfast the two sallied forth, and wandered about in the neighboring
woods, gun in hand. Generally Melville returned first, leaving Herbert,
not yet fatigued, to continue the sport. In this way our hero acquired a
skill and precision of aim which enabled him to make a very respectable
figure even among old and practiced hunters.

One morning, after Melville had returned home, Herbert was led, by the
ardor of the chase, to wander farther than usual. He was aware of this,
but did not fear being lost, having a compass and knowing his bearings.
All at once, as he was making his way along a wooded path, he was
startled by hearing voices. He hurried forward, and the scene upon which
he intruded was dramatic enough.

With arms folded, a white man, a hunter, apparently, stood erect, and
facing him, at a distance of seventy-five or eighty feet, was an Indian,
with gun raised, and leveled at the former.

"Why don't you shoot, you red rascal!" said the white man. "You've got
the drop on me, I allow, and I am in your power."

The Indian laughed in his guttural way; but though he held the gun
poised, he did not shoot. He was playing with his victim as a cat plays
with a mouse before she kills it.

"Is white man afraid?" said the Indian, not tauntingly, but with real
curiosity, for among Indians it is considered a great triumph if
a warrior can inspire fear in his foe, and make him show the white
feather.

"Afraid!" retorted the hunter. "Who should I be afraid of?"

"Of Indian."

"Don't flatter yourself, you pesky savage," returned the white man,
coolly, ejecting a flood of tobacco juice from his mouth, for though he
was a brave man, he had some drawbacks. "You needn't think I am afraid
of you."

"Indian shoot!" suggested his enemy, watching the effect of this
announcement.

"Well, shoot, then, and be done with it."

"White man no want to live?"

"Of course I want to live. Never saw a healthy white man that didn't. If
I was goin' to die at all, I wouldn't like to die by the hands of a red
rascal like you."

"Indian great warrior," said the dusky denizen of the woods,
straightening up, and speaking complacently.

"Indian may be great warrior, but he is a horse thief, all the same,"
said the hunter, coolly.

"White man soon die, and Indian wear his scalp," remarked the Indian, in
a manner likely to disturb the composure of even the bravest listener.

The hunter's face changed. It was impossible to reflect upon such a fate
without a pang. Death was nothing to that final brutality.

"Ha! White man afraid now!" said the Indian, triumphantly--quick to
observe the change of expression in his victim.

"No, I am not afraid," said the hunter, quickly recovering himself; "but
it's enough to disgust any decent man to think that his scalp will
soon be dangling from the belt of a filthy heathen like you. However, I
suppose I won't know it after I'm dead. You have skulked and dogged my
steps, you red hound, ever since I punished you for trying to steal my
horse. I made one great mistake. Instead of beating you, I should have
shot you, and rid the earth of you once for all."

"Indian no forget white man's blows. White man die, and Indian be
revenged."

"Yes, I s'pose that's what it's coming to," said the hunter, in a tone
of resignation. "I was a 'tarnal fool to come out this mornin' without
my gun. If I had it you would sing a different song."

Again the Indian laughed, a low, guttural, unpleasant laugh, which
Herbert listened to with a secret shudder. It was so full of malignity,
and cunning triumph, and so suggestive of the fate which he reserved for
his white foe, that it aggravated the latter, and made him impatient to
have the blow fall, since it seemed to be inevitable.

"Why don't you shoot, you red savage?" he cried. "What are you waiting
for?"

The Indian wished to gloat over the mental distress of his foe. He liked
to prolong his own feeling of power--to enjoy the consciousness that, at
any moment, he could put an end to the life of the man whom he hated
for the blows which he felt had degraded him, and which he was resolved
never to forget or forgive. It was the same feeling that has often led
those of his race to torture their hapless victims, that they may, as
long as possible, enjoy the spectacle of their agonies. For this reason
he was in no hurry to speed on its way the fatal bullet.

Again the Indian laughed, and, taking aim, made a feint of firing, but
withheld his shot. Pale and resolute his intended victim continued to
face him. He thought that the fatal moment had come, and braced himself
to meet his fate; but he was destined to be disappointed.

"How long is this goin' to last, you red hound?" he demanded. "If I've
got to die, I am ready."

"Indian can wait!" said the savage, with a smile of enjoyment.

"You wouldn't find it prudent to wait if I were beside you," said the
hunter. "It's easy enough to threaten an unarmed man. If some friend
would happen along to foil you in your cowardly purpose---"

"White man send for friend!" suggested the Indian, tauntingly.

Herbert had listened to this colloquy with varying emotions, and his
anger and indignation were stirred by the cold-blooded cruelty of the
savage. He stood motionless, seen by neither party, but he held his
weapon leveled at the Indian, ready to shoot at an instant's warning.
Brought up, as he had been, with a horror for scenes of violence, and a
feeling that human life was sacred, he had a great repugnance to use his
weapon, even where it seemed his urgent duty to do so. He felt that on
him, young as he was, rested a weighty responsibility. He could save the
life of a man of his own color, but only by killing or disabling a
red man. Indian though he was, his life, too, was sacred; but when he
threatened the life of another he forfeited his claim to consideration.

Herbert hesitated till he saw it was no longer safe to do so--till he
saw that it was the unalterable determination of the Indian to kill the
hunter, and then, his face pale and fixed, he pulled the trigger.

His bullet passed through the shoulder of the savage. The latter uttered
a shrill cry of surprise and dismay, and his weapon fell at his feet,
while he pressed his left hand to his wounded shoulder.

The hunter, amazed at the interruption, which had been of such essential
service to him, lost not a moment in availing himself of it. He bounded
forward, and before the savage well knew what he purposed, he had picked
up his fallen weapon, and, leveling it at his wounded foe, fired.

His bullet was not meant to disable, but to kill. It penetrated the
heart of the savage, and, staggering back, he fell, his face distorted
with rage and disappointment.

"The tables are turned, my red friend!" said the hunter, coolly. "It's
your life, not mine, this time!"

At that moment Herbert, pale and shocked, but relieved as well, pressed
forward, and the hunter saw him for the first time.

"Was it you, boy, who fired the shot?" asked the hunter, in surprise.

"Yes," answered Herbert.

"Then I owe you my life, and that's a debt Jack Holden isn't likely to
forget!"




CHAPTER XXXI. JACK HOLDEN ON THE INDIAN QUESTION.



It is a terrible thing to see a man stretched out in death who but a
minute before stood full of life and strength. Herbert gazed at the dead
Indian with a strange sensation of pity and relief, and could hardly
realize that, but for his interposition, it would have been the hunter,
not the Indian, who would have lost his life.

The hunter was more used to such scenes, and his calmness was unruffled.

"That's the end of the dog!" he said, touching with his foot the dead
body.

"What made him want to kill you?" asked Herbert.

"Revenge," answered Holden.

"For what? Had you injured him?"

"That's the way he looked at it. One day I caught the varmint stealin'
my best hoss. He'd have got away with him, too, if I hadn't come home
just as I did. I might have shot him--most men would--but I hate to take
a man's life for stealin'; and I took another way. My whip was lyin'
handy, and I took it and lashed the rascal over his bare back a dozen
times, and then told him to dust, or I'd serve him worse. He left, but
there was an ugly look in his eyes, and I knew well enough he'd try to
get even."

"How long ago was this?"

"Most a year. It's a long time, but an Indian never forgets an injury or
an insult, and I knew that he was only bidin' his time. So I always went
armed, and kept a good lookout. It was only this mornin' that he caught
me at a disadvantage. I'd been taking a walk, and left my gun at home.
He was prowlin' round, and soon saw how things stood. He'd have killed
me sure, if you hadn't come in the nick of time."

"I am glad I was near," said Herbert, "but it seems to me a terrible
thing to shoot a man. I'm glad it wasn't I that killed him."

"Mebbe it was better for me, as he was my enemy," said Jack Holden. "It
won't trouble my conscience a mite. I don't look upon an Indian as a
man."

"Why not?"

"He's a snake in the grass--a poisonous serpent, that's what I call
him," said Jack Holden.

Herbert shook his head. He couldn't assent to this.

"You feel different, no doubt. You're a tenderfoot. You ain't used to
the ways of these reptiles. You haven't seen what I have," answered
Holden.

"What have you seen?" asked Herbert, judging correctly that Holden
referred to some special experience.

"I'll tell you. You see, I'm an old settler in this Western country.
I've traveled pretty much all over the region beyond the Rockies, and
I've seen a good deal of the red men. I know their ways as well as any
man. Well, I was trampin' once in Montany, when, one afternoon, I and my
pard--he was prospectin'--came to a clearin', and there we saw a sight
that made us all feel sick. It was the smokin' ruins of a log cabin,
which them devils had set on fire. But that wasn't what I referred
to. Alongside there lay six dead bodies--the man, his wife, two boys,
somewhere near your age, a little girl, of maybe ten, and a baby--all
butchered by them savages, layin'--in the hunter's vernacular--in their
gore. It was easy to see how they'd killed the baby, by his broken
skull. They had seized the poor thing by the feet, and swung him against
the side of the house, dashin' out his brains."

Herbert shuddered, and felt sick, as the picture of the ruined home and
the wretched family rose before his imagination.

"It was Indians that did it, of course," proceeded Holden. "They're born
savage, and such things come natural to them."

"Are there no good Indians?" asked the boy.

"There may be," answered Jack Holden, doubtfully, "though I haven't seen
many. They're as scarce as plums in a boardin' house puddin', I reckon."

I present this as Jack Holden's view, not mine. He had the prejudices
of the frontier, and frontiersmen are severe judges of their Indian
neighbors. They usually look at but one side of the picture, and are
not apt to take into consideration the wrongs which the Indians
have undeniably received. There is another extreme, however, and the
sentimentalists who deplore Indian wrongs, and represent them as a
brave, suffering and oppressed people, are quite as far away from a just
view of the Indian question.

"What's your name, youngster?" asked Holden, with the curiosity natural
under the circumstances.

"Herbert Carr."

"Do you live nigh here?"

Herbert indicated, as well as he could, the location of his home.

"I know--you live with Mr. Falkland. Are you his son?"

"No; Mr. Falkland has gone away."

"You're not living there alone, be you?"

"No; I came out here with a young man--Mr. Melville. He bought the
cottage of Mr. Falkland, who was obliged to go East."

"You don't say so. Why, we're neighbors. I live three miles from here."

"Did you know Mr. Falkland?"

"Yes; we used to see each other now and then. He was a good fellow,
but mighty queer. What's the use of settin' down and paintin' pictures?
What's the good of it all?"

"Don't you admire pictures, Mr. Holden?" asked Herbert.

"That's that you called me? I didn't quite catch on to it."

"Mr. Holden. Isn't that your name?"

"Don't call me mister. I'm plain Jack Holden. Call me Jack."

"I will if you prefer it," said Herbert, dubiously.

"Of course I do. We don't go much on style in the woods. Won't you come
home with me, and take a look at my cabin? I ain't used to company, but
we can sit down and have a social smoke together, and then I'll manage
to find something to eat."

"Thank you, Mr. Holden--I mean, Jack--but I must be getting home; Mr.
Melville will be feeling anxious, for, as it is, I shall be late."

"Is Mr. Melville, as you call him, any way kin to you?"

"No; he is my friend and employer."

"Young man?"

"Yes; he is about twenty-five."

"How long have you two been out here?"

"Not much over a week."

"Why isn't Melville with you this morning?"

"He is in delicate health--consumption--and he gets tired sooner than I
do."

"I must come over and see you, I reckon."

"I hope you will. We get lonely sometimes. If you would like to borrow
something to read, Mr. Melville has plenty of books."

"Read!" repeated Jack. "No, thank you. I don't care much for books. A
newspaper, now, is different. A man likes to know what's going on in the
world; but I leave books to ministers, schoolmasters, and the like."

"If you don't read, how do you fill up your time, Jack?"

"My pipe's better than any book, lad. I'm goin' to set down and have a
smoke now. Wish I had an extra pipe for you."

"Thank you," said Herbert, politely, "but I don't smoke."

"Don't smoke! How old are you?"

"Sixteen."

"Sixteen years old, and don't smoke! Why, where was you raised?"

"In the East," answered Herbert, smiling.

"Why, I smoked before I was three foot high, I was goin' to say. I
couldn't get along without smokin'."

"Nor I without reading."

"Well, folks will have their different tastes, I allow. I reckon I'll be
goin' back."

"Shan't you bury him?" asked Herbert, with a glance at the dead Indian.

"No; he wouldn't have buried me."

"But you won't leave him here? If you'll bury him, I'll help you."

"Not now, boy. Since you make a point of it, I'll come round to-morrow,
and dig a hole to put him in. I'll take the liberty of carryin' home his
shootin' iron. He won't need it where he's gone."

The two parted in a friendly manner, and Herbert turned his face
homeward, grave and thoughtful.




CHAPTER XXXII. THE BLAZING STAR MINE.
