"No; for Professor Henderson."

"I've done jobs for him before. What does he want?"

Our hero explained.

"Very well, we will do it."

"Can you have it done before two o'clock?"

"Impossible. I am just bringing out my paper."

"When can you have the job finished?"

"To-morrow noon."

"I suppose that will do. We perform to-morrow at Berlin and they can be
sent over to the hotel there."

"You say 'we,'" answered Harry, amused. "I take tickets, and assist him
generally."

"How do you like the business?"

"Very well; but I should like your business better."

"What makes you think so?"

"I have been reading the 'Life of Benjamin Franklin.' He was a printer."

"That's true; but I'm sorry to say Franklins are scarce in our printing
offices. I never met one yet."

"I shouldn't expect to turn out a Franklins; but I think one couldn't
help being improved by the business."

"True again, though, of course, it depends on the wish to improve. How
long have you been working for Professor Henderson?"

"Not long. Only two or three weeks."

"What did you do before?"

"I was pegger in a shoe shop."

"Didn't you like it?"

"Well enough, for I needed to earn money and it paid me; but I don't
think I should like to be a shoemaker all my life. It doesn't give any
chance to learn."

"Then you like learning?"

"Yes. 'Live and learn'--that is my motto."

"It is a good one. Do you mean to be a printer?"

"If I get a chance."

"You may come into my office on the first of April, if you like. One of
my men will leave me by the first of May. If you are a smart boy, and
really wish to learn the business, you can break in so as to be useful
in four weeks."

"I should like it," said Harry; "but," he added, with hesitation, "I am
poor, and could not afford to work for nothing while I was learning."

"I'll tell you what I'll do, then," said the editor. "I'll give you your
board for the first month, on condition that you'll work for six months
afterwards for two dollars a week and board. That's a fair offer. I
wouldn't make it if I didn't feel assured that you were smart, and would
in time be valuable to me."

"I'll come if my father does not object."

"Quite tight. I should not like to have you act contrary to his wishes.
I suppose, for the present, you will remain with Professor Henderson."

"Yes, sir."

"Very well. Let me hear from you when you have communicated with your
father."

Harry left the office plunged in thought. It came upon him with
surprise, that he had engaged himself to learn a new business, and
that the one which he had longed to follow ever since he had become
acquainted with Franklin's early life. He realized that he was probably
making immediate sacrifice. He could, undoubtedly, make more money in
the shoe shop than in the printing office, for the present at least. By
the first of April the shoe business obtain employment. But then he was
sure he should like printing better, and if he was ever going to change,
why, the sooner he made the change the better.

When he returned to the hotel, he told the professor what he had done.

"I am glad you are not going at once," said his employer, "for I should
be sorry to lose you. I generally give up traveling for the season about
the first of April, so that I shall be ready to release you. I commend
your choice of a trade. Many of our best editors have been practical
printers in their youth."

"I should like to be an editor, but I don't know enough."

"Not at present; but you can qualify yourself to become one--that is, if
you devote you spare time to reading and studying."

"I mean to do that."

"Then you will fair chance of becoming what you desire. To a certain
extent, a boy, or young man, holds the future in his own hands."

Harry wrote to father, at once, in regard to the plan which he had in
view. The answer did not reach him for nearly a week; but we will so far
anticipate matters as to insert that part which related to it.

"If you desire to be a printer, Harry, I shall not object. It is a good
trade, and you can make yourself, through it, useful to the community.
I do not suppose it will ever make you rich. Still, I should think it
might, in time, give you a comfortable living--better, I hope, than I
have been able to earn as a farmer. If you determine to win success, you
probably will. If you should leave your present place before the first
of April, we shall be very glad to have you come home, if only for a
day or two. We all miss you very much--your mother, particularly. Tom
doesn't say much about it; but I know he will be as glad to see you as
the rest of us."

Harry read this letter with great pleasure, partly because it brought
him permission to do as he desired, and partly because it was gratifying
to him to feel that he was missed at home. He determined, if it was a
possible thing, to leave the professor a week before his new engagement,
and spend that time in Granton.





CHAPTER XXX. THE YOUNG TREASURER


On the morning after receiving the letter from his father, Harry came
down to breakfast, but looked in vain for the professor. Supposing he
would be down directly, he sat down to the breakfast table. When he had
nearly finished eating, a boy employed about the hotel came to his side.

"That gentleman you're with is sick. He wants you to come to his room as
soon as you are through breakfast."

Harry did not wait to finish, but got up from the table at once, and
went up to his employer's room.

"Are you sick, sir?" he inquired, anxiously.

The professor's face was flushed, and he was tossing about in bed.

"Yes," he answered. "I am afraid I am threatened with a fever."

"I hope not, sir."

"I am subject to fevers; but I hope I might not have another for some
time to come. I must have caught cold yesterday, and the result is, that
I am sick this morning."

"What can I do for you, sir?"

"I should like to have you go for the doctor. Inquire of the landlord
who is the best in the village."

"I will go at once."

On inquiry, our hero was informed that Dr. Parker was the most trusted
physician in the neighborhood, and he proceeded to his house at once.
The doctor was, fortunately, still at home, and answered the summons
immediately. He felt the sick man's pulse, asked him a variety of
questions, and finally announced his opinion.

"You are about to have a fever," he said, "if, indeed, the fever has not
already set in."

"A serious fever, doctor?" asked the sick man, anxiously.

"I cannot yet determine."

"Do you think I shall be long sick?"

"That, also, is uncertain. I suppose you will be likely to be detained
here a fortnight, at least."

"I wish I could go home."

"It would not be safe for you to travel, under present circumstances."

"If I were at home, I could be under my wife's care."

"Can't she come here?"

"She has three young children. It would be difficult for her to leave
them."

"Who is the boy that called at my house?"

"Harry Walton. He is my assistant--takes money at the door, and helps me
other ways."

"Is he trustworthy?"

"I have always found him so."

"Why can't he, attend upon you?"

"I mean to retain him with me--that is, if he will stay. It will be dull
work for a boy of his age."

"You can obtain a nurse, besides, if needful."

"You had better engage one for me, as I cannot confine him here all the
time."

"I will do so. I know of one, skillful and experienced, who is just now
at leisure. I will send her round here this morning."

"What is her name?"

"Not a very romantic one--Betsy Chase."

"I suppose that doesn't prevent her being a good nurse," said the
professor, smiling.

"Not at all."

Here Harry entered the room.

"Harry," said the professor, "the doctor tells me I am going to be
sick."

"I am very sorry, sir," said our hero, with an air of concern.

"I shall probably be detained here at least a fortnight. Are you willing
to remain with me?"

"Certainly, sir. I should not think of leaving you, sick and alone, if
you desired me to stay. I hope I can make myself useful to you."

"You can. I shall need you to do errands for me, and to sit with me a
part of the time."

"I shall be very willing to do so, sir."

"You will probably find it dull."

"Not so dull as you will find it, sir. The time must seem very long to
you, lying on that bed."

"I suppose it will; but that can't be helped."

"A nurse will be here this afternoon," said the doctor.

"Until she comes, you will be in attendance here."

"Yes, sir."

"I will direct you what to do, and how often to administer the
medicines. Can remember?"

"Yes, sir, I shall not forget."

Dr. Parker here gave Harry minute instructions, which need not be
repeated, since they were altogether of a professional nature.

After the doctor was gone, Professor Henderson said:

"As soon as the nurse comes, I shall want you to ride over to the
next town, Carmansville, and countermand the notices for an exhibition
to-night. I shall not be able to give entertainments for some time to
come. Indeed, I am not sure but I must wait till next season."

"How shall I go over?" asked Harry.

"You may get a horse and buggy at the stable, and drive over there. If
I remember rightly, it is between little seven and eight miles. The road
is a little winding, but I think you won't lose your way."

"Oh, I'll find it," said Harry, confidently.

It was not till three o'clock that the nurse made her appearance, and it
was past three before Harry started on his way.

"You need not hurry home," said the professor. "In fact, you had better
take supper at the hotel in Carmansville, as you probably could not very
well get back here till eight o'clock."

"Very well, sir," said Harry. "But shan't you need me?"

"No; Miss Chase will attend to me."

"Mrs. Chase, if you please," said the nurse. "I've been a widder for
twenty years."

"I beg your pardon, Mrs. Chase," said the sick man smiling.

"When my husband was alive, I never expected to go out nursin'; but I've
had come to it."

"The doctor says you are a very skillful and experienced nurse."

"I'd ought to be. I've nussed people in almost all sorts of diseases,
from measles to smallpox. You needn't be frightened, sir; I haven't had
any smallpox case lately. Isn't it most time to take your medicine?"

Harry left the room, and was soon on his way to Carmansville. Once he
got off the road, which was rather a perplexing one, but he soon found
it again. However, it was half past five before he reached the village,
and nearly an hour later before he had done the errand which brought
him over. Finally, he came back to the tavern, and being by this time
hungry, went in at once to the tavern, and being by this time hungry,
went in at once to supper. He did full justice to the meal which was set
before him. The day was cold, and his ride had stimulated his appetite.

When he sat down to the table he was alone; but a minute afterward a
small, dark-complexioned man, with heavy black whiskers, came in, and
sat down beside him. He had a heavy look, and a forbidding expression;
but our hero was too busy to take particular notice of him till the
latter commenced a conversation.

"It's a pretty cold day," he remarked.

"Very cold," said Harry. "I am dreading my ride back to Pentland."

"Are you going to Pentland to-night?" asked the stranger, with interest.

"Yes, sir."

"Do you live over there?"

"No; I am there for a short time only," Harry replied.

"Business?"

"Yes."

"You seem rather young to be in business," said the stranger.

"Oh," said Harry, smiling, "I am in the employ of Professor Henderson,
the ventriloquist. I suppose it is hardly proper to say that I am in
business."

"Professor Henderson! Why, he is going to give an entertainment here
to-night, isn't he?"

"He was; but I have come over to countermand the notice."

"What is that for?"

"He is taken sick at Pentland, and won't be able to come."

"Oh, that's it. Well, I'm sorry, for I should like to have gone to hear
him. So you are his assistant, are you?"

"Yes, sir."

"Can you perform tricks, too?"

"I don't assist him in that way. I take money at the door, and help him
with his apparatus."

"Have you been with him long?"

"Only a few weeks."

"So you are his treasurer, are you?" asked the stranger smiling.

"Ye--es," said Harry, slowly, for it brought to his mind that he had
one hundred and fifty dollars of the professor's money in his pocket,
besides the pocketbook containing his own. He intended to have left it
with his employer, but in the hurry of leaving he had forgotten to do
so. Now he was about to take a long ride in the evening with this large
sum of money about him.

"However," he said, reassuring himself, "there is nothing to be afraid
of. Country people are not robbers. Burglars stay in the cities. I have
nothing to fear."

Still he prudently resolved, if compelled to be out late again, to leave
his money at home.

He rose from table, followed by the stranger.

"Well," said the latter, "I must be going. How soon do you start?"

"In a few minutes."

"Well, good night."

"Good night."

"He seems inclined to be social," thought Harry, "but I don't fancy him
much."
