bad sort--my bark's worse nor my bite. I'm not a polished diamond. But
ef I don't make you a good husband, and ef you and me won't have the
jolliest little house in Liverpool together, my name ain't Dent--no--my
name ain't Dent. You trust me, Bet--I'll not anger you either now nor
in the future. What is it you wants me to do?"

"To leave me alone," said Bet, "until you can fetch the license and
bring me to church with you. Ef I was to see too much of you atween now
and our wedding, no promise that ever was would bind me. You keep away,
Isaac, and leave me my fortnight in peace, and I'll do what I said I'd
do--yes, I'll do it--I'll pay the price. You go back to Liverpool,
Isaac, and leave me yere--I has to find father and the lads. And ef
Jenny's a good sort, I'll stay with her. Ef she ain't, I'll find my own
lodging. But in no case will I walk with you, or talk with you, until
the day as we is wed. Ef I stays here for a fortnight we can be wed
here, but you must go back to Liverpool. Them's my terms, and if you
don't humor me for the present,--why, you know what to look for."

"Oh, I'm agreed," answered Dent, "I'll humor you now, and I'll humor
you in the future. I suppose we can be married before the register. You
don't want no church words over yer,--do you, Bet?"

"No, not when I stand by _your side_," said Bet, shuddering.

"Well, I'll do yer pleasure. I'll go now, and make inquiries, and enter
our names to be wed as soon as may be. Liverpool 'ull suit me a deal
better than this dull hole of a Warrington. Goodbye, my fine lady
Bet--when next we meets, it 'ull be never to part."

He kissed the tips of his fingers to her, and could not resist a laugh
which sounded between mockery and triumph.

As Dent turned away, Bet's attention was arrested by the girl called
Jenny, who had been standing by during this colloquy, and plucked her
by the sleeve.

"Yer a rare 'un!" she said, in a tone of sincere admiration. "Don't you
mate with him. He ain't fit for the likes of you. Break your word with
him,--what's a lie or two?"

"I hate lies," said Bet in a voice of scorn. "Let me be, Jenny--you're
right in what you say of Isaac Dent; but he have my promise, and I
ain't one as lies, ef it's only myself I have to think on."

"Yer a rare 'un," repeated Jenny. She was small and squat, with a
broad, freckled face, and light blue, saucer eyes. She looked up at the
handsome girl by her side with the most sincere admiration.

"Lor! you have the courage," she said. "I'll be proud to go a-hawking
with you."

Jenny's most commonplace appearance--her homely words--had a soothing
effect on Bet.

"I'll go with you presently. Jenny," she answered. "But now may I go to
your room, and may I stay alone there--for--for--say an hour?"

Jenny's beaming face fell. In her rough, untutored heart she had
already conceived an affection for Bet. She would have dearly liked to
sit in her very dirty attic bedroom, and gossip with her. That would
have been nearly as good as walking through the streets of Warrington
in company with so distinguished a companion. To walk through the
streets, the envied of all, with Bet by her side would have been a
crowning triumph for the poor little hawker, Jenny; but to give her up
her room,--not to see her at all for a whole hour,--was a far less
agreeable matter.

"Oh, I'll do it," she said. "You're welcome to the room. It ain't for
me to make no objections."

She spoke summarily, and with some bitterness of spirit, but Bet was
far too much absorbed in her own meditations to notice her.

When Jenny finally closed the door of her apartment, and unwillingly
sauntered downstairs, Bet drew Will's letter from its hiding-place. She
tore it open, and her feverish bright eyes devoured the few lines it
contained. These were the words with which Will bade his sweetheart
good-bye:

"Dear Bet,--Isaac Dent will take you my farewell. I am free, and I
means to find a berth in the first ship as leaves the docks as 'ull
take me on board. Dear Bet--I was innercent as the babe unborn--but it
was Dent as cleared me. He spoke as a man, dear Bet, and I was proud to
think as we was pals once on board The Albion ship when it sailed over
the dancing waves. He's not a feller to let a comrade suffer, is Dent.
I got your letter. You was right, Bet--I couldn't a-bear prison,--it
was killing me by inches. I'm wasted now almost to a shadder. Dent
tells me as you'll soon be wed, and that never may I call you wife o'
mine. Bless you and him! I hasn't another word to say.--Will Scarlett."

Bet read this letter with some difficulty. She was, as she said, "a
poor scholard," and she had to spread out the sheet of thin paper on
Jenny's little bed, and laboriously spell through the words before she
could arrive at any true glimpse of their meaning. It dawned upon her,
after nearly an hour's severe study,--it dawned upon her just as
Jenny's impatient tap came to the door, and her still more impatient
voice exclaimed--

"Time's hup--I'm going hawking."

Bet felt herself turning cold and hot, as the meaning of Will's words
seemed to scathe and burn her brain. Then, quick as a flash of
lightning, another thought came to her, and she smiled, and tore the
obnoxious and cruel letter into a thousand little bits.

"That wasn't from my Will," she said. "Dent wrote it--not Will. My
lad,--why he jest couldn't put words on paper sech as them! This is
Dent's villainy;--yes, Jenny, I'm a-coming," she called out in quite a
cheerful tone.

A weight was lifted from her mind when the conviction became assured
that this letter was none of Will's. She went downstairs, and Jenny and
she, on the best of terms, commenced their life of hawking together.

Will was free,--no doubt on that point arose to shake her
confidence,--but Will's whole nature had not changed. He who possessed
the tenderest and the truest heart for her in all the world had not
lost it during one week in jail. Bet almost sang as she accompanied
Jenny through the Warrington streets. Will was free--freed by her
act,--freed by her sacrifice; but a fortnight still stood between her
and her doom. For a fortnight, therefore, she could be almost happy,
and could at least devote her time to searching for her brothers, and
trying to rescue them from the tender mercies of their most cruel
father.




CHAPTER XXVI.


Two or three days after Will's second examination before the
magistrates-an examination which had ended, owing to Dent's testimony
against him, in his being remanded for trial at the coming
assizes-Hester Wright was standing in her little room, putting on her
shawl and bonnet to go out to her usual day's work. Hester was not at
all a model worker; nor had she any of the qualities which ensure
commercial success. She was clever all round; and whether it was
singing her soul away, or toiling by the hour at shop needlework, or
hawking fruit and vegetables about the Liverpool streets, she did a
little better than anybody else; but as she would never sell her gift
of song, and as her nature was in several respects, notwithstanding its
real depth and earnestness, volatile, she could never keep very long to
the same mode of earning her bread. A month or two of needlework would
be followed by a month or two of hawking: she did not earn more than
enough to keep soul and body together by either of these trades; but
money and creature comforts were alike matters of indifference to her,
and as a rule she preferred the roving life of a hawker, as it brought
her more into contact with her fellow creatures. Hawking was in the
ascendant now, and she was hurrying out to replenish her basket at St.
John's Market when a boy unceremoniously opened her door, and,
thrusting a crumpled and dirty piece of paper into her hand, stood
staring at her while she opened it.

The letter was a scrawl from Will Scarlett.

"Dear Hetty," it ran, "I may see a friend to-day. Come to me at noon,
for I am in a sore taking.--Your cousin Will."

"All right, ain't it?" questioned the boy.

"Yes," replied Hester. "It's from Will. How did you come by it, Davy?"

"John Wheeler gave it to me--he's one of the jailers. He said Will was
in a sore way about his lass."

A frown gathered on Hester's brow. "I'll go to him," she said. "Thank
you, Davy--the letter's all right."

The boy nodded and vanished, and Hester, taking up her basket, went
slowly downstairs.

At twelve o'clock that day she stood by Will's side in his dreary
little cell. She was allowed to see him for a few minutes without the
presence of a third person. Will had lost somewhat of his bronze; his
face was thin and pale; and Hester, going up to him, and clasping his
hands, was about to burst forth into a distressful wail at his changed
appearance, when he stopped her.

"We ha' no time, Hetty. I know just what your heart's full of, but it's
all about Bet we must talk. The time's all too short, and I'm bound
hand-and-foot here, and can do nought. See, Hetty-I had a letter from
my lass."

"I know, Will; but it ain't worth your while to fret for her. I know
she has gived you up for that Dent fellow; and ef she, what thought to
call you mate, can wed with one like him-why, let her, I say. I'm sorry
as you're pained, Will; but don't let's waste the minutes talking about
one like Bet Granger."

"Hush," said Will. "You say false words, Hetty-I'm 'shamed of you."

Will's blue eyes flashed.

He pulled Bet's letter out of the bosom of his prison shirt, and kissed
it passionately.

"She gived me up-poor Bet did," he said. "And that's all you thinked on
her! She thought to save me, and she took what would be as death to one
like her. I'm 'shamed of you, Hetty. I thought-I did think-that when a
gel did an out-and-out grand thing you'd be the first to see it."

Hester colored. Her eyes filled with tears.

"It seemed to me," she said, "as no one what loved you could take up
with one like Dent. I may be wrong--I was angered at Bet and I spoke
angry. Never mind. It's you as she has wronged--ef you can forgive her,
I'll bear no malice."

"I ha' nothing to forgive," said Will. "Forgive? It's all t'other way.
She said in her letter,--no, I don't want you to read it, as you
doubted her, but this is some o' what she said: 'I give you your
freedom, Will. I ain't much, only a lass like any other lass; but
freedom--that's all in all to one like you. I remember me how you spoke
of the salt breeze blowing on your cheek, and you said the fresh air
off the Mersey was nought at all to the fresh air off the ocean, when
you was miles and miles away to sea. I give it back to you, dear Will.
I'll be Dent's wife, for he won't set you free no other way; but
there's many another lass, and I pray that you may wed a good wife, and
forget poor Bet.' But I'll never forget her," said Will, who had been
reading these extracts in a choking voice, "and I say she's the noblest
lass in England, what thinks more of her lad than of herself, and I'm
proud of her for writing me like this, for she has let me see down into
her heart--and it's a good heart, and strong and pure; and though she
don't say no words about it she's the best gel in the land, and ef I
gave her up arter reading this letter I'd be the meanest cur that ever
sailed, and it's Davy Jones' locker as 'ud be the right place for me,
and no other. I'm as innercent as a baby, Hester, and that you know,
and so does my gel; and you has got now to turn round, and think on her
my way, and help me to save her."

Hester went up close to Will and took one of his hard muscular hands in
hers.

"I'll go your way, whether I think it or not," she said. "Let thoughts
alone, this is a time for deeds. What do you want me to do, Will?"

"To find Bet," said Will. "She mustn't wed that feller. Thank the good
God--she can't for a few days; but time passes, and Dent may have her
safe in his clutches afore I know. You has got to find her, Hetty, and
you has got to say that William Scarlett will never give her up--that I
love her tenfold more than ever for what she thought to do for me; but
ef she has promised herself ten times over to that scoundrel Dent, she
must tear up them promises, and think nought of them,--for she was mine
first, and I refuse to part her. Tell her from me, Hetty, that ef
they're the last words I'm ever to speak, much as I love her now, I
could curse her--ay, and I would curse her--ef she was to become wife
to Dent."

"But she can't, Will," said Hester; "the condition was ef you was set
free. Dent did not set you free. He locked you up firmer nor ever in
jail, so it ain't likely as Bet, seeing as she loved you, 'ud give
herself to him when he only deceived her, and done you an injury?"

"But, a while back," said Will, with a sad smile, "you misdoubted Bet's
love for me. I never misdoubted it, nor ever will; but I do misdoubt
Dent. He's a coward and a sneak, and deep is no word for him. Ef he
wants Bet--and I know he wants her, for he let out as much to me--he'll
move heaven and earth to win her, and he'd think nought of deceiving
her, and telling her dozens of lies. What does a girl like Bet Granger
know of the ways of the world? She has been up and down in the slums,
you say, all her life; but there's some as evil can't touch, and she's
one of them. Dent, he's full of wickedness, and he knows wicked ways
here and wicked ways in other places--so how could a gel like Bet be a
match for him? She's brave as a lion. But I can't sleep o' nights
thinking how he'll deceive her. He'll let her think as I'm free, and
she'll believe him, and he'll cast up her promise to her--and she's
terrible over promises, is Bet. You must find her, Hetty, and you
mustn't lose an hour, for it's near a week now since the day I was
examined last. You must find her and take her my message. Say it any
way you like, only let her feel that I'll never, never give her up."

"I'll find her," said Hester. "I'll find her, and speak your words to
her. Don't you fret, Will. I ain't your cousin Hetty, and the most
popular singer in the Liverpool slums, for nought. I own I was a bit
rough on Bet, and she's a proud lass, and wouldn't come nigh me ef she
thought I was angered, or took her the wrong way. Maybe I judged her
wrong--maybe I didn't--we won't go into that. When I meets her now I'll
promise to be gentle, and I'll keep her for you, cousin, ef such a
thing's possible, and I'll save her from that scoundrel, ef such a
thing's possible. You trust her to me. But now, one word about
yourself, Will. You has been done a bitter wrong, and you don't look
spry--no, you don't look spry."

"It was Dent," said Will. "I see it all now. It was a scheme of his to
win my gel from me. I don't suppose as I'll be acquitted, Hetty, and
they say as I'll have two year. Well, I ain't the first innercent man
as has been done by a rogue; no, nor the last neither. You tell Bet to
keep up heart, for, even if it is two year, I'll come to her at the
end, and we'll be none the worse, seeing that we know each other and
love each other as we do. Good-bye, Hetty--I hear the warder coming.
That bit of a verse you sang keeps running in my head, and it soothes
me wonderful when I get most mad, like. You remember it--'Oh, rest in
the Lord, wait patiently for Him!'"

"And He will give thee thy heart's desire," said Hester. Her eyes lit
up, and she half sang, half chanted the words.

"Seems as if He might." she said. "Not as I holds with no goodness; but
them words, they fasten on to me, and I can't rid myself neither of
them or of their meaning. Good-bye, Will. I'll do my best, not only for
Bet, but to set you free again."




CHAPTER XXVII.


When Hester left the jail she went straight to Sparrow Street. She knew
that Bet had gone back there, and felt pretty certain either that she
would see the girl herself or be able to leave a message for her with
one of the other lodgers. She climbed the three pair of stairs, and
knocked at the door of Bet's room. A voice, not Bet's, invited her in,
and she found herself in a cloud of tobacco-smoke, and in the presence
of both Granger and Dent, who were lounging one on each side of the
fire, smoking very coarse tobacco, and imbibing beer from a great jug
which stood on a little deal table between them.

Both men started, and removed their pipes from their mouth, when Hester
entered.

"Well, Hetty, what's your pleasure?" asked Granger, in a would-be
facetious tone. "Going, Dent?" For the younger man had risen to his
feet and was preparing to leave the room.

"Yes, I may as well see to that matter by the docks," mumbled Dent, as
he made for the door. Hester stepped between it and him.

"A word with you first, Isaac," she said, in that rich, peculiar voice
of hers. "I want to speak with Bet--where is she?"

Hester laid her hand on the man's shoulder.
