"I promise you I will do so. I will take him into my own family, and he
shall share with us."

The man raised his hand again, and a gleam of joy passed over his
features, as he took the hand of the lad and put it into that of
Edward. His eyes were then fixed upon Edward as if to scrutinize into
his character by his features, while the former bathed his temples and
washed the blood from his mouth with the water brought by the boy, who
appeared in a state of grief so violent as to paralyze his senses.
After a minute or two, another effusion of blood choked the wounded
man, who, after a short struggle, fell back dead.

"He is gone!" thought Edward, "and now what is to be done? I must first
ascertain whether the two villains are dead or not. Edward took a light
and examined the body of Ben, lying over the threshold of the door; the
man was quite dead, the ball having entered his brain. He was
proceeding round the outside of the cottage to examine the state of the
other man, whom he had shot himself; but the wind nearly blew out the
light, and he therefore returned to the chamber and placed it on the
floor, near to where the boy lay insensible over the corpse of the man
who had died in the arms of Edward; and then went out without a light,
and with his gun, to the other side of the cottage, where the other
robber had fallen. As he approached the man, a faint voice was heard to
say--

"Ben, Ben! some water, for the love of God! Ben, I'm done for!"

Edward, without giving an answer, went back to the room for the water,
which he took round to the man, and put it to his lips; he felt that he
was bound by humanity so to do to a dying man, scoundrel though he
might be. It was still dark, but not so dark as it had previously been,
for the late moon was just rising.

The man drank the water eagerly, and said, "Ben, I can speak now, but I
shan't long." He then pulled the basin toward him again, and after he
had drank, ho said, in broken sentences, "I feel--that I'm bleeding--to
death--inside." Then he paused. "You know the oak--struck by
lightning--a mile north--of this. Oh! I'm going fast. Three yards from
it south--I buried all my--money; it's yours. Oh! another drink!" The
man again attempted to drink out of the basin proffered by Edward, but
as he made the attempt, he fell back with a groan.

Edward perceiving that he was dead, returned to the cottage to look
after the lad, who still remained prostrate and embracing the corpse in
the chamber. Edward then reflected upon what had best be done. After a
time, he decided upon dragging away the body of the robber named Ben
outside of the threshold, and then securing the door. This, with some
trouble, he effected, and he then made fast the window that had been
forced open behind. Before he removed the boy, who lay with his face
buried on the corpse, and appeared to be in a state of insensibility,
Edward examined the corpse as it lay. Although plainly dressed, yet it
was evident that it was not the body of a rustic; the features were
fair, and the beard was carefully cut; the hands were white, and the
fingers long, and evidently had never been employed in labor. That the
body was that of some superior person disguised as a rustic, was
evident, and this was corroborated by the conversation which took place
between the two robbers. "Alas!" thought Edward, "the family of Arnwood
appear not to be the only people who are in disguise in this forest.
That poor boy! he must not remain there." Edward looked round, and
perceived that there was a bed in the adjoining room, the door of which
was open; he lifted up the boy, and carried him, still insensible, into
the room, and laid him on the bed. He then went for some more water,
which he found and threw into his face, and poured a little into his
mouth. Gradually the boy stirred, and recovered from his stupor, and
then Edward held the water to his mouth, and made him drink some, which
he did; and then, suddenly aroused to a recollection of what had
passed, the boy gave a shriek of woe, and burst into a paroxysm of
tears. This ended in convulsive sobbings and low moanings. Edward felt
that he could do no more at present, and that it would be better if he
was left for a time to give vent to his grief. Edward sat down on a
stool by the side of the orphan, and remained for some time in deep and
melancholy thought. "How strange," thought he at last, "it is, that I
should feel so little as I do now, surrounded by death, compared to
what I did when good old Jacob Armitage died! Then I felt it deeply,
and there was an awe in death. Now I no longer dread it. Is it because
I loved the good old man, and felt that I had lost a friend? No, that
can not be the cause; I may have felt more grief, but not awe or dread.
Or is it because that was the first time that I had seen death, and it
is the first sight of death which occasions awe? or is it because that
every day I have fancied myself on the battle-field, with hundreds
lying dead and wounded around me, in my dreamings? I know not. Poor old
Jacob died peaceably in his bed, like a good Christian and trusting,
after a blameless life, to find mercy through his Savior. Two of these
who are now dead, out of the three, have been, summoned away in the
height of their wickedness, and in the very commission of crime; the
third has been foully murdered, and out of three lying dead, one has
fallen by my own hand, and yet I feel not so much as when I attended
the couch, and listened to the parting words of a dying Christian! I
cannot account for it, or reason why; I only know that it is so, and I
now look upon death unconcerned. Well, this is a kind of preparation
for the wholesale murder and horrors of the battlefield, which I have
so long sighed for: God forgive me if I am wrong! And this poor boy! I
have promised to protect him, and I will. Could I fail my promise, I
should imaging the spirit of his father (as I presume he was) looking
down and upbraiding me. No, no, I will protect him. I and my brother
and sisters have been preserved and protected, and I were indeed vile
if I did not do to others as I have been done by. And now let me
reflect what is to be done. I must not take the boy away, and bury the
bodies; this person has friends at Lymington, and they will come here.
The murder has taken place in the forest: then I must let the intendant
know what has occurred. I will send over to Oswald; Humphrey shall go.
Poor fellow! what a state of anxiety must he and my little sisters be
in, at my not returning home! I had quite forgotten that, but it can
not be helped. I will wait till sunrise, and then see if the boy will
be more himself, and probably from him I shall be able to find out what
part of the forest I am in."

Edward took up the candle and went into the room in which he had laid
the boy on the bed. He found him in a sound sleep. "Poor fellow," said
Edward, "he has for a time forgotten his misery. What a beautiful boy
he is! I long to know his history. Sleep on, my poor fellow! it will do
you service."

Edward then returned to the other room, and recollected, or, rather,
was reminded, that he had had no supper, and it was now nearly dawn of
day. He looked into a cupboard and found plenty of provisions, and some
flasks of wine. "I have earned my supper," thought he, "and I will not,
therefore, deny myself." So ho brought out the viands and a flask of
wine, and made a hearty meal. "It is long since I have tasted wine,"
thought he, "and it maybe long ere I drink it again. I have little
relish for it now: it is too fiery to the palate. I recollect, when a
child, how my father used to have me at the table, and give me a stoup
of claret, which I could hardly lift to my lips, to drink to the health
of the king." The memory of the king raised other thoughts in Edward's
mind, and he again sunk into one of his reveries, which lasted till he
fell into a slumber. When he woke up, it was at the voice of the boy,
who in his sleep had cried out "Father!" Edward started up, and found
that the sun was an hour high, and that he must have slept some time.
He gently opened the cottage door, looked at the bodies of the two men,
and then walked out to survey the locality of the cottage, which he had
but faintly made out during the night. He found that it was surrounded
by a thicket of trees and underwood, so close and thick that there
appeared to him no outlet in any direction. "What a place for
concealment!" thought Edward, "but still these prowling thieves
discovered it. Why, troops of horse might scour the forest for months,
and never discover such a hiding-place." Edward walked round by the
side of the thicket, to find out the track by which the robbers had
entered when he followed them, and at last succeeded in doing so. He
followed the path through the thicket until he was clear of it, and
again in the forest; but the scenery outside was unknown to him, and he
had not an idea as to what part of the forest it was in. "I must
question the boy," thought Edward. "I will go back and wake him up, for
it is time that I was moving." As he was again turning into the
thicket, he heard a dog giving tongue, as if on a scent. It came nearer
and nearer to him, and Edward remained to see what it might be. In a
moment more, he perceived his own dog, Smoker, come bounding out of a
neighboring copse, followed by Humphrey and Pablo. Edward hallooed.
Smoker sprung toward him, leaping up, and loading him with caresses,
and in another moment he was in Humphrey's arms.

"Oh, Edward, let me first thank God!" said Humphrey, as the tears
started and rolled down his cheeks. "What a night we have passed! What
has happened? That dear fellow, Pablo, thought of putting Smoker on the
scent; he brought out your jacket and showed it to Smoker, and gave it
him to smell, and then led him along till he was on your footsteps; and
the dog followed him, it seems, although it has been round and round in
every direction, till at last he has brought us to you."

Edward shook hands with Pablo, and thanked him. "How far are we from
the cottage, Humphrey?"

"About eight miles, I should say, Edward; not more."

"Well, I have much to tell you, and I must tell it to you in few words
before I go farther, and afterward I will tell you all in detail."

Edward then gave a succinct narration of what had occurred, and, having
thus prepared Humphrey and Pablo for what they were to see, led the way
back through the thicket to the cottage inside of it. Humphrey and
Pablo were much shocked at the scene of slaughter which presented
itself to their eyes; and, after having viewed the bodies, they began
to consult what had best be done.

The proposal of Edward, that Humphrey should go over and make known the
circumstances to Oswald, that they might be communicated to the
intendant, was readily acceded to; and Pablo, it was agreed, should go
home and tell Alice and Edith that Edward was safe.

"But now, Humphrey, about this boy; we can not leave him here."

"Where is he?"

"He still sleeps, I believe. The question is, whether you should ride
over with the pony, or walk, and leave Pablo to return with the pony
and cart; for I will not take the boy away, or leave the house myself,
without removing the property which belongs to the boy, and of which I
will make inquiry when he awakes. Besides, there is money, by what the
robbers stated in my hearing, which of course must be taken care of for
him."

"I think it will be best for me to walk over, Edward. If I ride, I
should arrive too late in the afternoon for any thing to be done till
next morning, and if I walk I shall be in time enough; so that is
settled. Besides, it will give you more time to remove the boy's
property, which, as his father was in all probability a Malignant, and
denounced man, they might think right to secure for the government."

"Very true; then be it so. Do you start for the intendant's; and,
Pablo, go home and fetch the pony and cart, while I remain here with
the boy, and get every thing ready."

Humphrey and Pablo both set off, and then Edward went to waken the boy,
still lying on the bed.

"Come, you must get up now. You know that what's done can not be
undone; and if you are a good boy, and have read the Bible, you must
know that we must submit to the will of God, who is our kind father in
heaven."

"Ah me!" said the boy, who was awake when Edward went to him; "I know
well it is my duty, but it is a hard duty, and I am heartbroken. I have
lost my father, the only friend I had in the world; who is there to
love and to cherish me now? What will become of me!"

"I promised your father, before he died, that I would take care of you,
my poor fellow; and a promise is sacred with me, even if it were not
made to a dying man. I will do my best, depend upon it, for I have
known myself what it is to want and to find a protector. You shall live
with me and my brother and sisters, and you shall have all we have."

"Have you sisters, then?" replied the boy.

"Yes; I have sent for the cart to take you away from this, and to-night
you shall be in our cottage; but now tell me--I do not ask who your
father was, or why he was living here in secret, as I found it out by
what I overheard the robbers say to one another--but how long have you
lived here?"

"More than a year."

"Whose cottage is it?"

"My father bought it when he came, as he thought it safer so, that he
might not be discovered or betrayed; for he had escaped from prison
after having been condemned to death by the Parliament."

"Then he was a loyal man to his king?"

"Yes, he was, and that was his only crime."

"Then fear not, my good boy; we are all loyal as well as he was, and
will never be otherwise. I tell you this that you may safely trust to
us. Now, if the cottage was his, the furniture and property were his
also?"

"Yes, all was his."

"And it is now yours, is it not?"

"I suppose so," said the boy, bursting into tears.

"Then listen to me: your father is safe from all persecution now; he
is, I trust, in heaven; and you they can not touch, as you have done
nothing to offend them; but still they will take possession of your
father's property as soon as they know of his death, and find out who
he was. This, for your sake I wish to prevent them from doing, and have
therefore sent for the cart, that I may remove to my cottage every
thing that is of value, that it may be held for your benefit; some day
or another you may require it. The murder having been committed in the
forest, and I having been a witness and, moreover, having shot one of
the robbers, I have considered it right to send to the intendant of the
forest, to give him notice of what has taken place within his
jurisdiction. I do not think he is so bad a man as the rest; but still,
when he comes here, he may consider it his duty to take possession of
every thing for the Parliament, as I have no doubt such are his orders,
or will be when he communicates with the Parliament. Now this is a
robbery which I wish to prevent, by carrying away your property before
they come over, which they will to-morrow; and I propose that you shall
accompany me, with all that you can take away, or that may be useful,
this evening."

"You are very kind," replied the boy. "I will do all you wish, but I
feel very weak, and very unwell."

"You must exert yourself, for your own sake, my poor fellow. Come, now,
sit up and put all your own clothes together. Collect every thing in
this room, while I look about the house. And tell me, had not your
father some money? for the robbers said that they saw him counting it
out of a sack, through the chinks of the shutters, and that was why
they made the attack."

"Hateful money!" cried the boy. "Yes, he had, I believe, a great deal
of money; but I can not say how much."

"Now get up, and do as I request, my dear boy," said Edward, raising
him up in his arms; "when your grief is lessened, you may have many
happy days yet in store for you; you have a Father in heaven that you
must put your trust in, and with him you will find peace."

The boy rose up, and Edward closed the door of the chamber that he
might not see his father's corpse.

"I do put my trust in Heaven, good sir," replied the boy; "for it has
already sent me a kind friend in my distress. You are good, I am sure;
I see that in your face. Alas! how much more wretched would have been
my condition if you had not fortunately come to our assistance! too
late indeed to save my poor father, but not too late to succor and
console his child. I will go away with you, for I can not stay here."




CHAPTER XVI.


Edward then took the counterpane off the bed, and went with it into the
next room. He gently drew the body to the corner of the room, and
covered it up with the counterpane, and then proceeded to examine the
cupboards, etc. In one he found a good store of books, in another there
was linen of all sorts, a great many curious arms, two suits of bright
armor such as was worn in those times, pistols, and guns, and
ammunition. On the floor of one of the cupboards was an iron chest
about two feet by eighteen inches. It was locked. Edward immediately
concluded that this chest held the money of the unfortunate man; but
where was the key? Most likely about his person. He did not like to
afflict the poor boy by putting the question to him, but he went to the
body and examined the pockets of the clothes; he found a bunch of
several keys, which he took, and then replaced the coverlid. He tried
one of the keys, which appeared to be of the right size, to the lock of
the iron chest, and found that it fitted it. Satisfied with this, he
did not raise the lid of the chest, but dragged it out into the center
of the room. There were many things of value about the room; the
candlesticks were silver, and there were goblets of the same metal.
Edward collected all these articles, and a timepiece, and put them into
a basket, of which there were two large ones at the end of the room,
apparently used for holding firewood. Every thing that he thought could
be useful, or of value, he gathered together for the benefit of the
poor orphan boy. He afterward went into another small room, where he
found sundry small trunks and cases locked up. These he brought out
without examining, as he presumed that they contained what was of
value, or they would not be locked. When he had collected every thing,
he found that he had already more than the cart could carry in one
trip; and he wanted to take some bedding with him, as he had not a
spare bed in the cottage to give to the boy. Edward decided in his own
mind that he would take the most valuable articles away that night, and
return with the cart for the remainder early on the following morning.
It was now past noon, and Edward took out of the cupboard what victuals
were left, and then went into the chamber where the boy was, and begged
that he would eat something. The poor boy said that he had no appetite;
but Edward insisted and at last prevailed upon him to eat some bread
and drink a glass of wine, which proved of great service to him. The
poor fellow shuddered as he saw the body covered up in the corner of
the room, but said nothing. Edward was trying to make him eat a little
more, when Pablo made his appearance at the door.

"Have you put up all that you want in the bedchamber?" said Edward.

"Yes, I have put up every thing."

"Then we will bring them out. Come, Pablo, you must help us."

Pablo made signs, and pointed to the door. Edward went out.

"First pull body away from this."

"Yes," replied Edward, "we must do so."

Edward and Pablo pulled the body of the robber on one side of the
doorway, and threw over it some dried fern which lay by; they then
backed the cart down to the door; the iron chest was first got in, then
all the heavy articles, such as armor, guns, and books, etc., and by
that time the cart was more than half loaded. Edward then went into the
chamber, and brought out the packages the boy had made up, and put them
all in the cart until it was loaded high up; they brought out some
blankets, and laid over all to keep things steady; and then Edward told
the boy that all was ready, and that they had better go.

"Yes, I am willing," replied he, with streaming eyes; "but let me see
him once more."

"Come, then," said Edward, leading him to the corpse, and uncovering
the face.

The boy knelt down, kissed the forehead and cold lips, covered up the
face again, and then rose and wept bitterly on Edward's shoulder.
Edward did not attempt to check his sorrow, he thought it better it
should have vent; but, after a time, he led the boy by degrees till
they were out of the cottage.

"Now then," said Edward, "we must go, or we shall be late. My poor
little sisters have been dreadfully alarmed at my not having come home
last night, and I long to clasp them in my arms."

"Indeed you must," replied the boy, wiping away his tears, "and I am
very selfish; let us go on."

"No room for cart to get through wood," said Pablo; "hard work, cart
empty--more hard work, cart full."

And so it proved to be; and it required all the united efforts of
Billy, Edward, and Pablo to force a passage for the cart through the
narrow pathway; but at last it was effected, and then they went on at a
quick pace, and in less than two hours the cottage was in sight. When
within two hundred yards of it, Edith, who had been on the watch, came
bounding out, and flew into Edward's arms, and covered him with kisses.

"You naughty Edward, to frighten us so!"

"Look, Edith, I have brought you a nice little playfellow. Welcome him,
dearest."

Edith extended her hand as she looked into the boy's face.

"He is a pretty boy, Edward, much prettier than Pablo."

"No, Missy Edith," said Pablo; "Pablo more man than he."

"Yes, you may be more man, Pablo; but you are not so pretty."

"And where is Alice?"

"She was getting supper ready, and I did not tell her that I saw you
coming, because I wanted first kiss."

"You little jealous thing! but here comes Alice. Dear Alice, you have
been very uneasy, but it was not my fault," said Edward, kissing her.
"If I had not been where I was, this poor boy would have been killed as
well as his father. Make him welcome, Alice, for he is an orphan now,
and must live with us. I have brought many things in the cart, and
tomorrow we will bring more, for we have no bed for him, and to-night
he must sleep with me."

"We will make him as happy as we can, Edward; and we will be sisters to
him," said Alice, looking at the boy, who was blushing deeply. "How old
are you, and what is your name?"

"I shall be thirteen years old next January," replied the boy.

"And your Christian name?"
