At the exit of the wood the lion stood still, and the Prince took leave
of him, having first thanked him warmly for his kind protection. It had
become quite dark, and Iwanich was forced to wait for daylight before
continuing his journey.

He made himself a bed of grass and leaves, lit a fire of dry branches,
and slept soundly till the next morning.

Then he got up and walked towards a beautiful white palace which he saw
gleaming in the distance. In about an hour he reached the building, and
opening the door he walked in.

After wandering through many marble halls, he came to a huge staircase
made of porphyry, leading down to a lovely garden.

The Prince burst into a shout of joy when he suddenly perceived Militza
in the centre of a group of girls who were weaving wreaths of flowers
with which to deck their mistress.

As soon as Militza saw the Prince she ran up to him and embraced him
tenderly; and after he had told her all his adventures, they went into
the palace, where a sumptuous meal awaited them. Then the Princess
called her court together, and introduced Iwanich to them as her future
husband.

Preparations were at once made for the wedding, which was held soon
after with great pomp and magnificence.

Three months of great happiness followed, when Militza received one day
an invitation to visit her mother's sister.

Although the Princess was very unhappy at leaving her husband, she did
not like to refuse the invitation, and, promising to return in seven
days at the latest, she took a tender farewell of the Prince, and
said: 'Before I go I will hand you over all the keys of the castle. Go
everywhere and do anything you like; only one thing I beg and beseech
you, do not open the little iron door in the north tower, which is
closed with seven locks and seven bolts; for if you do, we shall both
suffer for it.'

Iwanich promised what she asked, and Militza departed, repeating her
promise to return in seven days.

When the Prince found himself alone he began to be tormented by pangs
of curiosity as to what the room in the tower contained. For two days he
resisted the temptation to go and look, but on the third he could stand
it no longer, and taking a torch in his hand he hurried to the tower,
and unfastened one lock after the other of the little iron door until it
burst open.

What an unexpected sight met his gaze! The Prince perceived a small room
black with smoke, lit up feebly by a fire from which issued long blue
flames. Over the fire hung a huge cauldron full of boiling pitch, and
fastened into the cauldron by iron chains stood a wretched man screaming
with agony.

Iwanich was much horrified at the sight before him, and asked the man
what terrible crime he had committed to be punished in this dreadful
fashion.

'I will tell you everything,' said the man in the cauldron; 'but first
relieve my torments a little, I implore you.'

'And how can I do that?' asked the Prince.

'With a little water,' replied the man; 'only sprinkle a few drops over
me and I shall feel better.'

The Prince, moved by pity, without thinking what he was doing, ran
to the courtyard of the castle, and filled a jug with water, which he
poured over the man in the cauldron.

In a moment a most fearful crash was heard, as if all the pillars of the
palace were giving way, and the palace itself, with towers and doors,
windows and the cauldron, whirled round the bewildered Prince's head.
This continued for a few minutes, and then everything vanished into
thin air, and Iwanich found himself suddenly alone upon a desolate heath
covered with rocks and stones.

The Prince, who now realised what his heedlessness had done, cursed too
late his spirit of curiosity. In his despair he wandered on over the
heath, never looking where he put his feet, and full of sorrowful
thoughts. At last he saw a light in the distance, which came from a
miserable-looking little hut.

The owner of it was none other than the kind-hearted gaunt grey beggar
who had given the Prince the bag of bread-crumbs and the hare. Without
recognising Iwanich, he opened the door when he knocked and gave him
shelter for the night.

On the following morning the Prince asked his host if he could get him
any work to do, as he was quite unknown in the neighbourhood, and had
not enough money to take him home.

'My son,' replied the old man, 'all this country round here is
uninhabited; I myself have to wander to distant villages for my living,
and even then I do not very often find enough to satisfy my hunger. But
if you would like to take service with the old witch Corva, go straight
up the little stream which flows below my hut for about three hours, and
you will come to a sand-hill on the left-hand side; that is where she
lives.'

Iwanich thanked the gaunt grey beggar for his information, and went on
his way.

After walking for about three hours the Prince came upon a
dreary-looking grey stone wall; this was the back of the building and
did not attract him; but when he came upon the front of the house
he found it even less inviting, for the old witch had surrounded her
dwelling with a fence of spikes, on every one of which a man's skull was
stuck. In this horrible enclosure stood a small black house, which had
only two grated windows, all covered with cobwebs, and a battered iron
door.

The Prince knocked, and a rasping woman's voice told him to enter.

Iwanich opened the door, and found himself in a smoke-begrimed kitchen,
in the presence of a hideous old woman who was warming her skinny hands
at a fire. The Prince offered to become her servant, and the old hag
told him she was badly in want of one, and he seemed to be just the
person to suit her.

When Iwanich asked what his work, and how much his wages would be, the
witch bade him follow her, and led the way through a narrow damp
passage into a vault, which served as a stable. Here he perceived two
pitch-black horses in a stall.

'You see before you,' said the old woman, 'a mare and her foal; you have
nothing to do but to lead them out to the fields every day, and to see
that neither of them runs away from you. If you look after them both for
a whole year I will give you anything you like to ask; but if, on the
other hand, you let either of the animals escape you, your last hour is
come, and your head shall be stuck on the last spike of my fence. The
other spikes, as you see, are already adorned, and the skulls are all
those of different servants I have had who have failed to do what I
demanded.'

Iwanich, who thought he could not be much worse off than he was already,
agreed to the witch's proposal.

At daybreak nest morning he drove his horses to the field, and brought
them back in the evening without their ever having attempted to break
away from him. The witch stood at her door and received him kindly, and
set a good meal before him.

So it continued for some time, and all went well with the Prince.

Early every morning he led the horses out to the fields, and brought
them home safe and sound in the evening.

One day, while he was watching the horses, he came to the banks of a
river, and saw a big fish, which through some mischance had been cast on
the land, struggling hard to get back into the water.

Iwanich, who felt sorry for the poor creature, seized it in his arms and
flung it into the stream. But no sooner did the fish find itself in the
water again, than, to the Prince's amazement, it swam up to the bank and
said:

'My kind benefactor, how can I reward you for your goodness?'

'I desire nothing,' answered the Prince. 'I am quite content to have
been able to be of some service to you.'

'You must do me the favour,' replied the fish, 'to take a scale from my
body, and keep it carefully. If you should ever need my help, throw it
into the river, and I will come to your aid at once.'

Iwanich bowed, loosened a scale from the body of the grateful beast, put
it carefully away, and returned home.

A short time after this, when he was going early one morning to the
usual grazing place with his horses, he noticed a flock of birds
assembled together making a great noise and flying wildly backwards and
forwards.

Full of curiosity, Iwanich hurried up to the spot, and saw that a large
number of ravens had attacked an eagle, and although the eagle was big
and powerful and was making a brave fight, it was overpowered at last by
numbers, and had to give in.

But the Prince, who was sorry for the poor bird, seized the branch of
a tree and hit out at the ravens with it; terrified at this unexpected
onslaught they flew away, leaving many of their number dead or wounded
on the battlefield.

As soon as the eagle saw itself free from its tormentors it plucked a
feather from its wing, and, handing it to the Prince, said: 'Here, my
kind benefactor, take this feather as a proof of my gratitude; should
you ever be in need of my help blow this feather into the air, and I
will help you as much as is in my power.'

Iwanich thanked the bird, and placing the feather beside the scale he
drove the horses home.

Another day he had wandered farther than usual, and came close to a
farmyard; the place pleased the Prince, and as there was plenty of good
grass for the horses he determined to spend the day there. Just as he
was sitting down under a tree he heard a cry close to him, and saw a fox
which had been caught in a trap placed there by the farmer.

In vain did the poor beast try to free itself; then the good-natured
Prince came once more to the rescue, and let the fox out of the trap.

The fox thanked him heartily, tore two hairs out of his bushy tail, and
said: 'Should you ever stand in need of my help throw these two hairs
into the fire, and in a moment I shall be at your side ready to obey
you.'

Iwanich put the fox's hairs with the scale and the feather, and as it
was getting dark he hastened home with his horses.

In the meantime his service was drawing near to an end, and in three
more days the year was up, and he would be able to get his reward and
leave the witch.

On the first evening of these last three days, when he came home and was
eating his supper, he noticed the old woman stealing into the stables.

The Prince followed her secretly to see what she was going to do. He
crouched down in the doorway and heard the wicked witch telling the
horses to wait next morning till Iwanich was asleep, and then to go and
hide themselves in the river, and to stay there till she told them to
return; and if they didn't do as she told them the old woman threatened
to beat them till they bled.

When Iwanich heard all this he went back to his room, determined that
nothing should induce him to fall asleep next day. On the following
morning he led the mare and foal to the fields as usual, but bound a
cord round them both which he kept in his hand.

But after a few hours, by the magic arts of the old witch, he was
overpowered by sleep, and the mare and foal escaped and did as they had
been told to do. The Prince did not awake till late in the evening; and
when he did, he found, to his horror, that the horses had disappeared.
Filled with despair, he cursed the moment when he had entered the
service of the cruel witch, and already he saw his head sticking up on
the sharp spike beside the others.

Then he suddenly remembered the fish's scale, which, with the eagle's
feather and the fox's hairs, he always carried about with him. He drew
the scale from his pocket, and hurrying to the river he threw it in. In
a minute the grateful fish swam towards the bank on which Iwanich was
standing, and said: 'What do you command, my friend and benefactor?'

The Prince replied: 'I had to look after a mare and foal, and they have
run away from me and have hidden themselves in the river; if you wish to
save my life drive them back to the land.'

'Wait a moment,' answered the fish, 'and I and my friends will soon
drive them out of the water.' With these words the creature disappeared
into the depths of the stream.

Almost immediately a rushing hissing sound was heard in the waters, the
waves dashed against the banks, the foam was tossed into the air, and
the two horses leapt suddenly on to the dry land, trembling and shaking
with fear.

Iwanich sprang at once on to the mare's back, seized the foal by its
bridle, and hastened home in the highest spirits.

When the witch saw the Prince bringing the horses home she could hardly
conceal her wrath, and as soon as she had placed Iwanich's supper before
him she stole away again to the stables. The Prince followed her, and
heard her scolding the beasts harshly for not having hidden themselves
better. She bade them wait next morning till Iwanich was asleep and then
to hide themselves in the clouds, and to remain there till she called.
If they did not do as she told them she would beat them till they bled.

The next morning, after Iwanich had led his horses to the fields, he
fell once more into a magic sleep. The horses at once ran away and hid
themselves in the clouds, which hung down from the mountains in soft
billowy masses.

When the Prince awoke and found that both the mare and the foal had
disappeared, he bethought him at once of the eagle, and taking the
feather out of his pocket he blew it into the air.

In a moment the bird swooped down beside him and asked: 'What do you
wish me to do?'

'My mare and foal,' replied the Prince, 'have run away from me, and have
hidden themselves in the clouds; if you wish to save my life, restore
both animals to me.'

'Wait a minute,' answered the eagle; 'with the help of my friends I will
soon drive them back to you.'

With these words the bird flew up into the air and disappeared among the
clouds.

Almost directly Iwanich saw his two horses being driven towards him by
a host of eagles of all sizes. He caught the mare and foal, and having
thanked the eagle he drove them cheerfully home again.

The old witch was more disgusted than ever when she saw him appearing,
and having set his supper before him she stole into the stables, and
Iwanich heard her abusing the horses for not having hidden themselves
better in the clouds. Then she bade them hide themselves next morning,
as soon as Iwanich was asleep, in the King's hen-house, which stood on
a lonely part of the heath, and to remain there till she called. If they
failed to do as she told them she would certainly beat them this time
till they bled.

On the following morning the Prince drove his horses as usual to the
fields. After he had been overpowered by sleep, as on the former days,
the mare and foal ran away and hid themselves in the royal hen house.

When the Prince awoke and found the horses gone he determined to appeal
to the fox; so, lighting a fire, he threw the two hairs into it, and
in a few moments the fox stood beside him and asked: 'In what way can I
serve you?'

'I wish to know,' replied Iwanich, 'where the King's hen-house is.'

'Hardly an hour's walk from here,' answered the fox, and offered to show
the Prince the way to it.

While they were walking along the fox asked him what he wanted to do
at the royal hen-house. The Prince told him of the misfortune that had
befallen him, and of the necessity of recovering the mare and foal.

'That is no easy matter,' replied the fox. 'But wait a moment. I have
an idea. Stand at the door of the hen-house, and wait there for your
horses. In the meantime I will slip in among the hens through a hole in
the wall and give them a good chase, so that the noise they make will
arouse the royal henwives, and they will come to see what is the matter.
When they see the horses they will at once imagine them to be the cause
of the disturbance, and will drive them out. Then you must lay hands on
the mare and foal and catch them.

All turned out exactly as the sly fox had foreseen. The Prince swung
himself on the mare, seized the foal by its bridle, and hurried home.

While he was riding over the heath in the highest of spirits the mare
suddenly said to her rider: 'You are the first person who has ever
succeeded in outwitting the old witch Corva, and now you may ask what
reward you like for your service. If you promise never to betray me I
will give you a piece of advice which you will do well to follow.'

The Prince promised never to betray her confidence, and the mare
continued: 'Ask nothing else as a reward than my foal, for it has not
its like in the world, and is not to be bought for love or money; for it
can go from one end of the earth to another in a few minutes. Of course
the cunning Corva will do her best to dissuade you from taking the foal,
and will tell you that it is both idle and sickly; but do not believe
her, and stick to your point.'

Iwanich longed to possess such an animal, and promised the mare to
follow her advice.

This time Corva received him in the most friendly manner, and set a
sumptuous repast before him. As soon as he had finished she asked him
what reward he demanded for his year's service.

'Nothing more nor less,' replied the Prince, 'than the foal of your
mare.'

The witch pretended to be much astonished at his request, and said that
he deserved something much better than the foal, for the beast was lazy
and nervous, blind in one eye, and, in short, was quite worthless.

But the Prince knew what he wanted, and when the old witch saw that he
had made up his mind to have the foal, she said, 'I am obliged to keep
my promise and to hand you over the foal; and as I know who you are and
what you want, I will tell you in what way the animal will be useful to
you. The man in the cauldron of boiling pitch, whom you set free, is a
mighty magician; through your curiosity and thoughtlessness Militza came
into his power, and he has transported her and her castle and belongings
into a distant country.

'You are the only person who can kill him; and in consequence he fears
you to such an extent that he has set spies to watch you, and they
report your movements to him daily.

'When you have reached him, beware of speaking a single word to him, or
you will fall into the power of his friends. Seize him at once by the
beard and dash him to the ground.'

Iwanich thanked the old witch, mounted his foal, put spurs to its sides,
and they flew like lightning through the air.

Already it was growing dark, when Iwanich perceived some figures in the
distance; they soon came up to them, and then the Prince saw that it
was the magician and his friends who were driving through the air in a
carriage drawn by owls.

When the magician found himself face to face with Iwanich, without hope
of escape, he turned to him with false friendliness and said: 'Thrice my
kind benefactor!'
