ugliest and dirtiest creatures under the sun.

The Prince thought some witchcraft must be at work, and he hastened away
before the return of the shepherdess, who became that evening the butt
of everybody's jests.

But the King's son thought often of the lovely maiden whom he had only
seen for a moment, though she seemed to him much more fascinating than
any lady of the Court. At last he dreamed of nothing else, and grew
thinner day by day till his parents inquired what was the matter,
promising to do all they could to make him as happy as he once was. He
dared not tell them the truth, lest they should laugh at him, so he only
said that he should like some bread baked by the kitchen girl in the
distant farm.

Although the wish appeared rather odd, they hastened to fulfil it, and
the farmer was told the request of the King's son. The maiden showed no
surprise at receiving such an order, but merely asked for some flour,
salt, and water, and also that she might be left alone in a little room
adjoining the oven, where the kneading-trough stood. Before beginning
her work she washed herself carefully, and even put on her rings; but,
while she was baking, one of her rings slid into the dough. When she had
finished she dirtied herself again, and let the lumps of the dough stick
to her fingers, so that she became as ugly as before.

The loaf, which was a very little one, was brought to the King's son,
who ate it with pleasure. But in cutting it he found the ring of the
Princess, and declared to his parents that he would marry the girl whom
that ring fitted.

So the King made a proclamation through his whole kingdom and ladies
came from afar to lay claim to the honour. But the ring was so tiny that
even those who had the smallest hands could only get it on their little
fingers. In a short time all the maidens of the kingdom, including the
peasant girls, had tried on the ring, and the King was just about to
announce that their efforts had been in vain, when the Prince observed
that he had not yet seen the shepherdess.

They sent to fetch her, and she arrived covered with rags, but with her
hands cleaner than usual, so that she could easily slip on the ring.
The King's son declared that he would fulfil his promise, and when his
parents mildly remarked that the girl was only a keeper of sheep, and a
very ugly one too, the maiden boldly said that she was born a princess,
and that, if they would only give her some water and leave her alone in
a room for a few minutes, she would show that she could look as well as
anyone in fine clothes.

They did what she asked, and when she entered in a magnificent dress,
she looked so beautiful that all saw she must be a princess in disguise.
The King's son recognized the charming damsel of whom he had once caught
a glimpse, and, flinging himself at her feet, asked if she would
marry him. The Princess then told her story, and said that it would be
necessary to send an ambassador to her father to ask his consent and to
invite him to the wedding.

The Princess's father, who had never ceased to repent his harshness
towards his daughter, had sought her through the land, but as no one
could tell him anything of her, he supposed her dead. Therefore it was
with great joy he heard that she was living and that a king's son asked
her in marriage, and he quitted his kingdom with his elder daughter so
as to be present at the ceremony.

By the orders of the bride, they only served her father at the wedding
breakfast bread without salt, and meat without seasoning. Seeing him
make faces, and eat very little, his daughter, who sat beside him,
inquired if his dinner was not to his taste.

'No,' he replied, 'the dishes are carefully cooked and sent up, but they
are all so dreadfully tasteless.'

'Did not I tell you, my father, that salt was the best thing in life?
And yet, when I compared you to salt, to show how much I loved you, you
thought slightingly of me and you chased me from your presence.'

The King embraced his daughter, and allowed that he had been wrong to
misinterpret her words. Then, for the rest of the wedding feast they
gave him bread made with salt, and dishes with seasoning, and he said
they were the very best he had ever eaten.

Sebillot.





THE ENCHANTED SNAKE



There was once upon a time a poor woman who would have given all she
possessed for a child, but she hadn't one.

Now it happened one day that her husband went to the wood to collect
brushwood, and when he had brought it home, he discovered a pretty
little snake among the twigs.

When Sabatella, for that was the name of the peasant's wife, saw the
little beast, she sighed deeply and said, 'Even the snakes have their
brood; I alone am unfortunate and have no children.' No sooner had she
said these words than, to her intense surprise, the little snake looked
up into her face and spoke: 'Since you have no children, be a mother to
me instead, and I promise you will never repent it, for I will love you
as if I were your own son.'

At first Sabatella was frightened to death at hearing a snake speak,
but plucking up her courage, she replied, 'If it weren't for any other
reason than your kindly thought, I would agree to what you say, and I
will love you and look after you like a mother.'

So she gave the snake a little hole in the house for its bed, fed it
with all the nicest food she could think of, and seemed as if she never
could show it enough kindness. Day by day it grew bigger and fatter, and
at last one morning it said to Cola-Mattheo, the peasant, whom it always
regarded as its father, 'Dear papa, I am now of a suitable age and wish
to marry.'

'I'm quite agreeable,' answered Mattheo, 'and I'll do my best to find
another snake like yourself and arrange a match between you.'

'Why, if you do that,' replied the snake, 'we shall be no better than
the vipers and reptiles, and that's not what I want at all. No; I'd much
prefer to marry the King's daughter; therefore I pray you go without
further delay, and demand an audience of the King, and tell him a snake
wishes to marry his daughter.'

Cola-Mattheo, who was rather a simpleton, went as he was desired to the
King, and having obtained an audience, he said, 'Your Majesty, I have
often heard that people lose nothing by asking, so I have come to inform
you that a snake wants to marry your daughter, and I'd be glad to know
if you are willing to mate a dove with a serpent?'

The King, who saw at once that the man was a fool, said, in order to get
quit of him, 'Go home and tell your friend the snake that if he can turn
this palace into ivory, inlaid with gold and silver, before to-morrow
at noon, I will let him marry my daughter.' And with a hearty laugh he
dismissed the peasant.

When Cola-Mattheo brought this answer back to the snake, the little
creature didn't seem the least put out, but said, 'To-morrow morning,
before sunrise, you must go to the wood and gather a bunch of green
herbs, and then rub the threshold of the palace with them, and you'll
see what will happen.'

Cola-Mattheo, who was, as I have said before, a great simpleton, made no
reply; but before sunrise next morning he went to the wood and gathered
a bunch of St. John's Wort, and rosemary, and suchlike herbs, and rubbed
them, as he had been told, on the floor of the palace. Hardly had he
done so than the walls immediately turned into ivory, so richly inlaid
with gold and silver that they dazzled the eyes of all beholders. The
King, when he rose and saw the miracle that had been performed, was
beside himself with amazement, and didn't know what in the world he was
to do.

But when Cola-Mattheo came next day, and, in the name of the snake,
demanded the hand of the Princess, the King replied, 'Don't be in such
a hurry; if the snake really wants to marry my daughter, he must do some
more things first, and one of these is to turn all the paths and walls
of my garden into pure gold before noon to-morrow.'

When the snake was told of this new condition, he replied, 'To-morrow
morning, early, you must go and collect all the odds and ends of rubbish
you can find in the streets, and then take them and throw them on the
paths and walls of the garden, and you'll see then if we won't be more
than a match for the old King.'

So Cola-Mattheo rose at cock-crow, took a large basket under his arm,
and carefully collected all the broken fragments of pots and pans, and
jugs and lamps, and other trash of that sort. No sooner had he scattered
them over the paths and walls of the King's garden than they became one
blaze of glittering gold, so that everyone's eyes were dazzled with the
brilliancy, and everyone's soul was filled with wonder. The King, too,
was amazed at the sight, but still he couldn't make up his mind to
part with his daughter, so when Cola-Mattheo came to remind him of his
promise he replied, 'I have still a third demand to make. If the snake
can turn all the trees and fruit of my garden into precious stones, then
I promise him my daughter in marriage.'

When the peasant informed the snake what the King had said, he replied,
'To-morrow morning, early, you must go to the market and buy all the
fruit you see there, and then sow all the stones and seeds in the palace
garden, and, if I'm not mistaken, the King will be satisfied with the
result.'

Cola-Mattheo rose at dawn, and taking a basket on his arm, he went to
the market, and bought all the pomegranates, apricots, cherries, and
other fruit he could find there, and sowed the seeds and stones in the
palace garden. In one moment, the trees were all ablaze with rubies,
emeralds, diamonds, and every other precious stone you can think of.

This time the King felt obliged to keep his promise, and calling
his daughter to him, he said, 'My dear Grannonia,' for that was the
Princess's name, 'more as a joke than anything else, I demanded what
seemed to me impossibilities from your bridegroom, but now that he has
done all I required, I am bound to stick to my part of the bargain. Be
a good child, and as you love me, do not force me to break my word, but
give yourself up with as good grace as you can to a most unhappy fate.'

'Do with me what you like, my lord and father, for your will is my law,'
answered Grannonia.

When the King heard this, he told Cola-Mattheo to bring the snake to
the palace, and said that he was prepared to receive the creature as his
son-in-law.

The snake arrived at court in a carriage made of gold and drawn by six
white elephants; but wherever it appeared on the way, the people fled in
terror at the sight of the fearful reptile.

When the snake reached the palace, all the courtiers shook and trembled
with fear down to the very scullion, and the King and Queen were in
such a state of nervous collapse that they hid themselves in a far-away
turret. Grannonia alone kept her presence of mind, and although both her
father and mother implored her to fly for her life, she wouldn't move
a step, saying, 'I'm certainly not going to fly from the man you have
chosen for my husband.'

As soon as the snake saw Grannonia, it wound its tail round her and
kissed her. Then, leading her into a room, it shut the door, and
throwing off its skin, it changed into a beautiful young man with golden
locks, and flashing eyes, who embraced Grannonia tenderly, and said all
sorts of pretty things to her.

When the King saw the snake shut itself into a room with his daughter,
he said to his wife, 'Heaven be merciful to our child, for I fear it is
all over with her now. This cursed snake has most likely swallowed her
up.' Then they put their eyes to the keyhole to see what had happened.

Their amazement knew no bounds when they saw a beautiful youth standing
before their daughter with the snake's skin lying on the floor beside
him. In their excitement they burst open the door, and seizing the skin
they threw it into the fire. But no sooner had they done this than the
young man called out, 'Oh, wretched people! what have you done?' and
before they had time to look round he had changed himself into a dove,
and dashing against the window he broke a pane of glass, and flew away
from their sight.

But Grannonia, who in one and the same moment saw herself merry and sad,
cheerful and despairing, rich and beggared, complained bitterly over
this robbery of her happiness, this poisoning of her cup of joy, this
unlucky stroke of fortune, and laid all the blame on her parents, though
they assured her that they had meant no harm. But the Princess refused
to be comforted, and at night, when all the inhabitants of the palace
were asleep, she stole out by a back door, disguised as a peasant woman,
determined to seek for her lost happiness till she found it. When she
got to the outskirts of the town, led by the light of the moon, she met
a fox, who offered to accompany her, an offer which Grannonia gladly
accepted, saying 'You are most heartily welcome, for I don't know my way
at all about the neighbourhood.'

So they went on their way together, and came at last to a wood, where,
being tired with walking, they paused to rest under the shade of a tree,
where a spring of water sported with the tender grass, refreshing it
with its crystal spray.

They laid themselves down on the green carpet and soon fell fast asleep,
and did not waken again till the sun was high in the heavens. They
rose up and stood for some time listening to the birds singing, because
Grannonia delighted in their songs.

When the fox perceived this, he said: 'If you only understood, as I
do, what these little birds are saying, your pleasure would be even
greater.'

Provoked by his words--for we all know that curiosity is as deeply
inborn in every woman as even the love of talking--Grannonia implored
the fox to tell her what the birds had said.

At first the wily fox refused to tell her what he had gathered from the
conversation of the birds, but at last he gave way to her entreaties,
and told her that they had spoken of the misfortunes of a beautiful
young Prince, whom a wicked enchantress had turned into a snake for the
period of seven years. At the end of this time he had fallen in love
with a charming Princess, but that when he had shut himself up into
a room with her, and had thrown off his snake's skin, her parents had
forced their way into the room and had burnt the skin, whereupon the
Prince, changed into the likeness of a dove, had broken a pane of glass
in trying to fly out of the window, and had wounded himself so badly
that the doctors despaired of his life.

Grannonia, when she learnt that they were talking of her lover, asked
at once whose son he was, and if there was any hope of his recovery; to
which the fox made answer that the birds had said he was the son of the
King of Vallone Grosso, and that the only thing that could cure him was
to rub the wounds on his head with the blood of the very birds who had
told the tale.

Then Grannonia knelt down before the fox, and begged him in her sweetest
way to catch the birds for her and procure their blood, promising at the
same time to reward him richly.

'All right,' said the fox, 'only don't be in such a hurry; let's wait
till night, when the little birds have gone to roost, then I'll climb up
and catch them all for you.'

So they passed the day, talking now of the beauty of the Prince, now
of the father of the Princess, and then of the misfortune that had
happened. At last the night arrived, and all the little birds were
asleep high up on the branches of a big tree. The fox climbed up
stealthily and caught the little creatures with his paws one after the
other; and when he had killed them all he put their blood into a little
bottle which he wore at his side and returned with it to Grannonia, who
was beside herself with joy at the result of the fox's raid. But the fox
said, 'My dear daughter, your joy is in vain, because, let me tell you,
this blood is of no earthly use to you unless you add some of mine to
it,' and with these words he took to his heels.

Grannonia, who saw her hopes dashed to the ground in this cruel way, had
recourse to flattery and cunning, weapons which have often stood the sex
in good stead, and called out after the fox, 'Father Fox, you would be
quite right to save your skin, if, in the first place, I didn't feel I
owed so much to you, and if, in the second, there weren't other foxes in
the world; but as you know how grateful I feel to you, and as there are
heaps of other foxes about, you can trust yourself to me. Don't behave
like the cow that kicks the pail over after it has filled it with milk,
but continue your journey with me, and when we get to the capital you
can sell me to the King as a servant girl.'

It never entered the fox's head that even foxes can be outwitted, so
after a bit he consented to go with her; but he hadn't gone far before
the cunning girl seized a stick, and gave him such a blow with it on the
head, that he dropped down dead on the spot. Then Grannonia took some of
his blood and poured it into her little bottle; and went on her way as
fast as she could to Vallone Grosso.

When she arrived there she went straight to the Royal palace, and let
the King be told she had come to cure the young Prince.

The King commanded her to be brought before him at once, and was much
astonished when he saw that it was a girl who undertook to do what all
the cleverest doctors of his kingdom had failed in. As an attempt hurts
no one, he willingly consented that she should do what she could.

'All I ask,' said Grannonia, 'is that, should I succeed in what you
desire, you will give me your son in marriage.'

The King, who had given up all hopes of his son's recovery, replied:
'Only restore him to life and health and he shall be yours. It is only
fair to give her a husband who gives me a son.'

And so they went into the Prince's room. The moment Grannonia had rubbed
the blood on his wounds the illness left him, and he was as sound and
well as ever. When the King saw his son thus marvellously restored to
life and health, he turned to him and said: 'My dear son, I thought
of you as dead, and now, to my great joy and amazement, you are alive
again. I promised this young woman that if she should cure you, to
bestow your hand and heart on her, and seeing that Heaven has been
gracious, you must fulfil the promise I made her; for gratitude alone
forces me to pay this debt.'

But the Prince answered: 'My lord and father, I would that my will were
as free as my love for you is great. But as I have plighted my word to
another maiden, you will see yourself, and so will this young woman,
that I cannot go back from my word, and be faithless to her whom I
love.'

When Grannonia heard these words, and saw how deeply rooted the Prince's
love for her was, she felt very happy, and blushing rosy red, she said:
'But should I get the other lady to give up her rights, would you then
consent to marry me?'

'Far be it from me,' replied the Prince, 'to banish the beautiful
picture of my love from my heart. Whatever she may say, my heart and
desire will remain the same, and though I were to lose my life for it, I
couldn't consent to this exchange.'

Grannonia could keep silence no longer, and throwing off her peasant's
disguise, she discovered herself to the Prince, who was nearly beside
himself with joy when he recognised his fair lady-love. He then told his
father at once who she was, and what she had done and suffered for his
sake.

Then they invited the King and Queen of Starza-Longa to their Court, and
had a great wedding feast, and proved once more that there is no better
seasoning for the joys of true love than a few pangs of grief.





THE BITER BIT



Once upon a time there lived a man called Simon, who was very rich,
but at the same time as stingy and miserly as he could be. He had a
housekeeper called Nina, a clever capable woman, and as she did her work
carefully and conscientiously, her master had the greatest respect for
her.

In his young days Simon had been one of the gayest and most active
youths of the neighbourhood, but as he grew old and stiff he found it
very difficult to walk, and his faithful servant urged him to get a
horse so as to save his poor old bones. At last Simon gave way to the
request and persuasive eloquence of his housekeeper, and betook himself
one day to the market where he had seen a mule, which he thought would
just suit him, and which he bought for seven gold pieces.

Now it happened that there were three merry rascals hanging about the
market-place, who much preferred living on other people's goods to
working for their own living. As soon as they saw that Simon had bought
a mule, one of them said to his two boon companions, 'My friends, this
mule must be ours before we are many hours older.'

'But how shall we manage it,' asked one of them.

'We must all three station ourselves at different intervals along the
old man's homeward way, and must each in his turn declare that the mule
he has bought is a donkey. If we only stick to it you'll see the mule
will soon be ours.' This proposal quite satisfied the others, and they
all separated as they had agreed.

Now when Simon came by, the first rogue said to him, 'God bless you, my
fine gentleman.'

'Thanks for your courtesy,' replied Simon.

'Where have you been?' asked the thief.
