"What have you got here?" the doctor asked in surprise, as they arrived
at the carriage.

"Breakfast," Chris said. "It is in the rough, but you will get it
rougher than this before you get to Ladysmith."

"Why, you must be a conjurer. Where did you get the water from? We were
just discussing whether we should go out and try to fight our way to
those barrels of beer where the Tommies are clustered, or content
ourselves with spirit and water, a drink I cannot recommend in the
morning."

There were exclamations of pleasure from all in the carriage as Jack
was handing in the things.

"We shall not want the ham, Mr. King," the senior lieutenant said. "We
provided ourselves with a great basket of eatables and a few bottles of
wine, but the idea of making tea in the train did not, I think, occur
to any of us."

Chris was not allowed to cut his ham, for the basket contained pies,
chicken, and other luxuries; but the tea was immensely appreciated. By
the time that the first mugs were empty Jack arrived with the fresh
supply, and long before the train started breakfast was over, pipes had
been lighted, and all felt thoroughly awake and cheery. "Do you always
travel so well provided, Mr. King?" the doctor asked.

"We always carry tea, preserved milk, and preserved cocoa, and two or
three gallons of paraffin for cooking with. In case we can't find wood
for a fire, it makes all the difference in the world in our comfort."

"Now, Mr. King, we must waste no more time; so please begin at once, or
there will be no time to hear all your story. Tell us something about
your expedition to Komati-poort. The other we shall hope to hear on
another occasion in our camp, where we shall all be glad to see you at
any time."

Chris then related the idea he had formed at Maritzburg, of blowing up
the bridge, and how he had carried out the adventure. He passed very
briefly over the journey, but described fully how they had been obliged
to relinquish their original project, owing to the bridge being so
strongly guarded at both ends; and how, failing in that respect, they
had determined to do as much damage as possible to the great assemblage
of waggons filled with arms and military stores; and fully detailed the
manner in which this had been accomplished, and the aspect of the yard
on the following morning.

"Splendidly planned and carried out!" the commander of the party
exclaimed, and the others all echoed his words. It was astonishing
indeed to think that such a plan should have been conceived and carried
out by a lad no older than some of their junior midshipmen, and
assisted by only three others of the same age.

"The day before we started," the doctor said, "I saw in one of the
Durban papers a telegram from Lorenzo Marques saying that there had
been an explosion at Komati-poort, where a few waggons had been injured
and two natives killed, but that the Boers had suffered in any way, and
that the damage would be repaired and the line opened for traffic in a
few hours."

"There is only one word of truth in that, sir," Chris said smiling,
"and that is that no Boers suffered. I am convinced that is strictly
true, for the eight Boers at the bridge were certainly instantaneously
killed; and of the natives, whom I am sorry for, there were certainly
eighteen killed, together with some eight or ten Portuguese employes.
If I could by any possibility have got the natives out of the way I
would have done so. As to the Portuguese I do not feel any great
regret, for I believe all the officials in the custom-house on the
railway are bribed by the Boers to break the official orders they
receive as to observing strict neutrality, and aid in every way in
passing the materials of war into the Transvaal."

There was no time for further conversation, for they were now within a
short distance of the Tugela, and the train was winding its way between
steep hills which could have been held successfully by a handful of men.

"The only wonder to me is," another officer said, "that the Boers did
not take up and drag away the rails all the way from here to Estcourt.
If they had lifted them out of their sleepers, they had only to harness
a rail behind each horse and trot off with it. I know that there is a
considerable amount of railway material at Durban, but I doubt if there
is anything like sufficient to make twenty miles of road. And the
business would have been still more difficult if the Boers had
collected the sleepers in great piles and burned them. Of course they
have destroyed a good many culverts and the bridge at Estcourt. It is
wonderful that the railway people should have managed to get up a
temporary trestle bridge so soon, and to make a deviation of the line
to carry the trains over. It does their engineers immense credit. This
pass is widening," he added after putting his head out of the window.
"I fancy we shall be at Chieveley in a few minutes."

The train came to a stand-still at a siding a short distance outside
the station, which was crowded by a long line of waggons with stores of
all kinds. A number of sailors were unloading shells for their guns,
and a crowd of Kaffirs, under the orders of military officers, were
getting out the stores. As they alighted, after hearty thanks to the
officer whose kindness had been the means of their getting forward so
promptly, and who now went to report his arrival to Captain Jones, who
was superintending the operations of the sailors, Chris and his party
hurried to the rear waggon. It was a work of considerable difficulty to
get the horses out, and could not have been accomplished had there not
been a stack of sleepers near the spot. A number of these were carried
and piled so as to make a sloping gangway, by which the horses were
brought down. The sleepers being returned to their places, Chris and
his friends mounted and rode to the camp, which was placed behind a
long, low ridge which screened it from the sight of the enemy on the
opposite hills, although within easy range of their heavy guns.

Here before daybreak on the 12th, Major-general Barton's Fusilier
brigade, with a thousand Colonial Cavalry, three field batteries, and
the naval guns, had marched north, and were the following night joined
by another brigade with some cavalry. The next day the big naval guns
had opened fire; but although their shell had reached the lower
entrenchments of the Boers, their batteries on the hill had proved to
be beyond their range even with the greatest elevation that could be
given to them, while the Boer guns carried far beyond the camp.

Chris had learned at Estcourt, where the train stopped a few minutes,
that Captain Brookfield's troop formed part of the Colonial Horse that
had advanced with General Barton's brigade, and they soon discovered
their position. Leaving the horses with the natives, they went to his
tent.

"I am delighted to see you back," he exclaimed as they entered. "I
heard in confidence from one of your party, when they joined me a week
back, that you had gone on a mad-brained adventure to try and blow up
the Komati-poort bridge. I was horrified! I had, of course, given you
leave to act on your own responsibility, but I never dreamt of your
undertaking an expedition of that sort. Of course you found it
impossible to get there. A lad told me that you had reckoned on being
away six or seven weeks, and it is less than a month since the date on
which he told me you left. Anyhow, I heartily congratulate you on all
getting back."

"We got there, sir, but nothing could be done with the bridge, it was
so safely guarded. However, we did blow up two big cannon and a battery
of small ones, some ten thousand rifles, and an enormous quantity of
ammunition."

"You don't say so, Chris? Then you had better luck than you deserved.
One of the correspondents told me this morning that there was news in
the town by a telegram from Lorenzo Marques that there had been an
accidental explosion at Komati-poort, but it did not seem to be
anything serious. Tell me all about it."

"I congratulate you most heartily," he said, when Chris had finished
the story. "Of course you have written a report of it?"

"Here it is, sir. I have made it very brief, merely saying that I had
the honour to report that, with Messrs. Peters, Brown, and Willesden, I
succeeded in blowing up, with two hundredweight of dynamite, the things
I have mentioned to you, destroying a large quantity of rolling stock,
badly damaging five locomotives, and destroying roads and sidings to
such an extent that traffic can hardly be resumed for a fortnight. Is
the general here, sir?"

"No, but he will be here this afternoon. Now, I will not detain you
from your friends. No doubt they saw you ride in, and will be most
anxious to hear of your doings. You will hardly know them again. When
they came up to join us they adopted the uniform of the corps, feeling
that it would be uncomfortable going about in a large camp in civilian
dress. They brought with them uniforms for you all, for they seemed
very certain that you would return alive."

"I am very glad of that, sir, for the soldiers all stared at us as we
came up here. I suppose they took us for sight-seers who had come up to
witness the battle."

As they left the tent they found the rest of their party, gathered in a
group twenty yards away, and the heartiest greeting was exchanged. The
delight of the party knew no bounds when they found that their four
friends had not had their journey in vain. They had two tents between
them, and gathering in one of them they listened to Peters, who told
the story, as Chris said he had told it twice, and should probably have
to tell it again. The four lads at once exchanged their civilian
clothes for the uniforms that had been brought up. They were, like
those of the other Colonial corps, very simple, consisting of a loose
jacket reaching down to the hip, with turned-down collar and pockets,
breeches of the same light colour and material, loose to the knee and
tighter below it; knee boots, and felt hats looped up on one side.

The first step when they were dressed was to mount an eminence some
distance in rear of the camp, whence they had a view of the whole
country. In front of them was a wide valley with a broad river running
through it. Beyond it rose steep hills, range behind range. It was
crossed by two bridges, that of the railway, which had been blown up
and destroyed, and the road bridge, which was still intact; though, as
Sankey, who had accompanied them, told them, it was known to be mined.
To the left of the line of railway was a hill known as Grobler's Kloof,
on the summit of which a line of heavy guns could be seen. There were
other batteries on slopes at its foot commanding the bridge, to the
right of which on another hill was Fort Wylie, and in a bend of the
river by the railway could be seen the white roof of the church tower
of Colenso. There was another battery behind this, and others still
farther to the right on Mount Hlangwane. Heavy guns could be seen on
other hills to the left of Grobler's Kloof; while far away behind
Colenso was the crest of Mount Bulwana, from which a cannonade was
being directed upon Ladysmith and an occasional white burst of smoke
showed that the garrison were replying successfully. On all the lower
slopes of the hills were lines, sometimes broken, sometimes connected,
rising one above another. These were the Boer entrenchments, and Cairns
said that he heard that they extended for nearly twenty miles both to
the right and left.

"It is believed that we don't see anything like all of them," he went
on, "but we really don't know much about them, for the Boers only
answer occasionally from their great guns on the hilltops, and although
yesterday the sailors fired lyddite shells at these lower trenches,
there was no reply."

"It is an awful place to take," Chris said, after examining the hills
for a quarter of an hour with his glasses. "We have seen that the Boers
are no good in the open, but I have no doubt they will hold their
entrenchments stubbornly, and it is certain that a great many of them
are good shots. I have gone over the ground at Laing's Nek, and that
was nothing at all in comparison to this position. Do you know how many
there are supposed to be of them, Cairns?"

"They say that there are about twenty-five thousand of them, but no one
knows exactly. Natives get through pretty often from Ladysmith, but
they know no more there than we do here. They are all jolly and
cheerful there, in the thought that they will soon be relieved."

"I hope that they are not counting their chickens before they are
hatched," Chris said. "I doubt very greatly whether we shall carry
those hills in front of us, and if we do the ranges behind are no doubt
fortified. How about crossing the river?"

"There are several drifts. There is one about four miles to the left of
the bridge, called Bridle Drift. Waggon Drift is about as much farther
on. There is a drift just this side of where the Little Tugela runs
into it, and one just farther on; there is Skeete Drift and Molen
Drift, with a pontoon ferry; there is an important one called
Potgieter's Drift, where the road from Springfield to Ladysmith
crosses; and another, Trichardt's, where a road goes to Acton Homes. I
know there are some to the right, but I don't know their names."

"Well, that is comforting, because even if we take Colenso there would
be no crossing if the bridge is mined. And as the town will be
commanded by a dozen batteries, we should not gain much by its capture.
Well, I tell you fairly that I am well satisfied that we belong to a
mounted corps and shall be only lookers-on, for even if we win we shall
certainly lose a tremendous lot of men. Is there no way of marching
round one way or the other?"

"I believe not. The only way at all open seems to be round by Acton
Homes; that is a place about fifteen miles west of Ladysmith, and on
the principal road from Van Reenen's Pass. From there down to Ladysmith
the country is comparatively open, but it is a tremendously long way
round. I don't know how far, but I should say forty or fifty miles; and
certainly the road will in many places be commanded by Boer guns; and
they will most likely have fortified strong positions at various
points. But, of course, the great difficulty will be transport; I am
sure we have nothing like enough to take stores for the army all that
distance. Besides, Chris, I don't see that we should gain any advantage
from going to Ladysmith that way, we should be as far as ever from
thrashing the Boers, and certainly could not remain in Ladysmith; we
should eat up all the provisions there in no time."

"I don't like the outlook at all," Peters said.

"Ah, there is a general officer with a staff riding into the camp. Most
likely it is Buller. We had better go down, for if Brookfield gives in
my report he may want to speak to me."

The party went down the hill. When they reached their camp they were at
once sent for to Captain Brookfield's tent.

"I am glad that you are back," he said. "Sir Redvers Buller has just
ridden up on to the ridge, I will speak to him as he comes down. You
had better come with me and stand a short distance off. Bring your
rifles with you, and stand in military order; you three in line, and
Chris two paces in front of you."

Having got their rifles they followed Captain Brookfield till he
stopped at the foot of the slope below the point where the general and
his staff were standing. Their leader advanced some fifty yards ahead
of them. In a quarter of an hour the party were seen descending the
hill. Captain Brookfield stepped forward and saluted the general as he
came along a horse's length in front of his staff. Sir Redvers checked
his horse a little impatiently.

"What is it sir?" he said sharply. "I cannot attend to camp details
now."

"I command the Maritzburg Scouts," Captain Brookfield said. "Three of
my men, with Mr. King, who commands the section to which they belong,
have just returned. I wish to hand you Mr. King's report; it contains
news which is, I think, of importance."

"Give it to Lord Gerard," the general said briefly, motioning to one of
the officers behind him. "Please see what it is about, Gerard." And he
then moved forward again, briefly acknowledging Captain Brookfield's
salute. He had gone, however, but twenty yards when Lord Gerard rode up
to him and handed to him the open dispatch.

"It is of importance, sir."

Supposing that it was merely the report of four scouts who had gone out
reconnoitring, and with his mind absorbed with weightier matters, the
general had hardly given the matter a thought. Without checking his
horse he glanced at the paper, and then abruptly reined in his charger
and read it through attentively. Then he turned to where Captain
Brookfield was still standing and called him up.

"I do not quite understand this report, sir," he said. "Is it possible
that your men have been up to Komati-poort? I gathered from your words
that they had merely returned from reconnoitring."

"No, sir; they only came in this morning by the train from Durban with
the naval detachment with details."

"But how in the world did they get to Komati-poort?"

"They started from Maritzburg, sir, and rode up through Zululand and
Swaziland. Their object was to blow up the bridge, and to stop supplies
of munitions of war continuing to pass up through Lorenzo Marques. I
may say that they acted on their own initiative. The section to which
they belong is composed entirely of gentlemen's sons from Johannesburg;
they provide their horses and equipment, and draw no pay or rations,
and when they joined my corps made it a condition that so long as not
required for regular work they should be allowed to scout on their own
account."

Before calling up Captain Brookfield the general had handed back the
despatch to Lord Gerard, with the words, "Pass it round."

"Are those your men?" the general said, pointing to the little squad.

"Yes, sir."

Sir Redvers rode up to them, and on returning their salute, said: "You
have done well indeed, gentlemen; it was a most gallant action. Have
you your own horse with you?" he asked Chris.

"Yes, sir."

"Then mount at once and join me as I leave camp. Then you can tell me
about this matter on my way back."

Chris was soon on horseback. He waited at a short distance while the
general talked with General Barton, and as soon as he saw him turn to
ride off cantered up and joined the staff. The general looked round as
he did so. He beckoned to him to come up to his side.

"Now, sir, let me hear more about this. The captain of the troop that
you belong to, tells me that you and twenty other young fellows, all
from Johannesburg, formed yourselves into a party of scouts, and are
making war at your own expense, and that although in a certain way you
joined his troop you really act independently when it so pleases you."

"Yes, sir. We and our families have received great indignities from the
Boers; and although we are conscious that we should be of little use as
troops, we thought that we could do service as scouts on our own
account, and have been lucky in inflicting some blows on them. I was
fortunate enough to attract Colonel Yule's attention at Dundee, and he
furnished me with an open letter addressed to you, and to officers
commanding stations, saying that we had done so."

"Have you it about you?"

"Yes, sir."

Sir Redvers held out his hand, and Chris handed him the letter. "So you
went into the Boer camp! Do you speak Dutch well?"

"Yes, sir; we all speak Dutch fairly, and most of us Kaffir also, that
was why we thought that we should be more useful scouting; until now we
have all been dressed as young Boers, and could, I think, pass without
suspicion anywhere."

"Now as to this other affair," Sir Redvers said, returning Colonel
Yule's letter. "You had better take this, it will be useful to you
another time. Now tell me all about it. Was it entirely your own idea?"

"I first thought of it, sir, and my three friends agreed to go with me.
I did not want a large number. We started from Maritzburg with our own
Kaffir servant, and two Zulus and two Swazis to act as guides, two
ponies, each of which carried a hundredweight of dynamite; we had also
a spare riding horse."

He then related their proceedings from the time of their start to their
arrival at Komati-poort; their failure at the bridge in consequence of
the strong guard that the Boers had set over it; and how, finding that
the main object of their journey could not be carried out, they
proceeded to wreck the station yard and its contents.

"Thank you, Mr. King," the general said, when Chris concluded by
mentioning briefly how they had ridden down to Lorenzo Marques, and
taken a ship to Durban, and come up by train. "I saw the telegram of
the accident at Komati-poort. I imagined that it was probably more
severe than was stated, but certainly had no idea that such wholesale
damage had been effected, or that it was the work of any of our people.
