commander-in-chief telegraphed to the anxious President at Washington:

"I have all the plans of the rebels, and will catch them in my own trap,
if my men are equal to the emergency."

The shrewd Lincoln took notice of the qualifying clause, "if my men are
equal to the emergency," and sighed a little. Already this general,
so bold in design and so great in preparation was making excuses for
possible failure in action--if he failed his men and not he would be to
blame.




CHAPTER VIII. THE DUEL IN THE PASS


Dick carried the news to Pennington who danced with delight.

"We've got 'em! we've got 'em!" he cried over and over again.

"So we have," said Dick, "we'll be marching in a half hour and then the
trap will shut down so tight on Robert Lee that he'll never raise the
lid again."

It was nearly noon, and they expected every moment the order to start,
but it did not come. Dick began to be tormented by an astonished
impatience, and he saw that Colonel Winchester suffered in the same way.
The army showed no signs of moving. Was it possible that McClellan would
not advance at once on Lee, whom the scouts had now located definitely?
The hot afternoon hours grew long as they passed one by one, and many a
brave man ate his heart out with anger at the delay. Dick saw Sergeant
Whitley walking up and down, and he was eager to hear his opinion.

"What is it, sergeant?" he asked. "Why do we sit here, twiddling our
thumbs when there is an army waiting to be taken by us?"

"You're a commissioned officer, sir, and I'm only a private."

"Never mind about that. You're a veteran of many years and many fights,
and I know but little. Why do we sit still in the dust and fail to take
the great prize that's offered to us?"

"The men of an army, sir, do the fighting, but its generals are its
brains. It is for the brains to judge, to see and to command. The
generals cannot win without the men, and the men cannot win without the
generals. Now, in this case, sir, you can see--"

He stopped and shrugged his shoulders, as if it were not for him to say
any more.

"I see," said Dick bitterly. "You needn't say it, sergeant, but I'll say
it for you. General McClellan has been overcome by caution again, and he
sees two Johnnies where but one stands."

Sergeant Whitley shrugged his shoulders again, but said nothing. Dick
was about to turn away, when he saw a tall, thin figure approaching.

"Mr. Warner," said Sergeant Whitley.

"So it is," exclaimed Dick. "It's really good old George come to help
us!"

He rushed forward and shook hands with Warner who although thin and pale
was as cool and apparently almost as strong as ever.

"Here I am, Dick," he said, "and the great battle hasn't been fought.
I knew they couldn't fight it without me. The hospital at Washington
dismissed me in disgrace because I got well so fast. 'What's the use,'
said one of the doctors, 'in getting up and running away to the army to
get killed? You could die much more comfortably here in bed.' 'Not at
all,' I replied. 'I don't get killed when I'm with the army. I merely
get nearly killed. Then I lie unconscious on the field, in the rain,
until some good friend comes along, takes me away on his back and puts
me in a warm bed. It's a lot safer than staying in your hospital all the
time.'"

"Oh, shut up, George! Come and see the boys. They'll be glad to know
you're back--what's left of 'em."

Warner's welcome was in truth warm. He seemed more phlegmatic than ever,
but he opened his eyes wide when they told him of the dispatch that had
been lost and found.

"General McClellan must have been waiting for me," he said. "Tell him
I've come."

But General McClellan did not yet move. The last long hour of the day
passed. The sun set in red and gold behind the western mountains, and
the Army of the Potomac still rested in its camp, although privates even
knew that precious hours were being lost, and that booming cannon might
already be telling the defenders of Harper's Ferry that Jackson was at
hand.

Nor were they far wrong. While McClellan lingered on through the night,
never moving from his camp, Jackson and his generals were pushing
forward with fiery energy and at dawn the next day had surrounded
Harper's Ferry and its doomed garrison of more than twelve thousand men.

But these were things that Dick could not guess that night. One small
detachment had been sent ahead by McClellan, chiefly for scouting
purposes, and in the darkness the boy who had gone a little distance
forward with Colonel Winchester heard the booming of cannon. It was a
faint sound but unmistakable, and Dick glanced at his chief.

"That detachment has come into contact with the rebels somewhere there
in the mountains," he said, "and the ridges and valleys are bringing us
the echoes. Oh, why in Heaven's name are we delayed here through all the
precious moments! Every hour's delay will cost the lives of ten thousand
good men!"

And it is likely that in the end Colonel Winchester's reckoning was
too moderate. He and Dick gazed long in the direction in which Harper's
Ferry lay, and they listened, too, to the faint mutter of the guns among
the hills. Before dawn, scouts came in, saying that there had been hard
fighting off toward Harper's Ferry, and that Lee with the other division
of the Southern army was retreating into a peninsula formed by the
junction of the river Antietam with the Potomac, where he would await
the coming of Jackson, after taking Harper's Ferry.

"Jackson hasn't taken Harper's Ferry yet," said Dick, when he heard the
news. "Many of Banks' veterans of the valley are there, and, our men
instead of being crushed by defeat, are always improved by it."

"Still, I wish we'd march," said Warner. "I didn't come here merely to
go into camp. I might as well have stayed in the hospital."

Nevertheless they moved at daylight. McClellan had made up his mind
at last, and the army advanced joyfully to shut down the trap on Lee.
Dick's spirits rose with the sun and the advance of the troops. They had
delayed, but they would get Lee yet. There was nothing to tell them that
Harper's Ferry had fallen, and Jackson's force must still be detained
there far away. They ought to strike Lee on the morrow and destroy
him, and then they would destroy Jackson. Oh, Lee and Jackson had been
reckless generals to venture beyond the seceding states!

They marched fast now, and the fiery Hooker soon to be called Fighting
Joe led the advance. He was eager to get at Lee, who some said did not
now have more than twenty thousand men with him, although McClellan
insisted on doubling or tripling his numbers and those of Jackson.
Scouts and skirmishers came in fast now. Yes, Lee was between the
Antietam and the Potomac and they ought to strike him on the morrow. The
spirits of the Army of the Potomac continually rose.

Dick remained in a joyous mood. He had been greatly uplifted by
the return of his comrade, Warner, for whom he had formed a strong
attachment, and he could not keep down the thought that they would now
be able to trap Lee and end the war. The terrible field of the Second
Manassas was behind him and forgotten for the time. They rode now to a
new battle and to victory.

Another great cloud of dust like that at Manassas rolled slowly on
toward the little river or creek of Antietam, but the heat was not so
great now. A pleasant breeze blew from the distant western mountains and
cooled the faces of the soldiers. The country through which they were
passing was old for America. They saw a carefully cultivated soil, good
roads and stone bridges.

None of the lads and young men around Colonel Winchester rejoiced more
than Warner. Released from the hospital and with his tried comrades once
more he felt as if he were the dead come back. He was in time, too, for
the great battle which was to end the war. The cool wind that blew upon
his face tingled with life and made his pulses leap. Beneath the granite
of his nature and a phlegmatic exterior, he concealed a warm heart that
always beat steadfastly for his friends and his country.

"Dick," he said, "have they heard anything directly from Harper's
Ferry?"

"Not a word, at least none that I've heard about, but it's quite sure
that Jackson hasn't taken the place yet. Why should he? We have there
twelve or thirteen thousand good men, most of whom have proven their
worth in the valley. Why, they ought to beat him off entirely."

"And while they're doing that we ought to be taking Mr. Lee and a lot of
well-known Confederate gentlemen. I've made a close calculation, Dick,
and I figure that the chances are at least eighty per cent in favor of
our taking or destroying Lee's army."

"I wish we had started sooner," said Pennington. "We've lost a whole
day, one of the most precious days the world has ever known."

"You're right, Frank, and I've allowed that fact to figure importantly
in my reckoning. If it were not for the lost day I'd figure our chance
of making the finishing stroke at ninety-five per cent. But boys, it's
glorious to be back with you. Once, I thought when we were marching back
and forth so much that if I could only lie down and rest for a week or
two I'd be the happiest fellow on earth. But it became awful as I lay
there, day after day. I had suddenly left the world. All the great
events were going on without me. North or South might win, while I lay
stretched on a hospital bed. It was beyond endurance. If I hadn't got
well so fast that they could let me go, I'd have climbed out of the
window with what strength I had, and have made for the army anyhow. Did
you ever feel a finer wind than this? What a beautiful country! It must
be the most magnificent in the world!"

Dick and Pennington laughed. Old George was growing gushy. But they
understood that he saw with the eyes of the released prisoner.

"It is beautiful," said Dick, "and it's a pity that it should be ripped
up by war. Listen, boys, there's the call that's growing mighty familiar
to us all!"

Far in front behind the hills they heard the low grumbling of cannon.
And further away to the west they heard the same sinister mutter. The
Confederates were scattered widely, and the fateful Orders No. 191 might
cause their total destruction, but they were on guard, nevertheless.
Jackson, foreseeing the possible advance of McClellan, had sent back
Hill with a division to help Lee, and to delay the Northern army until
he himself should come with all his force.

In this desperate crisis of the Confederacy, more desperate than any of
the Southern generals yet realized, the brain under the old slouch hat
never worked with more precision, clearness and brilliancy. He would not
only do his own task, but he would help his chief while doing it. When
McClellan began his march after a delay of a day he was nearer to Lee
than Jackson was and every chance was his, save those that lightning
perception and unyielding courage win.

The lads heard the mutter of the cannon grow louder, and rise to a
distant thunder. Far ahead of them, where high hills thick with forest
rose, they saw smoke and flashes of fire. A young Maryland cavalry
officer, riding near, explained to them that the point from which the
cannonade came was a gap in South Mountain, although it was as yet
invisible, owing to the forest.

"We heard that Lee's army was much further away," said Warner to Dick.
"What can it mean? What force is there fighting our vanguard?"

It was Shepard, the spy, who brought them the facts. He had already
reported to General McClellan, when he approached Colonel Winchester.
His face was worn and drawn, and he was black under the eyes. His
clothes were covered with dust. His body was weary almost unto death,
but his eyes burned with the fire of an undying spirit.

"I've been all the night and all this morning in the mountains and
hills," he said. "Harper's Ferry is not yet taken, but I think it will
fall. But Hill, McLaws and Longstreet are all in this pass or the other
which leads through the mountain. They mean to hold us as long as they
can, and then hang on to the flank of our army."

He passed on and the little regiment advanced more rapidly. Dick saw
Colonel Winchester's eyes sparkling and he knew he was anxious to be in
the thick of it. Other and heavier forces were deploying upon the same
point, but Winchester's regiment led.

As they approached a deadly fire swept the plain and the hills. Rifle
bullets crashed among them and shell and shrapnel came whining and
shrieking. Once more the Winchester regiment, as it had come to be
called, was smitten with a bitter and deadly hail. Men fell all around
Dick but the survivors pressed on, still leading the way for the heavy
brigades which they heard thundering behind them.

The mouth of the pass poured forth fire and missiles like a volcano, but
Dick heard Colonel Winchester still shouting to his men to come on, and
he charged with the rest. The fire became so hot that the vanguard
could not live in it without shelter, and the colonel, shouting to the
officers to dismount, ordered them all to take cover behind trees and
rocks.

Dick who had been carried a little ahead of the rest, sprang down, still
holding his horse, and made for a great rock which he saw on one side
just within the mouth of the pass. His frightened horse reared and
jerked so violently that he tore the bridle from the lad's hand and ran
away.

Dick stood for a moment, scarcely knowing what to do, and then, as a
half dozen bullets whistled by his head, urging him to do something, he
finished his dash for the rock, throwing himself down behind it just as
a half a dozen more bullets striking on the stone told him that he had
done the right thing in the very nick of time.

He carried with him a light rifle of a fine improved make, a number of
which had been captured at the Second Manassas, and which some of the
younger officers had been allowed to take. He did not drop it in his
rush for the rock, holding on to it mechanically.

He lay for at least a minute or two flat upon the ground behind the
great stone, while the perspiration rolled from his face and his hair
prickled at the roots. He could never learn to be unconcerned when a
dozen or fifteen riflemen were shooting at him.

When he raised his head a little he saw that the Winchester regiment had
fallen back, and that, in truth, the entire advance had stopped until it
could make an attack in full force upon the enemy.

Dick recognized with a certain grim humor that he was isolated. He was
just a little Federal island in a Confederate sea. Up the gap he saw
cannon and masses of gray infantry. Gathered on a comparatively level
spot was a troop of cavalry. He saw all the signs of a desperate
defense, and, while he watched, the great guns of the South began to
fire again, their missiles flying far over his head toward the Northern
army.

Dick was puzzled, but for the present he did not feel great alarm about
himself. He lay almost midway between the hostile forces, but it was
likely that they would take no notice of him.

With a judgment born of a clear mind, he lay quite still, while the
hostile forces massed themselves for attack and defense. Each was
feeling out the other with cannon, but every missile passed well over
his head, and he did not take the trouble to bow to them as they sailed
on their errands. Yet he lay close behind that splendid and friendly
rock.

He knew that the Southerners would have sharpshooters and skirmishers
ahead of their main force. They would lie behind stones, trees and brush
and at any moment one of them might pick him off. The Confederate force
seemed to incline to the side of the valley, opposite the slope on which
he lay, and he was hopeful that the fact would keep him hidden until the
masses of his own people could charge into the gap.

It was painful work to flatten his body out behind a stone and lie
there. No trees or bushes grew near enough to give him shade, and the
afternoon sun began to send down upon him direct rays that burned. He
wondered how long it would be until the Union brigades came. It seemed
to him that they were doing a tremendous amount of waiting. Nothing was
to be gained by this long range cannon fire. They must charge home with
the bayonet.

He raised himself a little in order that he might peep over the stone
and see if the charge were coming, and then with a little cry he dropped
back, a fine gray powder stinging his face. A rifle had been fired
across the valley and a bullet chipping the top of the rock sheltering
Dick warned him that he was not the only sharpshooter who lay in an
ambush.

Peeping again from the side of the rock, he saw curls of blue smoke
rising from a point behind a stone just like his own on the other side
of the valley. It was enough to tell him that a Southern sharpshooter
lay there and had marked him for prey.

Dick's anger rose. Why should anyone seek his life, trying to pick him
off as if he were a beast of prey? He had been keeping quiet, disturbing
nobody, merely seeking a chance to escape, when this ruthless rebel had
seen him. He became in his turn hot and fiercely ready to give bullet
for bullet. Smoke floating through the pass and the flash of the cannon,
made him more eager to hit the sharpshooter who was seeking so hard to
hit him.

Watching intently he caught a glimpse of a gray cap showing above the
rock across the valley, and, raising his light rifle, he fired, quick as
