'I wonder if those gipsies HAD stolen the Baby?' Noel said dreamily. He
had not fished much, but he had made a piece of poetry. It was this:


               'How I wish
               I was a fish.
               I would not look
               At your hook,
               But lie still and be cool
               At the bottom of the pool
               And when you went to look
               At your cruel hook,
               You would not find me there,
               So there!'


'If they did steal the Baby,' Noel went on, 'they will be tracked by the
lordly perambulator. You can disguise a baby in rags and walnut juice,
but there isn't any disguise dark enough to conceal a perambulator's
person.'

'You might disguise it as a wheel-barrow,' said Dicky.

'Or cover it with leaves,' said H. O., 'like the robins.'

We told him to shut up and not gibber, but afterwards we had to own that
even a young brother may sometimes talk sense by accident.

For we took the short cut home from the lane--it begins with a large gap
in the hedge and the grass and weeds trodden down by the hasty feet of
persons who were late for church and in too great a hurry to go round
by the road. Our house is next to the church, as I think I have said
before, some time.

The short cut leads to a stile at the edge of a bit of wood (the
Parson's Shave, they call it, because it belongs to him). The wood has
not been shaved for some time, and it has grown out beyond the stile and
here, among the hazels and chestnuts and young dogwood bushes, we saw
something white. We felt it was our duty to investigate, even if the
white was only the under side of the tail of a dead rabbit caught in a
trap.

It was not--it was part of the perambulator. I forget whether I said
that the perambulator was enamelled white--not the kind of enamelling
you do at home with Aspinall's and the hairs of the brush come out and
it is gritty-looking, but smooth, like the handles of ladies very best
lace parasols. And whoever had abandoned the helpless perambulator in
that lonely spot had done exactly as H. O. said, and covered it with
leaves, only they were green and some of them had dropped off.

The others were wild with excitement. Now or never, they thought, was a
chance to be real detectives. Oswald alone retained a calm exterior. It
was he who would not go straight to the police station.

He said: 'Let's try and ferret out something for ourselves before we
tell the police. They always have a clue directly they hear about the
finding of the body. And besides, we might as well let Alice be in
anything there is going. And besides, we haven't had our dinners yet.'

This argument of Oswald's was so strong and powerful--his arguments are
often that, as I daresay you have noticed--that the others agreed.
It was Oswald, too, who showed his artless brothers why they had much
better not take the deserted perambulator home with them.

'The dead body, or whatever the clue is, is always left exactly as it is
found,' he said, 'till the police have seen it, and the coroner, and the
inquest, and the doctor, and the sorrowing relations. Besides, suppose
someone saw us with the beastly thing, and thought we had stolen it;
then they would say, "What have you done with the Baby?" and then where
should we be?' Oswald's brothers could not answer this question, but
once more Oswald's native eloquence and far-seeing discerningness
conquered.

'Anyway,' Dicky said, 'let's shove the derelict a little further under
cover.'

So we did.

Then we went on home. Dinner was ready and so were Alice and Daisy, but
Dora was not there.

'She's got a--well, she's not coming to dinner anyway,' Alice said when
we asked. 'She can tell you herself afterwards what it is she's got.'

Oswald thought it was headache, or pain in the temper, or in the
pinafore, so he said no more, but as soon as Mrs Pettigrew had helped
us and left the room he began the thrilling tale of the forsaken
perambulator. He told it with the greatest thrillingness anyone could
have, but Daisy and Alice seemed almost unmoved. Alice said--

'Yes, very strange,' and things like that, but both the girls seemed
to be thinking of something else. They kept looking at each other and
trying not to laugh, so Oswald saw they had got some silly secret and he
said--

'Oh, all right! I don't care about telling you. I only thought you'd
like to be in it. It's going to be a really big thing, with policemen in
it, and perhaps a judge.'

'In what?' H. O. said; 'the perambulator?'

Daisy choked and then tried to drink, and spluttered and got purple, and
had to be thumped on the back. But Oswald was not appeased. When Alice
said, 'Do go on, Oswald. I'm sure we all like it very much,' he said--

'Oh, no, thank you,' very politely. 'As it happens,' he went on, 'I'd
just as soon go through with this thing without having any girls in it.'

'In the perambulator?' said H. O. again.

'It's a man's job,' Oswald went on, without taking any notice of H. O.

'Do you really think so,' said Alice, 'when there's a baby in it?'

'But there isn't,' said H. O., 'if you mean in the perambulator.'

'Blow you and your perambulator,' said Oswald, with gloomy forbearance.

Alice kicked Oswald under the table and said--

'Don't be waxy, Oswald. Really and truly Daisy and I HAVE got a secret,
only it's Dora's secret, and she wants to tell you herself. If it was
mine or Daisy's we'd tell you this minute, wouldn't we, Mouse?'

'This very second,' said the White Mouse.

And Oswald consented to take their apologies.

Then the pudding came in, and no more was said except asking for things
to be passed--sugar and water, and bread and things.

Then when the pudding was all gone, Alice said--

'Come on.'

And we came on. We did not want to be disagreeable, though really we
were keen on being detectives and sifting that perambulator to the
very dregs. But boys have to try to take an interest in their sisters'
secrets, however silly. This is part of being a good brother.

Alice led us across the field where the sheep once fell into the brook,
and across the brook by the plank. At the other end of the next field
there was a sort of wooden house on wheels, that the shepherd sleeps in
at the time of year when lambs are being born, so that he can see that
they are not stolen by gipsies before the owners have counted them.

To this hut Alice now led her kind brothers and Daisy's kind brother.
'Dora is inside,' she said, 'with the Secret. We were afraid to have it
in the house in case it made a noise.'

The next moment the Secret was a secret no longer, for we all beheld
Dora, sitting on a sack on the floor of the hut, with the Secret in her
lap.

It was the High-born Babe!

Oswald was so overcome that he sat down suddenly, just like Betsy
Trotwood did in David Copperfield, which just shows what a true author
Dickens is.

'You've done it this time,' he said. 'I suppose you know you're a
baby-stealer?'

'I'm not,' Dora said. 'I've adopted him.'

'Then it was you,' Dicky said, 'who scuttled the perambulator in the
wood?'

'Yes,' Alice said; 'we couldn't get it over the stile unless Dora put
down the Baby, and we were afraid of the nettles for his legs. His name
is to be Lord Edward.'

'But, Dora--really, don't you think--'

'If you'd been there you'd have done the same,' said Dora firmly. 'The
gipsies had gone. Of course something had frightened them and they fled
from justice. And the little darling was awake and held out his arms to
me. No, he hasn't cried a bit, and I know all about babies; I've often
nursed Mrs Simpkins's daughter's baby when she brings it up on Sundays.
They have bread and milk to eat. You take him, Alice, and I'll go and
get some bread and milk for him.'

Alice took the noble brat. It was horribly lively, and squirmed about in
her arms, and wanted to crawl on the floor. She could only keep it quiet
by saying things to it a boy would be ashamed even to think of saying,
such as 'Goo goo', and 'Did ums was', and 'Ickle ducksums, then'.

When Alice used these expressions the Baby laughed and chuckled and
replied--

'Daddadda', 'Bababa', or 'Glueglue'.

But if Alice stopped her remarks for an instant the thing screwed its
face up as if it was going to cry, but she never gave it time to begin.

It was a rummy little animal.

Then Dora came back with the bread and milk, and they fed the noble
infant. It was greedy and slobbery, but all three girls seemed unable to
keep their eyes and hands off it. They looked at it exactly as if it was
pretty.

We boys stayed watching them. There was no amusement left for us
now, for Oswald saw that Dora's Secret knocked the bottom out of the
perambulator.

When the infant aristocrat had eaten a hearty meal it sat on Alice's lap
and played with the amber heart she wears that Albert's uncle brought
her from Hastings after the business of the bad sixpence and the
nobleness of Oswald.

'Now,' said Dora, 'this is a council, so I want to be business-like. The
Duckums Darling has been stolen away; its wicked stealers have deserted
the Precious. We've got it. Perhaps its ancestral halls are miles and
miles away. I vote we keep the little Lovey Duck till it's advertised
for.'

'If Albert's uncle lets you,' said Dicky darkly.

'Oh, don't say "you" like that,' Dora said; 'I want it to be all of our
baby. It will have five fathers and three mothers, and a grandfather and
a great Albert's uncle, and a great grand-uncle. I'm sure Albert's uncle
will let us keep it--at any rate till it's advertised for.'

'And suppose it never is,' Noel said.

'Then so much the better,' said Dora, 'the little Duckyux.'

She began kissing the baby again. Oswald, ever thoughtful, said--'Well,
what about your dinner?'

'Bother dinner!' Dora said--so like a girl. 'Will you all agree to be
his fathers and mothers?'

'Anything for a quiet life,' said Dicky, and Oswald said--

'Oh, yes, if you like. But you'll see we shan't be allowed to keep it.'

'You talk as if he was rabbits or white rats,' said Dora, 'and he's
not--he's a little man, he is.'

'All right, he's no rabbit, but a man. Come on and get some grub, Dora,'
rejoined the kind-hearted Oswald, and Dora did, with Oswald and the
other boys. Only Noel stayed with Alice. He really seemed to like the
baby. When I looked back he was standing on his head to amuse it, but
the baby did not seem to like him any better whichever end of him was
up.

Dora went back to the shepherd's house on wheels directly she had had
her dinner. Mrs Pettigrew was very cross about her not being in to it,
but she had kept her some mutton hot all the same. She is a decent sort.
And there were stewed prunes. We had some to keep Dora company. Then we
boys went fishing again in the moat, but we caught nothing.

Just before tea-time we all went back to the hut, and before we got half
across the last field we could hear the howling of the Secret.

'Poor little beggar,' said Oswald, with manly tenderness. 'They must be
sticking pins in it.'

We found the girls and Noel looking quite pale and breathless. Daisy was
walking up and down with the Secret in her arms. It looked like Alice in
Wonderland nursing the baby that turned into a pig. Oswald said so, and
added that its screams were like it too.

'What on earth is the matter with it?' he said.

'_I_ don't know,' said Alice. 'Daisy's tired, and Dora and I are quite
worn out. He's been crying for hours and hours. YOU take him a bit.'

'Not me,' replied Oswald, firmly, withdrawing a pace from the Secret.

Dora was fumbling with her waistband in the furthest corner of the hut.

'I think he's cold,' she said. 'I thought I'd take off my flannelette
petticoat, only the horrid strings got into a hard knot. Here, Oswald,
let's have your knife.'

With the word she plunged her hand into Oswald's jacket pocket, and next
moment she was rubbing her hand like mad on her dress, and screaming
almost as loud as the Baby. Then she began to laugh and to cry at the
same time. This is called hysterics.

Oswald was sorry, but he was annoyed too. He had forgotten that his
pocket was half full of the meal-worms the miller had kindly given him.
And, anyway, Dora ought to have known that a man always carries his
knife in his trousers pocket and not in his jacket one.

Alice and Daisy rushed to Dora. She had thrown herself down on the pile
of sacks in the corner. The titled infant delayed its screams for a
moment to listen to Dora's, but almost at once it went on again.

'Oh, get some water!' said Alice. 'Daisy, run!'

The White Mouse, ever docile and obedient, shoved the baby into the
arms of the nearest person, who had to take it or it would have fallen a
wreck to the ground. This nearest person was Oswald. He tried to pass
it on to the others, but they wouldn't. Noel would have, but he was busy
kissing Dora and begging her not to. So our hero, for such I may perhaps
term him, found himself the degraded nursemaid of a small but furious
kid.

He was afraid to lay it down, for fear in its rage it should beat
its brains out against the hard earth, and he did not wish, however
innocently, to be the cause of its hurting itself at all. So he walked
earnestly up and down with it, thumping it unceasingly on the back,
while the others attended to Dora, who presently ceased to yell.

Suddenly it struck Oswald that the High-born also had ceased to yell. He
looked at it, and could hardly believe the glad tidings of his faithful
eyes. With bated breath he hastened back to the sheep-house.

The others turned on him, full of reproaches about the meal-worms and
