
'I wish--No, I don't mean that. I mean it's a PITY we aren't higher up,'
said Anthea, as the edge of the carpet grazed a chimney-pot.

'That's right. Be careful,' said the Phoenix, in warning tones. 'If you
wish when you're on a wishing carpet, you DO wish, and there's an end of
it.'

So for a short time no one spoke, and the carpet sailed on in calm
magnificence over St Pancras and King's Cross stations and over the
crowded streets of Clerkenwell.

'We're going out Greenwich way,' said Cyril, as they crossed the streak
of rough, tumbled water that was the Thames. 'We might go and have a
look at the Palace.'

On and on the carpet swept, still keeping much nearer to the
chimney-pots than the children found at all comfortable. And then, just
over New Cross, a terrible thing happened.

Jane and Robert were in the middle of the carpet. Part of them was
on the carpet, and part of them--the heaviest part--was on the great
central darn.

'It's all very misty,' said Jane; 'it looks partly like out of doors
and partly like in the nursery at home. I feel as if I was going to have
measles; everything looked awfully rum then, remember.'

'I feel just exactly the same,' Robert said.

'It's the hole,' said the Phoenix; 'it's not measles whatever that
possession may be.'

And at that both Robert and Jane suddenly, and at once, made a bound to
try and get on to the safer part of the carpet, and the darn gave way
and their boots went up, and the heavy heads and bodies of them went
down through the hole, and they landed in a position something between
sitting and sprawling on the flat leads on the top of a high, grey,
gloomy, respectable house whose address was 705, Amersham Road, New
Cross.

The carpet seemed to awaken to new energy as soon as it had got rid of
their weight, and it rose high in the air. The others lay down flat and
peeped over the edge of the rising carpet.

'Are you hurt?' cried Cyril, and Robert shouted 'No,' and next moment
the carpet had sped away, and Jane and Robert were hidden from the sight
of the others by a stack of smoky chimneys.

'Oh, how awful!' said Anthea.

'It might have been worse,' said the Phoenix. 'What would have been
the sentiments of the survivors if that darn had given way when we were
crossing the river?'

'Yes, there's that,' said Cyril, recovering himself. 'They'll be all
right. They'll howl till some one gets them down, or drop tiles into
the front garden to attract attention of passersby. Bobs has got my
one-and-fivepence--lucky you forgot to mend that hole in my pocket,
Panther, or he wouldn't have had it. They can tram it home.'

But Anthea would not be comforted.

'It's all my fault,' she said. 'I KNEW the proper way to darn, and I
didn't do it. It's all my fault. Let's go home and patch the carpet with
your Etons--something really strong--and send it to fetch them.'

'All right,' said Cyril; 'but your Sunday jacket is stronger than my
Etons. We must just chuck mother's present, that's all. I wish--'

'Stop!' cried the Phoenix; 'the carpet is dropping to earth.'

And indeed it was.

It sank swiftly, yet steadily, and landed on the pavement of the
Deptford Road. It tipped a little as it landed, so that Cyril and Anthea
naturally walked off it, and in an instant it had rolled itself up and
hidden behind a gate-post. It did this so quickly that not a single
person in the Deptford Road noticed it. The Phoenix rustled its way into
the breast of Cyril's coat, and almost at the same moment a well-known
voice remarked--

'Well, I never! What on earth are you doing here?'

They were face to face with their pet uncle--their Uncle Reginald.

'We DID think of going to Greenwich Palace and talking about Nelson,'
said Cyril, telling as much of the truth as he thought his uncle could
believe.

'And where are the others?' asked Uncle Reginald.

'I don't exactly know,' Cyril replied, this time quite truthfully.

'Well,' said Uncle Reginald, 'I must fly. I've a case in the County
Court. That's the worst of being a beastly solicitor. One can't take the
chances of life when one gets them. If only I could come with you to the
Painted Hall and give you lunch at the "Ship" afterwards! But, alas! it
may not be.'

The uncle felt in his pocket.

'_I_ mustn't enjoy myself,' he said, 'but that's no reason why you
shouldn't. Here, divide this by four, and the product ought to give you
some desired result. Take care of yourselves. Adieu.'

And waving a cheery farewell with his neat umbrella, the good and
high-hatted uncle passed away, leaving Cyril and Anthea to exchange
eloquent glances over the shining golden sovereign that lay in Cyril's
hand.

'Well!' said Anthea.

'Well!' said Cyril.

'Well!' said the Phoenix.

'Good old carpet!' said Cyril, joyously.

'It WAS clever of it--so adequate and yet so simple,' said the Phoenix,
with calm approval.

'Oh, come on home and let's mend the carpet. I am a beast. I'd forgotten
the others just for a minute,' said the conscience-stricken Anthea.

They unrolled the carpet quickly and slyly--they did not want to attract
public attention--and the moment their feet were on the carpet Anthea
wished to be at home, and instantly they were.

The kindness of their excellent uncle had made it unnecessary for them
to go to such extremes as Cyril's Etons or Anthea's Sunday jacket for
the patching of the carpet.

Anthea set to work at once to draw the edges of the broken darn
together, and Cyril hastily went out and bought a large piece of the
marble-patterned American oil-cloth which careful house-wives use to
cover dressers and kitchen tables. It was the strongest thing he could
think of.

Then they set to work to line the carpet throughout with the oil-cloth.
The nursery felt very odd and empty without the others, and Cyril did
not feel so sure as he had done about their being able to 'tram it'
home. So he tried to help Anthea, which was very good of him, but not
much use to her.

The Phoenix watched them for a time, but it was plainly growing more and
more restless. It fluffed up its splendid feathers, and stood first on
one gilded claw and then on the other, and at last it said--

'I can bear it no longer. This suspense! My Robert--who set my egg to
hatch--in the bosom of whose Norfolk raiment I have nestled so often and
so pleasantly! I think, if you'll excuse me--'

'Yes--DO,' cried Anthea, 'I wish we'd thought of asking you before.'

Cyril opened the window. The Phoenix flapped its sunbright wings and
vanished.

'So THAT'S all right,' said Cyril, taking up his needle and instantly
pricking his hand in a new place.


Of course I know that what you have really wanted to know about all this
time is not what Anthea and Cyril did, but what happened to Jane and
Robert after they fell through the carpet on to the leads of the house
which was called number 705, Amersham Road.

But I had to tell you the other first. That is one of the most annoying
things about stories, you cannot tell all the different parts of them at
the same time.

Robert's first remark when he found himself seated on the damp, cold,
sooty leads was--

'Here's a go!'

Jane's first act was tears.

'Dry up, Pussy; don't be a little duffer,' said her brother, kindly,
'it'll be all right.'

And then he looked about, just as Cyril had known he would, for
something to throw down, so as to attract the attention of the wayfarers
far below in the street. He could not find anything. Curiously enough,
there were no stones on the leads, not even a loose tile. The roof was
of slate, and every single slate knew its place and kept it. But, as so
often happens, in looking for one thing he found another. There was a
trap-door leading down into the house.

And that trap-door was not fastened.

'Stop snivelling and come here, Jane,' he cried, encouragingly. 'Lend a
hand to heave this up. If we can get into the house, we might sneak down
without meeting any one, with luck. Come on.'

They heaved up the door till it stood straight up, and, as they bent to
look into the hole below, the door fell back with a hollow clang on the
leads behind, and with its noise was mingled a blood-curdling scream
from underneath.

'Discovered!' hissed Robert. 'Oh, my cats alive!'

They were indeed discovered.

They found themselves looking down into an attic, which was also
a lumber-room. It had boxes and broken chairs, old fenders and
picture-frames, and rag-bags hanging from nails.

In the middle of the floor was a box, open, half full of clothes. Other
clothes lay on the floor in neat piles. In the middle of the piles of
clothes sat a lady, very fat indeed, with her feet sticking out straight
in front of her. And it was she who had screamed, and who, in fact, was
still screaming.

'Don't!' cried Jane, 'please don't! We won't hurt you.'

'Where are the rest of your gang?' asked the lady, stopping short in the
middle of a scream.

'The others have gone on, on the wishing carpet,' said Jane truthfully.

'The wishing carpet?' said the lady.

'Yes,' said Jane, before Robert could say 'You shut up!' 'You must have
read about it. The Phoenix is with them.'

Then the lady got up, and picking her way carefully between the piles of
clothes she got to the door and through it. She shut it behind her, and
the two children could hear her calling 'Septimus! Septimus!' in a loud
yet frightened way.

'Now,' said Robert quickly; 'I'll drop first.'

He hung by his hands and dropped through the trap-door.

'Now you. Hang by your hands. I'll catch you. Oh, there's no time for
jaw. Drop, I say.'

Jane dropped.

Robert tried to catch her, and even before they had finished the
breathless roll among the piles of clothes, which was what his catching
ended in, he whispered--

'We'll hide--behind those fenders and things; they'll think we've gone
along the roofs. Then, when all is calm, we'll creep down the stairs and
take our chance.'

They hastily hid. A corner of an iron bedstead stuck into Robert's side,
and Jane had only standing room for one foot--but they bore it--and when
the lady came back, not with Septimus, but with another lady, they held
their breath and their hearts beat thickly.

'Gone!' said the first lady; 'poor little things--quite mad, my
dear--and at large! We must lock this room and send for the police.'

'Let me look out,' said the second lady, who was, if possible, older
and thinner and primmer than the first. So the two ladies dragged a box
under the trap-door and put another box on the top of it, and then they
both climbed up very carefully and put their two trim, tidy heads out of
the trap-door to look for the 'mad children'.

'Now,' whispered Robert, getting the bedstead leg out of his side.

They managed to creep out from their hiding-place and out through the
door before the two ladies had done looking out of the trap-door on to
the empty leads.

Robert and Jane tiptoed down the stairs--one flight, two flights. Then
they looked over the banisters. Horror! a servant was coming up with a
loaded scuttle.

The children with one consent crept swiftly through the first open door.

The room was a study, calm and gentlemanly, with rows of books, a
writing table, and a pair of embroidered slippers warming themselves in
the fender. The children hid behind the window-curtains. As they passed
the table they saw on it a missionary-box with its bottom label torn
off, open and empty.

'Oh, how awful!' whispered Jane. 'We shall never get away alive.'

'Hush!' said Robert, not a moment too soon, for there were steps on the
stairs, and next instant the two ladies came into the room. They did not
see the children, but they saw the empty missionary box.

'I knew it,' said one. 'Selina, it WAS a gang. I was certain of it from
the first. The children were not mad. They were sent to distract our
attention while their confederates robbed the house.'

'I am afraid you are right,' said Selina; 'and WHERE ARE THEY NOW?'

'Downstairs, no doubt, collecting the silver milk-jug and sugar-basin
and the punch-ladle that was Uncle Joe's, and Aunt Jerusha's teaspoons.
I shall go down.'

'Oh, don't be so rash and heroic,' said Selina. 'Amelia, we must call
the police from the window. Lock the door. I WILL--I will--'

The words ended in a yell as Selina, rushing to the window, came face to
face with the hidden children.

'Oh, don't!' said Jane; 'how can you be so unkind? We AREN'T burglars,
and we haven't any gang, and we didn't open your missionary-box.
We opened our own once, but we didn't have to use the money, so our
consciences made us put it back and--DON'T! Oh, I wish you wouldn't--'

Miss Selina had seized Jane and Miss Amelia captured Robert. The
children found themselves held fast by strong, slim hands, pink at the
wrists and white at the knuckles.

'We've got YOU, at any rate,' said Miss Amelia. 'Selina, your captive
is smaller than mine. You open the window at once and call "Murder!" as
loud as you can.

Selina obeyed; but when she had opened the window, instead of calling
'Murder!' she called 'Septimus!' because at that very moment she saw her
nephew coming in at the gate.

In another minute he had let himself in with his latch-key and had
mounted the stairs. As he came into the room Jane and Robert each
uttered a shriek of joy so loud and so sudden that the ladies leaped
with surprise, and nearly let them go.

'It's our own clergyman,' cried Jane.

'Don't you remember us?' asked Robert. 'You married our burglar for
us--don't you remember?'

'I KNEW it was a gang,' said Amelia. 'Septimus, these abandoned children
are members of a desperate burgling gang who are robbing the house. They
have already forced the missionary-box and purloined its contents.'

The Reverend Septimus passed his hand wearily over his brow.

'I feel a little faint,' he said, 'running upstairs so quickly.'

'We never touched the beastly box,' said Robert.

'Then your confederates did,' said Miss Selina.

'No, no,' said the curate, hastily. '_I_ opened the box myself.
This morning I found I had not enough small change for the Mothers'
Independent Unity Measles and Croup Insurance payments. I suppose this
is NOT a dream, is it?'

'Dream? No, indeed. Search the house. I insist upon it.'

The curate, still pale and trembling, searched the house, which, of
course, was blamelessly free of burglars.

When he came back he sank wearily into his chair.

'Aren't you going to let us go?' asked Robert, with furious indignation,
for there is something in being held by a strong lady that sets the
blood of a boy boiling in his veins with anger and despair. 'We've never
done anything to you. It's all the carpet. It dropped us on the leads.
WE couldn't help it. You know how it carried you over to the island, and
you had to marry the burglar to the cook.'

'Oh, my head!' said the curate.

'Never mind your head just now,' said Robert; 'try to be honest and
honourable, and do your duty in that state of life!'

'This is a judgement on me for something, I suppose,' said the Reverend
Septimus, wearily, 'but I really cannot at the moment remember what.'

'Send for the police,' said Miss Selina.

'Send for a doctor,' said the curate.

'Do you think they ARE mad, then,' said Miss Amelia.

'I think I am,' said the curate.

Jane had been crying ever since her capture. Now she said-- 'You aren't
now, but perhaps you will be, if--And it would serve you jolly well
right, too.'

'Aunt Selina,' said the curate, 'and Aunt Amelia, believe me, this is
only an insane dream. You will realize it soon. It has happened to me
before. But do not let us be unjust, even in a dream. Do not hold the
children; they have done no harm. As I said before, it was I who opened
the box.'

The strong, bony hands unwillingly loosened their grasp. Robert shook
himself and stood in sulky resentment. But Jane ran to the curate and
embraced him so suddenly that he had not time to defend himself.

'You're a dear,' she said. 'It IS like a dream just at first, but you
get used to it. Now DO let us go. There's a good, kind, honourable
clergyman.'

'I don't know,' said the Reverend Septimus; 'it's a difficult problem.
It is such a very unusual dream. Perhaps it's only a sort of other
life--quite real enough for you to be mad in. And if you're mad, there
might be a dream-asylum where you'd be kindly treated, and in time
restored, cured, to your sorrowing relatives. It is very hard to see
your duty plainly, even in ordinary life, and these dream-circumstances
are so complicated--'

'If it's a dream,' said Robert, 'you will wake up directly, and then
you'd be sorry if you'd sent us into a dream-asylum, because you might
never get into the same dream again and let us out, and so we might stay
there for ever, and then what about our sorrowing relatives who aren't
in the dreams at all?'
