they lived, the girls all felt the highest respect for "papers" on
any subject, it being the fashion for ladies, old and young, to read
and discuss every subject, from pottery to Pantheism, at the various
clubs all over the city.

"It came about very naturally," continued Anna, as if anxious to
explain her seeming audacity. "I used to go to see Molly and Ria,
and heard all about their life and its few pleasures, and learned to
like them more and more. They had only each other in the world,
lived in two rooms, worked all day, and in the way of amusement or
instruction had only what they found at the Union in the evening. I
went with them a few times, and saw how useful and pleasant it was,
and wanted to help, as other kind girls only a little older than I
did. Eva Randal read a letter from a friend in Russia one time, and
the girls enjoyed it very much. That reminded me of my brother
George's lively journals, written when he was abroad. You remember
how we used to laugh over them when he sent them home? Well, when I
was begged to give them an evening, I resolved to try one of those
amusing journal-letters, and chose the best,--all about how George
and a friend went to the different places Dickens describes in some
of his funny books. I wish you could have seen how those dear girls
enjoyed it, and laughed till they cried over the dismay of the boys,
when they knocked at a door in Kingsgate Street, and asked if Mrs.
Gamp lived there. It was actually a barber's shop, and a little man,
very like Poll Sweedlepipes, told them 'Mrs. Britton was the nuss as
lived there now.' It upset those rascals to come so near the truth,
and they ran away because they couldn't keep sober."

The members of the club indulged in a general smile as they recalled
the immortal Sairey with "the bottle on the mankle-shelf," the
"cowcuber," and the wooden pippins. Then Anna continued, with an air
of calm satisfaction, quite sure now of her audience and herself,--

"It was a great success. So I went on, and when the journals were
done, I used to read other things, and picked up books for their
library, and helped in any way I could, while learning to know them
better and give them confidence in me. They are proud and shy, just
as we should be but if you REALLY want to be friends and don't mind
rebuffs now and then, they come to trust and like you, and there is
so much to do for them one never need sit idle any more. I won't
give names, as they don't like it, nor tell how I tried to serve
them, but it is very sweet and good for me to have found this work,
and to know that each year I can do it better and better. So I feel
encouraged and am very glad I began, as I hope you all are. Now, who
comes next?"

As Anna ended, the needles dropped and ten soft hands gave her a
hearty round of applause; for all felt that she had done well, and
chosen a task especially fitted to her powers, as she had money,
time, tact, and the winning manners that make friends everywhere.

Beaming with pleasure at their approval, but feeling that they made
too much of her small success, Anna called the club to order by
saying, "Ella looks as if she were anxious to tell her experiences,
so perhaps we had better ask her to hold forth next."

"Hear! hear!" cried the girls; and, nothing loath, Ella promptly
began, with twinkling eyes and a demure smile, for HER story ended
romantically.

"If you are interested in shop-girls, Miss President and ladies, you
will like to know that _I_ am one, at least a silent partner and
co-worker in a small fancy store at the West End."

"No!" exclaimed the amazed club with one voice; and, satisfied with
this sensational beginning Ella went on.

"I really am, and you have bought some of my fancy-work. Isn't that
a good joke? You needn't stare so, for I actually made that
needle-book, Anna, and my partner knit Lizzie's new cloud. This is
the way it all happened. I didn't wish to waste any time, but one
can't rush into the street and collar shabby little girls, and say,
'Come along and learn to sew,' without a struggle, so I thought I'd
go and ask Mrs. Brown how to begin. Her branch of the Associated
Charities is in Laurel Street, not far from our house, you know; and
the very day after our last meeting I posted off to get my 'chore.'
I expected to have to fit work for poor needlewomen, or go to see
some dreadful sick creature, or wash dirty little Pats, and was
bracing up my mind for whatever might come, as I toiled up the hill
in a gale of wind. Suddenly my hat flew off and went gayly skipping
away, to the great delight of some black imps, who only grinned and
cheered me on as I trotted after it with wild grabs and wrathful
dodges. I got it at last out of a puddle, and there I was in a nice
mess. The elastic was broken, feather wet, and the poor thing all
mud and dirt. I didn't care much, as it was my old one,--dressed for
my work, you see. But I couldn't go home bareheaded, and I didn't
know a soul in that neighborhood. I turned to step into a grocery
store at the corner, to borrow a brush or buy a sheet of paper to
wear, for I looked like a lunatic with my battered hat and my hair
in a perfect mop. Luckily I spied a woman's fancy shop on the other
corner, and rushed in there to hide myself, for the brats hooted and
people stared. It was a very small shop, and behind the counter sat
a tall, thin, washed-out-looking woman, making a baby's hood. She
looked poor and blue and rather sour, but took pity on me; and while
she sewed the cord, dried the feather, and brushed off the dirt, I
warmed myself and looked about to see what I could buy in return for
her trouble.

"A few children's aprons hung in the little window, with some knit
lace, balls, and old-fashioned garters, two or three dolls, and a
very poor display of small wares. In a show-case, however, on the
table that was the counter, I found some really pretty things, made
of plush, silk, and ribbon, with a good deal of taste. So I said I'd
buy a needle-book, and a gay ball, and a pair of distracting baby's
shoes, made to look like little open-work socks with pink
ankle-ties, so cunning and dainty, I was glad to get them for Cousin
Clara's baby. The woman seemed pleased, though she had a grim way of
talking, and never smiled once. I observed that she handled my hat
as if used to such work, and evidently liked to do it. I thanked her
for repairing damages so quickly and well, and she said, with my hat
on her hand, as if she hated to part with it, 'I'm used to
millineryin' and never should have give it up, if I didn't have my
folks to see to. I took this shop, hopin' to make things go, as such
a place was needed round here, but mother broke down, and is a sight
of care; so I couldn't leave her, and doctors is expensive, and
times hard, and I had to drop my trade, and fall back on pins and
needles, and so on.'"

Ella was a capital mimic, and imitated the nasal tones of the
Vermont woman to the life, with a doleful pucker of her own blooming
face, which gave such a truthful picture of poor Miss Almira Miller
that those who had seen her recognized it at once, and laughed
gayly.

"Just as I was murmuring a few words of regret at her bad luck,"
continued Ella, "a sharp voice called out from a back room, 'Almiry!
Almiry! come here.' It sounded very like a cross parrot, but it was
the old lady, and while I put on my hat I heard her asking who was
in the shop, and what we were 'gabbin' about.' Her daughter told
her, and the old soul demanded to 'see the gal;' so I went in, being
ready for fun as usual. It was a little, dark, dismal place, but as
neat as a pin, and in the bed sat a regular Grandma Smallweed
smoking a pipe, with a big cap, a snuff-box, and a red cotton
handkerchief. She was a tiny, dried-up thing, brown as a berry, with
eyes like black beads, a nose and chin that nearly met, and hands
like birds' claws. But such a fierce, lively, curious, blunt old
lady you never saw, and I didn't know what would be the end of me
when she began to question, then to scold, and finally to demand
that 'folks should come and trade to Almiry's shop after promisin'
they would, and she havin' took a lease of the place on account of
them lies.' I wanted to laugh, but dared not do it, so just let her
croak, for the daughter had to go to her customers. The old lady's
tirade informed me that they came from Vermont, had 'been wal on 't
till father died and the farm was sold.' Then it seems the women
came to Boston and got on pretty well till 'a stroke of numb-palsy,'
whatever that is, made the mother helpless and kept Almiry at home
to care for her. I can't tell you how funny and yet how sad it was
to see the poor old soul, so full of energy and yet so helpless, and
the daughter so discouraged with her pathetic little shop and no
customers to speak of. I did not know what to say till 'Grammer
Miller,' as the children call her, happened to say, when she took up
her knitting after the lecture, 'If folks who go spendin' money
reckless on redic'lus toys for Christmas only knew what nice things,
useful and fancy, me and Almiry could make ef we had the goods,
they'd jest come round this corner and buy 'em, and keep me out of a
Old Woman's Home and that good, hard-workin' gal of mine out of a
'sylum; for go there she will ef she don't get a boost somehow, with
rent and firin' and vittles all on her shoulders, and me only able
to wag them knittin'-needles.'

"'I will buy things here, and tell all my friends about it, and I
have a drawer full of pretty bits of silk and velvet and plush, that
I will give Miss Miller for her work, if she will let me.' I added
that, for I saw that Almiry was rather proud, and hid her troubles
under a grim look.

"That pleased the old lady, and, lowering her voice, she said, with
a motherly sort of look in her beady eyes: 'Seein' as you are so
friendly, I'll tell you what frets me most, a layin' here, a burden
to my darter. She kep' company with Nathan Baxter, a master
carpenter up to Westminster where we lived, and ef father hadn't a
died suddin' they'd a ben married. They waited a number o' years,
workin' to their trades, and we was hopin' all would turn out wal,
when troubles come, and here we be. Nathan's got his own folks to
see to, and Almiry won't add to HIS load with hern, nor leave me; so
she give him back his ring, and jest buckled to all alone. She don't
say a word, but it's wearin' her to a shadder, and I can't do a
thing to help, but make a few pinballs, knit garters, and kiver
holders. Ef she got a start in business it would cheer her up a
sight, and give her a kind of a hopeful prospeck, for old folks
can't live forever, and Nathan is a waitin', faithful and true.'

"That just finished me, for I am romantic, and do enjoy love stories
with all my heart, even if the lovers are only a skinny spinster and
a master carpenter. So I just resolved to see what I could do for
poor Almiry and the peppery old lady. I didn't promise anything but
my bits, and, taking the things I bought, went home to talk it over
with Mamma. I found she had often got pins and tape, and such small
wares, at the little shop, and found it very convenient, though she
knew nothing about the Millers. She was willing I should help if I
could, but advised going slowly, and seeing what they could do
first. We did not dare to treat them like beggars, and send them
money and clothes, and tea and sugar, as we do the Irish, for they
were evidently respectable people, and proud as poor. So I took my
bundle of odds and ends, and Mamma added some nice large pieces of
dresses we had done with, and gave a fine order for aprons and
holders and balls for our church fair.

"It would have done your hearts good, girls, to see those poor old
faces light up as I showed my scraps, and asked if the work would be
ready by Christmas. Grammer fairly swam in the gay colors I strewed
over her bed, and enjoyed them like a child, while Almiry tried to
be grim, but had to give it up, as she began at once to cut out
aprons, and dropped tears all over the muslin when her back was
turned to me. I didn't know a washed-out old maid COULD be so
pathetic."

Ella stopped to give a regretful sigh over her past blindness, while
her hearers made a sympathetic murmur; for young hearts are very
tender, and take an innocent interest in lovers' sorrows, no matter
how humble.

"Well, that was the beginning of it. I got so absorbed in making
things go well that I didn't look any further, but just 'buckled to'
with Miss Miller and helped run that little shop. No one knew me in
that street, so I slipped in and out, and did what I liked. The old
lady and I got to be great friends; though she often pecked and
croaked like a cross raven, and was very wearing. I kept her busy
with her 'pin-balls and knittin'-work, and supplied Almiry with
pretty materials for the various things I found she could make. You
wouldn't believe what dainty bows those long fingers could tie, what
ravishing doll's hats she would make out of a scrap of silk and
lace, or the ingenious things she concocted with cones and shells
and fans and baskets. I love such work, and used to go and help her
often, for I wanted her window and shop to be full for Christmas,
and lure in plenty of customers. Our new toys and the little cases
of sewing silk sold well, and people began to come more, after I
lent Almiry some money to lay in a stock of better goods. Papa
enjoyed my business venture immensely, and was never tired of joking
about it. He actually went and bought balls for four small black
boys who were gluing their noses to the window one day, spellbound
by the orange, red, and blue treasures displayed there. He liked my
partner's looks, though he teased me by saying that we'd better add
lemonade to our stock, as poor, dear Almiry's acid face would make
lemons unnecessary, and sugar and water were cheap.

"Well, Christmas came, and we did a great business, for Mamma came
and sent others, and our fancy things were as pretty and cheaper
than those at the art stores, so they went well, and the Millers
were cheered up, and I felt encouraged, and we took a fresh start
after the holidays. One of my gifts at New Year was my own
glove-case,--you remember the apple-blossom thing I began last
autumn? I put it in our window to fill up, and Mamma bought it, and
gave it to me full of elegant gloves, with a sweet note, and Papa
sent a check to 'Miller, Warren & Co.' I was so pleased and proud I
could hardly help telling you all. But the best joke was the day you
girls came in and bought our goods, and I peeped at you through the
crack of the door, being in the back room dying with laughter to see
you look round, and praise our 'nice assortment of useful and pretty
articles.'"

"That's all very well, and we can bear to be laughed at if you
succeeded, Miss. But I don't believe you did, for no Millers are
there now. Have you taken a palatial store on Boylston Street for
this year, intending to run it alone? We'll all patronize it, and
your name will look well on a sign," said Maggie, wondering what the
end of Ella's experience had been.

"Ah! I still have the best of it, for my romance finished up
delightfully, as you shall hear. We did well all winter, and no
wonder. What was needed was a little 'boost' in the right direction,
and I could give it; so my Millers were much comforted, and we were
good friends. But in March Grammer died suddenly, and poor Almiry
mourned as if she had been the sweetest mother in the world. The old
lady's last wishes were to be 'laid out harnsome in a cap with a
pale blue satin ribbin, white wasn't becomin', to hev at least three
carriages to the funeral, and be sure a paper with her death in it
was sent to N. Baxter, Westminster, Vermont.'

"I faithfully obeyed her commands, put on the ugly cap myself, gave
a party of old ladies from the home a drive in the hacks, and
carefully directed a marked paper to Nathan, hoping that he HAD
proved 'faithful and true.' I didn't expect he would, so was not
surprised when no answer came. But I WAS rather amazed when Almiry
told me she didn't care to keep on with the store now she was free.
She wanted to visit her friends a spell this spring, and in the fall
would go back to her trade in some milliner's store.

"I was sorry, for I really enjoyed my partnership. It seemed a
little bit ungrateful after all my trouble in getting her customers,
but I didn't say anything, and we sold out to the Widow Bates, who
is a good soul with six children, and will profit by our efforts.

"Almiry bid me good-by with all the grim look gone out of her face,
many thanks, and a hearty promise to write soon. That was in April.
A week ago I got a short letter saying,--

"'DEAR FRIEND,--You will be pleased to hear that I am married to Mr.
Baxter, and shall remain here. He was away when the paper came with
mother's death, but as soon as he got home he wrote. I couldn't make
up my mind till I got home and see him. Now it's all right, and I am
very happy. Many thanks for all you done for me and mother. I shall
never forget it My husband sends respects, and I remain Yours
gratefully, ALMIRA M. BAXTER.'"

"That's splendid! You did well, and next winter you can look up
another sour spinster and cranky old lady and make them happy," said
Anna, with the approving smile all loved to receive from her.

"My adventures are not a bit romantic, or even interesting, and yet
I've been as busy as a bee all winter, and enjoyed my work very
much," began Elizabeth, as the President gave her a nod.

"The plan I had in mind was to go and carry books and papers to the
people in hospitals, as one of Mamma's friends has done for years. I
went once to the City Hospital with her, and it was very
interesting, but I didn't dare to go to the grown people all alone,
so I went to the Children's Hospital, and soon loved to help amuse
the poor little dears. I saved all the picture-books and papers I
could find for them, dressed dolls, and mended toys, and got new
ones, and made bibs and night-gowns, and felt like the mother of a
large family.

"I had my pets, of course, and did my best for them, reading and
singing and amusing them, for many suffered very much. One little
girl was so dreadfully burned she could not use her hands, and would
lie and look at a gay dolly tied to the bedpost by the hour
together, and talk to it and love it, and died with it on her pillow
when I 'sung lullaby' to her for the last time. I keep it among my
treasures, for I learned a lesson in patience from little Norah that
I never can forget.

"Then Jimmy Dolan with hip disease was a great delight to me, for he
was as gay as a lark in spite of pain, and a real little hero in the
way he bore the hard things that had to be done to him. He never can
get well, and he is at home now; but I still see to him, and he is
learning to make toy furniture very nicely, so that by and by, if he
gets able to work at all, he may be able to learn a cabinet-maker's
trade, or some easy work.

"But my pet of pets was Johnny, the blind boy. His poor eyes had to
be taken out, and there he was left so helpless and pathetic, all
his life before him, and no one to help him, for his people were
poor and he had to go away from the hospital since he was incurable.
He seemed almost given to me, for the first time I saw him I was
singing to Jimmy, when the door opened and a small boy came fumbling
in.

"'I hear a pretty voice, I want to find it,' he said, stopping as I
stopped with both hands out as if begging for more.

"'Come on. Johnny, and the lady will sing to you like a bobolink,'
called Jimmy, as proud as Barnum showing off Jumbo.

"The poor little thing came and stood at my knee, without stirring,
while I sang all the nursery jingles I knew. Then he put such a thin
little finger on my lips as if to feel where the music came from,
and said, smiling all over his white face, 'More, please more, lots
of 'em! I love it!'

"So I sang away till I was as hoarse as a crow, and Johnny drank it
all in like water; kept time with his head, stamped when I gave him
'Marching through Georgia,' and hurrahed feebly in the chorus of
'Red, White, and Blue.' It was lovely to see how he enjoyed it, and
I was so glad I had a voice to comfort those poor babies with. He
cried when I had to go, and so touched my heart that I asked all
about him, and resolved to get him into the Blind School as the only
place where he could be taught and made happy."

"I thought you were bound there the day I met you, Lizzie; but you
looked as solemn as if all your friends had lost their sight," cried
Marion.

"I did feel solemn, for if Johnny could not go there he would be
badly off. Fortunately he was ten, and dear Mrs. Russell helped me,
and those good people took him in though they were crowded. 'We
cannot turn one away,' said kind Mr. Parpatharges.

"So there my boy is, as happy as a king with his little mates,
learning all sorts of useful lessons and pretty plays. He models
nicely in clay. Here is one of his little works. Could you do as
well without eyes?" and Lizzie proudly produced a very one-sided
pear with a long straw for a stem. "I don't expect he will ever be a
sculptor, but I hope he will do something with music he loves it so,
and is already piping away on a fife very cleverly. Whatever his
gift may prove, if he lives, he will be taught to be a useful,
independent man, not a helpless burden, nor an unhappy creature
sitting alone in the dark. I feel very happy about my lads, and am
surprised to find how well I get on with them. I shall look up some
more next year, for I really think I have quite a gift that way,
though you wouldn't expect it, as I have no brothers, and always had
a fancy boys were little imps."

The girls were much amused at Lizzie's discovery of her own powers,
for she was a stately damsel, who never indulged in romps, but lived
for her music. Now it was evident that she had found the key to
unlock childish hearts, and was learning to use it, quite
unconscious that the sweet voice she valued so highly was much
improved by the tender tones singing lullabies gave it. The fat pear
was passed round like refreshments, receiving much praise and no
harsh criticism; and when it was safely returned to its proud
possessor, Ida began her tale in a lively tone.

"I waited for MY chore, and it came tumbling down our basement steps
one rainy day in the shape of a large dilapidated umbrella with a
