go where the path does?"

"It's underground; right inside the mountain," said Ojo, peering into
the dark hole. "Perhaps there's a well there; and, if there is, it's
sure to be a dark one."

"Why, that's true enough!" cried Dorothy with eagerness. "Let's go in,
Scarecrow; 'cause, if others have gone, we're pretty safe to go, too."

Toto looked in and barked, but he did not venture to enter until the
Scarecrow had bravely gone first. Scraps followed closely after the
straw man and then Ojo and Dorothy timidly stepped inside the tunnel.
As soon as all of them had passed the big rock, it slowly turned and
filled up the opening again; but now they were no longer in the dark,
for a soft, rosy light enabled them to see around them quite distinctly.

It was only a passage, wide enough for two of them to walk
abreast--with Toto in between them--and it had a high, arched roof.
They could not see where the light which flooded the place so
pleasantly came from, for there were no lamps anywhere visible. The
passage ran straight for a little way and then made a bend to the right
and another sharp turn to the left, after which it went straight again.
But there were no side passages, so they could not lose their way.

After proceeding some distance, Toto, who had gone on ahead, began to
bark loudly. They ran around a bend to see what was the matter and
found a man sitting on the floor of the passage and leaning his back
against the wall. He had probably been asleep before Toto's barks
aroused him, for he was now rubbing his eyes and staring at the little
dog with all his might.

There was something about this man that Toto objected to, and when he
slowly rose to his foot they saw what it was. He had but one leg, set
just below the middle of his round, fat body; but it was a stout leg
and had a broad, flat foot at the bottom of it, on which the man seemed
to stand very well. He had never had but this one leg, which looked
something like a pedestal, and when Toto ran up and made a grab at the
man's ankle he hopped first one way and then another in a very active
manner, looking so frightened that Scraps laughed aloud.

Toto was usually a well behaved dog, but this time he was angry and
snapped at the man's leg again and again. This filled the poor fellow
with fear, and in hopping out of Toto's reach he suddenly lost his
balance and tumbled heel over head upon the floor. When he sat up he
kicked Toto on the nose and made the dog howl angrily, but Dorothy now
ran forward and caught Toto's collar, holding him back.

"Do you surrender?" she asked the man.

"Who? Me?" asked the Hopper.

"Yes; you," said the little girl.

"Am I captured?" he inquired.

"Of course. My dog has captured you," she said.

"Well," replied the man, "if I'm captured I must surrender, for it's
the proper thing to do. I like to do everything proper, for it saves
one a lot of trouble."

"It does, indeed," said Dorothy. "Please tell us who you are."

"I'm Hip Hopper--Hip Hopper, the Champion."

"Champion what?" she asked in surprise.

"Champion wrestler. I'm a very strong man, and that ferocious animal
which you are so kindly holding is the first living thing that has ever
conquered me."

"And you are a Hopper?" she continued.

"Yes. My people live in a great city not far from here. Would you like
to visit it?"

"I'm not sure," she said with hesitation. "Have you any dark wells in
your city?"

"I think not. We have wells, you know, but they're all well lighted,
and a well lighted well cannot well be a dark well. But there may be
such a thing as a very dark well in the Horner Country, which is a
black spot on the face of the earth."

"Where is the Horner Country?" Ojo inquired.

"The other side of the mountain. There's a fence between the Hopper
Country and the Horner Country, and a gate in the fence; but you can't
pass through just now, because we are at war with the Horners."

"That's too bad," said the Scarecrow. "What seems to be the trouble?"

"Why, one of them made a very insulting remark about my people. He said
we were lacking in understanding, because we had only one leg to a
person. I can't see that legs have anything to do with understanding
things. The Horners each have two legs, just as you have. That's one
leg too many, it seems to me."

"No," declared Dorothy, "it's just the right number."

"You don't need them," argued the Hopper, obstinately. "You've only one
head, and one body, and one nose and mouth. Two legs are quite
unnecessary, and they spoil one's shape."

"But how can you walk, with only one leg?" asked Ojo.

"Walk! Who wants to walk?" exclaimed the man. "Walking is a terribly
awkward way to travel. I hop, and so do all my people. It's so much
more graceful and agreeable than walking."

"I don't agree with you," said the Scarecrow. "But tell me, is there
any way to get to the Horner Country without going through the city of
the Hoppers?"

"Yes; there is another path from the rocky lowlands, outside the
mountain, that leads straight to the entrance of the Horner Country.
But it's a long way around, so you'd better come with me. Perhaps they
will allow you to go through the gate; but we expect to conquer them
this afternoon, if we get time, and then you may go and come as you
please."

They thought it best to take the Hopper's advice, and asked him to lead
the way. This he did in a series of hops, and he moved so swiftly in
this strange manner that those with two legs had to run to keep up with
him.




Chapter Twenty-Two

The Joking Horners


It was not long before they left the passage and came to a great cave,
so high that it must have reached nearly to the top of the mountain
within which it lay. It was a magnificent cave, illumined by the soft,
invisible light, so that everything in it could be plainly seen. The
walls were of polished marble, white with veins of delicate colors
running through it, and the roof was arched and fantastic and beautiful.

Built beneath this vast dome was a pretty village--not very large, for
there seemed not more than fifty houses altogether--and the dwellings
were of marble and artistically designed. No grass nor flowers nor
trees grew in this cave, so the yards surrounding the houses carved in
designs both were smooth and bare and had low walls around them to mark
their boundaries.

In the streets and the yards of the houses were many people all having
one leg growing below their bodies and all hopping here and there
whenever they moved. Even the children stood firmly upon their single
legs and never lost their balance.

"All hail, Champion!" cried a man in the first group of Hoppers they
met; "whom have you captured?"

"No one," replied the Champion in a gloomy voice; "these strangers have
captured me."

"Then," said another, "we will rescue you, and capture them, for we are
greater in number."

"No," answered the Champion, "I can't allow it. I've surrendered, and
it isn't polite to capture those you've surrendered to."

"Never mind that," said Dorothy. "We will give you your liberty and set
you free."

"Really?" asked the Champion in joyous tones.

"Yes," said the little girl; "your people may need you to help conquer
the Horners."

At this all the Hoppers looked downcast and sad. Several more had
joined the group by this time and quite a crowd of curious men, women
and children surrounded the strangers.

"This war with our neighbors is a terrible thing," remarked one of the
women. "Some one is almost sure to get hurt."

"Why do you say that, madam?" inquired the Scarecrow.

"Because the horns of our enemies are sharp, and in battle they will
try to stick those horns into our warriors," she replied.

"How many horns do the Horners have?" asked Dorothy.

"Each has one horn in the center of his forehead," was the answer.

"Oh, then they're unicorns," declared the Scarecrow.

"No; they're Horners. We never go to war with them if we can help it,
on account of their dangerous horns; but this insult was so great and
so unprovoked that our brave men decided to fight, in order to be
revenged," said the woman.

"What weapons do you fight with?" the Scarecrow asked.

"We have no weapons," explained the Champion. "Whenever we fight the
Horners, our plan is to push them back, for our arms are longer than
theirs."

"Then you are better armed," said Scraps.

"Yes; but they have those terrible horns, and unless we are careful
they prick us with the points," returned the Champion with a shudder.
"That makes a war with them dangerous, and a dangerous war cannot be a
pleasant one."

"I see very clearly," remarked the Scarecrow, "that you are going to
have trouble in conquering those Horners--unless we help you."

"Oh!" cried the Hoppers in a chorus; "can you help us? Please do! We
will be greatly obliged! It would please us very much!" and by these
exclamations the Scarecrow knew that his speech had met with favor.

"How far is it to the Horner Country?" he asked.

"Why, it's just the other side of the fence," they answered, and the
Champion added:

"Come with me, please, and I'll show you the Horners."

So they followed the Champion and several others through the streets
and just beyond the village came to a very high picket fence, built all
of marble, which seemed to divide the great cave into two equal parts.

But the part inhabited by the Horners was in no way as grand in
appearance as that of the Hoppers. Instead of being marble, the walls
and roof were of dull gray rock and the square houses were plainly made
of the same material. But in extent the city was much larger than that
of the Hoppers and the streets were thronged with numerous people who
busied themselves in various ways.

Looking through the open pickets of the fence our friends watched the
Horners, who did not know they were being watched by strangers, and
found them very unusual in appearance. They were little folks in size
and had bodies round as balls and short legs and arms. Their heads were
round, too, and they had long, pointed ears and a horn set in the
center of the forehead. The horns did not seem very terrible, for they
were not more than six inches long; but they were ivory white and sharp
pointed, and no wonder the Hoppers feared them.

The skins of the Horners were light brown, but they wore snow-white
robes and were bare-footed. Dorothy thought the most striking thing
about them was their hair, which grew in three distinct colors on each
and every head--red, yellow and green. The red was at the bottom and
sometimes hung over their eyes; then came a broad circle of yellow and
the green was at the top and formed a brush-shaped top-knot.

None of the Horners was yet aware of the presence of strangers, who
watched the little brown people for a time and then went to the big
gate in the center of the dividing fence. It was locked on both sides
and over the latch was a sign reading:

    "WAR IS DECLARED"


"Can't we go through?" asked Dorothy.

"Not now," answered the Champion.

"I think," said the Scarecrow, "that if I could talk with those Horners
they would apologize to you, and then there would be no need to fight."

"Can't you talk from this side?" asked the Champion.

"Not so well," replied the Scarecrow. "Do you suppose you could throw
me over that fence? It is high, but I am very light."

"We can try it," said the Hopper. "I am perhaps the strongest man in my
country, so I'll undertake to do the throwing. But I won't promise you
will land on your feet."

"No matter about that," returned the Scarecrow. "Just toss me over and
I'll be satisfied."

So the Champion picked up the Scarecrow and balanced him a moment, to
see how much he weighed, and then with all his strength tossed him high
into the air.

Perhaps if the Scarecrow had been a trifle heavier he would have been
easier to throw and would have gone a greater distance; but, as it was,
instead of going over the fence he landed just on top of it, and one of
the sharp pickets caught him in the middle of his back and held him
fast prisoner. Had he been face downward the Scarecrow might have
managed to free himself, but lying on his back on the picket his hands
waved in the air of the Horner Country while his feet kicked the air of
the Hopper Country; so there he was.

"Are you hurt?" called the Patchwork Girl anxiously.

"Course not," said Dorothy. "But if he wiggles that way he may tear his
clothes. How can we get him down, Mr. Champion?"

The Champion shook his head.

"I don't know," he confessed. "If he could scare Horners as well as he
does crows, it might be a good idea to leave him there."

"This is terrible," said Ojo, almost ready to cry. "I s'pose it's
because I am Ojo the Unlucky that everyone who tries to help me gets
into trouble."

"You are lucky to have anyone to help you," declared Dorothy. "But
don't worry. We'll rescue the Scarecrow somehow."

"I know how," announced Scraps. "Here, Mr. Champion; just throw me up
to the Scarecrow. I'm nearly as light as he is, and when I'm on top the
fence I'll pull our friend off the picket and toss him down to you."

"All right," said the Champion, and he picked up the Patchwork Girl and
threw her in the same manner he had the Scarecrow. He must have used
more strength this time, however, for Scraps sailed far over the top of
the fence and, without being able to grab the Scarecrow at all, tumbled
to the ground in the Horner Country, where her stuffed body knocked
over two men and a woman and made a crowd that had collected there run
like rabbits to get away from her.

Seeing the next moment that she was harmless, the people slowly
returned and gathered around the Patchwork Girl, regarding her with
astonishment. One of them wore a jeweled star in his hair, just above
his horn, and this seemed a person of importance. He spoke for the rest
of his people, who treated him with great respect.

"Who are you, Unknown Being?" he asked.

"Scraps," she said, rising to her feet and patting her cotton wadding
smooth where it had bunched up.

"And where did you come from?" he continued.

"Over the fence. Don't be silly. There's no other place I could have
come from," she replied.

He looked at her thoughtfully.

"You are not a Hopper," said he, "for you have two legs. They're not
very well shaped, but they are two in number. And that strange creature
on top the fence--why doesn't he stop kicking?--must be your brother,
or father, or son, for he also has two legs."

"You must have been to visit the Wise Donkey," said Scraps, laughing so
merrily that the crowd smiled with her, in sympathy. "But that reminds
me, Captain--or King--"

"I am Chief of the Horners, and my name is Jak."

"Of course; Little Jack Horner; I might have known it. But the reason I
volplaned over the fence was so I could have a talk with you about the
Hoppers."

"What about the Hoppers?" asked the Chief, frowning.

"You've insulted them, and you'd better beg their pardon," said Scraps.
"If you don't, they'll probably hop over here and conquer you."

"We're not afraid--as long as the gate is locked," declared the Chief.
"And we didn't insult them at all. One of us made a joke that the
stupid Hoppers couldn't see."

The Chief smiled as he said this and the smile made his face look quite
jolly.

"What was the joke?" asked Scraps.

"A Horner said they have less understanding than we, because they've
only one leg. Ha, ha! You see the point, don't you? If you stand on
your legs, and your legs are under you, then--ha, ha, ha!--then your
legs are your under-standing. Hee, hee, hee! Ho, ho! My, but that's a
fine joke. And the stupid Hoppers couldn't see it! They couldn't see
that with only one leg they must have less under-standing than we who
have two legs. Ha, ha, ha! Hee, hee! Ho, ho!" The Chief wiped the tears
of laughter from his eyes with the bottom hem of his white robe, and
all the other Horners wiped their eyes on their robes, for they had
laughed just as heartily as their Chief at the absurd joke.

"Then," said Scraps, "their understanding of the understanding you
meant led to the misunderstanding."

"Exactly; and so there's no need for us to apologize," returned the
Chief.

"No need for an apology, perhaps, but much need for an explanation,"
said Scraps decidedly. "You don't want war, do you?"

"Not if we can help it," admitted Jak Horner. "The question is, who's
going to explain the joke to the Horners? You know it spoils any joke
to be obliged to explain it, and this is the best joke I ever heard."
