to listen to college songs and get an idea of how college boys enjoy
themselves."

"A very sensible old gentleman!" thought James Holden. "Some men of his
age would make a fuss."

A little before the time when the students were expected to arrive
Doctor Mack shut himself up in his room, taking care to open the
transom. He had ascertained from the young man, his informant, that
supper had been engaged for twelve, and that the price charged per plate
was two dollars and a half, all to be paid by Walter Sherwood.

"That makes thirty dollars," he reflected. "No wonder Walter writes
for extra checks. I wonderin this thirty dollars is to figure as a
contribution to the library?"

From his window he could see the students as they approached the hotel.
Finally he caught sight of Walter, with a college friend on each sides
with whom he was chatting gaily.

"What a change!" thought Doctor Mack. "It seems only yesterday that
Walter started for college, a bashful, unformed boy, full of good
resolutions, and determined to distinguish himself in scholarship. Now
he has become a gay butterfly. And, what is worse, he has learned to
deceive his old guardian, and his chief aim seems to be to have a good
time. What can I do to change his course?"

The good doctor's face assumed a thoughtful look.

"I can tell better after what I shall hear to-night," he said to
himself.

It was not long before the guests were all assembled and the feast was
to begin.

Some one rapped for attention, and then Doctor Mack recognized the voice
of his young ward.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I am glad to welcome you to this festal board.
After spending ten or a dozen hours in hard study"--laughter and
applause--"we find it pleasant to close our books, to relax our learned
brows"--more laughter--"and show our appreciation of the good things of
life. As Horace, your favorite, says"--I won't insult you by offering to
translate his well-known words--_"dulce est desipere in loco_. That is
what has brought us here to-night We want to _desipere in loco._"

"So we do! Good for you!" exclaimed one and another.

"I regret," Walter continued, "that all the professors have declined my
urgent invitation to be present on this occasion. Professor Griggs"--the
professor of mathematics--"said he would not break away from his regular
diet of logarithms and radicals." Great laughter. "I have expressly
requested Mr. Daniels to provide no logarithms to-night. They don't
agree with my constitution."

"Nor with mine!" "Nor with mine!" echoed one and another.

"I shall expect you all, after the banquet, to do something for the
general entertainment. I stipulate, however, that none of the company
address us in Latin or Greek."--"We won't!" "We won't!"--"Sufficient for
the recitation-room is the evil thereof. But I have spoken long enough.
There are times when silence is golden, and one of those times is at
hand. Brethren, the feast awaits you! Pitch in!"

The speaker took his seat, and then there was a noise of clinking
glasses, and knives and forks came to the front. The banquet had begun.




CHAPTER III

A COLLEGE BANQUET


There was a rattling of knives and forks, a clink of glasses, and a buzz
of conversation. Doctor Mack was able to hear considerable of it.
There were anecdotes of the professors, accounts of narrow escapes from
"flunking" in the recitation-room, and remarks by no means complimentary
to some of the text-books in use in college. It was evident that the
collegians assembled cared more for a good time than for study. Yet
these seemed to be the chosen associates of his ward, the doctor
reflected.

As the feast proceeded, he grew more sober. He felt that college life,
however much it was doing for the faithful students, was only fostering
self-indulgence in his ward.

"Something must be done!" reflected Doctor Mack. "Desperate diseases
require desperate remedies."

Again the chairman rapped for order, and again Walter's voice was heard.

"Brothers," he said, "the material part of our banquet is ended. We have
gratified our appetites with the savory dishes provided by our friend
Daniels. We have quaffed the rare Falernian wine, of a vintage unknown
to Horace; we have quickened our wits, as I trust, under those favorable
conditions, and the time has now come for the feast of reason and the
flow of soul. Exhausted as we are by our labors in the classroom"--great
laughter--"we have sought refreshment in the way that is most agreeable.
It's a way we have at old Euclid! Sing!"

Immediately the assembled company started up the well-known college
song:

      "It's a way we have at old Euclid,
       It's a way we have at old Euclid,
       It's a way we have at old Euclid,
         To drive dull care away.
       It's a way we have at old Euclid,
       It's a way we have at old Euclid,
        To drive dull care away.

      "And we think it is no sin, sir,
       To take the Freshmen in, sir,
       And ease them of their tin, sir,
         To drive dull care away.
       It's a way we have at old Euclid,
       It's a way we have at old Euclid,
         To drive dull care away."

There were other verses, but these will serve as specimens. All joined
in the chorus, and Doctor Mack, who remembered his own college life,
felt almost tempted to add his voice to those of the young men in the
opposite room.

"But, pshaw!" he thought. "What would Walter and his friends think to
hear an old graybeard like me taking part in the convivial songs? There
is no great harm in singing college songs, if it is accompanied by good
work in the recitation-room."

"Brothers," resumed Walter, "we will do our best to drive dull care
away. Let us forget, this happy evening, that there are such things as
logarithms, and sines, and tangents, and Greek tragedies. To-night our
hearts shall be uplifted by sentiment and song. Brother Corbett, you
will oblige us with 'Rumsty Ho!'"

A young man with a pleasant voice sang this song, one unfamiliar to the
doctor:

     "A beggar man laid himself down to sleep,
           Rumsty Ho! rumsty Ho!
      A beggar man laid himself down to sleep
      By the banks of the Mersey, so high and steep,
           Rumsty Ho! rumsty Ho!

     "Two thieves came walking by that way,
           Rumsty Ho! rumsty Ho!
      Two thieves came walking by that way,
      And they came to the place where the old man lay,
           Rumsty Ho! rumsty Ho!

     "They stole his wallet and they stole his staff,
           Rumsty Ho! rumsty Ho!
      They stole his wallet and they stole his staff,
      And then broke out in a great horse-laugh,
           Rumsty Ho! rumsty Ho!"

There was more of this song, too. Next came "Crambambuli," and then
"Cocach-lunk" both of which were familiar to the doctor.

Then Walter said: "Brothers, I have great pleasure in stating that
Professor Griggs has concluded to honor our dinner by his learned
presence, and has consented to address us. Permit me to introduce
Professor Theophilus Griggs."

One of the company had made up as the mathematical professor. In a nasal
tone he made a rambling speech, in which he introduced mathematical
allusions, and used some of the favorite phrases of the rather dull
and prosy instructor, with whom all the students were familiar, some to
their sorrow. It seemed to be very amusing to the boys present, as shown
by their hearty laughter, but of course Doctor Mack could not appreciate
it.

Other songs and other speeches followed. Though for the most part
college songs, there were some of a more serious character. Time slipped
by, and at length Doctor Mack saw by his watch that it was half-past
eleven.

"How long will they keep it up, I wonder?" he asked himself. "I feel
drowsy."

He was answered by the chairman.

"Brothers," he said, "time waits for no man. The hour has arrived when,
according to agreement, we must wind up our festivities. Hand in hand we
will sing 'Auld Lang Syne,' hoping, at some auspicious season after the
coming vacation is over, to have another good time. I thank you all for
accepting my invitation, and hope you have enjoyed yourselves."

"Three cheers for Sherwood!" cried one of the company.

They were given with a will. Then the parting song was sung, and the
students retired to their rooms in one of the college dormitories.

Doctor Mack went thoughtfully to bed.

"It is well I came," he reflected. "Walter has done nothing decidedly
wrong as yet, but it is evident he is not improving."

"Well," said James Holdens as he met Doctor Mack the next morning, "did
you hear the boys last night?"

"I couldn't very well help it," answered the doctor, smiling. "That
young Sherwood seems to be very popular."

"Yes, sir; he is very free with his money."

"In what other way does he spend it?"

"Mr. Daniels keeps half a dozen horses to let to students and others.
Sherwood hires a team at least twice a week, and of course it counts
up."

"I was not able to spend money in that way when I attended college."

"Then you are a college graduate?" said Holden.

"Yes."

"Did you graduate at Euclid?"

"No; I am a Yale man."

"I congratulate you, sir; I should like to graduate from Yale.

"I hope you may, some time, my young friend. You would derive more
benefit, I'll be bound, than those young roysterers of last evening."

"I hope they didn't keep you awake, sir."

"They certainly did as long as they stayed. I should have gone to bed
soon afterward, but that I had something on my mind. By the way, don't
mention to any of the students that they had an unseen listener."

"No, sir."

Doctor Mack took the first train after breakfast, and returned to his
home without seeing his ward.

Nancy Sprague questioned him eagerly.

"And how is Master Walter?" she asked.

"Very well, indeed, Nancy."

"Was he surprised to see you?"

"He didn't see me, Nancy."

"He didn't see you!" ejaculated the housekeeper.

"No; the fact was, I went away on a matter of business, and it was not
convenient to call on Walter. But I heard him."

"I don't see how you could have been near him without seeing him."

"I shall see him soon, Nancy, and so will you. In two weeks vacation
will be here. Examinations are near, and I might have interfered with
his studies," the doctor added, with a little innocent evasion.

"To be sure, sir! To be sure! I make no doubt Master Walter is a great
scholar."

"I have very strong doubts on that point myself," thought Doctor Mack,
but he did not care to express himself thus to Nancy.

"I am so glad the dear boy is coming home soon," murmured the
housekeeper. "He has been studying so hard he needs a good long rest. I
will make some cookies expressly for him after he comes. I don't believe
he gets any at college."

"I wonder what Nancy would say if she could have seen Walter presiding
at the supper, and heard the songs?" thought Doctor Mack.




CHAPTER IV

THE DAY AFTER THE FEAST


The same morning, in a comfortably furnished room in Simpson Hall, sat,
or rather lounged, Walter Sherwood.

"I feel sleepy this morning, Gates," he said to his chum. "I can't fix
my mind on this confounded logic."

"No wonder, Sherwood. You have good reason to be tired after last
evening."

"That's so! We had a good time, though. I am sorry you couldn't accept
my invitation."

"I couldn't afford it, Sherwood. You know we are very differently
situated. You are rich, while I am the oldest son of a country minister,
with all I can do to get through college. As it is, I shall be in debt."

"Why not be in debt to me? You never would accept anything from me."

"Yes, I did. I have let you go to the entire expense of furnishing this
room, though I have an equal share in it."

"Oh, that's nothing! You pay me in helping me through my lessons when
I am behind. If you hadn't read my Horace to me the other day I should
have flunked as sure as can be."

"It would be better for you to get your own lesson, Walter."

"Well, I suppose it would," answered his roommate, yawning. "I wish you
could drive this logic into my head. I suppose I am unusually stupid
this morning."

"Suppose we go over it together."

Fifteen minutes later Walter said complacently: "Thanks, old fellow; you
have made it as plain as a pikestaff."

"And very likely you will get a higher mark at the recitation than I."

"Well, perhaps so," laughed Walter. "I suppose it is because I have more
cheek than you."

"You can do better on slight preparation, certainly. You talk like a
professor when you are on your feet."

"You want to be a professor some time, Gates, don't you?"

"Yes," answered his chum, his face flushing, "I should be proud to
become a professor in old Euclid."

"It would be awfully slow, I think," returned Walter, stifling a yawn.

"What then, is your ambition?"

"I want to go out among men. I want to take an active part in the
world."

"You will have to work harder than you do in college, then."

"I suppose I shall. But I am young, Gates. I am only seventeen."

"And I am nineteen, and look twenty-one."

"All the better! The older you look the better, If you are going to be
a college instructor. I would have to wait a long time if I wanted to,
even if I were a good deal wiser than I am now. I am so young, in short,
that I can afford to have a good time."

"It seems to me that is all you think of, Sherwood."

"Oh, well, I'll reform in time and become a sober old duffer like you,"
and Walter Sherwood laughed carelessly.

"I hope, at any rate, that you will change your views of life. You know
what Longfellow says: 'Life is real! Life is earnest!'"

"Oh, yes, I know that by heart. But it's no use, Gates, you can't make
an old man of me before my time. Will it disturb you if I play a tune or
two on my violin?"

"Well, to tell the truth, it will. I want to get my Greek lesson, and
you had better do the same."

"No, I will read a novel, and you can read over the Greek to me when you
have dug it out."

"I will if you wish, but I am afraid I am spoiling you by doing your
studying for you."

"Remember, I was out late last night."

"You have something almost every evening, Walter."

"Oh, well, I'll turn over a new leaf next term."

"Why not begin now?"

"If you knew how stupid I feel you wouldn't ask."

Walter stretched himself out on a comfortable lounge, and took up a
new novel which he had partially read, while Gates spread the big Greek
lexicon on the study-table, and opening his Aristophanes, began slowly
and laboriously to translate it into English.

Fifteen minutes passed when a knock was heard at the door.

"Come in!" called out Walter.

He looked up eagerly, hoping the visitor might prove to be one of his
jovial comrades of the night before. But he did not look so well pleased
