



_50_


re' al ize
pen' du lum
dil' i gent ly
sig nif' i cance
auc tion eer'
per sist' ent ly
in ex haust' i ble
un der stood'
hope' less ly
nev er the less



"GOING! GOING! GONE!"


The other day, as I was walking through a side street in one of our
large cities, I heard these words ringing out from a room so crowded
with people that I could but just see the auctioneer's face and uplifted
hammer above the heads of the crowd.

"Going! Going! Going! Gone!" and down came the hammer with a sharp rap.

I do not know how or why it was, but the words struck me with a new
force and significance. I had heard them hundreds of times before, with
only a sense of amusement. This time they sounded solemn.

"Going! Going! Gone!"

"That is the way it is with life," I said to myself;--"with time." This
world is a sort of auction-room; we do not know that we are buyers: we
are, in fact, more like beggars; we have brought no money to exchange
for precious minutes, hours, days, or years; they are given to us. There
is no calling out of terms, no noisy auctioneer, no hammer; but
nevertheless, the time is "going! going! gone!"

The more I thought of it, the more solemn did the words sound, and the
more did they seem to me a good motto to remind one of the value of
time.

When we are young we think old people are preaching and prosing when
they say so much about it,--when they declare so often that days, weeks,
even years, are short. I can remember when a holiday, a whole day long,
appeared to me an almost inexhaustible play-spell; when one afternoon,
even, seemed an endless round of pleasure, and the week that was to come
seemed longer than does a whole year now.

One needs to live many years before one learns how little time there is
in a year,--how little, indeed, there will be even in the longest
possible life,--how many things one will still be obliged to leave
undone.

But there is one thing, boys and girls, that you can realize if you will
try--if you will stop and think about it a little; and that is, how fast
and how steadily the present time is slipping away. However long life
may seem to you as you look forward to the whole of it, the present hour
has only sixty minutes, and minute by minute, second by second, it is
"going! going! gone!" If you gather nothing from it as it passes, it is
"gone" forever. Nothing is so utterly, hopelessly lost as "lost time."
It makes me unhappy when I look back and see how much time I have
wasted; how much I might have learned and done if I had but understood
how short is the longest hour.

All the men and women who have made the world better, happier or wiser
for their having lived in it, have done so by working diligently and
persistently. Yet, I am certain that not even one of these, when
"looking backward from his manhood's prime, saw not the specter of his
mis-spent time." Now, don't suppose I am so foolish as to think that all
the preaching in the world can make anything look to young eyes as it
looks to old eyes; not a bit of it.

But think about it a little; don't let time slip away by the minute,
hour, day, without getting something out of it! Look at the clock now
and then, and listen to the pendulum, saying of every minute, as it
flies,--"Going! going! gone!"

_Helen Hunt Jackson._

From "Bits of Talk." Copyright, Little, Brown & Co., Publishers.


       *       *       *       *       *


PROSING, talking in a dull way.

In the following sentences, instead of the words in italics, use others
that have the same general meaning:

I heard these words _ringing_ out from a _room_ so _crowded_ with
_people_ that I could _but_ just _see_ the man's _face._ How _fast_ and
_steadily_ the present time is _slipping_ away!


Punctuate the following:

Go to the ant thou sluggard consider her ways and be wise.


       *       *       *       *       *




_51_


yearn
car' ol
mus' ing
stee' ple
mag' ic al



SEVEN TIMES TWO.


       You bells in the steeple, ring, ring out your changes,
         How many soever they be,
       And let the brown meadowlark's note, as he ranges,
         Come over, come over to me!

       Yet birds' clearest carol, by fall or by swelling,
         No magical sense conveys;
       And bells have forgotten their old art of telling
         The fortune of future days.

       "Turn again, turn again!" once they rang cheerily,
         While a boy listened alone;
       Made his heart yearn again, musing so wearily
         All by himself on a stone.

       Poor bells! I forgive you; your good days are over,
         And mine, they are yet to be;
       No listening, no longing, shall aught, aught discover:
         You leave the story to me.

       The foxglove shoots out of the green matted heather,
         And hangeth her hoods of snow;
       She was idle, and slept till the sunshiny weather:
         Oh, children take long to grow!

       I wish and I wish that the spring would go faster,
         Nor long summer bide so late;
       And I could grow on like the foxglove and aster,
         For some things are ill to wait.

       I wait for the day when dear hearts shall discover,
         While dear hands are laid on my head,
       "The child is a woman--the book may close over,
         For all the lessons are said."

       I wait for my story: the birds cannot sing it,
         Not one, as he sits on the tree;
       The bells cannot ring it, but long years, O bring it!
         Such as I wish it to be.


_Jean Ingelow._


       *       *       *       *       *


"TURN AGAIN, TURN AGAIN!" Reference is here made to Dick
Whittington, a poor orphan country lad, who went to London to earn a
living, and who afterwards rose to be the first Lord Mayor of that city.


NOTE.--This poem is the second of a series of seven lyrics, entitled
"The Songs of Seven," which picture seven stages in a woman's life. For
the first of the series, "Seven Times One," see page 44 of the Fourth
Reader. Read it in connection with this. "Seven Times Two" shows the
girl standing at the entrance to maidenhood, books closed and lessons
said, longing for the years to go faster to bring to her the happiness
she imagines is waiting.


[Illustration:]


       *       *       *       *       *




_52_


man' i fold
do mes' tic
pet' tish ly
in grat' i tude



MY MOTHER'S GRAVE.


It was thirteen years since my mother's death, when, after a long
absence from my native village, I stood beside the sacred mound beneath
which I had seen her buried. Since that mournful period, a great change
had come over me. My childish years had passed away, and with them my
youthful character. The world was altered, too; and as I stood at my
mother's grave, I could hardly realize that I was the same thoughtless,
happy creature, whose cheeks she so often kissed in an excess of
tenderness.

But the varied events of thirteen years had not effaced the remembrance
of that mother's smile. It seemed as if I had seen her but yesterday--as
if the blessed sound of her well-remembered voice was in my ear. The gay
dreams of my infancy and childhood were brought back so distinctly to my
mind that, had it not been for one bitter recollection, the tears I shed
would have been gentle and refreshing.

The circumstance may seem a trifling one, but the thought of it now
pains my heart; and I relate it, that those children who have parents to
love them may learn to value them as they ought.

My mother had been ill a long time, and I had become so accustomed to
her pale face and weak voice, that I was not frightened at them, as
children usually are. At first, it is true, I sobbed violently; but
when, day after day, I returned from school, and found her the same, I
began to believe she would always be spared to me; but they told me she
would die.

One day when I had lost my place in the class, I came home discouraged
and fretful. I went to my mother's chamber. She was paler than usual,
but she met me with the same affectionate smile that always welcomed my
return. Alas! when I look back through the lapse of thirteen years, I
think my heart must have been stone not to have been melted by it. She
requested me to go downstairs and bring her a glass of water. I
pettishly asked her why she did not call a domestic to do it. With a
look of mild reproach, which I shall never forget if I live to be a
hundred years old, she said, "Will not my daughter bring a glass of
water for her poor, sick mother?"

I went and brought her the water, but I did not do it kindly. Instead of
smiling, and kissing her as I had been wont to do, I set the glass down
very quickly, and left the room. After playing a short time, I went to
bed without bidding my mother good night; but when alone in my room, in
darkness and silence, I remembered how pale she looked, and how her
voice trembled when she said, "Will not my daughter bring a glass of
water for her poor, sick mother?" I could not sleep. I stole into her
chamber to ask forgiveness. She had sunk into an easy slumber, and they
told me I must not waken her.

I did not tell anyone what troubled me, but stole back to my bed,
resolved to rise early in the morning and tell her how sorry I was for
my conduct. The sun was shining brightly when I awoke, and, hurrying on
my clothes, I hastened to my mother's chamber. She was dead! She never
spoke more--never smiled upon me again; and when I touched the hand that
used to rest upon my head in blessing, it was so cold that it made me
start.

I bowed down by her side, and sobbed in the bitterness of my heart. I
then wished that I might die, and be buried with her; and, old as I now
am, I would give worlds, were they mine to give, could my mother but
have lived to tell me she forgave my childish ingratitude. But I cannot
call her back; and when I stand by her grave, and whenever I think of
her manifold kindness, the memory of that reproachful look she gave me
will bite like a serpent and sting like an adder.


       *       *       *       *       *


Memory Gem:


       "But O for the touch of a vanished hand,
       And the sound of a voice that is still!"


       *       *       *       *       *




_53_


chide
be dewed'
em balmed'
be tide'
lin' gered
wor' shiped



THE OLD ARM-CHAIR.


       I love it, I love it; and who shall dare
       To chide me for loving that old Arm-chair?
       I've treasured it long as a sainted prize;
       I've bedewed it with tears, and embalmed it with sighs.
       'Tis bound by a thousand bands to my heart;
       Not a tie will break, not a link will start.
       Would ye learn the spell?--a mother sat there!
       And a sacred thing is that old Arm-chair.

       In Childhood's hour I lingered near
       The hallowed seat with listening ear;
       And gentle words that mother would give,
       To fit me to die, and teach me to live.
       She told me that shame would never betide,
       With truth for my creed and God for my guide;
       She taught me to lisp my earliest prayer,
       As I knelt beside that old Arm-chair.

       I sat and watched her many a day,
       When her eye grew dim and her locks were gray;
       And I almost worshiped her when she smiled,
       And turned from her Bible to bless her child.
       Years rolled on; but the last one sped--
       My idol was shattered; my earth-star fled:
       I learned how much the heart can bear,
       When I saw her die in that old Arm-chair.

       'Tis past, 'tis past, but I gaze on it now
       With quivering breath and throbbing brow:
       'Twas there she nursed me; 'twas there she died;
       And Memory flows with lava tide.
       Say it is folly, and deem me weak,
       While the scalding drops start down my cheek;
       But I love it, I love it; and cannot tear
       My soul from a mother's old Arm-chair.

_Eliza Cook._
