
"I feel better," said he.  "I was in search of a spring when that
cursed beast spied me and gave me chase."

They sat down under the shade of a large tree and lunched.

"What sort of luck have you had since you tried to break into my
restaurant, Mr. Hogan?" asked Joe.

Hogan changed color.  The question was an awkward one.

"Who told you I tried to enter your restaurant?" he asked.

"The man you brought there."

"That wasn't creditable of you, Hogan," said Joshua, with his mouth
full.  "After my friend Joe had given you a supper and promised you
breakfast, it was unkind to try to rob him.  Don't you think so
yourself?"

"I couldn't help it," said Hogan, who had rapidly decided on his
defense.

"Couldn't help it?" said Joe in a tone of inquiry.  "That's rather a
strange statement."

"It's true," said Hogan.  "The man forced me to do it."

"How was that?"

"He saw me comin' out of the restaurant a little while before, and
when he met me, after trying to rob me and finding that it didn't
pay, he asked me if I was a friend of yours.  I told him I was.  Then
he began to ask if you slept there at night and if anybody was with
you.  I didn't want to answer, but he held a pistol at my head and
forced me to.  Then he made me go with him.  I offered to get in,
thinking I could whisper in your ear and warn you, but he wouldn't
let me.  He stationed me at the window and got in himself.  You know
what followed.  As soon as I saw you were too strong for him I ran
away, fearing that he might try to implicate me in the attempt at
robbery."

Hogan recited this story very glibly and in a very plausible manner.

"Mr. Hogan," said Joe, "if I didn't know you so thoroughly, I might
be disposed to put confidence in your statements.  As it is, I regret
to say I don't believe you."

"Hogan," said Joshua, "I think you're one of the fust romancers of
the age.  If I ever start a story-paper I'll engage you to write for
me."

"I am sorry you do me so much injustice, gentlemen," said Hogan, with
an air of suffering innocence.  "I'm the victim of circumstances."

"I expect you're a second George Washington.  You never told a lie,
did you?"

"Some time you will know me better," said Hogan.

"I hope not," said Joe.  "I know you better now than I want to."




CHAPTER XXXV

THE NEW DIGGINGS

When lunch-was over, Joe said:

"Good day, Mr. Hogan.  Look out for the grizzlies, and may you have
better luck in future."

"Yes, Hogan, good by," said Joshua.  "We make over to you all our
interest in the bear.  He meant to eat you.  You can revenge yourself
by eatin' him."

"Are you going to leave me, gentlemen?" asked Hogan in alarm.

"You don't expect us to stay and take care of you, do you?"

"Let me go with you," pleaded Hogan.  "I am afraid to be left alone
in this country.  I may meet another grizzly, and lose my life."

"That would be a great loss to the world," said Mr. Bickford, with
unconcealed sarcasm.

"It would be a great loss to me," said Hogan.

"Maybe that's the best way to put it," observed Bickford.  "It would
have been money in my friend Joe's pocket if you had never been born."

"May I go with you?" pleaded Hogan, this time addressing himself to
Joe.

"Mr. Hogan," said Joe, "you know very well why your company is not
acceptable to us."

"You shall have no occasion to complain," said Hogan earnestly.

"Do you want us to adopt you, Hogan?" asked Joshua.

"Let me stay with you till we reach the nearest diggings.  Then I
won't trouble you any more."

Joe turned to Bickford.

"If you don't object," he said, "I think I'll let him come."

"Let the critter come," said Bickford.  "He'd be sure to choke any
grizzly that tackled him.  For the sake of the bear, let him come."

Mr. Hogan was too glad to join the party, on any conditions, to
resent the tone which Mr. Bickford employed in addressing him.  He
obtained his suit, and the party of three kept on their way.

As they advanced the country became rougher and more hilly.  Here and
there they saw evidences of "prospecting" by former visitors.  They
came upon deserted claims and the sites of former camps.  But in
these places the indications of gold had not been sufficiently
favorable to warrant continued work, and the miners had gone
elsewhere.

At last, however, they came to a dozen men who were busily at work in
a gulch.  Two rude huts near-by evidently served as their temporary
homes.

"Well, boys, how do you find it?" inquired Bickford, riding up.

"Pretty fair," said one of the party.

"Have you got room for three more?"

"Yes--come along.  You can select claims alongside and go to work if
you want to."

"What do you say, Joe?"

"I am in favor of it."

"We are going to put up here, Hogan," said Mr. Bickford.  "You can do
as you've a mind to.  Much as we value your interestin' society, we
hope you won't put yourself out to stay on our account."

"I'll stay," said Hogan.

Joe and Joshua surveyed the ground and staked out their claims,
writing out the usual notice and posting it on a neighboring tree.
They had not all the requisite tools, but these they were able to
purchase at one of the cabins.

"What shall I do?" asked Hogan.  "I'm dead broke.  I can't work
without tools, and I can't buy any."

"Do you want to work for me?" asked Joshua.

"What'll you give?"

"That'll depend on how you work.  If you work stiddy, I'll give you a
quarter of what we both make.  I'll supply you with tools, but
they'll belong to me."

"Suppose we don't make anything," suggested Hogan.

"You shall have a quarter of that.  You see, I want to make it for
your interest to succeed."

"Then I shall starve."

The bargain was modified so that Hogan was assured of enough to eat,
and was promised, besides, a small sum of money daily, but was not to
participate in the gains.

"If we find a nugget, it won't do you any good.  Do you understand,
Hogan?"

"Yes, I understand."

He shrugged his shoulders, having very little faith in any
prospective nuggets.

"Then we understand each other.  That's all I want."

On the second day Joe and Mr. Bickford consolidated their claims and
became partners, agreeing to divide whatever they found.  Hogan was
to work for them jointly.

They did not find their hired man altogether satisfactory.  He was
lazy and shiftless by nature, and work was irksome to him.

"If you don't work stiddy, Hogan," said Joshua, "you can't expect to
eat stiddy, and your appetite is pretty reg'lar, I notice."

Under this stimulus Hogan managed to work better than he had done
since he came out to California, or indeed for years preceding his
departure.  Bickford and Joe had both been accustomed to farm work
and easily lapsed into their old habits.

They found they had made a change for the better in leaving the banks
of the Yuba.  The claims they were now working paid them better.

"Twenty-five dollars to-day," said Joshua, a week after their
arrival.  "That pays better than hoeing pertaters, Joe."

"You are right, Mr. Bickford.  You are ten dollars ahead of me.  I am
afraid you will lose on our partnership."

"I'll risk it, Joe."

Hogan was the only member of the party who was not satisfied.

"Can't you take me into partnership?" he asked.

"We can, but I don't think we will, Hogan," said Mr. Bickford.

"It wouldn't pay.  If you don't like workin' for us, you can take a
claim of your own."

"I have no tools."

"Why don't you save your money and buy some, instead of gamblin' it
away as you are doin'?"

"A man must have amusement," grumbled Hogan.  "Besides, I may have
luck and win."

"Better keep clear of gamblin', Hogan."

"Mr. Hogan, if you want to start a claim of your own, I'll give you
what tools you need," said Joe.

Upon reflection Hogan decided to accept this offer.

"But of course you will have to find your own vittles now," said
Joshua.

"I'll do it," said Hogan.

The same day he ceased to work for the firm of Bickford & Mason, for
Joe insisted on giving Mr. Bickford the precedence as the senior
party, and started on his own account.

The result was that he worked considerably less than before.  Being
his own master, he decided not to overwork himself, and in fact
worked only enough to make his board.  He was continually grumbling
over his bad luck, although Joshua told him plainly that it wasn't
luck, but industry, he lacked.

"If you'd work like we do," said Bickford, "you wouldn't need to
complain.  Your claim is just as good as ours, as far as we can tell."

"Then let us go in as partners," said Hogan.

"Not much.  You ain't the kind of partner I want."

"I was always unfortunate," said Hogan.

"You were always lazy, I reckon.  You were born tired, weren't you?"

"My health ain't good," said Hogan.  "I can't work like you two."

"You've got a healthy appetite," said Mr. Bickford.  "There ain't no
trouble there that I can see."

Mr. Hogan had an easier time than before, but he hadn't money to
gamble with unless he deprived himself of his customary supply of
food, and this he was reluctant to do.

"Lend me half-an-ounce of gold-dust, won't you?" he asked of Joe one
evening.

"What do you want it for--to gamble with?"

"Yes," said Hogan.  "I dreamed last night that I broke the bank.  All
I want is money enough to start me."

"I don't approve of gambling, and can't help you."

Hogan next tried Mr. Bickford, but with like result.

"I ain't quite such a fool, Hogan," said the plain-spoken Joshua.

About this time a stroke of good luck fell to Joe.  bout three
o'clock one afternoon he unearthed a nugget which, at a rough
estimate, might be worth five hundred dollars.

Instantly all was excitement in the mining-camp, not alone for what
he had obtained, but for the promise of richer deposits.  Experienced
miners decided that he had, struck upon what is popularly called a
"pocket," and some of these are immensely remunerative.

"Shake hands, Joe," said Bickford.  "You're in luck."

"So are you, Mr. Bickford.  We are partners, you know."

In less than an hour the two partners received an offer of eight
thousand dollars for their united claim, and the offer was accepted.

Joe was the hero of the camp.  All were rejoiced at his good fortune
except one.  That one was Hogan, who from a little distance, jealous
and gloomy, surveyed the excited crowd.




CHAPTER XXXVI

HOGAN'S DISCONTENT

"Why don't luck come to me?" muttered Hogan to himself.  "That green
country boy has made a fortune, while I, an experienced man of the
world, have to live from hand to mouth.  It's an outrage!"

The parties to whom Joe and his partner sold their claim were
responsible men who had been fortunate in mining and had a
bank-account in San Francisco.

"We'll give you an order on our banker," they proposed.

"That will suit me better than money down," said Joe.  "I shall start
for San Francisco to-morrow, having other business there that I need
to look after."

"I'll go too, Joe," said Joshua.  "With my share of the
purchase-money and the nugget, I'm worth, nigh on to five thousand
dollars.  What will dad say?"

"And what will Susan Smith say?" queried Joe.

Joshua grinned.

"I guess she'll say she's ready to change her name to Bickford," said
he.

"You must send me some of the cake, Mr. Bickford."

"Just wait, Joe.  The thing ain't got to that yet.  I tell you, Joe,
I shall be somebody when I get home to Pumpkin Hollow with that pile
of money.  The boys'll begin to look up to me then.  I can't hardly
believe it's all true.  Maybe I'm dreamin' it.  Jest pinch my arm,
will you?"

Joe complied with his request.

"That'll do, Joe.  You've got some strength in your fingers.  I guess
it's true, after all."

Joe observed with some surprise that Hogan did not come near them.
The rest, without exception, had congratulated them on their
extraordinary good luck.

"Seems to me Hogan looks rather down in the mouth," said Joe to
Bickford.

"He's mad 'cause he didn't find the nugget.  That's what's the matter
with him.  I say, Hogan, you look as if your dinner didn't agree with
you."

"My luck don't agree with me."

"You don't seem to look at things right.  Wasn't you lucky the other
day to get away from the bear?"

"I was unlucky enough to fall in with him."

"Wasn't you lucky in meetin' my friend Joe in New York, and raisin'
money enough out of him to pay your passage out to Californy?"

"I should be better off in New York.  I am dead broke."

"You'd be dead broke in New York.  Such fellers as you always is dead
broke."

"Do you mean to insult me, Mr. Bickford?" demanded Hogan irritably.

"Oh, don't rare up, Hogan.  It won't do no good.  You'd ought to have
more respect for me, considerin' I was your boss once."

"I'd give something for that boy's luck."

"Joe's luck?  Well, things have gone pretty well with turn; but that
don't explain all his success--he's willin' to work."

"So am I."

"Then go to work on your claim.  There's no knowin' but there's a
bigger nugget inside of it.  If you stand round with your hands in
your pockets, you'll never find it."

"It's the poorest claim in the gulch," said Hogan discontentedly.

"It pays the poorest because you don't work half the time."

Hogan apparently didn't like Mr. Bickford's plainness of speech.  He
walked away moodily, with his hands in his pockets.  He could not
help contrasting his penniless position with the enviable position of
the two friends, and the devil, who is always in wait for such
moments, thrust an evil suggestion into his mind.

It was this:

He asked himself why could he not steal the nugget which Joe had
found?
