
"I don't think they would infer it from that.  By the way, Harry,
suppose my father could find an opening for you as a reporter on his
paper,--would you be willing to accept it?"

"I am not sure whether it would be best for me," said Harry, slowly,
"even if I were qualified."

"There is more chance to rise on a city paper."

"I don't know.  If I stay here I may before many years control a
paper of my own.  Then, if I want to go into politics, there would be
more chance in the country than in the city."

"Would you like to go into politics?"

"I am rather too young to decide about that; but if I could be of
service in that way, I don't see why I should not desire it."

"Well, Harry, I think you are going the right way to work."

"I hope so.  I don't want to be promoted till I am fit for it.  I am
going to work hard for the next two or three years."

"I wish I were as industrious as you are, Harry."

"And I wish I knew as much as you do, Oscar."

"Say no more, or we shall be forming a Mutual Admiration Society,"
said Oscar, laughing.

Harry received a cordial welcome back to the printing office.  Mr.
Anderson asked him many questions about Mr. Vincent; and our hero
felt that his employer regarded him with increased consideration, on
account of his acquaintance with the great city editor.  This
consideration was still farther increased when Mr. Anderson learned
our hero's engagement by the "Weekly Standard."

Three weeks later, the "Standard" published Harry's sketch, and
accepted another, at the same price.  Before this latter was printed,
Harry wrote a third sketch, which he called "Phineas Popkin's
Engagement."  This he inclosed to the "Weekly Argus," with a letter
in which he referred to his engagement by the "Standard." In reply he
received the following letter:--


  "BOSTON, Jan., 18--,

"MR. FRANK LYNN,--Dear Sir: We enclose three dollars for your
sketch,--'Phineas Popkin's Engagement.'  We shall be glad to receive
other sketches, of similar character and length, and, if accepted, we
will pay the same price therefor.

  "I. B. FITCH & Co."


This was highly satisfactory to Harry.  He was now an accepted
contributor to two weekly papers, and the addition to his income
would be likely to reach a hundred dollars a year.  All this he would
be able to lay up, and as much or more from his salary on the
"Gazette."  He felt on the high road to success.  Seeing that his
young compositor was meeting with success and appreciation abroad,
Mr. Anderson called upon him more frequently to write paragraphs for
the "Gazette."  Though this work was gratuitous, Harry willingly
undertook it.  He felt that in this way he was preparing himself for
the career to which he steadily looked forward.  Present
compensation, he justly reasoned, was of small importance, compared
with the chance of improvement.  In this view, Ferguson, who proved
to be a very judicious friend, fully concurred.  Indeed Harry and he
became more intimate than before, if that were possible, and they
felt that Clapp's departure was by no means to be regretted.  They
were remarking this one day, when Mr. Anderson, who had been
examining his mail, looked up suddenly, and said, "What do you think,
Mr. Ferguson?  I've got a letter from Clapp."

"A letter from Clapp?  Where is he?" inquired Ferguson, with interest.

"This letter is dated at St. Louis.  He doesn't appear to be doing
very well."

"I thought he was going to California."

"So he represented.  But here is the letter." Ferguson took it, and,
after reading, handed it to Harry.

It ran thus:--


  "ST. LOUIS, April 4, 18--.

"JOTHAM ANDERSON, ESQ.,--Dear Sir: Perhaps you will be surprised to
hear from me, but I feel as if I would like to hear from Centreville,
where I worked so long.  The man that induced me and Harrison to come
out here left us in the lurch three days after we reached St. Louis.
He said he was going on to San Francisco, and he had only money
enough to pay his own expenses.  As Luke and I were not provided with
money, we had a pretty hard time at first, and had to pawn some of
our clothes, or we should have starved.  Finally I got a job in the
'Democrat' office, and a week after, Luke got something to do, though
it didn't pay very well.  So we scratched along as well as we could.
Part of the time since we have been out of work, and we haven't found
'coming West' all that it was cracked up to be.

"Are Ferguson and Harry Walton still working for you?  I should like
to come back to the 'Gazette' office, and take my old place; but I
haven't got five dollars ahead to pay my travelling expenses.  If you
will send me out thirty dollars, I will come right on, and work it
out after I come back.  Hoping for an early reply, I am,

  "Yours respectfully,
    "HENRY CLAPP."


"Are you going to send out the money, Mr. Anderson?" asked Ferguson.

"Not I.  Now that Walton has got well learnt, I don't need another
workman.  I shall respectfully decline his offer."

Both Harry and Ferguson were glad to hear this, for they felt that
Clapp's presence would be far from making the office more agreeable.

"Here's a letter for you, Walton, also post-marked St. Louis," said
Mr. Anderson, just afterward.

Harry took it with surprise, and opened it at once.

"It's from Luke Harrison," he said, looking at the signature.

"Does he want you to send him thirty dollars?" asked Ferguson.

"Listen and I will read the letter."


"DEAR HARRY," it commenced, "you will perhaps think it strange that I
have written to you; but we used to be good friends.  I write to tell
you that I don't like this place.  I haven't got along well, and I
want to get back.  Now I am going to ask of you a favor.  Will you
lend me thirty or forty dollars, to pay my fare home?  I will pay you
back in a month or two months sure, after I get to work.  I will also
pay you the few dollars which I borrowed some time ago.  I ought to
have done it before, but I was thoughtless, and I kept putting it
off.  Now, Harry, I know you have the money, and you can lend it to
me just as well as not, and I'll be sure to pay it back before you
need it.  Just get a post-office order, and send it to Luke Harrison,
17 R---- Street, St. Louis, and I'll be sure to get it.  Give my
respects to Mr. Anderson, and also to Mr. Ferguson.

  "Your friend,
    "LUKE HARRISON."


"There is a chance for a first-class investment, Harry," said
Ferguson.

"Do you want to join me in it?"

"No, I would rather pay the money to have 'your friend' keep away."

"I don't want to be unkind or disobliging," said Harry, "but I don't
feel like giving Luke this money.  I know he would never pay me back."

"Say no, then."

"I will.  Luke will be mad, but I can't help it."

So both Mr. Anderson and Harry wrote declining to lend.  The latter,
in return, received a letter from Luke, denouncing him as a "mean,
miserly hunks;" but even this did not cause him to regret his
decision.




CHAPTER XXXI.

ONE STEP UPWARD.

In real life the incidents that call for notice do not occur daily.
Months and years pass, sometimes, where the course of life is quiet
and uneventful.  So it was with Harry Walton.  He went to his daily
work with unfailing regularity, devoted a large part of his leisure
to reading and study, or writing sketches for the Boston papers, and
found himself growing steadily wiser and better informed.  His
account in the savings-bank grew slowly, but steadily; and on his
nineteenth birthday, when we propose to look in upon him again, he
was worth five hundred dollars.

Some of my readers who are favored by fortune may regard this as a
small sum.  It is small in itself, but it was not small for a youth
in Harry's position to have saved from his small earnings.  But of
greater value than the sum itself was the habit of self-denial and
saving which our hero had formed.  He had started in the right way,
and made a beginning which was likely to lead to prosperity in the
end.  It had not been altogether easy to save this sum.  Harry's
income had always been small, and he might, without incurring the
charge of excessive extravagance, have spent the whole.  He had
denied himself on many occasions, where most boys of his age would
have yielded to the temptation of spending money for pleasure or
personal gratification; but he had been rewarded by the thought that
he was getting on in the world.

"This is my birthday, Mr. Ferguson," he said, as he entered the
printing-office on that particular morning.

"Is it?" asked Ferguson, looking up from his case with interest.
"How venerable are you, may I ask?"

"I don't feel very venerable as yet," said Harry, with a smile.  "I
am nineteen."

"You were sixteen when you entered the office."

"As printer's devil--yes."

"You have learned the business pretty thoroughly.  You are as good a
workman as I now, though I am fifteen years older."

"You are too modest, Mr. Ferguson."

"No, it is quite true.  You are as rapid and accurate as I am, and
you ought to receive as high pay."

"That will come in time.  You know I make something by writing for
the papers."

"That's extra work.  How much did you make in that way last year?"

"I can tell you, because I figured it up last night.  It was one
hundred and twenty-five dollars, and I put every cent into the
savings-bank."

"That is quite an addition to your income."

"I shall make more this year.  I am to receive two dollars a column,
hereafter, for my sketches."

"I congratulate you, Harry,--the more heartily, because I think you
deserve it.  Your recent sketches show quite an improvement over
those you wrote a year ago."

"Do you really think so?" said Harry, with evident pleasure.

"I have no hesitation in saying so.  You write with greater ease than
formerly, and your style is less that of a novice."

"So I have hoped and thought; but of course I was prejudiced in my
own favor."

"You may rely upon it.  Indeed, your increased pay is proof of it.
Did you ask it?"

"The increase?  No, the editor of the 'Standard' wrote me voluntarily
that he considered my contributions worth the additional amount."

"That must be very pleasant.  I tell you what, Harry, I've a great
mind to set up opposition to you in the story line."

"Do so," said Harry, smiling.

"I would if I had the slightest particle of imagination; but the fact
is, I'm too practical and matter-of-fact.  Besides, I never had any
talent for writing of any kind.  Some time I may become publisher of
a village paper like this; but farther than that I don't aspire."

"We are to be partners in that, you know, Ferguson."

"That may be, for a time; but you will rise higher than that, Harry."

"I am afraid you overrate me."

"No; I have observed you closely in the time we have been together,
and I have long felt that you are destined to rise from the ranks in
which I am content to remain.  Haven't you ever felt so, yourself,
Harry?"

Harry's cheek flushed, and his eye lighted up.

"I won't deny that I have such thoughts sometimes," he said; "but it
may end in that."

"It often does end in that; but it is only where ambition is not
accompanied by faithful work.  Now you are always at work.  You are
doing what you can to help fortune, and the end will be that fortune
will help you."

"I hope so, at any rate," said Harry, thoughtfully.  "I should like
to fill an honorable position, and do some work by which I might be
known in after years."

"Why not?  The boys and young men of to-day are hereafter to fill the
highest positions in the community and State.  Why may not the lot
fall to you?"

"I will try, at any rate, to qualify myself.  Then if
responsibilities come, I will try to discharge them."

The conversation was here interrupted by the entrance of Mr.
Anderson, the editor of the "Gazette."  He was not as well or strong
as when we first made his acquaintance.  Then he seemed robust
enough, but now he was thinner, and moved with slower gait.  It was
not easy to say what had undermined his strength, for he had had no
severe fit of sickness; but certainly he was in appearance several
years older than when Harry entered the office.

"How do you feel this morning, Mr. Anderson?" asked Ferguson.

"I feel weak and languid, and indisposed to exertion of any kind."

"You need some change."

"That is precisely what I have thought myself.  The doctor advises
change of scene, and this very morning I had a letter from a brother
in Wisconsin, asking me to come out and visit him."

"I have no doubt it would do you good."

"So it would.  But how can I go?  I can't take the paper with me,"
said Mr. Andersen, rather despondently.

"No; but you can leave Harry to edit it in your absence."

"Mr. Ferguson!" exclaimed Harry, startled by the proposition.

"Harry as editor!" repeated Mr. Anderson.

"Yes; why not?  He is a practised writer.  For more than two years he
has written for two Boston papers."

"But he is so young.  How old are you, Harry?" asked the editor.

"Nineteen to-day, sir."

"Nineteen.  That's very young for an editor."

"Very true; but, after all, it isn't so much the age as the
qualifications, is it, Mr. Anderson?"

"True," said the editor, meditatively.  "Harry, do you think you
could edit the paper for two or three months?"

"I think I could," said Harry, with modest confidence.  His heart
beat high at the thought of the important position which was likely
to be opened to him; and plans of what he would do to make the paper
interesting already began to be formed in his mind.

"It never occurred to me before, but I really think you could," said
the editor, "and that would remove every obstacle to my going.  By
the way, Harry, you would have to find a new boarding-place, for Mrs.
Anderson would accompany me, and we should shut up the house."

"Perhaps Ferguson would take me in?" said Harry.

"I should be glad to do so; but I don't know that my humble fare
would be good enough for an editor."

Harry smiled.  "I won't put on airs," he said, "till my commission is
made out."

"I am afraid that I can't offer high pay for your services in that
capacity," said Mr.  Anderson.

"I shall charge nothing, sir," said Harry, "but thank you for the
opportunity of entering, if only for a short time, a profession to
which it is my ambition to belong."

After a brief consultation with his wife, Mr. Anderson appointed
Harry editor pro tem., and began to make arrangements for his
journey.  Harry's weekly wages were raised to fifteen dollars, out of
which he waa to pay Ferguson four dollars a week for board.

So our hero found himself, at nineteen, the editor of an old
established paper, which, though published in a country village, was
not without its share of influence in the county and State.




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE YOUNG EDITOR.

The next number of the Centreville "Gazette" contained the following
notice from the pen of Mr. Anderson:--

"For the first time since our connection with the 'Gazette,' we
purpose taking a brief respite from our duties.  The state of our
health renders a vacation desirable, and an opportune invitation from
a brother at the West has been accepted.  Our absence may extend to
two or three months.  In the interim we have committed the editorial
management to Mr. Harry Walton, who has been connected with the
paper, in a different capacity, for nearly three years.  Though Mr.
Walton is a very young man, he has already acquired a reputation, as
contributor to papers of high standing in Boston, and we feel assured
that our subscribers will have no reason to complain of the temporary
change in the editorship."

"The old man has given you quite a handsome notice, Harry," said
Ferguson.

"I hope I shall deserve it," said Harry; "but I begin now to realize
that I am young to assume such responsible duties.  It would have
seemed more appropriate for you to undertake them."

"I can't write well enough, Harry.  I like to read, but I can't
produce.  In regard to the business management I feel competent to
advise."

"I shall certainly be guided by your advice, Ferguson."

As it may interest the reader, we will raise the curtain and show our
young hero in the capacity of editor.  The time is ten days after Mr.
Anderson's absence.  Harry was accustomed to do his work as
compositor in the forenoon and the early part of the afternoon.  From
three to five he occupied the editorial chair, read letters, wrote
paragraphs, and saw visitors.  He had just seated himself, when a man
entered the office and looked about him inquisitively.

"I would like to see the editor," he said.

"I am the editor," said Harry, with dignity.

The visitor looked surprised.

"You are the youngest-looking editor I have met," he said.  "Have you
filled the office long?"

"Not long," said Harry.  "Can I do anything for you?"

"Yes, sir, you can.  First let me introduce myself.  I am Dr.
Theophilus Peabody."

"Will you be seated, Dr. Peabody?"

"You have probably heard of me before," said the visitor.

"I can't say that I have."

"I am surprised at that," said the doctor, rather disgusted to find
himself unknown.  "You must have heard of Peabody's Unfailing
Panacea."

"I am afraid I have not."

