world besides war.  All the multifarious interests of peace and
civilization suddenly came crowding back upon them.  Harry remembered
Pendleton with its rolling hills, green fields, and clear streams, and
Dalton remembered his own home, much like it, in the Valley of
Virginia, not so far away.

"Do you remain long in Richmond?" asked Randolph.

"A week at least," replied Harry.

"Then you ought to see a little of social life.  Mrs. John Curtis, a
leading hostess, gives a reception and a dance to-morrow night. I can
easily procure invitations for both of you, and I know that she would
be glad to have two young officers freshly arrived from our glorious
Army of Northern Virginia."

"But our clothes!" said Dalton.  "We have only a change of uniform
apiece, and they're not fresh by any means."

All the men laughed.

"You don't think that Richmond is indulging in gorgeous apparel do
you?" said Daniel.  "We never manufactured much ourselves, and since
all the rest of the world is cut off from us where are the clothes to
come from even for the women?  Brush up your uniforms all you can and
you'll be more than welcome.  Two gallant young officers from the Army
of Northern Virginia!  Why, you'll be two Othellos, though white, of
course."

Harry glanced at Dalton, and Dalton glanced at Harry.  Each saw that
the other wanted to go, and Daniel, watching them, smiled.

"I see that you'll come," he said, "and so it's settled.  Have you
quarters yet?"

"Not yet," replied Harry, "but we'll see about it this afternoon."

"I'll have the invitations sent to you here at this hotel.  All of us
will be there, and we'll see that you two meet everybody."

Both thanked him profusely.  They were about to go, thinking it time to
report to General Winder, when Harry noticed a thin woman in a black
dress, carrying a large basket, and just leaving the hotel desk.  He
caught a glimpse of her face and he knew that it was the old maid of
the train.  Then something else was impressed upon his mind, something
which he had not noticed at their first meeting, but which came to him
at their second.  He had seen a face like hers before, but the
resemblance was so faint and fleeting that he could not place it,
strive as he would. But he was sure that it was there.

"Who is that woman?" he asked.

Daniel shook his head and so did Randolph, but Bagby spoke up.

"Her name is Henrietta Carden," he said, "and she's a seamstress. I've
seen her coming to the hotel often before, bringing new clothes to the
women guests, or taking away old ones to be repaired.  I believe that
the ladies account her most skillful.  It's likely that she'll be at
the Curtis house, in a surgical capacity, to-morrow night, as a quick
repairer of damaged garments, those fine linen and silk and lace
affairs that we don't know anything about.  Mrs. Curtis relies greatly
upon her and I ought to tell you, young gentlemen, that Mr. Curtis is a
most successful blockade runner, though he takes no personal risk
himself. The Curtis house is perhaps the most sumptuous in Richmond.
You'll see no signs of poverty there, though, as I told you, officers
in old and faded clothes are welcome."

Harry saw Henrietta Carden carrying the large basket of clothes, go out
at a side door, and he felt as if a black shadow like a menace had
passed across the floor.  But it was only for an instant.  He dismissed
it promptly, as one of those thoughts that come out of nothing, like
idle puffs of summer air.  He and Dalton bade a brief farewell to their
new friends and left for the headquarters of General Winder.  An
elderly and childless couple named Lanham had volunteered to take two
officers in their house near Capitol Square, and there Harry and Dalton
were sent.

They could not have found a better place.  Mr. and Mrs. Lanham were
quiet people, who gave them an excellent room and a fine supper.  Mrs.
Lanham showed a motherly solicitude, and when she heard that they were
going to the Curtis ball on the following night she demanded that their
spare and best uniforms be turned over to her.

"I can make them look fresh," she insisted, "and your appearance must
be the finest possible.  No, don't refuse again.  It's a pleasure to me
to do it.  When I look at you two, so young and strong and so honest in
manner and speech, I wish that I had sons too, and then again I'm glad
I have not."

"Why not, Mrs. Lanham?" asked Harry.

"Because I'd be in deadly fear lest I lose them.  They'd go to the
war--I couldn't help it--and they'd surely be killed."

"We won't grieve over losing what we've never had," smiled Mr. Lanham.
"That's morbid."

Harry and Dalton did their best to answer all the questions of their
hosts, who they knew would take no pay.  The interest of both Mr. and
Mrs. Lanham was increased when they found that their young guests were
on the staff of General Lee and before that had been on the staff of
the great Stonewall Jackson.  These two names were mighty in the South,
untouched by any kind of malice or envy, and with legends to cluster
around them as the years passed.

"And you really saw Stonewall Jackson every day!" said Mrs. Lanham.
"You rode with him, talked with him, and went into battle with him?"

"I was in all his campaigns, Mrs. Lanham," replied Harry, modestly, but
not without pride.  "I was with him in every battle, even to the last,
Chancellorsville.  I was one of those who sheltered him from the
shells, when he was shot by our own men.  Alas! what an awful mistake.
I--"

He stopped suddenly.  He had choked with emotion, and the tears came
into his eyes.  Mrs. Lanham saw, and, understanding, she quickly
changed the subject to Lee.  They talked a while after supper, called
dinner now, and then they went up to their room on the second floor.

It was a handsome room, containing good furniture, including two single
beds.  Their baggage had preceded them and everything was in order. Two
large windows, open to admit the fresh air, looked out over Richmond.
On a table stood a pitcher of ice water and glasses.

"Our lot has certainly been cast in a pleasant place," said Dalton,
taking a chair by one of the windows.

"You're right," said Harry, sitting in the chair by the other window.
"The Lanhams are fine people, and it's a good house.  This is luxury,
isn't it, George, old man?"

"The real article.  We seem to be having luck all around.  And we're
going to a big ball to-morrow night, too.  Who'd have thought such a
thing possible a week ago?"

"And we've made friends who'll see that we're not neglected."

"It's an absolute fact that we've become the favorite children of
fortune."

"No earthly doubt of it."

Then ensued a silence, broken at length by a scraping sound as each
moved his chair a little nearer to the window.

"Close, George," said Harry at length.

"Yes, a bit hard to breathe."

"When fellows get used to a thing it's hard to change."

"Fine room, though, and those are splendid beds."

"Great on a winter night."

"You've noticed how the commander-in-chief himself seldom sleeps under
a tent, but takes his blankets to the open?"

"Wonder how an Indian who has roamed the forest all his life feels when
he's shut up between four walls for the first time."

"Fancy it's like a prison cell to him."

"Think so too.  But the Lanhams are fine people and they're doing their
best for us."

"Do you think they'd be offended if I were to take my blankets, and
sleep on the grass in the back yard?"

"Of course they would.  You mustn't think of such a thing.  After this
war is over you've got to emerge slowly from barbarism.  Do you
remember whether at supper we cut our food with our knives and lifted
it to our mouths with forks, or just tore and lifted with our fingers?"

"We used knife and fork, each in its proper place.  I happened to think
of it and watched myself.  You, I suppose, did it through the force of
an ancient habit, recalled by civilized surroundings."

"I'm glad you remember about it.  Now I'm going to bed, and maybe I'll
sleep.  I suppose there's no hope of seeing the stars through the roof."

"None on earth!  But my bed is fine and soft.  We'd be all right if we
could only lift the roof off the house.  I'd like to hear the wind
rubbing the boughs together."

"Stop it!  You make me homesick!  We've got no right to be pining for
blankets and the open, when these good people are doing so much for us!"

Each stretched himself upon his bed, and closed his eyes.  They had not
been jesting altogether.  So long a life in the open made summer skies
at night welcome, and roofs and walls almost took from them the power
of breathing.

But the feeling wore away after a while and amid pleasurable thoughts
of the coming ball both fell asleep.




CHAPTER X

THE MISSING PAPER


Harry and Dalton did not awake until late the next morning and they
found they had not suffered at all from sleeping between four walls and
under a roof.  Their lungs were full of fresh air, and youth with all
its joyous irresponsibility had come back.  Harry sprang out of bed.

"Up! up! old boy!"  Harry cried to Dalton.  "Don't you hear the bugles
calling? not to battle but to pleasure!  There is no enemy in our
front! We don't have to cross a river with an overwhelming army
pressing down upon us!  We don't have to ride before the dawn on a
scout which may lead us into a thicket full of hostile riflemen.  We're
in a city, boy, and our business now is beauty and pleasure!"

"Harry," said Dalton, "you ought to go far."

"Why, George?  What induces you to assume the role of a prophet
concerning me?"

"Because you're so full of life.  You're so keen about everything. You
must have a heart and lungs of extra steam power."

"But I notice you don't say anything about brain power.  Maybe you
think it's the quiet, rather silent fellows like yourself, George, who
have an excess of that."

"None of your irony.  Am I not looking forward to this ball as much as
you are?  I was a boy when I entered the war, Harry, but two years of
fighting day and night age one terribly.  I feel as if I could
patronize any woman under twenty-five, and treat her as quite a simple
young thing."

"Try it, George, and see what happens to you."

"Oh, no!  I merely said I felt that way.  I've too much sense to put it
into action."

"Do you know, George, that when this war is over it will be really time
for us to be thinking about girls.  We'll be quite old enough.  They
say that many of the Yankee maidens in Philadelphia and New York are
fine for looks.  I wonder if they'll cast a favoring eye on young
Southern officers as our conquering armies go marching down their
streets!"

"It's too remote.  Don't think about it, Harry.  Richmond will do us
for the present."

"But you can let a fellow project his mind into the future."

"Not so far that we'll be marching as conquerors through Philadelphia
and New York.  Let's deal with realities."

"I've always thought there was something of the Yankee about you,
George, not in political principles--I never question your devotion to
the cause--but in calculating, weighing everything and deciding in
favor of the one that weighs an ounce the most."

"Are you about through dressing?  You've taken a minute longer than the
regular time."

There was a knock at the door, and, when Dalton opened it a few inches,
a black head announced through the crack that breakfast was ready.

"See what a disgrace you're bringing upon us," said Dalton.  "Delaying
everything.  Mrs. Lanham will say that we're two impostors, that such
malingerers cannot possibly belong to the Army of Northern Virginia."

"Lead on," said Harry.  "I'm ready, and I'm hungry as every soldier in
the Southern army always is."

They had a warm greeting from their hospitable hosts, followed by an
abundant breakfast.  Then at Mrs. Lanham's earnest solicitation they
turned over their dress uniforms to her to be repaired and pressed.
Then they went out into the streets again, and spent the whole day
rambling about, enjoying everything with the keen and intense delight
that can come only to the young, and after long abstinence.  Richmond
was not depressed.  Far from it.  There had been a wonderful
transformation since those dark days when the army of McClellan was
near enough to see the spires of its churches.  The flood of battle had
rolled far away since then, and it had never come back.  It could never
come back. It was true that the Army of Northern Virginia had failed at
Gettysburg, but it was returning to the South unassailed, and was ready
to repeat its former splendid achievements.

Harry went to the post office, and found there, to his great surprise
and delight, a letter from his father, written three or four days after
Vicksburg.


My dear son: [he wrote]

The news has just come to us that the Army of Northern Virginia, while
performing prodigies of valor, has failed to carry all the Northern
positions at Gettysburg.  Only complete success could warrant a further
advance.  I assume therefore that General Lee is retreating and I
assume also that you, Harry, my beloved son, are alive, that you came
unharmed out of that terrible battle.  It does not seem possible to me
that it could be otherwise.  I cannot conceive of you fallen.  It may
be that it's because you are my son.  The sons of others may fall, but
not mine, just as we know that all others are doomed to die, but get
into the habit of thinking ourselves immortal.  So, I address this
letter to you in the full belief that it will reach you somewhere, and
that you will read it.

You know, of course, of our great loss at Vicksburg.  It is disastrous
but not irreparable.  We still have a powerful army in the West, hardy,
indomitable, one with which the enemy will have to reckon.  As for
myself I have been spared in many battles and I am well.  It seems the
sport of chance that you and I, while fighting on the same side, should
have been separated in this war, you in the East and I in the West.
But it has been done by One who knows best, and after all I am glad
that you have been in such close contact with two of the greatest and
highest-minded soldiers of the ages, Stonewall Jackson and Robert E.
Lee.  I do not think of them merely as soldiers, but as knights and
champions with flaming swords.  One of them, alas! is gone, but we have
the other, and if man can conquer he will.  Here in the West we repose
our faith in Lee, as surely as do you in the East, you who see his face
and hear his voice every day.

I have had two or three letters from Pendleton.  That part of the State
is for the present outside the area of conflict, though I hear that the
guerilla bands to the east in the mountains still vex and annoy, and
that Skelly is growing bolder.  I foresee the time when we shall have
to reckon with this man, who is a mere brigand.

I hear that the prospects for fruit in our orchards were never finer.
You will remember how you prowled in them when you were a little boy,
Harry, and what a pirate you were among the apples and peaches and
pears and good things that grew on tree and bush and briar in that
beautiful old commonwealth of ours.  I often upbraided you then, but I
should like to see you now, far out on a bough as of old, reaching for
a big yellow pear, or a red, red bunch of cherries!  Alas! there are
many lads who will never return, who will never see the pear trees and
the cherry trees again, but I repeat I cannot feel that you will be
among them.  Who would ever have dreamed when this war began that it
could go so far?  More than two years of fierce and deadly battles and
I can see no end.  A deadlock and neither side willing to yield!  How
glad would be the men who made the war to see both sections back where
they were two and a half years ago! and that's no treason.


Water rose in Harry's eyes.  He knew how terribly his father's heart
had been torn by the quarrel between North and South, and that he had
thoughts which he did not tell to his son.  Harry was beginning at last
to think some of the same thoughts himself.  If the South succeeded,
then, after the war, what?  Another war later on or reunion.

The rest of the letter was wholly personal, and in the end it directed
Harry, when writing to him, to address his letters care of the Western
Army under General Bragg.  Harry was moved and he responded at once. He
went to the hotel in which he had met the young men who constituted the
leading lights in what was called the Mosaic Club, and, securing
writing materials, made a long reply, which he posted with every hope
that it would soon reach its destination.

Early in the evening he rejoined Dalton at the house of the Lanhams and
they found that Mrs. Lanham had done wonders with their best uniforms.
When they were dressed in them they felt that it was no harder to
charge the Curtis house than to rush a battery.

