rushed across to the Strong place and dashed up Emmeline's garret stairs
to Stephen. It was fortunate I had come, for he didn't know we had gone.
Prissy had hidden him behind the loom and he didn't dare move for
fear Emmeline would hear him on that creaky floor. He was a sight with
cobwebs.

I got him down and smuggled him into our barn, and he stayed there until
it was dark and the Strong girls had gone home. Emmeline began to rage
at Prissy the moment they were outside my door.

Then Stephen came in and we talked things over. He and Prissy had made
good use of their time, short as it had been. Prissy had promised to
marry him, and all that remained was to get the ceremony performed.

"And that will be no easy matter," I warned him. "Now that Emmeline's
suspicions are aroused she'll never let Prissy out of her sight until
you're married to another woman, if it's years. I know Emmeline Strong.
And I know Prissy. If it was any other girl in the world she'd run away,
or manage it somehow, but Prissy never will. She's too much in the habit
of obeying Emmeline. You'll have an obedient wife, Stephen--if you ever
get her."

Stephen looked as if he thought that wouldn't be any drawback. Gossip
said that Althea had been pretty bossy. I don't know. Maybe it was so.

"Can't you suggest something, Rosanna?" he implored. "You've helped us
so far, and I'll never forget it."

"The only thing I can think of is for you to have the license ready, and
speak to Mr. Leonard, and keep an eye on our ventilator," I said. "I'll
watch here and signal whenever there's an opening."

Well, I watched and Stephen watched, and Mr. Leonard was in the plot,
too. Prissy was always a favourite of his, and he would have been more
than human, saint as he is, if he'd had any love for Emmeline, after the
way she was always trying to brew up strife in the church.

But Emmeline was a match for us all. She never let Prissy out of her
sight. Everywhere she went she toted Prissy, too. When a month had gone
by, I was almost in despair. Mr. Leonard had to leave for the Assembly
in another week and Stephen's neighbours were beginning to talk about
him. They said that a man who spent all his time hanging around the yard
with a spyglass, and trusting everything to a hired boy, couldn't be
altogether right in his mind.

I could hardly believe my eyes when I saw Emmeline driving away one day
alone. As soon as she was out of sight I whisked over, and Anne Shirley
and Diana Barry went with me.

They were visiting me that afternoon. Diana's mother was my second
cousin, and, as we visited back and forth frequently, I'd often seen
Diana. But I'd never seen her chum, Anne Shirley, although I'd heard
enough about her to drive anyone frantic with curiosity. So when she
came home from Redmond College that summer I asked Diana to take pity on
me and bring her over some afternoon.

I wasn't disappointed in her. I considered her a beauty, though some
people couldn't see it. She had the most magnificent red hair and the
biggest, shiningest eyes I ever saw in a girl's head. As for her laugh,
it made me feel young again to hear it. She and Diana both laughed
enough that afternoon, for I told them, under solemn promise of secrecy,
all about poor Prissy's love affair. So nothing would do them but they
must go over with me.

The appearance of the house amazed me. All the shutters were closed and
the door locked. I knocked and knocked, but there was no answer. Then I
walked around the house to the only window that hadn't shutters--a tiny
one upstairs. I knew it was the window in the closet off the room where
the girls slept. I stopped under it and called Prissy. Before long
Prissy came and opened it. She was so pale and woe-begone looking that I
pitied her with all my heart.

"Prissy, where has Emmeline gone?" I asked.

"Down to Avonlea to see the Roger Pyes. They're sick with measles, and
Emmeline couldn't take me because I've never had measles."

Poor Prissy! She had never had anything a body ought to have.

"Then you just come and unfasten a shutter, and come right over to my
house," I said exultantly. "We'll have Stephen and the minister here in
no time."

"I can't--Em'line has locked me in here," said Prissy woefully.

I was posed. No living mortal bigger than a baby could have got in or
out of that closet window.

"Well," I said finally, "I'll put the signal up for Stephen anyhow, and
we'll see what can be done when he gets here."

I didn't know how I was ever to get the signal up on that ventilator,
for it was one of the days I take dizzy spells; and if I took one up on
the ladder there'd probably be a funeral instead of a wedding. But Anne
Shirley said she'd put it up for me, and she did. I had never seen that
girl before, and I've never seen her since, but it's my opinion that
there wasn't much she couldn't do if she made up her mind to do it.

Stephen wasn't long in getting there and he brought the minister with
him. Then we all, including Thomas--who was beginning to get interested
in the affair in spite of himself--went over and held council of war
beneath the closet window.

Thomas suggested breaking in doors and carrying Prissy off boldly, but
I could see that Mr. Leonard looked very dubious over that, and even
Stephen said he thought it could only be done as a last resort. I agreed
with him. I knew Emmeline Strong would bring an action against him
for housebreaking as likely as not. She'd be so furious she'd stick at
nothing if we gave her any excuse. Then Anne Shirley, who couldn't have
been more excited if she was getting married herself, came to the rescue
again.

"Couldn't you put a ladder up to the closet window," she said, "And
Mr. Clark can go up it and they can be married there. Can't they, Mr.
Leonard?"

Mr. Leonard agreed that they could. He was always the most saintly
looking man, but I know I saw a twinkle in his eye.

"Thomas, go over and bring our little ladder over here," I said.

Thomas forgot he was an elder, and he brought the ladder as quick as it
was possible for a fat man to do it. After all it was too short to reach
the window, but there was no time to go for another. Stephen went up to
the top of it, and he reached up and Prissy reached down, and they could
just barely clasp hands so. I shall never forget the look of Prissy. The
window was so small she could only get her head and one arm out of it.
Besides, she was almost frightened to death.

Mr. Leonard stood at the foot of the ladder and married them. As a rule,
he makes a very long and solemn thing of the marriage ceremony, but this
time he cut out everything that wasn't absolutely necessary; and it was
well that he did, for just as he pronounced them man and wife, Emmeline
drove into the lane.

She knew perfectly well what had happened when she saw the minister with
his blue book in his hand. Never a word said she. She marched to the
front door, unlocked it, and strode upstairs. I've always been convinced
it was a mercy that closet window was so small, or I believe that she
would have thrown Prissy out of it. As it was, she walked her downstairs
by the arm and actually flung her at Stephen.

"There, take your wife," she said, "and I'll pack up every stitch she
owns and send it after her; and I never want to see her or you again as
long as I live."

Then she turned to me and Thomas.

"As for you that have aided and abetted that weakminded fool in this,
take yourselves out of my yard and never darken my door again."

"Goodness, who wants to, you old spitfire?" said Thomas.

It wasn't just the thing for him to say, perhaps, but we are all human,
even elders.

The girls didn't escape. Emmeline looked daggers at them.

"This will be something for you to carry back to Avonlea," she said.
"You gossips down there will have enough to talk about for a spell.
That's all you ever go out of Avonlea for--just to fetch and carry
tales."

Finally she finished up with the minister.

"I'm going to the Baptist church in Spencervale after this," she said.
Her tone and look said a hundred other things. She whirled into the
house and slammed the door.

Mr. Leonard looked around on us with a pitying smile as Stephen put
poor, half-fainting Prissy into the buggy.

"I am very sorry," he said in that gently, saintly way of his, "for the
Baptists."





XI. The Miracle at Carmody


Salome looked out of the kitchen window, and a pucker of distress
appeared on her smooth forehead.

"Dear, dear, what has Lionel Hezekiah been doing now?" she murmured
anxiously.

Involuntarily she reached out for her crutch; but it was a little beyond
her reach, having fallen on the floor, and without it Salome could not
move a step.

"Well, anyway, Judith is bringing him in as fast as she can," she
reflected. "He must have been up to something terrible this time; for
she looks very cross, and she never walks like that unless she is angry
clear through. Dear me, I am sometimes tempted to think that Judith and
I made a mistake in adopting the child. I suppose two old maids don't
know much about bringing up a boy properly. But he is NOT a bad child,
and it really seems to me that there must be some way of making him
behave better if we only knew what it was."

Salome's monologue was cut short by the entrance of her sister Judith,
holding Lionel Hezekiah by his chubby wrist with a determined grip.

Judith Marsh was ten years older than Salome, and the two women were
as different in appearance as night and day. Salome, in spite of her
thirty-five years, looked almost girlish. She was small and pink and
flower-like, with little rings of pale golden hair clustering all over
her head in a most unspinster-like fashion, and her eyes were big and
blue, and mild as a dove's. Her face was perhaps a weak one, but it was
very sweet and appealing.

Judith Marsh was tall and dark, with a plain, tragic face and iron-gray
hair. Her eyes were black and sombre, and every feature bespoke
unyielding will and determination. Just now she looked, as Salome had
said, "angry clear through," and the baleful glances she cast on the
small mortal she held would have withered a more hardened criminal than
six happy-go-lucky years had made of Lionel Hezekiah.

Lionel Hezekiah, whatever his shortcomings, did not look bad. Indeed,
he was as engaging an urchin as ever beamed out on a jolly good world
through a pair of big, velvet-brown eyes. He was chubby and firm-limbed,
with a mop of beautiful golden curls, which were the despair of his
heart and the pride and joy of Salome's; and his round face was usually
a lurking-place for dimples and smiles and sunshine.

But just now Lionel Hezekiah was under a blight; he had been caught
red-handed in guilt, and was feeling much ashamed of himself. He hung
his head and squirmed his toes under the mournful reproach in Salome's
eyes. When Salome looked at him like that, Lionel Hezekiah always felt
that he was paying more for his fun than it was worth.

"What do you suppose I caught him doing this time?" demanded Judith.

"I--I don't know," faltered Salome.

"Firing--at--a--mark--on--the--henhouse--door--with--new-laid--eggs,"
said Judith with measured distinctness. "He has broken every egg that
was laid to-day except three. And as for the state of that henhouse
door--"

Judith paused, with an indignant gesture meant to convey that the state
of the henhouse door must be left to Salome's imagination, since the
English language was not capable of depicting it.

"O Lionel Hezekiah, why will you do such things?" said Salome miserably.

"I--didn't know it was wrong," said Lionel Hezekiah, bursting into
prompt tears. "I--I thought it would be bully fun. Seems's if everything
what's fun 's wrong."

Salome's heart was not proof against tears, as Lionel Hezekiah very well
knew. She put her arm about the sobbing culprit, and drew him to her
side.

"He didn't know it was wrong," she said defiantly to Judith.

"He's got to be taught, then," was Judith's retort. "No, you needn't
try to beg him off, Salome. He shall go right to bed without supper, and
stay there till to-morrow morning."

"Oh! not without his supper," entreated Salome. "You--you won't improve
the child's morals by injuring his stomach, Judith."

"Without his supper, I say," repeated Judith inexorably. "Lionel
Hezekiah, go up-stairs to the south room, and go to bed at once."

Lionel Hezekiah went up-stairs, and went to bed at once. He was never
sulky or disobedient. Salome listened to him as he stumped patiently
up-stairs with a sob at every step, and her own eyes filled with tears.

"Now don't for pity's sake go crying, Salome," said Judith irritably. "I
think I've let him off very easily. He is enough to try the patience of
a saint, and I never was that," she added with entire truth.

"But he isn't bad," pleaded Salome. "You know he never does anything the
second time after he has been told it was wrong, never."

"What good does that do when he is certain to do something new and twice
as bad? I never saw anything like him for originating ideas of mischief.
Just look at what he has done in the past fortnight--in one fortnight,
Salome. He brought in a live snake, and nearly frightened you into fits;
he drank up a bottle of liniment, and almost poisoned himself; he took
three toads to bed with him; he climbed into the henhouse loft, and fell
through on a hen and killed her; he painted his face all over with your
water-colours; and now comes THIS exploit. And eggs at twenty-eight
cents a dozen! I tell you, Salome, Lionel Hezekiah is an expensive
luxury."

"But we couldn't do without him," protested Salome.

"_I_ could. But as you can't, or think you can't, we'll have to keep
him, I suppose. But the only way to secure any peace of mind for
ourselves, as far as I can see, is to tether him in the yard, and hire
somebody to watch him."

"There must be some way of managing him," said Salome desperately. She
thought Judith was in earnest about the tethering. Judith was generally
so terribly in earnest in all she said. "Perhaps it is because he has
no other employment that he invents so many unheard-of things. If he had
anything to occupy himself with--perhaps if we sent him to school--"

"He's too young to go to school. Father always said that no child should
go to school until it was seven, and I don't mean Lionel Hezekiah shall.
Well, I'm going to take a pail of hot water and a brush, and see what I
can do to that henhouse door. I've got my afternoon's work cut out for
me."

Judith stood Salome's crutch up beside her, and departed to purify the
henhouse door. As soon as she was safely out of the way, Salome took her
crutch, and limped slowly and painfully to the foot of the stairs. She
could not go up and comfort Lionel Hezekiah as she yearned to do,
which was the reason Judith had sent him up-stairs. Salome had not been
up-stairs for fifteen years. Neither did she dare to call him out on the
landing, lest Judith return. Besides, of course he must be punished; he
had been very naughty.

"But I wish I could smuggle a bit of supper up to him," she mused,
sitting down on the lowest step and listening. "I don't hear a sound. I
suppose he has cried himself to sleep, poor, dear baby. He certainly
is dreadfully mischievous; but it seems to me that it shows an
investigating turn of mind, and if it could only be directed into the
proper channels--I wish Judith would let me have a talk with Mr. Leonard
about Lionel Hezekiah. I wish Judith didn't hate ministers so. I don't
mind so much her not letting me go to church, because I'm so lame that
it would be painful anyhow; but I'd like to talk with Mr. Leonard now
and then about some things. I can never believe that Judith and father
were right; I am sure they were not. There is a God, and I'm afraid
it's terribly wicked not to go to church. But there, nothing short of a
miracle would convince Judith; so there is no use in thinking about it.
Yes, Lionel Hezekiah must have gone to sleep."

Salome pictured him so, with his long, curling lashes brushing his rosy,
tear-stained cheek and his chubby fists clasped tightly over his breast
as was his habit; her heart grew warm and thrilling with the maternity
the picture provoked.

A year previously Lionel Hezekiah's parents, Abner and Martha Smith, had
died, leaving a houseful of children and very little else. The children
were adopted into various Carmody families, and Salome Marsh had amazed
Judith by asking to be allowed to take the five-year-old "baby." At
first Judith had laughed at the idea; but, when she found that Salome
was in earnest, she yielded. Judith always gave Salome her own way
except on one point.

"If you want the child, I suppose you must have him," she said finally.
"I wish he had a civilized name, though. Hezekiah is bad, and Lionel is
worse; but the two in combination, and tacked on to Smith at that, is
something that only Martha Smith could have invented. Her judgment was
the same clear through, from selecting husbands to names."

So Lionel Hezekiah came into Judith's home and Salome's heart. The
latter was permitted to love him all she pleased, but Judith overlooked
his training with a critical eye. Possibly it was just as well, for
Salome might otherwise have ruined him with indulgence. Salome, who
always adopted Judith's opinions, no matter how ill they fitted her,
deferred to the former's decrees meekly, and suffered far more than
Lionel Hezekiah when he was punished.

She sat on the stairs until she fell asleep herself, her head pillowed
on her arm. Judith found her there when she came in, severe and
triumphant, from her bout with the henhouse door. Her face softened into
marvelous tenderness as she looked at Salome.

"She's nothing but a child herself in spite of her age," she thought
pityingly. "A child that's had her whole life thwarted and spoiled
through no fault of her own. And yet folks say there is a God who is
kind and good! If there is a God, he is a cruel, jealous tyrant, and I
hate Him!"

Judith's eyes were bitter and vindictive. She thought she had many
grievances against the great Power that rules the universe, but the most
intense was Salome's helplessness--Salome, who fifteen years before
had been the brightest, happiest of maidens, light of heart and foot,
bubbling over with harmless, sparkling mirth and life. If Salome could
only walk like other women, Judith told herself that she would not hate
the great tyrannical Power.

Lionel Hezekiah was subdued and angelic for four days after that affair
