
"I don't think I should like to stop there," said Frank. "Isn't there
any private family where I can get board for a week or two?"

"If you don't object to plain fare," said the farmer, "I might agree to
board you myself."

This was precisely what Frank wanted, and he replied that nothing would
suit him better.

"We live humbly," continued Mr. Hamlin--for this, Frank learned, was his
driver's name--"but we will try to make you comfortable."

"I feel sure of that, sir, and I am much obliged to you for receiving
me."

"As to terms, you can pay whatever you can afford. My wife and children
will be glad to see you. It's pretty quiet out here, and it breaks the
monotony to meet any person from the East."

"How long have you lived in Jackson, Mr. Hamlin?"

"About eight years. I was not brought up as a farmer, but became one
from necessity. I was a bookkeeper in Chicago for a good many years,
until I found the confinement and close work were injuring my health.
Then I came here and set up as a farmer. I got along pretty well, at
first; at any rate, I made a living for my family; but when Mr.
Fairfield became agent, he raised my rent, and, in other ways, made it
hard for me. Now I have a hard struggle."

"I thought you were not always a farmer," said Frank.

"What made you think so?"

"You don't talk like a farmer. You have the appearance of a man who has
lived in cities."

"Seems to me you are a close observer, for a boy of your years," said
Mr. Hamlin, shrewdly.

Frank smiled.

"I should be glad if your compliment were deserved," he answered. "It's
a pity you were not agent, instead of Mr. Fairfield," suggested Frank,
pointedly.

"I wish I were," answered Hamlin. "I believe I should make a good one,
though I might not turn over as much money to my employer. I should,
first of all, lower the rents and make it as easy for the tenants as I
could in justice to my New York principal."

"Do you know how much Mr. Fairfield receives--how large a salary, I
mean?"

"I know what Mr. Sampson got--twelve hundred dollars a year; but Mr.
Fairfield lives at the rate of more than twice that sum, if I can judge
from appearances."

"I suppose you would be contented with the salary which Mr. Sampson
received?"

"Contented! I should feel like a rich man. It would not interfere with
my carrying on my farm, and I should be able to make something from
that. Why, it is as much as I received as a bookkeeper, and here the
expenses of living are small, compared with what they were in Chicago. I
could save money and educate my children, as I cannot do now. I have a
boy who wants a classical education, but of course there are no schools
here which can afford it, and I am too poor to send him away from home.
I suppose I shall have to bring him up as a farmer, though it is a great
pity, for he is not fitted for it."

Mr. Hamlin sighed, but Frank felt in unusually good spirits. He saw his
way clear already, not only to recommend Mr. Fairfield's displacement,
but to urge Mr. Hamlin's appointment in his stead; that is, if his
favorable impressions were confirmed on further acquaintance.

"It seems to me," said the driver, changing the subject, "you might find
something better to do than to peddle stationery."

"I don't mean to follow the business long," answered Frank.

"It can't pay much."

"I am not wholly dependent upon it," said our hero. "There is one
advantage about it. It enables me to travel about and pay my expenses,
and you know traveling is agreeable to a boy of my age."

"That is true. Well, your expenses won't amount to much while you are in
Jackson. I shall only charge you just enough to cover expenses--say
three dollars a week."

Frank was about to insist on paying a larger sum, but it occurred to him
that he must keep up appearances, and he therefore only thanked his kind
acquaintance.

By this time they had entered the village of Jackson.

"There's Mr. Fairfield now!" said Mr. Hamlin, suddenly, pointing with
his whip to a rather tall, stout man, with a red nose and inflamed
countenance, who was walking unsteadily along the sidewalk.

Frank carefully scrutinized the agent, and mentally decided that such a
man was unfit for the responsible position he held.




CHAPTER XXXV

DICK HAMLIN


Mr. Hamlin stopped his horse a quarter of a mile from the village in
front of a plain farmhouse.

An intelligent-looking boy, of perhaps fifteen, coarsely but neatly
dressed, approached and greeted his father, not without a glance of
surprise and curiosity at Frank.

"You may unharness the horses, Dick," said Mr. Hamlin. "When you come
back, I will introduce you to a boy friend who will stay with us a
while."

Dick obeyed, and Frank followed his host into the house.

Here he was introduced to Mrs. Hamlin, a motherly-looking woman, and
Annie and Grace, younger sisters of Dick.

"I am glad to see you," said Mrs. Hamlin, to our hero, after a brief
explanation from her husband. "We will try to make you comfortable."

"Thank you!" said Frank. "I am sure I shall feel at home."

The house was better furnished than might have been anticipated. When
Mr. Hamlin left Chicago, he had some money saved up, and he furnished
his house in a comfortable manner.

It was not, however, the furniture that attracted Frank's attention so
much as the books, papers and pictures that gave the rooms a homelike
appearance.

"I shall be much better off here than I would have been at the tavern,"
he thought. "This seems like home."

"I see," said Mr. Hamlin, "that you are surprised to see so many books
and pictures. I admit that my house does not look like the house of a
poor man, who has to struggle for the mere necessaries of life. But
books and periodicals we have always classed among the necessities, and
I am sure we would all rather limit ourselves to dry bread for two out
of the three meals than to give up this food for the mind."

"I think you are a very sensible man, Mr. Hamlin," said Frank. "I
couldn't get along without something to read."

"Not in this out-of-the-way place, at any rate," said Mr. Hamlin.
"Nothing can be more dismal than the homes of some of my neighbors, who
spend as much, or more, than I do every year. Yet, they consider me
extravagant because I buy books and subscribe for periodicals."

By this time, Dick came in from the barn.

"Dick," said his father, "this is Frank Courtney, who comes from Chicago
on a business errand. He is a traveling merchant--"

"In other words, a peddler," said Frank, with a smile, "ready to give
the good people in Jackson a chance to buy stationery at reasonable
prices."

"He will board with us while he is canvassing the neighborhood, and I
expect you and he will become great friends."

"I think we shall," said Frank.

Dick was a little shy, but a few minutes set him quite at ease with his
new acquaintance.

After supper, Frank said:

"Dick, if you are at leisure, I wish you would take a walk about the
village with me. I want to see how it looks."

"All right," said Dick.

When the two left the house, the country boy began to ask questions.

"How do you like your business?" he asked.

"Not very well," answered Frank. "I do not think I shall stay in it very
long."

"Do you sell enough to make your expenses?" asked Dick.

"No; but I am not wholly dependent on my sales. I have a little
income--a hundred dollars a year--paid me by my stepfather."

"I wish I had as much. It seems a good deal to me."

"It doesn't go very far. What are you intending to be, Dick?"

"I suppose I shall have to be a farmer, though I don't like it."

"What would you like to be?"

"I should like to get an education," said Dick, his eyes lighting up. "I
should like to study Latin and Greek, and go to college. Then I could be
a teacher or a lawyer. But there is no chance of that," he added, his
voice falling.

"Don't be too sure of that, Dick," said Frank Frank, hopefully.
"Something may turn up in your favor."

"Nothing ever does turn up in Jackson," said the boy, in a tone of
discouragement. "Father is a poor man, and has hard work to get along.
He can give me no help."

"Isn't the farm productive?"

"There is no trouble about that, but he has to pay too high a rent. It's
all the fault of Fairfield."

"The agent?"

"Yes."

"Your father was telling me about him. Now, if your father were in his
place, I suppose he could give you the advantages you wish."

"Oh, yes! There would be no trouble then. I am sure he would make a
better and more popular agent than Mr. Fairfield; but there is no use
thinking about that."

"I expected myself to go to college," said Frank. "In fact, I have
studied Latin and Greek, and in less than a year I could be ready to
enter."

"Why don't you?" asked Dick.

"You forget that I am a poor peddler."

"Then how were you able to get so good an education?" asked Dick, in
surprise.

"Because I was once better off than I am now. The fact is, Dick," he
added, "I have seen better days. But when I was reduced to poverty, I
gave up hopes of college education and became what I am."

"Wasn't it hard?"

"Not so much as you might suppose. My home was not happy. I have a
stepfather and stepbrother, neither of whom I like. In fact, there is no
love lost between us. I was not obliged to leave home, but under the
circumstances I preferred to."

"Where are your stepfather and your stepbrother now?"

"They are traveling in Europe."

"While you are working hard for a living! That does not seem to be
just."

"We must make the best of circumstances, Dick. Whose is that large house
on the left?"

"That belongs to Mr. Fairfield.

"He seems to live nicely."

"Yes, he has improved and enlarged the house a good deal since he moved
into it--at Mrs. Percival's expense, I suppose."

"He seems to have pretty much his own way here," said Frank.

"Yes. Mr. Percival never comes to Jackson, and I suppose he believes all
that the agent tells him."

"He may get found out some time."

"I wish he might. It would be a great blessing to Jackson if he were
removed and a good man were put in his place."

"That may happen some day."

"Not very likely, I am afraid."

At this moment Mr. Fairfield himself came out of his front gate.

"Hello, Hamlin!" he said, roughly, to Dick. "Is your father at home?"

"Yes, sir."

"I have something to say to him. I think I will call round."

"You will find him at home, sir."

"Dick," said Frank, when the agent had passed on, "do you mind going
back? What you tell me makes me rather curious about Mr. Fairfield. At
your house I may get a chance to see something of him."

"Let us go back, then," said Dick; "but I don't think, Frank, that you
will care much about keeping up the acquaintance."

"Perhaps not; but I shall gratify my curiosity."

The two boys turned and followed the agent closely. They reached the
house about five minutes after Mr. Fairfield.




CHAPTER XXXVI

MR. FAIRFIELD, THE AGENT


The two boys found Mr. Fairfield already seated in the most comfortable
chair in the sitting room.

He looked inquiringly at Frank when he entered with Dick.

"Who is that boy, Hamlin?" inquired the agent. "Nephew of yours?"

"No, sir. It is a young man who has come to Jackson on business."

"What kind of business?'

"I sell stationery," Frank answered for himself.

"Oh, a peddler!" said the agent, contemptuously.

"Many of our most successful men began in that way," said Mr. Hamlin,
fearing lest Frank's feelings might be hurt.

"I never encourage peddlers myself," said Mr. Fairfield, pompously.

"Then I suppose it will be of no use for me to call at your door," said
Frank, who, in place of being mortified, was amused by the agent's
arrogance.

"I should say not, unless your back is proof against a broomstick,"
answered Fairfield, coarsely. "I tell my servant to treat all who call
in that way."

"I won't put her to the trouble of using it," said Frank, disgusted at
the man's ill manners.

"That's where you are wise--yes, wise and prudent--young man."

"And now, Hamlin," said the agent, "I may as well come to business."

"To business!" repeated the farmer, rather surprised, for there was no
rent due for a month.

"Yes, to business," said Fairfield. "I came to give you notice that
after the next payment I shall feel obliged to raise your rent."

"Raise my rent!" exclaimed the farmer, in genuine dismay. "I am already
paying a considerably higher rent than I paid to your predecessor."

"Can't help it. Old Sampson was a slow-going old fogy. He didn't do his
duty by his employer. When I came in, I turned over a new leaf."

"I certainly got along better in his time."

"No doubt. He was a great deal too easy with you. Didn't do his duty,
sir. Wasn't sharp enough. That's all."

"You certainly cannot be in earnest in raising my rent, Mr. Fairfield,"
said the farmer, uneasily.

