
"I'll tell you all about it when I get back."

"Just mention that you've got a friend--a stylish young man whom they'd
like to meet. That may bring me an invitation next time."

Andy laughed.

"So far as I am concerned, Sam," he said, "I wish you were going. But
you have an engagement at the Star Theater."

"So I have. I almost forgot."

Andy had very little time for preparation, but made what haste he could,
and just as the public clocks struck seven he rang the bell of Mrs.
Mason's house.

"I am glad you received my invitation in time," said the lady.

"So am I," returned Andy; "nothing could have been more welcome."

Just then Roy and her brother, Mr. Crawford, entered.

Roy was a very pleasant-looking boy, with dark-brown hair and a dark
complexion. He was perhaps two inches shorter than Andy.

"This is Roy," said Mrs. Mason.

"I am glad to see you," said Roy, offering his hand.

Andy felt that he should like his new boy friend.

Next he was introduced to Mr. Crawford, a stout gentleman of perhaps
forty, looking very much like his sister.

"I have heard my sister speak of you so often that I am glad to meet
you, Andy," he said, affably.

"Thank you, sir."

"John, lead the way to the dining room," said his sister.

So they filed downstairs, and took their seats at the table.

Mr. Crawford sat at the head, opposite his sister, while Roy and Andy
occupied the sides.

When dinner was nearly over, Mr. Crawford remarked:

"I believe, Andy, you are in the employ of Mr. Flint, the jeweler."

"I was," answered Andy.

"Surely you have not left him?" exclaimed Mrs. Mason.

"No, I have been discharged."

"I am surprised to hear it. I thought you were a favorite with Mr.
Flint."

"So I was. He does not know I have been discharged."

"You puzzle me."

"Mr. Flint is in Colorado, and Mr. Rich, his head salesman, has taken
the opportunity to discharge me, and put his nephew in my place."

"But surely he would not venture to do this without some pretext."

"He claims that I took a watch from the case, and pawned it."

"Of course that is untrue."

"Yes, and I am in a position to prove it when Mr. Flint returns."

Andy told the story of his visit to the pawn shop, and the discovery he
made there.

"This is a shameful plot!" said Mrs. Mason, indignantly. "I am afraid
you are in trouble, deprived of your income."

"Fortunately I have no board to pay. That is paid by the gentleman who
procured me the situation."

Presently they went upstairs.

"Roy," said his mother, "we will excuse you for an hour while you are
getting your Latin lesson."

"I don't like Latin, mother," grumbled Roy, "at least not to-night. I am
afraid I can't fix my thoughts on the lesson. I want to be with Andy."

"What are you studying in Latin, Roy?" asked Andy.

"_Caesar_."

"If you wish, I will help you."

"Can you?" asked Roy, joyfully.

"I have been through _Caesar_, and _Virgil_, also. When I left the
academy I was studying _Cicero_."

"Roy will be glad of your help, Andy," said his mother. "I did not know
you were such a scholar."

"I was getting ready for college, but my father's losses required me to
break off."

Andy proved such an efficient helper that Roy found himself at leisure
in half an hour.

In the meantime Mrs. Mason asked her brother:

"What do you think of my protege?"

"He seems a manly and attractive boy."

"Can't you find something for him to do?"

"I will talk with him presently, and then decide."




CHAPTER XXI.

NEW PROSPECTS.


After Roy, with Andy's assistance, had prepared his lesson in _Caesar_,
John Crawford began to converse with him with a view of forming a
judgment of his business qualifications.

"Are you especially interested in the jewelry line?" he asked.

"No, sir. It was merely chance that led me to Mr. Flint's store."

"I see you are a Latin scholar. What career did you expect to follow if
your father's misfortune had not interrupted your education?"

"I don't think I should care for a profession. I prefer a life of
business."

"You have had no special business in view?"

"No, sir. I think I could adapt myself to any that I had an opportunity
to follow."

"What pay did you receive from Mr. Flint?"

"Five dollars a week."

"I will tell you why I am inquiring. I am in the real estate business,
in rather a large way. I have a boy in the office who is not suited to
his position. He is a good scholar, but has no head for business. I have
made up my mind to discharge him on Saturday. Would you like his place?"

"Very much, sir."

"I can only offer you five dollars a week, but as soon as you make
yourself worth more I will raise you."

"That is quite satisfactory, Mr. Crawford. As soon as Mr. Flint returns
I can get a recommendation from him. I am quite sure I shall like your
business better."

"My sister's recommendation is sufficient."

"Thank you, John," said Mrs. Mason.

"If you become interested in the business and show an aptitude for it,
there will be a chance to rise. It depends upon that. If you only work
for the money, you won't rise."

"I understand, Mr. Crawford, and I am satisfied."

"Mother," said Roy, "I wish you would engage Andy to come here evenings
and help me with my lessons. I should learn twice as fast. Besides, I
should like his company."

Roy was an only child, and it was the desire of his mother's heart that
he should acquire a good education. Her means were ample and her
disposition generous.

"I don't know but Andy would feel too tired, after being in your uncle's
office all day, to teach you in the evening, she said.

"Would you, Andy?" asked Roy.

"No; I should enjoy reviewing my old studies with you."

"Then, I will engage you," said Mrs. Mason. "You can come here at eight
every evening."

"I will do so with pleasure."

"And for compensation I will pay you as much as my brother does."

"I wouldn't charge anything for helping Roy," said Andy. "It would only
be a pleasure to me."

"Andrew," said Mr. Crawford. "I am afraid you will never make a business
man if you are willing to work on those terms. My advice to you is to
accept my sister's offer. She can afford to pay you what she offers, and
you have your living to make."

"I shall insist upon paying," said Mrs. Mason, "though I appreciate
Andy's generous offer."

"Thank you very much. With such an income I shall feel rich."

"I am so glad you are going to help me, Andy," said Roy. "We'll have
bully times."

"I don't think Julius Caesar ever made use of such an expression, Roy,"
said his uncle.

"When do you wish me to come down to business, Mr. Crawford?" asked
Andy.

"You may as well come to-morrow, and get broken in before your regular
engagement commences."

"I shall be glad to do so."

"For this week you need only stay till three o'clock in the afternoon.
There isn't much doing after that."

When Andy went home it will not be wondered at if he was in a state of
exhilaration. His discharge from the jeweler's had turned out to his
advantage. His income was now ten dollars a week, and he had no board to
pay. He certainly ought to lay up money.

He said to himself that now he would not go back to Mr. Flint's even if
he had the chance.

When he entered his room he found Sam Perkins waiting for him.

"I have been thinking, Andy," he said, "that I might be able to get you
into our store. I will speak to Mr. Chambers to-morrow."

"There is no occasion, Sam, though I thank you for your kind offer; I
have a place."

"What, already?" ejaculated Sam, in amazement. "What chance have you had
to hunt up a place?"

"The place hunted me up," answered Andy, with a smile. "I met a
gentleman at dinner, who offered to take me into his employment."

"What business?"

"Real estate."

"What is the firm?"

"John Crawford & Co."

"I know of the house. The office is on lower Broadway. It is a big
firm."

"I am glad of that."

"How much are you to get?"

"Five dollars a week."

"Won't you find it hard to live on that?"

"I have got another place, too."

"What do you mean?"

"I am to help a boy about his Latin in the evening. I shall get five
dollars a week for that, too."

"What! ten dollars a week in all?"

"You are right. I give you credit for your mathematical talent."

"Why, Andy, you are born to good luck! I wish I was paid ten dollars a
week," said Sam, rather enviously. "But I didn't know you understood
Latin."

"You don't know how learned I am," said Andy, smiling.

"When will you get time for your pupil?"

"In the evening."

"I am sorry for that. I sha'n't often meet you if you are to be occupied
day and evening, too."

"We shall meet at breakfast and supper. I sha'n't leave here to go
uptown till half-past seven."

"But you can't go to the theater."

"I am willing to give that up for five dollars a week."

"So would I be."

"If I hear of any other boy who needs a Latin tutor I will recommend
you."

The next morning Andy reported at Mr. Crawford's office. The office he
found to be a large one, consisting of three rooms, one of them small,
