likely to keep on their way, now is our time," said Henry.

They pushed farther into the lake, Ross and Shif'less Sol now handling
the paddles with wonderful dexterity. They went very slowly, not wishing
to make the faintest splash, and meanwhile the darkness thickened and
deepened again. It felt very damp to the face, and Paul saw now that fog
from the rain of the day was mingled with it. They could not see the
faintest outline of the island, but held their course from memory.

They had been out about ten minutes when Ross and Sol, as if by
simultaneous impulse, ceased paddling, and Henry whispered; "Don't anybody
make any noise; it's for our lives!"

They heard that faint splash, which Paul had learned to hate, coming back.
The Miami navy, from some unknown cause, had turned in its course. How
Paul blessed the thick, fog-charged darkness!

"It's all chance now," whispered Henry, ever so low, and Paul understood.

Then they held their breath, and the Miami canoes steadily drew nearer.
Would they come directly upon the white canoe or would they pass? They
passed, but they passed so near that Paul could hear the Indians in the
boats talking to each other. He also heard his heart beating in his body
as the invisible file went by, and the loud beat did not cease until no
more splashing of the paddles was heard.

"Is all my hair gray?" whispered Shif'less Sol.

Paul wanted to laugh in a kind of nervous relief, but he did not dare.
Instead he whispered back:

"I can't see, Sol, but I'm sure mine is."

Ross and Shif'less Sol took up the paddles again, and now they reached the
island without interruption. The boat was hidden again, and soon all were
in the hut in the sheltered cove. Henry spoke with approval of the
industry and forethought of Paul and Jim in their absence.

"This hut is a mighty good place on a raw night like this," he said. "Now,
I'm going to sleep, and I'd advise you to do the same, Paul. I'll tell you
to-morrow all that we've done and have seen and know."

While the others slept, Jim Hart, long-legged and captious, but brave,
faithful, and enduring, watched. He saw the fog and the darkness clear
away, and the moonlight came out, crisp and cold. A light wind blew and
dead leaves fell from the trees, rustling dryly as they fell. Autumn was
waning and cold weather would soon be at hand. When pale dawn showed, Jim
roused his comrades, and they ate breakfast, though no fire was lighted.
Then Henry talked.

"It's true," he said, "about a great league of all the tribes being formed
to destroy forever the white settlements in Kentucky. They are alarmed
about their hunting grounds, and they think they must all strike together
now, and strike hard. We've spied upon several of their villages, and we
know. Some renegades are with them, pointing the way, and among them is
Braxton Wyatt, the most venomous of them all. I don't see how one who is
born white can do such a thing."

But Paul had read books, and his mind was always leaping forward to new
knowledge.

"It is the bad blood of some far-off ancestor showing," he said. "It is
what they call a reversion. You know, Henry, that Braxton was always mean
and sulky. I never saw anybody else so spiteful and jealous as he is, and
maybe he thinks he will be a big man among the Indians."

"That's so," said Henry. "I can understand why anybody should love a life
in the forest. Ah, it's such a glorious thing!"

He expanded his chest, and the light leaping into his eyes told that Henry
Ware was living the life he loved.

"But," he added, "I can't see how anybody could ever turn against his own
people."

"It's moral perversity," said Paul.

"Moral perversity," said Jim Hart, stumbling over the syllables. "Them
words sound mighty big, Paul. Would you mind tellin' us what they mean?"

"They mean, Jim," put in Shif'less Sol, "that you won't be what you ought
to be, an' that you won't, all the time."

"That's a good enough explanation," laughed Paul.

"Whatever is the reason," said Tom Ross, who used words as rarely as if
they were precious jewels, "the tribes are comin' together to destroy the
white settlements. Braxton is givin' them all kinds uv useful information,
an' we've got to hinder these doin's, ef we kin."

The others agreed once more, and talked further of the new league. They
did not go into much detail about their adventures while spying on the
villages, rather looking now to the future.

"I told you, Paul, we ought to a-put a knife in that Braxton Wyatt when we
had the chance," growled Shif'less Sol.

"I couldn't do it, Sol," replied Paul.

Later they held a conference beside a bed of coals that threw out no
smoke, and Paul listened with absorbed attention while Henry stated the
case fully.

"The Shawnees were somewhat daunted by their repulse at Wareville last
year," he said, "but they hope yet to crush the white settlement before we
grow too strong. They are seeking to draw the Miamis, Wyandottes, and all
the other tribes up here into a league for that purpose, and they want to
have it formed and strike while our people are not expecting it.
Wareville, owing to her victory of last year, thinks she's safe, and it is
not the custom of Indians to raid much in winter. See, cold weather is not
far away."

Henry looked up, and the eyes of the others followed. The trees were still
clothed in leaves, but the blazing reds and yellows and the dim mist on
the horizon showed that Indian summer was at hand.

"Any day," continued Henry, "a cold wind may strip off all these leaves,
and winter, which can be very cold up here, will come roaring down. Now,
the Shawnees are more than willing to cross the Ohio again to attack us,
but the Miamis, while ready enough to take white scalps up here, have not
yet made up their minds to go south on the war trail. The Shawnees are
sending war belts to them, because the Miamis are a powerful tribe and
have many warriors. The first thing for us to do is to take the messengers
with the war belts."

"An' to do that," said Shif'less Sol, "we've got to git off this islan' ez
soon ez we kin, an' shake off the band o' Miamis. Thar is always work fur
a tired man to do."

Paul laughed at his tone of disgust. The boy's spirits were high now; in
fact, he was exuberant over the safe return of his comrades, and the
entire enterprise appealed with steadily increasing force to him. To
hinder and prevent the Indian alliance until the white settlements were
strong enough to defy all the tribes! This was in truth a deed worth
while! It was foresight, statesmanship, a long step in the founding of a
great state, and he should have a part in it! Already his vivid mind
painted the picture of his comrades and himself triumphant.

"We must go to-night, if it is dark," said Henry.

"That's so," said Tom Ross emphatically.

The three had captured fresh supplies of ammunition while they were gone,
and they replenished the powder-horns and bullet pouches of Paul and Jim
Hart. Moreover, they had taken blankets, of a fine, soft, light but warm
make, probably bought by the Indians from European traders, and they gave
one each to Paul and Jim Hart.

"It's getting too cold now," said Henry, "to sleep in our clothes only on
the ground in the forest."

They made up the blankets in tight little rolls, which they fastened on
their backs, and Paul and Jim Hart put in a tanned deerskin with each of
theirs.

"They're pow'ful light, an' they may come in mighty handy," said Long Jim.

The night fortunately was dark, as they had hoped, and about eleven
o'clock they embarked in the canoe, paddling straight for the western
shore. Paul looked back with some regret at the island, which at times had
been a snug little home. The ancient, mummified bodies in the trees had
protected them, as if with a circle of steel, and he was grateful to those
dead of long ago.

They saw no sign of the Indian canoes, and both Henry and Ross were
certain that they were in camp somewhere on the eastern shore. The little
party reached the dense woods on the west without incident whatever, and
there they partly sank the canoe in shallow water among dense bushes. Then
they plunged into the forest, and traveled fast. Shif'less Sol spoke after
a while, and apparently his groaning voice was drawn up from the very
bottom of his chest.

"Oh, that blessed canoe!" he said. "I wuz so happy when I wuz a-ridin' in
it, an' somebody else wuz a-paddlin'. Now I hev to do all my own work."

"You wouldn't be truly happy, Sol Hyde," said Jim Hart, "'less you wuz
ridin' in a gilt coach drawed by four white horses, right smack through
the woods here."

"That's heaven," said the shiftless one, with a deep sigh. "I don't ever
dream o' sech a thing ez that, and please don't call it up to my mind, Jim
Hart; the contras' between that an' footin' it ez I am now is too cruel
an' too great."

Paul smiled. The little by-play between those two good friends amused and
brightened him, but nothing else was said for a long time. Then it was
Henry who spoke, and he called a halt.

"The big Miami village is not more than a dozen miles away," he said, "and
the warriors there are expecting messengers from the Shawnees, with war
belts. The messengers will pass near here, and we'll wait for them. The
rest of you will go to sleep, and Tom and I will watch."

Paul, Jim Hart, and Shif'less Sol rolled themselves in their blankets and
lay down under a tree, the shiftless one murmuring, "Now, this is what I
like," and the others saying nothing. Paul was devoutly grateful for the
blanket, because the air was now quite cold, but in five minutes all
emotions were lost in deep and dreamless sleep.

When Paul awoke from his slumber he started up in horror. Three powerful,
painted Shawnees stood over him. He was so much overwhelmed by the
catastrophe that he could only utter a kind of gasp. But the blood flowed
back from his heart into his veins when he heard the dry laugh of Long
Jim Hart.

"Paul," said Jim, "I'd like to introduce you to the three new Shawnee
warriors that you used to know, when they were white, an' that you called
then Henry Ware, Tom Ross, and Sol Hyde."

"Why, what has happened?" asked Paul, still in the depths of astonishment.

Then Henry spoke, and he spoke gravely.

"Sol did not sleep long, Paul," he said, "and when he awoke he joined us.
Then we went to meet the three Shawnee messengers, carrying war belts and
peace belts, for the Miamis to choose. It was not a business for you,
Paul. We met them, there was a fight--well, they will never appear in the
Miami village, and we are here in their place."

Paul understood, and he shuddered a little at the deadly conflict that
must have raged out there in the forest while he slept. Then he looked
curiously at the three. He never would have known any one of them
anywhere. They were savages in every aspect--painted and garbed like them,
and with their hair drawn up in the defiant scalp lock.

"What are you going to do?" he asked.

"Deliver the belts at the Miami village," replied Henry Ware, "but they
will be peace belts, not war belts."

"It is death," said Paul in protest.

"It is not death," replied Henry. "We will come back safely, and it is for
a great stake. You and Jim must remain here in the woods, waiting for us
again, and we'll trust to your skill and caution not to be caught. If the
warriors become too thick around here you might retreat to the island.
Anyway, the signal will be as before--three wails of the whip-poor-will."

Paul was impressed by his words, which were spoken with gravity and
emphasis.

"Yes, it's in a great cause, Henry," he said, "and we'll wait, expecting
you to come back."

Five minutes later the three newly made warriors took their path through
the forest, and they never looked back. Yet Henry Ware felt emotion.
Although he regarded Paul Cotter almost as a younger brother, he respected
him as a high type of one kind of being, and they were comrades true as
steel. Moreover, he knew that he and Ross and Sol were engaged upon the
most dangerous of tasks, and the chances were that they would not come
back. Yet he faced them with a high heart and dauntless courage.

The three walked swiftly and silently in single file, and neither Shawnee
nor Miami eye would have known that they were not Indian. They walked,
toes in, as Indians do, and they had every trick of manner or gesture
that the red men have. All trace of civilization was gone. Henry Ware,
Thomas floss, and Solomon Hyde had disappeared. In their places were Big
Fox, Brown Bear, and The Bat, Shawnee warriors who bore belts to the Miami
village, and who would talk about the war to be made upon the white
intruders far to the south of the Ohio.

Shortly before noon Big Fox, Brown Bear, and The Bat approached the Miami
village, pitched in a pleasant valley, where wood and water were in
plenty. Then they uttered the long whoop of the Shawnees, and it was
answered from the Miami village; but Big Fox, Brown Bear, and The Bat,
assured of a welcome, never stopped, keeping straight on for the village.
Squaws and children clustered around them, and openly spoke their
admiration of the three stalwart, splendidly proportioned warriors who had
come from the friendly tribe; but Big Fox, Brown Bear, and The Bat, in
accordance with the Indian nature, took no notice. It was only warriors
and chiefs to whom they would condescend to speak, and they were silent
and expressionless until the right moment should come. They passed
straight through the swarm of old men, women, children, and dogs, toward
the center of the village, where a long, low cabin of poles stood. An
ancient and reverend figure stood in the doorway to meet them. It was that
of Gray Beaver, head chief of the Miamis, an old, old man, gray with years
and wise like the beaver, from which he took his name.

"My Shawnee brethren are welcome to the Council House," he said. "You have
come far, and you shall rest, and the squaws shall bring you food before
we talk."

"It is sufficient to us to see the great and wise chief, Gray Beaver,"
said Henry. "Though we come from a long journey, it makes us strong and
brave again."

The old chief bowed, but his grave features did not relax. Nevertheless,
he was pleased in his secret soul at the gallant bearing and polite words
of the young warrior who addressed them. He led the way into the Council
House, and a half dozen underchiefs followed them, hiding their interest
beneath their painted masks of faces.

The Council House was large--fifty warriors could have sat in it--and
robes of the buffalo, beaver, and other animals were spread about. Big
Fox, Brown Bear, and The Bat sat down gravely, each upon a mat of skins,
and were served by the warriors with food and drink, which the squaws had
brought to the door, but beyond which they could not pass. The three
Shawnee belt bearers ate and drank in silence and dignity, and they
appreciated the rest and refreshment so needful to those who had traveled
far. Neither did anyone else speak. The venerable Gray Beaver sat on a
couch of skins a little higher than the others, and his eyes rested
steadily on the belt bearers. The subchiefs, silent and motionless on
their mats of skins, also watched the belt bearers. At one end of the
great room, in a kind of rude chimney, smoldered the council fire, a bed
of coals.

