recalling what the scout had said about the skill of the animal as a
sentinel, he had no doubt but that it meant that he had scented danger and
that the redskins were close at hand. Scarcely pausing to reflect upon the
advisability of the step, the lad began crawling in the direction of the
animal, not more then twenty feet away.

Before he had passed half the distance he was certain that a redskin was
at some deviltry, for the horse stamped and snorted, and showed such
excitement, that Fred forgot his own danger, and, springing to his feet,
ran rapidly toward the animal. Just as he reached him, he saw that an
Indian had him by the bridle, and was trying to draw him along, the
mustang resisting, but still yielding a step at a time. In a short time,
if the thief was not disturbed, he would have gotten him beyond the
possibility of rescue, he seeming more anxious to secure the steed than
the scalp of its owner. With never a thought of the consequences, Fred
raised his revolver and blazed away with both barrels, aiming as best he
could straight at the marauding Apache, who, with a howl of rage and
terror, dropped the bridle of the mustang and bounded away among the
rocks.

"There! I guess when you want to borrow a horse again, you'll ask the
owner."

The lad was reminded of his imprudence by the flash of a rifle almost in
his face, and the whizz of the bullet which grazed his cheek. But he still
had two loaded chambers in his revolver, and he wheeled for the purpose of
sending one of them at least, into the warrior that had made an attempt
upon his life. At this critical juncture the mustang displayed an
intelligence that was wonderful.

The Apache who was stealing upon him was near the steed, which, without
any preliminary warning, let out both his heels, knocking the unsuspecting
wretch fully a dozen feet and stretching him, badly wounded, upon the
ground.

"I wonder how many more there are?" exclaimed the lad, looking about him,
and expecting to see others rushing forward from the gloom.

But the repulse for the time being was effectual and the way was clear.

"I guess I'd better get out of here," was the thought of Fred, "for it
ain't likely they will leave me alone very long when they've found out
that I'm the only one left."

With revolver in hand he moved hurriedly backward among the rocks, and,
after going a few rods, halted and looked for his pursuers, whom he
believed to be close behind him. There was something coming, but a
moment's listening satisfied him that it was his mustang, which seemed to
comprehend the exigency fully as well as he did himself.

"I don't know about that," he reflected. "They can follow him better then
they can me, and he can't sneak along like I can. If they catch him,
they'll be pretty sure to catch me."

He started to flee, not from the Indians only, but from the mustang as
well. But the speed of the latter was greater than his own, and, after
several attempts to dodge him, he gave it up.

"If you can travel so well," reflected Fred, "you might as well carry me
on your back."

Saying this he leaped upon the animal's back and gave him free rein. The
animal was going it on his own hook and he plunged and labored along for
some minutes longer, over the rockiest sort of surface, until he halted of
his own accord. The instant he did so Fred leaped to the ground, paused
and listened for his pursuers. Nothing but the hurried breathing of the
mustang could be heard. The latter held his head well up, with ears thrown
forward, in the attitude of attention. But minute after minute passed and
the stillness remained unbroken. It looked indeed as if the fugitive horse
and boy had found rest for the time, and, so long as the darkness
continued, there was no necessity for further flight.




CHAPTER XXV.

HUNTING A STEED.


Leaving Fred Munson to watch for the approach of the Indians, it becomes
necessary to follow Mickey O'Rooney and Sut Simpson on their hunt for a
horse with which to continue their flight from the mountains and across
the prairies. It cannot be said that the scout, in starting upon this
expedition, had any particular plan in view. As he remarked, Indians were
around them, and, wherever Indians were found, it was safe to look for the
best kind of horses. Wherever the best opportunity offered, there he
intended to strike. With this view, the first position of their expedition
was in the nature of a survey, by which they intended to locate the field
in which to operate.

The Irishman could not fail to see the necessity of caution and silence,
and, leaving his more experienced companion to take the lead, he followed
him closely, without speaking or halting. The way continued rough and
broken, being very difficult to travel at times; but after they had
tramped a considerable distance, Mickey noticed that they were going down
hill at quite a rapid rate, and finally they reached the lowermost level,
where the scout faced him.

"Do yer know whar yer be?" he asked, in a significant tone.

"Know whar I be?" repeated the Irishman, in amazement. "How should I know,
as the spalpeens always said arter I knocked them down at the fair? What
means of information have I?"

"You've been over this spot afore," continued the scout, enjoying the
perplexity of his friend.

The latter scratched his head and looked about him with a more puzzled
expression than ever.

"The only place that it risimbles in my mind, is a hilly portion in the
north of Ireland. Do you maan to say we've arrived thar?"

"This is the pass which you tramped up and down, and whar you got into
trouble."

"It don't look like any part that I ever obsarved; but why do you have
such a hankering for this ravine, in which we haven't been used very
well?"

"Yer's whar the Injuns be, and yer's whar we must look for hosses--sh!"

Mickey heard not the slightest sound, but he imitated the action of the
scout and dodged down in some undergrowth, which was dense enough to hide
them from the view of any one who did not fairly trample upon them. They
had crouched but a minute or two in this position, when Mickey fancied he
heard the tramp of a single horse, approaching on a slow walk. He dared
not raise his head to look, although he noticed that the shoulders of the
scout in front of him were slowly rising, as he peered stealthily forward.

The experiences of the last few days had been remarkable in more than one
respect. The two men had set out to secure a horse, neither deeming it
probable that the one which was desired above all others could be
obtained; and yet, while they were crouching in the bushes, the very
animal--the one which had been ridden by Mickey O'Rooney--walked slowly
forth to view, on his way up the ravine or pass. The most noticeable
feature of the scene was that he was bestrode by an Indian warrior, whose
head was bent in a meditative mood. The redskin, so far as could be seen,
was without a companion, the steed walking at the slowest possible gait
and approaching a point which was no more than a dozen feet away.

The instant Mickey caught sight of the warrior and recognized his own
horse, there was a slight movement on the part of the scout. The Irishman
narrowly escaped uttering an exclamation of surprise and delight as he
identified his property, but he checked himself in time to notice that Sut
was stealthily bringing his gun around to the front, with the unmistakable
purpose of shooting the Apache. The heart of the Irishman revolted at such
a proceeding. There seemed something so cowardly in thus killing an
adversary without giving him an opportunity to defend himself that he
could not consent to it. Reaching forward, he twitched the sleeve of Sut,
who turned his head in surprise.

"What is it ye're driving at, me laddy?"

"Sh!--him!" he whispered, in return, darting his head toward the slowly
approaching horseman, winking and blinking so significantly that it was
easy to supply the words which were omitted.

"But why don't ye go out and tell him what ye intend, so that he can
inform his friends, and bid them all good-bye? It ain't the thing to pop a
man over in that style, without giving him a chance to meditate on the
chances of his life, so be aisy wid him, Soot."

[Illustration: "BE AISY WID HIM, SOOT."]

The scout seemed at a loss to understand the meaning of his companion,
whose waggery and drollery cropped out at such unexpected times that no
one knew when to expect it. The Indian was approaching and was already
close at hand. Keen-eared, and with their senses always about them,
Apaches are likely to detect the slightest disturbance. The scout glanced
at the horseman, and then at Mickey, who was in earnest.

"It's the only way to git the hoss, you lunkhead, so will yer keep yer
meat-trap shet?"

"I don't want a horse if we've got to murder a man to git the same."

"But the only way out here to treat an Injin is to shoot him the minute
yer see him--that's sensible."

"I don't want ye to do it," said Mickey, so pleadingly that the scout
could not refuse.

"Wal, keep still and don't interfere, and I promise yer I won't slide him
under, onless he gits in the way, and won't git out."

"All right," responded Mickey, not exactly sure that he understood him,
but willing to trust one who was not without his rude traits of manhood.

All this took place in a few seconds, during which the Apache horseman had
approached, and another moment's delay would have given him a good chance
of escape by flight. As noiselessly as a shadow the scout arose from his
knees to a stooping position, took a couple of long, silent strides
forward, and then straightened up, directly in front of the startled
horse, and still more startled rider. The former snorted, and partly
reared up, but seemed to understand, as if by an instinct, that the
stranger was more entitled to claim him than the one upon his back.
Another step forward and the scout held the bridle in his left hand, while
he addressed the astounded Apache in his own tongue, a liberal translation
being as follows:

"Let my brother, the dog of an Apache, slide off that animile, and vamoose
the ranch, or I'll lift his ha'r quicker'n lightning."

The savage deemed it advisable to "slide." He carried a knife at his
girdle, and held a rifle in his grasp, but the scout had come upon him so
suddenly that he felt he was master of the situation. So without
attempting to argue the matter with him, he dropped to the ground, and
began retreating up the ravine, with his face toward his conquerer, as if
he mistrusted treachery.

"Our blessing go wid ye," said Mickey, rising to his feet, and waving his
hand toward the alarmed Apache; "we don't want to harm ye, and ye may go
in pace. There, Soot," he added, as he came up beside him, "we showed that
spalpeen marcy whin he scarcely had the right to expict it, and he will
appreciate the same."

"Ye're right," grunted the scout. "He'll show ye how he'll appreciate it
the minute he gets a chance to draw bead onto yer; but ye've larned that
thar are plenty of varmints in this section, and if we're going to get
away with this hoss thar ain't no time to lose. Up with yer thar and take
the bridle."

Mickey did as he requested, not exactly understanding what the intention
was.

"What is to be done?" he asked, as the head of the animal was turned back
over the route that he had just traveled. "Am I to ride alone, while ye
walk beside me?"

"That's the idea for the present, so as to save the strength of the horse.
A half mile or so up the pass is a trail which leads down inter it. The
mustang can go over that like a streak of greased lightning, and thar's
whar we'll leave the pass, and make off through the woods and mountains,
till we can jine in with the younker and go it without trouble."

A few words of hurried consultation completed the plans. As they were very
likely to encounter danger, it was agreed that the scout should go ahead
of the horseman, keeping some distance in advance, and carefully
reconnoitering the way before him with a view of detecting anything amiss
in time to notify his friend, and prevent his running into it. There might
come a chance where it would not be prudent for Sut Simpson to press
forward, but where, if the intervening distance was short, Mickey might be
able to make a dash for the opening in the pass and escape with his
mustang. The Apache, being unhorsed in the manner described, had fled in
the opposite direction from that which they intended to follow. Of course
he could get around in front, and signal those who were there of what was
coming, provided the two whites were tardy in their movements, which they
didn't propose to be.

It required only a few minutes to effect a perfect understanding, when the
scout went a hundred yards or so ahead, moving forward at an ordinary
walk, scanning the ravine right, left and in front, and on the watch for
the first sign of danger. He had previously so located and described the
opening by which they expected to leave the pass, that Mickey was sure he
would recognize it the instant they came in sight of it. This was a rather
curious method of procedure, but it was continued for a time, and the
avenue alluded to was nearly in sight when Sut Simpson, who was a little
further than usual in advance, suddenly stopped and raised his hand as a
signal for his friend to stop.

Mickey did so at once, holding the mustang in check, while he watched the
scout with the vigilance of a cat. Sut never once looked behind him, but
his long form gradually sank down in the grass, until little more than his
broad shoulders and a coon-skin cap were visible. The pass at that place
was anything but straight, so that the view of Mickey was much less than
that of the scout; and, had it been otherwise, it is not likely that the
former would have been able to read the signs which were as legible to the
latter as the printed pages of a book.

"Begorrah, but that's onplisant!" muttered the Irishman to himself, "We
must be moighty close onto the door, when some of the spalpeens stick up
their heads and object to our going out. Be the powers! but they may
object, for all I care. I'm going to make a run for it!"

At this juncture the figure of the scout was seen approaching in the same
guarded manner.

"Well, Soot, me laddy, what do ye make of it?"

"Thar's a party of the varmints just beyont the place we meant to ride
out."

"Well, what of that? You can lave the pass somewhere along here, where
there seem plenty of places that ye can climb out, while I make a dash out
of that, and we'll meet agin after we get clear of the spalpeens."

"Thar's a mighty risk about it, and yer be likelier to get shot than to be
missed."

"That's all right," responded Mickey. "I'm reddy to take the chances in
that kind of business. Lead on, and we'll try it. It'll soon be dark, and
I'm getting tired of this fooling."

Sut liked that kind of talk. There was a business ring about it, and he
responded:

"I'll go ahead, and when it's time to stop I'll make yer the signal. Keep
watch of my motions."

Ten minutes later they had reached a spot so near the opening that Mickey
easily recognized it. He compressed his lips and his eyes flashed with a
stern determination as he surveyed it. The scout was still in the advance,
proceeding in the same careful manner, all his wits about him, when he
again paused, and motioned for the Irishman to stop. The latter saw and
recognized the gesture, but he declined to obey it. He permitted his
mustang to walk on until he had reached the spot where Sut was crouching,
making the most furious kind of motions, and telling him to stay where he
was.

"Why didn't yer stop when I tell yer, blast ye?" he demanded angrily.

"Is that the place where ye expected to go out?" asked Mickey, without
noticing the question, as he pointed off to the spot which he had fixed
upon as the one for which they were searching.

"Of course it is; but what of it? You can't do anything thar."

"I'll show ye, me laddy; I'm going there as sure as me name's Mickey
O'Rooney, and me."

"Yer ain't going to try any such thing; if yer do, I'll bore yer."

But the Irishman had already given the word to his horse. The latter
bounded forward, passing by the dumbfounded hunter, who raised his rifle,
angered enough to tumble the reckless fellow from the saddle. But, of
course, he could not do that, and he stared in a sort of a wondering
amazement at the course of the Irishman. The latter, instead of seeking to
