Potato Joust

In the potato joust each warrior is armed with a fork, on the end of which
is a potato. The combatants take their position in the center of the
playroom, facing each other. They should be separated by not less than
three feet. Each must lift a leg from the floor (see illustration, next
page). The fighters may use their own discretion as to which leg shall be
lifted from the floor and may hold it up with either hand they prefer. A
small cushion placed under the knee will add materially to the comfort of
the contestants.

The battle is decided by one of the warriors knocking the potato from his
opponent's fork. Toppling over three times is also counted as defeat. If
one of the knights is obliged to let go of his foot in order to keep his
balance it is counted as a fall. Every time the battle is interrupted in
this way, either of the contestants is at liberty to change the foot he is
resting upon. If one of the warriors falls against the other and upsets
him, it is counted against the one who is responsible for the tumble.

You are not likely to realize on your first introduction to a potato joust
the amount of skill and practice required to really become expert in
handling the fork. A slight turn of the wrist, a quick push and the
practised knight will defeat the novice so deftly, so easily that you are
amazed.

Move your fork as little as possible; long sweeping strokes are more
likely to throw off your own potato than to interfere with that of your
opponent.

The most dangerous stroke is one from underneath; always maneuver to keep
your potato below that of your antagonist.

[Illustration: Handkerchief Tussle; Potato Joust]

Handkerchief Tussle

Study the illustration and see if you can discover a way for the boys to
get apart. To make it really exciting, a number of couples should be set
going at once, and a "second" on ice cream offered to the pair who get
apart first. To separate, the boys have only to push the center of one of
the handkerchiefs under the loop made by the other handkerchief when it
was tied about the wrist, and then carry the loop over the hand.

Rough-house is the expression used by the boy of today when he is
describing a general scuffle, and he always smacks his lips over the word.
But rough-house has its disadvantages, as many sprains and bruises can
testify, and if the same amount of fun may be had from less trying
amusement, an amusement, say, which is quite as energetic and quite as
exciting, the boy of today will certainly adopt it in preference to
rough-house.

[Illustration: A Terrier Fight]

Terrier Figh

A terrier fight is exciting, and it is funny--it is also energetic--and
victory depends quite as much upon the skill of the fighter as upon his
strength. Furthermore a terrier fight is not brutal. No boy will hurt
himself while engaged in this sport. Two boys are placed facing each other
in the center of the room, hands clasped beneath the knees and a stick
just under the elbows, as shown. Each contestant endeavors to push the
other over; but as it requires considerable attention to keep the balance
at all when in this position, the attack is no easy matter.

To give way suddenly is a maneuver almost sure to upset your adversary,
but unfortunately it is very apt to upset you at the same time and only
after considerable practice will you be able to overcome a man in this
way. The pivot, a sudden swing to the right or left is safer, though not
quite as effective. Always remember that the best terrier fighter
invariably makes his opponent throw himself. Give way at some unexpected
point, and unless he is a skilful man, he is sure to go over. Never try a
hard push except in the last extremity when everything else has failed.

A terrier fight consists of three one-minute rounds, with thirty seconds'
rest between each round. The one scoring the largest number of falls
during the time set is accounted the winner.

Circle Ball

A large circle of players throw a lawn tennis ball at one in the center.
The object of the player in the center is to remain "in" as long as
possible without being hit. If he catches the ball in his hands it does
not count as a hit. Whoever hits him with the ball takes his place. The
player who remains "in" longest wins.

Leg Wrestle

Lie down on the back, side by side, by twos, the feet of each boy of a two
being beside the other boy's head. At the word  "Go!" each brings the leg
nearest his opponent at right angles with his body and then lowers it.
This may be done twice or three times, but the last time the leg is raised
he should catch his opponent's and endeavor to roll him over, which is a
defeat.

Hand Wrestling

Take hold of each other's right or left hand and spread the feet so as to
get a good base. At the word "Go!" each one endeavors to force his
opponent to lose his balance, so as to move one of his feet. This
constitutes a throw.  The opponent's arm is forced quickly down or
backward and then drawn out to the side directly away from him, thus
making him lose his balance. The one moving his foot or touching his hand
or any part of his body to the floor, so as to get a better base, is
thrown. The throw must be made with the hand. It is thus not rulable to
push with the head, shoulder or elbow.

Rooster Fight

The combatants are arranged facing each other in two front, open ranks.
The first two "opposites" at either or both ends, or if the floor is large
enough all the opposites, may combat at the same time. The boys should
fold their arms forward, and hop toward each other on one leg. The butting
is done with the shoulder and upper arm, and never with the elbow, and the
arm must remain folded throughout the combat. When the two adversaries
meet, each attempts to push the other over, or make him touch to the floor
the foot that is raised. When all have fought, the winners arrange
themselves in two opposing ranks and renew the combat. This is done, until
but one remains, and he is declared the victor.

Shoe and Sweater Race

The sweaters are placed at the opposite ends of the room. The boys start
with their shoes (or sneakers) on (laces out). A line is drawn in the
middle of the room; here the contestants sit down and pull off their shoes
(or sneakers), run to the sweaters and put them on. On the return trip
they put their shoes on and finish with both shoes and sweaters on.

Peanut Relay Race

Boys are lined up in two columns, as in ordinary relay races. For each
column two chairs are placed a convenient distance apart, facing one
another, with a knife and a bowl half full of peanuts on one, and an empty
bowl on the other. At the proper word of command the first boy on each
side takes the knife, picks up a peanut with it, and carries the peanut on
the knife to the farther bowl; upon his return the second boy does the
same and so on. The second boy cannot leave until the first has deposited
his peanut in the empty bowl, and has returned with the knife. Peanuts
dropped must be picked up with the knife. Fingers must not be used either
in putting the peanut on the knife or holding it there. The side, every
member of which first makes the round, wins.

A FEW INTERESTING TESTS

You can't stand for five minutes without moving, if you are blindfolded.

You can't stand at the side of a room with both of your feet touching the
wainscoting lengthwise.

You can't get out of a chair without bending your body forward or putting
your feet under it, that is, if you are sitting squarely on the chair and
not on the edge of it.

You can't crush an egg when placed lengthwise between your hands, that is,
if the egg is sound and has the ordinary shell of a hen's egg.

You can't break a match if the match is laid across the nail of the middle
finger of either hand and pressed upon by the first and third fingers of
that hand, despite its seeming so easy at first sight.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Social Activities for Men and Boys--A. M. Chesley. Association Press,
$1.00. 295 ideas, games, socials and helpful suggestions. A gold mine for
one dollar.

Games for Everybody--May C. Hofman. Dodge Publishing Co., 50 cents. 200
pages of rare fun.

Education by Play and Games--G. E. Johnson. Ginn and Company, 90 cents.  A
discussion of the meaning of play. Contains also a number of good games,
graded according to ages or periods of child life.

Play--Emmett D. Angell. Little, Brown and Company, $1.50 net. A very
practical book, containing instruction for planning more than one hundred
games, including eight games in the water.

[Illustration: "Hiawatha," Presented by the Boys--Camp Becket]



CHAPTER XXI--EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITIES

RECREATIVE AND CONSTRUCTIVE EDUCATION
WHITTLERS' CLUB
PYROGRAPHY
BOAT BUILDING
PLAYS
LANTERN TALKS
LIBRARY
TUTORING
PHOTOGRAPHY
AGRICULTURE
FORESTRY
SCOUTCRAFT
CAMP PAPER
RECORD OF PERSONAL ACHIEVEMENT
KITE MAKING AND FLYING
MODEL AEROPLANE
PARACHUTE IDEA
BOX FURNITURE
CAMP CLOCK
HOW TO MAKE A MOCCASIN
HOW TO MAKE A "ROUGH AND READY" HAMMOCK
A HOME-MADE TOBOGGAN
HANDY FUNNEL
INK FOR SCOUTING GAMES
BIBLIOGRAPHY.

'Tis education forms the common mind;
Just as the twig is bent the tree's inclined.
--Pope.

A boy is better unborn than untaught.--Gascoigne


Camping should not be merely a time of loafing or "having fun." The boy
who has returned from a camp, having learned some definite thing, whether
it be different from the school curriculum or supplementary to his school
work, has accomplished something and his outing has been of use to him.
All play and no work makes Jack a dull boy, as well as "all work and no
play." Recreative and constructive education forms a combination which
appeals strongly to a boy. He would call it, "doing things," and in the
doing would have fun galore.

In addition to nature study, woodcraft, first-aid instruction and similar
types of educational activities in vogue in boy's camps, there are many
other forms of educational activities which boys can engage in during the
camping season.

Whittlers' Club

A "Whittlers' Club," organized to meet one hour several mornings a week,
proved attractive to a group of boys in one camp. Under the leadership of
a man who understood "Sloyd" [1] work the boys were taught how to handle a
knife, and it is surprising how few boys really know how to handle this
useful article found in every boy's pocket. They were also taught to know
the different kinds of wood, bark, grain, and method of cutting and sawing
wood for building and furniture purposes, etc. A popular model was a paper
knife made of wild cherry. The bark was permitted to remain on the handle,
while the other end was whittled evenly and smoothly for cutting leaves of
books or magazines. With the aid of a pyrography set the name of the camp
and that of the owner of the knife was burned on the handle.

[Transcriber's Footnote 1: Manual training developed in Sweden, using
woodworking tools.]

Pyrography

Carved paddles, war clubs, hiking sticks, etc., were used to display the
artistic ability of the boys who brought to camp pyrography sets. The camp
name, date of hikes, miles travelled, and other interesting information
was burned on these souvenirs. Shields containing the athletic records and
names of honor boys were made and hung upon the walls of the permanent
building.

Boat Building

[Illustration: Boat Building at Camp Durrell]

In one large camp an experienced boatman was engaged, and under his
direction three large dories were built by the boys. Plans were carefully
worked out, lumber purchased, and details of boat construction explicitly
explained. It took three weeks to build the boats, but no boats of the
fleet were used and appreciated as much by the boys as these which
represented so much of their own labor and time. (See illustration.)
Working plans and "knocked down" material for building boats may be
purchased from a number of firms. Building a boat during the winter by
boys who are contemplating going camping, aids to the anticipation of the
delightful summer time.

[Illustration: "Pyramus and Thisbe," Players Scene from Midsummer Night's
Dream; Camp Becket]

Plays

"The Player's Scene," from "Midsummer Night's Dream," has been given
several times outdoors with great success in the camps conducted by the
writer. The boys were coached by a graduate of a School of Oratory,
costumes were made by the boys out of all sorts of material, make-up was
bought from a theatrical supply house and the scenery supplied by nature.
Footlights were lanterns set in front of reflectors made from old tomato
cans. The path leading to the natural amphitheatre was lighted by Japanese
lanterns and the guests were seated on the ground. In the words of Hamlet,
"The Play's the Thing," and boys and visitors are always enthusiastic over
the presentation, while the players get a new conception of Shakespeare's
plays and writings. "Hiawatha" was given with equal enthusiasm and
success.

Lantern Talks

Since the invention of the inexpensive Reflectoscope, illustrated talks in
camp are now possible. Travel talks, using postal cards from different
parts of the world, postals telling the "Story of the Flag," "State Seals
and their Mottoes," etc., are now published in series, and will be found
to be very interesting and instructive. A number of the large camps have
stereopticons. Lantern slides with accompanying lecture may be rented at
reasonable rates, such as "The True Sportsman," and "Personal and National
Thrift," sent out by the Moral Education League, Baltimore, Md., for the
East. Any first-class firm dealing in lantern slides can furnish a number
of valuable lectures with slides. A sheet hung between two trees on a dark
night makes an excellent screen on which to show pictures.

Library

Every camp should have a library or at least a small collection of good
books. In most cases arrangements can be made with a near-by library or
with the State Library for the loan of books for a certain period of time.
Camps having permanent buildings should "grow" a library. The excellent
library of 1,200 books in the camp of the writer was given by the boys
(see illustration).

[Illustration: Book Identification]

Gummed book labels were sent to each boy with the suggestion that he paste
them in books which he could bring to camp to present to the library. Some
boys would bring as many as ten books from the home library, all good,
readable books. The books are catalogued and a loan system established,
under the "Department of Education," and the following rules govern the
library and use of books:

1. Library open for one-half hour after dinner daily except on Sunday,
when it will be open for one-half hour after breakfast.

2. Books can be kept out three days. If kept overtime a charge of two (2)
cents per day is made. Books may be renewed if returned on day due,
otherwise the usual charge will be made.

3. From 9 o'clock A. M. to 12 o'clock M., and from 2 o'clock P. M., books
may be taken away to read in the room, but must not be taken outside the
building under any condition. Violation of this rule will deprive the
violator of the use of the books for three days.

4. Please bring small change to pay fines.

Tutoring

The following announcement is sent by the writer to parents and boys
concerning tutoring in camp:

SPECIAL ANNOUNCEMENT OF TUTORING.

Provides Opportunity For

(1) Those who, on account of illness or other unavoidable circumstances,
have fallen behind their grade and wish to catch up by summer study.

(2) Those who, on account of poor work or failure in examination, cannot
be promoted unless they do special work during the vacation time.

(3) Those who have not fully mastered a given subject and desire to review
and strengthen themselves in the subject.

(4) Those who wish to use their summer in order to earn an extra
promotion.

Instruction

Many of our camp leaders are college men and have the requisite
scholarship to conduct the academic feature of the camp. The instruction
is very largely individual and is given in the morning and does not
interfere with the recreation life. The combination of study and
recreation makes tutoring attractive and stimulating.

Subjects

Any subject in the grammar or high school curriculum.

Time

Two or three periods per week will be given to each subject.

Cost

One dollar per week will be charged for each subject.

An accurate record is kept of every boy being tutored, on a card (see
illustration), and a duplicate sent to his parent at the close of the
season.

[Illustration: Report Cards]

Photography

To stimulate interest in photography, a contest is held during the latter
part of the camping season for a cup, to be awarded to the boy securing
the best collection of photographs of camp life. The award is determined
upon: first, selection of subjects, and, second, execution of detail.
Ribbon awards are given for the best individual photograph in these three
classes: (a) portraits, (b) groups, (c) landscapes. The regulations
governing the contest are:

1. Exposure, developing, and printing must be the work of the exhibitor.

2. Mounted or unmounted photographs may be submitted.

3. All photographs must be handed in before 12 o'clock noon (date
inserted).

For camps having good dark rooms, the following rules may be suggestive:

1. Key to the dark room must be returned to the office immediately after
using room and locking same.

2. If films are drying, inform the office of same, so that the next user
may be notified and care taken not to disturb the films.

3. Room must be kept clean:
(a) Do not wipe shelves with the hand towels.
(b) Hang hand towels on nail provided.
(c) Leave buckets and trays in clean condition.
(d) Put paper, empty tubes, etc., in box provided for same and not
upon the floor.

4. Use only the buckets provided, and not those used for kitchen or camp
purposes.

5. Use only your own property and that provided by the camp, and never
touch the property or films or plates of others.

Camp Paper

Every large camp has its official organ or camp paper. An editorial board
is appointed, and the doings of the camp recorded in a permanent manner
through the weekly issue or reading of the paper. Various names are given
the paper, such as "The Camp Log," "Dudley Doings,"  "Seen and Heard,"
"Wawayanda Whirlwind," "The Maskwa," "The Wyanoka Log," "Kinoe Kamper."
Some of these papers are printed and others are mimeographed and sold to
the campers at five cents a copy. Most of them, however, are written in a
book and read at the camp fire.

Agriculture

Where a camp is located so as to be near a farm, opportunity should be
given city boys to study soil, rotation of crops, gardening, etc. In
cooperation with the Department of Agriculture and under the leadership of
a student of an Agricultural College, an experiment in raising vegetables
may be tried in long-term camps. A plot of ground may be plowed and
harrowed, and sub-divided into as many plots as there are tents, each tent
to be given a plot and each boy in the tent his "own row to hoe," the boy
to make his own choice of seed, keep a diary of temperature, sunshine,
