
Clarissa watched the door uneasily; no one came.

"I am willing to allow children all possible freedom," said Mrs.
Stanhope, seriously; "but the order of the house must be maintained. I
am very much annoyed at unpunctuality at meals. Fani has never allowed
himself any such irregularity. I wonder how it happened now."

She looked from one brother to another as if expecting some explanation.
They looked so uncomfortable that she took it as a sign of regret for
their sister's delinquency, and so forbore farther remark.

After supper, Mrs. Stanhope went out as usual on the terrace, and the
others followed. It began to grow dark. Clarissa's anxiety became
unendurable; what could have happened to the children?

"Dear Mrs. Stanhope," she said, entreatingly, "do let me send some one
out to look for the children. I cannot rest for fear that they have met
with some accident."

"Where can we send? We have no clue to the direction they have taken,"
answered Mrs. Stanhope in a tone of vexation. "It is very provoking.
Fani never did such a thing before. I will go with you."

She rose and went through a long corridor to the court-yard. Clarissa
and the children followed. There they found the servants all assembled:
the footman, coachman, cook, and maids were holding a council. They were
talking over the children's absence, its possible cause, and Mrs.
Stanhope's probable displeasure. When that lady came upon them
unperceived, they tried to separate and escape; but it was too late. She
told the men to go out into the street and to inquire in different
directions whether anything had been seen of the lost children. Lina
came forward to say that the cook knew that the young lady had gone
fishing. It was a pity that all these young people were so cruel to
animals, the house-maid added; and therewith she shot an angry glance at
Fred, whom she hadn't forgiven for the trouble he had given her.

"For Heaven's sake!" cried Clarissa, in great alarm. "If those children
have gone out on the river, something terrible must have happened to
them! If we could only have the least idea which way they went!"

The cook, being appealed to, said that she had directed the young lady
to the fisherman's hut. It might be well to look for her there.

Clarissa started at once, calling the men to go with her and show her
the way.

Poor Elsli was more frightened now than any one else. She thought that
Aunt Clarissa would now learn the story which she ought long ago to have
told her. By her daily visits she had become so familiar with all the
wants and sufferings of the fisherman's family that she had been led on
to undertake more and more, till at last she had come to do nearly all
the housework of the poor little dwelling. But gradually had grown upon
her the conviction that Mrs. Stanhope would be extremely displeased if
she knew of her conduct. In great agony she now started after Aunt
Clarissa, crying out:--

"Oh, do let me go with you! I have something to tell you, and we can
talk as we go."

"My dear child, what a time to choose to tell me something! How could I
listen now? Turn back directly. What will Mrs. Stanhope think to see you
running away at such a time?"

Mrs. Stanhope only thought that Elsli was anxious about her brother, as
was very natural. She bade the children go to bed, since they could be
of no use in finding the missing ones. They obeyed her in silence, and
went to their rooms. The boys fell asleep as soon as their heads touched
their pillows, and so happily lost remembrance of their troubles; but
poor Elsli sat on her bed with wide-open eyes, for the anxious fear in
her heart made sleep impossible. She went over and over again the events
of the last few weeks. She had not at first meant to do wrong, but she
certainly ought not to have repeated her visits to the fisherman's house
without leave, especially as she knew that Mrs. Stanhope would probably
object. Yet, how could she have left those poor people without help,
when she found that she could do so much for them, and they reminded her
so much of her family at home? Probably Mrs. Stanhope would send her and
Fani away, but she deserved it and Fani did not. The more the poor girl
pondered over all this trouble, the more unhappy she became; and at last
she burst into tears and sobbed out:--

"Oh, if I only had some one to help me. I cannot tell what to do!"

Then Elsli remembered that she could bring her trouble to her Heavenly
Father, and seek comfort and forgiveness from him. She had already
repeated her daily evening prayer; but now she folded her hands again,
and prayed, not as a form but from the bottom of her heart, that God
would help her in her dire need, so that Fani should not be punished for
her fault, and that she should not do wrong again, and that the
fisherman's family should not suffer any more. Peace came as she prayed,
and she lay down and slept at last.




CHAPTER VII.

AN UNEXPECTED TERMINATION.


Directly after dinner Emma and Fani had started on their expedition.
They had no trouble to-day in finding their way to the willows, and they
went as quickly as they could, so that they could have a long afternoon,
and yet get back in time for Oscar's Festival.

They found the boat ready for them; oars and pole all in position, and a
seat in the middle. The boat was but lightly fastened to the shore, and
the children sprang gayly into it. Emma took the oars and pushed off.
She rowed well, and knew what she was about. She handled the boat
skilfully, for she had often been out on the lake with her friend when
the wind blew and the waves were high.

Fani took his seat in the stern, saying:--

"When you want my help, just say so, Emma. But I don't know anything at
all about rowing."

"I shan't need you," answered Emma, bravely, as she pulled away.

Two things, however, she had not counted on. The boat was much heavier
than that which she had used on the lake, and the swift current of the
river was a very different thing to row against, from the quiet waters
of a lake. Emma worked sturdily against the stream. She wanted to go out
far enough to be in full sight of the ruined castle. She had arranged in
her mind a plan for keeping the boat in place while Fani sketched. But
she soon began to find herself growing very tired, while yet she made
little head-way.

"Take the pole, Fani," she said, "and stick it firmly against the
bottom and push." Fani did so, and the boat made an advance of several
feet. "Again, again, Fani." Fani did his best.

"Now I'll row a bit farther into the middle of the river, then hold fast
so that we shall not be carried down; here we are! there is the ruin,
Fani! Now, Fani, stick the pole down, and I'll hold it and you can begin
to sketch."

Fani stuck his pole manfully into the bottom of the river, but the
rushing current seized it and threw it up again as if it had been a
reed.

"Oh! oh!" he cried, "we shall be carried away!"

"You take one of the oars and we'll row back to the shore," said Emma,
anxiously. "Come, be quick!"

But the stream seized the oar before Fani could take it from her, and it
was swept away.

"What shall we do? There is no one to help us," cried Emma, beside
herself. "Suppose the boat should upset!"

Faster and faster they were whirled along, the boat tossing like a
nut-shell upon the waves.

The children sat still, although frightened almost to death.

"Fani, we are lost! who can help us?" screamed Emma. "Let us say our
prayers. I have forgotten to say them ever since I came to Rosemount. I
promised mamma not to forget; but I did. Do you think God will hear me
now? Fani, you pray; you do it every day, I know."

"No; I thought Elsli would do it for me and for herself," said the boy
hoarsely.

"That is no good; you must do it for yourself or God will not listen. He
will only say, 'I do not know him,' when Elsli prays for you. Oh, if I
had not forgotten to pray myself, he would not punish me so now!"

And then she sat silent, looking at the sky and praying from her heart
that God would forgive her forgetfulness of him, and save her and Fani
from the danger that threatened them.

"A steamboat! A steamboat! It is going to run us down!" shrieked Fani;
and his fears were well grounded. With lightning speed, as it seemed,
the great boat came rushing toward them like a huge giant, and in a few
minutes the little boat would be engulfed in the swelling waves.

The children screamed; the steamer came nearer; it was close upon them;
the boat was upset! At the same instant Emma was seized by a strong
hand, lifted into the air, and then set down upon her feet on the deck
of the steamer. Fani was saved, too, by another seaman, and both stood
shivering with cold and fright, dripping with water, and soaked to the
skin, but safe and sound. The passengers crowded about them.

Suddenly a tall, black-bearded man with angry eyes came toward them. It
was the captain.

"What madness is this?" he thundered. "Do you think it is the business
of steamboats to look out for little fools of fishermen? Whose fault
would it have been if you had been run down and drowned?"

But as he looked at the two little dripping, miserable figures, his tone
softened.

"Bring them below and give them something hot to drink," he said to one
of the gaping by-standers. It was a mercy to get them away from all
those staring eyes; they swallowed the steaming contents of the glass
that was given them in the cabin without a word, though it burned their
throats. They did not dare to sit down; they were too wet.

After a while the captain came down and asked where they came from, and
where they were going in that "old fish-box."

Fani told the whole story without reserve. An expression of amusement
passed over the captain's brown face more than once during this
narration, and when he had heard all, he said kindly that they must get
themselves dried off as best they could; he was going to stop at
Cologne, and there they could take the train home again.

To reward him for saving them, Mrs. Stanhope could invite him to visit
her house at the next vintage.

This was their second visit to Cologne; how different it was from the
first one!

The captain's parting advice was that they should in future make their
expeditions by land rather than by water; it was much safer, he said.

It was pretty dark by this time, and they had some trouble in finding
the way to the station. They wandered from street to street inquiring
their way, and at last found themselves again at the steamboat wharf,
just where they had landed. They began to fear that they should lose the
train and have to stay in the city all night. They set out again upon
their search, and at last they came upon a policeman, who took pity upon
them and led them through alleys and by-streets to the station, where
they found that one train had just left, and they must wait two hours
for the next. The little wanderers sat down outside the building to
wait. They were wet and cold and hungry, but they did not complain of
these minor troubles; their anxieties lay far deeper.

"I am dreadfully worried," said Fani, with a deep sigh.

"So am I, but I don't know exactly why," replied Emma.

"Well, I do," said the boy. "I'm perfectly sure that Mrs. Stanhope will
send me home after this, and poor Elsli will have to go too, for she
could never stay without me."

"Oh, that is dreadful!" cried Emma. She was conscience-stricken. It was
a bad scrape, and it was mainly her fault. "Mrs. Stanhope is so kind,"
she went on hopefully, "perhaps she will not be so very angry."

Fani shook his head.

"You don't know about it, Emma. Of course Mrs. Stanhope is the greatest
benefactress in the world. But she is very particular about our minding
exactly what she tells us; and one of her principal rules is that we
must never disturb the regularity of the household, and must keep
punctually to just such hours; and now see what we have done! We shall
not get home till twelve o'clock to-night, midnight! Probably they are
hunting for us everywhere. How will it all turn out? Oh, dear! if she
sends us off, there's an end of drawing and painting for me! That's all
over"; and Fani looked despairing.

Emma felt that he knew Mrs. Stanhope far better than she did, and her
courage began to fail. They sat in silence till the train came along. At
the end of their journey they had a long walk from the station to
Rosemount, and they stumbled along in the dark, frightened and
trembling, and scarcely exchanging a word. Their hearts beat more and
more as they neared the house. As they entered the court-yard, the
watch-dog began to bark, but he stopped when he heard Fani's voice.

The great house-door was opened, and Aunt Clarissa came out to meet
them from the lighted hall.

"Is it you?" she cried. "Thank God!" and she drew them into the house.

Mrs. Stanhope had not gone to bed. She was standing just inside the
door.

"Now you may tell me all about it," she said, looking seriously at the
children, who presented a shocking appearance. "So, you've been in the
water! Where are the men?"

The children stammered out that they had seen no men. They had just come
up from the station.

Mrs. Stanhope shook her head.

"Some one must be sent to the fisherman's hut to tell the men to stop
the search," she said coldly. "I will leave the care of the children to
more skilful hands"; and she withdrew without more words.

Aunt Clarissa put them to bed directly, and a big pitcher of hot tea
was brought to each of them, from which they had to drink one steaming
cup after another, till they were warmed through. Then Clarissa sat down
first by Emma's bed, and then by Fani's, to learn exactly what had
happened, and whether they had met with any injuries that would need a
doctor's attention.

In the midst of assurances that they were not injured, and of attempts
to explain what had happened, the two tired miscreants fell asleep, and
Aunt Clarissa went to her room with thankful heart that things were no
worse.

The next morning Fani was determined, in spite of his weariness of limb,
to be punctual at the breakfast table. He sprang out of bed the moment
that he waked, and dressed an hour too early. He went into the garden to
listen to the birds; he thought their happy singing might make him
happier. As he was walking up and down, he saw the fisherman coming into
the court-yard. He went to meet him. The man stopped and lifted his cap
politely. "I know what you have come for," said Fani, taking out his
purse; "how much do I owe you?"

The man turned his cap about in his hands, as if he were turning his
thoughts over too.

"I don't want to be unreasonable," he said presently, "and I don't
suppose a young gentleman like you knows how much a boat with all its
belongings is worth. I cannot say less than eighty marks; I shall lose
at that, but I will not ask more."

Fani stood thunder-struck. Of course, as the boat was lost, he must make
it good. But eighty marks! He had never even seen so much money as
that. He was speechless. The fisherman looked thoughtfully at him.
Presently he said modestly:--

"I can understand that you cannot pay me the money yourself; you will
have to ask your mother for it. I will come again to-morrow."

"No, no!" cried Fani. "I will bring it to you as soon as I get it. I
will certainly come," he added, as he saw the man's disappointed look.
"I shall keep my word; only I can't say exactly when."

It seemed as if the man had something more to say; but he swallowed it
down, and went away, muttering to himself, "No boat! and no money to buy
another!"

Fani ran back into the house. He looked at Emma's door to see whether
her boots were still outside, but they had disappeared; so he tapped on
the door and said softly:--

"Come out, Emma, I have something to say to you."

