like to introduce him. Loftus, come here."

Captain Bertram, raising his hat to the Bells as he passed, approached
his mother's side. He was introduced in due form to Lady Verney and the
Lady Georgiana, and the two young people, retiring a little into the
background, began to chat.

"Who are those extraordinary folk?" asked Lady Georgiana of her
companion.

She waved her fan in the direction of Mrs. Bell's fat back.

"Do you know them, Captain Bertram?"

His eyes fairly danced with mirth as he swept them over the little
group.

"I must confess something, Lady Georgiana. I do know those young ladies
and their mother. I have supped with them."

"Oh, horrors! And yet, how entertaining. What were they like?"

"Like themselves."

"That is no answer. Do divert me with an account of them all. I am sure
they are deliciously original. I should like to sketch that mother's
broad back beyond anything."

It was at this moment that Beatrice and Catherine appeared together on
the scene. Captain Bertram, who thought himself an adept in a certain
mild, sarcastic description, was about to gratify Lady Georgiana with a
graphic account of the Bells' supper-table, when his gaze met the kind,
clear, happy expression of Beatrice Meadowsweet's eyes. He felt his
heart stir within him. The Bells were her friends, and she was so good,
bless her--the best girl he had ever met. No, he could not, he would
not, turn them into fun, just to while away an idle five minutes.

Mrs. Bertram called Catherine over to introduce her to Lady Verney, and
Bertram, in a moment, was by Beatrice's side.

"This is lucky," he said. "I thought you had left me for the day."

"Why should you think that?" she replied. "It would be impossible for
people not constantly to come against each other in a small place like
this."

"May I come with you now? You seem very busy."

"You can come and help me if you feel inclined. I always have a great
deal to do at these feasts; I have been at them for years, and know all
about them, and the Rector invariably expects me to keep the ball
going."

"What ball?"

"The ball of pleasure. Each hand must grasp it--everyone must be happy.
That is the Hector's aim and mine."

"I think it is your aim not only to-day, but every day."

"Yes, if I can manage it. I can't always."

"You could always make me very happy."

Beatrice turned her eyes and looked at him. Her look made him blush.

"You are mistaken when you say that," she responded, in a grave tone.
"You are not the sort of person to be made happy by a simple country
girl like me. The Northbury people only need small things, and many
times it is within my power to supply their desires. But you are
different. You would not be content with small things."

"Assuredly not from you."

Then he paused; and as she blushed this time, he hastened to add:

"You can help me not in a small, but in a big way, and if you grant me
this help, you will save my mother, and--yes--and Catherine."

"I love Catherine," said Beatrice.

"I know it--you would like to save her."

"Certainly; but I did not know she was in peril."

"Don't whisper it, but she is. You can put things straight for her. May
I talk to you? May I tell you what I mean?"

"You look very solemn, and this is a day of pleasure. Must you talk to
me to-day?"

"I won't talk of anything to worry you today. But I may some time?"

"I suppose you may. At least it is difficult to reply in the negative to
any one who wants my help."

"That is all I need you to say. You will understand after I have spoken.
May I come to see you to-morrow?"

"Yes, you may come to-morrow. I shall be at home in the morning."

"Beatrice," said a voice, "Bee--Trixie--I do think it's unkind to cut an
old friend."

Beatrice turned.

Mrs. Bell, puffed and hot, accompanied by Matty, who was also a little
blown, and by the younger girls, looking very cross, had been chasing
Captain Bertram and Miss Meadowsweet from one lawn to another. Mrs.
Bell, after receiving a somewhat severe snubbing from Mrs. Gorman
Stanley, had just retired into the marquee to refresh herself with
strawberry ices, when Sophy, laying a hand on her mother's shoulder,
informed her in a loud whisper that Captain Bertram and Bee Meadowsweet
had gone down the steps of the terrace to the tennis lawn side by side.

"We'll make after them!" exclaimed the good lady. "Girls, don't finish
your ices; come quick."

Mrs. Bell took her eldest daughter's hand, and rushed out of the tent.
Sophy and Alice stayed behind to have one parting spoonful each of their
delicious ices. Then the whole family went helter-skelter down the five
sacred steps and on to the lawn. They saw the objects of their desire
vanishing through a gap in the hedge into a distant field. They must
pursue, they must go hotly to work. Mrs. Bell panted and puffed, and
Matty stopped once to breathe hard.

"Courage, child," said the mother. "We'll soon be up with them. I'm not
the woman to leave an innocent young man alone with that siren."

"Mother! You call Beatrice a siren?"

"Well, and what is she, Matty, when she takes your lawful sweetheart
away before your very eyes? But here, we're in hailing distance, now,
and I'll shout. Beatrice--Bee--Trixie!"

Beatrice turned. She came up at once to Mrs. Bell, took her hand, and
asked all four why they had run so fast after her.

"For I was coming back at once," she said, in a _naive_ tone.
"Captain Bertram was kind enough to walk with me to the archery field.
Then I was coming to arrange some tennis sets."

"My girls have had no tennis yet to-day, Beatrice," said Mrs. Bell,
fixing her eyes solemnly on Miss Meadowsweet. "And they are all partial
to it, more especially Matty. You're a devotee to tennis too, aren't
you, Captain Bertram?"

"Well, ah, no, I don't think I am," said the captain.

"You'd maybe rather have a quiet walk, then. For my part I approve of
young men who are prudent, and don't care to exercise themselves too
violently. Violent exercise puts you into too great a heat, and then
you're taken with a chill, and lots of mischief is done that way. Bee,
lend me your arm, love. I'm more recovered now, but I did have to hurry
after you, and that's a fact."

Determined women very often have their way, and Mrs. Bell had the
satisfaction of walking in front with Beatrice, while Captain Bertram
brought up the rear in Matty's company.

Sophy and Alice Bell no longer belonged to the group. They had found
matters so intolerably dull that they started off on their own hook to
find partners for tennis.

Mrs. Bell, as she walked in front with Beatrice heard Matty's little and
inane giggles, and her heart swelled within her.

"Poor young man, he is devoted," she whispered to her companion. "Ah,
dear me, Beatrice, I know you sympathize with me; when one has a dear
child's fate trembling in the balance it's impossible not to be
anxious."

Mrs. Bell's face was so solemn, and her words so portentous, that
Beatrice was really taken in. It was stupid of her to misunderstand the
good woman, but she did.

"Is anything the matter?" she asked, turning to look at Mrs. Bell.
"Whose fate is trembling in the balance?"

If it had been possible for light blue eyes of a very common shade and
shape to wither with a look, poor Beatrice would never have got over
that terrible moment.

Stout Mrs. Bell dropped her companion's arm, moved two or three paces
away, and accompanied her scorching glance with words of muffled
thunder.

"Beatrice Meadowsweet, you are either green with jealousy, or you are a
perfect goose."




CHAPTER XX.

YOU CAN TAKE ANY RANK.


Beatrice was not, in any sense of the word, a conventional girl. Her
nature was independent, and from her earliest days she had been allowed
a great deal of liberty. While her father lived he had trained her to
love his tastes, to respond to his ideas; he had shared his thoughts
with her, and as these thoughts happened to be original, and even
slightly tinged with latent genius, the young girl had from the first
taken a broad view of life. She was naturally intelligent; and to read
and think for herself became a delight to her.

Mr. Meadowsweet died when Beatrice was twelve and then that further
thing happened which so often makes an unselfish woman really noble.
Beatrice had to support the burdens of another. Mrs. Meadowsweet was a
most loving and affectionate character; but she was not as strong
mentally as her daughter. She did not know that she leant on Beatrice,
but she did. The effect of all this was that Miss Meadowsweet grew up
something as the wild flowers do, with perfect liberty, and yet governed
by the gracious and kindly laws which nature sets about her children.

Beatrice did not know what it was to be proud of her reputed wealth.
When she looked at her sweet face in the glass she was not vain of it.
Altogether, she was a very simple-hearted girl, as yet untouched by real
trouble, for, except when her father died, its shadow had not approached
her.

The passionate, childish sorrow for her father was no longer poignant.
She revered his memory, she loved to dwell on his gentleness and
goodness, and in her own manner she tried to plant her young footsteps
in his.

On the morning after the Rector's feast, Beatrice sat at home and waited
for Captain Bertram. She almost always wore white in the hot days, and
she was in white now. She chose natural flowers as her invariable
adornment, and two crimson roses were now daintily fastened into her
girdle.

Beatrice could not help wondering what special thing Captain Bertram had
to communicate. She was not particularly troubled or roused in any way
by his admiration of her. He was certainly pleasant to talk to; she had
never met a refined man of the world before, and Captain Bertram was
handsome to look at, and had a charming way of saying charming nothings.
Beatrice did not object to his talking to her, but her heart had never
yet in the smallest degree responded to any beat of his.

More than one young man in Northbury had fallen in love with Beatrice.
She had been very kind to these would-be lovers, and had managed
skilfully to get rid of them. No man yet had secured even a small place
in her affections.

"Are you going out this morning, Bee?" asked her mother. "It's very
fine, and you are fond of a row on the water in the sunshine. It's
wonderful to me how your skin never tans nor freckles, child. You might
be out in all weathers without its doing you harm."

Mrs. Meadowsweet was seated in her arm-chair. In her hand she held a
piece of knitting. She was making a quilt for Beatrice's bed. This quilt
was composed of little squares of an elaborate pattern, with much
honey-combing, and many other fancy and delicate stitches ornamenting
it. Mrs. Meadowsweet liked to feel her fingers employed over Beatrice's
quilt.

"With each stitch I give her a thought," she said to herself. "Beatrice
will sleep soft and warm under this covering when it is finished," the
old mother used to say, "for every bit of it is put together with love."

She was knitting Beatrice's quilt now, her chair drawn up as usual to
face the sunny garden, and on the footstool at her feet her favorite
tabby cat was curled.

"It is too hot for me to go out this morning," replied Beatrice. "So for
that reason I don't go, and also for another. Captain Bertram has
promised to call."

"Eh?" queried Mrs. Meadowsweet. To call, has he? Maybe you'd like to ask
him to lunch, child?"

"No, mother, I don't think so."

"You can if you like, Trixie. Say the word, and I'll have a spring
chicken done to a turn, and a cream, and a jelly put in hand."

"Oh, no, mother, he won't want to pay such a long call."

"Well, he's a nice young man. I have nothing to say against him, he
carries himself nearly as upright as your poor father did, and he has a
pleasant, affable way with old and young alike. I haven't a word to say
against the young man, not a word. When he comes I'll just step into the
garden, for you two young things would rather have your chatter alone.
Oh, you needn't tell me, Trixie, I know. I was young once, and I never
cared to have my nonsense listened to. By the way, I might ask Captain
Bertram to take a box of Eleazer's Life-pills to his poor mother. I was
recommending them to her, and I'm convinced they are just the medicine
for her complaint. And, Bee, I wish you'd remind me to tell Jane to send
over a jug of buttermilk to the Bells. I did think that poor child Matty
looked so frightfully burnt yesterday, and there's nothing like bathing
the face and neck in buttermilk, to get rid of the ugly redness. My
word, child, is that a ring at the hall door? Then I'll be off, but I'll
be in the garden handy within call, in case you should want me, my pet."

As Captain Bertram entered the drawing-room Mrs. Meadowsweet's trailing
skirts might have been seen disappearing down the steps which led from
the French window to the garden. Beatrice said to herself with an inward
smile:

"From the dear old mother's way, any one would suppose I was going to
receive a lover," and then she raised her eyes, and a very lover-like
gaze met hers.

The expression in Captain Bertram's dark eyes joined to the thought
which had flown into her heart, made the young girl flush up almost
painfully. This sudden blush caused the gallant wooer's heart to beat
with rapture, and he instantly changed his tactics and resolved, instead
of giving Beatrice a half confidence with regard to his troubles, to
take the apparently unapproachable fortress by storm.

"I had a long story to tell you, but I find I can't tell it," he said.

Then he looked at her again, as he knew how momentous were the words
which must follow, he turned pale.

"Sit down," said Beatrice. "Come over to the window and sit down. We
have such a pretty view of the garden from here. Mother and I are very
proud of our garden."

"Are you? Miss Meadowsweet, I want to say something. Look at me, will
you look at me?"

"Of course I will. I expected you to say something when you called this
morning. You had some sort of trouble you wanted to confide in me. What
is the matter?"

"I don't feel now as if I had any trouble to confide in you. I can only
say one thing."

Beatrice began to wish that her mother had not left the drawing-room.
She moved forward as if to step through the open French window.

"And I must tell you this thing," pursued the captain's voice.

Its tone arrested her.

"But I am mad to say it."

"Don't say it then," she began.

"I can't help myself. You must listen. I love you better than all the
world. I won't marry any one but you. I will marry you, I am
determined."

"You are determined," repeated Beatrice, slowly. "_You_--determined--and
about me? I am obliged."

Her lips took a scornful curl. She sat down. She was quiet enough now;
the worst was over.

Beatrice, however, was only a country girl, and she had very little idea
with whom she had to deal. No one could plead better his cause than
Loftus Bertram. Defeat here meant the ruin of his worldly prospects as
well as of his love. He was the kind of man with whom the present must
always be paramount; for the time being he had absolutely forgotten
Josephine Hart, for the time being he thought himself honestly, deeply
in love with Beatrice.

