
John saw the door open, and a porter of great stature, clad in a
uniform, heavy with gold lace, appear, bowing profoundly. It was often
difficult to tell a head porter from a field marshal, but in this case
the man's deferential attitude not only indicated the difference, but
the fact also that Auersperg was coming.

The prince, preceded by two young men in close-fitting blue-gray
uniforms, came out. John was bound to confess once more that he was a
fine-looking man, large, bearded magnificently, and imposing in
appearance and manner. His effect at a state ball or a reception would
be highly decorative, and many a managing American mother would have
been glad to secure him as a son-in-law, provided the present war did
not make such medieval survivals unfashionable.

Auersperg entered his automobile, a very dark red limousine of great
size, and he was shut from John's view, save only his full beard
glimmering faintly through the glass. More men came, soldiers or
attendants, and among them was Antoine Picard, gigantic and sullen. His
arms were unbound and he went with the others willingly. Perhaps
Auersperg had divined that he would not attempt to escape, as long as
Julie was in his hands.

Then came the two women, Julie first, and John heard about him the
muttered exclamation: "The French spies!" He knew that this belief had
taken strong hold of the soldiers and people who stood about. Women,
when they chose to be, were the most dangerous of all spies and the
watchers regarded them with intense curiosity.

Neither was veiled. Julie was erect, and her chin high. John saw that
the girl had become a woman, matured by hardship and danger, and she
looked more beautiful than ever to him that morning. Her cheeks were
pale and tiny curls of the deep golden hair escaped from her hood and
clustered about her temples. John's heart swam with pity. Truly, she was
a bird in the hands of the fowler.

She gave a glance half appealing and half defiant at the people, but the
stalwart Suzanne who followed her was wholly grim and challenging. Then
something strange occurred. John had the most intense anxiety for her to
look at him. He had no belief whatever in anything supernatural, but
sound, intelligible words were made to travel on waves of air, and it
was barely possible in this unexplored world that thought too might be
propelled in the same way.

Almost unconsciously he kept his eyes upon Julie's and he poured his
very soul into the gaze. It was only a little distance from the door to
the automobile which she was to take, and he had time. His gaze became
concentrated, burning, a thing more of the spirit than of sight, and as
her eyes glanced once more about the circle of idle spectators they met
his own and rested there.

John looked straight into their dark blue depths and he saw a startled
flash leap up. Chance or a power yet unknown had drawn her gaze and made
her vision keen. He saw that she knew him, knew him even in that
peasant's dress and under the new stubble of beard. The flash became for
a moment a fire, and her figure quivered, but he was not afraid. He had
an instinctive confidence that she would understand, and that she would
not betray him by any impulsive act.

"I am here to save you," his eyes said.

"I know it," hers replied.

"I will follow you across the world to help you."

"I know that, too."

"Don't betray the fact that you've seen a friend."

"I will not."

Thus the eyes spoke to one another and understood what was said. Julie's
glance passed on, and with unfaltering step she entered an automobile,
the German chauffeur standing by the side of it and respectfully holding
the door. Suzanne followed, the chauffeur closed the door, sprang into
his seat and the little train moved majestically through the streets of
Metz. Comment was plentiful and it was not unkind to Julie.

"Too handsome to be executed as a spy," said a burly German almost in
John's ear. "A girl with a face like that should never feel the touch of
a bullet or a rope. It's a face to be kissed and a neck to fit into a
man's arm."

The man's phrasing was rough, but both his admiration and his pity were
sincere, and John felt no resentment toward him.

"Some of the French girls are wonderful for looks," said another and
younger German, "but they're the most dangerous kind. If it's proved on
the one the prince has caught she'll expect her blue eyes and all that
hair of gold to pull her through."

Him, John hated and would have been glad to strike, but he could help
neither Julie nor himself by resenting it. Instead, he watched the
automobiles, four in number, disappear on the road leading from Metz
toward Stuttgart, a small body of hussars following as a guard, and
then, pack on back, he trudged on foot behind them.

The invaluable passport carried him through the fortifications, and
along the great highway into the country. He was glad that Auersperg had
not gone by train, as it would have been harder to trace him then. Now,
although far behind, he could hear of him at inns and little towns by
the way. Yet he was compelled to recall to himself again and again the
ancient and worn fable of the hare and the tortoise.

He knew well enough that the tortoise did not often overtake the hare.
Hares were cunning little animals, riot able to fight and almost wholly
dependent upon speed for survival in the battle of life. Hence, they
never went to sleep, and in only a single instance recorded in history
had a tortoise won a footrace from a hare. Yet an old proverb, even if
based upon a solitary exception, is wonderfully consoling, and John was
able to use it now as comfort.

After he had passed the fortifications and was well behind the German
interior lines, travel became easier. The Germans, considering their
army a wall before them, were less suspicious and the interruptions were
few. John, moreover, was a cheerful peasant. He had a fair voice, and he
sang German hymns and war songs in a mellow baritone as he strode along.
The road was really not so bad, after that long and hideous life in
filthy trenches. The heat of Sahara would be autumn coolness after a
return from Hades, and now John enjoyed the contrast.

There were many tracks of automobiles in the light snow and hail that
covered the road, and one broader than the rest John felt sure was made
by the great limousine of Auersperg. It was like a trail to lead him on,
and he was a trailer who could not be shaken off.

Rejoicing in his new possession of German--thankful now that he had
studied it so hard--although he spoke it with a strong accent of
Lorraine, John saluted such German soldiers as he passed and wished them
good day. Invariably the salute was returned in pleasant fashion. His
nature was essentially friendly and therefore he bred friendliness in
others. Although he was in a hostile land he was continually meeting
people who seemed to have an instinctive wish to help him.

As he walked on he overtook a stout man of middle age dressed heavily
in brown who appeared to be a priest, and who turned upon him a benign
countenance.

"Why do you travel so fast for one on foot?" asked the man.

"Because I feel strong and my errand takes me far, Father."

"If it takes you far, my son, the less speed in the beginning the
greater at the end."

"True, Father," said John, slackening his pace, and glancing at the
shrewd face which was also both ruddy and kindly. "The Church can give
good advice in temporal as well as spiritual matters."

"Even so, my son," said the priest, who had noted John's frank
countenance, his width between the eyes. "One of my vocation cannot go
through life merely looking inward. Come, walk with me. The world is
mad, gone wholly mad, but let us try to be two sane beings in it for a
little while."

"Thanks, Father," said John. "I can wish no better company. I agree with
you that the world has gone mad. I have seen its madness at its height."

"And at such a time the Church, Protestant or Catholic, must do the best
it can. But we are so few, while so many souls are leaving their bodies.
And yet I tell you, young sir, that not one man in a hundred of this
great European peasantry knows why he fights. I, a priest, may speak
freely, and I do so because my mind is full of indignation this
morning."

"I do not love war, either. You see I walk away from it. But why are
you on foot, Father?"

"By preference. I might have gone in one of the automobiles with the
soldiers, but they are a part of the war madness, and I wished to be
alone. You will learn with years that it's well to be alone at times,
when one may take the measure of himself and those about him. I have
chosen to walk this morning, because it makes my blood run better, and
the winds at least are pure."

"I find the case the same with me, sir. My best thoughts usually come
when I'm walking and alone."

The priest threw out his hands in a wide gesture.

"We agree, I see," he said. "You appear to be a peasant, but your voice
is that of another kind. No, do not protest or say anything. It is no
business of mine that you're not the peasant you claim to be, nor do I
ask the nature of your errand behind the German army."

"I could not tell it to you, Father, but it is an errand of peace. I
think it the highest and holiest I could undertake, and, in undertaking
it, I believe myself to be animated by such a spirit as the knights felt
in the first flush of the Crusades."

"I believe your words. When I first looked into your eyes I said they
were those of an honest young man. We of the cloth learn to know. We
feel instinctively the presence of honesty or dishonesty. Young sir, I
hope that your quest, although it may take you far, will take you to
success."

John's heart beat hard. He knew that the man was only a village priest,
but good wishes carry. They might even travel upon waves of their own,
and send to a happy goal those for whom they were intended.

"Father," he said, "you and I have never met before this day, and we may
never see each other after it. As I told you, mine is a long quest and
it's full of danger. Will you give it your blessing without asking what
it is?"

"Willingly," said the priest as he spread out his hands, and murmured
rapid words in Latin. John, Protestant though he was, felt a curious
lightening of the soul. The Crusaders always sought a blessing before
going into battle, and a spiritual fire that would uphold him seemed to
have passed from the mind of this humble village priest to his.

They went on now for a little while in silence. Uhlans, hussars,
infantry and cannon passed them, but few questions were asked of them.
The day remained cold, and the heavens were a brilliant blue. It was
fine weather for walking and the middle-aged man and the young man kept
pace with each other, stride for stride.

By and by they drank from a brook and then ate together. The priest also
carried a knapsack under his heavy brown overcoat and they shared their
food, finishing it with a sip or two from a flask of light wine.

"We come to a crossroad a mile further on," said the priest, "and there
I think we will part. I turn into the crossroad, and you, I take it,
keep the road to Stuttgart."

"I shall be sorry."

"The way of the world, my son. All through life we are meeting and
parting. The number of people who travel with us all the road is very
small. It may be that I have surmised somewhat of your quest. No, say
nothing! I would not know more, but a far greater power than mine will
help you in it."

They parted at the crossroad and John felt as if he left an old friend.
When he looked back he saw the priest on a little hill gazing after him,
and he felt again as if the good wish that would count was coming on a
wave of air. Then his own road dipped into a valley and at nightfall he
came to a village which had a little inn, humble but neat and clean.
Here he procured a razor and shaved the stubble from his face. He no
longer had a fear of meeting anyone whom he might know, save possibly
Weber, and Weber was a friend.

John's frank face and cheerful manner again made friends for him. The
stout innkeeper and his stout wife favored him with the food, and
hearing that he had come from Metz they wanted to know all the gossip,
which he told them as far as he knew. He had noted the broad track of
the great limousine in the road before he entered the inn, and thinking
it must have stopped there for a little while, he spoke casually of
those who passed.

"Aye," said the innkeeper, "many go by, many of whom will never come
back. They go mostly toward Metz, but a great prince traveling in the
other direction came today, before noon, and we served him refreshment."

"Perhaps it was the Prince of Auersperg," said John. "He was in Metz
when I was there, and I saw him leave."

"They did not tell me his name, but that must have been the man."

"He was in a great, dark red automobile."

"Then it was surely he. One could not mistake that automobile. I take it
that only kings and princes travel in its like."

"He carried with him two Frenchwomen, dangerous spies, intended for
imprisonment in Germany."

"So I heard, and we saw the face of one of them, very young and with the
most marvelous golden hair. I never saw a fairer face. But, as all the
world knows, the most beautiful women are often the most wicked. I
suppose there wasn't a woman among the Philistines who could compare
with Delilah in either face or figure."

"I suppose not," said John, scarcely able to restrain a smile. "Did the
women come into the inn?"

"Oh, no. My wife took food to them in the automobile. She saw them much
better than I did. She says that the younger one--and she was but a
girl--spoke softly and did not look wicked at all. But then, my wife is
fat and sentimental."

The stout hausfrau smiled.

"It is Hans who has the heart full of sentiment," she said. "When he saw
that the French spy was a girl of such beauty and such youth he
believed that she should not be punished, and he a good German! Ah, all
men are alike!"

Hans filled his pipe and wisely made no reply. But John smiled also.

"Is it wicked in a man to have an eye for beauty?" he said. "I know that
my host's heart has thrilled many a time when he caught a glimpse of the
lady who is now his wife and the very competent head of his household."

It was obvious, but both smiled.

"Hans is not so bad," said the hausfrau complacently, and John's
compliment won him an unusually good room that night. Hans told him also
that he could probably secure him a place in an empty supply wagon the
next morning, and John was grateful. Walking was good, and it had done
much to maintain his strength and steady his nerves, but one could not
walk all the way across Germany.

He was aware that he was surrounded by dangers but he felt that the
omens remained fair. Perhaps the good wishes that had been given to him
still clothed him about and protected him from harm. In abnormal times
the human mind seeks more than an ordinary faith.

He would have slept well, but in the night an army passed. For hours and
hours the gray legions trod by in numbers past counting, the moonlight
casting gleams upon the spiked helmets. Then came masses of Uhlans and
hussars and after them batteries of great guns and scores and scores of
the wicked machine guns. Truly, as the priest had said, the whole world
had gone mad. He remembered those days in Vienna when the gay and
light-head ed Viennese had marched up and down the streets all night
long, singing and dancing, and thinking only of war as a festival, in
which glorious victory was sure and quick. Torrents of blood had flowed
under the bridges since then, gay Austria, that had set the torch, had
been shaken to its foundation, and no victory was yet in sight for
anybody.

Nevertheless the German legions seemed inexhaustible. John had seen them
turned back in those long days of fighting on the Marne, and more than a
million had been killed or wounded since the war began, but that
avalanche of men and guns still poured out of the heart of Germany. He
felt more deeply than ever that the world could not afford a German
victory, and the sanguinary spectacle of a Kaiser riding roughshod over
civilization. The fact that so many German people were likable and that
Germany had achieved so much made the case all the worse.

He took the road the next morning, not on foot this time but in an empty
provision wagon, returning eastward, drawn by two powerful horses and
driven by Fritz, a stout German youth. Both Hans and the hausfrau wished
him well, and he soon made a friend of Fritz, who was a Bavarian from a
