before the regular dinner hour arrived.  Although he always remained
late, he was never invited to stay to supper, Mr. Ashton's
understanding being that the mid-day meal was the only one to which the
lad was entitled.

But for his love for his mother, Bush would have given up more than
once.  His tasks were so severe and continuous that many a time he was
hardly able to drag himself homeward.  Every bone in his body seemed to
ache, and neither his employer nor his wife ever uttered a pleasant or
encouraging word.

But no word of murmuring fell from his lips.  He resolutely held back
all complaints, and crept away early to his couch under the plea that
it was necessary in order to be up betimes.  The mother's heart was
distressed beyond expression, but she comforted herself with the fact
that his term of service was drawing to a close, and he would soon have
all the rest and play he wanted.

Bush allowed his wages to stand until the first of September, when his
three months expired.  He had counted on the pride and happiness that
would be his when he walked into the house and tossed the whole
eighteen dollars in his mother's lap.  How her eyes would sparkle, and
how proud he would be!

"Lemme see," said the skinflint, when settling day arrived; "I was to
give you four dollars a month, warn't I?"

"It was six," replied Bush, respectfully.

"That warn't my understanding, but we'll let it go at that; I've allers
been too gin'rous, and my heart's too big for my pocket.  Lemme see."

He uttered the last words thoughtfully, as he took his small
account-book from his pocket, and began figuring with the stub of a
pencil.  "Three months at six dollars will be eighteen dollars."

"Yes, sir; that's right."

"Don't interrupt me, young man," sternly remarked the farmer, frowning
at him over his spectacles.  "The full amount is eighteen
dollars--Kerrect--L--em--m--e see; you have et seven breakfasts here;
at fifty cents apiece that is three dollars and a half.  Then,
l--em--m--e see; you was late eleven times, and I've docked you
twenty-five cents for each time; that makes two dollars and
seventy-five cents."

Inasmuch as Bush's wages amounted hardly to twenty-five cents a day, it
must be admitted that this was drawing it rather strong.

"L--em--m--e see," continued Mr. Ashton, wetting the pencil stub
between his lips, and resuming his figuring; "your board amounts to
three dollars and a half; your loss of time to two seventy-five; that
makes six and a quarter, which bein' took from eighteen dollars, leaves
'leven seventy-five.  There you are!"

As he spoke, he extended his hand, picked up a small canvas bag from
the top of his old-fashioned writing-desk, and tossed it to the
dumfounded boy.  The latter heard the coins inside jingle, as it fell
in his lap, and, as soon as he could command his voice, he swallowed
the lump in his throat, and faintly asked:

"Is that--is that right, Mr. Ashton?"

"Count it and see for yourself," was the curt response.

This was not exactly what Bush meant, but he mechanically unfastened
the cord around the throat of the little bag, tumbled the coins out in
his hat and slowly counted them.  They footed up exactly eleven dollars
and seventy-five cents, proving that Mr. Ashton's figuring was
altogether unnecessary, and that he had arranged the business
beforehand.

While Bush was examining the coins, his heart gave a sudden quick
throb.  He repressed all signs of the excitement he felt, however.

"How do you find it?" asked the man, who had never removed his eyes
from him, "Them coins have been in the house more'n fifty year--that
is, some of 'em have, but they're as good as if they's just from the
mint, and bein' all coin, you can never lose anything by the bank
bustin'."

"It is correct," said Bush.

"Ar' you satisfied?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then sign this receipt, and we're square."

The lad sat down at the desk and attached his name in a neat round hand
to the declaration that he had received payment in full for his
services from Mr. Zephaniah Ashton, up to the first of September of the
current year.

"This is all mine, Mr. Ashton?"

"Of course--what do you mean by axin' that?"

"Nothing; good-day."

"Good-day," grunted the miser, turning his back, as a hint for him to
leave--a hint which Bush did not need, for he was in a tumult of
excitement.

"That is the queerest thing that ever happened," he said to himself
when he reached the public highway, and began hurrying along the road
in the direction of Newark.  "If he had paid me my full wages I would
have told him, but all these are mine, and I shall sell them; won't
Professor Hartranft be delighted, but not half as much as mother and I
will be."


That evening Mr. Ashton and his wife had just finished their supper
when Professor Hartranft, a pleasant, refined-looking gentleman,
knocked at their door.

"I wish to inquire," said he, after courteously saluting the couple,
"whether you have any old coins in the house."

"No," was the surly response of the farmer, "we don't keep 'em."

"But you _had_ quite a collection."

"I had 'leven dollars and seventy-five cents' worth, but I paid 'em out
this mornin'."

"To a boy named Bushrod Wyckoff?"

"Yas."

"They were given to him unreservedly?--that is, you renounce all claim
upon them?"

"What the blazes ar' you drivin' at?" demanded the angry farmer.  "I
owed him 'leven dollars and seventy-five cents for wages, and I paid
him purcisely that amount, and have his receipt in full.  I'd like to
know what business it is of yours anyway."

Now came the professor's triumph.

"Young Wyckoff called at my office this afternoon, and I bought a
number of the coins from him."

"What!" exclaimed the amazed farmer, "you didn't pay him nothin' extra
for that rusty old money, did you?  You must be crazy."

"I did, and shall make a handsome thing of it.  For instance, among the
coins which you gave him was a copper penny, with a liberty cap, of
1793; I paid Bush three dollars for that; I gave him twenty-five
dollars for a half dime coined in 1802; twenty dollars for a quarter
dollar of 1827; the same sum for a half dollar, fillet head, of 1796;
and, what caps all, five hundred dollars for a silver dollar of 1804.
There are only five or six of the latter in existence, and I shall sell
this specimen for at least eight hundred dollars.  Mr. Ashton,
sometimes a mean man overreaches himself, and it looks as though you
had made a mistake.  I bid you good-day, sir."

The numismatist spoke the truth; and when the miserly old farmer
realized how completely he had turned the tables on himself, it is
enough to say that his feelings may be "better imagined than described."




A BATTLE IN THE AIR.

One of the most interesting towns I ever visited is New Braunfels,
Texas.  It was founded by a colony of Germans, and experienced the most
distressing trials during its early days; but it is now a picture of
thrift and industry.  The cowboy who attempts to ride through New
Braunfels, with his revolvers displayed, is promptly pulled off his
mustang and compelled to pay a round fine for violating a city
ordinance.  If he undertakes to "kick," it won't help him a bit, and
probably will increase the penalty imposed.  Our German cousins propose
to run that town to suit themselves, and they succeed quite well.

The rivers of Texas are subjected to violent rises, often as great as
twenty feet in an hour or less.  Such sudden floods play havoc with the
bridges along the bank, but I noticed in riding into New Braunfels an
ingenious arrangement of the wooden structure by which, no matter how
high the stream may rise, the bridge accommodates itself, and floats on
the surface, while securely held from being carried away by the current.

But I set out to tell you a true incident of what happened a few years
since, to a bright, lively youngster, sixteen years old, who lives in
New Braunfels, and is brimful of pluck.  His name is Lee Hemingway; he
is an orphan, and if his life is spared, he is certain to be heard from
when he reaches man's estate.

Prof. McInery, the well-known naturalist, spent several weeks last
spring in the neighborhood of New Braunfels, hunting ornithological
specimens for his collection, and he offered fifty dollars to any one
who would bring him an eagle's nest, with living eaglets or with eggs
in it.

When Lee Hemingway learned of the offer, he determined to earn it.  It
was rather early in the season for our emblematical birds to hatch
their young, but, by carefully watching a pair, he succeeded in finding
where their nest was made.  It was on the summit of an almost
insurmountable bowlder, rising nearly a hundred and twenty-five feet in
the valley of the Guadaloupe.

The bravest man might well shrink from attempting to scale the
perpendicular sides of this mass of rock, but as young Hemingway gazed
longingly up the side to the nest, he noticed that the stone had become
coated, in the course of time, with earth, which was covered with
tangled vines and stunted vegetation.

"I believe I can climb that," thought the sturdy lad, after
scrutinizing the herculean task, and watching one of the eagles soaring
far above the summit.  "I think there is enough foothold, and I can use
the vines to help pull me up; but, if the eagles should catch me at it,
they would make music."

It was the birds that caused him more dread than the forty odd yards of
rock.  We knew their fierce nature, and, if they discovered his designs
against their home, as they were almost certain to do, they would
assail him with a fury that must be resistless in his cramped position.

The professor advised him not to make the attempt, but the daring youth
had to earn his own living, and the prize of fifty dollars was too
tempting to be resisted.

"_I'll do it_!" he exclaimed, after considering the question, "if you
will keep watch with your gun for the eagles."

"Of course I'll do _that_," replied the professor, delighted with the
prospect of securing that which he had sought so long in vain.

The preparations for the work were simple.  With a basket, furnished
with a lid, slung to his back, in which to secure the eggs or eaglets,
young Hemingway began his laborious and dangerous ascent, while the
professor, gun in hand, watched him from the ground below.

The boy quickly proved the possession of unusual skill as a climber.
With the help of the vines he went steadily upward, hunting secure
places for his feet and testing every support before trusting his
weight to it.  Once or twice, the professor thought the lad had made a
mistake and was on the point of paying the penalty, but he never
faltered nor slipped.  Higher and higher he ascended until at last the
feat was accomplished, and the very summit reached.

His heart throbbed with pleasure when he discovered two young eagles in
the nest.  They were no more than a couple of days old, and he had no
trouble in placing them and a portion of the nest in the basket, which
was again strapped to his back, and, after a brief rest, he started to
descend.

Nothing was seen of the parent eagles, and he was congratulating
himself on his good fortune, when bang went the professor's gun.  At
the same moment a shadow flitted over his head, and looking up he saw
that instead of one, both of the eagles had arrived.

The lad had not descended half-way and the professor's shot did not
harm either of them.  They landed on the summit of the rocks, and, if a
bird can feel astonishment, they must have felt it when they looked
around and discovered nothing of their home.

But the great American bird is not the one to submit tamely to such an
outrage.  They began an immediate investigation, and, when they caught
sight of a boy scrambling down the side of the rocks with a basket
strapped to his back, from which came a number of familiar squeak-like
chirpings, they had no trouble in understanding matters.

The style in which they went for that same boy was a sight to behold.
There was no hesitation or maneuvering; but, with outstretched wings
and hoarse screeches, they dashed toward him like a couple of cyclones.
The youth saw that he was caught in a desperate fix, for he had no
weapons, and had to cling to the vines with one hand to save himself
from being dashed to the ground below.

He ducked his head to ward off their beaks and talons from his eyes,
and tried hard to beat them back with his free hand.

This was impossible.  Their beaks struck him repeatedly in the head,
bringing blood, which flowed over his face and almost blinded him,
while they savagely buffeted him with their great wings, until he was
in danger of being knocked from his position.

Meanwhile, the alarmed professor could do nothing for his young friend.
The eagles kept so close to him, that, if he tried, he was as likely to
hit one as the other.  He walked back and forth, on the alert for such
a chance, and fortunately had not long to wait.  One of the furious
birds, circled off a few feet, as if to gather impetus for a decisive
charge, when, taking a quick aim, the gentleman fired.

The shot was unerring and killed the female.  She fluttered into a
large sapling that sprouted from a large crevice in the rocks, about
eight feet above the boy's head, and lay motionless.  Although nearly
blinded by blood, young Hemingway now attempted a feat which he was
convinced offered the only means of saving his life.

He drew himself up to the foot of the tree, and once there, braced
himself firmly with his feet, and tied his handkerchief around his
forehead, to keep the blood out of his eyes.  Seizing the dead bird by
the feet, he swung it around with might and main and struck the male,
which had continued beating him incessantly.

It was a strange weapon--a dead eagle against a live one, and the boy's
constrained position prevented his using it with much effect.  So
lacking, indeed, were the blows in force, that the male flew directly
at his face.  The sorely beset lad dropped the dead bird and fastened
both hands around the throat of his assailant.  The latter fought
desperately, but the young hero never released his grip, until it
ceased its struggles.  Then he flung it from him, and it tumbled
downward to the professor's feet.

This gentleman had done his best to help his young friend, but was
unable to do so.  The lad, after resting awhile, picked his way down to
the ground, where his feet had hardly touched when he fainted in the
professor's arms.  He soon rallied, however, though his wounds were so
severe that he was obliged to keep his bed for several weeks.

The two eaglets were found uninjured, and were safely carried to the
professor's home, as were the bodies of the dead birds.  They were
mounted by Professor McInery, who, in consideration of the danger
undergone by the boy, and the two extra birds, presented Lee with $100,
and no one will deny that the money was well earned.




WHO SHALL EXPLAIN IT?

Let me begin by saying that I was never a believer in signs, omens, or
the general superstitions which, it must be admitted, influence most
people to a greater or less degree.  I have been the thirteenth guest
at more than one table, without my appetite being affected; I have
tipped over my salt-cellar without a twinge of fear; I have never
turned aside to avoid passing under a leaning ladder, and I do not care
a jot whether the first glimpse of the new moon is over my right or
left shoulder.

I had a little boy Bob, who was fourteen years old on the last
anniversary of American independence.  Being our only son, his mother
and myself held him close to our hearts.  In fact, I am sure no little
fellow was ever regarded with more affectionate love than our Bob.  The
painful story which, with much hesitation, I have set out to tell is
one, therefore, that no member of our little family can ever forget.

We always tried to act the part of sensible parents toward our little
boy.  He never stepped inside of a school-house until he was seven
years old, and, when he did so, it was to stay only a brief while.  It
was six months before he became acquainted with every letter of the
alphabet, and no youngster of his years ever ruined more clothing than
he.  The destruction of shoes, hats, and trousers was enough to
bankrupt many a father, and it often provoked a protest from his
mother.  I have seen him, within a half hour after having his face
scrubbed until it shone like an apple, present himself in such ragged
attire and with so soiled a countenance, that it took a second glance
to identify him.

And yet, as I sit here writing by the evening lamp, I am glad to recall
that I never scolded Bob.  I would have been sadly neglectful of my
duty had I failed to reprove and advise him, and I am sure he honestly
strove to obey my wishes; but the sum and substance of it all was, he
couldn't do it.  He was a vigorous little fellow, overrunning with
animal spirits, high health, and mischief; and it was a pleasure to me
to see him laying the firm foundation of a lusty constitution, which,
in later years, could laugh at disease.

And then when he did take a start in his studies, he advanced with a
speed that astonished his teacher.  At the age of twelve there was not
a girl or boy in school (and some of them were several years older than
he) who could hold his own with him.  I took some credit to myself for
all this, for I believed it was largely due to the common-sense I used
in his early youth.  The foundation was strong and secure, and the
building erected upon it was upon solid rock.

During the last two or three years I suffered from a great fear.
Between the school-house and our home was a mill-pond, which in many
places was fully a dozen feet deep.  I knew what a temptation this was
to the boys during the long, sultry summer weather, and there was not a
day when a dozen youngsters, more or less, were not frolicking and
splashing in it.

One afternoon, when I sauntered thither, I found fully a score of them
in the height of enjoyment, and the wildest and most reckless fellow
was my Bob.  When he observed me standing on the shore he was so
anxious to astonish me that he ventured into the water up to his chin,
I shouted to him to come to shore, for he was in fearful peril, and it
needed only a few inches further advance for him to drown before help
could reach him.

"Bob," said I, in a voice and manner that could not be mistaken, "if
you ever do that again I'll whip you within an inch of your life."

"I won't, pop," he replied, in such meek tones that, parent-like, my
heart reproached me at once.

"Now," I added more gently, "every boy ought to learn to swim, and
until he is able to do so, he should keep out of deep water.  If you
will promise me that you will never venture into a depth above your
waist until a good swimmer, you may bathe here; otherwise you shall
never come near it."

He gave me his promise, and, telling him that he had been in the water
long enough for that afternoon, I asked him to dress himself and come
home with me.

I felt that I had been weak.  I ought to have forbidden him ever to
enter the mill-pond unless in my company, and thus that which followed
never could have occurred.  I did not tell his mother what had taken
place, for I knew she would insist on a strict prohibition of his
aimless swimming efforts.

To tell the truth, there were two reasons why I did not forbid Bob to
enter the mill-pond.  I knew it would be the most cruel kind of
punishment, and, I may as well confess it, I didn't believe the boy
would obey me if he gave the pledge.  The temptation was too strong to
be resisted.  Alas! how often our affection closes our eyes to the
plainest duty!

And now I have reached a point which prompts me to ask the question at
the head of this sketch, "Who Shall Explain It?"  I have my own theory,
which I shall submit, with no little diffidence, later on.

It was on Saturday afternoon, the ninth of last August, that I became a
victim to a greater depression of spirits than I had known for years.
I felt nothing of it during the forenoon, but it began shortly after
the midday meal and became more oppressive with each passing minute.  I
sat down at my desk and wrote for a short time.  I continually sighed
and drew deep inspirations, which gave me no relief.  It was as if a
great and increasing weight were resting on my chest.  Had I been
superstitious, I would have declared that I was on the eve of some
dreadful calamity.

Writing became so difficult and distasteful that I threw down my pen,
sprang from my chair, and began rapidly pacing up and down the room.
My wife had gone to the city that morning to visit her relatives, and
was not to return until the following day; so I was alone, with only
two servants in the house.
