room instead, to keep me from growing vain, I did not dispute her
statement that "the less little girls looked in the glass the better."
And when I went to see Maud Mary (who was the only child of rich
parents, and had a cheval-glass in her own bed-room), it was a just
satisfaction to me to feel that if she was prettier, and could see
herself full length, she was probably vainer than I.

It was very mortifying, therefore, to find that my godmother not only
thought me plain, but gave me no credit for not minding it. I grew
redder and redder, and my eyes filled with tears.

Lady Elizabeth was very nice in one way--she treated us with as much
courtesy and consideration as if we were grown up. People do not think
about being polite to children, but my godmother was very polite.

"My dear child," she said, holding out her hand, "I am very sorry if I
have hurt your feelings. I beg your pardon."

I put my hot and rather dirty little paw among her cool fingers and
diamond rings. I could not mutter to her face, but I said rather under
my sobs that "it seemed such a thing" to be blamed for not being
pretty.

"My dear Selina, I never said anything about your being pretty. I said
I should be sorry if you did not grow up nice-looking, which is quite
another thing. It will depend on yourself whether you are nice-looking
or not."

I began to feel comforted, but I bridled my chin in an aggrieved
manner, which I know I had caught from Mrs. Marsden, the charwoman,
when she took tea in the nursery and told long tales to nurse; and I
said I "was sure it wasn't for want of speaking to" nurse that my hair
did not wave like Maud Mary's, but that when I asked her to crimp it,
she only said, "Handsome is that handsome does, and that ought to be
enough for you, Miss Selina, without _my_ slaving to damp-plait your
hair every night."

I repeated nurse's speech pretty volubly, and with her sharp accent
and accompanying toss. My godmother heard me out, and then she said--

"Nurse quoted a very good proverb, which is even truer than it is
allowed to be. Those who do well grow to look well. My little
goddaughter, that soft child's face of yours can be pinched and pulled
into a nice shape or an ugly shape, very much as you pull and pinch
that gutta-percha head I gave you, and, one way or another, it is
being shaped all along."

"But people can't give themselves beautiful figures, and eyes, and
mouths, and hands, as you said papa had, unless they are born so," I
objected.

"Your father's figure, my dear," said Lady Elizabeth, "was beautiful
with the grace and power which comes of training. He was a military
man, and you have only to look at a dozen common men in a marching
regiment and compare them with a dozen of the same class of men who go
on plodding to work and loafing at play in their native villages, to
see what people can do for their own figures. His eyes, Selina, were
bright with intelligence and trained powers of observation; and they
were beautiful with kindliness, and with the well-bred habit of giving
complete attention to other people and their affairs when he talked
with them. He had a rare smile, which you may not inherit, but the
real beauty of such mouths as his comes from the lips being restrained
into firm and sensitive lines, through years of self-control and fine
sympathies."

I do not quite understand. "Do you mean that I can practise my mouth
into a nice shape?" I asked.

"Certainly not, my dear, any more than you can pinch your nose into
shape with your finger and thumb; but your lips, and all the lines of
your face, will take shape of themselves, according to your temper and
habits.

"There are two things," my godmother continued, after turning round to
look at me for a minute, "there are two things, Selina, against your
growing up good-looking. One is that you have caught so many little
vulgarisms from the servants; and the other is your little bad habit
of grumbling, which, for that matter, is a very ill-bred habit as
well, and would spoil the prettiest eyes, nose, mouth, and chin that
ever were inherited. Under-bred and ill-educated women are, as a
general rule, much less good-looking than well-bred and
highly-educated ones, especially in middle life; not because good
features and pretty complexions belong to one class more than to
another, but because nicer personal habits and stricter discipline of
the mind do. A girl who was never taught to brush her teeth, to
breathe through the nostrils instead of the lips, and to chew with the
back teeth instead of the front, has a very poor chance of growing up
with a pretty mouth, as anyone may see who has observed a middle-aged
woman of that class munching a meat pie at a railway-station. And if,
into the bargain, she has nothing to talk about but her own and her
neighbour's everyday affairs, and nothing to think about to keep her
from continually talking, life, my dear child, is so full of little
rubs, that constant chatter of this kind must almost certainly be
constant grumbling. And constant grumbling, Selina, makes an ugly
under-lip, a forehead wrinkled with frowning, and dull eyes that see
nothing but grievances. There is a book in the library with some
pictures of faces that I must show you. Do you draw at all, my dear?"

"Mamma gave me a drawing-slate on my birthday," I replied, "but Joseph
bothered me to lend it to him, and now he's broken the glass. It _is_
so tiresome! But it's always the way if you lend things."

"What makes you think that it is always the way if you lend things?"
my godmother gently inquired.

"It seems as if it was, I'm sure," was my answer. "It was just the
same with the fish-kettle when cook lent it to the Browns. They kept
it a fortnight, and let it rust, and the first time cook put a drop of
water into it it leaked; and she said it always _was_ the way; you
might lend everything you had, and people had no conscience, but if
it came to borrowing a pepperpot--"

My godmother put up both her long hands with an impatient gesture.

"That will do, my dear. I don't care to hear all that your mother's
cook said about the fish-kettle."

I felt uncomfortable, and was glad that Lady Elizabeth went on
talking.

"Have you and Joseph any collections? When I was your age, I remember
I made a nice collection of wafers. They were quite as pretty as
modern monograms."

"Joseph collected feathers out of the pillows once," I said, laughing.
"He got a great many different sorts, but nurse burned them, and he
cried."

"I'm sorry nurse burned them. I daresay they made him very happy. I
advise you to begin a collection, Selina. It is a capital cure for
discontent. Anything will do. A collection of buttons, for instance.
There are a great many kinds; and if ever some travelled friend crowns
your collection with a mandarin's button, for one day at least you
won't feel a grievance worth speaking of."

I was feeling very much aggrieved as Lady Elizabeth spoke, and
thinking to myself that "it seemed so hard to be scolded out visiting,
and when one had not got into any scrape." But I only said that
"nobody at home ever said that I grumbled so much;" and that I "didn't
know that our servants complained more than other people's."

"I do not suppose they do," said my godmother. "I have told you
already that I consider it a foible of ill-educated people, whose
interests are very limited, and whose feelings are not disciplined.
You know James, the butler, Selina, do you not?"

"Oh, yes, godmamma!"

I knew James well. He was very kind to me, and always liberal when, by
Lady Elizabeth's orders, he helped me to almonds and raisins at
dessert.

"My mother died young," said Lady Elizabeth, "and at sixteen I was
head of my father's household. I had been well trained, and I tried to
do my duty. Amid all the details of providing for and entertaining
many people, my duty was to think of everything, and never to seem as
if I had anything on my mind. I should have been fairly trained _for a
kitchen-maid_, Selina, if I had done what I was told when it was
bawled at me, and had talked and seemed more overwhelmed with work
than the Prime Minister. Well, most of our servants had known me from
babyhood, and it was not a light matter to have the needful authority
over them without hurting the feelings of such old and faithful
friends. But, on the whole, they respected my efforts, and were proud
of my self-possession. I had more trouble with the younger ones, who
were too young to help me, and whom I was too young to overawe. I was
busy one morning writing necessary letters, when James--who was then
seventeen, and the under-footman--came to the drawing room and wished
to speak to me. When he had wasted a good deal of my time in
describing his unwillingness to disturb me, and the years his father
had lived in my father's service, I said, 'James, I have important
letters to write, and very little time to spare. If you have any
complaint to make, will you kindly put it as shortly as you can?' 'I'm
sure, my lady, I have no wish to complain,' was James's reply; and
thereon his complaints poured forth in a continuous stream. I took out
my watch (unseen by James, for I never insult people), and gave him
five minutes for his grievances. He got on pretty fast with them. He
had mentioned the stone floor of his bed-room, a draught in the pantry,
the overbearingness of the butler, the potatoes for the servants' hall
being under-boiled when the cook was out of temper, the inferior
quality of the new plate-powder, the insinuations against his father's
honesty by servants who were upstarts by comparison, his hat having
been spoilt by the rain, and that he never was so miserable in his
life--when the five minutes expired, and I said 'Then, James, you want
to go?' He coloured, and I really think tears stood in his eyes. He
was a good-hearted lad.

"When he began to say that he could never regard any other place as he
looked on this, and that he felt towards his lordship and me as he
could feel towards no other master and mistress, I gave him another
five minutes for what he was pleased with. To do him justice, the list
was quite as long as that of his grievances. No people were like us,
and he had never been so happy in his life. So I said, 'Then, James,
you want to stay?'

"James began a fresh statement, in which his grievances and his
satisfactions came alternately, and I cut this short by saying, 'Well,
James, the difficulty seems to be that you have not made up your mind
what you do want. I have no time to balance matters for you, so you
had better go downstairs and think it well over, and let me know what
you decide.'

"He went accordingly, and when he was driven to think for himself by
being stopped from talking to me, I suppose he was wise enough to
perceive that it is easier to find crosses in one's lot than to feel
quite sure that one could change it for a better. I have no doubt that
he had _not_ got all he might lawfully have wished for, but, different
as our positions were, no more had I, and we both had to do our duty
and make the best of life as we found it. It's a very good thing, dear
child, to get into the habit of saying to oneself, 'One can't have
everything.' I suppose James learned to say it, for he has lived with
me ever since."

At this moment Joseph called to me through the open window which led
into the garden--

"Oh, Selina! I am so sorry; but when I got to the shop I couldn't
remember whether it was a quarter of a yard of ribbon or
three-quarters that you wanted for the doll's hat."

Joseph was always doing stupid things like this. It vexed me very
much, and I jumped up and hastily seized my doll to go out and speak
to him, saying, as I did so, that "boys were enough to drive one wild,
and one might as well ask the poodle to do anything as Joseph." And it
was not till I had flounced out of the drawing-room that I felt rather
hot and uncomfortable to remember that I had tossed my head, and
knitted my brows, and jerked my chin, and pouted my lips, and shaken
my skirts, and kicked up my heels, as I did so, and that my godmother
had probably been observing me through her gold eye-glasses.




CHAPTER II.

"It is easier to prevent ill habits than to break them."--OLD
PROVERB.


I must say that Joseph _was_ rather a stupid boy. He was only a year
younger than me, but I never could make him understand exactly what I
wanted him to do when we played together; and he was always saying,
"Oh, I say, look here, Selina!" and proposing some silly plan of his
own. But he was very good-natured, and when we were alone I let him be
uncle to the dolls. When we spent the day with Maud Mary, however, we
never let him play with the baby-house; but we allowed him to be the
postman and the baker, and people of that sort, who knock and ring,
and we sent him messages.

During the first week of our visit to Lady Elizabeth, the weather was
so fine that Joseph and I played all day long in the garden. Then it
became rainy, and we quarrelled over the old swing and the imperfect
backgammon board in the lumber-room, where we were allowed to amuse
ourselves. But one morning when we went to our play-room, after
drilling with Sergeant Walker, Joseph found a model fortress and
wooden soldiers and cannon in one corner of the room; and I found a
Dutch market, with all kinds of wooden booths, and little tables to
have tea at in another. They were presents from my godmother; and
they were far the best kind of toys we had ever had, you could do so
many things with them.

Joseph was so happy with his soldiers that he never came near the
Dutch fair; and at other times he was always bothering to be allowed
to play with the dolls. At first I was very glad, for I was afraid he
would be coming and saying, "Oh, I say, Selina," and suggesting
things; and I wanted to arrange the shops my own way. But when they
were done, and I was taking the dolls from one booth to another to
shop, I did think it seemed very odd that Joseph should not even want
to walk through the fair. And when I gave him leave to be a
shopkeeper, and to stand in front of each booth in turn, he did not
seem at all anxious to come; and he would bring a cannon with him, and
hide it behind his back when I came to buy vegetables for the dolls'
dinners.

We quarrelled about the cannon. I said no one ever heard of a
greengrocer with a cannon in his shop; and Joseph said it couldn't
matter if the greengrocer stood in front of the cannon so as to hide
it. So I said I wouldn't have a cannon in my fair at all; and Joseph
said he didn't want to come to my fair, for he liked his fortress much
better, and he rattled out, dragging his cannon behind him, and
knocked down Adelaide Augusta, the gutta-percha doll, who was leaning
against the fishmonger's slab, with her chin on the salmon.

It was very hard, and I said so; and then Joseph said there were
plenty of times when I wouldn't let him play with the dolls; and I
said that was just it--when I didn't want him to he wanted, and when I
wanted him to he wouldn't, and that he was very selfish.

So at last he put away his cannon, and came and played at shops; but
he was very stupid, and would look over his shoulder at the fortress
when he ought to have been pretending to sell; and once, when I had
left the fair, he got his cannon back and shot peas out of it, so that
all the fowls fell off the real hooks in the poulterer's shop, and
said he was bombarding the city.

I was very angry, and said, "I shall go straight down, and complain to
godmamma," and I went.

The worst of it was that only that very morning Lady Elizabeth had
said to me, "Remember one thing, my dear. I will listen to no
complaints whatever. No grumbles either from you or from Joseph. If
you want anything that you have not got, and will ask for it, I will
do my best for you, as my little guests; and if it is right and
reasonable, and fair to both, you shall have what you want. But you
must know your own mind when you ask, and make the best of what I can
do for you. I will hear no general complaints whatever."

Remembering this, I felt a little nervous when I was fairly in the
drawing-room, and Lady Elizabeth had laid down her glasses to hear
what I had to say.

"Do you want anything, my dear?" said she.

I began to complain--that Joseph was so stupid; that it seemed so
provoking; that I did think it was very unkind of him, etc.; but Lady
Elizabeth put up her hand.

"My dear Selina, you have forgotten what I told you. If there is
anything that an old woman like me can do to make your father's child
happy, do not be afraid to ask for it, but I will not have grumbling
in the drawing-room. By all means make up your mind as to what you
want, and don't be afraid to ask your old godmother. But if she thinks
it right to refuse, or you do not think it right to ask, you must make
the best of matters as they stand, and keep your good humour and your
good manners like a lady."

I felt puzzled. When I complained to nurse that Joseph "was so
tiresome," she grumbled back again that "she never knew such
children," and so forth. It is always easy to meet grievance with
grievance, but I found that it was not so easy to make up my mind and
pluck up my courage to ask in so many words for what I wanted.

"Shall I ask Joseph to put away his cannon and come and play at your
game for an hour now, my dear? I will certainly forbid him to fire
into your shop."

This did not quite satisfy me. As a matter of fact, Joseph had left
his fortress to play with me; and I did not really think he would
discharge his cannon at the poulterer's again. But I thought myself
hardly used, and I wanted my godmother to think so too, and to scold
Joseph. What else I wanted, I did not feel quite sure.

"I wish you would speak to Joseph," I said. "He would attend to you if
you told him how selfish and stupid he is."

"My dear, I never offered to complain to Joseph, but I will order him
not to molest you, and I will ask him to play with you."

"I'm sure I don't want him to play with me, unless he can play nicely,
and invent things for the dolls to say, as Maud Mary would," was my
reply; for I was getting thoroughly vexed.

"Then I will tell him that unless he can play your game as you wish
it, he had better amuse himself with his own toys. Is there anything
else that you want, my dear?"

I could not speak, for I was crying, but I sobbed out that "I missed
Maud Mary so."

"Who is Maud Mary, Selina?"
