your chin. Lie on your back with legs straight before you, feet
together, arms close at your sides, and head thrown back; trust the
water to bear you up and all that is necessary to keep you afloat is a
rotary motion of your hands _under_ water. After a time all movement may
be given up and you will lie easily and quietly as on a bed. It is said
that it is easier for women and girls to float than for men, because
their bones are lighter, and some learn to float the first time they
enter the water; all of which is very encouraging to girls. Breathe
deeply but naturally while floating, for the more air there is in your
lungs the more buoyant will be your body and the higher it will float.
If your body is inclined to roll from side to side spread out your arms
_under_ water until you steady yourself. If your feet persist in sinking
extend your arms above your head _under_ water and this will maintain
the balance.

Do not try to lift your head, but keep it well back in the water. If
your nose and mouth are out that is all that is necessary. Let your
muscles relax and lie limply.

To regain your feet after floating bring your arms in front and pull on
the water with scooped hands while raising your body from the hips.


=Diving=

You will learn to dive merely for the joy of the quick plunge into cool
waters, but there are times when to understand diving may mean the
saving of your own or some one else's life, and no matter how suddenly
or unexpectedly you are cast into the water by accident, you will retain
your self-possession and be able to strike out and swim immediately.

One should never dive into unknown water if it can be avoided, but as on
the trail all water is likely to be unknown, investigate it well before
diving and look out for hidden rocks. Do not dive into shallow water;
that is dangerous. If you are to dive from the bank some distance above
the water, stand on the edge with your toes reaching over it. Extend
your arms, raise them, and duck your head between with your arms,
forming an arch above, your ears covered by your arms. Lock your thumbs
together to keep your hands from separating when they strike the water.
Bend your knees slightly and spring from them, but straighten them
immediately so that you will be stretched full length as you enter the
water. As soon as your body is in the water curve your back inward, lift
your head up, and make a curve through the water to the surface.


=Breathing=

Breathe through your nose always when swimming as well as when walking.
To open your mouth while swimming is usually to swallow a pint or two of
water. Exhale your breath as you thrust your hands forward, inhale it as
you bring them back. "Blow your hands from you."


=Treading Water=

In treading water you maintain an upright position as in walking. Some
one says: "To tread water is like running up-stairs rapidly." Try
running up-stairs and you will get the leg movement. While the water is
up to your neck, bend your elbows and bring your hands to the surface,
then keep the palms pressing down the water. The principle is the same
as in swimming. When you swim you force the water back with your hands
and feet and so send your body forward. When you tread water you force
the water _down_ with your hands and feet and so send your body, or keep
it, up.

It is even possible to stand quite still in deep water when you learn to
keep your balance. All you do is to spread out your arms at the sides on
a line with your shoulders and keep your head well back. You may go
below the surface once or twice until you learn, but you will come up
again and the feat is well worth while. What an outdoor girl should
strive for is to become thoroughly at home in the water so that she may
enter it fearlessly and know what to do when she is there.

[Illustration: For dinner.]


=Fishing=

Just here would seem to be the place to talk of fishing, but I am not
going to try to tell you how to fish; that would take a volume, there
are so many kinds of fish and so many ways of fishing. One way is to cut
a slender pole, tie a fish-line on the small end, tie a fish-hook to the
end of the line, bait it with an angleworm, stand on the bank, drop the
hook and bait into the water, and await results. Another way is to put
together a delicate, quivering fishing-rod, carefully select a "fly,"
adjust it, stand on the bank, or in a boat, and "cast" the fly far out
on the water with a dexterous turn of the wrist. You may catch fish in
either way, but in some cases the pole and angleworm is the surest.

A visitor stood on the bank of our Pike County lake and skilfully sent
his fly skimming over the water while the boy of the family, catching
perch with his home-cut pole and angleworms, was told to watch and
learn. He did watch politely for a while, then turned again to his own
affairs. Once more some one said: "Look at Mr. J., boy, and learn to
cast a fly." But the boy, placidly fishing, returned: "I'd rather know
how to catch fish." It was true the boy had caught the fish and the
skilful angler had not. All of which goes to prove that if it is fish
you want, just any kind of fish and not the excitement of the sport, a
pole like the boy's will probably be equal to all requirements. But
there are black bass in the lake, and had one of them been in that
particular part of it, no doubt the fly would have tempted him, and the
experience and skill of Mr. J. supplemented by his long, flexible rod,
his reel and landing net, would have done the rest, while the boy had
little chance of such a bite and almost none of landing a game fish like
the bass.

[Illustration: The veteran.]

If you want to fish, and every girl on the trail should know how, take
it up in a common-sense way and learn from an experienced person. Own a
good, serviceable rod and fishing tackle and let it be your business to
know why they are good. Make up your mind to long, patient, trying
waits, to early and late excursions, and to some disappointments. Take a
fisherman's luck cheerfully and carry the thing through like a true
sportsman. There is one thing to remember which sportsmen sometimes
forget in the excitement of the game and that is _not to catch more fish
than you have use for_. One need not be cruel even to cold-blooded fish,
nor need one selfishly grab all one can get merely for the sake of the
getting and without a thought for those who are to come after. We have
all heard of good fishing places which have been "fished out," and that
could not be if the fishermen had taken only as many as they could use.
This rule holds good all through the wild: Take what you need, it is
yours, but all the rest belongs to others.




CHAPTER XI

USEFUL KNOTS AND HOW TO TIE THEM

=Square Knots. Hitching Knots. Other Knots=


Every outdoor girl should know what knots to use for various purposes
and how to tie them, but only those which will be found useful on the
trail are given here.


=Terms Used in Knot-Tying=

There are three different kinds of bends that are given a rope in the
process of tying a knot, and each bend has its own name. You must learn
these in order to understand the directions for knot-tying; they are:
the _bight_, the _loop_, and the _round turn_.

The _bight_ (Fig. 46) is made by bending the rope so that the sides are
parallel. The _loop_ (Fig. 47) is made by lapping one rope of the bight
across the other. The _round turn_ (Fig. 48) is made by carrying one
rope of the loop all the way around to the other side, making half of
the loop double.


=Square Knot=

This is probably what you would at first call a hard knot, and so it is
a hard knot to come untied of itself or to slip, but it is easy to untie
when necessary. The hard knot most people tie is not quite the same as
the square knot, though it does resemble it.

The ordinary hard knot is what is known as the _granny_ knot, a slurring
name which means a failure. The granny knot will not always stay tied,
it often slips and it cannot be trusted when absolute security is
needed.

Begin the _square knot_ with the single first tie (Fig. 49). You see the
end _X_ turns up _over_ the other rope while the end _O_ laps _under_
the rope. Now bring the two ends together, lapping _X over O_ (Fig. 50).
Then pass _X_ back under _O_, making the single tie once more. Now
compare what you have done with Fig. 51. Notice in the drawing that the
ends of rope _X_ are _both over_ the right-hand bight, and the ends of
rope _O_ are _both under_ the left-hand bight. Draw the square knot
tight and it looks like Fig. 52.

You cannot make a mistake in tying the square knot if you remember to
notice which end is on top, or laps _over_ the other rope when the first
single tie is made (Fig. 49), and then be sure to lap this _same end
over_ the other end in making the second tie which finishes the knot.


=Figure-Eight Knot=

Use the figure-eight knot to make a knot on the end of a rope or to
prevent the end of the strands from untwisting. Form a loop like Fig. 53
near the end of the rope, bringing the short end over the long rope;
then pass the short end under the long rope once, as shown by dotted
line, and carry it up over and through the loop (Fig. 54). Pull it up
tightly to bring the end square across the rope (Fig. 55). This knot is
not difficult to untie.

[Illustration: 46 Bight.

47 Loop.

48 Round turn.

BENDS IN KNOT TYING

49 SQUARE KNOT 50

51 52]


=Bow-Line Knot=

To form a loop that will not slip and yet may be easily untied use the
bow-line knot.

(1) When the loop is not fastened to anything use the _overhand method_
of tying it. First measure off sufficient rope for the loop you wish
to make and hold the place with your left hand (this place is indicated
by the arrow in Fig. 56); then with your right hand throw the short end
of the rope over the long rope (Fig. 56). Still holding the short end
with your right hand, with the left hand bring the long rope up to form
a loop over the end (Fig. 57). Now with your right hand take up the end,
draw it farther through the loop, and pass it behind the long rope above
the loop, from right to left (Fig. 58). Bring the end forward again and
slip it downward through the loop (Fig. 59). Draw the knot tight and it
cannot slip, no matter how great the strain.

(2) Use the _underhand method_ when the loop is passed _around_
something or _through_ a ring. This loop may be put around the neck of a
horse or cow without danger of injury, for it will not slip and tighten.
It can also be used in place of the hitching tie.

Slip the rope through the ring, or around the object, from left to right
while you hold the long rope in your left hand. Take a half-hitch around
the long rope, passing the end _over_ the long rope, then under it. This
makes a loop like Fig. 60. Transfer this loop from the short rope to the
long rope by holding loosely, or giving slack, with the left hand and
pulling up with the right. A little practise will enable you to do this
easily. Fig. 61 shows the loop transferred to the long rope with the
short end passing through it. At this stage carry the short end over,
then under the long rope _below_ the loop (Fig. 62), then up and through
the loop as in Fig. 63. Tighten the knot by pulling on both the long
rope and the short end.

[Illustration: 53 54 55

FIGURE EIGHT KNOT

56 57 58

OVERHAND BOWLINE KNOT

59]


=Sheep-Shank Knot=

It is sometimes necessary to shorten a rope temporarily and not
desirable to cut it, and the sheep-shank knot solves the problem. It
is used by the sailors, who do not believe in cutting ropes. It will
stand a tremendous strain without slipping, but will loosen when held
slack, and can be untied by a quick jerk of the two outside ropes
forming the bights.

Begin by bending the rope to form two bights as in _A_, Fig. 64, carry
the single rope over at the top of the bend, then under to form a
half-hitch as in _B_. Do the same with the other single rope at the
bottom of the bend _C_, and draw both ends tight (_D_). With a little
practise this can be done very quickly. If the rope is to be permanently
shortened pass the ends through the first and second bights at the bend
as in _E_, and the knot will hold for any length of time.


=The Parcel Slip-Knot=

This is the simplest of all knots to start with in tying up a parcel.
Begin by making a knot about one inch from the end of your twine, using
the single tie like _F_ (Fig. 65). If this does not make the knot large
enough use the figure-eight knot. The single tie is sufficient in
ordinary cases. Wrap your twine once around your parcel, lapping the
long twine over the knotted end as in _G_. Bring the knotted end over
the long twine, forming a bight, then _over_ and _under_ its own twine
with the single tie (_H_). Draw the tie up close to the knot at the end;
the knot prevents it from slipping off. Now the long twine may be drawn
tight or loosened at will, and will hold the first wrap in place while
the twine is being wrapped around the package in a different place.


[Illustration: 60 61 62 63

UNDERHAND BOWLINE KNOT

A B C

FIG 64 SHEEPSHANK KNOT

D E]


=Cross-Tie Parcel Knot=

When you have two or more parallel twines on your parcel and have begun
to bring down the cross-line, secure it to each twine in this way: Bring
the long twine down and loop it under the first twine to form a bight
as in _I_ (Fig. 66).

Then carry the long twine over, itself forming a loop (_J_), then under
the first twine as in _K_.

Draw tight and proceed to the second twine, making the same cross-tie.

When you have carried your cross-line entirely around the parcel, tie it
securely to the first twine where it began and finish with a single-tie
knot, making a knot on the last end of the twine close to the fastening,
to keep the end from slipping through.


=Fisherman's Knot=

The fisherman's knot is used by fishermen to tie silkworm gut together.
It is easily untied by pulling the two short ends, but it never slips.
Lay the two ropes side by side (_L_, Fig. 67), then make a loop around
one rope with the other rope, passing the end under both ropes (_M_).
Bring the end over and into the loop to make a single tie (_N_). Tie the
end of the second rope around the first rope in the same manner (_N_)
and draw both knots tight (_O_).


=Halter, Slip, or Running Knot=

The halter or slip knot is often convenient, but should never be used
around the neck of an animal, for if either end is pulled it will slip
and tighten, thereby strangling the creature.

First form a bight, then with one end of the rope make a single tie
around the other rope (Fig. 68).


[Illustration: F G H

FIG 65 PARCEL SLIP KNOT

I J K

FIG 66 CROSS-TIE PARCEL KNOT

L M N O

FIG 67 FISHERMAN'S KNOT]


=Half-Hitch=

If you have anything to do with horses or boats you must know how to
make the proper ties for hitching the horse to a post, or a boat to a
tree, stump, or anything else that is handy.

The half-hitch is a loop around a rope with the short end secured under
the loop (Fig. 69). This answers for a temporary, but not a secure,
fastening.


=Timber-Hitch=

When you want a temporary fastening, secure yet easily undone, make a
_timber-hitch_ (Fig. 70). Pass the rope around an object, take a
half-hitch around the rope, and pass the short end once more between the
rope and the object.


=Hitching Tie=

If the hitching tie is properly made, and the knot turned to the _right_
of the post, the stronger the pull on the long end of the rope, the
tighter the hold, and the loop will not slip down even on a smooth,
plain post. If the knot is turned to the left, or is directly in front,
the loop will not pull tight and will slide down. For the reason that
the loop will tighten, the _hitching tie_ should never be used around
the neck of a horse, as it might pull tight and the animal be strangled.

In making the hitching tie, first pass the rope from left to right
around the post, tree, or stump; bring it together and hold in the left
hand. The left hand is represented by the arrow (Fig. 71). With the
right hand throw the short end of the rope across the ropes in front of
the left hand, forming a loop below the left hand (Fig. 72). Slip the
right hand through this loop, grasp the rope just in front, and pull it
back to form a bight, as you make a chain-stitch in crocheting (Fig.
73). Down through this last bight pass the end of the rope and pull the
