      Made them a terror--'twas a pleasing fear;
      For I was as it were a child of thee
      And trusted to thy billows far and near,
    And laid my hand upon thy mane--as I do here.

Byron: "Childe Harold's Pilgrimage."




    Britain's myriad voices call
    "Sons be welded each and all,
    Into one imperial whole,
    One with Britain, heart and soul!
    One life, one flag, one fleet, one Throne!"
        Britons, hold your own!

Tennyson


[Illustration: HOMEWARD BOUND]




PONTIAC'S ATTEMPT TO CAPTURE FORT DETROIT


In the year 1763, a celebrated chief of the Ottawas, called Pontiac,
succeeded in forming a confederacy of the Ottawas, Hurons, Chippewas,
and some other tribes, with the avowed object of expelling the British
from the lake regions of the country. With the craftiness peculiar to
the Indian race, an ingenious stratagem was devised, by means of which
it was hoped that the allies would easily gain possession of the forts.

For this purpose a grand Lacrosse match was organized at each post, and
the officers of the garrison invited to become participators in the
game.

Pontiac and his attendant chiefs had, while the warriors and braves were
engaged in the game of Lacrosse on the common, sought an audience of the
governor of the fort. He received them in the mess-room, apparently not
suspecting any artifice on their part.

"The pale warrior, the friend of the Ottawa chief, is not here," said
the governor, as he glanced his eye along the semi-circle of Indians.
"How is this? Is his voice still sick, that he cannot come? or has the
great chief of the Ottawas forgotten to tell him?"

"The voice of the pale warrior is still sick, and he cannot speak,"
replied the Indian. "The Ottawa chief is very sorry; for the tongue of
his friend, the pale-face, is full of wisdom."

Scarcely had the last words escaped his lips when a wild, shrill cry
from without the fort rang on the ears of the assembled council, and
caused a momentary commotion among the officers. It arose from a single
voice, and that voice could not be mistaken by any who had heard it once
before. A second or two, during which the officers and chiefs kept their
eyes intently fixed on one another, passed anxiously away; and then
nearer to the gate, apparently on the very drawbridge itself, was pealed
forth the wild and deafening yell of a legion of fiendish voices. At
that sound, the Ottawa and the other chiefs sprang to their feet, and
their own fierce cry responded to that yet vibrating on the ears of all.
Already were their gleaming tomahawks brandished wildly over their
heads, and Pontiac had even bounded a pace forward to reach the governor
with the deadly weapon, when, at the sudden stamping of the foot of the
latter upon the floor, the scarlet cloth in the rear was thrown aside,
and twenty soldiers, their eyes glancing along the barrels of their
levelled muskets, met the startled gaze of the astonished Indians.

An instant was enough to satisfy the keen chief of the true state of the
case. The calm, composed mien of the officers, not one of whom had even
attempted to quit his seat amid the din by which his ears were so
alarmingly assailed,--the triumphant, yet dignified, and even severe
expression of the governor's countenance; and, above all, the unexpected
presence of the prepared soldiery,--all these at once assured him of the
discovery of his treachery, and the danger that awaited him. The
necessity for an immediate attempt to join his warriors without was now
obvious to the Ottawa; and scarcely had he conceived the idea before he
sought to execute it. In a single spring he gained the door of the
mess-room, and, followed eagerly and tumultuously by the other chiefs,
to whose departure no opposition was offered, in the next moment stood
on the steps of the piazza that ran along the front of the building
whence he had issued. The surprise of the Indians on reaching this point
was now too powerful to be dissembled; and incapable either of
advancing or receding, they remained gazing on the scene before them
with an air of mingled stupefaction, rage, and alarm. Scarcely ten
minutes had elapsed since they had proudly strode through the naked area
of the fort, and yet even in that short space of time its appearance had
been entirely changed. Not a part was there now of the surrounding
buildings that was not replete with human life and hostile preparation.
Through every window of the officers' low rooms was to be seen the dark
and frowning muzzle of a field-piece bearing upon the gateway, and
behind these were artillerymen holding their lighted matches, supported
again by files of bayonets that glittered in their rear. In the
block-houses the same formidable array of field-pieces and muskets was
visible; while from the four angles of the square as many heavy guns,
that had been artfully masked at the entrance of the chiefs, seemed
ready to sweep away everything that should come before them. The
guard-room near the gate presented the same hostile front. The doors of
this, as well as of the other buildings, had been firmly secured within;
and from every window affording cover to the troops gleamed a line of
bayonets, rising above the threatening field-pieces, pointed, at a
distance of little more than twelve feet, directly upon the gateway. In
addition to his musket, each man of the guard held a hand grenade,
provided with a short fuse that could be ignited in a moment from the
matches of the gunners, with immediate effect. The soldiers in the
block-houses were similarly provided.

Almost magical as was the change thus suddenly effected in the
appearance of the garrison, it was not the most interesting feature in
the exciting scene. Choking up the gateway, in which they were
completely wedged, and crowding the drawbridge, a dense mass of "husky"
Indians were to be seen casting their fierce glances around, yet
paralyzed in their movements by the unlooked-for display of resisting
force, threatening instant annihilation to those who should attempt
either to advance or recede. Never, perhaps, were astonishment and
disappointment more forcibly depicted on the human countenance, than
they were now exhibited by these men, who had already in imagination
secured to themselves an easy conquest. They were the warriors who had
so recently been engaged in the manly yet innocent exercise of the ball;
but, instead of the harmless hurdle, each now carried a short gun in
one hand and a gleaming tomahawk in the other.

After the first general yelling heard in the council-room, not a sound
was uttered. Their burst of rage and triumph had evidently been checked
by the unexpected manner of their reception; and they now stood on the
spot on which the further advance of each had been arrested, so silent
and motionless, that, but for the rolling of their dark eyes, as they
keenly measured the insurmountable barriers that were opposed to their
progress, they might almost have been taken for a wild group of
statuary. Conspicuous at the head of these was he who wore the blanket;
a tall warrior on whom rested the startled eye of every officer and
soldier who was so situated as to behold him. His face was painted black
as death; and as he stood under the arch of the gateway, with his white
turbaned head towering far above those of his companions, this
formidable and mysterious enemy might have been likened to the spirit of
darkness presiding over his terrible legions.

In order to account for the extraordinary appearance of the Indians,
armed in every way for death, at a moment when neither gun nor tomahawk
was apparently within miles of their reach, it was necessary to revert
to the first entrance of the chiefs into the fort. The fall of Pontiac
had been the effect of design; and the yell pealed forth by him, on
recovering his feet, as if in taunting reply to the laugh of his
comrades, was in reality a signal intended for the guidance of the
Indians without. These now following up their game with increasing
spirit, at once changed the direction of their line, bringing the ball
nearer to the fort. In their eagerness to effect this object, they had
overlooked the gradual secession of the unarmed troops, spectators of
their sport from the ramparts, until scarcely more than twenty
stragglers were left. As they neared the gate, the squaws broke up their
several groups, and, forming a line on either hand of the road leading
to the drawbridge, appeared to separate solely with a view not to impede
the players. For an instant a dense group collected around the ball,
which had been drawn to within a hundred yards of the gate, and fifty
hurdles were crossed in their endeavour to secure it, when the warrior,
who formed the solitary exception to the multitude, in his blanket
covering, and who had been lingering in the extreme rear of the party,
came rapidly up to the spot where the well-affected struggle was
maintained. At his approach the hurdles of the other players were
withdrawn, when, at a single blow from his powerful arm, the ball was
seen flying in an oblique direction and was for a moment lost altogether
to the view. When it again met the eye, it was descending into the very
centre of the fort.

With the fleetness of thought now commenced a race which had ostensibly
for its object the recovery of the lost ball, and in which he who had
driven it with resistless force outstripped them all. Their course lay
between the two lines of squaws; and scarcely had the head of the
bounding Indians reached the opposite extremity of those lines, when the
women suddenly threw back their blankets, and disclosed each a short gun
and tomahawk. To throw away their hurdles and seize upon these, was the
work of an instant. Already, in imagination, was the fort their own;
and, such, was the peculiar exaltation of the black and turbaned warrior
when he felt the planks of the drawbridge bending beneath his feet, all
the ferocious joy of his soul was pealed forth in the terrible cry
which, rapidly succeeded by that of the other Indians, had resounded so
fearfully through the council-room.

What their disappointment was, when, on gaining the interior, they found
the garrison prepared for their reception, has already been shown.

Major Richardson




MY NATIVE LAND


    Breathes there the man, with soul so dead,
    Who never to himself hath said,
      This is my own, my native land!
    Whose heart hath ne'er within him burned,
    As home his footsteps he hath turned,
      From wandering on a foreign strand!
    If such there breathe, go, mark him well;
    For him no minstrel raptures swell;
    High though his titles, proud his name,
    Boundless his wealth as wish can claim:
    Despite those titles, power, and pelf,
    The wretch, concentred all in self,
    Living, shall forfeit fair renown,
    And, doubly dying, shall go down
    To the vile dust, from whence he sprung,
    Unwept, unhonoured, and unsung.

Scott: "The Lay of the Last Minstrel."




MORNING ON THE LIEVRE


    Far above us where a jay
    Screams his matins to the day,
    Capped with gold and amethyst,
    Like a vapour from the forge
    Of a giant somewhere hid,
    Out of hearing of the clang
    Of his hammer, skirts of mist
    Slowly up the woody gorge
    Lift and hang.

    Softly as a cloud we go,
    Sky above and sky below,
    Down the river; and the dip
    Of the paddles scarcely breaks,
    With the little silvery drip
    Of the water as it shakes
    From the blades, the crystal deep
    Of the silence of the morn,
    Of the forest yet asleep;
    And the river reaches borne
    In a mirror, purple gray,
    Sheer away
    To the misty line of light,
    Where the forest and the stream
    In the shadow meet and plight,
    Like a dream.

    From amid a stretch of reeds,
    Where the lazy river sucks
    All the water as it bleeds
    From a little curling creek,
    And the muskrats peer and sneak
    In around the sunken wrecks
    Of a tree that swept the skies
    Long ago,
    On a sudden seven ducks
    With a splashy rustle rise,
    Stretching out their seven necks,
    One before, and two behind,
    And the others all arow,
    And as steady as the wind
    With a swivelling whistle go,
    Through the purple shadow led,
    Till we only hear their whir
    In behind a rocky spur,
    Just ahead.

Archibald Lampman




I call, therefore, a complete and generous education, that which fits a
man to perform justly, skilfully, and magnanimously, all the offices,
both private and public, of peace and war.

Milton: "On Education."




EVENING


    From upland slopes I see the cows file by,
    Lowing, great-chested, down the homeward trail,
    By dusking fields and meadows shining pale
    With moon-tipped dandelions. Flickering high,
    A peevish night-hawk in the western sky
    Beats up into the lucent solitudes,
    Or drops with griding wing. The stilly woods
    Grow dark and deep and gloom mysteriously.
    Cool night winds creep, and whisper in mine ear,
    The homely cricket gossips at my feet,
    From far-off pools and wastes of reeds I hear,
    Clear and soft-piped, the chanting frogs break sweet
    In full Pandean chorus. One by one
    Shine out the stars, and the great night comes on.

Archibald Lampman




    For manners are not idle, but the fruit
    Of loyal nature and of noble mind.

Tennyson




AN ELIZABETHAN SEAMAN


Some two miles above the port of Dartmouth, once among the most
important harbours in England, on a projecting angle of land which runs
out into the river at the head of one of its most beautiful reaches,
there has stood for some centuries the Manor House of Greenaway. The
water runs deep all the way to it from the sea, and the largest vessels
may ride with safety within a stone's throw of the windows. In the
latter half of the sixteenth century there must have met, in the hall of
this mansion, a party as remarkable as could have been found anywhere in
England. Humfrey and Adrian Gilbert, with their half-brother, Walter
Raleigh, here, when little boys, played at sailors in the reaches of
Long Stream, in the summer evenings doubtless rowing down with the tide
to the port, and wondering at the quaint figure-heads and carved prows
of the ships which thronged it; or climbing on board, and listening,
with hearts beating, to the mariners' tales of the new earth beyond the
sunset. And here in later life, matured men, whose boyish dreams had
become heroic action, they used again to meet in the intervals of quiet,
and the rock is shown underneath the house where Raleigh smoked the
first tobacco. Another remarkable man could not fail to have made a
fourth at these meetings. A sailor-boy of Sandwich, the adjoining
parish, John Davis, showed early a genius which could not have escaped
the eye of such neighbours, and in the atmosphere of Greenaway he
learned to be as noble as the Gilberts, and as tender and delicate as
Raleigh.

In 1585 John Davis left Dartmouth on his first voyage into the Polar
Seas; and twice subsequently he went again, venturing in small,
ill-equipped vessels of thirty or forty tons into the most dangerous
seas. These voyages were as remarkable for their success as for the
daring with which they were accomplished, and Davis' epitaph is written
on the map of the world, where his name still remains to commemorate his
discoveries. Brave as he was, he is distinguished by a peculiar and
exquisite sweetness of nature, which, from many little facts of his
life, seems to have affected every one with whom he came in contact in a
remarkable degree. We find men, for the love of Master Davis, leaving
their firesides to sail with him, without other hope or motion; we find
silver bullets cast to shoot him in a mutiny; the hard, rude natures of
the mutineers being awed by something in his carriage which was not like
that of a common man. He has written the account of one of his northern
voyages himself; and there is an imaginative beauty in it, and a rich
delicacy of expression, which is called out in him by the first sight of
strange lands and things and people.

We have only space to tell something of the conclusion of his voyage
north. In latitude sixty-three degrees, he fell in with a barrier of
ice, which he coasted for thirteen days without finding an opening. The
very sight of an iceberg was new to all his crew; and the ropes and
shrouds, though it was midsummer, becoming compassed with ice,--

"The people began to fall sick and faint-hearted--whereupon, very
