clear the house and hold it till my father comes up with the whole
troop."

Five minutes after they had left the boat, the party approached the
house. Walter halted his men for a moment in the shrubbery behind it.

"Steady, lads, and take breath. You will follow me into the house, and
keep together. Give no quarter to the scoundrels."

Scarcely had he spoken than a piercing scream, accompanied by a pistol
shot, was heard within.

"Come on, lads!" Walter exclaimed, as he rushed at full speed at the
door, the men following close at his heels.

The door was open. In the passage lay one of the maidservants, shot
through the head by one of the Hessian troopers, who still held the
pistol in his hand. Walter's pistol cracked before the man had time to
draw his sword, and he fell dead.

Then he rushed on into the hall, in which were a score of troopers,
gathered round a barrel of wine which had just been broached. In an
instant, the Irish were upon them. Many were cut down or shot, before
they had time to stand on the defensive. The rest were slain after a
short and desperate fight.

"Bar the front door!" Walter shouted. "Sergeant Mullins, take six men and
hold it against those outside. The rest follow me."

Short as the fight had been, it had given time to the rest of the
Hessians, scattered about the house in the act of plundering, to gather
on the stair, headed by their officers. Without a moment's hesitation
Walter dashed at them. In point of numbers the party were well matched;
but the fury of the Irishmen more than counterbalanced the advantage of
position on the part of the Hessians.

For five minutes a desperate fight raged. Those in front grappled each
other, and fought with clubbed pistols and shortened swords. Those behind
struck a blow as they could with sword or musket.

But the Hessians, ignorant of the strength of the force which had
suddenly thus attacked them, thought more of securing their safety than
of defending the stairs, so several of those behind slipped away and
jumped from the windows to the ground. Their desertion disheartened those
in front, and, with a shout, Walter and his troopers bore back the
Hessians on to the landing, and the latter then broke and fled. Most of
them were overtaken and cut down at once. Two or three only gained the
windows and leaped out.

The instant resistance had ceased, Walter rushed into the drawing room,
bidding the men run down and hold the lower windows. Mrs. Conyers lay in
a dead faint on the sofa. Claire, with a face as pale as death, was
standing beside her.

"Walter!" she gasped out; "then we are safe!"

She tottered, and would have fallen, had not Walter rushed forward in
time to catch her, and place her in a chair:

"Don't faint, my dear Claire," he said urgently. "There is your mother to
be looked after, and I must run downstairs, for they are attacking the
house."

"I won't faint," Claire said, laughing and crying in a manner which
frightened Walter more than her fainting would have done. "I shall be
better directly, but it seems almost like a miracle. Oh, those dreadful
men!"

"They have all gone now, Claire. We hold the house, and have cleared them
out. Pray, calm yourself and attend to your mother. I must go. Don't be
frightened at the firing. My father will be here in a few minutes, with
aid."

"Oh! I am not frightened, now," Claire said; "and oh! Walter, you are
bleeding dreadfully."

"Never mind that now," Walter said; "I will see to it, when it is all
over."

Then, leaving her to look after Mrs. Conyers, he ran downstairs. His
right arm was disabled, he having received a sweeping blow on the
shoulder from one of the Hessians, as he won his way on to the landing;
but he had no time to think of this now, for his men were hardly pressed.
For a moment, a panic had reigned among the troopers outside, at the
outburst of firing, and at the sight of their comrades leaping
panic-stricken from the windows; but inquiry soon showed them that they
were still greatly superior in numbers to the party who had obtained
possession of the hall; and, furious at the loss of all their officers,
and of many of their comrades, they attacked on all sides, and tried to
force their way in at the doors and lower windows, in spite of the
vigorous resistance from within. Walter hurried from point to point,
cheering on his men by assurance that help was at hand, and seeing that
no point had been left undefended.



Chapter 10: A Cavalry Raid.


Staunchly as Walter's troopers maintained the defence, they were sorely
pressed, for the enemy still outnumbered them by three to one. Several
times the Hessians almost forced their way in, at one or other of the
windows, but each time Walter, who kept four men with him as a reserve,
rushed to the assistance of the defenders of the windows and drove them
back; but this could not last. The defenders were hard pressed at several
points, and Walter, feeling sure that his father would be up in a very
few minutes, called the men off from their posts and stationed them on
the staircase.

With shouts of triumph, the Hessians burst in. The hall was filled with a
crowd of furious soldiers, who hurled themselves like a wave at the
defenders of the staircase. All the pistols had long since been emptied,
and they fought sword to sword. Walter had detached five of his little
party to hold the top of the other staircase, should the assailants try
to force a passage there; and he had but ten men now, and several of
these severely wounded, to hold the staircase.

Great as the advantage that the position gave the defenders, they were
forced up step by step, and Walter began to fear that he would be driven
to the landing before succour came, when a crowd of figures suddenly
burst in at the hall door, and above the cracking of pistols, which at
once arose, he heard his father's voice:

"Down with the murdering dogs! No quarter!"

Taken wholly by surprise, ignorant of the force by which they were
attacked, and taken between two bodies of enemies, the Hessians turned to
fly. Walter and his men at once pressed down upon them, while the
newcomers fell upon them with fury.

There was but little resistance, for the Hessians thought only of flight.
Some burst through their assailants and gained the door; more fled down
the passages, and escaped by the windows through which they had entered;
but more than thirty of them fell in the hall.

The instant resistance was over, Captain Davenant ran out with his men to
secure the horses. A few of the Hessians, who had escaped from the front
door, had jumped on the backs of the nearest animals and ridden off. The
rest had fled on foot, and the exulting troopers counted seventy-two
horses remaining in their hands. Captain Davenant at once returned to the
house.

"Where are you, Walter?" he shouted; but there was no answer. Getting
more light, Captain Davenant searched hastily among the numerous bodies
scattered in the hall, and soon came upon Walter, who was lying,
insensible, just at the foot of the stairs. The excitement had supported
him so long as the defence had to be continued; but, as soon as succour
appeared, and the assailants retreated, he had stumbled forward with his
men, and had fallen insensible from loss of blood at the foot of the
stairs. Captain Davenant hastily examined him.

"Thank God," he said to Larry, who had smuggled himself over with the
second detachment, "he has no other wound but this on the shoulder, and
has only fainted from loss of blood! Run upstairs, and snatch a sheet
from one of the beds. We will soon make some bandages."

Larry did as he was ordered. Slips were torn off the sheets, and, after
cutting Walter's coat and shirt from his shoulder, Captain Davenant bound
and bandaged up the wound. In the meantime, Larry had got some spirits
from the buffet in the dining room, and a spoonful or two were poured
down Walter's throat, and in a few minutes he opened his eyes. For a
moment he looked confused, then he smiled at his father.

"You were just in time," he said. "We couldn't have held out much
longer."

"Yes, we were just in time, thank God!" his father said; "but where are
the ladies?"

"In the drawing room. Mrs. Conyers has fainted."

Captain Davenant ran upstairs. Claire had succeeded in restoring her
mother, who had just sat up when Captain Davenant entered.

"My daughter tells me that you have rescued us, you and your son," she
said faintly. "How can I thank you enough?"

"Never mind that now, my dear lady," Captain Davenant said hastily. "Just
at present, we have no time to lose. The fellows who have escaped will
carry the news to William's camp, and in half an hour we shall have a
regiment of cavalry here. I must retreat at once, and carry my wounded
with me. What will you do? Will you stay here, or will you and your
daughter come with us?"

"Oh, I will go with you, please. If I was sure my husband would come with
them, I would not fear; but he may not hear of it, and there is no saying
what they might do."

"How is Walter, Captain Davenant?" Claire--who had been waiting
impatiently for her mother to finish--burst in. "He was wounded, and
there was such terrible fighting afterwards, and he has not come back
with you."

"He fainted from loss of blood," Captain Davenant said; "but I do not
think his wounds are serious.

"Mrs. Conyers, I can only give you five minutes. Take with you any jewels
or valuables you prize most. If they should arrive without your husband,
they will be sure to sack and burn the house."

Captain Davenant now hurried downstairs. The wounded had already been
collected. There were but four so seriously wounded as to be unable to
walk. Six had been killed. The wounded, including Walter, lay on
blankets. Men took each a corner, and at once started to the spot where
the boats had been left.

Captain Davenant told four men to wait at the foot of the stairs, while
he went up to the drawing room. Mrs. Conyers and her daughter were
already prepared. Each had thrown a shawl over her head, and had in their
hands the dressing cases containing Mrs. Conyers's jewellery.

"Now, madam," Captain Davenant said, "if you will point out your plate
chest, I have four men below in readiness to carry it to the boat. It is
no use leaving that to be divided between the marauders."

Mrs. Conyers pointed out two chests, in one of which deeds and other
valuable documents were kept, and in the other the plate, of which Mrs.
Conyers had a considerable quantity. Two men seized each of them.

"Now, Mrs. Conyers, please accompany them as quick as you can to the
river. We will follow and cover the retreat. I think we have a few
minutes yet, before cavalry can arrive from the camp."

When Captain Davenant and the rearguard reached the bank, they found that
the boats had already returned, after taking over the wounded and a
portion of the detachment. The rest, with the two ladies and the female
servants, at once took their places, and were taken across before any
sound betokened the arrival of the enemy at the Hall.

"I sincerely hope, Mrs. Conyers," Captain Davenant said, as they landed,
"that Mr. Conyers may accompany the first body of troops who arrive, for
if not, I fear they will set fire to the Hall. They must have lost
considerably over fifty men, and in their rage at finding no one on whom
to wreak their vengeance, they will make no inquiry as to whom the house
belongs. Indeed, they will find no one there to ask. The servants of the
house had already fled, and I sent my boy's servant, Larry, round to the
stables to tell the men there to ride away with the horses. They will
accompany fifteen of my men, who mounted as many of the horses we
captured, and are driving the rest to a ford some miles away. They are a
valuable capture, and altogether, as far as we are concerned, we have
made a good night's work of it."

"But I do not understand now," Mrs. Conyers said, "how it was that you
came across just in time. How did you know that we were in such trouble?
Because I am sure you would not have come across to attack the soldiers
in our house, without some special reason?"

"No, indeed, madam, I certainly should not have made your house a
battlefield. The fact is, our fortunate arrival is due entirely to my
son. He made all the arrangements, without my knowing anything about it.
He sent over his boy to one of your lads in the stable, and arranged
that, if there should be any trouble in the house in the absence of Mr.
Conyers, he should run down and signal across the river. Your daughter's
maid was to let the boy know what was going on within. It was not till he
had the whole business in train, that Walter told me anything about it.
As it was his plan and not mine, and I could see he was extremely anxious
about it, I left the matter in his hands, and authorized him to lead the
first party across whenever the signal was made, night or day. Our boats
would only carry twenty-five men, and four of these had to return with
them. As Walter would have but a quarter of our force with him, I ordered
him, in case the signal was made and he crossed, not to attack until I
joined him, unless the necessity seemed very urgent. I suppose he
considered it was so, for he would hardly have fallen upon some eighty or
ninety troopers, unless he had deemed it most urgent."

"Thank God he did so!" Mrs. Conyers said, "for we owe him our lives, and
more. I cannot tell you all now. It is too horrible to think of. But I
shall never forget the thankfulness and joy I felt, when suddenly I heard
the noise of shouts and firing, and the men who were trying to tear my
child from my arms suddenly desisted and, rushing out of the room, left
us alone. I fainted then, and knew nothing more till I heard, in a
confused way, the sound of shouting and conflict, and Claire was bending
over me, telling me that your son was holding the stairs against the
Germans, and that he was expecting help to arrive every moment.

"Where is he? I long to see him, and give him my thanks and blessing."

"He is in that cottage yonder, which is at present our quarters," Captain
Davenant said. "I told them to send off a trooper to Limerick, for a
doctor, as soon as they got across."

"But you assured me his wound was not dangerous," Mrs. Conyers said
anxiously.

"No, I am sure it is not. It is a severe wound, but not likely to have
serious consequences. But I fear that some of the men are in a far worse
condition."

"I shall install myself as head nurse," Mrs. Conyers said, decidedly. "We
owe so much to you all, that that is the least I can do."

"Very well, Mrs. Conyers. Then I appoint you head of the hospital. I will
have the four seriously wounded men moved into the cottage next to mine.
You will be able to obtain plenty of assistance among the women of the
village. O'Moore and I will move into other quarters, and leave the
cottage to you and your daughter. Your servants can have the cottage on
the other side."

They had now reached the door.

"I will just go in and see him first," Captain Davenant said.

Larry was sitting by Walter's couch.

"Well, Walter, how are you feeling?"

"Oh, I am all right now," Walter said, "since Larry brought me word that
the boats have brought everyone across safely. I was anxious before, you
know."

"How does your shoulder feel?"

"It throbs a bit, father; but that is no odds."

"Mrs. Conyers is coming in to see you. She is going to establish herself
here, and O'Moore and I are moving out. She is going, for the present, to
be head nurse."

"That will be nice," Walter said; "but I sha'n't want much nursing."

"I don't know, Walter. A downright cut with a heavy cavalry sword is not
a light matter, even when it falls on the shoulder instead of the head.
But you had better not talk much now, but, when you have seen Mrs.
Conyers, try and get off to sleep.

"Larry, do you see to moving our things out, at once."

So saying, Captain Davenant left the room, and a minute later Mrs.
Conyers came in. She took the left hand that Walter held out to her.

"God bless you, my boy!" she said, softly. "I shall never forget what
Claire and I owe to you. All my life I shall be your grateful debtor, and
some day I hope that my husband will be able to thank you for what you
did for us.

"And now," she went on, in a lighter tone, "I am going to be your nurse,
