you to come with me at once to see him, for there is not a moment to be
lost in deciding what is best to be done."

"Yes," said Effie, "I will come."

She felt stunned--her keenest feelings of anguish were lulled into
momentary quiet by the greatness of this blow.

"I will write a note to Agnes," she said; "she is out--I had to send her
to the hospital to say that I could not return there to-night." Then she
added, her face turning whiter than ever, "If my mother knows of this,
it will kill her."

"Your mother is the person to be considered, of course," said Lawson.
"But for her, I should say that the best thing possible for George would
be to undergo the punishment which he merits. As it is, however, matters
are different. Well, write your note, and let us be quick. That strong
opiate will keep your mother sleeping quietly until the morning. All
your sister has to do is to watch her."

Effie drew a sheet of paper toward her, scribbled a few hasty lines on
it, folded it up, and left it where Agnes could see it the moment she
returned; then she followed Lawson into the street.

He hailed a passing hansom, and they drove straight to his rooms on the
Embankment.

The feeling of a dream remained with Effie all during that drive; she
kept rubbing her eyes and saying to herself, "It's only a dream--I shall
awaken presently and find myself back at St. Joseph's."

The hansom drew up at the lodgings, and Lawson preceded Effie upstairs.
He threw open the door of his little sitting room.

"Come in," he said. "Here is your sister, Staunton," he sang out.

Effie entered. She found herself in a small bright room. The gas was
turned full on; one of the windows was open--a fresh breeze from the
river came in. George was seated on a horse-hair sofa at the farthest
end of the room. He held a small walking-stick in his hand, and was
making imaginary patterns with it on the carpet. His shoulders were
hitched up to his ears, his eyes were fixed on the ground. Effie looked
at him. She said:

"George, I am here--I have come."

He did not make any response. She gave a little cry when he took no
notice of her, and sank down helplessly on the nearest chair.

Lawson strode across the room and grasped George's shoulder.

"Look here, Staunton," he said; "you have got to pull yourself together.
I have brought your sister here to consult what is best to be done. Look
up, old chap! Take courage--all isn't lost yet. Now try and tell your
sister everything."

"I have nothing to tell her," said George--he raised two lackluster eyes
and fixed them with a sort of dull stare on Lawson's face.

"Don't talk folly--you have to tell her what you told me. You know the
position you are in--you may be arrested at any moment. No one can help
you but your sister; don't turn away from her."

"Oh, I understand all that," said George, shrugging his shoulder out of
Lawson's grip. "I know well enough what has happened--I have gone under.
I'm only one more. I--I can't help it--I have nothing to say."

Lawson looked at the big fellow almost in despair. He was really puzzled
what to do. This was the moment, however, for Effie to take the
initiative. She sprang suddenly to her feet, dashed the tears from her
eyes, and went up to her brother. She fell on her knees by his side, and
put her soft arms round his neck.

"Think of the old days, Geordie," she said, "when we were both little
children. Think of mother and father, and the little old house, and the
apple tree in the garden. Don't you remember the day when that ripe red
apple fell, and we ate it bite about?"

When Effie began to speak, George trembled. He avoided her eyes for a
moment longer, then he gave her a quick, furtive glance.

changed voice. "Before God, I couldn't help it."
a changed voice. "Before God, I couldn't help it."
[Transcriber's note: These two fragmented lines appear, as shown,
at this point in the original text.]

Lawson stepped softly out of the room.

The moment he had done so, George said eagerly:

"He has told you, hasn't he?"

Effie nodded.

"Then I needn't go over it. Let's talk of something else. How is
mother?"

"She is very ill indeed--she watched for you all the evening."

"Watched for me? But I told her I shouldn't be back to-night."

"Yes; but she didn't believe you, or she forgot it--anyhow, she watched
for you, and when you didn't come, her mind began suddenly to wander;
she is in bed now--she is very, very ill."

"Go on," said George; "hammer it in hard--I deserve it all."

"Oh, George, why will you talk like that? Don't you believe in my love
for you?"

"I believe in mother's love. It's the only thing I have left to cling
to. I believe she'd go on loving me even after this--I do truly."

"Of course she would--nothing could turn her love from you. Now, won't
you let us consult together when Mr. Lawson comes into the room?"

"There's nothing to be done--nothing; I'm perfectly safe to be committed
for trial, and then I shall get at least two years. Mother will die. And
I shall have gone under forever."

"Nonsense! I have a thought in my head."

"You?" George spoke with almost contempt. "You always thought a great
deal of yourself, Effie, but even you can't pull the ropes on the
present occasion. I'm a thief, and I must suffer the penalty. That's the
long and short of it."

Effie rose suddenly and walked to the door. She called Lawson--he came
in at once.

"I think George will talk over matters now," she said. "But before we
begin any discussion, I wish to say what I have made up my mind to do. I
don't know Mr. Gering, but that does not matter. I mean to go to see him
the first thing to-morrow morning, and beg of him not to prosecute
George. That is the only chance for mother's life, and I mean to try
it."




CHAPTER XXII.


When Effie said these words, Lawson gave her a startled glance, and
George's sulkiness seemed to vanish magically. He opened his lips as if
to speak, then closed them again; a rush of color spread over his face,
and he turned his head aside.

"I fear it is impossible that you can do the least vestige of good, Miss
Staunton," said Lawson. "All the same it is a brave thought, and worthy
of you."

George looked round when Lawson said this; he fully expected Effie to
explain herself more fully, to argue the point, and to give her reasons
for approaching Mr. Gering. To the surprise of both the men, however,
she was silent. After a little pause, she said, turning to Lawson:

"Do you think George will be safe here until the morning?"

"I do--perfectly safe," answered Lawson.

"Then I will say good-night. I will come to you, George if I have news,
in the morning."

"Oh, you won't have news," replied George; "there never was such a hard
nut to crack as old Gering."

Effie made no reply.

"Good-night," she said to her brother.

He did not offer to kiss her, but he took her hand and gave it a silent
squeeze. It seemed to Effie then that she got near his heart.

Lawson took her downstairs and put her into a cab.

"You are only wasting your time in going to Mr. Gering," he said, as he
stood for a moment at the cab door.

"I must waste it, then," replied Effie; "for, whatever the consequence,
I am going."

"Then, if you will go, you had better do so early. Gering is always at
his office by nine o'clock. George may quite possibly be arrested
to-morrow morning, and brought before the magistrates at Bow Street at
ten or ten-thirty. When once he is arrested, Mr. Gering can do nothing.
The law then takes up the case, and prosecutes on its own account. You
will see, therefore, that if you wish to save your brother you must be
astir betimes."

"I quite see, and thank you very much," said Effie.

Lawson said good-by, the cab rolled away, and Effie soon found herself
back again at her own lodgings.

She ran upstairs, to find that her mother was still sound asleep. She
sent the two tired girls to bed, and, lying down on the sofa in the
sitting room, tried to sleep. She had left her mother's door slightly
ajar, and knew that she would hear the least movement in the room. All
was perfect stillness, however, and presently Effie fell into a light
doze.

She awoke long before the dawn of day, thought carefully over the whole
complex situation, and then rose and dressed herself. She slipped softly
into her mother's room. The opiate was still taking effect. Mrs.
Staunton's face looked pinched and drawn as it lay on the pillow, there
were blue lines under the eyes, and a blue tint round the lips which
spoke of heart trouble; but just at the present moment the spirit was at
peace, and the body resting calmly.

"Poor mother!" murmured Effie; "poor, tried, faithful heart! If you
really knew what I know, you could not survive the shock. Oh, George!
who could have thought of this who remembered you in the old days? Yes,
I will do what I can to save mother and to rescue you. It is true that I
am only a weak girl, but sometimes girls like me have power. I will not
be afraid; I will go now to exercise all the power that is in me."

Effie left the room; she went to the one where her sisters slept,
changed her dress and washed herself, and then waking Agnes, to tell
her to be sure to look after her mother, she ran downstairs.

The landlady, Mrs. Robinson, met her in the passage.

"Why, surely, Miss Staunton," she said, "you are not going out on a raw,
foggy morning like this without breakfast?"

"Oh, I can't wait for breakfast," exclaimed Effie.

"I have some tea in my sitting room--do come in, and let me give you a
cup, miss. Do, now--you're so white, you look as if you'd drop."

"Thank you," said Effie, after a little pause. "I should be very glad of
a cup of tea," she added.

The landlady bustled her into her little sitting room, seated her by the
fire, and would not leave her alone until she had swallowed a cup of tea
and a piece of toast.

"I'm all the better for the tea," said Effie; "thank you very much."

The unlooked-for kindness cheered the poor girl; she looked upon it as a
good omen. She walked quickly up the narrow street which led into the
larger thoroughfare, and was soon on her way to Mr. Gering's office in
Leadenhall Street.

She arrived there just as the clock was striking nine. She did not allow
herself even to feel nervous, but, walking boldly in, asked to see Mr.
Gering at once.

"Have you an appointment with him?" asked the clerk whom she addressed.

"No; but I hope he will see me without that; my business is very
pressing."

"What is your name, miss?"

"Staunton." Effie hesitated for a minute, then she said abruptly, "I am
the sister of George Staunton, who is a clerk here."

The moment she uttered the words every clerk in the place looked up with
interest, and one, coming up in a somewhat familiar way, said
cavalierly:

"I don't think there's the least use in your troubling Mr. Gering; I may
as well tell you beforehand that he certainly won't see you."

At this moment a man came out of an inner room. He spoke to the head
clerk, who gave him a bundle of letters.

"Take these to Mr. Gering at once," he said.

Effie followed this man with her eyes.

The other clerks stared at her, expecting her to go.

She looked at the one to whom she had first spoken.

"Will you take my message to Mr. Gering?" she said. "Will you tell him
that Effie Staunton--George Staunton's sister--wishes to see him on most
important business?"

There was much distress in her tone, but withal such firmness that the
clerk could not help looking at her with admiration.

"I would gladly take your message, Miss Staunton, but it would be
useless. I know beforehand that nothing will induce Mr. Gering to see
you."

"He must see me," replied Effie in a firm voice. "If no one here will be
polite enough to take him my message, I will go to him myself."

Before one of the clerks could prevent her, Effie walked across the
large room, opened the door where the clerk who took Mr. Gering his
letters had vanished, and found herself the next moment in a handsomely
furnished room, where a portly old gentleman was seated at a desk.

He looked up in unfeigned astonishment when he saw a pretty girl
standing near the door.

As she did not speak for an instant, he raised his voice with an
inquiry.

"May I ask what you are doing here?" he said.

"I have come to speak to you about my brother," said Effie.

"Your brother! What do you mean? Who is your brother?"

"George Staunton."

"Then, Miss Staunton, let me tell you that you have taken a great
liberty in coming to see me. You have forced your way into my room
unannounced. I must ask you to have the goodness to retire as quickly as
you came. If you do not leave my room this moment, I shall be forced to
compel you to go."

"No, you will not," said Effie--"no, that is not like you. You would not
willingly be unkind to a suffering and innocent girl, when she forces
herself, against her true inclinations, against her real modesty, to
seek an interview with you. I come in great sorrow and despair, and you
are not the man who will treat me roughly--I don't fear it. You like to
say harsh words, but your heart is not harsh. I beg of you, therefore,
to listen to my story. I will not keep you long."

"You are a very queer, courageous sort of girl," said Gering, after a
pause. "As you have come, I suppose I may as well listen to you; but
please understand at once that I have no mercy for your brother; that
his career here is ended."

"That is only just and right. I have not come to plead with you to take
George back--I know that that would be asking too much. What I have come
to say I can say in a very few words."

"They must be very few if you expect me to leave my business to attend
to them."

Effie came close to where Mr. Gering was seated; he did not rise, nor
motion her to a chair. At this moment the clerk who had refused to take
her message entered the room.

"Leave us for a moment, Power," said Mr. Gering. The man withdrew
immediately.

"Thank you," said Effie. Then she added abruptly, "I won't keep you a
moment. I will tell you quite simply what I want. My brother George has
behaved very badly."

"To put it plainly," interrupted Mr. Gering, "your brother George is a
scoundrel."

"You may call him any names you please," said Effie; "I have not come
here to defend him. I know that he stole fifty pounds from you
yesterday."

