
"I can prevent that."

"How?"

"You'll see."

The manner of Nicholas toward his uncle was far from agreeable. In fact,
it was almost insolent. Dick retained his temper out of policy, but he
said to himself:

"Some time or other, my fine nephew, I'll pay off old scores. See if I
don't."

"Are you going to ride this morning?" he asked the next day.

"I may," answered Nicholas.

"I should like to ride with you."

"I prefer riding by myself."

"Oh, come, nephew. I shan't stay here long. Don't refuse such a small
favor."

In consequence probably of the first part of this answer, Mrs. Kent
said:

"Nicholas, you'd better take your uncle out this morning and show him a
little of the village."

Nicholas grumblingly assented.

So about ten o'clock they started out.

"You've got a good horse here," said Dick.

"He ought to be. Mother paid four hundred dollars for him."

"Did she, though? You ought to have got me to send you one from the
West. For half the money I'd have sent you a better one."

"I don't believe it."

"Because you don't know. I do."

"It takes a good driver to drive this horse," said Nicholas.

"Does it? I could drive this horse blindfolded."

He spoke contemptuously, and Nicholas was nettled. He prided himself
upon his driving ability, and now his uncle underestimated it.

"The horse is not as easy to drive as you think," he said. "If you don't
believe it, take the reins and see."

"All right."

This was what Dick wanted, for he had a plan for revenging himself on
his upstart nephew. He drove on till he got to a place where there was a
muddy and miry puddle beside the road. Then by a dexterous manoeuver,
for he understood driving thoroughly, he managed to overturn the wagon,
and Nicholas was thrown headlong into the puddle. Dick leaped out just
at the right time, retaining his hold on the reins.

Bespattered with mud and drenched with mire, Nicholas arose from the
puddle a sorry figure.

"What did you do that for?" he demanded, wrathfully, surveying himself
with disgust.

"I'm afraid I can't manage your horse," said Dick, with hypocritical
meekness. "He was too much for me."

"Didn't I tell you so?" said Nicholas, triumphing in spite of his woful
condition.

"I'm sorry you fell into the puddle. Why didn't you jump, as I did?"

"I didn't have time," said Nicholas, ruefully. "What a figure I am!"

"I suppose we may as well go home."

"Yes," said Nicholas, sullenly. "That comes of giving you the reins."

"You are right," said Dick. "You'd better drive home yourself."

Nicholas took the reins, but it mortified him not a little to see the
looks of wonder and amusement which he attracted as he passed through
the village.

Dick laughed to himself.

"I rather think, my proud nephew, we're about even," he said to himself.

In the course of the next day Dick ventured to suggest to his sister
that a temporary loan would be very acceptable.

"A loan!" she repeated, curling her lip. "Why not say 'gift' at once?"

"I'm willing to put it on that ground," said Dick, unabashed. "Still,
I'll give you my note for the amount, if you say so."

"What good would that do?"

"Why, I've got some plans in view which, if successful, will enable me
to repay you the money, with interest."

"I have small faith in the success of your plans, Richard."

"I haven't been as lucky as you, sister Helen, I admit; but where would
you have been but for your lucky marriage?"

"As to that, I have always taken care of myself," said his sister,
coldly.

"May be so. There are some born to good luck."

"How much money do you expect me to give you?" asked Mrs. Kent.

Dick looked at his sister's face attentively. He wished to judge how
much there was a chance of getting out of her. His survey was not
particularly encouraging. She didn't appear to be a woman easily
wheedled out of her money. Still, he spoke up boldly, and said:

"A loan of five hundred dollars, Helen, would be a great lift to me."

"I have no doubt it would," said Mrs. Kent, quietly; "but if you have
any expectation of getting that sum from me you know very little of me.
I should be a fool to throw away such a sum of money."

"You would be generous."

"I have no ambition to be considered generous," she answered, coldly. "A
fool and his money are soon parted. You appear to take me for a fool,
but I beg to assure you that you are entirely mistaken."

"How much will you lend me, then?" asked Dick, rather sullenly.

"Don't use that ridiculous word 'lend,' when you know there's no
probability of your ever repaying it, even if you should be able."

"Have your own way, Helen."

"I will give you fifty dollars, though in justice to my boy I ought not
to do so."

"Fifty dollars!" repeated Dick, chagrined. "Why, that don't pay me for
coming East."

"You are right. You would have done better to stay where you were."

"You don't seem to consider, Helen, that we hadn't met for years, and I
wanted to see my only sister."

"Suppose I had had no money, would you have come then?" asked Mrs. Kent,
with contemptuous incredulity.

"No; I couldn't have afforded it. But, Helen, fifty dollars is nothing
at all. You might say a hundred."

"I might say a hundred, but there is no chance that I shall. Are you not
ashamed--a great, strong man, as you are--not to be able to support
yourself and wife without help from me?"

"Luck's been agin me," said Dick, sullenly. "I could have got ahead but
for that."

"How has it been against you?"

"I owned a mining claim in California--it didn't pay anything--and I
sold it for ten dollars. The man I sold it to kept working till he
struck a vein. He cleared ten thousand dollars."

"As you might have done if you hadn't despaired too quickly."

"Oh, well, it's easy enough to criticise, Helen. You've struck a vein,
and you're in luck. No more hard work for you."

"There would be if I gave away my money, five hundred dollars at a time.
You needn't complain of my good fortune. I have had my share of work to
do. Now I am comfortable, and I mean to keep so."

"No matter what becomes of your poor brother?" whined Dick.

"My poor brother must work as I have done, and he won't starve. Do you
think, if I were a man," she said, disdainfully, "that I would stoop to
ask help of a woman!"

"Well, let me have the money, then," said Dick, gloomily.

Mrs. Kent drew from her pocket-book five ten-dollar bills and placed
them in his hand.

"Don't expect any further help," she said. "In justice to my son I must
refuse it."

Dick left the house with an execration.

"Was there ever a more selfish, cold-hearted woman?" he muttered. "It's
all for her son, is it? I'd like to choke the whelp!"

With this sentiment the affectionate uncle left his sister's house.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

AN IMPORTANT COMMISSION.


It was nearly a year later, and Jasper Kent still remained in St. Louis,
and in the employ of Herman Fitch. He had won his way to the favor of
his employer, not alone on account of his personal good qualities, but
because in the way of business he manifested an unusual aptitude. For
this reason he had already had his pay raised to fifteen dollars a week
and was thoroughly trusted, even in matters of importance.

Of this he was about to receive an additional proof.

"Jasper," said Mr. Fitch one day, as our hero entered his counting-room,
"how would you like a little journey?"

Jasper's eyes brightened.

"I would like nothing better," he answered, promptly.

"So I supposed. Young men of your age generally like to travel."

"To what place do you wish me to go, may I ask, sir?"

"To Kansas--a small town named Plattville."

"Very well, sir, I will go."

"The business is this: A firm in that town, Watts & Duncan, are
considerably indebted to me, and I have doubts as their solvency. In the
event of their failure I want to realize as much as possible of my
claim. I don't want the other creditors to forestall me."

"Yes, sir; I see."

"It is rather a delicate commission, you perceive. You are to go there
and quietly find out what you can of their affairs, and report to me by
mail. Then I shall send you instructions how to proceed."

"Very well, sir."

"Some might blame me for sending so young a messenger, but I have two
objects in view. A boy of your age will not excite suspicion, and again,
I repose great confidence in you."

Jasper was not a little gratified by this assurance.

"I will try not to disappoint your expectations," he said, earnestly.

"I don't think you will."

"When do you want me to start?"

"To-morrow."

"I'll be ready," said Jasper, briskly.

"You can go a part of the way by rail, but only a part. It is a frontier
town, and you may have to ride horseback a part of the way. That I must
leave to your judgment."

"All the better," said Jasper.

"I see you don't mind roughing it," said Mr. Fitch.

"No; that's the best part of it."

"Well, you may go home now and make preparations. To-morrow morning come
to the office for instructions and money. One thing only I suggest
now--take as little baggage as possible. It would only be in your way."

"All right, sir. I've got a small knapsack that will hold all I want to
carry."

"Good! Be here to-morrow at nine o'clock."

At the appointed hour Jasper received his instructions and a certain sum
of money. He had provided himself with a belt, into which he put the
money to guard against possible robbery, carrying only a few dollars in
a pocket-book for outward show.

In explanation of these precautions it must be stated that the events
which I am describing took place some years since, when Kansas was more
sparsely settled and life less secure than at present.

He received his instructions, and set out on his journey, secretly
envied by other clerks who had been longer in the office than himself,
but who had not been complimented by having a similar trust reposed in
them.

We will follow him and see how he fares.




CHAPTER XXXV.

AN INDIAN MAIDEN.


From the information afforded by his employer Jasper was led to expect a
somewhat adventurous journey. He was not to be disappointed. As long as
he was in the well-settled part of the country he encountered no
difficulties nor adventures worth recording. Plattville, as already
stated, was a frontier town, and there was a large tract of almost
uninhabited country between it and the nearest settlement.

Late in the afternoon of the fourth day Jasper found himself standing on
the bank of a river which must be crossed. There was no boat in sight,
and he was puzzled what to do. While he was considering, a young Indian
girl glided by in a canoe. She handled the paddle dexterously and as one
who had been long accustomed to the exercise, though she did not look
more than twelve years of age.

"I wonder if she understands English?" thought Jasper. "Perhaps I could
get her to ferry me across."

Acting upon this thought he called out:

"Halloo, there!"

The young girl turned quickly, and discovered Jasper, whom she had not
before seen.

She stopped paddling, and asked, in a musical voice:

"White boy speak?"

"Yes," said Jasper. "Do you speak English?"

"A little."

"I want to go across the river. Will you take me in your canoe?"

The girl hesitated a moment, perhaps from uncertainty as to whether she
could trust our hero, for she surveyed him attentively. It appeared that
her impressions were favorable, for she turned her canoe to the shore
and said, simply:

"Yes."

"Thank you," said Jasper, and he promptly took his place in the frail
craft.

The Indian girl pushed off and began to paddle rapidly.

"It seems odd to be ferried by a girl," thought Jasper. "I think I ought
to offer to take her place." "Shall I paddle instead of you?" he asked.

The girl laughed and shook her head.

"White boy not know how to paddle a canoe--tip it over," and she laughed
again.

"I don't know but I should," thought Jasper, as he noticed how light and
frail the little canoe was, and how a slight motion would agitate it.

"Do you live around here?" he asked, in some curiosity.

"Up the river," said the girl, indicating with her head, for her hands
were occupied.

"Have you a father?"

"Monima's father great chief," said the girl, proudly.

"Monima! Is that your name?"

"Yes."

"It is a pretty name."

The girl laughed and appeared to be pleased with the compliment, though
it was only to her name. She seemed in turn to be possessed by
curiosity, for she asked:

"What white boy's name?"

"Jasper."

"Jasper," she repeated, with difficulty.

"Isn't it a pretty name?"

"No," said Monima, laughing.

"I am sorry you don't like it, Monima."

"I like white boy. He will be big warrior some day."

"I don't know about that, Monima. So your father is a chief?"

"Yes," said Monima, proudly. "Great chief."

"Did he give you this canoe?"

"Yes."

"Have you any brothers and sisters?"

"One brother, young man; no sister."

By this time they had reached the other side. Monima skilfully drew up
the canoe alongside, and Jasper jumped out. He stood on the bank, and
drew from his vest-pocket a silver half-dollar, which he handed to
Monima.

"Monima no want money," said the girl, proudly.

"Keep it to remember white boy," said Jasper.

"Monima will remember white boy without money."

Jasper reluctantly put the money in his pocket, but he did not like to
accept the favor from Monima without rendering her some return. He was
in doubt at first, but finally an idea occurred to him. He had half a
dozen photographs of himself, which he had recently had taken in St.
Louis. He drew out one of these and extended it to Monima.

"Take that, Monima," he said. "Keep that and remember me."

Monima's face lighted up with wonder and admiration when she saw the
photograph, for she had never seen one before. She looked from the
picture to Jasper, and from Jasper back again to the picture, and
laughed softly.

"White boy's picture?" she said.

"Yes, Monima. Do you think it looks like me?"

She nodded emphatically.

"Two white boy--here and there," she said, pointing first to the
picture, then to Jasper.

