hearty admiration of this genuine and hearty man.

A few moments later they stepped ashore, and a mighty cheer went up
from the men who had crowded upon the banks, at the safety of their
beloved general.  Greene met him at the landing, and the two men
clasped hands.  The general immediately mounted his powerful white
horse, and stationed himself on a little hillock to watch the landing
of the rest of the men, engaging General Greene in a low conversation
the while.

"Do you know, Greene, that Gates has refused my entreaty to stop one
day at Bristol, and take command of Reed's and Cadwalader's troops and
help us in the attack!  I did not positively order him to do so; only
requested him to delay his journey by a day or two.  I can't understand
his action.  A letter was handed me just before we crossed by
Wilkinson, telling me that he had gone on to Congress."

"To Congress!  What wants he there?  Oh, general, it seems as if you
had to fight two campaigns,--one against the enemy, and the other
against secret, nay open, attempts to minimize your authority and check
your plans."

"It seems so, Greene; but with a just cause to sustain, and the
blessing of God to help our efforts, we cannot ultimately fail, though,
indeed, it may be better that I give place to another man, more able to
save the country," went on the general, solemnly.

"Forbid it, Heaven!" cried Greene, passionately.  "We, at least, in the
army, know to whom has been committed this work; ay, and who has done
it, and will do it, too!  We will stand by you to the last.  Could you
not feel in the cheers of those frozen men, when you landed, the love
they bear you?"

"Yes, I know that you are with me, and they too.  'T is that alone that
gives me heart.  Did you publish the orders about the capture of the
transport?"

"Yes, sir, and it put new heart in the men, I could see.  I wish we had
the supplies, the clothing especially, now.  It grows colder every
moment."

"Ay, and darker, too; I think we shall have snow again before we get
through with the night.  I wonder how the others down the river have
got along.  But who comes here?" continued the general, as two men
walked hastily up to him and saluted.

"Well, sir?" he said to the first.

"Message from General Ewing, sir."

"Did he get across?"

"No, sir, the ice was so heavy he bade me say he deemed it useless to
try it."

"One piece removed from the game, General Greene," said Washington,
smiling bitterly.  "Now your news, sir?" to the other.

"General Cadwalader got a part of his men across, but the ice banks so
against the east side that not a single horse or piece of artillery
could be landed, so he bade me say he has recrossed with his men, sir."

"And there's the other piece gone, too!  Now, what is to be done?"

General Sullivan, having crossed with the last of his division, at this
moment rode up.

"The troops are all across, general," he said.

"Well done!  What time is it, some one?"

"Half after eleven, sir," answered a voice.

"Very well, indeed!  We have now only to wait for the guns.  But,
gentlemen, I have just heard that Ewing made no attempt to cross, and
that Cadwalader, having tried it, failed.  He could get his men over,
but no horses and guns, on account of the ice on the bank, and
therefore he returned, and we are here alone.  What, think you, is to
be done now?"

There was a moment's silence.

"Perhaps we would better recross and try it again on a more favorable
night," finally said De Fermoy, in his broken accents.

"Yes, yes, that might be well," said one or two others, simultaneously.
The most of them, however, said nothing.  The general waited a moment,
looking about him.

"Gentlemen, it is too late to retreat.  I promised myself I would not
return without a fight, and I intend to keep that promise.  We will
carry out the plan ourselves, as much of it at least as we can.  I
trust Putnam got Griffin off, and that his skirmishers may draw out Von
Donop.  But be that as it may, we will have a dash at Trenton, and try
to bag the game, and get away before the enemy can fall upon us in
force.  General Greene, you, of course have sent out pickets?"

"Yes, sir, the first men who crossed over, a mile up the road, on the
hill yonder."

"Good!  Ha, what was that?  Snow, as I live, and the moon 's gone, too!
How dark it has grown!  I think you might allow the men to light fires
in those hollows, and let them move about a little; they will freeze to
death standing still--I wonder they don't, anyway.  How unfortunate is
this snow!"

"Beg pardon, your excellency?" said the first of the two messengers.

"What is it, man?  Speak out!"

"Can we stay here and take part in your attack, sir?"

"Certainly you may.  Fall in with the men there.  Where are your
horses?"

"We left them on the other side, sir."

"Well, they will have to stay there for this time, and you 'll have to
go on foot with the rest."

"Thank you, sir," said the men, eagerly, darting off in the darkness.

"That's a proper spirit, isn't it?  Well, to your stations, gentlemen!
We have nothing to do now but wait.  Don't allow the men to lie down or
to sleep, on any account."

And wait they did, for four long hours, the general sitting motionless
and silent on his horse, wrapped in his heavy cloak, unheeding, alike,
the whirling snow or the cutting sleet of the storm, which grew fiercer
every moment.  He strained his eyes out into the blackness of the river
from time to time, or looked anxiously at the troops, clustered about
the fires, or tramping restlessly up and down in their places to ward
off the deadly attack of the awful winter night, while some of them
sought shelter, behind trees and hillocks, from the fury of the storm.
Filled with his own pregnant thoughts, and speaking to no one, he
waited, and no man ventured to break his silence.  At half after three
General Knox, whose resolute will and iron strength had been exerted to
the full, and whose mighty voice had been heard from time to time above
the shriek of the fierce wind, was able to report that he had got all
the artillery over without the loss of a man, a horse, or a gun, and
was ready to proceed.  The men were hastily assembled, and, leaving a
strong detail to guard the boats, at four o'clock in the morning the
long and awful march to Trenton was begun, the general and his staff,
escorted by the Philadelphia City Troop, in the lead.  The storm was at
its height.  All hopes of a night attack and surprise had necessarily
to be abandoned.  Still the general pressed on, determined to abide the
issue, and make the attack as soon as he reached the enemy.  It was the
last effort of liberty, conceived in desperation and born in the throes
of hunger and cold!  What would the bringing forth be?




CHAPTER XXV

_Trenton--The Lion Strikes_

The route, for the first mile and a half, lay up a steep hill, where
the men were much exposed and suffered terribly; after that, for three
miles or so, it wound in and out between the hills, and through forests
of ash and black oak, which afforded some little shelter.  The storm
raged with unabated fury, and the progress of the little army was very
slow.  The men were in good spirits, however, and they cheerfully
toiled on over the roads covered with deep drifts, bearing as best they
might the driving tempest.  It was six in the morning when they reached
the little village of Birmingham, where the two columns divided:
General Greene's column, accompanied by Washington, taking the longer
or inland road, called the Pennington road, which entered the town from
the northeast; while Sullivan's column followed the lower road, which
entered the town from the west, by way of a bridge over the Assunpink
Creek.  As Greene had a long detour to make, Sullivan had orders to
wait where the cross-road from Rowland's Ferry intersected his line of
march, until the first column had time to effect the longer circuit, so
that the two attacks might be delivered together.  General Washington
himself rode in front of the first column.  It was still frightfully
cold.

About daybreak the general spied an officer on horseback toiling
through the snowdrifts toward him.  As the horseman drew nearer, he
recognized young Martin.

"What is it now, sir?"

"General Sullivan says that the storm has rendered many of his muskets
useless, by wetting the priming and powder.  He wishes to know what is
to be done, sir?"

"Return instantly, and tell him he must use the bayonet!  When he hears
the firing, he is to advance and charge immediately.  The town must be
taken, and I intend to take it."

"Very good, sir," said the young man, saluting.

"Can you get through the snow in time?"

"Yes, sir," he replied promptly.  "I can get through anything, if your
excellency will give the order."

The general smiled approvingly.  It was evident that young man's first
lesson had been a good one; his emphasis, he was glad to see, had not
been misapplied.

When Martin rejoined Sullivan's column, which had been halted at the
cross-roads, the men who had witnessed his departure were eagerly
waiting his return.  As he repeated the general's reply, they began
slipping the bayonets over the muzzles of their guns without orders.
So eager were they to advance, that Sullivan had difficulty in
restraining them until the signal was given.  Such was their temper and
spirit that, in the excitement of the moment, they recked little of the
freezing cold and the hardships of their terrible march.  The
retreating army was at last on the offensive, they were about to attack
now, and no attack is so dangerous as that delivered by men from whom
the compelling necessity of retreat has been suddenly removed.

It was about eight o'clock in the morning when they came in sight of
the town.  The village of Trenton then contained about one hundred
houses, mostly frame, scattered along both sides of two long streets,
and chiefly located on the west bank of the Assunpink, which here bent
sharply to the north before it flowed into the Delaware.  The Assunpink
was fordable in places at low water, but it was spanned by a
substantial stone bridge, which gave on the road followed by Sullivan,
at the west end of the village.  Washington came down from the north,
and entered the village from the other side.  About half a mile from
the edge of the town, the column led by him came abreast of an old man,
chopping wood in a farm-yard by the roadside.

"Which is the way to the Hessian picket?" said the general.

"I don't know," replied the man, sullenly.

"You may tell," said Captain Forest, riding near the general, at the
head of his battery, "for this is General Washington."

The man's expression altered at once.

"God bless and prosper you!" he cried eagerly, raising his hands to
heaven.  "There!  The picket is in that house yonder, and the sentry
stands near that tree."

The intense cold and heavy snow had driven the twenty-five men, who
composed the advance picket, to shelter, and they were huddled together
in one of the rude huts which served as a guard-house.  The snow
deadened the sound of the American advance, and the careless sentry did
not perceive them.  No warning was given until the lieutenant in
command of the guard stepped out of the house by chance, and gave the
alarm in great surprise.  The picket rushed out, and the men lined up
in the road in front of the column, the thick snow preventing them from
forming a correct idea of the approaching force.  The advance guard of
the Continentals, led by Captain William A. Washington and Lieutenant
James Monroe, instantly swept down upon them.  After a scattered volley
which hurt no one, they fled precipitately back toward the village,
giving the alarm and rallying on the main guard, posted nearer the
centre of the town, which had been speedily drawn up, to the number of
seventy-five men.  Meanwhile Sullivan's men, with Stark at the head,
had routed the pickets on the other road in the same gallant style.
This picket was composed of about fifty Hessian chasseurs, and twenty
English light dragoons, under command of Lieutenant Grothausen of the
chasseurs.  They all fled so precipitately that they did not stop to
alarm the brigade which they had been stationed to protect, but rapidly
galloped down the road, and, crossing the bridge over the Assunpink,
made good their escape toward Bordentown.  Grave suspicions of
cowardice attached thereafter to their commanding officer.  Had Ewing
performed his part in the plan, the bridge would have been held, and
they would have been captured with the rest.  Stark's men, followed by
the rest of Sullivan's division, were now pushed on rapidly for the
town, and the cheers of the New England men were distinctly heard by
Washington and his men on the main road.  The main guard on the upper
road, almost as completely surprised as the other by the dashing
onslaught of the Americans, made another futile attempt at resistance
to Greene's column, but they soon fell back in great disorder upon the
main body.

It was broad daylight now, and the violence of the storm had somewhat
abated.  In the town, where the firing had been heard, the drums of the
three regiments were rapidly beating the assembly.  Colonel Rahl was in
bed, sleeping off the effects of his previous night's indulgences, when
he heard the commotion.  Jumping from the bed and running rapidly to
the window, still undressed, he thrust out his head and asked the
acting brigade adjutant, Biel,--who was hurriedly galloping past,--what
it was all about.  There was a total misapprehension on all sides, even
at this hour, as to the serious nature of the attack; so the confused
colonel, satisfied with Biel's surmise that it was a raid, ordered him
to take a company and go to the assistance of the main guard, in the
supposition that it was only a skirmishing party, and never dreaming of
a general attack.  Nevertheless he then dressed rapidly, and, running
down to the street, mounted his horse, which had been brought around.
The three regiments which comprised his brigade and command were
already forming; they were the regiment Rahl, the regiment Von
Lossburg, and the regiment Von Knyphausen.  At this moment the advance
party and the main guard came running through the streets in great
confusion, crying that the whole rebel army was down upon them.  The
regiment Rahl and the regiment Von Lossburg at once began retreating to
an apple orchard back of the town; firing ineffectively in their
excitement, as they ran, from behind the houses, at the head of the
column, which had now appeared in the street; while the regiment Von
Knyphausen, under the command of Major Von Dechow, the second in
command of the brigade, separated from the two others and made for the
bridge over the Assunpink.

King and Queen streets run together at the east end of the town.  There
Washington stationed himself, on the left of Forest's battery, which
was immediately unlimbered and opened up a hot fire.  The general's
position was much exposed, and after his horse had been wounded, his
officers repeatedly requested him to fall back to a safer point, which
he peremptorily refused to do.  The joy of battle sparkled in his eyes;
he had instinctively chosen that position on the field from whence he
could best see and direct the conflict, and nothing but a successful
charge of the enemy upon them could have moved him to retire.

A few of the cooler-headed men among the Hessians had rallied some of
the Lossburg regiment, and two guns had been run out into the street
and pointed up toward the place where Washington stood, to form a
battery, which might, could it have been served, have held the American
army in check until such time as the startled Germans could recover
their wits and make a stand.  General Washington pointed them out to
the officer of the advance guard, which had already done such good
service, with a wave of his sword.  The little handful of men, led by
Captain Washington and Lieutenant Monroe, charged down upon the guns,
which the party had not had time to load.  A scattering volley received
them.  Captain Washington and Monroe and one of the men were wounded,
another fell dead; the men hesitated.  Talbot sprang to the head of the
column, in obedience to the general's nod, and they rallied, advanced
on the run, and the guns were immediately captured.

Meanwhile the fire of Stark's riflemen could be heard at the other end
of the town.  St. Clair's brigade held the bridge; the regiment Von
Knyphausen lost a few precious moments endeavoring to extricate its
guns, which had become mired in the morass near the bridge, and then
charged upon St. Clair.  But it was too late; Von Dechow was seriously
wounded, and when the regiment saw itself taken in the flank by
Sargeant's brigade, it retired in disorder, though some few men escaped
by the fords.

At this juncture Rahl re-formed his scattered troops in the apple
orchard.  He seems to have had an idea of retreating toward Princeton
at first, with the two regiments still under his command; at any rate,
he also lost precious moments by hesitation.  It was even then too late
to effect a successful retreat, for Washington, foreseeing the
