short time since, and am not accustomed to it."

"Thank you, chief! I will do my best." Then, waving his arm round,
he said, "You will do more good by looking after your men."

The chief went up to his house, and returned with an old
smooth-bore gun and a bag of slugs.

"I shall do better with this," he said, "when they get close."

A heavy fire was opened on both sides; but the defenders, lying
behind the hedge, had a considerable advantage; which almost
neutralized the great superiority in numbers of the assailants, who
were in the open. Lisle, lying down behind the bank from which he
had fired, and only lifting his head above the crest to take aim,
occupied himself exclusively with the men who appeared to be the
leaders of the attack, and brought down several of them. The
assailants presently drew off, and gathered together.

It was evident to Lisle, from his lookout, that there was a
considerable difference of opinion among them; but at last they
scattered again round the village and, lying down and taking
advantage of every tuft of grass, they began to crawl forward on
their stomachs. Although, as the line closed in, several were
killed, it was evident that they would soon get near enough to make
a rush.

The chief was evidently of the same opinion, for he shouted an
order, and the defenders all leapt to their feet and ran to the
three fortified houses. There were only three-and-twenty of them,
in all. Lisle saw with satisfaction that they had evidently
received orders, beforehand, from the chief; for seven were running
to the chief's house, making up its garrison, altogether, to nine
men; and seven were running to each of the others.

As the enemy burst through the bushes, which were but some
twenty-five yards from the houses, the defenders opened fire from
every loophole. At so short a distance every shot told; and the
assailants recoiled, leaving more than a dozen dead behind them,
while several of the others were wounded.

They now took up their places in the ditch, and fired through the
hedge. Lisle at once signed to the chief to order his men to cease
firing, and to withdraw from the loopholes.

"It is no good to fire now," he said. "Let them waste their
ammunition."

The chief at once shouted orders to his men to cease firing, and to
take their place on the lower story; the walls of which, being
strongly built of stone, were impenetrable by bullets; while these
passed freely through the lightly-built story above. The enemy
continued to fire rapidly for some time; and then, finding that no
reply was made, gradually stopped. There was a long pause.

"I think they are waiting till it is dark," Lisle said. "Tell the
men to make torches, and thrust them out through the loopholes when
the enemy come."

The chief nodded, after Lisle had repeated the sentence in a dozen
different ways. He at once ordered the men to bring up ropes, and
to soak them with oil; and then in a low voice, so that the
assailants should not hear, repeated the order to the men in the
other houses.

The ropes were cut up into lengths of three feet, and then there
was nothing to do but to wait. The attack had begun at three in the
afternoon, and by six it was quite dark. A loud yell gave the
signal, and the enemy rushed through the hedge and surrounded the
three houses. All had walls round them and, while the assailants
battered at the doors, which had been backed up with earth and
stones, the defenders lighted their torches and thrust them out,
through loopholes in the upper stories, and then retired again to
the ground floor.

The doors soon gave way to the attacks upon them, and the
assailants rushed in, in a crowd. As they did so, the defenders
poured in a terrible fire from their magazine rifles. The heads of
the columns melted away, and the assailants fell back, hastily.

"I do not think they will try again," Lisle said. "If they have
lost as heavily, in the other two houses, as they have here, their
loss must have been heavy, indeed."

The torches were kept burning all night, but there was no
repetition of the attack and, in the morning, the assailants were
seen gathered half a mile away. Presently a man was observed
approaching, waving a green bough. He was met at the hedge by the
chief. He brought an offer that, if the Afridis were allowed to
carry off their dead and wounded, they would be content that the
same tribute as of old should be paid; and to take oath that it
should not, in the future, be increased. The chief agreed to the
terms, on condition that only twenty men should be allowed to pass
the hedge, and that they should there hand over the dead to their
companions.

On returning to his house, he made Lisle understand that, after the
heavy loss they had inflicted on their assailants, there would
forever be a blood feud between them; and that, in future, they
would have to retire for the winter to some valley far away, and
keep a constant watch until spring came again. When Lisle had, with
great difficulty, understood what the chief said, he nodded.

"I can understand that, chief," he said, "and I think you should
keep a very strong guard, every night, till we move away."

"Good man," the chief said, "you have fought by our side, and are
no longer a prisoner but a friend. When spring comes, you shall go
back to your own people."

It took some hours to remove the dead, of whom there were
forty-three; and the badly wounded, who numbered twenty-two--but
there was no doubt that many more had managed to crawl away.

Lisle now set to work to learn the language, in earnest. A boy was
told off by the chief to be his companion and, at the end of two
months, Lisle was able to converse without difficulty. The chief
had already told him that he could leave when he liked, but that it
would be very dangerous for him to endeavour to make his way to the
frontier, especially as the tribe they had fought against occupied
the intervening country.

"When we get among the hills, I will give you four men to act as
your escort down the passes; but you will have to go in disguise
for, after the fighting that has taken place, and the destruction
of the villages, even if peace is made it would not be safe for a
white man to travel among the mountains. He would certainly be
killed."

Every precaution was taken against attack, and six men were
stationed at the hedge, all night. Two or three times noises were
heard, which seemed to proceed from a considerable body of men. The
guard fired, but nothing more was heard. Evidently a surprise had
been intended but, directly it was found that the garrison were on
watch, and prepared, the idea was abandoned; for the lesson had
been so severe that even the hope of revenge was not sufficient to
induce them to run the risk of its repetition.

Lisle did not fret at his enforced stay. He was very popular in the
little village, and was quite at home with the chief's family. The
choicest bits of meat were always sent to him; and he was treated
as an honoured guest, in every way.

"When you return to your people," the chief said, one day, "please
tell them that, henceforth, we shall regard them as friends; and
that, if they choose to march through our country, we will do all
we can to aid them, by every means in our power."

"I will certainly tell them so," Lisle replied, "and the kindness
you have shown me will assuredly be rewarded."

"I regret that we fought against you," the chief said, "but we were
misled. They will not take away our rifles from us, I hope; for
without them we should be at the mercy of the other tribes. These
may give up many rifles, but they are sure to retain some and,
though there are other villages of our clan, we should be an easy
prey, if it were known that we were unarmed."

"I think I can promise that, after your friendly conduct to me, you
will not be required to make any payment, whatever; and indeed, for
so small a matter as twenty rifles, your assurances, that these
would never again be used against us, would be taken into
consideration."

When Lisle had been in the village about three months, one of the
men came up to him and spoke in Punjabi.

"Why, how did you learn Punjabi?" he said, in surprise; "and why
did you not speak to me in it, before? It would have saved me an
immense deal of trouble, when I first came."

"I am sorry," the man said, "but the thought that you could speak
Punjabi did not enter my mind. I thought that you were a young
white officer who had just come out from England. I learnt it
because I served, for fifteen years, in the 32nd Punjabis."

"You did?" Lisle said; "why, the 32nd Punjabis was my father's
regiment! How long have you left it?"

"Six years ago, sahib."

"Then you must remember my father, Captain Bullen."

"Truly I remember him," the man said. "He was one of our best and
kindest officers. And he was your father?"

"Yes. You might remember me too, I must have been eleven or twelve
years old."

The man looked hard at him.

"I think, sir, that I remember your face; but of course you have
changed a good deal, since then. I remember you well, for you often
came down our lines; and you could speak the language fluently, and
were fond of talking to us.

"And your father, is he well?"

"He was killed, three years ago," Lisle said, "in an attack on a
hill fort."

"I am sorry, very sorry. He was a good man. And so you are an
officer in his regiment?"

"No," Lisle said, "I left the regiment in the march to the relief
of Chitral. They wanted to send me home, so I darkened my skin and
enlisted in the regiment, by the aid of Gholam Singh; and went
through the campaign without even being suspected, till just at the
end."

"You went as a soldier?" the man said, in surprise; "never before
have I heard of a white sahib passing as a native, and enlisting in
the ranks. You lived and fought with the men, without being
discovered! Truly, it is wonderful."

"I did not manage quite so well as I ought to have done; for I
found, afterwards, that I had been suspected before we got to
Chitral. Then Colonel Kelly took me out of the ranks and made me a
temporary officer, and afterwards got a commission for me."

"It is truly wonderful," the man repeated.

From that time the native took every pains to show him respect and
liking for the son of his old officer; and the account he gave, to
the others, of the affection with which the young sahib's father
was regarded by the regiment, much increased the cordiality with
which he was generally treated. Spring came at last, and the snow
line gradually rose among the distant hills and, at last, the chief
announced that they could now start for their summer home.

The news was received with general satisfaction, for the night
watches and the constant expectation of attack weighed heavily upon
them all. The decision was announced at dawn and, three hours
afterwards, the animals were packed and they set out on the march.
They had started a fortnight earlier than usual for, if they had
waited till the usual time, their old enemies would probably have
placed an ambush.

They travelled without a halt, until they were well among the
hills. Then the wearied beasts were unladen, fires were lighted,
and a meal cooked. But even yet they were not altogether safe from
attack; and sentries were posted, some distance down the hill, to
give notice of the approach of an enemy. The night, however, passed
quietly; and the next evening they were high among the hills, and
camped, for the first time for three months, with a sense of
security.

It was determined to rest here for a few days, for they had almost
reached the snow line. This was receding fast, under the hot rays
of the sun, but it was certain that the gorges would be full of
fierce torrents; and that, until these abated somewhat, they would
be absolutely impassable. A week was extended into a fortnight. As
the snow melted the grass grew, as if by magic; and the animals
rapidly regained condition and strength. Then they started again
and, after encountering no little difficulty and hardship, arrived
at their mountain home.

"Now, sahib," the chief said the next morning, "I will keep my
promise to you, and will send four of my men with you to Peshawar.
The sun and the glare from the snow have browned you almost to our
colour, so there will be no occasion for you to stain your face
and, in Afghan costume, you could pass anywhere. Besides, you speak
our language so well that, even if you were questioned, no one
would suspect that you are not one of ourselves."

"How many days will it take, chief?"

"In five days you will be at Peshawar. I know not whether you will
find an army assembled there, to march again into our country; but
I hope that peace has been settled. It will take the tribes all the
year to rebuild their houses. It will be years before their flocks
and herds increase to what they were before and, now they have
found that British troops can force their way through their
strongest passes, that they can no longer defy white men to enter
their lands, they will be very careful not to draw down the anger
of the white man upon themselves. They will have a hard year of it
to repair, in any way, the damages they have incurred; to say
nothing of the loss of life that they have suffered. They have also
had to give up great numbers of their rifles; and this, alone, will
render them careful, at any rate until they replace them; so I do
not think that there will be any chance of fighting this year, or
for some years to come. I am sure I hope not."

"I hope not, also," Lisle said. "We too have lost heavily, and the
expense has been immense. We shall be as glad as your people to
live at peace. I think I may safely say that, if the country is
quiet, a messenger will be sent up from Peshawar with the general's
thanks for the way in which I have been treated; and with
assurances that, whatever may happen, your village will be
respected by any force that may march into the country. Probably
such an assurance will be sent by the men who go with me."

Another fortnight was spent in the village, for the rivers were
still filled to the brim; but as soon as the chief thought that the
passes were practicable, Lisle, in Afridi costume, started with
four of the men. All the village turned out to bid him goodbye;
several of the women, and many of the children, crying at his
departure.

The journey down was accomplished without adventure; the men giving
out, at the villages at which they stopped, that they were on their
way to Peshawar, to give assurances to the British there that they
were ready to submit to terms. On nearing Peshawar, Lisle abandoned
his Afridi costume and resumed his khaki uniform.

When he arrived at the town, he went at once to headquarters. The
sentry at the door belonged to his own regiment; and he started,
and his rifle almost fell from his hand, as his eye fell upon
Lisle.

"I am not a ghost," Lisle laughed, "but am very much alive.

"I am glad to see you again, Wilkins," and he passed in at the
door.

"Is the general engaged?" he asked the orderly who, like the
soldier at the door, stood gazing at him stupidly.

"No, sir," the man gasped.

"Then I will go in unannounced."

General Lockhart looked up from the papers he was reading, and gave
a sudden start.

"I have come to report myself ready for duty, sir," Lisle said,
with a smile.

"Good heavens! Mr. Bullen, you have given me quite a turn! We had
all regarded your death as certain; and your name appeared in the
list of casualties, five months ago.

"I am truly glad to see you again," and he heartily shook Lisle's
hand. "There is another in here who will be glad to see you."

He opened the door, and said:

"Colonel Houghton, will you step in here, for a moment?"

As the colonel entered the room, and his eye fell upon Lisle, he
stood as if suddenly paralysed. The blood rushed from his cheeks.

"I am glad to see that you have recovered from your wound, sir,"
Lisle said.

The blood surged back into the colonel's face. He strode forward
and, grasping both Lisle's hands in his own, said in broken
accents:

"So it is really you, alive and well! This is indeed a load off my
mind. I have always blamed myself for saving my life at the expense
of your own. It would have embittered my life to the end of my
days.

"And you are really alive! I thank God for it. I tried in vain to
check my horse, but it got the bit between its teeth and, with my
wounded leg, I had no power to turn him. As I rode, I pictured to
myself your last defence; how you died fighting.

"How has this all come about?" and he looked at the general, as if
expecting an answer.

"I know no more than yourself, Houghton. He had but just entered
when I called you in."

"Now, Mr. Bullen, let us hear how it happened."

"It was very simple, sir. The Afridis were but twenty paces away,
when I started the colonel's horse. I saw that fighting would be
hopeless, so threw down my sword and pistol. I should have been cut
up at once, had not their chief shouted to them to leave me alone,
and to fire after Colonel Houghton. This they did and, I was happy
to see, without success."

"Then the chief sent me off, under the guard of four men, to his
village; with the intention, as I afterwards heard, of holding me
as a hostage. A week later we moved down to the plain. When we had
been settled in our winter quarters for about two months, we were
attacked by a neighbouring tribe.

"By this time I had begun to pick up enough of the language to make
myself understood. I volunteered to aid in the defence. The chief
gave me his rifle, and I picked off a few of the leading
assailants, and aided in the defence of the village. The enemy were
beaten off with very heavy loss, and the chief was pleased to
attribute their defeat to my advice.

"He at once declared that I was to regard myself no longer as a
prisoner, but as a guest. I spent the next three months in getting
up their language, which I can now speak fluently enough for all
purposes.

"All this time, a vigilant watch had been kept against another
attack and, as soon as the snow began to melt, we returned to the
mountains. There we remained until the passes were open; and then
the chief sent me down, with an escort of four, and I arrived here
a quarter of an hour before I reported myself.

"I believe that I owe my life, in the first place, to the Afridi's
surprise at my sending off Colonel Houghton on my horse."

"No wonder he was surprised, Mr. Bullen. It was a splendid action;
and in reporting your death, I spoke of it in the warmest terms;
and said that, had you returned alive, I should have recommended
you for the V.C.

"I shall, of course renew the recommendation, now that you have
returned."

Turning to Colonel Houghton, he said:

"You no doubt wish to have a further chat with Lieutenant Bullen
and, as there is no special work here today, pray consider yourself
at liberty to take him down to your quarters."

"Thank you, sir! I shall certainly be glad to learn further about
the affair."

"If you please, General," Lisle said, "I have a message to give
you, from the chief. He says that, henceforth, he will be friends
with the British; and that if you ever enter his country again, he
will do all in his power to aid you. He hopes that you will allow
them to retain their rifles and, as they only amount to some three
or four and twenty fighting men, I was tempted to promise him that
you would."

"You were quite right, Mr. Bullen. I suppose the men who
accompanied you are still here?"

"Yes."

"Tell them not to go away. I will myself send a message to their
chief."

"We will write him a letter, Colonel Houghton, thanking him for his
kindness to his prisoner; sending him a permit to retain his arms,
and a present which will enable his tribe to increase their flocks
and herds."

"Thank you very much, sir! I shall myself, of course, send a
present of some sort, in return for his kindness."

"You talk the Pathan language with facility?"

"Yes, sir. I was five months with them, and devoted the chief part
of my time to picking it up."

"You shall be examined at the first opportunity, Mr. Bullen; and
the acquisition of their language, as well as your proficiency in
Punjabi will, of course, greatly add to your claim to be placed on
staff appointments; and will add somewhat to your income.

"I hope you will dine with me, this evening; when you can give me a
full account of your life in the village, and of that fight you
