it in the world."

It was not long before the girls had all finished and turned in their
papers to the teacher in charge.

"Oh, glorious happy day!" cried Nora, as she sped joyously down the
corridor. "Examinations are over, and now for a good time!"

A dozen or more of the freshman class had been invited to Miriam's to a
tea to celebrate the close of school. Anne, of course, was not invited;
but Grace and her friends had received invitations and promptly accepted
them.

Grace had taken Nora and Jessica into her confidence to some extent. She
needed their help, but she had not mentioned the letter from Anne's
father. The three girls met early by appointment, at the Harlowe house,
to discuss matters before going to Miriam Nesbit's.

"Here's a list of the people in Oakdale," said Nora, "who have bought
sandalwood perfume. I have been to four drug stores and all the dry
goods stores."

Grace took the list and read:

"'Mrs. I. Rosenfield, Miss Alice Gwendolyn Jones, Mr. Percival Butz,
etc.' Good heavens!" she cried, "there's not a single person on this
list who has anything to do with Oakdale High School. Mr. Percival
Butz," she laughed. "The idea of a man buying perfume. Really, girls,"
she added in despair, "we've been wasting our time. I can't see that any
of us has made the least headway. I have called on almost every freshman
in the class and inquired what her favorite perfume is, and I know some
of them thought I was silly. Anyway, not one of them claimed to use
sandalwood."

"The stupidest girls would be the ones who would be most likely to want
to copy the papers," observed Jessica, "but those girls are much too
nice to believe such horrid things about. I went to see Ellen Wiggins
and Sallie Moore yesterday afternoon. Neither of them use perfume.
Sallie Moore told me she had an orris root sachet that had almost lost
its scent. Which reminds me," she continued, "why couldn't this
handkerchief have been scented by some other means than just perfume.
Perhaps it was put into a mouchoir case with sandalwood powder."

"Why, of course," exclaimed Grace. "Jessica, I never thought of asking
who had been buying sachet powders. You have a great head."

"Must I go back and ask all those storekeepers for more lists?" demanded
Nora.

"No, child," replied Grace. "Just give us time to think first."

"It's time to go to Miriam's anyhow," observed Jessica. "Perhaps some
sort of inspiration will come on the way," and the three girls set out
for the tea party.

As they paused to admire the beautiful flower beds on the Nesbit lawn
Jessica said:

"Have you inquired Miriam's favorite perfume?"

"Oh, yes," answered Grace. "She said she liked them all and had no
favorites."

"Why are all these strange young women breaking into my premises?"
demanded a voice behind them.

"David Nesbit," cried Grace, "where have you been all this time? You
never seem to find the time to come near your old friends any more."

"I have been busy, girls," replied David. "Never busier in my life. But
I believe I've struck it at last. It will not be long, now, before I
turn into a bird."

"Oh, _do_ show it to us!" cried Grace. "Where is the model?"

"In my workroom," he replied. "If you are very good, and will promise to
say nothing to the others, I'll give you a peep this afternoon. When I
signal to you from the music room, by sounding three bass notes on the
piano, start upstairs and I'll meet you on the landing. You may ask why
this mystery? But I know girls, and if all those chattering freshmen are
allowed to come into my room they are sure to knock over some of the
models, or break something, and I couldn't stand it."

The three girls entered the large and imposing drawing room where
Miriam, in a beautiful pink mulle, trimmed with filmy lace insertions,
received them with unusual cordiality; and presently they all repaired
to the dining room where ice cream and strawberries were served with
little cakes with pink icing. It was, as a matter of fact, a pink tea,
and Miriam's cheeks were as pink as her decorations. She looked
particularly excited and happy. Each of the three chums had just
swallowed her last and largest strawberry, saved as a final relish, when
three low notes sounded softly on the piano in the adjoining room.

In the hum of conversation nobody had noticed David's signal except
Grace and her friends, who strolled into the music room where he was
waiting.

"Come along," he said, leading the way up the back stairs, "and please
consider this as a special mark of attention from the great inventor who
has never yet made anything go. Where's Anne?"

"I suppose she is resting," answered Grace. "She had just about reached
the end of her strength to-day."

"But she'll win the prize, I hope," continued David.

"We are all sure of it," answered Grace, in emphatic tones.

David opened the door into his own private quarters, which consisted of
a large workroom with a laboratory attached, where he had once worked on
chemical experiments until he had become interested in flying machines.

"Here they are," he exclaimed, walking over to a large table in the
workroom. "I have three models, you see, and each one works a little
better than the other. This last one, I believe, will do the business."
He pointed to a graceful little aeroplane made of bamboo sticks and rice
paper.

"Isn't it sweet?" exclaimed the girls in unison.

"And it has a name, too," continued David unabashed. "I've called her
'Anne,' because, while she's such a small, unpretentious-looking little
craft, she can soar to such heights. There is not room here to show you
how good she is, but we'll have another gymnasium seance some day soon,
Anne must come and see her namesake."

"There!" cried Grace in a tone of annoyance. "I have jagged a big place
in my dress, David Nesbit, on a nail in your table. Why do you have such
things about to destroy people's clothes?"

"But nobody who wears dresses ever comes in here," protested David,
"except mother and the maid, and they know better than to come near this
table. Can't I do something? Glue it together or mend it with a piece of
sticking plaster?"

"No, indeed," answered the girl. "Just get me a needle and thread,
please. I don't want to go downstairs with such a hideous rent in my
dress."

"Why, of course," assented David. "Why didn't I think of it sooner?
Mother will fix you up," and he opened the door into the hall and called
"mother!"

Mrs. Nesbit came hurrying in. She never waited to be called twice by her
son, who was the apple of her eye.

"My dear Grace," she exclaimed when she saw the tear, "this is too bad.
Come right into my room and I'll mend it for you."

So it happened that Grace was presently seated in an armchair in Mrs.
Nesbit's bedroom, while the good-natured woman whipped together the
jagged edges of the rent.

"What a beautiful box you have, Mrs. Nesbit," said Grace, pointing to a
large carved box on the dressing table.

"Do you like it?" replied the other. "I'm fond of it, probably because I
was so happy when I bought it years ago while traveling abroad with my
husband. It smells as sweet as it did when it was new," she added,
placing the box in Grace's lap.

Nora and Jessica, who had been hovering about the room, now came over to
see the sweet-scented box. How strangely familiar was that pungent
perfume which floated up to them. Where had they smelled it before?

"It is made of carved sandalwood," continued Mrs. Nesbit, opening the
lid, "and I have always kept my handkerchiefs in it, you see----"

"Mother!" called David's voice from the hall, and Mrs. Nesbit left the
room for a moment.

"Sandalwood!" gasped Grace.

Yes, it was the same perfume that now faintly scented the famous
handkerchief.

There was a pile of handkerchiefs in the box. Grace lifted the top one
and sniffed at it. She examined the border carefully and the texture.

"It looks like stealing," she whispered, "but I must have this
handkerchief. I'll return it afterwards," and she slipped the
handkerchief into her belt.

Nora and Jessica had exchanged significant glances, while Nora's lips
had formed the words, "exactly like the other one."

In the meantime Miss Thompson had been closeted with Anne Pierson for
half an hour in the principal's office. By special request she had
arranged to have Anne's examination papers looked over immediately and
sent to her. The papers were therefore the first to receive attention
from each teacher, and were then turned over to Miss Thompson, who
hurried with them into her office and locked the door behind her.

"It would be a pity if they were too perfect," she said to herself.
"That would tell very much against Anne, I fear."

But, as her eyes ran over them, she shook her head dubiously. They were
marvels of neatness and not one cross or written comment marred their
perfection. At the foot of each sheet the word "perfect" had been
written. Some of the teachers had even added notes stating that no
errors of any sort had been found, while one professor had paid Anne the
very high compliment of stating that the perfection of her examination
papers had not been a surprise. Never in that teacher's experience had
he taught a more brilliant pupil. Miss Thompson looked with interest at
the algebra papers. If this had not come up, she thought, Miss Leece
would certainly have managed to find a flaw somewhere, even if she had
had to invent one. But under the circumstances, it was more to that wily
woman's purpose to give Anne her due. For Miss Leece knew that a perfect
examination paper would tell more against the young girl than for her.

It was after this that Miss Thompson had her talk with Anne, a very
kindly, interested talk, in which the young girl's prospects, her work
and health had all come under consideration. And then in the gentlest
possible way Miss Thompson had produced the letter.

"Is this yours, Anne?" she asked.

Anne started violently.

"O Miss Thompson," she cried, making a great effort to keep back her
tears, "where did you find it? I spent one entire afternoon here looking
for it. It was the very day you and Miss Leece were here."

"Oh, you saw us then," replied the principal. "And where were you?"

"I was outside on the steps," replied Anne. "Didn't Miss Leece mention
it? She looked up and saw me just as you unlocked the door. Then the
other door slammed and some one hurried down the passage. I saw her,
too, but----"

"But what, Anne?" asked the principal slowly.

"But I am not sure who it was."

"Have you an idea?"

"I could only guess from the outline of her figure," replied Anne. "And
it wouldn't be fair to tell her name unless I had seen her plainly. It
might have been some one else."

Anne had a suspicion that something had happened, and that Miss Thompson
had brought her here to find out what she knew. But she never dreamed
that she herself was under suspicion.

One thing had struck Miss Thompson very forcibly. Miss Leece had known
all along that Anne was on the staircase at the very moment the other
person was slamming the door in their faces. And yet Miss Leece was
determined to condemn Anne to the faculty that very night. She had said
so in as many words, in defiance of the principal's arguments against
such a course.

"Well, good night, my child," she said at last, giving Anne a motherly
kiss. "You have done a good winter's work and I am proud of you."

Anne hurried away, clutching the letter in her hand. She wondered if
Miss Thompson had read it, and somehow she didn't mind so much after
all. The principal seemed to her the very embodiment of all that was
good and kind.

Miss Thompson was destined to have several callers that afternoon. In a
few moments Grace hurried in, breathless and excited.

"Look at that, Miss Thompson," cried the girl, thrusting a handkerchief
into her hand. "Look at it and smell it."

"Well," replied the principal, "I've seen it before and smelled it
before, too. Only you've had it washed and ironed, haven't you!"

Grace took a crumpled handkerchief from her pocket.

"Here's the real one," she cried triumphantly.

The two handkerchiefs were certainly identical in shape and material and
both were perfumed with sandalwood.

"Where did you get this one?" demanded the principal.

"From Mrs. Nesbit's sandalwood handkerchief box," whispered Grace
slowly.

"You think it was then----?"

"Yes," replied Grace. "I'm certain of it. It's as plain as daylight. She
borrowed her mother's handkerchief."

"Dear, dear!" exclaimed the principal. "How very foolish! How very
unnecessary! And all because she couldn't endure to be beaten! Do you
know," she continued presently, "that Miss Leece intends to denounce
Anne before the faculty to-night? My authority can't stop her, and I
don't believe the similarity of these two handkerchiefs will either."

"Miss Thompson," exclaimed Grace, "I tell you I know perfectly well that
woman is going to try to ruin Anne for the sake of Miriam. I have known
it for months. Why, at Mrs. Gray's Christmas party she did a thing that
is too outrageous to believe," and here Grace opened a bundle she had
brought with her and produced the marionette of James Pierson.

Miss Thompson was shocked at the recital of the story. She, too,
recognized the green silk tie, although she had no recollection of
Miriam's red velveteen suit, a piece of which formed the waistcoat. But
there was something about that green silk which stuck in the memory.
Probably because it was so ugly, having a semi-invisible yellow line
running through it.

"Yes," she said, "I remember it very well. It was the trimming on a
blouse Miss Leece wore last autumn. I do not believe anyone could forget
such a hideous piece of material."

Miss Thompson paused a moment and considered.

"My dear," she continued presently, "I believe this is all I shall need
to confront Miss Leece with. Your bringing it to me at this moment shows
most excellent judgment. It may prevent a painful scandal in the school,
as well as saving Anne from disgrace. As for the two handkerchiefs, the
evidence is too slight to make any open accusations; but at any rate you
may leave both with me. I may need them in my interview with Miss Leece.
I may as well tell you I am anticipating a pretty stiff battle with her.
I don't believe I should have won with only the handkerchiefs."

"Oh, I hope we can save Anne, Miss Thompson," cried Grace.

"I earnestly hope so, too," replied the principal. "It would be too
heart breaking to have the child go down under this false accusation;
and aside from that, such scandals are bad for the school and I would
rather deal with them privately than have them made public. But run
along now, dear. You have done nobly and deserve a prize yourself."

A knock was heard, and as Grace departed through one door Miss Leece
opened the other.

"If Miss Thompson only wins this battle!" the young girl exclaimed to
herself. "I want to believe she will, but I know that terrible Miss
Leece will make a tremendous fight."

She joined her friends, who were waiting for her outside.

"Girls," she cried, "pray for Anne to-night!"

Nora, good little Catholic that she was, went straight to her church and
burned two candles before the altar of the Holy Virgin, while she
offered up a humble petition for Anne's deliverance; while Grace and
Jessica, in their own bedrooms, that night prayed reverently and
earnestly that Anne might be saved from her enemies. Thus were Anne's
three devoted friends working and praying for her while she slept the
sleep of exhaustion.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE FRESHMAN PRIZE


Graduation night in Oakdale High School was one of the great social
events of the year. The floor and galleries of Assembly Hall were
invariably packed with an enthusiastic audience; for the two schools
united at the ceremony of graduation and the senior class formed a mixed
company on the stage.

Most of the pupils attended commencement and the freshman class of the
Girls' High School was always there in full to witness the triumph of
one of its members, who was called forth from the audience to receive
the usual freshman prize of twenty-five dollars.

The identity of the winner was always kept a secret until the great
night, when she was summoned from the audience to the stage and
presented with the money before the entire assembly.

The readers can imagine, therefore, the uncertainty and trepidation that
fluttered in the hearts of our four girls as they sat together in the
center of the great hall. Anne had passed through a dozen stages of
emotions, both hopeful and otherwise, and had finally steeled herself to
give up all thought of winning either of the prizes.
