done on other small kings, we will assuredly resist him as long as there
is a man left in the district to wield a battle-axe."

There was a great shout and clash of arms when this was said, and the
King's face became crimson with rage, for he saw clearly that the
feeling of the majority was against him.

At this point Jarl Rongvold stood up and spoke in the bland tones of a
man who wishes to throw oil on troubled waters.

He said that it was his earnest entreaty to the bonders and
house-holding men, both great and small, then and there assembled, that
they should calmly consider the proposals of the King, and not allow
themselves to be carried away by unsound reasoning, although it might
seem very plausible, for he was certain that the King's desire was the
good of the country; and although circumstances had rendered it
necessary that some of the rebellious should be punished, no one could
say that the King was not willing and ready to do all that he did in a
fair, open, and straightforward manner.

At this Erling was unable to restrain himself.  He sprang up, and, with
a passionate flow of words that burst forth like a mountain torrent,
exclaimed--

"Thinkest thou, Jarl Rongvold, that our brains are so addled that we
cannot distinguish between black and white?  Is thy memory so short, is
thy slavery to the King so complete, that thou must say evil is good and
good evil?  Hast thou and has the King so soon forgotten that two
strangers came to the court with a message from one of the legal
assemblies of this land,--that, trusting to the honour of the King, they
came without following, and with only such arms as were needful for
personal defence,--and that the honour to which they trusted was not
proof against the temptation to send a noted berserk and nineteen men to
waylay and slay them?  Is all this clean gone from your memory, Jarl and
King? or is your wit so small that ye should think we will believe in
soft words about fair play when such foul deeds are so recent that the
graves are yet wet with the blood of those whom Glumm and I were
compelled to slay in self-defence?"

At this the King started up, and his face became white and red by turns,
as he said--

"Ye shall, both of you, rue this day, Erling and Glumm!"

Erling made no reply, but Glumm started up and was in so great a passion
that he could hardly speak; nevertheless he made shift to splutter out--

"Threats, King Harald, are like water spilt on a shield which can only
rust if left there; I wipe them off and fling them away!"

He could add no more, but with a contemptuous motion of the hand he
struck his fist violently against his shirt of mail, and the bonders
laughed while they applauded him.

Then stood up a man in the troop of the Springdal men, who was of great
stature and grim countenance, clad in a leather cloak, with an axe on
his shoulder and a great steel hat upon his head.  He looked sternly,
and said--

"When rights are not respected then the crows flap their wings and caw,
for they know that ere long they shall glut themselves with human
blood."

He sat down, and immediately after Ulf of Romsdal stood up.  Ulf had
fully as much fire as Erling or Glumm, but he possessed greater power of
self-restraint, and, as he spoke with deliberation, his words had all
the more weight.  He said--

"King Harald, when in the exercise of our udal rights we bonders elected
thee to be our King at the Thing held in Drontheim, we stated and traced
thy descent from Odin through the Vingling dynasty, proved thy udal
right to the crown, and truly thought that we had placed it on the head
of one who would walk in the footsteps of his father, and respect that
authority and power in virtue of which he held his own high position.
But we now find that thou hast constituted thyself a law higher than the
law which made thee what thou art, and thou now wouldst have us, of our
own free will, bend our necks so low that thou mayest with the more ease
set thy foot on them and keep us down.  We have served thee in all good
faith up to the present time; we have readily met thy demands for men,
ships, arms, and money, by calling together our assemblies and voting
these supplies; and now thou wouldst rob us of this our old right, and
tax us without our consent, so that thou mayest raise men for thyself,
and have it all thine own way.  This must not, shall not, be.  Even now,
we bonders will unanimously hold by the law if it be passed in the
proper assembly and receives our yea, and we will follow thee and serve
thee as our King as long as there is a living man amongst us.  But thou,
King, must use moderation towards us, and only require of us such things
as it is lawful or possible for us to obey thee in.  If, however, thou
wilt take up this matter with a high hand, and wilt try thy power and
strength against us, we have resolved among ourselves to part with thee,
and to take to ourselves some other chief who will respect those laws by
which alone society can be held together.  Now, King Harald, thou must
choose one or other of these conditions before the Thing is ended."

The loud applause which followed this speech showed that the bonders
heartily sympathised with it, and indeed several of them rose and said
that it expressed their will exactly, and they would stand or fall by
what had been spoken.

When silence had been restored, Jarl Rongvold, who had whispered in the
King's ear some earnest words, stood forth and said:

"It is King Harald's will to give way to you in this matter for he does
not wish to separate himself from your friendship."

This brought the Thing to a close.  Thereafter the two parties returned
to their ships, intending to feast and pass the night in them.

The King was very affable, and invited Haldor and some of the others
whose language had been comparatively moderate to feast with him, but
they declined the honour, and retired to their own ships.

In the evening, while the sounds of revelry were heard everywhere, a
boat approached Erling's ship.  It was rowed by a single man, who, when
it touched her side, leaped on board and went aft to where Erling was
seated with Guttorm Stoutheart.

"King Harald would speak with thee," said the man, who was no other than
Hake the berserk.

"Methinks his intentions can scarce be friendly," said Erling, with a
grim smile, "when he sends so trusty a messenger."

"It may be so," replied Hake coolly, "but that is nothing to me.  My
business is to deliver the message and offer to conduct thee to him."

"And pray, what surety have I that thou wilt not upset me in the fiord?"
asked Erling, laughing.

"The surety that if I upset thee we shall be on equal terms in the
water," replied Hake gruffly.

"Nay, that depends on which of us can swim best," returned Erling; "and,
truly, if thou canst fight as well in the water as on the land, we
should have a rare struggle, Hake."

"Am I to say to the King that thou art afraid of him?" asked the
berserk, with a look of scorn.

"Yea, truly, if it is thy desire to tell him a lie," retorted Erling.
"But get thee into the boat, fellow; I will follow anon."

Hake turned on his heel and returned to the boat, while Erling took
Guttorm aside.

"Now, art thou fey?"  [death-doomed] said Guttorm.  "What has made thee
so tired of life that thou shouldest put thy neck under his heel thus
readily?"

"Fear not, my friend," said Erling; "now that I have seen King Harald a
second time, I think him a better man than at first I did.  Ambition
will no doubt lead him to do many things that are contrary to his
nature; but I do not think he will violate the laws of hospitality after
what has passed.  However, I may be wrong; so I would ask thee, Guttorm,
to go aboard of your ship, which lies nearest to that of the King, and,
should ye see anything like a struggle, or hear a shout do thou haste to
the rescue.  I will have my men also in readiness."

While the stout-hearted old Sea-king, in compliance with this request,
got into a small boat and rowed to his own vessel, Erling gave
particular directions to his chief house-carle to keep a sharp lookout
and be ready to act at a moment's notice.  Then he went into Hake's
boat, and was rowed alongside the Dragon, where the King received him
with much condescension, and took him aft to the cabin under the high
poop.  Here he offered him a horn of ale, which, however, Erling
declined, and then began to use his utmost powers of persuasion to
induce him to enter his service.  At first he tried to influence him by
flattery, and commended him for his bold and straightforward conduct at
the Thing, which, he said, showed to all men that he merited well his
distinctive title; but, on finding that our hero was not to be won by
flattery, he quickly and adroitly changed his ground, began to talk of
the future prospects of Norway, and the necessity for improved
legislation.  In this he was so successful that he secured the interest,
and to some extent the sympathy, of the young warrior, who entered
eagerly and somewhat more respectfully into the discussion.

"But, sire," he said, at the close of one of the King's remarks, "if
these are your sentiments, why did you not state them more fully to-day
at the Thing, and why should you not even now call a meeting of the Stor
Thing, and have the matter properly discussed by all in the land who
have a right to speak?"

"Hadst thou had any experience of kingcraft, Erling, thou hadst not
asked the question.  If I were now to do as thou dost suggest, the
numerous small kings who have already been put down by force would band
against me, and bring such a following of opponents to the Thing that
fair discussion would be out of the question."

Erling thought in his own mind, "One false step always necessitates
another; you should have called a meeting of the Thing before putting
down anyone;" however, he did not give utterance to the thought, but
said--

"I think you are mistaken, sire; there may be many who, out of revenge,
might oppose you, but certain am I that those who would vote for that
which is for the wellbeing of the land would form a vast majority.
Besides, it is the only course left open to you."

At this the King flushed with a feeling of anger, and, drawing himself
up, touched the hilt of his sword without uttering a word.

"When I said the only course," remarked Erling, "I meant the only lawful
course.  Sorry should I be to see you, King Harald, draw the sword in a
bad cause; but if you do, be assured that thousands of good blades will
gleam in opposition."

At this the King's eyes flashed, and, turning suddenly upon Erling, he
shook back the masses of his yellow hair with lion-like ferocity,
exclaiming--

"Dost thou dare to speak thus to me in mine own ship, Erling?"

"It is because I am in your ship that I dare.  Were I in my own, the
laws of hospitality had shut my mouth."

"Knowest thou not," said the King, waxing still more angry at the rebuke
conveyed in this speech, and laying his hand on his sword, "that I have
power to shut thy mouth now and for ever?"

"It may be so, and it may be not so," replied Erling, stepping back, and
laying his hand on the hilt of his own weapon.

At this the King laughed sarcastically.  "And if," said he, "thou hadst
the power and skill to overcome my feeble arm, hast thou the folly to
think that ye could clear the Dragon of all her men?"

Erling replied: "The remembrance, King Harald, of the way in which I
treated some of thy men in the woods not long ago, inclines me to
believe that I could give them some trouble to slay me, and the thought
of that transaction induced me, before I came hither, to make such
arrangements that at all events my fall should not go unavenged."

For a moment or two the King's countenance lowered ferociously on the
youth, and he ground his teeth together as if unable to restrain his
passion; but suddenly he uttered a short laugh, and said--

"Truly thou shouldst have been styled prudent as well as bold.  But go,
I will take counsel with others, and perhaps thou shalt hear again of
this matter."

Our hero retired immediately, but he observed in passing that Hake was
summoned to attend the King, and that another man stepped into the boat
to row him to his own ship.

"Is all well?" growled the rich voice of old Guttorm as he passed the
vessel of that worthy.

Erling told the rower to stop, and, glancing up, beheld the stern yet
good-humoured visage of his bluff friend looking over the rows of bright
shields that hung on the bulwarks.

"All is well," replied Erling.

"It is well for the King that it is so," rejoined Guttorm, "for my hand
was itching to give him a taste of our northern metal.  Assuredly, if a
mouse had but squeaked on board the Dragon, I had deemed it sufficient
ground on which to have founded an immediate onslaught.  But get thee to
bed, Erling, and let me advise thee to sleep with thy windward eye
open."

"Trust me," said Erling, with a laugh, as he pushed off; "I will not
sleep with both eyes shut to-night!"

Getting on board his own ship, Erling said to his foot-boy--

"I will not sleep in my bed to-night, for I suspect there may be
treachery abroad.  Thou shalt keep watch, therefore, in case anything
may happen in the night; and if thou shalt see me strive with anyone, do
not alarm the men.  Meanwhile go thou and fetch me a billet of wood, and
let it be a large one."

The boy quickly brought from the hold one of the largest billets of wood
he could find, and gave it to his master, who laid it in his own bed,
which was under a small tent spread over the aft part of the vessel,
close to the poop.  Having covered it up carefully, he sent the boy
forward, and went himself to lie down elsewhere.

At midnight a boat was rowed stealthily alongside.  It was guided by one
man, and moved so silently that the lightest sleeper on board could not
have been awakened by it.  The man stepped on board; lifted up the cloth
of the tent over the bulwarks; looked cautiously all round him, and then
went up and struck in Erling's bed with a great axe, so that it stuck
fast in the billet of wood.  Next instant the man felt his neck in a
grip like that of an iron vice, and his face was thrust upon the ground
and held there, while a heavy knee pressed into the small of his back,
so that he was utterly unable to rise.

Erling's foot-boy saw the whole of this, and heard what followed, for
the curtain of the tent was raised; but he moved neither hand nor foot,
though he held a spear ready for instant action if required.

"It ill becomes thee, Hake," said Erling, "to seek my life a second
time, after making such poor work of it the first.  What! wilt thou not
lie quiet?"

While he was speaking the berserk struggled with the fury of a madman to
free himself, but Erling's grip (perhaps his own wisdom also!) prevented
him from shouting, and Erling's knee prevented the struggles from making
much noise.  Finding, however, that he would not be quiet, our hero
tightened the pressure of his left hand until the tongue and eyes of the
berserk began to protrude, and his face to get black, while with his
right hand he drew his knife, and ran the point of it about a quarter of
an inch into the fleshy part of Hake's back.  The effect was
instantaneous!  Hake could face danger and death bravely, and could hurl
defiance at his foe with the best, when on his legs; but when he felt
the point of the cold steel, and knew that the smallest impulse would
cause it to find a warm bed in his heart, his fury vanished.  Brave and
bold though he was, and a berserk to boot, he sank quietly down, and lay
perfectly still!

Erling at once relaxed the pressure of his fingers, and allowed Hake to
breathe, but he let the point of the knife remain, that it might refresh
his memory, while he read him a lesson:--

"Now, Hake, let me tell thee that thou richly deservest to lose thy
life, for twice hast thou sought to take mine in an unfair way, and once
have I spared thine.  However, thou art but a tool after all, so I will
spare it again--and I do it the more readily that I wish thee to convey
a message to thy master, King Harald, who, I doubt not, has sent thee on
this foul errand."

Erling here signalled to his foot-boy, whom he directed to bind Hake's
arms securely behind his back.  This having been done, Erling suffered
him to rise and stand before him.

"See now," he said, taking a silver ring from his finger, "knowest thou
this ring, Hake?  Ah, I see by thy look that thou dost.  Well, I will
return it to thee and claim mine own."

He turned the berserk round, took off the gold ring which he had placed
on his finger on the day of the fight and put the silver one in its
place.

"By these tokens," said he, "thou mayest know who it was that cared for
thee in the wood after the fight, and restored thy consciousness,
instead of cutting off thy head, as he might easily have done.  I know
not why I did it, Hake, save that the fancy seized me, for thou art an
undeserving dog.  But now we will take thee back to thy master, and as
our message can be conveyed without the use of speech, we will bind up
thy mouth."

So saying, Erling gagged the berserk (who looked dreadfully sulky) with
a strip of sailcloth.  Then he made him sit down, and tied his legs
together with a piece of rope, after which he lifted him in his arms to
the side of the ship and laid him down.

"Go fetch me a stout carle," he said to the foot-boy, who went forward
and immediately returned with a strapping man-at-arms.

The man looked surprised, but asked no questions, as Erling directed him
in a low tone to assist in lifting the prisoner into the boat as quietly
as possible.  Then they placed the lump of wood with the axe sticking in
it beside him.  This accomplished, they rowed silently to the side of
the Dragon, where a sentinel demanded what they wanted.

"We bring a prisoner to King Harald," answered Erling.  "We have him
here tied hand and foot."

"Who is he?" asked the sentinel; for there was not so much light as is
usual at midnight of that time of the year, owing to a mist on the sea.

"Thou shalt see when he is aboard."

"Hoist him up, then," said the man, Erling and his carle raised Hake
