overboard.

"Let her away," cried the captain quickly.

The steersman obeyed; the ship fell off, and again bounded on her mad
course like a wild horse set free.

"It's of no use, sir," said the mate, as the captain leaped towards the
wheel, which the other had already gained; "no boat could live in that
sea for a moment.  The poor fellow's gone by this time.  He must be more
than half-a-mile astern already."

"I know it," returned the captain, in a deep sad voice.  "Get these
masts down, Mr Millons, and see that everything is made fast.  Who is
it, did you say?"

"The men can't tell, sir; one of 'em told me 'e thinks it was young
Boswell.  It was too dark to see 'is face, but 'is figure was that of a
stout young fellow."

"A stout young fellow," muttered the captain, as the mate hurried
forward.  "Can it have been Glynn?"  His heart sank within him at the
thought, and he would have given worlds at that moment, had he possessed
them, to have heard the voice of our hero, whom, almost unwittingly, he
had begun to love with all the affection of a father.  While he stood
gazing up at the rigging, attempting to pierce the thick darkness, he
felt his sleeve plucked, and, looking down, observed Ailie at his side.

"My child," he cried, grasping her by the arm convulsively, "_you_ here!
How came you to leave your cabin, dear?  Go down, go down; you don't
know the danger you run.  Stay--I will help you.  If one of those seas
comes on board it would carry you overboard like a fleck of foam."

"I didn't know there was much danger, papa.  Glynn told me there
wasn't," she replied, as her father sprang with her to the
companion-ladder.

"How? when? where, child?  Did Glynn speak to you within the last ten
minutes?"

"Yes; he looked down the hatch just as I was coming up, and told me not
to be afraid, and said I must go below, and not think of coming on deck;
but I heard a shriek, papa, and feared something had happened, so I came
to ask what it was.  I hope no one is hurt."

"My darling Ailie," replied the captain, in an agitated voice, "go down
to your berth, and pray for us just now.  There is not _much_ danger;
but in all times of danger, whether great or slight, we should pray to
Our Father in Heaven, for we never know what a day or an hour may bring
forth.  I will speak to you about everything to-morrow; to-night I must
be on deck."

He kissed her forehead, pushed her gently into the cabin, shut the door,
and, coming on deck, fastened the companion-hatch firmly down.

In a short time the ship was prepared to face the worst.  The topsails
were close-reefed; the topgallant-masts sent down on deck; the spanker
and jib were furled, and, soon after, the mainsail and foresail were
also furled.  The boats were taken in and secured on deck, and the ship
went a little more easily through the raging sea; but as the violence of
the gale increased, sail had to be further reduced, and at
last everything was taken in except the main spencer and
foretopmast-staysail.

"I wouldn't mind this much," said the captain, as he and the first mate
stood close to the binnacle, "if I only knew our exact position.  But
we've not had an observation for several days, and I don't feel sure of
our whereabouts.  There are some nasty coral reefs in these seas.  Did
you find out who the poor fellow is yet?"

"It's young Boswell, I fear, Mr Markham is mustering the men just now,
sir."

As he spoke, the second mate came aft and confirmed their fears.  The
man who had thus been summoned in a moment, without warning, into the
presence of his Maker, had been a quiet, modest youth, and a favourite
with every one on board.  At any other time his death would have been
deeply felt; but in the midst of that terrible storm the men had no time
to think.  Indeed, they could not realise the fact that their shipmate
was really gone.

"Mr Markham," said the captain, as the second mate turned away, "send a
hand in to the chains to heave the lead.  I don't feel at all easy in my
mind, so near these shoals as we must be just now."

While the order was being obeyed the storm became fiercer and more
furious.  Bright gleams of lightning flashed repeatedly across the sky,
lighting up the scene as if with brightest moonlight, and revealing the
horrid turmoil of the raging sea in which the ship now laboured heavily.
The rapidity with which the thunder followed the lightning showed how
near to them was the dangerous and subtle fluid; and the crashing,
bursting reports that shook the ship from stem to stern gave the
impression that mountains were being dashed to atoms against each other
in the air.

All the sails still exposed to the fury of the gale were blown to
shreds; the foretopmast and the jib-boom were carried away along with
them and the _Red Eric_ was driven at last before the wind under bare
poles.  The crew remained firm in the midst of this awful scene; each
man stood at his post, holding on by any fixed object that chanced to be
within his reach, and held himself ready to spring to obey every order.
No voice could be heard in the midst of the howling winds, the lashing
sea, and the rending sky.  Commands were given by signs as well as
possible, during the flashes of lightning; but little or nothing
remained to be done.  Captain Dunning had done all that a man thoroughly
acquainted with his duties could accomplish to put his ship in the best
condition to do battle with the storm, and he now felt that the issue
remained in the hands of Him who formed the warring elements, and whose
will alone could check their angry strife.

During one of the vivid flashes of lightning the captain observed Glynn
Proctor standing near the starboard gangway, and, waiting for the next
flash, he made a signal to him to come to the spot where he stood.
Glynn understood it, and in a few seconds was at his commander's side.

"Glynn," my boy, said the latter, "you won't be wanted on deck for some
time.  There's little to be done now.  Go down and see what Ailie's
about, poor thing.  She'll need a little comfort.  Say I sent you."

Without other reply than a nod of the head, Glynn sprang to the
companion-hatch, followed by the captain, who undid the fastenings to
let him down and refastened them immediately, for the sea was washing
over the stern continually.

Glynn found the child on her knees in the cabin with her face buried in
the cushions of one of the sofas.  He sat down beside her and waited
until she should have finished her prayer; but as she did not move for
some time he laid his hand gently on her shoulder.  She looked up with a
happy smile on her face.

"Oh, Glynn, is that you?  I'm so glad," she said, rising, and sitting
down beside him.

"Your father sent me down to comfort you, my pet," said Glynn, taking
her hand in his and drawing her towards him.

"I have got comfort already," replied the child; "I'm so very happy,
now."

"How so, Ailie? who has been with you?"

"God has been with me.  You told me, Glynn, that there wasn't much
danger, but I felt sure that there was.  Oh!  I never heard such
terrible noises, and this dreadful tossing is worse than ever I felt
it--a great deal.  So I went down on my knees and prayed that God, for
Christ's sake would save us.  I felt very frightened, Glynn.  You can't
think how my heart beat every time the thunder burst over us.  But
suddenly--I don't know how it was--the words I used to read at home so
often with my dear aunts came into my mind; you know them, Glynn, `Call
upon Me in the time of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt
glorify Me.'  I don't know where I read them.  I forget the place in the
Bible now; but when I thought of them I felt much less frightened.  Do
you think it was the Holy Spirit who put them into my mind?  My aunts
used to tell me that all my _good_ thoughts were given to me by the Holy
Spirit.  Then I remembered the words of Jesus, `I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee,' and I felt so happy after that.  It was just before
you came down.  I _think_ we shall not be lost.  God would not make me
feel so happy if we were going to be lost, would He?"

"I think not, Ailie," replied Glynn, whose conscience reproached him for
his ignorance of the passages in God's word referred to by his
companion, and who felt that he was receiving rather than administering
comfort.  "When I came down I did not very well know how I should
comfort you, for this is certainly the most tremendous gale I ever saw,
but somehow I feel as if we were in less danger now.  I wish I knew more
of the Bible, Ailie.  I'm ashamed to say I seldom look at it."

"Oh, that's a pity, isn't it, Glynn?" said Ailie, with earnest concern
expressed in her countenance, for she regarded her companion's ignorance
as a great misfortune; it never occurred to her that it was a sin.  "But
it's very easy to learn it," she added with an eager look.  "If you come
to me here every day we can read it together.  I would like to have you
hear me say it off, and then I would hear you."

Before he could reply the vessel received a tremendous shock which
caused her to quiver from stem to stern.

"She must have been struck by lightning," cried Glynn, starting up and
hurrying towards the door.  Ailie's frightened look returned for a few
minutes, but she did not tremble as she had done before.

Just as Glynn reached the top of the ladder the hatch was opened and the
captain thrust in his head.

"Glynn, my boy," said he, in a quick, firm tone, "we are ashore.
Perhaps we shall go to pieces in a few minutes.  God knows.  May He in
His mercy spare us.  You cannot do much on deck.  Ailie must be looked
after till I come down for her.  Glynn, _I depend upon you_."

These words were uttered hurriedly, and the hatch was shut immediately
after.  It is impossible to describe accurately the conflicting feelings
that agitated the breast of the young sailor as he descended again to
the cabin.  He felt gratified at the trust placed in him by the captain,
and his love for the little girl would at any time have made the post of
protector to her an agreeable one; but the idea that the ship had struck
the rocks, and that his shipmates on deck were struggling perhaps for
their lives while he was sitting idly in the cabin, was most trying and
distressing to one of his ardent and energetic temperament.  He was not,
however, kept long in suspense.

Scarcely had he regained the cabin when the ship again struck with
terrific violence, and he knew by the rending crash overhead that one or
more of the masts had gone over the side.  The ship at the same moment
slewed round and was thrown on her beam-ends.  So quickly did this occur
that Glynn had barely time to seize Ailie in his arms and save her from
being dashed against the bulkhead.

The vessel rose again on the next wave, and was hurled on the rocks with
such violence that every one on board expected her to go to pieces
immediately.  At the same time the cabin windows were dashed in, and the
cabin itself was flooded with water.  Glynn was washed twice across the
cabin and thrown violently against the ship's sides, but he succeeded in
keeping a firm hold of his little charge and in protecting her from
injury.

"Hallo, Glynn!" shouted the captain, as he opened the companion-hatch,
"come on deck, quick! bring her with you!"

Glynn hurried up and placed the child in her father's arms.

The scene that presented itself to him on gaining the deck was indeed
appalling.  The first grey streak of dawn faintly lighted up the sky,
just affording sufficient light to exhibit the complete wreck of
everything on deck, and the black froth-capped tumult of the surrounding
billows.  The rocks on which they had struck could not be discerned in
the gloom, but the white breakers ahead showed too clearly where they
were.  The three masts had gone over the side one after another, leaving
only the stumps of each standing.  Everything above board--boats,
binnacle, and part of the bulwarks--had been washed away.  The crew were
clinging to the belaying-pins and to such parts of the wreck as seemed
likely to hold together longest.  It seemed to poor Ailie, as she clung
to her father's neck that she had been transported to some far-distant
and dreadful scene, for scarcely a single familiar object remained by
which her ocean home, the _Red Eric_, could be recognised.

But Ailie had neither desire nor opportunity to remark on this
tremendous change.  Every successive billow raised the doomed vessel,
and let her fall with heavy violence on the rocks.  Her stout frame
trembled under each shock, as if she were endued with life, and shrank
affrighted from her impending fate; and it was as much as the captain
could do to maintain his hold of the weather-bulwarks and of Ailie at
the same time.  Indeed, he could not have done it at all had not Glynn
stood by and assisted him to the best of his ability.

"It won't last long, lad," said the captain, as a larger wave than usual
lifted the shattered hull and dashed it down on the rocks, washing the
deck from stern to stem, and for a few seconds burying the whole crew
under water.  "May the Almighty have mercy on us; no ship can stand this
long."

"Perhaps the tide is falling," suggested Glynn, in an encouraging voice,
"and I think I see something like a shore ahead.  It will be daylight in
half-an-hour or less."

The captain shook his head.  "There's little or no tide here to rise or
fall, I fear.  Before half-an-hour we shall--"

He did not finish the sentence, but looking at Ailie with a gaze of
agony, he pressed her more closely to his breast.

"I think we shall be saved," whispered the child, twining her arms more
closely round her father's neck, and laying her wet cheek against his.

Just then Tim Rokens crept aft, and said that he saw a low sandy island
ahead, and a rocky point jutting out from it close to the bows of the
ship.  He suggested that a rope might be got ashore when it became a
little lighter.

Phil Briant came aft to make the same suggestion, not knowing that
Rokens had preceded him.  In fact, the men had been consulting as to the
possibility of accomplishing this object, but when they looked at the
fearful breakers that boiled in white foam between the ship's bow and
the rocky point, their hearts failed them, and no one was found to
volunteer for the dangerous service.

"Is any one inclined to try it?" inquired the captain.  "There's niver a
wan of us but 'ud try it, cap'en, _if you gives the order_," answered
Briant.

The captain hesitated.  He felt disinclined to order any man to expose
himself to such imminent danger; yet the safety of the whole crew might
depend on a rope being connected with the shore.  Before he could make
up his mind, Glynn, who saw what was passing in his mind,
exclaimed--"I'll do it, captain;" and instantly quitting his position,
hurried forward as fast as circumstances would permit.

The task which Glynn had undertaken to perform turned out to be more
dangerous and difficult than at first he had anticipated.  When he stood
at the lee bow, fastening a small cord round his waist, and looking at
the turmoil of water into which he was about to plunge, his heart
well-nigh failed him, and he felt a sensation of regret that he had
undertaken what seemed now an impossibility.  He did not wonder that the
men had one and all shrunk from the attempt.  But he had made up his
mind to do it.  Moreover, he had _said_ he would do it, and feeling that
he imperilled his life in a good cause, he set his face as a flint to
the accomplishment of his purpose.

Well was it for Glynn Proctor that day that in early boyhood he had
learned to swim, and had become so expert in the water as to be able to
beat all his young companions!

He noticed, on looking narrowly at the foaming surge through which he
must pass in order to gain the rocky point, that many of the submerged
rocks showed their tops above the flood, like black spots, when each
wave retired.  To escape these seemed impossible--to strike one of them
he knew would be almost certain death.

"Don't try it, boy," said several of the men, as they saw Glynn hesitate
when about to spring, and turn an anxious gaze in all directions; "it's
into death ye'll jump, if ye do."

Glynn did not reply; indeed, he did not hear the remark, for at that
moment his whole attention was riveted on a ledge of submerged rock,
which ever and anon showed itself, like the edge of a knife, extending
between the ship and the point.  Along the edge of this the retiring
waves broke in such a manner as to form what appeared to be dead
water-tossed, indeed, and foam-clad, but not apparently in progressive
motion.  Glynn made up his mind in an instant, and just as the first
mate came forward with an order from the captain that he was on no
account to make the rash attempt, he sprang with his utmost force off
the ship's side and sank in the raging sea.

Words cannot describe the intense feeling of suspense with which the men
on the lee bow gazed at the noble-hearted boy as he rose and buffeted
with the angry billows.  Every man held his breath, and those who had
charge of the line stood nervously ready to haul him back at a moment's
notice.

On first rising to the surface he beat the waves as if bewildered, and
while some of the men cried, "He's struck a rock," others shouted to
haul him in; but in another second he got his eyes cleared of spray, and
seeing the ship's hull towering above his head, he turned his back on it
and made for the shore.  At first he went rapidly through the surge, for
his arm was strong and his young heart was brave; but a receding wave
caught him and hurled him some distance out of his course--tossing him
over and over as if he had been a cork.  Again he recovered himself, and
gaining the water beside the ledge, he made several powerful and rapid
strokes, which carried him within a few yards of the point.

"He's safe," said Rokens eagerly.

"No; he's missed it!" cried the second mate, who, with Gurney and Dick
Barnes, payed out the rope.

Glynn had indeed almost caught hold of the farthest-out ledge of the
point when he was drawn back into the surge, and this time dashed
against a rock and partially stunned.  The men had already begun to haul
in on the rope when he recovered, and making a last effort, gained the
rocks, up which he clambered slowly.  When beyond the reach of the waves
he fell down as if he had fainted.

This, however, was not the case; he was merely exhausted, as well as
confused, by the blows he had received on the rocks, and lay for a few
seconds quite still in order to recover strength, during which period of
inaction he thanked God earnestly for his deliverance, and prayed
fervently that he might be made the means of saving his companions in
danger.

After a minute or two he rose, unfastened the line from his waist, and
began to haul it ashore.  To the other end of the small line the men in
the ship attached a thick cable, the end of which was soon pulled up,
and made fast to a large rock.

Tim Rokens was now ordered to proceed to the shore by means of the rope
in order to test it.  After this a sort of swing was constructed, with a
noose which was passed round the cable.  To this a small line was
fastened, and passed to the shore.  On this swinging-seat Ailie was
seated, and hauled to the rocks, Tim Rokens "shinning" along the cable
at the same time to guard her from accident.  Then the men began to
land, and thus, one by one, the crew of the _Red Eric_ reached the shore
in safety; and when all had landed, Captain Dunning, standing in the
