With something of a shudder he looked round his little hut, endeavouring
to remember where he was and to recall recent events.  He was alone at
the time, and he fancied the fight with the robbers and rescue of the
boy must have been all a dream.  The name Cormac, however, puzzled him
not a little.  Many a time before that had he dreamed of vivid scenes
and thrilling incidents, but never in his recollection had he dreamt a
name!

Being thoughtfully disposed, he lay meditating listlessly on this point
in that tranquil frame of mind which often accompanies convalescence,
and had almost fallen asleep when a slight noise outside awoke him.  The
curtain-door was lifted, and Cormac, entering, sat quietly down on a
block of wood beside him.

Bladud became suddenly aware that he had not been dreaming, but he did
not move.  Through his slightly opened eyelids he watched the lad while
he mixed some berries in a cup of water.  As he lay thus silently
observant, he was deeply impressed with the handsome countenance of his
nurse and the graceful movements of his slight figure.

Presently the thought of his disease recurred to him--it was seldom,
indeed, absent from his mind--and the strict injunctions which he had
given to his young companion.

"Boy!--boy!" he cried suddenly, with a vigour that caused the boy to
start off his seat and almost capsize the cup, "did I not forbid you to
enter my hut or to touch me?"

At first Cormac looked alarmed, but, seeing that a decided change for
the better had taken place in his patient, his brow smoothed and he
laughed softly.

"How dared you to disobey me?" exclaimed Bladud again in stern tones.

"I dared because I saw you were unable to prevent me," returned the lad,
with a quiet smile.  "Besides, you were too ill to feed yourself, so, of
course, I had to do it for you.  Do you suppose I am so ungrateful to
the man who saved my life as to stand aside and let him die for want of
a helping hand?  Come, now, be reasonable and let me give you this
drink."  He approached as he spoke.

"Keep off!--keep off, I say," shouted the prince in a voice so resolute
that Cormac was fain to obey.  "It is bad enough to come into my hut,
but you _must not_ touch me!"

"Why not?--I have touched you already."

"How! when?"

"I have lifted your head many a time to enable you to drink when you
could not lift it yourself."

A groan escaped Bladud.

"Then it is too late!  Look at this," he cried, suddenly uncovering his
arm.

"What is that?" asked the boy, with a look of curiosity.

"It is--leprosy!"

"I am not afraid of leprosy!"

"Not afraid of it!" exclaimed the prince, "that may well be, for you
have the air of one who fears nothing; but it will kill you for all
that, unless the Maker of all defends you, for it is a dread--a
terrible--disease that no strength can resist or youth throw off.  It
undermines the health and eats the flesh off the bones, renders those
whom it attacks horrible to look at, and in the end it kills them.  But
it is possible that you may not yet have caught the infection, poor lad,
so you must keep away from me now, and let not a finger touch me
henceforth.  Your life, I say, may depend on it."

"I will obey you as to that," replied Cormac, "now that you are
beginning to recover, but I must still continue to put food and water
within your reach."

"Be it so," rejoined the prince, turning away with a slight groan, for
his excitement not less than the conversation had exhausted him.  In a
few minutes more he was asleep with an expression of profound anxiety
stereotyped on his countenance.

It was not long after the fever left him that returning strength enabled
Bladud to crawl out of his hut, and soon after that he was able to
ramble through the woods in company with Cormac, and with Brownie--that
faithful friend who had lain by his master's side during all his
illness.  The sparkling river gladdened the eyes, and the bracing air
and sunshine strengthened the frame of the prince, so that with the
cheerful conversation of Cormac and the gambols of his canine friend he
was sometimes led to forget for a time the dark cloud that hung over
him.

One day he was struck by something in the appearance of his dog, and,
sitting down on a bank, he called it to him.  After a few minutes'
careful examination he turned to Cormac with a look of deep anxiety.

"My boy," he said, "I verily believe that the hound is smitten with my
own complaint.  In his faithful kindness he has kept by me until I have
infected him."

"That cannot be," returned Cormac, "for, during my rambles alone, when
you were too ill to move, I saw that a great many of the pigs were
affected by a skin disease something like that on the dog, and, you
know, you could not have infected the pigs, for you have never touched
them."

Bladud's anxiety was not removed but deepened when he heard this, for he
called to remembrance the occasion when he had rescued one of the little
pigs and carried it for some distance in his arms.

"And, do you know," continued the lad, "I have observed a strange thing.
I have seen that many of the pigs, affected with this complaint, have
gone down to the place where the hot waters rise, and, after bathing
there, have returned all covered with mud, and these pigs seem to have
got better of the disease, while many of those which did not go down to
the swamp have died."

"That is strange indeed," returned the prince; "I must see to this, for
if these waters cure the pigs, why not the dog?"

"Ay," rejoined Cormac, "and why not the man?"

"Because my disease is well known to be incurable."

"Are you sure?"

"We can hardly be sure of anything, not even of killing our mid-day
meal," rejoined the prince.  "See, there goes a bird that is big enough
to do for both of us.  Try your hand."

"That will be but losing an opportunity, for, as you know, I am not a
good marksman," returned the youth, fitting an arrow quickly to his bow
nevertheless, and discharging it.  Although the bird in question was
large and not far off, the arrow missed the mark, but startled the bird
so that it took wing.  Before it had risen a yard from the ground,
however, an arrow from Bladud's bow transfixed it.

That night, after the bird had been eaten, when Brownie was busy with
the scraps, and Cormac had retired to his couch in the firewood booth,
Bladud lay in his hut unable to sleep because of what he had heard and
seen that day.  "Hope springs eternal in the human breast"--not less in
the olden time than now.  At all events it welled up in the breast of
the royal outcast with unusual power as he waited anxiously for the
first dawn of day.

Up to this time, although living within a few miles of it, the prince
had not paid more than one or two visits to the Hot Swamp, because birds
and other game did not seem to inhabit the place, and the ground was
difficult to traverse.  He had, of course, speculated a good deal as to
the cause of the springs, but had not come to any conclusions more
satisfactory than have been arrived at by the scientific minds of modern
days.  That heat of some sort was the cause applied in one fashion or
another to the water so as to make it almost boil he had no manner of
doubt, but what caused the heat he could not imagine, and it certainly
did not occur to him that the interior of the earth was a lake of fire--
the lovely world of vision being a mere crust.  At least, if it did, he
was never heard to say so.

But now he went down to the swamp with a renewed feeling of hope that
gave fresh impulse to his heart and elasticity to his tread.

Arrived at the place, he observed that numbers of his porcine family
were there before him.  On seeing him they retreated with indignant
grunts--their hasty retreat being accelerated by a few remarks from
Brownie.

Making his way to what he believed to be the main fountain of the
spring, the prince and the dog stood contemplating it for some time.
Then the former dipped his hand in, but instantly withdrew it, for he
found the water to be unbearably hot.  Following its course, however,
and testing it as he went along, he soon came to a spot where the
temperature was sufficiently cool to render it agreeable.  Here, finding
a convenient hole big enough to hold him, he stripped and bathed.
Brownie, who seemed much interested and enlivened by his master's
proceedings, joined him on invitation, and appeared to enjoy himself
greatly.  Thereafter they returned home to breakfast and found Cormac
already up and roasting venison ribs before the fire.

"I thought you were still sound asleep in your hut," he said in
surprise, as they came up, "and I have been doing my best to make little
noise, for fear of awaking you.  Have you been bathing at the springs?
I see the hound's coat is muddy."

"Thanks for your care, Cormac.  Ay, we have indeed had a bath--Brownie
and I.  You see I have taken your advice, and am trying the pigs' cure."

"Right, Bladud.  Wiser men have learned lessons from pigs."

"Are you not presumptuous, my lad, to suggest that there may be a wiser
man than I?"

"Truly, no, for taking the advice of a mere stripling like me, is not a
sign of wisdom in a man."

"In the present case you are perhaps right, but there are some
striplings whose wisdom is sufficient to guide men.  However, I will
hope that even you, with all your presumption, may be right this time."

"That encourages me to offer additional advice," retorted the lad with a
laugh, "namely, that you should devote your attention to these ribs, for
you will find them excellent, and even a full-grown man can hardly fail
to know that without food no cure can be effected."

"You are right, my boy.  Sit down and set me an example, for youth, not
less than age, must be supported."

Without more words they set to work, first throwing a bone to the hound,
in order, as Bladud remarked, that they might all start on equal terms.

From that day the health of the prince began to mend--slowly but
steadily the spot on his arm also began to diminish and to assume a more
healthy aspect.  Brownie also became convalescent, and much to the joy
of Bladud, Cormac showed no symptoms of having caught the disease.
Still, as a precaution, they kept studiously apart, and the prince
observed--and twitted the boy with the fact--that the more he gained in
health, and the less danger there was of infection, the more anxious did
he seem to be to keep away from him!

Things were in this state when, one evening, they received a visit--
which claims a new chapter to itself.

CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

IN WHICH VERY PERPLEXING EVENTS OCCUR.

The visitor referred to in the last chapter was a tall, broad-shouldered
old man with a snowy head of hair and a flowing white beard, a long,
loose black garment, and a stout staff about six feet long.

Cormac had gone to a spring for water at the time he arrived, and Bladud
was lying on his back inside his hut.

"Is any one within?" demanded the stranger, lifting a corner of the
curtain.

"Enter not here, whoever you are!" replied the prince quickly, springing
up--"stay--I will come out to you."

"You are wonderfully inhospitable," returned the stranger, as the prince
issued from the hut and stood up with an inquiring look which suddenly
changed to one of astonishment.

"Beniah!" he exclaimed.

"Even so," replied the Hebrew, holding out his hand, but Bladud drew
back.

"What! will you neither permit me to enter your house nor shake your
hand?  I was not so churlish when you visited my dwelling."

"You know well, old man, that I do not grudge hospitality, but fear to
infect you."

"Yes, I know it well," rejoined the Hebrew, smiling, "and knowing that
you were here, I turned aside on my journey to inquire as to your
welfare."

"I have much to say about my welfare and strange things to tell you, but
first let me know what has brought you to this part of the land--for if
you have turned aside to see me--seeing me has not been your main
object."

"You are right.  Yet it pleases me well to use this opportunity, and to
see by your looks and bearing, that the disease seems to have been
arrested."

"Yes, thanks be to the All-seeing One, I am well, or nearly so.  But
proceed to explain the reason of your journey."

"The cause of it is the unaccountable disappearance of the girl named
Branwen."

"What! she who is the bosom friend of my sister Hafrydda?"

"The same.  She had fled, you may remember, from your father's court for
fear of being compelled to wed with Gunrig, the chief whose crown you
cracked so deftly on the day of your arrival.  She, poor thing, took
refuge at first with me.  I hid her for some time--"

"Then," interrupted the prince, "she must have been hidden in your hut
at the time of my visit!"

"She was.  But that was no business of yours."

"Surely it was, old man, for my father's business is my business."

"Yea, but it was not my business to enlighten you, or the king either,
while I had reason to know that he meant unduly to coerce the maiden.
However, there she was hidden, as I tell you.  Now, you are aware that
Branwen's father Gadarn is a great chief, whose people live far away in
the northern part of Albion.  I bade Branwen remain close in my hut, in
a secret chamber, while I should go and acquaint her father with her
position, and fetch him down with a strong band of his retainers to
rescue her.  You should have seen the visage of Gadarn, when I told him
the news.  A wild boar of the woods could scarce have shown his tusks
more fiercely.  He not only ordered an armed band to get ready,
instantly, but he roused the whole country around, and started off that
same day with all his followers armed to the teeth.  Of course I led
them.  In due course we arrived at my hut, when--lo!  I found that the
bird was flown!"

"I could see by the appearance of things," continued the Hebrew, "that
the foolish girl had left of her own will, for there was no evidence of
violence anywhere--which would doubtless have been the case if robbers
had found her and carried her away, for they would certainly have
carried off some of my goods along with her.  The rage of her father on
making this discovery was terrible.  He threatened at once to cut off my
old head, and even drew his sword with intent to act the part of
executioner.  But I reminded him that if he did so, he would cut off the
only head that knew anything about his daughter, and that I had still
some knowledge regarding her with which he was not acquainted.

"This arrested his hand just in time, for I actually fancied that I had
begun to feel the edge of his sword slicing into my spinal marrow.  When
he had calmed himself enough to listen, I told him that Branwen had
spoken about paying a visit to the Hot Springs--that I knew she was bent
on going there, for some reason that I could not understand, and that I
thought it more than likely she had gone.  `Axe-men, to the front!  Form
long line! hooroo!' yelled the chief--(or something of that sort, for
I'm a man of peace, and don't understand warlike orders), and away went
the whole host at a run, winding through the forest like a great snake;
Gadarn and I leading them, except when the thickets became impenetrable,
and then the axe-men were ordered to the front and soon broke them down.
And so, in course of time, we came within a few miles of the Hot Swamp,
and--and, as I have said, I have been permitted to turn aside to visit
you."

"Truly a strange tale," remarked the prince.  "And is the armed host of
Gadarn actually within a few miles of us?"

"It is; and, to say truth, I have come out to search for you chiefly to
inquire whether you have seen any young woman at all resembling Branwen
during your wanderings in this region?"

The Hebrew looked keenly at the prince as he put this question.

"You forget I have never seen this girl, and, therefore, could not know
her even if I had met her.  But, in truth, I have not seen any woman,
young or old, since I came here.  Nor have I seen any human being save
my mad master, Konar, and a poor youth whom I rescued some time ago from
the hands of robbers.  He has nursed me through a severe illness, and is
even now with me.  But what makes you think that Branwen intended to
come to the Swamp?"

"Because--because, she had reasons of her own.  I do not profess to
understand the workings of a young girl's mind," answered the Hebrew.

"And what will you do," said Bladud, "now that you find she has not been
here?  Methinks that when Gadarn hears of your failure to find her at
