"Oh, I remember!  I remember!  Evie!  The toboggan dashed up the bank,
and she was looking after the girls, and I crashed into her, and she
shrieked.  Oh, Evie!  Evie!  She was hurt, terribly hurt...  She fell
down over me.  Where is she now?  I must go to her--I must go at once!"

The two watchers exchanged a rapid glance, and even in that moment of
agitation Rhoda realised that this was the awakening which they had been
dreading, this the explanation of the universal depression.  A new note
of fear sounded in her voice, as she quavered feebly:

"Is Evie--dead?"

"No, no, nor likely to die!  She has been ill, but is getting better
now.  She is in her own room, with Nurse to look after her.  You cannot
possibly see her yet, for it would be bad for both."

"But you are sure she is better?  You are sure she will get well?  You
are not deceiving me just to keep me quiet?"

"No, indeed.  It is the truth, that she is getting stronger every day.
When I say that, you can believe that I am not deceiving you, can't you,
dear?"

Yes, of course, she was bound to believe it; but in some patients the
faculties seem strangely sharpened in convalescence, and despite her
mother's assurance Rhoda felt convinced that something was being kept
back--that something had happened to Evie which she was not to be
allowed to know.  She asked no more questions, but with sharpened eyes
watched the faces of the visitors who were now allowed to see her, and
found in each the same shade of depression.  She was waiting for an
opportunity, and it came at last on the first day when she was allowed
to sit up, and Miss Bruce came in to pay her usual visit.  No one else
was in the room, and Rhoda looked up into the strong, grave face, and
felt her heart beat rapidly.  Now was her opportunity!  Miss Bruce could
be trusted to answer truthfully, however painful might be the news which
she had to unfold; she was neither hard nor unsympathetic, but she had
the courage of her convictions, and had faced too many disagreeable
duties to understand the meaning of shirking.  Rhoda clasped her hands
tightly together, swallowed nervously once or twice, and began--

"Miss Bruce please--I want to ask you--Mother won't tell me.  Was it my
fault that--Evie was hurt?"

The Principal's face hardened involuntarily.

"What do you think yourself, Rhoda?  Your companions, as you know, are
never ready to speak against a friend, but I have made the strictest
enquiries into this sad affair, and I hear that the girls warned you
that you were attempting a dangerous feat, and implored you to wait
until Miss Everett returned.  You chose to disregard them, and to take
no thought of the risk to others, and--"

Rhoda turned, if possible, a shade paler than before.

"I see!" she said slowly.  "I suppose it's no use saying that I never
thought I could hurt anyone but myself.  I _should_ have thought!
Everyone who knows me, knows that I love Evie, and would rather have
been smashed to pieces than have harmed her in any way."

"Yes, Rhoda!"  Miss Bruce sighed heavily, "that is quite true,
nevertheless it seems to me a little inconsistent that you did not think
more of her feelings.  She was responsible for your safety, and you can
hardly have believed that she would have allowed such a mad trick.
However, I don't wish to reproach you, for your punishment has been
taken out of my hands.  Nothing that I could do or say could affect you
half so much as the thought of the trouble which you have brought upon
your kind, good friend--"

It was coming now; it was coming at last!  Rhoda's heart gave a wild,
fluttering leap; she looked up breathlessly into the unbending face.

"What is the trouble?  I thought she was like me--stunned and shaken.  I
never heard--"

"No, it is not at all the same.  You had a slight concussion, from which
you have now recovered.  Her injury is much more lasting.  Her right
knee-cap was broken, and the doctors fear it will never be quite right
again.  She will probably be lame for life."

Rhoda turned her head aside, and said no word, and Miss Bruce stood
looking down at her in silence also.  The curly hair was fastened back
by a ribbon tied in the nape of the neck, and the profile was still
visible leaning against the pillows.  It was motionless, except for one
tell-tale pulse above the ear which beat furiously up and down, up and
down, beneath the drawn skin.  The Principal looked on that little
pulse, and laid her hand pitifully on the girl's head.

"I will leave you now, Rhoda.  You would rather be alone.  I am truly
sorry for you, but I am powerless to help.  One can only pray that some
good may come out of all this trouble."

She left the room, and Rhoda was alone at last, to face the nightmare
which had come into her life.  Evie _lamed_, and by her doing!  Evie
injured for life by one moment's thoughtlessness--rashness--call it
_wickedness_ if you will--even then it seemed impossible that it should
be _allowed_ to have such lasting consequences!  One moment's
disobedience, and then to suffer for it all her life! to see Evie--dear,
sweet, graceful Evie--limping about, crippled and helpless; to keep ever
in one's mind the memory of that last wild run--the last time Evie would
ever run!  Could retribution possibly have taken to itself a more
torturing form?  She had spoiled Evie's life, and brought misery into a
happy home.

"I could have borne it if it had happened to myself," she gasped.  "But
no!  I must needs get well, and be strong, and rich, and healthy.  I
suppose I shall laugh again some day, and forget, and be happy, while
Evie--.  I am a Cain upon earth, not fit to live!  I wish I could die
this minute, and not have a chance to do any more mischief."

But we cannot die just because we wish to escape the consequences of our
own misdoing; we are obliged to live, and face them day after day.
Crises of suffering, moments of humiliation, stabbing returns of pain
just when we are congratulating ourselves that the worst is over--they
must be lived through, and though we fly to the ends of the world they
will still follow in our wake.

One of the consequences which Rhoda dreaded, and yet longed for in
curious, contradictory fashion, was her first interview with Evie
herself.  What would she say?  What would she do?  Would she be sweet
and self-forgetful as of old, or full of bitter reproaches?  She could
gather no clue from her companions, and her first request to be allowed
to visit the invalid in her room was vetoed on the ground that the
excitement would be bad for herself, and could do Evie no good.  When,
however, she was allowed to walk about, and even entertain her
companions to tea, the first excuse could no longer be offered, and at
last, consent being given, she tapped tremblingly at the well-known
door.  Nurse's voice bade her enter, and she walked forward with her
eyes fixed on the bed on which Evie lay.  Her face was thin and drawn,
and had lost its colour, yet it was none of these things which struck a
chill to Rhoda's heart, but the expression in the eyes themselves--
Evie's sweet brown eyes, which of old had been alight with kindly
humour.  They were blank eyes now, listless eyes, which stared and
stared, yet seemed hardly to see that at which they gazed.  Rhoda stood
before her for a full moment, before the light of recognition showed in
their depths, and even then it was a flicker more than a light, and died
out again with startling rapidity.

The girl stood trembling, the carefully rehearsed words fading away from
memory, for excuses and protestations seemed alike useless in the
presence of that despairing calm.  She looked pitifully into the set
face, and faltered out:

"Evie, I've come...  I wanted to see you!  I have thought about you
every minute of the time...  I could not stay away--"

No answer.  Evie might not have heard her speak, for all signs of
emotion which appeared on her face.  Rhoda waited another moment and
then with a catch in her voice asked another question:

"Is--is your knee very painful, Evie?"

"No!"  Evie winced at that, and turning towards the other side of the
bed, held out her hand appealingly towards the Nurse, who took it in her
own, and frowned a warning to the visitor.

"You had better go now, Miss.  She isn't equal to much yet.  You have
got your way and seen her, so just give her a kiss, and go quietly
away."

Tears of disappointment rushed to Rhoda's eyes, and as she stooped to
give that farewell kiss the salt drops fell upon Evie's cheeks, and
roused her momentarily from her lethargy.

"Poor Rhoda!" she sighed softly.  "Poor little Rhoda!" then her eyes
closed, and Nurse took hold of the girl's arm and led her resolutely
away.

"You look as if you were going to faint yourself, and I can't have two
of you on my hands," she said as soon as the corridor was reached, and
the door closed behind them.  "You'll just come back to your own room,
my dear, and lie down on the bed."

"Nurse--tell me! you have been with her the whole time, and know how she
feels.  Will she ever forgive me?  I never, never thought it would be so
bad as this.  She would not speak to me, would not look at me even."

"She wasn't thinking of you at all, my dear, she was thinking of her
knee.  That is all she can find time to think of just now.  The doctors
kept it from her as long as they could, but she questioned them, and
would not be put off, so they had to tell her the truth.  She knows she
will be lame, and it has pretty well broken her heart.  It's the bread
out of her mouth, poor lamb, and she knows it.  It will be many a long
day before she is herself again."

And this was the end of Rhoda's first meeting with Laura Everett after
her accident!



CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

MRS. CHESTER'S PLAN.

It was many days before Rhoda saw Miss Everett again, but, if she was
not admitted to the sick room, her mother was a frequent and welcome
visitor, and took entire charge of the invalid while the nurse fulfilled
her ordinary duties.  There was little actual nursing to be done, but
the doctors were anxious to prevent solitary repinings, and to do what
was possible to raise the spirits of their patient.  Evie's own mother
had come down for a few days to satisfy herself concerning her
daughter's condition, but had been obliged to hurry back to the
Vicarage, where the invalid sister was growing worse rather than better,
so that her presence could badly be spared.  She was a worn, faded
edition of Evie, and looked so typical of what the girl herself might
now become that Rhoda could not bear to look at her.  The two mothers,
however, became great friends, for they met with a remembrance of
kindness on the one side, and an overwhelming sympathy on the other, and
were drawn together by hours of mutual anxiety.  In each case the worst
dread was unfulfilled, but what remained to be borne required all the
fortitude which they could summon.  The Vicar's wife saw one of the
props of the home disabled for life, and Mrs Chester's kind heart was
wrung with anguish at the thought that her child had been the cause of
so much suffering.  It seemed a strange dispensation of Providence that
she, the main object of whose life had been to help her fellow-
creatures, should have this burden laid upon her; but she bore it
uncomplainingly, striving to cheer the poor woman whose lot was so much
harder than her own.

Before they parted she broached a scheme which she had been planning in
secret, and, having received a willing consent, bided her opportunity to
lay it before the invalid herself.  It came at last one chilly
afternoon, when Evie was laid on a sofa before the fire, as a sign that
convalescence had really begun.  The knee was still bound up, as it was
not proposed that she should attempt to walk until the journey home had
been accomplished, and it was on this subject that Evie made her first
remark.

"I suppose," she began, looking at Mrs Chester with the brown eyes
which had grown so pathetic in their gaze in the last few weeks, "I
suppose I can travel now, as soon as it can be arranged.  I shall have
to be carried about at each of the changes, and it must be planned ahead
in this busy season.  I must speak to Miss Bruce, and ask her what I had
better do."

Mrs Chester bent forward and poked the fire in a flurried, embarrassed
manner; she knitted her brows, and her rosy face grew a shade deeper in
colour.

"Er--yes," she assented vaguely.  "Of course; but Evie, dear, I have
been waiting to talk to you about something which has been very much on
my mind lately.  We are leaving on Thursday, Rhoda and I, and are having
a through carriage and every possible appliance to make the journey
easy, and I thought that it would be so much simpler for you, dear, to
travel with us, and spend a few weeks at the Chase before going home!"

Evie smiled, with the languid courtesy with which an invalid listens to
an impossible proposition.

"It is very kind of you," she said.  "Some day I shall be glad to come,
but not at present, thank you.  I am not well enough to pay visits."

"But my child, it would not be like an ordinary visit; you should do
exactly as you would in your own home--stay in bed, or get up, as you
pleased, and make out your own programme for the day.  You know me now,
and can surely understand that you need feel no ceremony in coming to my
house."

"No, indeed!  You have been so kind to me all this time, that I should
be ungrateful if I did not realise that.  I would rather be with you
than anyone else outside my own family, but--but--" the tears gathered
and rolled down the pale cheeks--"Oh, surely you understand that just
now I want to be at home with my own mother and father!"

"Yes, I do understand, poor dear; it would be unnatural if you felt
anything else; but listen, Evie, it is for your parents' sake, as well
as for your own, that I urge you to come.  You need constant care and
nursing, and cheering up, and it would be very difficult for them to
manage all this just now.  Your mother is overworked as it is, and has
already one invalid on her hands; but if you come to us, the whole
household will be at your service.  My kind old Mary shall be your
nurse, and wait upon you hand and foot.  I will drive you about so that
you can get the air without fatigue, and you shall have your couch
carried into the conservatory off the drawing-room, and lie there among
the flowers which you love so much.  Every comfort that money can buy
shall be yours to help to make you strong again.  I say it in no spirit
of boasting, dear, for we have been poor ourselves, and owe our riches
to no merit of our own.  We look upon them as a trust from God, to be
used for the good of others even more than ourselves, and surely no one
had ever a nearer, stronger claim--"

Her voice broke off tremblingly, and Evie looked at her with a troubled
glance.

"Dear Mrs Chester, you are so good!  It all sounds most attractive and
luxurious, and I am sure you would spoil me with kindness, but--would it
not be rather selfish?  You say mother is overworked, and that is quite
true; but, all the same, she might feel hurt if I chose to go somewhere
else."

"Now, I'll tell you all about it," cried Mrs Chester briskly, scenting
victory in the air, and beginning to smile again in her old cheery
fashion.  "Your mother and I had a talk about it before she left.  She
felt grieved not to have you at home for Christmas, but for your own
sake was most anxious that you should come to us.  She realised that it
would be better for you in every way, and the quickest means to the end
which we all have in view, to make you well and strong again.  She left
it to me to make the suggestion, but you will find that she is quite
willing, even anxious--"

"Yes," said Evie, and lay silently gazing at the heart of the fire.  The
downcast face looked very fair and fragile, but for the moment the old
sweetness was wanting.  The lips were pressed together, the chin was
fixed and stubborn, outward signs of the mental fight which was going on
between the impulse to give way, and a sore, sore feeling of injury
which made it seem impossible to accept a favour from this quarter of
all others.  The elder woman saw these signs, and read their meaning
with painful accuracy, and the exclamation which burst from her lips
startled the invalid by its intensity.

"Oh, my lassie!" she cried.  "Oh, my lassie, be generous!  You have been
sorely tried, and our hearts are broken to think of your trouble, but
don't you see this is the only way in which it is left to us to help?
Sympathy and regret are abstract things, and can do no real good, for,
though they ease our minds, they leave you untouched.  My dear girl, can
you be generous enough to accept help from the hands that have injured
you?  It's a hard thing to ask--I know it is; but I am an old woman, and
I plead with you to give us this opportunity!  Let me be a mother to
you, dear, and ease your recovery in every way that I can.  Money has
great power, and one never realises it more than in time of sickness.  I
can spare you many a pain and discomfort if you will give me the
opportunity, and my poor girl is fretting herself thin by brooding over
the past--it would be new life to her to be allowed to wait upon you!
It's hard for you, dear, I know it's hard!  You would rather cut
yourself adrift from us, and never see us again; but it is in your power
to return good for evil--to lighten our trouble as no one else could do.
Will you come, Evie?"

Evie looked into the quivering face, and her eyes shone--then the kind
arms opened wide and the brown head nestled down on the broad, motherly
shoulder.  There was no need for words, for the answer was given far
more eloquently in look and gesture.

"God bless you, my lassie!" murmured Mrs Chester fondly, and they sat
in silence together, gazing into the fire.  A few tears rose in Evie's
eyes and ran silently down her cheeks, but they were happy tears, with
which were wiped away all remains of bitterness.  There is no truer way
of forgiving our enemies than by consenting to be helped at their hands,
and, if the effort be great, it brings with it an exceeding great
reward.  At the end of ten minutes Evie raised her head from its resting
place and said, in her old, bright voice:

"Shall we ask Rhoda to tea?  It is such a lovely fire, and you brought
in such a bountiful supply of cakes and good things that it seems greedy
to keep them all to myself.  Ask Rhoda to come in and help to make a
cosy little party."

Then, as Mrs Chester stooped to kiss her cheek, she whispered hastily,
"Tell her not to mention the past--never to mention it again!  We will
turn over a new leaf to-day and think only of the future."



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

GOOD-BYE TO HURST MANOR.

The morning of the day dawned on which the invalids were to travel to
Erley Chase, and Rhoda lay awake upon her bed, listening to the echo of
the girls' voices as they sang the morning hymn in the hall below.  Her
heart was softened with a feeling at once of thankfulness and dread--
thankfulness that Evie's life had been spared, and her friendship
renewed, and dread because, she dimly realised, this was the last of the
dear school days as they had been.  Even if she returned after the
holidays, which seemed doubtful, it would be a changed house indeed,
