


CHAPTER FIFTY TWO.

INFLATION AND FAILURE.

At length arrived the hour for making that important experiment--as to
whether their aerial ship would prove herself air-worthy.

All three stood around the spot where the chopped grass and shawl-wool
were to be set on fire.  This fuel itself appeared underneath--in a
little heap lightly laid, and ready for the touch of the tinder.

Karl had a piece of blazing torch in his hand; Caspar held one of the
stay-ropes, to prevent the balloon from rising too rapidly; while
Ossaroo, equipped as if for a journey, stood by the hamper, in
readiness, when the proper time should arrive, to "pack" himself into
it.

Alas! for the frailty of all human foresight!  The most careful
calculations often prove erroneous--not that in the present instance
there was any unforeseen error: for from the very first, Karl had been
distrustful of his data; and they were now to disappoint, rather than
deceive him.  It was not written in the book of destiny that Ossaroo
should ever set foot in that wicker car or ever make an ascent by that
balloon.

The torch was applied to the chopped grass and shawl-wool.  Both blazed
and smoked, and smouldered; and, more being thrown on, the blaze was
kept up continuously.  The heated air ascended through the aperture,
causing the great sphere of stitched skins to swell out to its full
dimensions.

It trembled and rocked from side to side, like some huge monster in
pain.  It rose to the height of a few inches from the ground, sank, and
then rose again, sank once more, and so kept on rising and sinking and
bobbing about, but alas! never exhibiting sufficient ascending power, to
raise the hamper even as high as their heads!

Karl continued to feed the furnace with the chopped grass and poshm, but
all to no purpose.  The air within was sufficiently heated to have
raised it for miles--had they only been as low as the sea-level, and the
balloon constructed of lighter materials.

As it was, all their efforts were in vain.  The gigantic globe could not
be raised above six feet from the ground.  It had not power enough to
carry up a cat--much less a man.  In short, it was a failure--one more
added to the long list of their dark disappointments!

For more than an hour Karl continued to keep his fire ablaze.  He even
tried faggots of the resinous pine: in hopes that by obtaining a greater
strength of caloric he might still succeed in causing the balloon to
soar upward; but there was no perceptible difference in the effect.  It
bobbed about as before, but still obstinately refused to ascend.

At length, with patience exhausted and hopes completely crushed, the
engineer turned away from the machine which he had taken so much pains
in constructing.  For a moment he stood irresolute.  Then heaving a sigh
at the recollection of his wasted labour, with sad, slow step he
departed from the spot.  Caspar soon followed him--fully participating
in the feeling of grievous disappointment.  Ossaroo took leave of the
inflated monster in a different fashion.  Drawing near to it, he stood
for some seconds contemplating it in silence--as if reflecting on the
vast amount of seam he had stitched to no purpose.  Then uttering a
native ejaculation, coupled with a phrase that meant to say, "No good
either for the earth, the water, or the air," he raised his foot, kicked
the balloon in the side--with such violence that the toe of his sandals
burst a hole in the distended eel-skins; and, turning scornfully away,
left the worthless machine to take care of itself.

This task, however, it proved ill adapted to accomplish: for the
disappointed aeronauts had not been gone many minutes from the ground,
when the heated air inside, which had for some time been gradually
growing cooler, reached at length so low a temperature, that the great
sphere began to collapse and settle down upon the embers of the pine
faggots still glowing red underneath.  The consequence was that the
inflammable skins, cords, and woodwork coming in contact with the fire,
began to burn like so much tinder.  The flames ran upward, licking the
oily eel-skins like the tongues of fiery serpents; and when the
_ci-devant_ aeronauts looked back from the door of their hut, they
perceived that the balloon was ablaze!

Had the accident occurred two hours before, they would have looked upon
it as the saddest of calamities.  Now, however, they stood regarding the
burning of that abandoned balloon, with as much indifference as is said
to have been exhibited by Nero, while contemplating the conflagration of
the seven-hilled city!



CHAPTER FIFTY THREE.

ANOTHER SPELL OF DESPAIR.

Never, during all the days of their sojourn in that "Valley of Despond,"
did our adventurers feel more despondence, than on the afternoon that
succeeded the bursting of their great air-bubble--the balloon.  They
felt that in this effort, they had exhausted all their ingenuity; and so
firmly were they convinced of its being the last, that no one thought
about making another.  The spirits of all three were prostrate in the
dust, and seemed at length to have surrendered to despair.

Of course, it was not that sort of despair which takes possession of one
conscious of coming and certain death.  It was far from being so dire as
this; but for all it was a bitter feeling.  They knew they could
continue to live, perhaps as long there, as elsewhere upon the earth;
but what would life be worth to them, cut off from all communication
with the world?--for now, to the fulness of conviction, did they believe
themselves thus isolated.

In disposition not one of the three had the slightest particle of the
hermit.  Not one of them, but would have shuddered at the thought of
becoming a Simon Stylites.  You might suppose that, with books and
Nature to study, Karl could have made shift.  True, with such companions
he might have lived a less irksome life than either of the others; but
even with these to occupy him, it is doubtful whether Karl could have
passed the time; for it is not very certain, that a man--knowing himself
alone in the world, and for ever to be alone--would care either for the
books of men or the book of Nature.

As for Caspar, the thought that their lonely existence was to be
perpetual, was enough at times to send the blood rushing coldly through
his veins.

The Hindoo felt the affliction as much as either of his companions in
misfortune; and sighed as much for his bamboo hut on the hot plains of
Hindostan, as they for their home in the far fatherland of Bavaria.

It is true their situation was not so bad as if each had been left alone
by himself.  Many a poor castaway upon a desert island has been
condemned to a far more unhappy fate.  They knew and acknowledged this.
Each had the other two for companions; but as they reflected thus, they
could not hinder their thoughts from casting forward into the future--
perhaps not distant--when one of them might leave that valley without
the aid of either rope-ladders or balloons; and then another--leaving
the last of the three lonely and forlorn!

With such sad reflections did they pass the evening of that day, and the
morning and evening of that which followed.  They took no heed of time;
and could scarce summon sufficient energy to cook their frugal meals.
The spirit to plan, and the energy to act, seemed both to have departed
from them at once and for ever.

This state of things could not long continue.  As already said, the soul
of man holds within itself a power of resuscitation.  So long as it
continues to live, it may hope to recover from the heaviest blow.
Broken hearts are more apparent than real; and even those that are worst
shattered have their intervals in which they are restored to a perfect
soundness.  The slave in his chains, the prisoner within his dark
dungeon, the castaway on his desert isle, all have their hours of joy--
perhaps as vivid and lasting as those of the king upon his throne, or
the conqueror in his car of triumph.

On earth there is no happiness unmingled with alloy; and, perhaps, there
is no sorrow that may not in time find solace.

On the second clay succeeding their last great disappointment, the
spirits of all three began to revive; and those natural wants--which,
whether we will or not, force themselves upon our attention--commenced
to claim their consideration.

Karl was the first to recognise these necessities.  If they were to live
there for life, he reasoned,--and this seemed no longer a doubtful
supposition,--it would be of no use, giving way to despondency--moping
out their days like mutes at a funeral.  Better far to lead an active
life; and live well too--by providing plenty to eat and plenty to
drink--which with industry they could easily do.  All this might not
make them cheerful; but they would certainly be less a prey to
melancholy while engaged in some active industry, than if they remained
brooding over their fate.

These thoughts, as we have said, arose on the morning of the second day
succeeding that on which the balloon had been abandoned.  Karl gave
words to them, in an attempt to cheer his brother Caspar--who had
relapsed into a state of unusual despondency.  Ossaroo equally required
cheering; and therefore it devolved on the botanist to attempt
enlivening the spirits of his companions.

For a time, he met with very slight success; but gradually the necessity
of action forced itself upon the attention of all--if only to provide
the means to keep them from starving; and without further loss of time,
they resumed the various branches of industry, by which they had
hitherto been enabled to supply their larder.

To Caspar, as before, the chase was entrusted; while Ossaroo attended to
the fishing; as he, better than either of the others, understood the
management of hooks, lines, and nets.

The botanist busied himself in the old way, exploring the valley, in
search of such seeds, plants, and roots, as might be found wholesome for
food--not neglecting others of a medicinal character, that might serve
in case of sickness.  Many such had the young plant-hunter encountered
during his early researches; and had made note of them against the
possibility of their being required.

Fortunately, up to that time there had been no real need for any of the
party to make trial of the natural _Pharmacopoeia_ which the valley
afforded: and it was to be hoped they should never have occasion to test
the virtues of the specifics which the plant-hunter had discovered.
Karl nevertheless collected several kinds; and, after submitting them to
a process necessary for their preservation, had stored them away within
the hut.

Of those vegetable products adapted for food, the chief article obtained
was the nutritive seed yielded by the edible pine (_Pinus Gerardiana_).
The cones of this valuable tree were as large as artichokes; each
yielding several seeds of the size and appearance of pistachio nuts.

The wild cockscomb (_Amaranthus Cruentus_) also furnished a portion of
their supply.  Its seeds when parched, and crushed between two stones,
produced a kind of meal, of which cakes of bread were manufactured by
Ossaroo.  These, although very far inferior to the real home-bake, or
even to the most ordinary production of the bakehouse, were nevertheless
sufficiently palatable to those who had no other bread.

The lake, besides yielding fish to the nets of Ossaroo, also afforded a
supply of vegetables.  On searching it, the botanist discovered several
edible kinds of plants; among others the curious _Trapa bicornis_, or
horned water-nut--known among the natives of the Himalayan countries by
the name _Singara_, and much used by them as an article of wholesome
food.

There was also a splendid water-lily--with very broad leaves and large
flowers of pink and white colour--the seeds and the stalks of which Karl
knew to be edible; as he had read of their being used for this purpose
by the poorer people in the country of Cashmeer.  The lily in question,
viz. the _Nelumbium speciosum_, grows plentifully in the lakes of the
far-famed valley so named.

On first observing this beautiful plant growing luxuriantly, as it was,
in their own little valley lake, Karl took occasion to inform his
brother--Ossaroo at the same time listening attentively to his
statement--of the various uses made of it by the inhabitants of
Cashmeer.  How the boys sailing about in their boats when the day
chances to be very hot, are in the habit of plucking one of its large
shining leaves out of the water, and spreading it over their crowns, to
protect them from the fervid rays of the sun; and how the petiole of the
leaf, being hollow inside, serves them as a tube for drinking out of.
Many such interesting particulars, in regard to the economy of this fine
aquatic plant, did the young botanist communicate to his companions; but
none more interesting than the fact that both its seeds and stalks are
edible: since this promised them additional security against the danger
of running short in their supply of vegetable food.



CHAPTER FIFTY FOUR.

THE BEAN OF PYTHAGORAS.

The discovery of the water-lily was not a thing of recent occurrence.
They had known of its existence before; and more than once had visited
the little embayment in the lake, where it chiefly grew.  In fact, it
had attracted their attention a few days after their first arrival in
the valley--not by its own conspicuousness, for its broad round leaves,
spread horizontally upon the surface, could scarce be seen from the
shore.  Only when its beautiful pink-white flowers were in bloom, could
it be observed at any great distance.

That which had first led them to approach the place where it grew, and
examine the plant, was their having noticed a singular phenomenon
connected with it; and which for awhile had puzzled all three of them to
explain.

The _bed_ of lilies, at that time in full bloom, was visible from the
place where they had originally made their encampment; and every
morning, just after daybreak, and sometimes also during the day, they
were in the habit of seeing some birds disporting themselves near that
place in a singular manner--very singular indeed: since these birds
appeared to _walk upon the water_!

They were tall, long-legged, slender-bodied creatures, and easily
distinguished by both Karl and Caspar, as belonging to the family of
_rallidae_ or water-hens.

There could be no doubt that they were walking on the water--sometimes
slowly, at other times in a quick run--and, what was even more
unaccountable than this, they were seen at times to _stand still upon
the water_!  Ay, and, what might be considered more surprising still,
they performed this aquatic feat _upon only one leg_!

The thing might have been more mysterious, had not Karl from the first
suspected the reason why the laws of specific gravity appeared to be
thus contradicted.  He suspected the existence of some plant, whose
leaves, lying spread on the surface, perhaps offered a footing for the
birds, sufficiently firm to support the weight of their bodies.

The botanist was only reasoning from remembrance.  He had lately read
the account published but a few years before of the discovery of the
gigantic water-lily of tropical America--the _Victoria Regia_--and
remembered how its discoverers had spoken of large birds of the crane
family making their perch upon its huge leaves, and thus supported,
playing about over the surface of the water, as if the firm earth had
been under their feet.

With these facts fresh in his memory, Karl conjectured that the
water-hens seen by him and his companions were supported on a similar
pedestal, and playing themselves on a like platform.  His conjecture
proved correct: for on visiting the place shortly after, the broad
orbicular leaves of the _Nelumbium speciosum_ were perceived--almost as
large as those of their South American congener.

Other interesting points relating to the great lily growing in the
Himalayan lake, Karl had mentioned from time to time to his companions:
for he knew that the _Nelumbium speciosum_ was the celebrated
Pythagorean bean mentioned in the writings of the Greeks--more
especially by Herodotus and Theophrastes.

It is described by these writers as growing plentifully in Egypt; and no
doubt was cultivated in that country in their day; though it is not
known there at the present time.  It is found represented on the
Egyptian sculptures, and so accurately has it been described by the
Greek writers, as to leave no doubt as to the identification of the
species.

It is one of the plants supposed to be the celebrated "lotus" of
antiquity; and this supposition is probable enough: since not only its
succulent stalk, but its seeds or "beans," have been eaten in all times
by the people in whose country it grows.  It is a food that produces a
strengthening effect upon the system; and is also very refreshing in
cases of thirst.  The Chinese call it "Lienwha," and its seeds with thin
slices of its root, mixed with the kernels of apricots and walnuts, and
placed between alternate layers of ice, constituted one of the select
dishes offered by the great mandarins to the British ambassadors on the
visit of the latter to the Celestial Empire.

These people store up the roots of the lienwha for winter use--
preserving them in a pickle of salt and vinegar.  The Japanese also make
use of the plant as an esculent; and it is, moreover, regarded by them
as sacred to their divinities--the images of which are often represented
seated upon its large leaves.

The flowers of the _Nelumbium speciosum_ when in full bloom, give out a
most fragrant odour--somewhat resembling that of anise; while the seeds,
shaped like acorns, have a flavour equal in richness and delicacy to
that of the finest almonds.



CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE.

AN AQUATIC HARVEST.

It was not upon that occasion that Karl communicated to his companions
all these interesting facts in relation to the great lily.  Many of them
he had made known long before--especially that the seeds of the plant
were eatable; and both Caspar and Ossaroo had often proved to their own
satisfaction that they were something more than eatable--in short, a
great delicacy.

It was from a knowledge of this fact that the thoughts of all three were
now turned upon the lilies--whose huge roseate corollas, no longer seen
glistening above the surface of the water, proclaimed that the "beans"
were ripe, and ready for "shelling."

The three were about starting from the hut to reap this aquatic
harvest--which, judging from the quantity of seed-pods that appeared
above the surface, promised to be abundant.

Each had provided himself with a rush basket--which the shikaree had
woven, during the long winter nights, for other purposes; but as they
were of just the size and shape to hold the Pythagorean beans they were
now to be employed in that capacity.

Both Karl and Caspar had rolled up their trowsers to mid-thigh; so as
not to wet them while wading among the lilies; but Ossaroo, not being
provided with any nether garment entitled to the name of trowsers, had
simply tucked up the skirt of his cotton tunic, making it fast under his
girdle.

In this guise all three proceeded round the shore of the lake, to that
side where they would be nearest the bed of lilies.  The water-hens,
seeing them make their approach, rose from their perch upon the leaves,
and fluttered off to seek a more secure shelter among the sedge.

The aquatic gleaners at once waded in; and commenced picking off the
pods, and shelling them into their rush baskets.  They had been there
before, and knew there was no danger in the depth of the water.

They had nearly filled their respective sacks with the Pythagorean
beans, and were meditating a return to dry land, when a dark shadow
passing over the tranquil surface of the lake--closely followed by
another of similar size and shape--attracted their attention.

All three saw the shadows at the same instant of time; and all
simultaneously looked up to ascertain what sort of creatures were
casting them.  In the sky above they beheld a spectacle, calculated to
inspire them with feelings of a strange interest.

Right above the lake, and also over their heads, a brace of large birds
was circling in the air.  Each was borne up by a pair of huge wings full
five yards from tip to tip; while from the body, between, a neck of
enormous length was extended horizontally--prolonged into a
tapering-pointed beak, in shape like the seed-pistil of a pelargonium.

Their beaks might well have been compared to the pistil of a
pelargonium; or rather the latter should be assimilated to them; since
it is from this species of birds, the flower has derived its botanical
cognomen.

The birds were _storks_.  Not the ordinary _Ciconia_, that makes its
home among the Hollanders--or finds a still more welcome hospitality on
the roof-tree of the Hungarian by the plains of the _Puszta_--but a
stork of far grander dimensions; in short, a stork that is the _tallest_
of his tribe--the _Adjutant_.

On looking up, Karl recognised the species; so did Caspar, and at a
glance.  It required no lengthened scrutiny--no profound knowledge of
natural history, to identify the noted _adjutant_.  It only needed to
have seen him before either in _propria persona_, or in a picture; but
both brothers had seen specimens of the bird, in full flesh and feather,
on the plains of India--in the environs of Calcutta itself.

As to the shikaree, was it likely he should be mistaken about the
character of those winged giants--those tall scavengers he had seen
thousands of times stalking pompously along the sandy shores of the
sacred Ganges?  It was not possible for him, to have a doubt about the
identity of the birds, who were now throwing their shadows over that
lone lake of the Himalayas.  He had no doubt.  The very certainty that
the birds above him were the gigantic cranes of the Ganges--the sacred
birds of Brahma--caused him to utter a sort of frenzied shout, and at
the same time, dropping his "sack of beans" into the water!

He needed not to look at the colour of the birds, to note that they were
brown black above, and white underneath.  The naked vulture neck with
its pouch-like appendage of brick-red hue; the silken feathers of bluish
white under the tail--those precious plumes well-known and worn by the
ladies of many lands under the appellation of _marabout feathers_--all
