The strangers lowered their fire-arms, as if half-ashamed at being
surprised into a state of alarm by two men.

"Who said we were `afraid,' young man?" continued the first speaker,
riding up with his comrades, and eyeing the travellers narrowly.  "Where
have you come from, and how comes it that your clothes are torn, and
your faces covered with blood?"

The party of horsemen edged forward, as he spoke, in such a manner as to
surround the two friends, but Ned, although he observed the movement,
was unconcerned, as, from the looks of the party, he felt certain they
were good men and true.

"You are a close interrogator for a stranger," he replied.  "Perhaps you
will inform me where _you_ have come from, and what is your errand in
these lonesome places at this hour of the night?"

"I'll tell ye wot it is, stranger," answered another of the party--a
big, insolent sort of fellow--"we're out after a band o' scoundrels that
have infested them parts for a long time, an' it strikes me you know
more about them than we do."

"Perhaps you are right," answered Ned.

"Mayhap they're not _very_, far off from where we're standin',"
continued the man, laying his hand on Tom Collins's shoulder.  Tom gave
him a look that induced him to remove the hand.

"Right again," rejoined Ned, with a smile.  "I know where the villains
are, and I'll lead you to them in an hour, if you choose to follow me."

The men looked at each other in surprise.

"You'll not object to some o' us ridin' before, an' some behind ye!"
said the second speaker, "jist by way o' preventin' yer hosses from
runnin' away; they looks a little skeary."

"By no means," answered Ned, "lead on; but keep off the edge of the
track till I call a halt."

"Why so, stranger?"

"Never mind, but do as I bid you."

The tone in which this was said effectually silenced the man, and during
the ride no further questions were asked.  About a quarter-of-an-hour
afterwards the moon rose, and they advanced at such a rapid pace that in
a short time they were close upon the spot where the battle had taken
place.  Just before reaching it Ned called a halt, and directed the
party to dismount and follow him on foot.  Although a good deal
surprised, they obeyed without question; for our hero possessed, in an
eminent degree, the power of constituting himself a leader among those
with whom he chanced to come into contact.

Fastening his horse to a tree, Ned led the men forward a hundred yards.

"Are these the men you search for!" he inquired.

"They are, sir," exclaimed one of the party, in surprise, as he stooped
to examine the features of the robbers, who lay where they had been
left.

"Halloo!" exclaimed Tom Collins, "I say, the biggest fellow's gone!
Didn't we lay him hereabouts?"

"Eh! dear me, yes; why, this is the very spot, I do believe--"

All further remarks were checked at that moment by the sound of horses'
hoofs approaching, and, almost before any one could turn round, a
horseman came thundering down the pass at full gallop.  Uttering a
savage laugh of derision, he discharged his pistol full into the centre
of the knot of men as he passed, and, in another moment, was out of
sight.  Several of the onlookers had presence of mind enough to draw
their pistols and fire at the retreating figure, but apparently without
effect.

"It's him!" cried Tom Collins; "and he's mounted on your horse, Ned."

"After him, lads!" shouted Ned, as he ran back towards the place where
the horses were fastened.  "Whose is the best horse?"

"Hold on, stranger," said one of the men, as he ran up to Ned, "ye may
save yer wind.  None o' the horses can overtake your one, I guess.  I
was lookin' at him as we came along.  It would only be losin' time for
nothin', an' he's miles ahead by this time."

Ned Sinton felt that the man's remarks were too true, so he returned to
the spot where the remaining robbers lay, and found that the miners had
cut their fastenings, and were busily engaged in rebinding their hands
behind them, preparatory to carrying them back to their settlement.  It
was discovered that the lashings of one of the men had been partly
severed with a knife, and, as he could not have done it himself, it was
plain that the robber who had escaped must have done it, and that the
opportune arrival of the party had prevented him from accomplishing his
purpose.  How the man had broken his own bonds was a mystery that could
not now be solved, but it was conjectured they must have been too weak,
and that he had burst them by main strength.

Another discovery was now made, namely, that one of the three robbers
secured was no other than Black Jim himself; the darkness of the night
had prevented Ned and Tom from making this discovery during the fight.

In less time than we have taken to describe it, the robbers were
secured, and each was mounted behind one of his captors.

"Ain't you goin' with us?" inquired one of the men, observing that Ned
Sinton stood leaning on his rifle, as if he meant to remain behind.

"No," answered Ned; "my companion and I have travelled far to-day,
besides fighting a somewhat tough battle; we mean to camp here for the
night, and shall proceed to your settlement to-morrow."

The men endeavoured to dissuade them from their purpose, but they were
both fatigued, and persisted in their determination.  The impression
they had made, however, on their new friends was so favourable, that one
of their number, a Yankee, offered the loan of his horse to Ned, an
offer which the latter accepted thankfully, promising to return it safe
and sound early on the following day.  Five minutes later the sound of
the retreating hoofs died away, and the travellers stood silently side
by side in the gloomy ravine.

For a few minutes neither spoke; then Ned heaved a sigh, and, looking in
his companion's face with a serio-comically-sad expression, said:

"It may not, perhaps, have occurred to you, Tom, but are you aware that
we are a couple of beggars?"

"If you use the term in its slang sense, and mean to insinuate that we
are a couple of unfortunate beggars, I agree with you."

"Well, I've no objection," rejoined Ned, "to your taking my words in
that sense; but I mean to say that, over and above that, we are real,
veritable, _bona fide_ beggars, inasmuch as we have not a sixpence in
the world."

Tom Collins's visage grew exceedingly long.

"Our united purse," pursued Ned, "hung, as you are aware, at my
saddle-bow, and yon unmitigated villain who appropriated my good steed,
is now in possession of all our hard-earned gold!"

Tom's countenance became preternaturally grave, but he did not venture
to speak.

"Now," continued Ned, forcing a smile, "there is nothing for it but to
make for the nearest diggings, commence work again, and postpone our
travels to a future and more convenient season.  We may laugh at it as
we please, my dear fellow, but there's no denying that we are in what
the Yankees would call an `oncommon fix.'"

Ned's remark as to "laughing at it," was altogether uncalled for and
inappropriate, for his own smile might have been more correctly termed a
grin, and nothing was further from Tom Collins's thoughts at that moment
than laughing.

"Are the victuals gone too?" inquired Ned, hastily.

Both turned their eyes towards Tom Collins's horse, which grazed hard
by, and both heaved a sigh of relief on observing that the saddle-bags
were safe.  This was a small drop of comfort in their otherwise bitter
cup, and they made the most of it.  Each, as if by a common impulse,
pretending that he cared very little about the matter, and assuming that
the other stood in need of being cheered and comforted, went about the
preparations for encamping with a degree of reckless joviality that
insensibly raised their spirits, not only up to but considerably above
the natural level; and when at last they had spread out their viands,
and lighted their fire and their pipes, they were, according to Tom's
assertion, "happy as kings."

The choosing of a spot to encamp on formed the subject of an amicable
dispute.

"I recommend the level turf under this oak," said Ned, pointing to a
huge old tree, whose gnarled limbs covered a wide space of level sward.

"It's too low," objected Tom, (Tom could always object--a quality which,
while it acted like an agreeable dash of cayenne thrown into the
conversation of some of his friends, proved to be sparks applied to
gunpowder in that of others;) "it's too low, and, doubtless, moist.  I
think that yonder pine, with its spreading branches and sweet-smelling
cones, and carpet of moss below, is a much more fitting spot."

"Now, who is to decide the question if I don't give in, Tom?  For I
assume, of course, that you will never give in."

At that moment an accident occurred which decided the question for them.
It frequently happens that some of the huge, heavy branches of the oaks
in America become so thoroughly dried and brittle by the intense heat of
summer, that they snap off without a moment's warning, often when there
is not a breath of air sufficient to stir a leaf.  This propensity is so
well-known to Californian travellers that they are somewhat careful in
selecting their camping ground, yet, despite all their care, an
occasional life is lost by the falling of such branches.

An event of this kind occurred at the present time.  The words had
barely passed Ned's lips, when a large limb of the oak beside which they
stood snapt off with a loud report, and fell with a crash to the ground.

"That settles it," said Tom, somewhat seriously, as he led his horse
towards the pine-tree, and proceeded to spread his blanket beneath its
branches.

In a few minutes the bright flame of their camp-fire threw a lurid glare
on the trees and projecting cliffs of the wild pass, while they cooked
and ate their frugal meal of jerked beef and biscuit.  They conversed
little during the repast or after it, for drowsiness began to steal over
them, and it was not long before they laid their heads, side by side, on
their saddles, and murmuring "Good-night," forgot their troubles in the
embrace of deep, refreshing slumber.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

A CURIOUS AND VALUABLE DRAUGHT--LYNCH LAW APPLIED--BLACK JIM'S
CONFESSION--NED BECOMES A PAINTER, AND FINDS THE PROFESSION PROFITABLE
AS WELL AS AMUSING--THE FIRST PORTRAIT.

Next morning the travellers were up and away by daybreak, and in the
afternoon they came upon a solitary miner who was prospecting in a gulch
near the road-side.

This word gulch is applied to the peculiarly abrupt, short ravines,
which are a characteristic feature in Californian more than in any other
mountains.  The weather was exceedingly hot, and the man took off his
cap and wiped his streaming brow as he looked at the travellers who
approached him.

"Ha! you've got water there, I see," cried Tom Collins, leaping off his
horse, seizing a cup which stood on the ground full of clear water, and
draining it eagerly.

"Stop!" cried the man, quickly.

"Why!" inquired Tom, smacking his lips.

The miner took the empty cup and gazed inquiringly into it.

"Humph! you've drunk it, every grain."

"Drop, you mean," suggested Tom, laughing at the man's expression; "of
course I have, and why not?  There's plenty more of the same tap here."

"Oh, I wouldn't mind the water," replied the man, "if ye had only left
the gold-dust behind, but you've finished that too."

"You _don't_ mean it!" gasped Tom, while the questions flashed across
his mind--Is gold-dust poison?  And if not, is it digestible?  "How--how
much have I swallowed?"

"Only about two dollars--it don't signify," answered the man, joining in
the burst of laughter to which Ned and Tom gave way on this
announcement.

"I'm afraid we must owe you the sum, then," said Ned, recovering his
composure, "for we have only one dollar left, having been robbed last
night; but as we mean to work in this neighbourhood, I dare say you will
trust us."

The man agreed to this, and having directed the travellers to the
settlement of Weaver Creek, resumed his work, while they proceeded on
their way.  Tom's digestion did not suffer in consequence of his golden
draught, and we may here remark, for the benefit of the curious, that he
never afterwards experienced any evil effects from it.  We may further
add, that he did not forget to discharge the debt.

After half-an-hour's ride they came in sight of a few straggling
diggers, from whom they learned that the settlement, or village, or town
of Weaver Creek was about two miles further on, and in a quarter of an
hour they reached it.

The spot on which it stood was wild and romantic, embosomed among lofty
wooded hills, whose sides were indented by many a rich ravine, and
seamed by many a brawling water-course.  Here digging was, as the miners
have it, in full blast.  Pick, and shovel, and cradle, and long-tom, and
prospecting-pan--all were being plied with the utmost energy and with
unwearied perseverance.  The whole valley was cut up and converted into
a net-work of holes and mud-heaps, and the mountain slopes were covered
with the cabins, huts, and canvas tents of the miners.

About the centre of the settlement, which was a very scattered one,
stood a log-house or cabin, of somewhat larger dimensions than the
generality of those around it.  This was the grand hotel, restaurant,
and gambling-house of the place, besides being the scene of the trials
and executions that occasionally took place.  Some such work was going
forward when our travellers rode up, for the area in front of the hotel
was covered with a large concourse of miners.

"I suspect they are about to try the poor wretches who attacked us last
night," said Ned, dismounting at the door of the house.

He had scarcely spoken, when a couple of men ran towards them.

"Here you are, strangers," they cried, "come along and bear witness
agin' them blackguards; they're just about to be strung up.  We'll look
after your horses."

The duty was a disagreeable one, but it could not be avoided, so Ned and
Tom suffered themselves to be led into the centre of the ring where the
three culprits were standing already pinioned, and with the ropes round
their necks.  For a short time silence was obtained while Ned stated the
circumstances of the robbery, and also the facts regarding the murder of
which Black Jim had been previously found guilty.  Then there was a
general shout of "String 'em up!"  "Up wi' the varmints!" and such
phrases; but a short respite was granted in consequence of Black Jim
expressing a desire to speak with Ned Sinton.

"What have you to say to me?" inquired Ned, in a low tone, as he walked
close up to the wretched man, who, although his minutes on earth were
numbered, looked as if he were absolutely indifferent to his fate.

"I've only to say," answered the culprit, sternly, "that of all the
people I leaves behind me in this world there's but one I wish I hadn't
bin bad to, and that's Kate Morgan.  You know something of her, though
you've never seen her--I know that.  Tell her I--no, tell her she'll
find the gold I robbed her of at the foot o' the pine-tree behind the
tent she's livin' in jist now.  An' tell her that her little sister's
not dead, though she don't believe me.  I took the child to--"

"Come, come, ha' done wi' yer whisperin'," cried several of the
bystanders, who were becoming impatient of delay.

"Have patience," said Ned, raising his hand.  "The man is telling me
something of importance."

"I've done," growled Black Jim, scowling on the crowd with a look of
hate; "I wish I hadn't said so much."

The rope was tightened as he spoke, and Ned, turning abruptly on his
heel, hurried away with his friend from the spot just as the three
robbers were run up and suspended from the branch of the tree, beneath
and around which the crowd stood.

Entering the inn, and seating themselves in a retired corner of the
crowded gambling-room, Ned and Tom proceeded to discuss their present
prospects and future plans in a frame of mind that was by no means
enviable.  They were several hundreds of miles distant from the scene of
their first home at the diggings, without a dollar in their pockets, and
only a horse between them.  With the exception of the clothes on their
backs, and Ned's portfolio of drawing materials, which he always carried
slung across his shoulder, they had nothing else in the world.  Their
first and most urgent necessity was supper, in order to procure which it
behoved them to sell Tom's horse.  This was easily done, as, on
application to the landlord, they were directed to a trader who was on
the point of setting out on an expedition to Sacramento city, and who
readily purchased the horse for less than half its value.

Being thus put in possession of funds sufficient at least for a few
days, they sat down to supper with relieved minds, and afterwards went
out to stroll about the settlement, and take a look at the various
diggings.  The miners here worked chiefly at the bars or sand-banks
thrown up in various places by the river which coursed through their
valley; but the labour was severe, and the return not sufficient to
attract impatient and sanguine miners, although quite remunerative
enough to those who wrought with steady perseverance.  The district had
been well worked, and many of the miners were out prospecting for new
fields of labour.  A few companies had been formed, and these, by united
action and with the aid of long-toms, were well rewarded, but single
diggers and pan-washers were beginning to become disheartened.

"Our prospects are not bright," observed Tom, sitting down on a rock
close to the hut of a Yankee who was delving busily in a hole hard by.

"True," answered Ned, "in one sense they are not bright, but in another
sense they are, for I never yet, in all my travels, beheld so beautiful
and bright a prospect of land and water as we have from this spot.  Just
look at it, Tom; forget your golden dreams for a little, if you can, and
look abroad upon the splendid face of nature."

Ned's eye brightened as he spoke, for his love and admiration of the
beauties and charms of nature amounted almost to a passion.  Tom, also,
was a sincere admirer of lovely, and especially of wild, scenery,
although he did not express his feelings so enthusiastically.

"Have you got your colours with you?" he inquired.

"I have; and if you have patience enough to sit here for half-an-hour
