have at irregular intervals, from time immemorial, shattered its
mountains, overwhelmed some of its fairest lands, and killed thousands
of its inhabitants.  It is not our intention, however, to touch on this
subject more than will suffice to elucidate our tale.

Deeply interesting is it, at times, to note the intimate connection that
sometimes exists between places and events which seem exceedingly
remote.  One would imagine that the eruption of a volcanic mountain in
Java could not have much influence on the life or fortunes of people
living on an island nearly a thousand miles distant from the same.  Yet
so it was, in a double sense, too, as we shall see.

The great shock in Java, which overturned the bald little old
gentleman's chair, causing him to spring up and exclaim to his partner,
"Hallo, Brooks!" passed through the intervening earth, losing much of
its power on the way, caused Refuge Islands to tremble, and Pauline to
look up suddenly with the exclamation--

"What's that Dom?"

"It is marvellously like an earthquake, Pina."

Strange to say, Brooks in Java made precisely the same remark, at about
the same moment, to his senior partner.

Thereafter old Mr Rigonda, who didn't like earthquakes, said to
Brooks--who didn't mind earthquakes, being used to them--

"I'll start off for England immediately."

He did start off, even more immediately than he had intended, for the
neighbouring volcano, as if angered by his remark, sent up a shock that
shook the surrounding houses to their foundations.  The senior partner
rushed out in terror, and was just in time to receive a shower of mud
and ashes while he fled away through fire and smoke, as already
mentioned.

The volcano went to sleep again for a short time after that little
indication of its power, and you may be sure that old Rigonda did not
wait for its reawakening.  One of his own ships was on the point of
sailing that very day.  He went on board--after cleaning himself--got
Brooks to wind up their business relations in the cabin, and left for
England with a fair wind.

And well was it for the bald little old gentleman that he did so, for, a
few days later, strange sounds and appearances were in the air and on
the sea.  Fine ashes filled the sky, so that noon became like midnight,
and everything betokened that something unusually violent must have
occurred in the land which they had left.  Nothing more serious,
however, befell our voyager.  In due course he reached England, hastened
home, and, without warning, burst in upon his wife while that dear
little old lady was in the act of remarking to the middle-aged cat, in a
very dolorous tone, that she feared something must have happened to the
ship, for her darlings could never have been so long of writing if all
had gone well.

It was while the cat gazed contemplatively at the everlasting socks, as
if meditating a reply, that old Rigonda burst in.

Starting up with amazing activity and a cry of joy, the old lady swept
her feline friend from the table--inadvertently, of course--and rushed
into her husband's arms, while the outraged animal sought refuge on top
of the bookcase, whence it glared at the happy meeting with feelings
that may be more easily understood than described.  Of course the old
man's joy was turned into grief and anxiety when he heard of the
departure of his children and was told of their prolonged silence; but
with that we have nothing to do at present.

We return to Silver Bay, where a sense of insecurity had been aroused in
the community, ever since the tremors of the earth, to which we have
just referred.

With the slumbering of the Javanese mountains, however, these tremors
and the consequent fears subsided, and were almost forgotten in another
source of anxiety.

One morning, while Teddy Malone was walking on the beach of Silver Bay,
he observed a small object running and stumbling towards him, as if in
great haste or fear.  Hurrying forward to meet this object he soon
perceived that it was little Brown-eyes, of whom he was very fond.

"What's wrong, me darlint?" he asked, catching the child up and kissing
her.

"Oh, such funny tings me sawd--oder side de rocks," replied Brown-eyes,
panting; "come wid me an' see dem.  Come kik!"

"Funny things, eh, mavourneen, what sort of things?"

"Oh, like beasts.  Come kik!"

"They wasn't sarpints, was they?" said Malone, seating the child on his
shoulder and hastening towards the rocky point which separated Silver
Bay from the land beyond.

"No, no--not saa'pints.  Long beasts, like mans, only hims not stand and
walk, but lie down and crawl."

Much impressed with the child's eager manner, the Irishman hurried
towards the point of rocks, filled with curiosity as to what the
creatures could be.

"What sort o' hids have they, darlint?" he asked, as he neared the
point.

"Hids same as mans, and faces like you, but more uglier, all scratched
over, an' dey try to catch me, but me runned away."

Teddy Malone's hitherto obtuse faculties were awakened.  He stopped
suddenly, being by that time convinced that he stood unarmed within
spear-throw of savages in ambush.  To advance, supposing his conjecture
to be right, he knew would be certain death.  To turn and fly would
probably be the same, for naked savages could easily overtake him even
if unburdened with Brown-eyes, whom, of course, he could not forsake,
and he was too far from the settlement to shout an alarm.

Perspiration burst from poor Teddy's brow, for even delay, he knew,
would be fatal, as the savages would suspect him of having discovered
them.

Suddenly he put Brown-eyes down on the sand, and, twisting his figure
into a comical position, began to hop like a frog.  His device had the
desired effect; Brown-eyes burst into a hearty fit of laughter, forgot
for the moment the "funny beasts," and cried, "Do it agin!"

The poor man did it again, thinking intensely all the time what he
should do next.

"Would you like to see me dance, darlint?" he asked suddenly.

"Oh yis!"

Thereupon Teddy Malone began to dance an Irish jig to his own whistling,
although, being much agitated, he found it no easy matter to whistle in
tune or time, but that was unimportant.  As he danced he took care to
back in a homeward direction.  The child naturally followed.  Thus, by
slow degrees, he got beyond what he considered spear-throw, and feeling
boldness return with security, he caught the child up and danced with
her on his shoulder.  Then he set her down, and pretended to chase her.
He even went the length of chasing her a little way in the wrong
direction, in order to throw the savages more completely off their
guard.  By degrees he got near to the settlement, and there was met by
Otto.

"You seem jolly to-day, Ted," said the boy.

"Whist, lad," returned the other, without intermitting his exercise.
"Look as if ye was admirin' me.  There's lot of them tattooed monkeys--
savages--beyant the pint.  They don't know I've found it out.  Slink up
an' gather the boys, an' look alive.  I'll amuse 'em here till you come
back.  An' I say, don't forgit to bring me revolver an' cutlash."

"All right," was Otto's brief reply, as he sauntered slowly up towards
the bushes.  No sooner was he screened by these, however, than he ran
like a hare to the palace.

"Halloo!  Dom, Joe, Hugh--all of you--the savages again!  Arm--quick!"

It needed no urging to hasten the movements of all who heard the boy's
voice.  Ever since the first appearance of the savages Dominick and the
doctor had put all the men of the settlement under daily training in
drill for an hour or so, that they might be better able to act promptly
and in concert if occasion should again occur.  The arms had been
collected, and such of them as were not in use stored in a handy
position, so that in two minutes an armed company was proceeding at a
run towards the spot on the shore where Malone was still performing his
antics, to the inexpressible delight of Brown-eyes.

"Where are the spalpeens?" asked the widow Lynch, who had followed the
men.

"Beyant the rocks, mother," answered Malone, as he received his weapons
from Otto and fell into his place in the ranks; "ye'd as well take the
child home, or she'll be sure to follow--she's nigh as wild as yerself."

The widow was indeed fond of seeing, as she used to say, "all the fun
that was goin'," but on this occasion she consented to carry Brown-eyes
out of danger while the settlers moved at a quick step towards the
point.

Behind that point of rocks a band of savages lay concealed, as Malone
had rightly conjectured.  There were about forty of them, all armed with
clubs and spears, evidently bent on attacking the settlement.  Of course
they meant to do it by surprise, and had concealed themselves among the
bushes behind the point, where they probably would have lain till
nightfall if Brown-eyes in her wanderings had not discovered them.
Their chief would have instantly caught and silenced the poor child, had
she not run so far clear of the point that he would infallibly have
revealed himself to Teddy Malone in doing so.

When that worthy drew near to the rocks, as described, the chief got
ready a spear for his reception.  When Malone took to dancing, the chief
condescended to smile, or grin, hideously.  When he retreated out of
range the chief consoled himself with the reflection that it was just as
well, night being the best time for attack.  When, however, he beheld a
band of men moving towards him armed with the terrible things that
"spouted smoke, fire, and stones," a change came over the spirit of his
dream.  After a hasty consultation with his comrades, he glided off in
the direction of their canoe.  The rest followed, and when our settlers
at last turned the point, they saw the foe paddling at full speed across
the lagoon.

Firing a volley of disappointment after them, both in words and bullets,
they ran to their boats and gave chase, but, as on the former occasion,
the canoe proved too swift for the boats under oars, and the savages got
away.

The anxiety that naturally filled the breasts of Queen Pauline and her
councillors at this event was speedily forgotten in a recurrence of the
earthquake which had previously alarmed them so much.

It happened on a calm, bright morning, when the widow Lynch chanced to
be washing garments in the palace beside the queen.  You see they had
not much regard for state-ceremonial or etiquette at the court of
Pauline the First even in public, much less in private, so that, while
the widow was deep in the washtub at one end of the hall, the queen was
busy at the other end patching Otto's garments.

At first there occurred a slight trembling of the earth, which the
widow, attributing to giddiness in her own cranium, recognised with a
remonstrative "Ohone!"

"Did you feel _that_?" exclaimed Pauline, pausing in her work and
looking up with a slight feeling of alarm.

"_What_, dearie?" demanded the widow, clearing the soap-suds from her
red roly-poly arms.

Before Pauline could answer, the earthquake took the liberty of reply by
giving an abrupt shake to the whole island, which not only set chairs
and tables rocking in an alarming manner, but drove the entire
population from their houses in consternation.  Among other effects it
caused Mrs Lynch to stagger and catch hold of the washtub, which, far
from supporting her, let her fall to the ground, and fell on the top of
her.

To most of the settlers the sensation of a trembling earth was quite new
and exceedingly alarming.  They stopped abruptly after the first rush,
and then looked about with pale faces, not knowing what to do.  Malines,
however, was cool and collected.  He had been in various volcanic
regions of the world, and undertook to comfort them.

"Don't be afraid," he said, when the most of the people had gathered
round him.  "I've often seen this sort o' thing, on the coast o' South
America and among the Malay Islands.  It passes away after a while, and
often without doin' much damage--though I _have_ seen a town shook
almost to pieces in about five minutes."

"And what did they do?" asked Jabez Jenkins.

"Och, whirri-hoo!" shouted Teddy Malone, for at that moment another
shock was felt, more violent than the preceding.  The earth seemed
absolutely to roll, and one or two of the huts that had been carelessly
built, fell asunder in partial ruin.

"Where is my brother--and the doctor?" demanded Pauline, running up to
the group at the moment.

"They're away up the mountain, with Joe and Otto," answered little
Buxley; "I saw 'em start soon after daybreak--to explore, they said."

"What do you think should be done?" asked Pina, turning naturally to the
mate, as being the most intelligent of those around her.

"If it's goin' to be bad," said Malines, "I would advise you all to git
on board the ship as fast as ye can, for the land isn't so safe as the
water when it takes to quakin'."

"You seem to have had some experience of it.  Is it going to be bad,
think you?"

"Earthquakes are deceptive--no man can tell."

"Well, then, we must do our best at once," said the queen, with an air
of calm decision worthy of her rank.  "Go, Mr Malines, with your
sailors, and get all the boats ready.  And you, my people, carry down
what you esteem most valuable and get on board the ship without loss of
time--for the rest, we are in the hands of a loving and merciful God."

While these events were enacting on the shore, Dominick, Otto, the
doctor, and Joe Binney were seated near the summit of the highest peak,
enjoying a cold breakfast.  It was their first visit to that particular
peak, which had a slight hollow or basin of perhaps fifty feet diameter
in the centre.

Just before the first tremulous shock the doctor had been explaining to
the prime minister the nature of volcanoes, and stating his opinion that
the cup-like hollow before them was an extinct crater.  The slight shock
stopped him in his discourse, and caused the party to look at each other
with serious faces.

"It's not extinct yet," exclaimed Otto excitedly, pointing to the
hollow, the earth of which had suddenly cracked in several places and
was emitting puffs of sulphurous smoke and steam.

They all started up.

"We'd better hasten home," said Dominick.

"Yes--they'll be terribly scared," said the doctor, hastily beginning to
pack up the remains of their breakfast.

But, before this could be done, the second convulsion took place.
Violent trembling occurred for a few seconds; then the ground in the old
crater burst open, and, with a terrible explosion, fire and smoke
belched forth, sending huge fragments of rock and showers of ashes into
the air, which latter fell around the explorers in all directions--
fortunately without doing them injury.

They waited no longer.  Without even uttering a word they all turned and
ran down the hill at full speed.  Being a considerable distance from the
settlement, it was upwards of an hour before they arrived.  By that time
most of the women and children had been sent off to the ship.  Pauline,
however, had remained on shore to direct and encourage the rest, as well
as to await the return of her brothers.

"Right--right--you couldn't have done better," said Dominick, when
Pauline hastily explained how she had acted.

"It was Mr Malines, not I, who suggested the plan," returned the queen.

"Hadn't you better go on board yourself?" said the doctor, "and leave us
to manage."

"No, I am not a mere puppet, sir," answered Pauline, with a little
smile, yet firmly.  "My place is here till all my subjects are safe!
And your duty is to assist in the embarkation, not to offer advice to
your queen!"

With a laugh the doctor went off to do his duty, muttering, "My _queen_,
indeed!" fervently.

For some time the volcano, which had thus sprung into sudden activity,
partially subsided, yet there were occasional tremulous motions of the
earth and low growlings in the heart of the mountain on Big Island,
while several minor explosions occurred in the crater, so that the
thoroughly alarmed settlers hastened the embarkation with all despatch.
Before night had closed in they were all safely on board with most of
their lighter valuables and tools, though, necessarily, much of their
heavier property was left behind.  Where life is threatened, however,
men are not apt to mind such losses.

It now became a question whether they should remain at anchor where they
were and abide the issue, or proceed at once to sea.  Some were for
remaining, others were for putting off to sea.  There was much wrangling
