
"Your house is plundered," said Francisco to Bacri, after Jacob Mordecai
had conducted them to the skiffa of his dwelling.

"I guessed as much.  But how came you to escape?" asked Bacri.

Lucien related the circumstances of their escape, while his father
dipped his head in the fountain, for the purpose, as he remarked, of
cooling his brains.

"And what is now to be done?" asked Mariano, with a look of perplexity.
"Bacri has been kind enough to get me out of that horrible Bagnio just
in time to save me from torture of some sort; but here we are in the
heart of a city in a state of insurrection, with almost every
street-corner guarded, and bands of men, that appear to me to be devils
in turbans, going about seeking for subjects on whom to exercise their
skill."

"The insurrection is over--at least _this_ one is over," said Jacob
Mordecai sadly, "though it may well be that another insurrection shall
follow close on its heels; but it is probable that there will be some
degree of peace now for a time, and the guarded condition of the town
will favour your escape."

"How so, Signor Mordecai?" asked Francisco; "it has hitherto been my
belief as well as experience that a town in a state of siege was the
reverse of favourable to anything implying freedom of action."

"Thou art right, friend," returned Jacob, with a smile, "and that
absence of freedom will keep the streets clear of all who might
otherwise interrupt thee, while, as to the guarded corners, my brother
Bacri knows a variety of passages above and under ground, through which
he will guide you past them to the city wall."

"Then let us be gone without delay," urged Francisco, "for, good sirs,
my neck has for some time past felt sundry twinges, as though the
bow-string were already around it."

"Half an hour must elapse ere we can venture forth with safety," said
Bacri.  "'Tis well that you have brought the knotted rope with you.
Mariano knows how to use it.  He will explain the mode of escape which
you must follow, while I hold private converse with my brother."

So saying the kindly Jew bowed his tall form to his friends with the air
of a king, and accompanied Jacob Mordecai into an inner room.

At the end of the time specified--which had appeared an age to the
impatient trio--Bacri returned to the skiffa with two coarse burnouses
similar to the one worn by Mariano.  He directed Francisco and Lucien to
put these on, after exchanging their varied habiliments for the jacket,
short drawers, and red fez or cap, worn by Moors of the middle class.
He then produced some brown ochre, with which he stained their hands and
their legs below the knee--these latter parts being usually uncovered in
Moors who did not belong to the wealthy classes.

"Why not paint our faces too?" asked Mariano, amused at the figure they
cut, despite the dangers which rendered the disguise necessary.

"Because neither the painting of your faces," replied Bacri, "nor the
shaving of your heads--which latter would be essential to the converting
of you into genuine Moors--would constitute any disguise were your
voices to be heard or your features to be scrutinised.  You must be
careful to pull the hoods of your burnouses well forward on your faces.
All that you can hope to gain by your costume is to avoid attracting the
attention of any whom you should chance to meet, or whom you may have to
pass at a distance.  If any one speaks to you after you reach the open
country, refuse to answer.  If he should insist on it, you must either
run or fight, for which latter purpose I provide you with these short
swords, which you will find better suited to your hands than the curved
weapons of the Turks."

"Signor Bacri," said Francisco, examining the straight short weapon
handed to him, "I thank thee for all thy kindness to me and my boys--
especially for these swords, for assuredly unless thou canst also
furnish me with a pair of young and active legs, I am like to have more
of fighting than running hereafter.  However, let us not waste more time
in speech, for, as I have said, my neck already itches most
uncomfortably."

In deference to Francisco's anxiety to be out of the city, which he was
wont to style with great emphasis the Pirates' Nest, Bacri hastened his
preparations, and soon led them to the roof of the house of Jacob
Mordecai, from which they scrambled to that of a friendly neighbour, and
crossed over, with the care of burglars and the quiet steps of cats, to
the other side.  Here a difficulty met them, in the shape of a leap
which was too long for Francisco's heavy person to venture.

He might, indeed, have taken it with ease on level ground and in
daylight; but, like his son Mariano on a somewhat similar occasion, he
felt it difficult to screw up his courage to the point of springing
across a black chasm, which he was aware descended some forty or fifty
feet to the causeway of the street, and the opposite parapet, on which
he was expected to alight like, a bird, appeared dim and ghostly in the
uncertain light.

Twice did the courageous man bend himself to the leap, while the blood
rushed with apoplectic violence to his bald head; and twice did his
spirit fail him at the moment of need!

"Oh, Bacri!" he said in a hoarse whisper, wiping the perspiration from
his brow, as he stood on the giddy height, "if there were only a damsel
in distress on the opposite side, or a legion of Turks defying me to
come on, I could go over, methinks, like a rocket, but to be required to
leap in cold blood upon next to nothing over an unfathomable abyss,
really--.  Hast never a morsel of plank about thee, Jacob?"

Fortunately for all parties, Jacob had a flower stand on his roof, to
which he returned with Mariano, who wrenched a plank therefrom, and
brought it to the point of difficulty.

After this they met with no serious obstruction.  Sometimes descending
below the streets and passing through cellars, at others crossing roofs
or gliding along the darkest sides of dark walls and passages, they
traversed the town without being challenged, and gained the southern
wall near the point at which Mariano had crossed it on a former
occasion.

Here the Jew bade them God-speed, and left them.

"I hope thou art sure of the road, Mariano?" said Francisco anxiously.

"Trust me, father; I know it well.  Only have a care that you tread
lightly and make no noise.--Come."

Leading them to the point on the ramparts where poor Castello's head
still stood withering in the night-wind, Mariano bade them remain in
shadow while he attached the rope to the spike.

The sentinel could be dimly seen, for there was no moon, pacing to and
fro within two hundred yards of them.  They watched and lay still while
he sauntered towards them, and glided noiselessly and quickly to the
rope while his back was turned.

Thus one by one they descended the wall, crossed the ditch, ascended the
slope on the other side, without having been observed, and, ere long,
were safe among the rocks and fastnesses of the Sahel hills.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

IN WHICH SOLES ARE BEATEN AND MEN ARE SOLD--WITH PLOTS AND COUNTERPLOTS.

Comfortably ensconced in the palace of the Deys--elected by a majority
of his comrades--the Aga Hamet proceeded to enjoy his high position, and
to exercise the authority of ruler of the pirate city.

The day after his ascension of what we may call the dangerous throne, he
sent for Hadji Baba the story-teller.

"Thou art a witty fellow, it seems?" said the Dey, when Baba made his
appearance.

"So it has been said of me, and so I once thought," replied the jester
humbly; "but I have come to doubt the worth of my own wit, since it has
led me to dwell in a palace."

"How so, knave?  What mean you?"

"In truth, I know not," replied Baba.  "My wit is scarce sufficient to
make my meaning plain even to myself.  Only I feel that the brilliancy
of the wit of those who dwell in palaces is too much for me.  'Twere
better, methinks, if I had remained on my shoemaker's bench."

"'Twere indeed better for thee to have done so, good fellow, if thou
canst say nothing better than that," replied Hamet angrily, for he was a
stupid as well as an ambitious man.  "Let's have something better from
thee, else the bastinado shall drive sense from thy heels into thy
head."

"Nay, then, it is hard," returned Baba, with a smile, "to be asked to
talk sense when I was hired by thy late master--"

"_My_ late master!" roared the Dey.

"Surely I said `_my_ late master,' did I not?" returned Hadji Baba,
rubbing his forehead as if he were confused--as, in truth, the poor
fellow was, by the terrible scenes that had lately been enacted in the
palace.  "As I meant to say, then,--it is hard for me to talk sense when
_my_ late master hired me expressly to talk nonsense."

"H'm, yes, very true," replied the Dey, looking wise.  "Let me, then,
hear some of thy nonsense."

"Ah, your highness, that is easily done," said Baba, with sudden
animation.  "What shall be the subject of my discourse?--the affairs of
state?"

The Dey nodded.

"Let me, then, make a broad statement of a nonsensical kind, which, in
its particular applications may be said to be endless.  A throne won by
treachery, violence, and bloodshed cannot stand long in--"

"Villain!" shouted the Dey.

"Nay, I do but jest," said Baba, with a look of simplicity.

"Jest or no jest, thou shalt smart for it," cried the Dey, whose anger
had been greatly roused.--"Ho! seize him and give him the bastinado, and
afterwards bring him hither again."

Two chaouses, who were in attendance in a neighbouring room, at once
entered, and, seizing the unfortunate story-teller, hurried him down to
an apartment in the palace which was reserved for punishments of various
kinds, including strangulation.  Here they stripped off Baba's
embroidered shoes and white hose.

"We have long been fellow-servants under this roof," said Hadji Baba, as
they were about to begin.

"That is true," replied one of the chaouses sternly.

"_I_ shall be forgiven, and depend on it _thou_ shalt not be forgotten,"
said Baba quietly.

The executioner, who knew that the story-teller had been a man of
influence and power in the previous reign, hesitated.

"We have our orders, Hadji Baba," said he, remonstratively, "and you
know that it is as much as our lives are worth to fail in our
obedience."

"I bid you not to fail in the performance of your duty, but I counsel
you to lay on lightly," returned the jester, with a grim smile.

"And how if the Dey should expect to hear thy cries, and afterwards to
see thee limp into his presence?" asked the man in a tone of indecision.

"Depend on't he shall both see and hear," exclaimed Baba, with a laugh.
"Thinkest thou that my head is not equal to the saving of my feet?  Lay
on _lightly_, so that there may be somewhat to show; but see thou dost
not over-do it.  I will engage to let the tyrant hear on the deafest
side of his head, and will limp into his presence with most unfeigned
sincerity."

"Well, then, I begin," said the man, applying a few strokes with a lithe
rod to the soles of the jester's feet.

Baba was true to his word.  He suddenly gave vent to a yell so appalling
that the very executioner, accustomed though he was to such sounds,
quailed for a moment, and said anxiously--

"Did I hit you too hard?"

"Hard!" echoed Baba, mingling a roar of laughter with his next yell.
"Fear not, good comrade; go on, do thy duty--ha! ha!--ho-o-o!  Stop!
Why, it is worse than I had imagined," he added, as the man delivered a
cut that was rather sharp.  "But go on," cried Hadji Baba, with another
yell; "I must have _something_ to show, and _he_ shall smart for it."

He followed up this remark with a series of amateur shrieks and howls so
terrible that the hardened chaouses, being accustomed only to the
genuine display of suffering, were overcome, and entreated him to
desist.

The excitement of the exercise, the conflict of varied feelings, the
smarting of his soles, the indignation of his soul, and the absurdity of
the deception, had such an effect on Hadji Baba's spirit, that he
experienced no difficulty whatever in limping like a confirmed cripple,
and trembling like an aspen leaf when led into the presence of the
tyrant.

"Ha!" exclaimed the Dey, "I think I have cured thee.  Thou wilt talk no
more nonsense, I warrant."

"Not a word, your highness, not a syllable," exclaimed the jester,
falling on his knees, as the executioners retired.  "Even though your
highness were to hold the reins of power with a hand of gentleness and
benignity, which I doubt not you will, I would not repeat such nonsense
for the world."

"Gentleness and benignity," laughed the Dey, catching at the words, and
paying little regard to what followed; "truly that were a novel feature
in my character, as thou knowest well.--Now, listen, rascal: as thy feet
are in good walking trim, I have an errand for thee.  Go, tell Sidi
Hassan that I want him, and see thou find him quickly, else another
beating awaits thee."

"Your highness shall be obeyed," said the jester, with a profound
obeisance, as he turned and limped out of the room.

Sidi Hassan had left the service of the British consul, without leave,
just before the insurrection, and was seated in his own town mansion,
sipping a cup of coffee, and conversing with Rais Ali, when the message
reached him.

"Thou art but a cowardly fellow, a weak villain after all," said Hassan
to some remark of the interpreter.  "The man who plays fast and loose is
sure to be brought low sooner or later.  Why not leave the British
consul's service now that a chance offers?  It will be to thy advantage,
for I can speak a good word for thee with the new Dey."

"Because," said Rais Ali anxiously, "although I have not a sensitive
conscience, I cannot prevail on myself to betray my old master."

"Very good," said Hassan; "continue to vacillate until thy head is
shaken off.  Adieu.  I must not keep his highness waiting."

So saying, he hastened to the palace, congratulating himself on the
expected fulfilment of the promises which the late Aga Hamet had so
lavishly made to him.

Like many other sycophants, Sidi Hassan had mistaken his man.  The new
Dey was well aware that Hassan was a turbulent, ambitious character, and
thought that it would be best for his own interests to appoint him
governor of a distant province of his dominions.  Like many other
coarse, though energetic, characters, Hamet also mistook his man.  He
did not know that Hassan would be content with nothing short of the
position of second in command.  When, therefore, he handed him, with
many compliments, the paper containing his commission to the
governorship of the province alluded to, he was greatly surprised to
behold his former friend fly into a violent passion, tear the paper to
pieces, and fling it on the ground, as he turned on his heel and left
the room abruptly.

So suddenly and vigorously was the act done that Hamet's wonted coolness
failed him for a moment, and Hassan had passed out into the street
before he gave orders, in a voice of thunder, to have him arrested and
brought back.

There is no doubt that in his present temper the Dey would have had his
late colleague strangled on the spot, but, fortunately for himself, Sidi
Hassan, instead of returning to his own house, went straight to the
Marina, without having any definite object in view, save that he
thirsted for vengeance, and meant to have it if possible.

On his way down he met the sapient interpreter, Blindi Bobi.

"Well, Bobi," he said, making an effort to look calm, "any probability
of a rising among the slaves?"

"Not much," replied Bobi, in Turkish, shaking his head; "slaves don't
like to have their heads cut off and their skin torn away in bits."

"True!" returned Hassan, smiling grimly.  "Do you know where Sidi Omar
is?"

"There," said Blindi Bobi in reply, pointing to the individual in
question, and sidling rapidly away.
