"Step inside if you're going," shouted a guard.

I saw a porter near the booking-office door advance towards the bell.

At the same moment I saw, or fancied I saw, at the window of a third-
class carriage a certain pale face appear momentarily, and, with an
anxious glance up at the clock, vanish again inside.

"Wait a second," I cried to the guard, "till I get a ticket."

"Not time now," I heard him say, as I dashed into the booking-office.

The clerk was shutting the window.

"Third single--anywhere--Fleetwood!"  I shouted, flinging down a couple
of sovereigns.

I was vaguely aware of seizing the ticket, of hearing some one call
after me something about "change," of a whistle, the waving of a flag,
and a shout, "Stand away from the train."  Next moment I was sprawling
on all fours on the knees of a carriage full of passengers; and before I
had time to look up the 1:30 train was outside Euston station.

It took me some time to recover from the perturbation of the start, and
still longer to overcome the bad impression which my entry had made on
my fellow-passengers.

Indeed I was made distinctly uncomfortable by the attitude which two, at
any rate, of these persons took up.  One was a young man of the type
which I usually connect with detectives.  The other was a rollicking
commercial traveller.

"You managed to do it, then?" said the latter to me when finally I had
shaken myself together and found a seat.

"Yes, just," said I.

The other man looked hard at me from behind a newspaper.

"Best to cut your sort of job fine," continued the commercial,
knowingly.  "Awkward to meet a friend just when you're starting,
wouldn't it?" with a wink that he evidently meant to be funny.

I coloured up violently, and was aware that the other man had his eye on
me.  I was being taken for a runaway!

"Worth my while to keep chummy with you," said the heartless man of the
road.  "Start a little flush, don't you?"

I ignored this pointed inquiry.

"Not bank-notes, I hope--because they've an unkind way of stopping them.
Not but what you might get rid of one or two if you make haste.  But
they're ugly things to track a chap out by, you know.  Why, I knew a
young fellow, much your age and build, borrowed a whole sheaf of 'em and
went up north, and made up his mind he'd have a high old time.  He did
slip through a fiver; but--would you believe it?--the next he tried on,
they were down on him like shooting stars, and he's another two years to
do on the mill before he can come another trip by the 1:30.  They all
fancy this train."

This style of talk, much as it amused my fellow-passengers and
interested the man in the corner, made me feel in a most painful
position.  My looks and blushes, I am aware, were most compromising; and
my condition generally, without luggage, without rug, without even a
newspaper, enveloped me in such an atmosphere of mystery and suspicion
that I half began to wonder whether I was not an absconding forger
myself.

Fortunately the train stopped at Willesden and I took advantage of the
halt to change my carriage, explaining clumsily that I should prefer a
carriage where I could sit with my face to the engine, whereat every one
smiled except myself and the man in the corner.

I tried hard to find an empty carriage; but the train was full and there
was no such luxury to be had.  Besides, guards, porters, and station-
masters were all shouting to me to get inside somewhere, and a score of
heads attracted by the commotion appeared at the windows and added to my
discomfort.  Finally I took refuge in a carriage which seemed less
crowded than the rest--having but two occupants.

Alas! to my horror and dismay I discovered when the train had started
that I had intruded myself on a palpably honeymoon couple, who glared at
me in such an unfriendly manner that for the next hour and a half,
without respite, I was constrained to stand with my head out of the
window.  Even in the tunnels I had no encouragement to turn my head
round.

This was bad enough, but it would have been worse had it not happened
that, in craning my head and neck out of the window, I caught sight, in
the corner of the carriage--next to mine, of half of the back of a head
which I felt sure I knew.  It belonged, in fact, to Michael McCrane, and
a partial turn of his face left no doubt on the matter.  I had run my
man down already!  I smiled to myself as I contemplated the unconscious
nape of that neck and recalled the gibes of the commercial traveller and
the uncomfortable stare of the man in the corner.

What should I do?  The train would stop for two minutes at Bletchley,
and not again until we reached Rugby.  Should I lay my hand on his
shoulder at the first place or the second?

I wished I could have dared to retire into my carriage and consult my
timetable about trains back.  But the consciousness of the honeymoon
glare at my back glued me to the window.  I must inquire at Bletchley
and act accordingly.

We were beginning to put on the break, and show other signs of coming to
a halt, when I was startled by seeing McCrane stand up and put his head
out of the window.  I withdrew as hastily as I could; not daring, of
course, to retreat fully into the carriage, but turning my face in an
opposite direction, so as to conceal my identity.  I could not guess
whether he had seen me or not, it had all occurred so quickly.  If he
had, I might have need of all my strategy to run him to earth.

As the train pulled up I saw him lower his window, and, with anxious
face, make a sudden bolt across the platform.

That was enough for me.  I darted out too, much to the satisfaction of
my fellow-travellers.

"When's the next train back to Euston?"

"Take your seats!" bawled the guard, ignoring me.

"When does the next train go to Euston?"

"There's a time-table there."

I went; keeping one eye on the train, another on the spot where my man
had vanished, and feeling a decided inconvenience from the lack of a
third with which to consult the complicated document before me.  In a
rash moment I ventured to concentrate my whole attention on the
timetable.  I had found Bletchley; and my finger, painfully tracing down
one of the long columns, was coming very near to the required latitude,
when I became aware of a whistle; of a figure, bun in hand, darting from
the refreshment-room to a carriage; of a loud puff from the engine.

I abandoned the time-table, and rushed in the same direction.  Alas! the
train was in full motion; a porter was standing forbiddingly between me
and my carriage, and the honeymoon couple were blandly drawing down the
blinds in my very face!  Worst of all, I saw the half-profile of Michael
McCrane, inflated with currant bun, vanish; and as the end carriage
whirled past me I received a friendly cheer from the commercial
traveller, and a particularly uncomfortable smile from his silent
companion in the corner.

I was left behind!  The bird had flown out of my very hand; and there
was nothing now but to return in confusion and report my misfortunes at
the bank.

Stay!  I could telegraph to detain my man at Rugby.  Let me see.  "To
Station Master, Rugby.  Detain Michael McCrane--bank robbery--tall,
dark--third-class--left Euston 1:30--I follow--Samuels."  How would that
do?  I was pleased with the look of it; and, in the fullness of my
heart, consulted the station-master.

He eyed me unfavourably.

"Who are you?" he had the boldness to inquire.

"I'm from the bank."

"Oh!" he said; and added, "your best plan is to follow him in the
supplemental.  It will be up in five minutes.  He's sure to be bound for
Fleetwood, and you'll catch him on the steamer.  They won't stop him on
the road without a warrant.  They don't know you."

I admitted the truth of this, and, after some inward debate--
particularly as I had a ticket through--I decided to take advice, and
avail myself of the "Supplemental."

It was painfully supplemental, that train--a string of the most
ramshackle carriages the line could muster, and the carriage in which I
found myself smelt as if it had been in Billingsgate for a month.
However, I could sit down this time.  There was neither honeymoon,
commercial traveller, nor man in the corner to disturb my peace; only a
rollicking crowd of Irish harvest men on their way home, in spirits
which were not all of air.

I was claimed as one of their noble fraternity before we were many
stages on the road; and although I am happy to say I was not compelled
to take part in their potations, for the simple reason that they had
none left to offer me, I was constrained to sing songs, shout shouts,
abjure allegiance to the Union Jack, and utter aspirations for the long
life of Charlie Parnell and Father Mickey (I believe that was the
reverend gentleman's name), and otherwise abase myself, for the sake of
peace, and to prevent my head making acquaintance with the shillalahs of
the company.  I got a little tired of it after a few hours' incessant
bawling, and was rather glad, by the assistance of a few half-crowns
(which I fervently trusted the manager would allow me to charge to his
account), to escape their company at Preston, and seek the shelter of a
more secluded compartment for the rest of the way.

I found one occupied by two files of soldiers in charge of a couple of
deserters, and in this genial company performed the remainder of the
journey in what would have been something like comfort but for the
ominous gusts of wind and rain which, as we neared the coast, buffeted
the carriage window, and promised a particularly ugly night for any one
contemplating a sea voyage.

Sub-Chapter II.

BOWLED OUT.

When we reached Fleetwood it was blowing (so I heard some one say) "half
a cap."  I privately wondered what a whole cap must be like; for it was
all I could do, by leaning hard up against the wind, and holding on my
hat--a chimney-pot hat, by the way--to tack up the platform and fetch
round for the Belfast steamer, which lay snorting and plunging
alongside.

It takes a very good sailor to be cheerful under such circumstances.  I
felt profoundly melancholy and wished myself safe at home in my bed.
The sight of the black and red funnel swaying to and fro raised qualms
in me which, although still on _terra firma_, almost called for the
intervention of a friendly steward.  Alas! friend there was none.

In my desperation I was tempted basely to compromise with duty.  How did
I know Michael McCrane was on the steamer at all?  He might have dropped
out at any one of a dozen wayside stations between Bletchley and here.
Indeed the probability was that he had.  Or--and I felt almost
affectionately towards him as the thought crossed my mind--even if he
had come so far, he, like myself, might be a bad sailor, and prefer to
spend the night on this side of the angry Channel.  I could have
forgiven him much, I felt, had I been sure of that.

In any case, I asked myself earnestly, was I justified in running my
employers into the further expense of a return ticket to Belfast without
being reasonably sure that I was on the right track?  And _was_ I
reasonably sure?  Was I even--

On the steerage deck of the steamer below me, with a portmanteau in one
hand and a brand-new hat-box and a rug in the other, a figure staggered
towards the companion ladder and disappeared below.  That figure, even
to my unwilling eyes, was naught else but a tragic answer to my own
question.

Michael McCrane was on board, and going below!

A last lingering hope remained.

"Hardly put off to-night, will you?" said I to a mate beside me, with
the best assumption of swagger at my command.

He was encasing himself in tarpaulins, and appeared not to hear me.

I repeated my inquiry, and added, in the feeble hope that he might
contradict me, "Doesn't look like quieting down."

"No," said he, looking up at the sky; "there'll be a goodish bit more of
it before we're over.  All aboard there?"

"No," I shouted, rushing towards the gangway; "I'm not!"

Oh, how I wished I could have found myself just left behind.  As it was
I was precipitated nearly head first down the gangway, amid the by no
means friendly expletives of the sailors, and landed at the bottom a
clear second after my hat, and two seconds, at least in advance of my
umbrella.  Before I had recovered all my component parts the _Royal
Duke_ was off.

It was not the slightest comfort to me to reflect that if only I had
dashed on board the moment I saw my man, and arrested him there and
then, we might both be standing at this moment comparatively happy on
that quay whose lights blinked unkindly, now above us, now below, now
one side, now the other, as we rolled out of the harbour.

"Bit of a sea outside, I guess," said a voice at my side.

Outside!  Then what was going on now did not count!  I clapped my hat
down on my head and made for the cabin door.

It had entered my mind to penetrate into the steerage at once and make
sure of my runaway; but when I contemplated the distance of deck between
where I now stood and where I had seen him disappear; and when,
moreover, as the boat's head quitted the lee of the breakwater a big
billow from the open leapt up at her and washed her from stem to stern,
something within me urged me to go below at once, and postpone business
till the morning.

I have only the vaguest recollection of the ghastly hours which ensued.
I have a wandering idea of a feeble altercation with a steward on
hearing that all the berths were occupied and that he had nowhere to put
me.  Then I imagine I must have lain on the saloon floor or the cabin
stairs; at least, the frequency with which I was trodden upon was
suggestive of my resting-place being a public thoroughfare.

But the treading under foot was not quite so bad as being called upon to
show my ticket later on.  That was a distinctly fiendish episode, and I
did not recover from it all the night.  More horrible still, a few
brutes, lost to all sense of humanity, attempted to have supper in the
saloon, within a foot or two of where I lay.  Mercifully, their evil
machinations failed, for nothing could stay on the table.

Oh, the horrors of that night!  Who can say at what angles I did not
incline?  Now, as we swooped up a wave I stood on my head, next moment I
shivered and shuddered in mid-air.  Then with a wild plunge I found
myself feet downward, and as I sunk my heart and all that appertained to
it seemed to remain where they had been.  Now I was rolling obliquely
down the cabin on to the top of wretches as miserable as myself.  Now I
was rolling back, and they pouring on to the top of me.  The one thought
in my mind was--which way are we going next? and mixed up with it
occasionally came the aspiration--would it were to the bottom!  Above it
all was the incessant thunder of the waves on the decks above and the
wild wheezing of the engines as they met the shrieking wind.

But I will not dwell on the scene.  Once during the night I thought of
Michael McCrane, and hoped he was even as I was at that moment.  If he
was, no dog was ever in such a plight!

At last the early dawn struggled through the deadlights.

"At last," I groaned, "we shall soon be in the Lough!"

"Where are we?" said a plaintive voice from the midst of the heap which
for the last few hours had regularly rolled on the top of me whenever we
lurched to larboard.

"Off the Isle of Man," was the reply.  "Shouldn't wonder if we get a bit
of a sea going past, too."

Off the Isle of Man!  Only half way, and a bit of a sea expected as we
went past!

I closed my eyes, and wished our bank might break before morning!
