which at present lay hidden beneath what was discreditable and wretched.
They saw in him a nobility disfigured and a chivalry marred, still
capable of asserting itself, but which as yet every rebuke and every
warning had failed to arouse; and on this account the good people of
England sorrowed with a jealous sorrow over their "Prince Hal," and
looked forward with trembling to see how all this would end.

But to return.  The case against the prisoner was full and complete, and
nothing now remained but to pronounce him guilty, and sentence him to
the penalty his crime required.  This duty the judge was proceeding to
discharge, when at the door of the court was heard a commotion.  For a
moment the judge's words were drowned in the shuffling of feet and the
sound of voices; then the door opened, and in walked a youth, scarcely
more than a boy, tall, slender, and handsome, with flushed cheeks and
wild eye, fashionably dressed, with a sword at his side and a plumed hat
upon his head.

"The Prince of Wales!" broke from the lips of a score of onlookers, as
they recognised in that youth the heir to the crown, towards whose
delinquencies their thoughts had that moment been turned.

He advanced gaily and recklessly to the bench, the crowd falling back on
either side to give him passage.  As he passed the bar at which the
prisoner stood awaiting his sentence, he stopped, and, nodding
familiarly, exclaimed--

"What ho, comrade!  I heard thou wast in trouble, and have come myself
to ease thee; so cheer up, lad!"  Then approaching the judge, he said,
"Good Master Gascoigne, your prisoner is a friend of mine, too gay a
comrade to languish in bonds for a trifling scrape like this.  Spare
yourself, therefore, further pains on his account, and come, solace your
gravity with a party of boon companions who assemble to-night to
celebrate their hero's emancipation from your clutches!"

Gravely and sorrowfully the judge regarded the prince who thus
flippantly defied the law of which he was the guardian, but his face was
firm and his voice authoritative as he replied--

"Prince, my duty is to defend the laws of the king, your father, not to
break them.  As you entered, I was passing the sentence of imprisonment
on the prisoner which he has merited by his evil deeds.  That sentence
must now be put in force."

Prince Henry's face clouded, and he scowled as he exclaimed--

"What I would you defy the Prince of Wales to his very face?  Liberate
my comrade, I charge you, at once, or it shall be the worse for you!"

"Be warned, prince.  They who obstruct the law incur the penalties of
the law, be they princes or peasants.  Officers, remove the prisoner."

Henry flushed angrily, and his eyes glared like fire.  Advancing a step,
he laid his hand on the hilt of his sword, and drew it from its
scabbard.

The judge rose quietly to his feet, and laying his hand gently on the
foolish boy's shoulder, said, in a voice calm and clear, which all could
hear--

"Henry, Prince of Wales, I arrest thee in the name of the king, your
father, whose laws you have defied, and whose court you have insulted!
Officers, remove the prince in custody."

There was a strange and solemn pause as the judge resumed his seat, and
all eyes turned on Henry.  The firmness of the judge had touched the
right chord at last.  The sword dropped back into its sheath, the scowl
of passion gave place to the flush of shame, the wild eyes sought the
ground, and the haughty head hung down in confusion.  Without a word he
submitted to the officers of the court, and accompanied them to the
place of his confinement, humble and repentant.

Years after this a gay throng of courtiers were assembled at court to do
homage to King Henry the Fifth of England on his accession to the
throne.  There were there princes and nobles and ladies--some the
friends of the late king, some the friends of the new.  In the faces of
not a few of the former might be detected traces of uneasiness and
anxiety; while the latter talked and looked, for the most part,
confident and triumphant.  It was easy to guess the cause of this
strange variety of feeling.  The gay young reveller was now king.  There
were some there who had made no secret of their disapproval of his wild
courses as a prince.  How would he regard them now the crown was on his
head?  Others there were who had borne him company in his excesses,
drinking from the same bowl, and sharing in all the lawlessness of his
lawless youth.  Was not the time for their advancement come, now that
the fountain of honour was in the person of their own boon companion and
comrade?

Amid waving and acclamation, the young king stepped into the presence
chamber to receive the homage of his subjects.

In general appearance he was not much changed from the tall, handsome
youth who, a few years ago, had openly defied the law and insulted its
dignity; but the more serious expression of his face, and the more
sedate pose of his lips, betokened an inward change of no small
importance.  And now that the whole court was eagerly looking for some
indication of his conduct under the new honours and duties which had
this day devolved upon him, he was not long in satisfying their
curiosity in a decided and significant manner.

Glancing for a moment among the gay throng which surrounded him, his eye
lit on a grave, dignified man, with clear eye and firm mouth, now
advanced in years, and clad in the robes of a judge.

King Henry stepped towards him, and, with a friendly smile, took him by
the hand.

"Good Master Gascoigne," he said, "I know you of old.  What my father
said of you, let me say too, in the hearing of all these people.  _Happy
is the king that has such a man who dares to execute justice even on the
king's son_.  You did well by me when you once committed me to prison;
you shall still be my councillor and the trusted guardian of my laws."

The judge bowed low as he replied, "My lord, your father added yet
another word to that you have yourself recalled.  _Happy_, said he, _the
king that has such a son, who will submit even his princely self to the
hand of justice_."

And a tear stood in the grave man's eye as he kissed the hand of him who
had once been his prisoner, but was now his king and his friend.



CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

LAMBERT SIMNEL, THE BAKER'S BOY WHO PRETENDED TO BE A KING.

A scene of unwonted excitement was being enacted in Dublin.  The streets
were thronged with people, the houses were gay with flags, soldiers
lined the paths, and nobles in their grand carriages went by in
procession.  The common folk shouted till they were hoarse, and pressed
forward on every hand towards the great church of the city, to witness
the ceremony which was taking place there.

Whence was all this excitement?  How came the Irish capital into such a
state of festivity and holiday-making?  The story is a short one and a
strange.

Some weeks before, a man in the dress of a priest, accompanied by a
good-looking boy, had landed in Dublin, and made his way to the
residence of the governor of the place, with whom he sought an
interview.  On being admitted, he much astonished that nobleman by the
tale he told.

It was well known that Richard the Third had during his lifetime shut up
in prison the young Earl of Warwick, his nephew, whose title to the
crown was better than his own.  The cruel uncle, who seemed unable to
endure the presence of any of those whom he had so basely robbed of
their inheritance, had already, as is well known, murdered those other
two nephews whose claims were most prominent and unmistakable.  The
young Earl of Warwick, however, was allowed to keep his life, but
remained a close prisoner in a castle in Yorkshire.

When Henry the Seventh took the crown from Richard and became king, he
was by no means disposed to liberate a prince who was clearly nearer to
the throne than himself.  So he had him removed from Yorkshire to the
Tower of London, where he remained almost forgotten amid the bustle of
coronation festivities of the new king.

Now the story told by the priest was that this prince had succeeded in
escaping from the Tower, and indeed was none other than the lad who now
stood at his side, having made his way to Ireland in the company of his
tutor and friend, to beg the aid of the Governor of Dublin in an effort
to recover his lawful inheritance.

The Earl of Kildare (that was the governor's name) looked in
astonishment from one to the other, and bade them repeat their story,
asking the boy many questions about his childhood and the companions of
his youth, which the latter answered so glibly and unhesitatingly that
the foolish governor was fully persuaded this was no other than the
rightful King of England.

He caused the lad to be treated with all the honour due to royalty; he
gave him a guard of soldiers, he showed him to the populace, who
welcomed him with enthusiasm, and he set to work to organise an army
which should follow to enforce his claim to the throne of England.

The boy took all this sudden glory in a half-bewildered manner, but
adhered so correctly to his plausible story that none of those generous
Irish folk doubted that he was any other than the disinherited prince he
professed to be.

Had they only known that the youth about whom they were so enthusiastic
was no better than a baker's son, named Lambert Simnel, they might have
been less pleased.

Well, in due time it was decided to crown the new king with all honour.
And this was the occasion about which, as we have seen, Dublin was in
such a state of festivity and holiday.

The boy was conducted with great pomp to church, amid the shouts of the
people, and there crowned with a diadem taken from a statue of the
Virgin Mary.  Afterwards, according to custom, he was borne on the
shoulders of a huge Irish chieftain back to the castle, where he lived
as a king for some time.

All this while the real Earl of Warwick was safe in the Tower, and now
when the rumour of Lambert Simnel's doings in Ireland reached King
Henry, he had him brought out from his prison and exhibited in public,
so that every one might be convinced of the imposture of the boy who set
himself up to be the same person.

But though the people of England were thus kept from being deceived, as
the Irish had been, there were a good many of them who heartily disliked
King Henry, and were ready to join in any movement against him,
irrespective of right or wrong.  The consequence was, Lambert Simnel--or
rather the people who instigated him in his falsehood--found they might
count on a fair amount of support even from those who discredited their
story; and this encouraged them to attempt an invasion of England, and
venture their scheme on the field of battle.  So, with a force of about
8,000 men, they landed in Lancashire.  There is no need to tell the
result of this expedition.  After many disappointments occasioned by the
reluctance of the people to join them, they encountered the king's army
near Newark, and after a desperate battle were defeated, and lost all
their leaders.  Lambert Simnel and the priest were taken prisoners, and
for a time there was an end of this silly attempt to deceive the nation.

In the following years of Henry's reign, any one entering the royal
kitchens might have observed a boy, meanly dressed, following his
occupation as a turnspit; and that boy, had he felt disposed to give you
his history, would have told you how once upon a time he was crowned a
king, and lived in a palace, how nobles bowed the knee before him, and
troops fought at his bidding.  He would have told how people had hailed
him as King Edward of England, and rushed along beside his carriage,
eager to catch so much as a glance from his eye.  And then he would go
on to tell how all this was because designing men had put into his head
foolish ambitions, and taught him to repeat a likely-looking story.  And
if one had questioned him further, doubtless he would have confessed
that he was happier far now as a humble turnspit than ever he had been
as a sham king, and would have warned one sadly that cheats never
prosper, however successful they may seem for a time; and that
contentment with one's lot, humble though it be, brings with it rewards
infinitely greater than riches or power wrongly acquired.



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

EDWARD AND RICHARD PLANTAGENET, THE BOYS WHO WERE MURDERED IN THE TOWER.

A horseman stood at the gate of the Tower of London, and demanded
entrance in the name of the king, Richard Iii.

On hearing the summons, and the authority claimed by the stranger, the
governor, Sir Thomas Brackenbury, directed that he should be admitted,
and deliver his message.

"Read this," said the man, handing a missive sealed with the royal
seal.

Sir Thomas read the document hastily, and as he read his face grew
troubled.  For a long time he was silent; then addressing the king's
messenger, he said--

"Know you the contents of this letter?"

"How should I know?" replied the other evasively.

"The king directs me here," said Sir Thomas, "to do a deed horrible and
unworthy of a man.  He demands that I should rid him of the two lads now
lying in this Tower in my custody."

"And what of that?" said the king's messenger.  "Is it not necessary to
the country's peace?  And will _you_, Sir Thomas, render so base an
ingratitude for the favours you have received at the king's hands by
refusing him this service?"

"Not even with the sanction of a king will Thomas Brackenbury hire
himself out as a butcher.  My office and all I have," he added, "I hold
at His Majesty's pleasure.  He may take them from me if he will, but my
hands shall at least stay free from innocent blood!"

With that he bade the messenger return to his master and deliver his
reply.

When Richard, away in Gloucestershire, heard of the refusal of the
Governor of the Tower to execute his commands, he was very wroth, and
vowed he would yet carry out his cruel purpose with regard to his two
helpless nephews.

These two boys, the sons of Edward the Fourth, were the principal
obstacles to Richard's undisturbed possession of the throne he had
usurped.  The elder of them, a boy of thirteen, had already been crowned
as Edward the Fifth, but he was a king in name only.  Scarcely had the
coronation taken place when his bad uncle, under the pretence of
offering his protection, got him into his power, and shut him up, with
his young brother Richard, in the Tower, while he himself plotted for
the crown to which he had neither right nor title.

How he succeeded in his evil schemes history has recorded.

By dint of falsehood and cunning he contrived to make himself
acknowledged king by an unwilling people; and then, when the height of
his ambition had been attained, he could not rest till those whom he had
so shamefully robbed of their inheritance were out of his path.

Therefore it was he sent his messenger to Sir Robert Brackenbury.

Foiled in his design of making this officer the instrument of his base
scheme, he summoned to his presence Sir James Tyrrel, a man of reckless
character, ready for whatever might bring him profit or preferment; and
to him he confided his wishes.

That same day Tyrrel started for London, armed with a warrant entrusting
him with the Governorship of the Tower for one day, during which Sir
Robert Brackenbury was to hand over the fortress and all it contained to
his keeping.

The brave knight had nothing for it but to obey this order, though he
well knew its meaning, and could foretell only too readily its result.

In a lofty room of that gloomy fortress, that same summer evening, the
two hapless brothers were sitting, little dreaming of the fate so nearly
approaching.

The young king had indeed for some time past seemed to entertain a vague
foreboding that he would never again breathe the free air outside his
prison.  He had grown melancholy, and the buoyant spirits of youth had
given place to a listlessness and heaviness strangely out of keeping
with his tender years.  He cared neither for talk nor exercise, and
neglected both food and dress.  His brother, two years younger than
himself, was of a more hopeful demeanour, perhaps realising less fully
the hardships and dangers of their present imprisonment.  As they sat
this evening in their lonely chamber, he tried to rally his elder
brother from his melancholy.

"Look not so black, brother; we shall soon be free.  Why should we give
up hope?"

The young king answered nothing, and apparently did not heed his
brother's words.

"Nay," persisted the latter, "should we not be glad our lives are spared
us, and that our imprisonment is made easy by the care of good Sir
Robert, our governor?"

Still Edward remained absorbed in his own gloomy reflections, and the
younger lad, thus foiled in his efforts at cheerfulness, became silent
too, and sad, and so continued till a warder entered their chamber with
food, and remained to attend them to bed.

They tasted little that evening, for the shadow of what was to come
seemed already to have crept over their spirits.

"Will Sir Robert come to see us, as is his wont, before we retire to
rest?" inquired Richard of the warder.

"Sir Robert is not now Governor of the Tower," curtly replied the man.

Now indeed they felt themselves utterly friendless, and as they crept to
their bed they clung one to the other, in all the loneliness of despair.

Then the warder took his leave, and they heard the key turn in the lock
behind him, and counted his footsteps as he descended the stairs.

Presently sleep mercifully fell upon their weary spirits, and closed
their weeping eyes with her gentle touch.

At dead of night three men stole up the winding staircase that led to
their chamber, armed, and carrying a light.  The leader of these was Sir
James Tyrrel, and his evil-looking companions were the men he had hired
to carry out the cruel order of the king.  The key turned in the door,
and they entered the apartment.

It was a sight to touch any heart less hard than those of the three
villains who now witnessed it, to see those two innocent boys sleeping
peacefully in each other's arms, dreaming perhaps of liberty, and
forgetting the sorrow which had left its traces even yet on their closed
eyes.  But to Tyrrel and his two assassins, Forest and Deighton, the
spectacle suggested neither pity nor remorse.

At a signal from Tyrrel, who remained outside the room while the deed
was being done, the ruffians snatched the pillows from under the heads
of the sleepers, and ere they could either resist or cry out the poor
lads were stifled beneath their own bedclothes, and so perished.

Then these two murderers called to Tyrrel to enter and look on their
work, and bear witness that the king's command had been faithfully
executed.

The cup of Richard's wickedness was now full.  He concealed for some
time the fate of his two victims, and few people knew what had become of
their rightful king and his brother.  But the vengeance of Heaven fell
on the cruel uncle speedily and terribly.  His own favourite son died,
his family turned against him, his people rebelled: the kingdom so
evilly gained was taken from him, and he himself, after months of
remorse, and fear, and gathering misfortunes, was slain in battle,
lamented by none, and hated by all.

Two centuries later, in the reign of King Charles the Second, some
workmen, digging in the Tower, discovered under the stairs leading to
the chapel of the White Tower a box containing the bones of two
children, corresponding to the ages of the murdered princes.  These were
found to be without doubt their remains, and in a quiet comer of
Westminster Abbey, whither they were removed, a simple memorial now
