week, and would then come back with twenty dollars in his pocket, and
having thus provided the sinews of war, would carry out the plan of
elopement. Away they went down the river on the ice. The big Dogs
pulled swiftly but sulkily as he cracked the long whip and shouted,
"Allez, allez, marchez." They passed at speed by Renaud's shanty on the
bank, and Paul, cracking his whip and running behind the train, waved
his hand to Ninette as she stood by the door. Speedily the cariole with
the sulky Dogs and drunken driver disappeared around the bend--and that
was the last ever seen of Fiddler Paul.

That evening the Huskies came back singly to Fort Garry. They were
spattered with frozen blood, and were gashed in several places. But
strange to tell they were quite "unhungry."

Runners went on the back trail and recovered the packages. They were
lying on the ice unharmed. Fragments of the sled were strewn for a mile
or more up the river; not far from the packages were shreds of clothing
that had belonged to the Fiddler.

It was quite clear, the Dogs had murdered and eaten their driver.

The Factor was terribly wrought up over the matter. It might cost him
his Dogs. He refused to believe the report and set off to sift the
evidence for himself. Renaud was chosen to go with him, and before they
were within three miles of the fatal place Renaud pointed to a very
large track crossing from the east to the west bank of the river, just
after the Dog sled. He ran it backward for a mile or more on the
eastern bank, noted how it had walked when the Dogs walked and run when
they ran, before he turned to the Factor and said: "A beeg Voolf--he
come after ze cariole all ze time."

Now they followed the track where it had crossed to the west shore. Two
miles above Kildonan woods the Wolf had stopped his gallop to walk over
to the sled trail, had followed it a few yards, then had returned to
the woods.

"Paul he drop somesin' here, ze packet maybe; ze Voolf he come for
smell. He follow so--now he know zat eez ze drunken Paul vot slash heem
on ze head."

A mile farther the Wolf track came galloping on the ice behind the
cariole. The man track disappeared now, for the driver had leaped on
the sled and lashed the Dogs. Here is where he cut adrift the bundles.
That is why things were scattered over the ice. See how the Dogs were
bounding under the lash. Here was the Fiddler's knife in the snow. He
must have dropped it in trying to use it on the Wolf. And here-what!
the Wolf track disappears, but the sled track speeds along. The Wolf
has leaped on the sled. The Dogs, in terror, added to their speed; but
on the sleigh behind them there is a deed of vengeance done. In a
moment it is over; both roll off the sled; the Wolf track reappears on
the east side to seek the woods. The sled swerves to the west bank,
where, after half a mile, it is caught and wrecked on a root.

The snow also told Renaud how the Dogs, entangled in the harness, had
fought with each other, had cut themselves loose, and trotting homeward
by various ways up the river, had gathered at the body of their late
tyrant and devoured him at a meal.

Bad enough for the Dogs, still they were cleared of the murder. That
certainly was done by the Wolf, and Renaud, after the shock of horror
was past, gave a sigh of relief and added, "Eet is le Garou. He hab
save my leel girl from zat Paul. He always was good to children."


VI

This was the cause of the great final hunt that they fixed for
Christmas Day just two years after the scene at the grave of Little
Jim. It seemed as though all the Dogs in the country were brought
together. The three Huskies were there--the Factor considered them
essential--there were Danes and trailers and a rabble of farm Dogs and
nondescripts. They spent the morning beating all the woods east of St.
Boniface and had no success. But a telephone message came that the
trail they sought had been seen near the Assiniboine woods west of the
city, and an hour later the hunt was yelling on the hot scent of the
Winnipeg Wolf.

Away they went, a rabble of Dogs, a motley rout of horsemen, a mob of
men and boys on foot. Garou had no fear of the Dogs, but men he knew
had guns and were dangerous. He led off for the dark timber line of the
Assiniboine, but the horsemen had open country and they headed him
back. He coursed along the Colony Creek hollow and so eluded the
bullets already flying. He made for a barb-wire fence, and passing that
he got rid of the horsemen for a time, but still must keep the hollow
that baffled the bullets. The Dogs were now closing on him. All he
might have asked would probably have been to be left alone with
them--forty or fifty to one as they were--he would have taken the odds.
The Dogs were all around him now, but none dared to close in, A lanky
Hound, trusting to his speed, ran alongside at length and got a side
chop from Garou that laid him low. The horsemen were forced to take a
distant way around, but now the chase was toward the town, and more men
and Dogs came running out to join the fray.

The Wolf turned toward the slaughter-house, a familiar resort, and the
shooting ceased on account of the houses, as well as the Dogs, being so
near. These were indeed now close enough to encircle him and hinder all
further flight. He looked for a place to guard his rear for a final
stand, and seeing a wooden foot-bridge over a gutter he sprang in,
there faced about and held the pack at bay. The men got bars and
demolished the bridge. He leaped out, knowing now that he had to die,
but ready, wishing only to make a worthy fight, and then for the first
time in broad day view of all his foes he stood--the shadowy
Dog-killer, the disembodied voice of St. Boniface woods, the wonderful
Winnipeg Wolf.


VII

At last after three long years of fight he stood before them alone,
confronting twoscore Dogs, and men with guns to back them--but facing
them just as resolutely as I saw him that day in the wintry woods. The
same old curl was on his lips--the hard-knit flanks heaved just a
little, but his green and yellow eye glowed steadily. The Dogs closed
in, led not by the huge Huskies from the woods--they evidently knew too
much for that--but by a Bulldog from the town; there was scuffling of
many feet; a low rumbling for a time replaced the yapping of the pack;
a flashing of those red and grizzled jaws, a momentary hurl back of the
onset, and again he stood alone and braced, the grim and grand old
bandit that he was. Three times they tried and suffered. Their boldest
were lying about him. The first to go down was the Bulldog. Learning
wisdom now, the Dogs held back, less sure; but his square-built chest
showed never a sign of weakness yet, and after waiting impatiently he
advanced a few steps, and thus, alas! gave to the gunners their
long-expected chance. Three rifles rang, and in the snow Garou went
down at last, his life of combat done.

He had made his choice. His days were short and crammed with quick
events. His tale of many peaceful years was spent in three of daily
brunt. He picked his trail, a new trail, high and short. He chose to
drink his cup at a single gulp, and break the glass-but he left a
deathless name.

Who can look into the mind of the Wolf? Who can show us his wellspring
of motive? Why should he still cling to a place of endless tribulation?
It could not be because he knew no other country, for the region is
limitless, food is everywhere, and he was known at least as far as
Selkirk. Nor could his motive be revenge. No animal will give up its
whole life to seeking revenge; that evil kind of mind is found in man
alone. The brute creation seeks for peace.

There is then but one remaining bond to chain him, and that the
strongest claim that anything can own--the mightiest force on earth.

The Wolf is gone. The last relic of him was lost in the burning Grammar
School, but to this day the sexton of St. Boniface Church avers that
the tolling bell on Christmas Eve never fails to provoke that weird and
melancholy Wolf-cry from the wooded graveyard a hundred steps away,
where they laid his Little Jim, the only being on earth that ever met
him with the touch of love.




THE LEGEND OF THE WHITE REINDEER


  Skoal! Skoal! For Norway Skoal!
  Sing ye the song of the Vand-dam troll.
  When I am hiding
  Norway's luck
  On a White Storbuk
  Comes riding, riding.


Bleak, black, deep, and cold is Utrovand, a long pocket of glacial
water, a crack in the globe, a wrinkle in the high Norwegian mountains,
blocked with another mountain, and flooded with a frigid flood, three
thousand feet above its Mother Sea, and yet no closer to its Father Sun.

Around its cheerless shore is a belt of stunted trees, that sends a
long tail up the high valley, till it dwindles away to sticks and moss,
as it also does some half-way up the granite hills that rise a thousand
feet, encompassing the lake. This is the limit of trees, the end of the
growth of wood. The birch and willow are the last to drop out of the
long fight with frost. Their miniature thickets are noisy with the
cries of Fieldfare, Pipit, and Ptarmigan, but these are left behind on
nearing the upper plateau, where shade of rock and sough of wind are
all that take their place. The chilly Hoifjeld rolls away, a rugged,
rocky plain, with great patches of snow in all the deeper hollows, and
the distance blocked by snowy peaks that rise and roll and whiter
gleam, till, dim and dazzling in the north, uplifts the Jotunheim, the
home of spirits, of glaciers, and of the lasting snow.

The treeless stretch is one vast attest to the force of heat. Each
failure of the sun by one degree is marked by a lower realm of life.
The northern slope of each hollow is less boreal than its southern
side. The pine and spruce have given out long ago; the mountain-ash
went next; the birch and willow climbed up half the slope. Here,
nothing grows but creeping plants and moss. The plain itself is pale
grayish green, one vast expanse of reindeer-moss, but warmed at spots
into orange by great beds of polytrichum, and, in sunnier nooks,
deepened to a herbal green. The rocks that are scattered everywhere are
of a delicate lilac, but each is variegated with spreading frill-edged
plasters of gray-green lichen or orange powder-streaks and beauty-spots
of black. These rocks have great power to hold the heat, so that each
of them is surrounded by a little belt of heat-loving plants that could
not otherwise live so high. Dwarfed representatives of the birch and
willow both are here, hugging the genial rock, as an old French
habitant hugs his stove in winter-time, spreading their branches over
it, instead of in the frigid air. A foot away is seen a chillier belt
of heath, and farther off, colder, where none else can grow, is the
omnipresent gray-green reindeer-moss that gives its color to the
upland. The hollows are still filled with snow, though now it is June.
But each of these white expanses is shrinking, spending itself in
ice-cold streams that somehow reach the lake. These snoe-flaks show no
sign of life, not even the 'red-snow' tinge, and around each is a belt
of barren earth, to testify that life and warmth can never be divorced.

Birdless and lifeless, the gray-green snow-pied waste extends over all
the stretch that is here between the timber-line and the snow-line,
above which winter never quits its hold. Farther north both come lower,
till the timber-line is at the level of the sea; and all the land is in
that treeless belt called Tundra in the Old World, and Barrens in the
New, and that everywhere is the Home of the Reindeer--the Realm of the
Reindeer-moss.


I

In and out it flew, in and out, over the water and under, as the
Varsimle', the leader doe of the Reindeer herd, walked past on the
vernal banks, and it sang:--

"Skoal! Skoal! Gamle Norge Skoal!" and more about "a White Reindeer and
Norway's good luck," as though the singer were gifted with special
insight.

When old Sveggum built the Vand-dam on the Lower Hoifjeld, just above
the Utrovand, and set his ribesten a-going, he supposed that he was the
owner of it all. But some one was there before him. And in and out of
the spouting stream this some one dashed, and sang songs that he made
up to fit the place and the time. He skipped from skjaeke to skjaeke of
the wheel, and did many things which Sveggum could set down only to
luck--whatever that is; and some said that Sveggum's luck was a
Wheel-troll, a Water-fairy, with a brown coat and a white beard, one
that lived on land or in water, as he pleased.

But most of Sveggum's neighbors saw only a Fossekal, the little
Waterfall Bird that came each year and danced in the stream, or dived
where the pool is deep. And maybe both were right, for some of the very
oldest peasants will tell you that a Fairy-troll may take the form of a
man or the form of a bird. Only this bird lived a life no bird can
live, and sang songs that men never had sung in Norway. Wonderful
vision had he, and sights he saw that man never saw. For the Fieldfare
would build before him, and the Lemming fed its brood under his very
eyes. Eyes were they to see; for the dark speck on Suletind that man
could barely glimpse was a Reindeer, with half-shed coat, to him and
the green slime on the Vandren was beautiful green pasture with a
banquet spread.

Oh, Man is so blind, and makes himself so hated! But Fossekal harmed
none, so none were afraid of him. Only he sang, and his songs were
sometimes mixed with fun and prophecy, or perhaps a little scorn.

From the top of the tassel-birch he could mark the course of the
Vand-dam stream past the Nystuen hamlet to lose itself in the gloomy
waters of Utrovand or by a higher flight he could see across the barren
upland that rolled to Jotunheim in the north.

The great awakening was on now. The springtime had already reached the
woods; the valleys were a-throb with life; new birds coming from the
south, winter sleepers reappearing, and the Reindeer that had wintered
in the lower woods should soon again be seen on the uplands.

Not without a fight do the Frost Giants give up the place so long their
own; a great battle was in progress; but the Sun was slowly, surely
winning, and driving them back to their Jotunheim. At every hollow and
shady place they made another stand, or sneaked back by night, only to
suffer another defeat. Hard hitters these, as they are stubborn
fighters; many a granite rock was split and shattered by their blows in
reckless fight, so that its inner fleshy tints were shown and warmly
gleamed among the gray-green rocks that dotted the plain, like the
countless flocks of Thor. More or less of these may be found at every
place of battle-brunt, and straggled along the slope of Suletind was a
host that reached for half a mile. But stay! these moved. Not rocks
were they, but living creatures.

They drifted along erratically, yet one way, all up the wind. They
swept out of sight in a hollow, to reappear on a ridge much nearer, and
serried there against the sky, we marked their branching horns, and
knew them for the Reindeer in their home.

The band came drifting our way, feeding like Sheep, grunting like only
themselves. Each one found a grazing-spot, stood there till it was
cleared off, then trotted on crackling hoofs to the front in search of
another. So the band was ever changing in rank and form. But one there
was that was always at or near the van--a large and well-favored
Simle', or Hind. However much the band might change and spread, she was
in the forefront, and the observant would soon have seen signs that she
had an influence over the general movement--that she, indeed, was the
leader. Even the big Bucks, in their huge velvet-clad antlers, admitted
this untitular control; and if one, in a spirit of independence,
evinced a disposition to lead elsewhere, he soon found himself
uncomfortably alone.

The Varsimle', or leading Hind, had kept the band hovering, for the
last week or two, along the timber-line, going higher each day to the
baring uplands, where the snow was clearing and the deer-flies were
blown away. As the pasture zone had climbed she had followed in her
daily foraging, returning to the sheltered woods at sundown, for the
wild things fear the cold night wind even as man does. But now the
deer-flies were rife in the woods, and the rocky hillside nooks warm
