the little game they were constantly playing together.

The address opened with these words:

        "FELLOW-CITIZENS: We meet this evening not in
        sorrow, but gladness of heart. The evacuation
        of Petersburg and Richmond, and the surrender
        of the principal insurgent army (at Appomattox)
        give hope of a righteous and speedy peace whose
        joyous expression cannot be restrained. In the
        midst of this, however, He from whom all
        blessings flow must not be forgotten. A call
        for national thanksgiving is being prepared and
        will be duly promulgated."


"GIVE US 'DIXIE,' BOYS!"

Then he went on outlining a policy of peace and friendship toward the
South--showing a spirit far higher and more advanced than that of the
listening crowd. On concluding his address and bidding the assembled
multitude good night, he turned to the serenading band and shouted
joyously:

"Give us 'Dixie,' boys; play 'Dixie.' We have a right to that tune now."

There was a moment of silence. Some of the people gasped, as they had
done when they saw Tad waving the Confederate flag at the window. But
the band, loyal even to a mere whim (as they then thought it) of "Father
Abraham," started the long-forbidden tune, and the President, bowing,
retired, with little Tad, within the White House. Those words, "Give us
'Dixie,' boys," were President Lincoln's last public utterance.

As Mr. Lincoln came in through the door after speaking to the crowd,
Mrs. Lincoln--who had been, with a group of friends, looking on from
within--exclaimed to him:

"You must not be so careless. Some one could easily have shot you while
you were speaking there--and you know they are threatening your life!"

The President smiled at his wife, through a look of inexpressible pain
and sadness, and shrugged his great shoulders, but "still he answered
not a word."


THE SEPARATION OF THE TWO "BOYS"

At a late hour Good Friday night, that same week, little Tad came in
alone at a basement door of the White House from the National Theater,
where he knew the manager, and some of the company, had made a great pet
of him. He had often gone there alone or with his tutor. How he had
heard the terrible news from Ford's Theater is not known, but he came up
the lower stairway with heartrending cries like a wounded animal.
Seeing Thomas Pendel, the faithful doorkeeper, he wailed from his
breaking heart:

"Tom Pen, Tom Pen, they have killed Papa-day! They have killed my
Papa-day!"

       *       *       *       *       *

After the funeral the little fellow was more lonely than ever. It was
hard to have his pony burned up in the stable. It was harder still to
lose Brother Willie, his constant companion, and now his mother was
desperately ill, and his father had been killed. Tad, of course, could
not comprehend why any one could be so cruel and wicked as to wish to
murder his darling Papa-day, who loved every one so!

He wandered through the empty rooms, aching with loneliness, murmuring
softly to himself:

"Papa-day, where's my Papa-day. I'm tired--tired of playing alone. I
want to play together. Please, Papa-day, come back and play with your
little Tad."

Young though he was he could not sleep long at night. His sense of
loneliness penetrated his dreams. Sometimes he would chuckle and gurgle
in an ecstacy, as he had done when riding on his father's back, romping
through the stately rooms. He would throw his arm about the neck of the
doorkeeper or lifeguard who had lain down beside him to console the boy
and try to get him to sleep. When the man spoke to comfort him, Tad
would find out his terrible mistake, that his father was not with him.

Then he would wail again in the bitterness of his disappointment:

"Papa-day, where's my Papa-day?"

"Your papa's gone 'way off"--said his companion, his voice breaking with
emotion--"gone to heaven."

Tad opened his eyes wide with wonder. "Is Papa-day happy in heaven?" he
asked eagerly.

"Yes, yes, I'm sure he's happy there, Taddie dear; now go to sleep."

"Papa-day's happy. I'm glad--_so_ glad!"--sighed the little boy--"for
Papa-day never was happy here."

Then he fell into his first sweet sleep since that terrible night.

       *       *       *       *       *


"GIVE THE BOYS A CHANCE"

The fond-hearted little fellow went abroad with his mother a few years
after the tragedy that broke both their lives. By a surgical operation,
and by struggling manfully, he had corrected the imperfection in his
speech. But the heart of little Tad had been broken. While still a lad
he joined his fond father in the Beyond.

"Give the boys a chance," had amounted to a passion with Abraham
Lincoln, yet through great wickedness and sad misunderstandings his own
little son was robbed of this great boon. Little Tad had been denied the
one chance he sorely needed for his very existence. For this, as for all
the inequities the great heart of the White House was prepared. His
spirit had shone through his whole life as if in letters of living fire:

"With malice toward none; with charity for all."


THE END




ALTEMUS BOOKS

        The Best and Least Expensive Books
        for Twentieth Century Boys and Girls

       *       *       *       *       *





BOOKS FOR BOYS





THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL BOYS SERIES

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

[Illustration]

Dick Prescott, Dan Dalzell, Tom Reade, and the other members of Dick &
Co. are always found in the forefront of things--in scholarship,
athletics, and in school-boy fun. Small wonder that this series has made
such a hit with the boys of America.

        1. THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL BOYS OF GRIDLEY; or, Dick
        and Co. Start Things Moving.

        2. THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL BOYS SNOWBOUND; or, Dick
        and Co. at Winter Sports.

        3. THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL BOYS IN THE WOODS; or,
        Dick and Co. Trail Fun and Knowledge.

        4. THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL BOYS IN SUMMER ATHLETICS;
        or, Dick and Co. Make Their Fame Secure.




THE HIGH SCHOOL BOYS SERIES

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

This series of stories, based on the actual doings of High School boys,
teems with incidents in athletics and school-boy fun. The real
Americanism of Dick Prescott and his chums will excite the admiration of
every reader.

        1. THE HIGH SCHOOL FRESHMEN; or, Dick and Co.'s
        First Year Pranks and Sports.

        2. THE HIGH SCHOOL PITCHER; or, Dick and Co. on
        the Gridley Diamond.

        3. THE HIGH SCHOOL LEFT END; or, Dick and Co.
        Grilling on the Football Gridiron.

        4. THE HIGH SCHOOL CAPTAIN OF THE TEAM; or,
        Dick and Co. Leading the Athletic Vanguard.

        Sold by all Booksellers or Sent Postpaid on
        Receipt of Price.

       *       *       *       *       *

        HENRY ALTEMUS COMPANY
        1326-1336 Vine Street,              PHILADELPHIA, PA.




THE HIGH SCHOOL BOYS VACATION SERIES

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

[Illustration]

Outdoor sports are the keynote of these volumes. Boys will alternately
thrill and chuckle over these splendid narratives of the further
adventures of Dick Prescott and his chums.

        1. THE HIGH SCHOOL BOYS' CANOE CLUB; or, Dick
        and Co.'s Rivals on Lake Pleasant.

        2. THE HIGH SCHOOL BOYS IN SUMMER CAMP; or, The
        Dick Prescott Six Training for the Gridley
        Eleven.

        3. THE HIGH SCHOOL BOYS' FISHING TRIP; or, Dick
        and Co. in the Wilderness.

        4. THE HIGH SCHOOL BOYS' TRAINING HIKE; or,
        Dick and Co. Making Themselves "Hard as Nails."




THE YOUNG ENGINEERS SERIES

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

Tom Reade and Harry Hazelton meet every requirement as young civil
engineers with pick, shovel, and pluck, and with resourcefulness and
determination overcome all obstacles.

        1. THE YOUNG ENGINEERS IN COLORADO; or, At
        Railroad Building in Earnest.

        2. THE YOUNG ENGINEERS IN ARIZONA; or, Laying
        Tracks on the "Man-Killer" Quicksand.

        3. THE YOUNG ENGINEERS IN NEVADA; or, Seeking
        Fortune on the Turn of a Pick.

        4. THE YOUNG ENGINEERS IN MEXICO; or, Fighting
        the Mine Swindlers.

        5. THE YOUNG ENGINEERS ON THE GULF; or, The
        Dread Mystery of the Million-Dollar Breakwater.




THE ANNAPOLIS SERIES

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

[Illustration]

Dave Darrin and Dan Dalzell proved their mettle at the U. S. Naval
Academy and gave promise of what might be expected of them in the great
war that was even at that moment hovering over the world.

        1. DAVE DARRIN'S FIRST YEAR AT ANNAPOLIS; or,
        Two Plebe Midshipmen at the U. S. Naval
        Academy.

        2. DAVE DARRIN'S SECOND YEAR AT ANNAPOLIS; or,
        Two Midshipmen as Naval Academy "Youngsters."

        3. DAVE DARRIN'S THIRD YEAR AT ANNAPOLIS; or,
        Leaders of the Second Class Midshipmen.

        4. DAVE DARRIN'S FOURTH YEAR AT ANNAPOLIS; or,
        Headed for Graduation and the Big Cruise.




THE WEST POINT SERIES

By H. IRVING HANCOCK

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

Dick Prescott and Greg Holmes are not human wonders, but a pair of
average bright American boys who had a hard enough time working their
way through West Point. Their experiences will inspire all other
American boys.

        1. DICK PRESCOTT'S FIRST YEAR AT WEST POINT;
        or, Two Chums in the Cadet Gray.

        2. DICK PRESCOTT'S SECOND YEAR AT WEST POINT;
        or, Finding the Glory of the Soldier's Life.

        3. DICK PRESCOTT'S THIRD YEAR AT WEST POINT;
        or, Standing Firm for Flag and Honor.

        4. DICK PRESCOTT'S FOURTH YEAR AT WEST POINT;
        or, Ready to Drop the Gray for Shoulder Straps.




THE BATTLESHIP BOYS SERIES

By FRANK GEE PATCHIN

PRICE, $1.00 EACH

[Illustration]

Inspiring adventure, moving incidents over the seven seas, and in the
air above them; fighting the Huns from the decks of sinking ships, and
coming to grief above the clouds; strange peoples and still stranger
experiences, are some of the things that the readers of this series will
live when they cruise with Dan Davis and Sam Hickey. Mr. Patchin has
lived every phase of the life he writes about, and his stories truly
depict life in the various branches of the navy--stories that glow with
the spirit of patriotism that has made the American navy what it proved
itself to be in the world war.

        1. THE BATTLESHIP BOYS AT SEA; or, Two
        Apprentices in Uncle Sam's Navy.

        2. THE BATTLESHIP BOYS' FIRST STEP UPWARD; or,
        Winning Their Grades as Petty Officers.

        3. THE BATTLESHIP BOYS IN FOREIGN SERVICE; or,
        Earning New Ratings in European Seas.

        4. THE BATTLESHIP BOYS IN THE TROPICS; or,
        Upholding the American Flag in a Honduras
        Revolution.

