refreshments of a particularly ethereal, grateful character awaited
them. This scene really ended the never-to-be-forgotten fancy ball.
Hasty departures followed. Carriages rolled away with many sleepy and
happy little folk, and at last the two carriages which were to convey
Sir John Thornton and his party back to the Grange, appeared.

Nora was to return with them, and Annie Forest had arranged to specially
attend to her comforts. Molly, who intended to come back to the Towers
in a day or two, was also wrapping a white shawl round her shoulders
preparatory to departure, when a brownie rushed quickly from one of the
ante-rooms, flung his arms round her neck, and whispered in her ear.

"Oh, Molly, what are you waiting for?" exclaimed Nan. "We're all
perfectly dead with sleep, Boris, you naughty boy; you know you have
nothing whatever to say; what are you keeping Molly for now?"

"I have something to say," replied Boris. "Something most 'portant, I
can tell you." His face flushed with anger; he dragged Molly into the
ante-room.

"There she is, Nell," he exclaimed; "now you can tell her."

"What is the matter, Nell, darling?" exclaimed Molly, struck by the
expression on her little sisters face.

"Molly, Molly," exclaimed Nell, with a sort of gasp in her voice.

"What is it, Nell, dear? Do speak; they're all waiting for me and I must
go."

"Oh, must you go? Do stay, do stay; I have something very important to
say; its a message."

"A message!" exclaimed Molly; anxiety stealing quickly into her voice;
"is it anything about--about father and mother?"

"Yes, yes; and nobody else is to know; you will stay?"

"Yes, I'll stay. Wait there a minute, and I'll be back with you."

Molly ran up to Hester, who was waiting for her in the entrance hall.

"Good-bye, Hetty," she said, kissing her; "I'm not going back with you."

"What in the world do you mean, Molly?" exclaimed Hester. "You know you
have promised to stay with us for another day or two, and I want you to
know more of Mrs. Willis, and--why, what's the matter, dear?"

"Nell is not quite well, I think," replied Molly; "anyhow, I must stay
here to-night; don't say anything to make Nora anxious; good-night."

"I am afraid, Hester, that we must not keep the horses waiting any
longer," said Sir John in his most measured tones. "Good-night, Molly,
we shall be pleased to see you at the Grange to-morrow if you can tear
yourself away from domestic cares."

Hester went away, the carriage door was shut, and a moment later the
last of the visitors had departed.

Molly rushed back for one moment to Nell.

"I am here," she said, "but if you have a secret to tell me, I can't
talk to you for the present without exciting the curiosity of the whole
house. Go upstairs and get into bed, and I'll be with you as soon as I
can. I daresay my bed is not ready for me, so I'll sleep with you
to-night."

A ghost of a smile of pleasure flitted across Nell's face as she glided
away.

Molly went back to the rest of her brothers and sisters. Jane
Macalister, still true to her Minerva costume, was seated at the supper
table, eating a large slice of cold game pie.

"I am famished," she said; "it was the most fatiguing thing I ever did,
and the dressmaker has made the sleeves of this horrid dress a great
deal too tight, and the neck chokes me. Now, I hope this is the last
folly of the kind that we shall have here for many a long day. I, for
one, refuse to be laced up in this heathen mythology style again. Now
then, my dears, all of you to bed. Molly, what in the world are you
staying here for? We didn't expect you, and your room isn't ready."

"Oh, I'll sleep with Nell," replied Molly.

"Very inconsiderate indeed," replied poor Minerva. "Nell's bed is only
large enough for herself, and she's like a feathers weight--with those
dark circles under her eyes too. I saw her flying about and absolutely
going out on to the lawn this evening. Nell is a great deal too
excitable, and certainly her sleep ought not to be disturbed."

"I promise not to disturb it," replied Molly; "you know, Jane, I'm not
an exciting sort of person."

"No more you are, my dear; but it frets me to have my arrangements put
out by fads. However, off with you to bed now. Dear me, I am famished.
If Minerva felt as I do, I pity her, poor soul. I'll have a glass of
stout; there's nothing like it when you're worn out. Good night, Molly."

Molly ran eagerly away. She was waylaid by more than one brother and
sister on her way upstairs, but at last she found herself in Nell's
room.

Nell was sitting on the side of the bed; she had not attempted to
undress.

"Oh, come, this will never do," said the practical Molly; "why, you're
ready to drop with fatigue, you poor mite. Here, let me undress you, and
you can talk while I'm doing it. Now, what's the trouble?"

"It's about father."

"What about him?"

"He came back to-night; he stood under the oak tree at the end of the
lawn. I saw him first, because he pressed his face up against one of the
windows and looked in, and afterwards he stood under the oak tree; Boris
and I ran out to him."

"Yes, yes; go on, Nell."

Molly's fingers were trembling now, but they did not cease their busy
task of unfastening Nell's clothes.

"Go on," she said; "what did he say, and why, _why_ didn't you call me?"


"Boris tried to catch you up, but you would dance with Hugh Pierson. We
ran out to father and he talked to us. The 'perhaps' has come true,
Molly; oh, Molly, the 'perhaps' has come quite true."

"How do you know, Nell? Don't tremble so, Nell, dear."

"Father wouldn't come in," continued Nell, making a brave effort to
recover herself. "He told us about our great-great-grandmother and her
apple-green dress, and he said that he had come back to fetch something,
and that he must return to London to-night; and then he said,'God--God
bless you,' and his voice shook just a tiny bit, and he said that mother
would be home to-morrow, and----"

"Yes, Nell, and----"

"Boris said 'Will you come home?' and--but----"

"What did he say to that?"

"He said nothing to that; he walked away very soft and quick. Molly,
what does it mean?"

"I don't know," said Molly. "Now, Nell, you must get into bed. You are
quite cold and shivery. I am going downstairs to fetch you a little hot
wine and water, and then I'll put my arms round you until you sleep."

Nell was glad to submit to Molly's most comforting ministrations.

"But I think I do know what it means," murmured the elder girl as she
listened to the gentle breathing of her little sister by-and-by.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE LORRIMERS OF THE TOWERS.


The morning post brought a letter from Mrs. Lorrimer, which set all
curiosity at rest. This letter was addressed to Jane Macalister, who
read it through first, with feverish haste and brows drawn darkly
together, then again straight from the beginning more slowly, and then a
third time, during which she surreptitiously wiped her eyes, and hoped
the children had not seen her do so.

Jane was seated before the tea equipage at the head of the long
breakfast table. Molly was helping her brothers and sisters to porridge,
cups of milk, and bread and jam, in her usual deft fashion. Jane raised
her eyes and encountered the brown ones of Molly.

"Well, Jane," said the young girl in a steady voice; "what is the news?"

"It's for you all to know, my dears," said Jane Macalister in a steady
voice. "Your mother has asked me to break it to you all. It's just a
question whether you shall all hear it together, or whether Molly shall
hear it by herself first. I think Molly must decide that point."

"I'll hear it with the others," said Molly.

As she spoke she went and sat down in a vacant chair near Nell.

"Perhaps it is not such news to Nell and me as you think," she said.
"Anyhow, we are prepared to hear it."

"It's 'perhaps' come true," said Nell in a faint voice, looking at Molly
with the ghost of a smile.

"Dear, dear," exclaimed Kitty, "whatever it is, let's out with it. I
don't suppose we are a set of cowards, any of us. I'm going to guess
what it is beforehand; it's that father's mare has broken her knees;
that's about the worst thing that _could_ happen. Father sent for the
mare to London a week ago; don't you remember, Guy, and when he was
riding her in the park she fell and broke her knees; that's it, you
bet."

"Do shut up," exclaimed Guy.

"You bet I'm right," replied Kitty, flushed and defiant.

Under no other possible circumstances would Kitty have dared to say "you
bet" in the presence of Jane Macalister.

"Well, my dears," said poor Jane, looking round at all the eager faces,
"I'd better read your mother's letter aloud. I've read it three times to
myself, and have got over the choky business; so now I can read it aloud
without breaking down. This is what your mother says, children. If I
stand up, my loves, you'll all hear it better."

Jane Macalister stood up at the end of the long table. All the children
dropped their spoons, and knives, and forks, as they listened to her.

"MY DEAR JANE," she began.

Here she paused.

"Your mother and I," she said, "have been Jane and Lucy to each other
ever since we were children."

"Who cares about that rot now?" murmured angry Kitty. Harry gave her a
pinch which make her scream.

"You shut up," she said back to him. "I must say something or I'll
'splode."

"MY DEAR JANE," continued the governess,

     "I must ask you to break the news as you best can to the poor
     children. The Squire and I have done all that lay in the power of
     mortals to avert the blow. But it has been God's will that we
     should not succeed. You can tell Molly by-and-by how it is that her
     dear father has got into such terrible money difficulties, but now
     the all-important thing for the children to know is this.... The
     Towers is sold, and we must all go away from the dear home we have
     loved so long. The Squire is terribly upset, and cannot bring
     himself to come back just at once, but I am returning to-morrow.
     There is nothing for us now but to bear up and make the best of
     things. It is not so hard on any of us as it is on the
     Squire.--Believe me, dear Jane, your affectionate friend,

                              "LUCY LORRIMER."

There was dead silence after the letter had been read. Then quite
suddenly the terrible and unexpected sound of Nell's weeping filled the
room.

"Oh, father," sobbed Nell. "Oh, father's face; oh, father's face."

She hid her head on Molly's shoulder and moaned in the most
broken-hearted way. Boris, too, looked very pale. He remembered the
pressure of the hand which had held his the night before. He heard the
words which were commonplace enough, once again, and he saw the haggard
lines round the lips and round the kindly eyes.

Boris slipped away from his own side of the table. He went up to Nell
and began to kiss her.

"I know," he said. "I understand. I saw him, too; but he'll be all right
by-and-by. It's like a big battle, but he'll not flinch; father's made
of the stuff that soldiers have in them. He'll be all right by-and-by."

"I wish you'd let me look at that letter, Jane Macalister," said Guy.

Guy was the heir of the Towers. It was his property and all his future,
which that letter seemed suddenly to deprive him of. He was the last boy
in the world to think first of himself; but now his head did feel a
little dizzy. If, it seemed to him up to this moment, there was a solid
fact in all the world, it was that in due time he should step into his
father's shoes and become Squire Lorrimer of the Towers.

Molly instantly understood the tone of Guy's voice. She started up, and
going to Jane took the letter; then she went to Guy, and put her arm
round his neck.

"Let's come into the garden and read it together," she said.

He stumbled up and went with her as if he were blind. They went out
through the open window and down the lawn, and Molly read the letter
aloud once again.

"Well, it's all up," she said when she had finished. "I have been
expecting it for a long time--a long time; haven't you, Guy?"

"No," answered Guy. "That's the awful part to me; it's such a sudden
blow. I knew, of course, there were money difficulties; but, then,
somehow or other, most fellows' fathers seem to have got them; and I was
so busy with my books and keeping ahead of the other fellows in form
that I didn't fret specially. I never wanted to think of myself
specially; but sometimes the thought used to cross my mind that there
might be a difficulty about my going to Cambridge by-and-by, and, of
course, I knew that Eton was quite out of the question; but that was
the worst, the very worst, that I thought could happen to me, and
now--now."

"Poor Guy," said Molly. "You'll never be Squire Lorrimer of the Towers."

"Oh, of course, that doesn't matter," said Guy, in a would-be careless
tone. "They can never take my real birthright from me. I'm the son of a
gentleman, and I come of the real old stock. It's thinking of father
that floors me, though, Molly. Why, this will just kill him."

"I'm awfully anxious about him," said Molly.

"How did he contrive to get into a scrape of this sort? I'm sure we
never were extravagant; we didn't care a bit what we wore nor what we
ate; and I know the grammar school at Nortonbury is cheap enough, and I
really don't think Jane Macalister gets ten pounds a year. I'm sure she
never has a new rag to her back; and as to you girls, of course I'm not
blind; but if you were dressed like other fellows' sisters, you and Nora
would look far and away the prettiest girls in the place."

"No, no, that's humbug," said downright Molly. "I'm not a bit pretty,
and what's more I don't want to be. Of course, Nora is different. I
acknowledge that she has a beautiful face."

"And you acknowledge another thing," said Guy; "that very little money
has been spent. How in the world has father got into this scrape?"

"Well, of course, we can't understand that," said Molly; "only I think I
can guess a little bit. Of course, these are bad times for all
landlords, and half the farmers don't pay their rents properly; and you
remember, Guy, last autumn, the lease of the Sunny Side farm fell in,
and father hasn't been able to let it since, because the whole place is
