
We were about a quarter of a mile from a point of rocks when our ship
sank.  In an incredibly short space of time we were close on the rocks.
Being several yards ahead of Jack, I was the first to clamber up, my
heart fluttering with fear, yet filled with deep gratitude for my
deliverance.  I turned to help Jack.  He was yet six yards from shore,
when a dreadful shark made a rush at him.

"Oh! quick! quick!"  I screamed.

He was panting and straining like a lion.  Another moment and his hand
would have been in mine, but at that moment I beheld the double rows of
horrid teeth close upon him.  He uttered a piercing shriek, and there
was an indescribably horrible _scrunch_ as he went down.  In a moment
after, he re-appeared, and making a last frightful effort to gain the
rocks, caught my hand.  I dragged him out of danger instantly, and then
I found, to my unutterable joy, that the shark had only bitten off the
half of his wooden leg!

Embracing each other fervently, we sat down in the rocks to rest and
collect our thoughts.



STORY TWO, CHAPTER 7.

I have often found, from experience, that the more one tries to collect
one's thoughts, the more one's thoughts pertinaciously scatter
themselves abroad, almost beyond the possibility of discovery.  Such was
the case with me, after escaping from the sea and the sharks, as related
circumstantially in the last chapter.  Perhaps the truth of this may
best be illustrated by laying before my readers the dialogue that ensued
between me and Jack on the momentous occasion referred to, as follows:--

_Jack_.  "I say, Bob, where in all the world have we got to?"

_Bob_.  "Upon my word, I don't know."

_Jack_.  "It's very mysterious."

_Bob_.  "What's very mysterious?"

_Jack_.  "Where we've got to.  Can't you guess?"

_Bob_.  "Certainly.  Suppose I say Lapland?"

_Jack_.  (Shaking his head), "Won't do."

_Bob_.  "Why?"

_Jack_.  "'Cause there are no palm-trees in Lapland."

_Bob_.  "Dear me, that's true.  How confused my head is!  I'll tell you
what it is, Jack, I can't think.  _That's it_--that's the cause of the
mystery that seems to beset me, I can't tell how; and then I've been
ill--that's it too."

_Jack_.  "How can there be two causes for one effect, Bob?  You're
talking stuff, man.  If I couldn't talk better sense than that, I'd not
talk at all."

_Bob_.  "Then why don't you hold your tongue?  I tell you what it is,
Jack, we're bewitched.  You said I was mad some time ago.  You were
right--so I am; so are you.  There are too many mysteries here for any
two sane men."  (Here Jack murmured we weren't men, but boys.) "There's
the running away and not being caught--the ship ready to sail the moment
we arrive; there's your joining me after all your good advice; there's
that horrible fight, and the lions, and Edwards, and the sinking of our
ship, and the--the--in short, I feel that I'm mad still.  I'm not
recovered yet.  Here, Jack, take care of me!"

Instead of replying to this, Jack busied himself in fitting a piece of
wood he had picked up to his wooden leg, and lashing it firmly to the
old stump.  When he had accomplished his task, he turned gravely to me
and said--

"Bob, your faculties are wandering pretty wildly to-day, but you've not
yet hit upon the cause of all our misfortunes.  The true cause is that
_you have disobeyed your father, and I my mother_."

I hung my head.  I had now no longer difficulty in collecting my
thoughts--they circled round that point until I thought that remorse
would have killed me.  Then suddenly I turned with a look of gladness to
my friend.

"But you forget _the letter_!  We are forgiven!"

"True," cried Jack, with a cheerful expression; "we can face our fate
with that assurance.  Come, let us strike into the country and discover
where we are.  I'll manage to hop along pretty well with my wooden leg.
We'll get home as soon as we can, by land if not by water, and then
we'll remain at home--won't we, Bob?"

"Remain at home!"  I cried; "ay, that will we.  I've had more than
enough of foreign experiences already.  Oh!  Jack, Jack, it's little I
care for the sufferings I have endured--but your leg, Jack!  Willingly,
most willingly, my dear friend, would I part with my own, if by so doing
I could replace yours."

Jack took my hand and squeezed it.

"It's gone now, Bob," he said sadly.  "I must just make the most of the
one that's left.  'Tis a pity that the one that's left is only the left
one."

So saying he turned his back to the sea, and, still retaining my hand in
his, led me into the forest.

But here unthought-of trouble awaited us at the very outset of our
wanderings.  The ground which we first encountered was soft and swampy,
so that I sank above the ankles at every step.  In these circumstances,
as might have been expected, poor Jack's wooden leg was totally useless.
The first step he took after entering the jungle, his leg penetrated
the soft ground to the depth of nine or ten inches, and at the second
step it disappeared altogether--insomuch that he could by no means pull
it out.

"I say, Bob," said he, with a rueful expression of countenance, "I'm in
a real fix now, and no mistake.  Come to anchor prematurely.  I resolved
to stick at nothing, and here I have stuck at the first step.  What _is_
to be done?"

Jack's right leg being deep down in the ground, it followed, as a
physical consequence, that his left leg was bent as if he were in a
sitting posture.  Observing this fact, just as he made the above remark,
he placed both his hands on his left knee, rested his chin on his hands,
and gazed meditatively at the ground.  The action tickled me so much
that I gave a short laugh.  Jack looked up and laughed too, whereupon we
both burst incontinently into an uproarious fit of laughter, which might
have continued ever so long had not Jack, in the fulness of his mirth,
given his fixed leg a twist that caused it to crack.

"Hallo!  Bob," he cried, becoming suddenly very grave, "I say, this
won't do, you know; if I break it short off you'll have to carry me, my
boy: so it behoves me to be careful.  What is to be done?"

"Come, I'll help you to pull it out."

"Oh! that's not what troubles me.  But after we get it out what's to be
done?"

"Jack," said I, seriously, "one thing at a time.  When we get you out,
then it will be time enough to inquire what to do next."

"That's sound philosophy, Bob; where did you pick it up?  I suspect you
must have been studying Shakespeare of late, on the sly.  But come, get
behind me, and put your hands under my arms, and heave; I'll shove with
my sound limb.  Now let us act together.  Stay!  Bob, we've been long
enough aboard ship to know the value of a song in producing unity of
action.  Take the tune from me."

Suiting the action to the word, Jack gave forth, at the top of his
voice, one or two of those peculiarly nautical howls wherewith seamen
are wont to constrain windlasses and capstans to creak, and anchors to
let go their hold.

"Now then, heave away, my hearties; yo-heave-o-hoi!"

At the last word we both strained with all our might.  I heard Jack's
braces burst with the effort.  We both became purple in the face, but
the leg remained immovable!  With a loud simultaneous sigh we relaxed,
and, looking at each other, groaned slightly.

"Come, come, Bob, never say die; one trial more; it was the braces that
spoiled it that time.  Now then, cheerily ho! my hearties,
heave-yo-hee-o-HOY!"

The united force applied this time was so great that we tore asunder all
the fastenings of the leg at one wrench, and Jack and I suddenly shot
straight up, as if we had been discharged from a hole in the ground.
Losing our balance we fell over each other on our backs--the wooden leg
remaining hard and fast in the ground.

"Ah!  Jack," said I sorrowfully, as I rubbed the mud off my garments,
"if we had remained at home this would not have happened."

"If we had remained at home," returned Jack, rather gruffly, as he
hopped towards his leg, "_nothing_ would have happened.  Come, Bob, lay
hold of it.  Out it shall come, if the inside of the world should come
along with it.  There now--_heave_!"

This time we gave vent to no shout, but we hove with such a will, that
Jack split his jacket from the waist to the neck, and the leg came out
with a crack that resembled the drawing of the largest possible cork out
of the biggest conceivable bottle.

Having accomplished this feat we congratulated each other, and then sat
down to repair damages.  This was not an easy matter.  It cost us no
little thought to invent some contrivance that would prevent the leg
from sinking, but at last we thought of a plan.  We cut a square piece
of bark off a tree, the outer rind of which was peculiarly tough and
thick.  In the centre of this we scooped a hole and inserted therein the
end of the leg, fastening it thereto with pieces of twine that we
chanced to have in our pockets.  Thus we made, as it were, an artificial
foot, which when Jack tried it served its purpose admirably--indeed, it
acted too well, for being a broad base it did not permit the wooden leg
to sink at all, while the natural leg did sink more or less, and, as the
wooden limb had no knee, it was stiff from hip to heel, and could not
bend, so that I had to walk behind my poor comrade, and when I observed
him get somewhat into the position of the Leaning Tower of Pisa I sprang
forward and supported him.

Thus we proceeded slowly through the forest, stumbling frequently,
tumbling occasionally, and staggering oft; but strange to say, without
either of us having any very definite idea of where we were going, or
what we expected to find, or why we went in one direction more than
another.  In fact, we proceeded on that eminently simple principle which
is couched in the well-known and time-honoured phrase, "follow your
nose."

True, once I ventured to ask my companion where he thought we were
going, to which he replied, much to my surprise, that he didn't know and
didn't care; that it was quite certain if we did not go forward we could
not expect to get on, and that in the ordinary course of things if we
proceeded we should undoubtedly come to something.  To this I replied,
in a meditative tone, that there was much truth in the observation, and
that, at any rate, if we did not come to something, something would
certainly come to us.

But we did not pursue the subject.  In fact, we were too much taken up
with the interesting and amusing sights that met our gaze in that
singular forest; insomuch that on several occasions I neglected my
peculiar duty of watching Jack, and was only made aware of my
carelessness by hearing him shout, "Hallo!  Bob, look alive!--I'm over!"
when I would suddenly drop my eyes from the contemplation of the plumage
of a parrot or the antics of a monkey, to behold my friend leaning over
at an angle of "forty-five."  To leap forward and catch him in my arms
was the work of an instant.  On each of these occasions, after setting
him upright, I used to give him a tender hug, to indicate my regret at
having been so inattentive, and my sympathy with him in his calamitous
circumstances.

Poor Jack was very gentle and uncomplaining.  He even made light of his
misfortune, and laughed a good deal at himself; but I could see,
nevertheless, that his spirits were at times deeply affected, in spite
of his brave efforts to bear up and appear gay and cheerful.



STORY TWO, CHAPTER 8.

It was evening when we were cast ashore in this new country, so that we
had not advanced far into the forest before night closed in and
compelled us to halt; for, had we continued our journey in the dark, we
should certainly have been drowned in one of the many deep morasses
which abounded there, and which we had found it difficult to steer clear
of, even in daylight.

As the moon arose and the stars began to glimmer in the sky, I observed,
to my dismay, that all kinds of noxious creatures and creeping things
began to move about, and strange hissing sounds and low dismal hootings
and wails were heard at times indistinctly, as if the place were the
abode of evil spirits, who were about to wake up to indulge in their
midnight orgies.

"Oh!  Jack," said I, shuddering violently, as I stopped and seized my
companion by the arm.  "I can't tell what it is that fills me with an
unaccountable sensation of dread.  I--I feel as if we should never more
get out of this horrible swamp, or see again the blessed light of day.
See! see! what horrid creature is that?"

"Pooh! man," interrupted Jack, with a degree of levity in his tone which
surprised me much.  "It's only a serpent.  All these kind o' things are
regular cowards.  Only let them alone and they're sure to let you alone.
I should like above all things to tickle up one o' these brutes, and
let him have a bite at my wooden toe!  It would be rare fun, wouldn't
it, Bob, eh?  Come, let us push on, and see that you keep me straight,
old fellow!"

I made no reply for some time.  I was horrified at my comrade's levity
in such circumstances.  Then, as I heard him continue to chuckle and
remark in an undertone on the surprise the serpent would get on
discovering the exceeding toughness of his toe, it for the first time
flashed across my mind that his sufferings had deranged my dear
companion's intellect.

The bare probability of such a dreadful calamity was sufficient to put
to flight all my previous terrors.  I now cared nothing whatever for the
loathsome reptiles that wallowed in the swamps around me, and the quiet
glidings and swelterings of whose hideous forms were distinctly audible
in the stillness of approaching night.  My whole anxiety was centred on
Jack.  I thought that if I could prevail on him to rest he might
recover, and proposed that we should encamp; but he would not hear of
this.  He kept plunging on, staggering through brake and swamp, reedy
pond and quaking morass, until I felt myself utterly unable to follow
him a step farther.

Just at this point Jack stopped abruptly and said--

"Bob, my boy, we'll camp here."

It was a fearful spot.  Dark, dismal, and not a square foot of dry
ground.

"Here, Jack?"

"Ay, here."

"But it's--it's all wet.  Excuse me, my dear comrade, I've not yet
acquired the habit of sleeping in water."

"No more have I, Bob; we shall sleep on a fallen tree, my boy.  Did you
never hear of men sleeping in a swamp on the top of a log?  It's often
done, I assure you, and I mean to do it to-night.  See, here is a good
large one, three feet broad by twenty feet long, with lots of stumps of
broken branches to keep us from rolling off.  Come, let's begin."

We immediately began to make our arrangements for the night.  With the
aid of our clasp-knives we cut a quantity of leafy branches, and spread
them on the trunk of a huge prostrated tree, the half of which was sunk
in the swamp, but the other half was sufficiently elevated to raise us
well out of the water.  The bed was more comfortable than one would
suppose; and, being very tired, we lay down on it as soon as it was
made, and tried to sleep: having nothing to eat, we thought it well to
endeavour to obtain all the refreshment we could out of sleep.

We had not lain long, when I started up in a fright, and cried--

"Hallo!  Jack, what's that?  See, through the reeds; it creeps slowly.
Oh; horror! it comes towards us!"

Jack looked at it sleepily.  "It's an alligator," said he.  "If it
approaches too close, just wake me; but, pray, don't keep howling at
every thing that comes to peep at us."

Just at that moment, the hideous reptile drew near, and, opening its
jaws, let them come together with a snap!  Even Jack was not proof
against this.  He started up, and looked about for a defensive weapon.
We had nothing but our clasp-knives.  The alligator wallowed towards us.

"Oh for an axe!" gasped Jack.

The brute was within a few yards of us now.  I was transfixed with
horror.  Suddenly an idea occurred to me.

"Your leg, Jack, your leg!"

He understood me.  One sweep of his clasp-knife cut all the fastenings--
the next moment he grasped the toe in both hands, and, swaying the heavy
butt of the limb in the air, brought it down with all his force on the
skull of the alligator.  It rang like the sound of a blow on an empty
cask.  Again the limb was swayed aloft, and descended with extraordinary
violence on the extreme point of the alligator's snout.  There was a
loud crash, as if of small bones being driven in.  The animal paused,
put its head on one side, and turning slowly round waddled away into the
noisome recesses of its native swamp.

Scarcely had we recovered from the effects of this, when we heard in the
distance shouts and yells and the barking of dogs.  Crouching in our
nest we listened intently.  The sounds approached, but while those who
made them were yet at some distance we were startled by the sudden
approach of a dark object, running at full speed.  It seemed like a man,
or rather a huge ape, for it was black, and as it came tearing towards
us, running on its hind-legs, we could see its eyes glaring in the
moonlight, and could hear its labouring breath.  It was evidently hard
pressed by its pursuers, for it did not see what lay before it, and had
well-nigh run over our couch ere it observed Jack standing on one leg,
with the other limb raised in a threatening attitude above his head.  It
was too late to turn to avoid the blow.

Uttering a terrible cry the creature fell on its knees, and, trembling
violently, cried--

"Oh, massa! oh, massa, spare me!  Me no runaway agin.  Mercy, massa!
mercy!"

"Silence, you noisy villain," cried Jack, seizing the negro by the hair
of the head.

"Yis, massa," gasped the man, while his teeth chattered and the whites
of his eyes rolled fearfully.

"What are you?  Where d'ye come from?  Who's after ye?"

To these abrupt questions, the poor negro replied as briefly, that he
was a runaway slave, and that his master and bloodhounds were after him.

We had guessed as much, and the deep baying of the hounds convinced us
of the truth of his statement.

"Quick," cried Jack, dragging the black to the edge of our log, "get
under there; lie flat; keep still;" so saying he thrust the negro under
the branches that formed our couch.  We covered him well up and then sat
down on him.  Before we had well finished our task the foremost of the
bloodhounds came bounding towards us, with its eyeballs glaring and its
white fangs glittering in the dim light like glow-worms in a blood-red
cavern.  It made straight for the spot where the negro was concealed,
and would have seized him in another instant, had not Jack, with one
blow of his leg, beat in its skull.

"Shove him out of sight, Bob."

I seized the dead hound and obeyed, while my comrade prepared to receive
the second dog.  But that animal seemed more timid.  It swerved as the
blow was delivered, received on its haunches, and fled away howling in
another direction.

Jack at once laid down his leg and sat down on the negro, motioning me
to do the same.  Then pulling an old tobacco-pipe out of his pocket, he
affected to be calmly employed in filling it when the pursuers came up.
There were two of them, in straw hats and nankeen pantaloons, armed with
cudgels, and a more ruffianly pair of villains I never saw before or
since.

"Hallo! strangers," cried one, as they halted for a few moments on
observing us.  "Queer place to camp.  Fond o' water and dirt, I guess?"

"You seem fond o' dirt and not o' water, to judge from your faces,"
replied Jack, calmly, attempting to light his pipe, which was rather a
difficult operation, seeing that it was empty and he had no fire.  "Ah!
my light's out.  Could you lend us a match, friend?"

"No, we can't.  No time.  Hain't got none.  Did you see a nigger pass
this way?"

"Ha! you're after him, are you?" cried Jack, indignantly.  "Do you
suppose I'd tell you if I did?  Go and find him for yourselves."

The two men frowned fiercely at this, and appeared about to attack us.
But they changed their minds, and said, "Mayhap you'll tell us if ye saw
two hounds, then?"

"Yes, I did."

"Which way did they pass?"
