
"Oh, it will. It was made with both ends of the service in view. Your
apparatus would first have to be adjusted and tuned until it was at
the same frequency as the station with which you were talking. That
you have to do anyhow, whether you are sending or receiving. And I
told you, you remember, how to regulate that. Your antenna is
connected through an adjustable induction coil, and moreover you have
a small condenser which together with it forms a closed circuit. It is
simple enough when you understand the principle to adjust the
vibratory motion in the antenna by moving the connection. The
frequency of the closed circuit can be adjusted, too. Tuning is
nothing more than putting these two circuits into accord with the
waves you receive. Your detector does a good part of the work for you,
for it responds to every oscillation set up in the receiver. When,
however, you are transmitting a message, you must take care to cut out
your receiver by turning on the switch. Never forget that. You won't
be likely to, either, when you are told why. You see it requires power
to send out transmission waves and therefore to do it you have to
employ a high-pressure current. Receiving, on the other hand, demands
delicately adjusted instruments which are equipped to catch every
faint, incoming wave. Should you let the strong charge of electricity
used for transmission pass through your fragile receiving apparatus
you would ruin it in no time."

"I can see that," replied Dick.

"Grasp that notion and you have one big principle of the difference
between sending messages and receiving them," said Bob. "Skill in
learning to take messages either in code or cipher comes with
practice. The more you work at it the faster you can go. You have a
keyboard all installed and the only thing standing between you and an
expert operator is patience. Speed comes sooner than you think, too,
if you practice persistently every day. As for the Morse code you
press the key lever down quickly and instantly release it to make a
dot. A dash is equal to three dots; the space between the parts of the
same letters is equal to a dot; that between two letters to three
dots; and between two words to five dots. You must train your ear
until the span of these intervals becomes unmistakable. When you get
some skill and are ready to try out what you can do, you will find
that there are several ways of getting wider practice. There are, for
example, local clubs that broadcast in code and send messages limited
in speed to an amateur's capacity. Such centers are considerate enough
to transmit at the rate of not more than five or ten words to the
minute. It is persistence and a willingness to go slowly and carefully
that win out in the end. A moderately delivered message that is
without errors is worth a dozen fast, inaccurate ones; for when you
blunder and have to go back and repeat, you not only waste your time
and that of the man at the other end of the line but you annoy and
usually confuse him. You will never gain anything if you are content
with being a sloppy operator since above everything else radio
messages must be correct. That is their chief value. Therefore, if
after trying with all your might you find you cannot qualify as a
topnotch, high-speed man be content to drop into the class below and
be an accurate, slower operator. There are always certain things we
do better than others. Speed may not be one of your gifts. That is no
sign you have not other talents, however. Face the fact and go into
the class where you belong. You won't get so nervous and fussed up,
and by and by you may surprise yourself by finding that with time and
experience the desired speed will come."

"I am not aiming to be a crackerjack like you," grinned Dick. "If I
can take down and send any messages at all I shall feel pretty cocky."

"You think that now," returned Bob, ignoring the flattery contained in
the observation. "But by and by you will find yourself discontented
and as crazy to make time as you are in an automobile. There is a
fascination about it."

"Doesn't the Morse Continental bother you a bit?" inquired Mr.
Crowninshield.

"Not a particle. In fact, it has come to be almost as easy reading as
straight English," answered Bob. "The thing that does fuss me
sometimes though is to send and receive in cipher."

"Mercy! Do they do that too?" gasped Mrs. Crowninshield.

"Certainly. Often both in time of war and times of peace confidential
messages which it is not desirable all the world should know have to
be transmitted. Sometimes these are government communications;
sometimes business or personal ones. At any rate, their senders wish
them kept private and hence they are sent in cipher. Many of them are
queer enough, too, when they come in."

"Can you understand them yourself?" asked Nancy.

"Certainly not. It is not intended that any one except the person for
whom they are intended shall know what they mean."

"But I should think since they make no sense you would wonder whether
you had them right," commented Dick.

"I do wonder sometimes," admitted Bob honestly. "When you get a
sequence of queer words or combinations of letters you cannot help
wondering. However, there is not much chance for a mistake, either in
the transmission or in the delivery of such messages, for the operator
is always obliged to send them slower than he does ordinary stuff,
spacing the letters or groups of letters with unusual care.
Furthermore, code words are always repeated once. This gives the man
receiving them a chance to print the letters by hand rather than write
them, a precaution that does much to prevent mistakes. The address and
signature must also be very carefully transmitted. With such
watchfulness at each end of the line it would be only a colossally
stupid person who would blunder."

"But suppose the operator who is transmitting went faster than you
could?" murmured Walter.

"He doesn't as a general rule. It isn't wireless ethics. And even
should he be a more skillful radio man he knows he would gain nothing
by hustling the chap at the other end for he would only lose time by
having to go back and repeat."

"Is all the general transmission of messages given such care?"
inquired Mr. Crowninshield.

"Of course cipher communications are fussier," Bob said. "Nevertheless
the rules are pretty strict for all messages. And since accuracy is
the keynote of radio and to get it your outfit must be in A1
condition, every care must be taken to have strong, clear, and
effective sending and receiving power. That means you must constantly
clean your apparatus and tighten it up; test out your detector by the
buzzer intended for the purpose and make sure that it is in sensitive
condition; and assure yourself that every part of your set is OK.
Moreover, an operator who is on duty listening in is expected to wear
the double head receiver all the time, so no sound, however faint, may
get by him. He must also see that his detector is adjusted to its
greatest degree of sensibility and his tuner to the proper wave
length. If your station happens to be near another, or if you are one
of a group of ships and other vessels near yours are sending, you must
watch out and either weaken the coupling of your detector or open your
switch and cut it out altogether when those around you are using
powerful currents for transmission; else you will wreck this delicate
part of your instrument."

"Gee, but there are things to remember!" ejaculated Dick.

"Not so many, really, if you use ordinary brains," Bob returned. "You
just have to think, that is all. A few big principles hold throughout.
The other _don'ts_ are simply to make your own work and the other
fellow's smoother; prevent mistakes; do away with as much interference
as possible; and protect your outfit. For example, I found I could
often lessen the interference by loosening the coupling of my
receiving set after I had heard a call and reduce the sound to a point
where it was just readable. You get your message all right but you do
not get so much else with it. Then you can save wear and tear if you
only run your generator while you are sending messages. That you
cannot transmit at the hours reserved for naval radio stations to send
out the time signals by which navigators set their chronometers, or
when operators are broadcasting, goes without saying. Any dunce would
know that."

"I had no idea there were hours for sending out the time," confessed
Dick.

"Indeed there are. It is very important, too, that ships know the
correct time to prevent disasters. There are shore stations whose sole
duty it is to supply to ships the time and their location. Don't you
recall my mentioning such coastal stations?"

"Oh, yes; I guess I do remember now," returned Dick, a trifle
confused.

"What happens if you call a station and nobody answers?" interrogated
Nancy. "I have been meaning to ask. Do you just keep on calling as you
do at the telephone?"

"No, indeed," was the instant reply. "Should you do that you would
cause no end of interference and make yourself a nuisance to
everybody. The rule is that after you have called a station three
times at two-minute intervals you must stop for a quarter of an hour
before you call again. If you happened to be calling a fleet of ships
it is desirable to alter your tune rather than keep repeating the
summons in the same key. It saves time. Merchant ships and coast
stations must, however, be called in the wave length definitely
specified for their use."

"Shipboard stations seem to have more rules than the others,"
commented Dick.

"Not more rules but different ones," Bob said. "You see their nearness
to other ships makes this imperative. Each ship has to take care not
to knock out the apparatus of its neighbor by inconsiderate use of a
high-power current; also it must not cause undue interference. In
other words, a bevy of ships, like a group of persons, must be
courteous to one another. If a ship within a ten-mile radius of
another is receiving signals that are so faint that they are difficult
to distinguish, a neighboring vessel should not complicate matters by
trying to transmit a message until the other ship has received what
was coming in. This rule makes for ordinary politeness, that is all."

"Couldn't the ship waiting to talk send a message in a different wave
length?" inquired Dick.

"Oh, yes; that would be quite possible, if the tune varied enough to
make it perfectly distinct."

"But what about high-power stations?" demanded Walter. "They handle
important stuff and of course cannot keep stopping for other people
to talk. Don't their powerful currents damage the receiving sets in
stations near them? I should think they might even injure their own."

"High-power, or long-distance stations have still another problem to
meet and they meet it in a different way," responded Bob. "In order
that the currents they are obliged to use shall not destroy detectors
and other delicate receiving apparatus they carry on what are known as
duplex operations. That is, the receiving station is constructed at
some distance from the sending station--often several miles away--and
the two parts of the service are performed independently by different
antennae. In this way sending and receiving can be carried on at the
same time in slightly varying wave lengths."

"But how can they talk and act as one station if they are so far
apart?" questioned His Highness much puzzled.

"It is not as impossible as it seems. The operator at the sending
station has a small sending key connected by electricity with a relay
at the receiving station. By means of a lever and certain complex
paraphernalia this key can be used as the sending key for the main
apparatus. Thus the station operated by distant control carries on a
duplex system of transmission so that both sending and receiving
stations are kept in touch with one another."

"That is clever!" interrupted Mr. Crowninshield.

"A high-power station has to be ingeniously equipped," responded Bob,
"for it does a great deal of business, rapid business and business
that is important. In some stations so fast do the messages come in
and so long are they that an automatic tape not unlike that seen at
the stock exchange is used to make perforated records of the dots and
dashes. Later this punctured slip can be run through a Morse writer
and the message taken down at leisure by the operator. Or sometimes
photographic or phonographic records are resorted to and these like
the others can be reproduced at a slower rate of speed and interpreted
by the operator."

"I should like that and then I wouldn't have to hurry," murmured
Nancy.

"It must be jolly to be an operator in a long-distance station," mused
Dick, "where real things are going on."

"Perhaps it is," was Bob's nonchalant answer. "I fancy, though, that
very vital government messages go in cipher. Uncle Sam isn't risking
having his secrets published far and wide over the face of the whole
earth. Although for that matter all radio messages are secret."

"But how can they be if any and everybody can listen in?"

"Well, on a high-power wave length probably ordinary persons would not
be able to listen in. Their apparatus would not be equipped for it.
Should a station be able to, however, during critical periods, such as
times of war, the government takes no chances and orders all but
certain specified stations dismantled. That puts an end to intruders
unless a spy has a hidden wireless somewhere; and if he has he takes
an almighty risk with his neck, that is all I can say," concluded Bob
with a grin.

"But operators have tongues and can talk," Mrs. Crowninshield
suggested. "Don't they sometimes?"

"Usually they do not know what the message passing through their hands
means," Bob answered. "But even should they contrive to study it out
they would not dare repeat it because of the penalty entailed."

"Penalty?"

The young operator nodded.

"You would not have to concern yourself much about blabbers if you
heard what happens to them," piped Walter, who suddenly found himself
on ground which previous instruction had rendered familiar. "It's off
with their heads!"

"Not really!" gasped the horrified Nancy.

"Oh, he does not mean literally," the elder brother explained. "But it
is away with their license which is almost as disastrous a fate to a
man who has planned to make his living by wireless. Nor is the loss of
the license all that happens. In addition one is liable to a
two-hundred-and-fifty-dollar fine or three years' imprisonment."

"Jove! They do come down on you!" Dick averred.

"Ra-_ther_! You know, of course, that if you violate any clause of
your radio agreement you may be fined one hundred dollars; and should
an operator fake a distress call the fine is twenty-five hundred
dollars, or five years in prison and perhaps both. Even the smallest
fine one can get off with for such an offense is two years behind the
bars. It makes you think twice before playing that little joke. The
government is wise, too, to spread it on thick, for to fake an S O S
which is given the right of way over every other signal would be a
contemptible trick. Mild punishments like fines and imprisonments
would be too good for the wretch who would so deliberately mislead
people. Moreover a few such offenses would cause the importance of the
call to be discredited so that in time nobody would be in a rush to
pay attention to it."

"I didn't realize an S O S so invariably had the right of way,"
meditated Dick. "Of course I knew it was the distress signal at sea."

"S O S in the International Morse Code is the universal distress call
adopted by the common consent of our civilized nations at the wireless
convention held at Berlin in 1906. Every radio station ashore or
afloat is obliged to give it first place and do everything possible to
further its demands. When a distress call is heard all ships and
stations everywhere that hear it are in honor bound to stop whatever
they may be doing and listen; nor must they try to talk with the ship
herself unless she asks them to. Instead, after she has sent out her
call for attention, which is equivalent to our _Hello_ of the
telephone, she gives her name; the name of the station or ship she
wishes to talk with; states what the matter is; and defines as nearly
as she is able her position. This done she sends out a general call
and if the station or ship she has asked aid from has not caught the
signal and fails to answer her, any operator within hearing may do so.
The instant he begins to talk with her, however, all the others
listening in must remain silent. At last, when the message is
delivered or the necessary conversation at an end, then the ship's
radio man sends out a broadcast to let everybody know that he has
finished so that all stations may resume their regular routine."

"Some system!" breathed Dick.

"I guess you would think there was some system if you were to see a
book of radio rules," returned Bob. "I'll show you mine some day. All
the various shore stations have their many regulations, as I have told
you before; shipboard stations have theirs; and even the amateurs are
protected so that every class may get fair play and not bother his
neighbor. Wireless stations, you see, are not mere toys. They have
work to do and must be able to do it unhampered."

"I'd like a glimpse of that manual," suggested Dick.

"I'll bring it round to-morrow," Bob answered, glancing at his watch
and rising.

The others rose too.

"I suppose it would be no use to listen in for O'Connel again,"
remarked Mr. Crowninshield.

"I will if you like," Bob responded. "I doubt, though, if it would do
any good."

"No, I guess it wouldn't. We shall just have to wait," sighed the
man.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE NET TIGHTENS


When on the morrow no call of any kind came from O'Connel Mr.
Crowninshield was, as his son expressed it, "fit to be tied."

"I can't see why we do not hear something to-day," fumed he. "He can't
expect us to _wait developments_ forever. Are you sure you did not
miss the signal, Bob."

"I don't see how I could have missed it," replied the operator
patiently.

"But he always does call, doesn't he?"

"He has for the last few days."

"Then why not to-day?"

"I cannot imagine. Perhaps he couldn't."

"You don't suppose anything has happened to Lola, do you?"

"Who can tell?"

"You are right; it was a foolish question," admitted the financier,
accepting the rebuke gracefully. "Still, I cannot help being anxious
and wondering."

"Of course not."

"If only that miserable inspector would turn up and you could get your
license! It is absurd that you cannot send a message, a man of your
experience!"

"I am as sorry about the delay as you are," Bob answered. "Perhaps I
am more so. Nevertheless I am not going to break the rules. Besides,
were we to call O'Connel, it might arouse suspicion and get him into
trouble. It is far better to leave the calling to him."

"But he hasn't called."

"Then there is some good reason, I'll be bound. He knows what he is
about when he says to await developments."

"Maybe he does," sighed the elder man. "However, I am not much used to
waiting. When I want a thing done, I want it done."

Bob smiled at the characteristic remark.

"You cannot whisk everything off like that," observed he. "Sometimes
it is necessary----"

"To wait? Yes, I suppose so," put in Mr. Crowninshield. "Well, I will
hold my horses for one more day. But I warn you to-morrow I shall do
something. I can't be hanging around like this--not knowing anything
or hearing anything."

"It is hard," Bob returned sympathetically.

"It is hard for one born in New York and accustomed to seeing things
hum," asserted the owner of Surfside with a wry smile. "Well, we must
try to forget it, that's all. Come, get your books and let us go on
with our radio lesson from the point where we left it yesterday. The
