Cavendish promised that it would be given, and ordered the Spanish
officers to strike their sails and lower a boat.

Without loss of time this was done, and one of the principal merchants
coming up the side of the _Desire_, falling on his knees, implored the
Admiral's mercy.

Cavendish assured him it would be granted, that their lives would be
spared, and that they would be well treated, provided he was correctly
informed of the amount of valuables on board the galleon.

The captain and pilot, who had also arrived, told him that the ship
carried one hundred and twenty-two thousand pesos of gold, and that the
rest of her cargo consisted of silks, satins, damasks, with musk and
other merchandise, with provisions of all sorts in abundance.

They were detained on board while the galleon their prize was carried
into Puerto Seguro.  There was here a stream of clear water, with plenty
of fish, fowl, and wood to be obtained, as also numerous hares and
coneys.  As soon as they had anchored, the English employed themselves
in transferring the rich cargo on board their own vessels, as also in
dividing the treasure, to each man being allotted a certain portion; but
the crew of the _Content_ were very far from contented, and showed some
inclination to mutiny.  They were, however, to all appearances speedily
pacified, though as it turned out they were far from being really so.

The Spaniards were supplied with sufficient arms to defend themselves
against the natives and everything else they required, for which the
captain, in the name of the rest, expressed himself very grateful.  All
the passengers and most of the ship's company were allowed to go except
two Japanese lads, who were detained, and three others who had been born
in Manilla, the youngest of whom afterwards became a page to the
Countess of Essex.

Besides these, Rodrigo, a Portuguese who had visited Canton and other
parts of China, and had been in Java and the Philippines, was kept, and
a Spaniard, Thomas de Ersola, an experienced pilot between Acapulco, the
Ladrones, and the Philippines.

The _Santa Anna_, which had still five hundred tons of goods in her, was
set on fire, and all arrangements being made, on the 19th of November,
to the joy of their crews, the Admiral, firing a farewell salute, stood
out of harbour at three o'clock in the afternoon, and with a fair wind,
steering westward, they commenced their homeward voyage.

The King's ship was soon burnt down to the water's edge, but curious as
it may seem, she escaped destruction.  Her cables being burnt through,
she drifted on shore, when the Spaniards managed to extinguish the
flames, and with the planks they had obtained and the sails and rigging
which had been landed, the trees in the neighbourhood supplying them
with masts and yards, they fitted her for sea, and before long contrived
to make their escape.

Cavendish took a great liking to Ersola, and placed much confidence in
him as a pilot.  He seemed to merit this by the accurate way in which he
guided the ship across the Pacific.

On going out of the harbour the _Content_ had been left astern.  Night
coming on, she was lost sight of, and when morning broke she was nowhere
to be seen.  In vain the _Desire_ waited for her.  At length, spreading
her sails, she stood on her course.

From that day no more was seen of the hapless _Content_, nor was the
slightest clue obtained as to what became of her.  Some thought that she
had sailed for the Straits and been lost, but Ersola was of opinion that
Captain Hare, who commanded her, thinking to be wiser than Drake, had
attempted the North-East Passage, and had got so far north that he had
perished, with all his company, in the ice.

That there was such a passage no one doubted, and that America was a
continent by itself, independent of the rest of the world.

For forty-five days the _Desire_ glided on with a fair wind out of sight
of land, until on the 3rd of January, 1588, she made the island of
Guham, one of the Ladrones.  From thence a number of natives came off,
bringing fruits and vegetables, but became so troublesome that, losing
temper, Cavendish in a most unjustifiable manner ordered a shot to be
fired among them.

On the 14th of the same month the _Desire_ made the Philippines, and
sailing on, came to an anchor, on the morning of the 15th, in a safe
harbour in the island, called Capal.  Scarcely had the anchor been
dropped than one of the chief caciques of the island came off with
provisions, supposing the ship to be Spanish.  He being detained on
board, his people were sent on shore to invite the other cacique to come
off, which he shortly did, bringing an abundance of provisions, so that
the whole of the clay was spent in buying hogs, hens, roots, cocoas, and
other vegetables, by which the crew were greatly refreshed.

This island was about sixty leagues distant from Manilla, which was
already a flourishing place, containing seven hundred inhabitants, among
them many merchants from China, and also several Sanguelos, who were
partly Moors, or Malays probably, and partly heathen.  The Sanguelos
were especially clever in inventing and making all manner, of things, so
that few or no Christians could surpass them.  They excelled in drawing
and embroidering upon satin, silk or lawn, representing either beasts,
fowls, fish, or worms, in the most natural manner.  They also worked in
silk, silver, gold, and pearl.

On the same night of their arrival at Capal the Portuguese Nicholas
Rodrigo, who had been taken out of the _Santa Anna_, desired to speak to
Cavendish in secret.  His request being granted, he told the Admiral
that although he had hitherto appeared to be discontented, he was truly
grateful to him for the kindness he had received, and as a proof of this
he desired to put him on his guard against a treacherous plot which had
been devised by the pilot Ersola to deliver up his vessel to the
Spaniards.  As a proof that what he said was true, a letter, he stated,
would be found in Ersola's chest.  Search being made, the letter was
discovered, which Ersola had intended to send by some natives to
Manilla.  It called on the authorities there forthwith to fit out an
expedition to capture the _Desire_, warning them that if she escaped,
the English would bring their countrymen down to attack the settlement.

A drum-head court martial was immediately held.  The hapless pilot at
first denied all knowledge of the letter, but at length compelled to
confess his guilt, with a short shrift he was next morning hanged at the
yard-arm.

The _Desire_ remained nine days at Capal, during which Cavendish obliged
the chief cacique, as well as the caciques of a hundred other islands,
to pay tribute to him in hogs, hens, potatoes, and cocoas.  The tribute
being received on board, he hoisted the flags and sounded the drums and
trumpets.  Then telling them that the English were enemies to the
Spaniards, he paid them in money more than an equivalent for the
provisions they had brought.  To show their pleasure, the caciques rowed
about the ship in their canoes at a great rate.  The brave voyagers, who
never doubted the existence of Satan, firmly believed what they
stated,--that those people wholly worshipped the devil, and oftentimes
have conferences with him who "appeareth unto them in a most ugly and
monstrous shape."

Setting sail on the 24th, the _Desire_ ran along the coast, past
Manilla, putting to flight some frigates which had been sent after her,
and dispersing some Spaniards who fired at her boat.

One or two men died at this time, and on the last day of February
Captain Havers succumbed to a burning ague, from which he had suffered
several days, to the great grief of all on board.

Passing by the Moluccas, the _Desire_, after various adventures, reached
Java, where she was visited by the chief Rajah, named Bolamboam, an aged
despot who possessed a hundred wives, while his son had fifty.  His
people were said to be the bravest of all those inhabiting the
south-east part of the world, for they never feared any death.

Several Portuguese who were settled in this part of the island visited
the ship, and, hearing that their King, Don Antonio, was a friend of the
Queen of England, urged Cavendish to advise him to come out and found a
kingdom which would comprehend the Moluccas, Ceylon, China, and the
Philippines.  A friendly reception was also promised to the English.

Firing a parting salute on the 16th of March, Cavendish took his
departure, traversing for forty days that "mightie and vaste sea between
the yle of Java and the main of Africa, observing the heavens, the
crosiers or southern cross, the other starres, the fowles, which are
marks unto seamen of fair weather or foul weather, approaching of lands
or islands, the winds, the tempests, the rains and thunder, with the
alterations of the tides and currents."

On the 10th of May the _Desire_ was overtaken by a terrific storm, but
it calmed in a few hours, and the next day a look-out from the masthead
saw land, which was supposed to be the Cape of Good Hope, but was
ultimately proved to be False Cape.

It was not until the 16th of May that, with a brisk gale, the ship
passed the Cape of Good Hope, and on the 8th of June she came in sight
of the island of Saint Helena.  Only four people were found upon the
island, but it was abundantly stored with fruits and vegetables of all
sorts, carefully cultivated, while there were numberless goats and hogs
running wild among the mountains.

The Portuguese homeward-bound East Indian fleet, the smallest of which
vessels were of eight or nine hundred tons burden, laden with spices,
Calicut cloth, precious stones, pearls, and treasure, had called off
there only twenty days before.

Having touched at the Azores on the 3rd of September, the _Desire_ fell
in with a Plymouth vessel coming from Lisbon, which gave the voyagers
the glorious information of the overthrow of the Spanish Armada.

Directly afterwards the _Desire_ encountered a terrific gale, which
carried away the greater part of her remaining sails.  To replace them
others were manufactured from the Indian damasks, and the canvas made of
the silk grass of the South Seas, which had a most lustrous appearance.
One of her topsails was of cloth of gold, while her officers and crew
were dressed in silk clothes, their own having probably long since worn
out.

Thus equipped, on the 9th of September the _Desire_ entered the
long-wished-for port of Plymouth, to the great astonishment of the
inhabitants, who, as they gazed at her, fancied that all her sails were
of silk, supposing naturally that this betokened the value of her cargo.
In this they were not far wrong, for the wealth Cavendish brought home
was enough to buy a fair earldom.

He was received with great kindness by the Queen, who, considering that
his exploit almost rivalled that of Drake, bestowed on him the honour of
knighthood.  He boasted to his patron, Lord Hunsdon, that he had burnt
and sunk nineteen sail of ships, small and great; that all the villages
and towns where he had landed he had burnt and spoiled, and had carried
off a great quantity of treasure, his most profitable transaction being
that of the capture of the _Santa Anna_, as her cargo was the richest
that had ever floated on those seas, so that his ships could only
contain a small portion.

Happy would it have been for the gallant Cavendish had he remained
contentedly on shore, but his eager soul burned for fresh enterprises.
Having fitted out a squadron of three ships and two barks, in one of
which, the _Roebuck_, John Davis went as captain, he sailed from
Plymouth on the 26th of August, 1591, for the purpose of finding a
North-West Passage by way of the Pacific into the Atlantic.  Disaster,
however, followed him from the first.  He was deserted by one of his
captains, and failing to get through the Straits of Magellan, was
compelled to return home.  He died of a broken heart, after a vain
search for Saint Helena, where he hoped to refresh his crew, towards the
end of the year 1592.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

CAPE HORN FIRST DOUBLED BY SCHOUTEN AND LE MAIRE--A.D. 1615-17.

Desire of Dutch merchants to find a fresh passage into the South Sea--Le
Maire applies to Captain Schouten--The _Unity_ and _Horn_ fitted out--
Sail--Touch at Dover and Plymouth--Put into Sierra Leone--Fruit and
water obtained--The _Horn_ struck by a sea-unicorn--Make the coast of
South America--Attempting to enter Port Desire, the _Unity_ strikes a
rock--Both vessels nearly lost--The vessels put on shore to clean--The
_Horn_ burnt--Penguins--Sea-lions--Discovery of the Straits of Le
Maire--Cape Horn named and doubled--Steer for Juan Fernandez--Unable to
find anchorage off it--Touch at Dog, Water, and Fly Islands--Fire at a
double canoe--Some of the natives killed--The _Unity_ anchors off an
island--Natives swarm around her--Boat attacked--Natives become
friendly--Their chief visits the ship--The savages attack the ship--
Course changed to the northward--Two savages killed--Friendly
intercourse with others--The King and his courtiers take to flight at
the sound of a great gun--Meeting of two Kings--A feast--Other islands
visited--Coast of New Guinea reached--Natives attack the ship--Shock of
an earthquake felt on board--Sail along western coast of New Guinea--
Hostility of the natives--Barter with the natives at the south end--
Touch at Gilolo and Amboyna--The _Unity_ confiscated at Batavia--Death
of La Maire--Captain Schouten reaches Holland.

The Dutch, from an early period of their history, had actively engaged
in commercial enterprises.  They had followed the Spaniards and
Portuguese to India, and having successfully competed with them for its
trade, had established settlements and factories in many of the most
fertile portions of the Eastern Archipelago.  They had, notwithstanding,
no idea of the advantages of free trade, and the Dutch East India
Company having been formed, obtained from the States General of the
United Provinces--as their government was then called--exclusive
privileges, prohibiting all the rest of their subjects from trading to
the eastward beyond the Cape of Good Hope, or westward through the
Straits of Magellan, in any of the countries within those limits,
whether known or unknown, under the heaviest penalties.  This
prohibition gave great dissatisfaction to many of the wealthy merchants
of Holland, who wished to employ their ships in making discoveries and
trading at their own risk.  Among them was Isaac Le Maire, a rich
merchant of Amsterdam, then residing at Egmont, who had a desire to
employ his wealth in acquiring fame as a discoverer.

Le Maire was a person of determination, and having considered among his
friends who was most likely to assist him, fixed upon William Cornelison
Schouten, of Horn, an experienced master-mariner, who had already made
three voyages to the Indies, as supercargo, pilot, and master.  Le Maire
first asked him whether he thought it possible that some other passage,
besides that of the Straits of Magellan, might be found to the South
Sea, and if so whether the countries to the south of that passage would
afford commodities as rich as those of the East or West Indies.

Schouten replied that such a passage might be found, and also that there
might be many wealthy countries to the westward of the straits.

Believing that the East India Company's charter could not prohibit Dutch
subjects from trading with countries to be reached by a new route, they
came to the determination of at once fitting out some fleet vessels to
make the experiment.

Le Maire advanced half of the funds, and Schouten, with the assistance
of Peter Clementson, burgomaster of Horn, and other friends, advanced
the remainder.  It is probable that they might have heard from some
English pilots who were in the service of the United Provinces, that
Drake had discovered an open sea to the south of Terra del Fuego.  They
did not openly avow their object, but they succeeded in obtaining from
the Government the privilege of making the first four voyages to the
places they might discover.  Their destination, however, was not
disclosed to the seamen.  The other merchants, unable to penetrate their
designs, derisively called them: "gold-seekers."

Schouten was to have command of the expedition, and to sail in the
larger ship, and Jacques Le Maire, the eldest son of Isaac, was to be
supercargo.  They at once commenced fitting out two vessels for the
voyage, the largest, the _Eendracht_, or in English the _Unity_, was of
three hundred and sixty tons, carried nineteen guns and twelve swivels,
and a crew of sixty-five men, and had on board two pinnaces, one for
sailing and another for rowing, a launch, and a small boat.  The smaller
vessel was named the _Horn_, of one hundred and ten tons, carrying eight
guns and four swivels.  Her crew consisted of twenty-two men.  She was
commanded by Jan Schouten, and Aris Clawson was her supercargo.

The two vessels sailed from the Texel on the 14th of June, and called
off Dover, where an experienced English gunner was engaged.
Experiencing a heavy storm, they took shelter under the Isle of Wight,
and on the 27th put into Plymouth, where a carpenter, Maydenblick, was
engaged.

Sailing thence on the 28th of June, with fine weather and a fair breeze,
they proceeded on their voyage.  The strictest rules were laid down for
the government of officers and men.  When a boat went on shore where any
hostility was to be expected, one of the commanders was always to be in
charge.  The supercargo was to have the exclusive management of all
commercial dealings.  The officers were warned against holding
conversations with the men in regard to the objects of the voyage; and
while they were to be strict in the execution of their duty, they were
not to subject the crews to unnecessary toil.

Touching at various places, they cast anchor off Sierra Leone on the
30th of August.  The village at that time consisted only of eight or
nine poor thatched huts.  The native inhabitants declined to come off
until a hostage was left for their security, because a French ship had
lately perfidiously carried off two of their number.  The water which
poured down from every hill was to be had in abundance, and the casks
could be filled by placing them under the falls.  Lemons were so cheap
that ten thousand could have been obtained for a few knives.  Each man
purchased one hundred and fifty for sea store.

After leaving Sierra Leone, as they were gliding over the smooth sea, a
sudden shock was felt on board the _Horn_, as if she had struck on a
rock, and, as the crew looked over her side, they saw the water change
to a crimson hue.  The cause was not known until the ship was afterwards
laid on shore, when a large horn, of a substance resembling ivory, was
found sticking into her bottom, it having pierced through three stout
planks.  The Line was crossed on the 25th of October, after which
Captain Schouten informed the ships' companies of the object of the
voyage.  At this they exhibited their satisfaction, hoping to discover
some gold countries, to make amends for their toils.

On the 3rd of November they were off the island of Ascension or Martin
Vaz.  Standing on, they came in sight on the 6th of December of the
mainland of South America.  It was of no great height, and had a white
appearance.  The same night they dropped anchor in ten fathoms, at a
short distance from Port Desire.  Next morning, standing on to the
southward, they saw before them a line of cliffs, which they understood
marked the entrance to the channel.  They, however, found that they had
got into a wrong one, and the _Unity_ ran aground by the stern, but the
wind blowing from off the land, she got clear again.  Next morning, a
boat being sent ahead to sound the channel, which was found to be twelve
fathoms deep, they entered boldly, having a north-east wind to carry
them along.  After they had sailed about three miles, however, the wind
began to veer, and they brought up in twenty fathoms, but the bottom
being composed of slippery stones, and the wind blowing hard from the
north-west, they dragged their anchors, and drifted down towards the
cliffs, where there appeared every probability that they both would be
lost.  The _Unity_ lay with her side against the cliffs, though still
afloat, while the _Horn_ stuck so fast that, as the tide fell, she
remained high and dry.  For some time a strong wind blowing from the
north-west kept her upright, but as it dropped she sank over, until her
bulwarks were under water.  On seeing this, as it was impossible to
right her, the explorers gave up all hopes of saving her; but, the
weather remaining calm, the succeeding flood set her upright again, and
she and the _Unity_, hauling out of their dangerous position, stood
farther up the river.

Here they again dropped anchor off King's Island.  On landing they found
it so thickly covered with the nests of penguins, each of which
contained three or four eggs--that a man might have taken fifty or sixty
without moving his position.  They here also saw emus and deer with
extremely long necks.  While wandering over the hills they came upon
several heaps of stones, beneath which they discovered bones, as they
supposed of persons ten and eleven feet along.  Plenty of good fish and
fowls were obtained, but no water could be found for some days.

On the 17th of December they laid the _Unity_ ashore in order to clean
her bottom, and the following day the _Horn_ was hauled up for the same
purpose, at a distance of about two hundred yards from her consort.  It
was providential that she was thus far.  It being necessary to soften
the old pitch off her bottom, to which barnacles and mud were sticking,
they lighted a fire beneath her bottom.  As they were in a hurry to
perform the operation, they threw on more sticks and reeds, scattering
the fire along her whole length.  While they were working away with
their iron scrapers, suddenly they saw fire bursting out through her
ports.  How this had happened they could not tell.  There was no fresh
water at hand, and as the tide had fallen, leaving her fully fifty feet
from the margin of the river, they had to run all that distance with
buckets, or whatever else they could lay hold of, to bring up water to
extinguish the flames.  Before a sufficient quantity could be brought
the fire had got a complete hold of the vessel.  In vain they dashed the
water over her, the flames rapidly spread from stem to stern, and, at
length, seeing that all their efforts were useless, they had to stand by
and watch her burning, a small portion only of her stores and provisions
having been saved.  In a short time the poor _Horn_ became a mere heap
of ashes.

On the 20th they launched the _Unity_, and the next day carried on board
all the ironwork, anchors, guns, and whatever else they had been able to
save from the unfortunate _Horn_.  While hunting about for water,
without which they could not venture to sea, they found on the 25th some
holes full of it.  Though it was white and muddy, it was well tasting,
and they accordingly carried on board a large quantity in casks on men's
shoulders.

Near this place they discovered a number of sea-lions, the young of
which they found very good to eat; but the creatures were so fierce that
they could only be killed by musket-shots.  On the 13th of January,
1616, they left Port Desire, and on the 18th sighted the Falkland
Islands.

Holding their course south by west, they saw land bearing west and
west-south-west from them, and shortly afterwards other land to the
south.  The wind blowing strong, they were compelled to take in sail.
The next morning they saw land to starboard at the distance of about a
league, consisting of high snow-covered hills.  Then they saw other land
bearing east from the former, also high and rugged.  As these two lands
were about eight leagues apart, and as there was a strong current
running to the southward in the direction of the opening, they guessed
that there might be a free passage between them.

They had good reason to hope that this might be the one they were in
search of, leading into the South Sea.  They accordingly steered for it,
but the wind falling, they were compelled to restrain their eagerness.
Here, as they were gliding on, they saw prodigious multitudes of
penguins and also whales in such vast schools that they had to steer
with caution lest, by running against them, the monsters should injure
the ship.  On the 25th they got close up to the north shore of the
eastern land they had seen, to which they gave the name of Staten Land,
in honour of the States of Holland.

The wind being favourable, they now stood through the Straits.  On both
sides they observed sandy bays and good roadsteads, but the shores were
bare of trees and shrubs.  There were, however, abundance of fish,
porpoises, penguins, and other birds.  To the land on the starboard side
they gave the name of Maurice Land, being a part of Terra del Fuego.
The wind being north, they stood briskly on, steering west-south-west,
but again shifting to south-west, they were compelled to steer south.

They now met with long high waves, which rolled on in slow succession,
while the water appeared to be unusually blue, evident signs, as they
considered, that the great South Sea was before them, and that they had
made their way into it by a passage of their own discovering.  Numbers
of seamews, or rather of albatrosses, larger than swans, their wings
when extended measuring six feet from tip to tip, came circling round
the ship, and even alighted on board, being so tame as to allow
themselves to be taken by the hand without even attempting to escape.
The wind was generally favourable, but with storms of rain and snow, the
sea running very high.  As they steered south-west they saw land to the
north-west and north-north-west, the lofty snow-capped mountains of
Terra del Fuego.  At length they came off a sharp point, the most
southern extremity of that land, to which they gave the name of Cape
Horn, in compliment to the port from which they had sailed.

Theirs were the first human eyes probably which had ever closely viewed
that now well-known promontory, although Drake may possibly have seen it
at a distance when scudding before the gale which drove the
sorely-battered _Golden Hind_ out of her course.

Having kept a bright look-out in all directions, and having seen no land
to the southward, they were now thoroughly convinced that they had
doubled the extreme end of the continent of South America, or rather of
the islands which lie off it.

Altering their course to the northward, they, on the 12th of February,
had attained the parallel of the western end of the Straits of Magellan,
and returning thanks to Heaven for their happy discovery, they
commemorated the event by a cup of wine, which was handed three times
round the ship's company.  The officers, holding a consultation, agreed
to give the name of the Straits of Le Maire to the passage through which
they had come, in compliment to the worthy merchant who had promoted the
expedition, although that honour might justly have been bestowed upon
Captain Schouten.

The next land they saw was Juan Fernandez, but missing the proper
anchorage, they were unable to bring up.  Captain Schouten sent a boat,
however, to look for a safe place to anchor; but the officer in command
of her, on his return, reported that the island was inaccessible, though
he brought off a large quantity of lobsters, crabs, and a few fish,
having also seen many sea-wolves.  They next sighted another small
island, but here also were unable to anchor, and on sending a boat
ashore, her crew could only find some herbs, which tasted like
scurvy-grass, though they saw several dogs which neither barked nor
snarled, for which reason they called it Dog Island.

When about a league away from another low island, a canoe, in which were
six or eight reddish-coloured Indians with long black hair, came off to
the ship; but the explorers could not communicate with them, as they
understood none of the languages in which they were addressed.

Sailing along the coast, another canoe came off.  The skins of her crew,
who were nearly naked, except a piece of matting hung from a belt round
their waists, were punctured over with snakes, dragons, and other
reptiles.  They would not venture on board, but came to the boats, when
the Dutch gave them beads, knives, and other trifles.  They quickly
showed their thievish disposition by stealing the nails from the cabin
windows and the bolts from the doors.  The boat, with a well-armed crew,
was now sent on shore; but the moment they landed, about thirty natives
rushed from the woods, armed with clubs, slings, and spears, and tried
to take away the arms from the soldiers; but on receiving a discharge of
musketry, they took to flight.

This island was low and sandy, and was covered with cocoa-nut-trees.  It
was about one hundred leagues from Dog Island.  At the next island at
which they touched, on the 16th, they were fortunate enough to find
abundance of fresh water in a pit not far from shore, as also some
herbs, which proved serviceable to those who were afflicted with scurvy.
To this island they gave the name of Water Island.

Sailing westward, anchorage was found off another island about twenty
leagues distant from it, a musket-shot from the shore, where they
observed a stream of fresh water.  After having had considerable
difficulty in getting ashore, they found a spring in a wood; but
suddenly, as they were about to fill their casks with water, a savage
started up, and they considered it wise to beat a retreat to the boat.

Just as they got there, five or six more savages appeared, but on seeing
them, quickly retired into the wood.  Although they had got rid of the
savages, they encountered other adversaries of a more formidable nature,
for they were followed by myriads of black flies, so that they came on
board absolutely covered with them from head to foot.  This plague of
flies raged in the ship for three or four days, until by the help of a
good breeze they were blown away.  The Dutch naturally called this
island Fly Island, but it is now known as Palliser's Island.

Continuing their course westward, when about one thousand five hundred
and ten leagues from the coast of Peru, they saw a large double canoe
standing towards them.  On this a gun was fired to make her heave to.
The people in her not understanding the meaning of the signal, naturally
made off as fast as they could.  On this the Dutch sent their boat with
ten musketeers, who fired a volley at her.  On seeing the boat approach,
some of the savages leapt overboard, but the rest surrendered without
resistance, on which the Dutch used them kindly, dressing the wounds of
those who were hurt, and saving the lives of some who had leapt into the
sea.  Besides the men, there were eight women and several children,--in
all twenty-three persons.  They were cleanly looking, of a reddish
colour, and almost naked, wearing only the usual cloth, hung to a belt
in front.

The men wore their long black hair curled, but the women had theirs cut
short.  The only articles found on board were a few fishing-hooks: the
upper part was formed of stone, and the other of bone or
mother-of-pearl.  They had no water, but satisfied their thirst with the
liquor of a few cocoa-nuts, or with salt water, of which even the
children drank heartily.  The canoe was probably bound from one of the
Society Islands to Otaheite.

On the 10th high land was seen on the larboard side, about eight leagues
off, but the _Unity_ was unable to reach it.  On the 11th she came up
with another high island, with a second, much lower, about two leagues
to the southward.

About this time another double canoe appeared, which outsailed the
_Unity_.  She was steered with two oars, one in each canoe.  The Dutch,
wishing to anchor, stood in until they brought up about a cannon-shot
from the island, which consisted of an entire mountain, resembling one
of the Moluccas, and was covered over with cocoa-nut-trees.  No sooner
had the ship come to an anchor than she was surrounded by canoes, the
people from which leaped into the water and swam to her, carrying in
their hands cocoa-nuts and roots of various sorts.  These they bartered
for nails, beads, and other trifles; so that the crew obtained a
sufficient number of cocoa-nuts to supply each of them bountifully.

This traffic brought so many of the native canoes round the ship, that
the Dutchmen had a difficulty in steering clear of them.  A boat was now
sent to the other island to discover better anchorage, but she was
quickly beset with a vast number of canoes, full of wild savages armed
with clubs, who attempted to board her.  When the seamen first fired
their muskets, the natives laughed at them for making so much noise and
doing so little harm; but at the next discharge, a savage being shot
through the breast, they quickly retreated.  They were strong,
well-proportioned men, and expert swimmers.

Notwithstanding the hostility they first displayed, the savages came
again on the 12th in their canoes, laden with cocoa-nuts, bananas,
roots, hogs, and fresh water, all struggling to get first on board.
Those from the canoes outside leaped into the sea, and, diving, swam to
the ship with bunches of cocoa-nuts in their mouths, climbing up the
sides like so many rats, in such swarms that the Dutch had to keep them
off with their cutlasses.  Sufficient cocoa-nuts were obtained that day
to give each man of the crew a dozen.

The natives seemed astonished at the strength of the _Unity_.  Some of
them were seen to dive under her bottom, knocking against it with
stones, as if to try how strong it was.  Their King or chief sent on
board a black hog as a present, the messenger being ordered to take no
reward.  Shortly afterwards he came in person, in a large double canoe,
attended by thirty-five single canoes.  When at a distance he and his
people began to shout at the top of their voices, that being their
manner of welcoming strangers.  He was not to be distinguished from any
of his subjects by any external mark, for he was as naked as they were;
but it was seen who he was by the reverence they showed him.  The
Dutchmen, to do him honour, began beating their drums and sounding their
trumpets, and this seemed to afford him much satisfaction, as he and his
attendants, to show how highly they appreciated this reception, bowed
and clapped their hands until they grew tired of the performance.  The
