se'f.--I 'clar' ter gracious," exclaimed the old man after a pause, "ef
hit don't seem periently lak 't wuz yistiddy!"

"What, Uncle Remus?"

"Oh, des ole Brer Tarrypin, honey; des ole Brer Tarrypin en a tale w'at
I year 'bout 'im, how he done tuck'n do Brer Fox."

"Did he scare him, Uncle Remus?" the little boy asked, as the old man
paused.

"No, my goodness! Wuss'n dat!"

"Did he hurt him?"

"No, my goodness! Wuss'n dat!"

"Did he kill him?"

"No, my goodness! Lots wuss'n dat!"

"Now, Uncle Remus, what _did_ he do to Brother Fox?"

"Honey!"--here the old man lowered his voice as if about to describe a
great outrage--"Honey! he tuck'n make a fool out'n 'im!"

The child laughed, but it was plain that he failed to appreciate the
situation, and this fact caused Uncle Remus to brighten up and go on
with the story.

"One time w'en de sun shine down mighty hot, ole Brer Tarrypin wuz gwine
'long down de road. He 'uz gwine 'long down, en he feel mighty tired; he
puff, en he blow, en he pant. He breff come lak he got de azmy 'way down
in he win'-pipe; but, nummine! he de same ole Creep-um-crawl-um
Have-some-fun-um. He 'uz gwine 'long down de big road, ole Brer Tarrypin
wuz, en bimeby he come ter de branch. He tuck'n crawl in, he did, en got
'im a drink er water, en den he crawl out on t'er side en set down und'
de shade un a tree. Atter he sorter ketch he win', he look up at de sun
fer ter see w'at time er day is it, en, lo en beholes! he tuck'n skivver
dat he settin' in de shade er de sycamo' tree. No sooner is he skivver
dis dan he sing de ole song:--

    "'_Good luck ter dem w'at come and go,
    W'at set in de shade er de sycamo'._'

"Brer Tarrypin he feel so good en de shade so cool, dat 't wa'n't long
'fo' he got ter noddin', en bimeby he drapt off en went soun' asleep.
Co'se, Brer Tarrypin kyar he house wid 'im eve'ywhar he go, en w'en he
fix fer ter go ter sleep, he des shet de do' en pull to de
winder-shetters, en dar he is des ez snug ez de ole black cat und' de
barn.

"Brer Tarrypin lay dar, he did, en sleep, en sleep. He dunner how long
he sleep, but bimeby he feel somebody foolin' 'long wid 'im. He keep de
do' shet, en he lay dar en lissen. He feel somebody tu'nin' he house
'roun' en 'roun'. Dis sorter skeer Brer Tarrypin, 'kaze he know dat ef
dey tu'n he house upside down he ull have all sorts er times gittin'
back. Wid dat, he open de do' little ways, en he see Brer Fox projickin'
wid 'im. He open de do' little furder, he did, en he break out in a
great big hoss-laff, en holler:--

"'Well! well, well! Who'd 'a' thunk it! Ole Brer Fox, cuter dan de
common run, is done come en kotch me. En he come at sech a time, too! I
feels dat full twel I can't see straight skacely. Ef dey wuz any
jealousness proned inter me, I'd des lay yer en pout 'kaze Brer Fox done
fine out whar I gits my Pimmerly Plum.'

"In dem days," continued Uncle Remus, speaking to the child's look of
inquiry, "de Pimmerly Plum wuz monst'us skace. Leavin' out Brer Rabbit
en Brer Tarrypin dey wa'n't none er de yuther creeturs dat yuvver got a
glimp' un it, let 'lone a tas'e. So den w'en Brer Fox year talk er de
Pimmerly Plum, bless gracious! he h'ist up he head en let Brer Tarrypin
'lone. Brer Tarrypin keep on laffin' en Brer Fox 'low:--

"'Hush, Brer Tarrypin! you makes my mouf water! Whar'bouts de Pimmerly
Plum?'

"Brer Tarrypin, he sorter cle'r up de ho'seness in he th'oat, en sing:--

    "'_Poun' er sugar, en a pint er rum,
    Ain't nigh so sweet ez de Pimmerly Plum!_'

"Brer Fox, he lif' up he han's, he did, en holler:--

"'Oh, hush, Brer Tarrypin! you makes me dribble! Whar'bouts dat Pimmerly
Plum?'

"'You stannin' right und' de tree, Brer Fox!'

"'Brer Tarrypin, sho'ly not!'

"'Yit dar you stan's, Brer Fox!'

"Brer Fox look up in de tree dar, en he wuz 'stonish'."

"What did he see in the sycamore tree, Uncle Remus?" inquired the little
boy.

There was a look of genuine disappointment on the old man's face, as he
replied:--

"De gracious en de goodness, honey! Ain't you nev' is see dem ar little
bit er balls w'at grow on de sycamo' tree?"[48]

The little boy laughed. There was a huge sycamore tree in the centre of
the circle made by the carriage way in front of the "big house," and
there were sycamore trees of various sizes all over the place. The
little balls alluded to by Uncle Remus are very hard at certain stages
of their growth, and cling to the tree with wonderful tenacity. Uncle
Remus continued:--

"Well, den, w'en ole Brer Tarrypin vouch dat dem ar sycamo' balls wuz de
ginnywine Pimmerly Plum, ole Brer Fox, he feel mighty good, yit he
dunner how he gwine git at um. Push 'im clos't, en maybe he mought beat
Brer Tarrypin clammin' a tree, but dish yer sycamo' tree wuz too big fer
Brer Fox fer ter git he arms 'roun'. Den he up'n 'low:--

"'I sees um hangin' dar, Brer Tarrypin, but how I gwine git um?'

"Brer Tarrypin open he do' little ways en holler out:--

"'Ah-yi! Dar whar ole Slickum Slow-come got de 'vantage! Youer mighty
peart, Brer Fox, yit somehow er nudder you ain't bin a-keepin' up wid
ole Slickum Slow-come.'

"'Brer Tarrypin, how de name er goodness does you git um?'

"'Don't do no good fer ter tell you, Brer Fox. Nimble heel make restless
min'. You ain't got time fer ter wait en git um, Brer Fox.'

"'Brer Tarrypin, I got all de week befo' me.'

"'Ef I tells you, you'll go en tell all de t'er creeturs, en den dat'll
be de las' er de Pimmerly Plum, Brer Fox.'

"'Brer Tarrypin, dat I won't. Des try me one time en see.'

"Brer Tarrypin shet he eye lak he studyin', en den he 'low:--

"'I tell you how I does, Brer Fox. Wen I wants a bait er de Pimmerly
Plum right bad, I des takes my foot in my han' en comes down yer ter
dish yer tree. I comes en I takes my stan'. I gits right und' de tree,
en I r'ars my head back en opens my mouf. I opens my mouf, en w'en de
Pimmerly Plum draps, I boun' you she draps right spang in dar. All you
got ter do is ter set en wait, Brer Fox.'

"Brer Fox ain't sayin' nothin'. He des sot down und' de tree, he did, en
r'ar'd he head back, en open he mouf, en I wish ter goodness you mought
er bin had er chance fer ter see 'im settin' dar. He look scan'lous,
dat's de long en de short un it; he des look scan'lous."

"Did he get the Pimmerly Plum, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy.

"_Shoo!_ How he gwine git plum whar dey ain't no plum?"

"Well, what did he do?"

"He sot dar wid he mouf wide open, en eve'y time Brer Tarrypin look at
'im, much ez he kin do fer ter keep from bustin' aloose en laffin'. But
bimeby he make he way todes home, Brer Tarrypin did, chucklin' en
laffin', en 't wa'n't long 'fo' he meet Brer Rabbit tippin' 'long down
de road. Brer Rabbit, he hail 'im.

"'W'at 'muze you so mighty well, Brer Tarrypin?'

"Brer Tarrypin kotch he breff atter so long a time, en he 'low:--

"'Brer Rabbit, I'm dat tickle' twel I can't shuffle 'long, skacely, en
I'm fear'd ef I up'n tell you de 'casion un it, I'll be tooken wid one
er my spells whar folks hatter set up wid me 'kaze I laff so loud en
laff so long.'

"Yit atter so long a time, Brer Tarrypin up'n tell Brer Rabbit, en dey
sot dar en chaw'd terbacker en kyar'd on des lak sho' 'nuff folks. Dat
dey did!"

Uncle Remus paused; but the little boy wanted to know what became of
Brer Fox.

"Hit's mighty kuse," said the old man, stirring around in the ashes as
if in search of a potato, "but endurin' er all my days I ain't nev' year
nobody tell 'bout how long Brer Fox sot dar waitin' fer de Pimmerly
Plum."


FOOTNOTES:

[47] Point-blank.

[48] In another version of this story current among the negroes the
sweet-gum tree takes the place of the sycamore.




[Illustration: Brother Rabbit gets Provisions]

XXXIX

BRER RABBIT GETS THE PROVISIONS


The next time the little boy called on Uncle Remus a bright fire was
blazing on the hearth. He could see the light shining under the door
before he went into the cabin, and he knew by that sign that the old man
had company. In fact, Daddy Jack had returned and was dozing in his
accustomed corner, Aunt Tempy was sitting bolt upright, nursing her
contempt, and Uncle Remus was making a curious-looking box. None of the
negroes paid any attention to the little boy when he entered, but
somehow he felt that they were waiting for him. After a while Uncle
Remus finished his curious-looking box and laid it upon the floor. Then
he lifted his spectacles from his nose to the top of his head, and
remarked:--

"Now, den, folks, dar she is, en hit's bin so long sence I uv made one
un um dat she make me sweat. Yasser! She did dat. Howsumev', hit ain't
make no diffunce wid me. Promise is a promise, dough you make it in de
dark er de moon. Long time ago, I tuck'n promise one er my passin'
'quaintance dat some er deze lonesome days de ole nigger 'd whirl in en
make 'im a rabbit-trap ef he'd des be so good ez to quit he devilment,
en l'arn he behavishness."

"Is that my rabbit-trap, Uncle Remus?" exclaimed the child. He would
have picked it up for the purpose of examining it, but Uncle Remus waved
him off with a dignified gesture.

"Don't you dast ter tetch dat ar trap, honey, 'kaze ef you does, dat
spiles all. I'll des hatter go ter wuk en make it bran-new, en de Lord
knows I ain't got no time fer ter do dat."

"Well, Uncle Remus, you've had your hands on it."

"Tooby sho' I is--tooby sho' I is! En w'at's mo' dan dat, I bin had my
han's in tar-water."

"I year talk er dat," remarked Aunt Tempy, with an approving nod.

"Yasser! in de nat'al tar-water," continued Uncle Remus. "You put yo'
han' in a pa'tridge nes', en he'll quit dem premises dough he done got
'lev'm dozen aigs in dar. Same wid Rabbit. Dey ain't got sense lak de
ole-time Rabbit, but I let you know dey ain't gwine in no trap whar dey
smell folks' han's--dat dey ain't. Dat w'at make I say w'at I does.
Don't put yo' han' on it; don't tetch it; don't look at it skacely."

The little boy subsided, but he continued to cast longing looks at the
trap, seeing which Uncle Remus sought to change the current of his
thoughts.

"She bin er mighty heap er trouble, mon, yet I mighty glad I tuck'n make
dat ar trap. She's a solid un, sho', en ef dey wuz ter be any skaceness
er vittles, I lay dat ar trap 'ud help us all out."

"De Lord knows," exclaimed Aunt Tempy, rubbing her fat hands together,
"I hope dey ain't gwine ter be no famishin' 'roun' yer 'mungs we all."

"Likely not," said Uncle Remus, "yet de time mought come w'en a big
swamp rabbit kotch in dat ar trap would go a mighty long ways in a
fambly no bigger dan w'at mine is."

"Mo' speshually," remarked Aunt Tempy, "ef you put dat wid w'at de
neighbors mought sen' in."

"Eh-eh!" Uncle Remus exclaimed, "don't you put no 'pennunce in dem
neighbors--don't you do it. W'en famine time come one man ain't no
better dan no yuther man 'ceppin' he be soopless; en he got ter be
mighty soople at dat."

The old man paused and glanced at the little boy. The child was still
looking longingly at the trap, and Uncle Remus leaned forward and
touched him lightly on the shoulder. It was a familiar gesture, gentle
and yet rough, a token of affection, and yet a command to attention;
for the venerable darkey could be imperious enough when surrendering to
the whims of his little partner.

"All dish yer talk 'bout folks pe'shin' out," Uncle Remus went on with
an indifferent air, "put me in min' er de times w'en de creeturs tuck'n
got up a famine 'mungs deyse'f. Hit come 'bout dat one time vittles wuz
monst'us skace en high, en money mighty slack. Long ez dey wuz any
vittles gwine 'roun', Brer Rabbit, he 'uz boun' ter git he sheer un um,
but bimeby hit come ter dat pass dat Brer Rabbit stomach 'gun ter pinch
'im; en w'iles he gettin' hongry de yuther creeturs, dey 'uz gettin'
hongry deyse'f. Hit went on dis a-way twel one day Brer Rabbit en Brer
Wolf meet up wid one er n'er in de big road, en atter dey holler howdy
dey sat down, dey did, en make a bargain.

"Dey tuck'n 'gree wid one er n'er dat dey sell der mammy en take de
money en git sump'n' n'er ter eat. Brer Wolf, he 'low, he did, dat bein'
's hit seem lak he de hongriest creetur on de face er de yeth, dat he
sell his mammy fus', en den, atter de vittles gin out, Brer Rabbit he
kin sell he own mammy en git some mo' grub.

"Ole Brer Rabbit, he chipt in en 'greed, he did, en Brer Wolf, he tuck'n
hitch up he team, en put he mammy in de waggin, en den him en Brer
Rabbit druv off. Man come 'long:--

"'Whar you gwine?'

    "'_Gwine 'long down ter town,
    Wid a bag er co'n fer ter sell;
    We ain't got time fer ter stop en talk,
    Yit we wish you mighty well!_'"

"Did they talk poetry that way, Uncle Remus?" the little boy inquired.

"Shoo! lot's wuss dan dat, honey. Dey wuz constant a-gwine on dat a-way,
en ef I wa'n't gittin' so mighty weak-kneed in de membunce I'd bust
aloose yer en I'd fair wake you up wid de gwines on er dem ar creeturs.

"Now, den, dey tuck'n kyar Brer Wolf mammy ter town en sell 'er, en dey
start back wid a waggin-load er vittles. De day wuz a-wanin' den de sun
wuz a-settin'. De win' tuck'n blow up sorter stiff, en de sun look red
when she settin'. Dey druv on, en druv on. De win' blow, en de sun shine
red. Bimeby, Brer Wolf scrooch up en shiver, en 'low:--

"'Brer Rabbit, I'm a-gittin' mighty cole.'

"Brer Rabbit, he laugh en 'low:--

"'I'm gittin' sorter creepy myself, Brer Wolf.'

"Dey druv on en druv on. Win' blow keen, sun shine red. Brer Wolf
scrooch up in little knot. Bimeby he sing out:--

"'Brer Rabbit, I'm freezin'! I'm dat cole I dunner w'at ter do!'

"Brer Rabbit, he p'int ter de settin' sun en say:--

"'You see dat great big fier 'cross dar in de woods, Brer Wolf? Well,
dey ain't nothin' ter hender you fum gwine dar en wommin' yo'se'f en
I'll wait yer fer you. Gimme de lines, Brer Wolf, en you go wom yo'se'f
all over.'

"Wid dat Brer Wolf, he put out des ez hard ez he kin, fer ter see ef he
can't fin' de fier; en w'iles he wuz gone, bless goodness, w'at should
Brer Rabbit do but cut off de hosses' tails en stick um down deep in de
mud--"

"Le' 'im 'lone, now! Des le' 'im 'lone!" exclaimed Aunt Tempy in an
ecstasy of admiration.

"He stick de hosses' tails down in de mud," continued Uncle Remus, "en
den he tuck'n druv de waggin 'way off in de swamp en hide it. Den he
tuck'n come back, ole Brer Rabbit did, fer ter wait fer Brer Wolf.

"Atter so long a time, sho' 'nuff, yer come Brer Wolf des a-gallin'-up
back. Brer Rabbit he hail 'im.

"'Is you wom yo'se'f, Brer Wolf?'

"'Brer Rabbit, don't talk! Dat de mos' 'seetful fier w'at I had any
speunce un. I run, en I run, en I run, en de mo' w'at I run de furder
de fier git. De nigher you come ter dat fier de furder hit's off.'

"Brer Rabbit, he sorter scratch hisse'f behime de shoulder-blade, en
'low:--

"'Nummine 'bout de fier, Brer Wolf. I got sump'n' yer dat'll wom you up.
Ef you ain't nev' bin wom befo', I lay you'll get wom dis time.'

"Dis make Brer Wolf sorter look 'roun', en w'en he see Brer Rabbit
hol'in' on ter de two hoss-tails, he up'n squall out, he did:--

"'Lawdy mussy, Brer Rabbit! Whar my vittles? Whar my waggin? Whar my
hosses?'

"'Dey er all right yer, Brer Wolf; dey er all right yer. I stayed dar
whar you lef' me twel de hosses gun ter git restless. Den I cluck at um,
en, bless gracious, dey start off en lan' in a quicksan'. W'en dey gun
ter mire, I des tuck'n tu'n eve'ything a-loose en grab de hosses by de
tail, en I bin stan'in' yer wishin' fer you, Brer Wolf, twel I done gone
gray in de min'. I 'low ter myse'f dat I'd hang on ter deze yer
hoss-tails ef it killt eve'y cow in de islan'. Come he'p me, Brer Wolf,
en I lay we'll des nat'ally pull de groun' out but w'at we'll git deze
creeturs out.'

"Wid dat, Brer Wolf, he kotch holt er one hoss-tail, en Brer Rabbit, he
kotch holt er de yuther, en w'en dey pull, co'se de tails come out'n de
mud. Dey stood dar, dey did, en dey look at de tails en den dey look at
one n'er. Bimeby Brer Rabbit 'low:--

"'Well, sir, Brer Wolf; we pull so hard twel we pull de tails plum out!'

"Ole Brer Wolf, he dunner w'at ter do, but it 'gun ter git dark, en 't
wa'n't long 'fo' he tell Brer Rabbit good-by, en off he put fer home.
Dat ar Brer Rabbit," Uncle Remus went on, "he des tuck'n wait twel Brer
Wolf git out'n yearin', en den he went into de swamp en druv de hosses
home en git all de vittles, en he ain't hatter sell he ole mammy n'er.
Dat he ain't."




XL

"CUTTA CORD-LA!"


To all appearances Daddy Jack had taken no interest in Uncle Remus's
story of the horses' tails, and yet, as soon as the little boy and Aunt
Tempy were through laughing at a somewhat familiar climax, the old
African began to twist and fidget in his chair, and mumble to himself in
a lingo which might have been understood on the Guinea coast, but which
sounded out of place in Uncle Remus's Middle Georgia cabin. Presently,
however, his uneasiness took tangible shape. He turned around and
exclaimed impatiently:--

"Shuh-shuh! w'en you sta't fer tell-a dem tale, wey you no tell um lak
dey stan'? 'E bery bad fer twis' dem tale 'roun' un 'roun'. Wey you no
talk um stret?"

"Well, Brer Jack," said Uncle Remus, smiling good-humoredly upon the
queer little old man, "ef we done gone en got dat ar tale all twis' up,
de way fer you ter do is ter whirl in en ontwis' it, en we-all folks 'll
set up yer en he'p you out plum twel Mars John comes a-hollerin' en
a-bawlin' atter dish yer baby; en atter he done gone ter bed, den me en
Sis Tempy yer we ull set up wid you plum twel de chickens crow fer day.
Dem's de kinder folk we all is up yer. We ain't got many swimps en crabs
up yer in Putmon county, but w'en it come ter settin' up wid comp'ny en
hangin' 'roun' atter dark fer ter make de time pass away, we er mighty
rank. Now den, Brer Jack, I done call de roll wid my eye, en we er all
yer 'ceppin' dat ar 'Tildy gal, en 't won't be long 'fo' she'll be
a-drappin' in. Run over in yo' min', en whar my tale 'uz wrong, des
whirl in en put 'er ter rights."

"Shuh-shuh!" exclaimed the old African, "Oona no git dem tale stret. I
yed dem wey me lif; 'e soun' lak dis: One tam dem bittle bin git bery
skace. Da rice crop mek nuttin'; da fish swim low; da bud fly high.
Hard times bin come dey-dey. 'E so hard, dem creeturs do git honkry fer
true. B'er Rabbit un B'er Wolf dey come pit bote 'e head tergerrer; dey
is mek talk how honkry dey is 'way down in da belly.

"Bumbye, B'er Rabbit, 'e shed 'e y-eye, 'e say dey mus' kill dey
gran'mammy. B'er Wolf say 'e mek 'e y-eye come wat'ry fer yeddy da talk
lak dat. B'er Rabbit say:--

"'Ki, B'er Wolf! da water come in you' y-eye wun you is bin honkry. Me
y-eye done bin-a come wat'ry so long tam befo' I bin talky wit' you
'bout we gran'mammy.'

"B'er Wolf, 'e der keep on cryin'; 'e wipe 'e y-eye 'pon 'e coat-sleef.
B'er Rabbit, 'e bin say:--

"'Ef you is bin tek it so ha'd lak dis, B'er Wolf, 'e bery good fer
kill-a you' gran'mammy fus', so you is kin come glad ag'in.'

"B'er Wolf, 'e go dry 'e y-eye un kill 'e gran'mammy, un dey is bin tek
'im gran'mammy off un sell um fer bittle. Dun dey is bin eat dis bittle
