
And at last he came to the great sea-serpent himself, lying dead at the
bottom; and as he was too thick to scramble over, Tom had to walk round
him three-quarters of a mile and more, which put him out of his path
sadly; and, when he had got round, he came to the place called Stop. And
there he stopped, and just in time.

For he was on the edge of a vast hole in the bottom of the sea, up which
was rushing and roaring clear steam enough to work all the engines in
the world at once; so clear, indeed, that it was quite light at moments;
and Tom could see almost up to the top of the water above, and down
below into the pit for nobody knows how far.

But, as soon as he bent his head over the edge, he got such a rap on the
nose from pebbles, that he jumped back again; for the steam, as it
rushed up, rasped away the sides of the hole, and hurled it up into the
sea in a shower of mud and gravel and ashes; and then it spread all
around, and sank again, and covered in the dead fish so fast, that
before Tom had stood there five minutes he was buried in silt up to his
ankles, and began to be afraid that he should have been buried alive.

And perhaps he would have been, but that while he was thinking, the
whole piece of ground on which he stood was torn off and blown upwards,
and away flew Tom a mile up through the sea, wondering what was coming
next.

At last he stopped--thump! and found himself tight in the legs of the
most wonderful bogy which he had ever seen.

It had I don't know how many wings, as big as the sails of a windmill,
and spread out in a ring like them; and with them it hovered over the
steam which rushed up, as a ball hovers over the top of a fountain. And
for every wing above it had a leg below, with a claw like a comb at the
tip, and a nostril at the root; and in the middle it had no stomach and
one eye; and as for its mouth, that was all on one side, as the
madreporiform tubercle in a star-fish is. Well, it was a very strange
beast; but no stranger than some dozens which you may see.

"What do you want here," it cried quite peevishly, "getting in my way?"
and it tried to drop Tom: but he held on tight to its claws, thinking
himself safer where he was.

So Tom told him who he was, and what his errand was. And the thing
winked its one eye, and sneered:

"I am too old to be taken in in that way. You are come after gold--I
know you are."

"Gold! What is gold?" And really Tom did not know; but: the suspicious
old bogy would not believe him.

But after a while Tom began to understand a little. For, as the vapours
came up out of the hole, the bogy smelt them with his nostrils, and
combed them and sorted them with his combs; and then, when they steamed
up through them against his wings, they were changed into showers and
streams of metal. From one wing fell gold-dust, and from another silver,
and from another copper, and from another tin, and from another lead,
and so on, and sank into the soft mud, into veins and cracks, and
hardened there. Whereby it comes to pass that the rocks are full of
metal.

But, all of a sudden, somebody shut off the steam below, and the hole
was left empty in an instant: and then down rushed the water into the
hole, in such a whirlpool that the bogy spun round and round as fast as
a teetotum. But that was all in his day's work, like a fair fall with
the hounds; so all he did was to say to Tom--

"Now is your time, youngster, to get down, if you are in earnest, which
I don't believe."

"You'll soon see," said Tom; and away he went, as bold as Baron
Munchausen, and shot down the rushing cataract like a salmon at
Ballisodare.

And, when he got to the bottom, he swam till he was washed on shore safe
upon the Other-end-of-Nowhere; and he found it, to his surprise, as most
other people do, much more like This-End-of-Somewhere than he had been
in the habit of expecting.

And first he went through Waste-paper-land, where all the stupid books
lie in heaps, up hill and down dale, like leaves in a winter wood; and
there he saw people digging and grubbing among them, to make worse books
out of bad ones, and thrashing chaff to save the dust of it; and a very
good trade they drove thereby, especially among children.

Then he went by the sea of slops, to the mountain of messes, and the
territory of tuck, where the ground was very sticky, for it was all made
of bad toffee (not Everton toffee, of course), and full of deep cracks
and holes choked with wind-fallen fruit, and green gooseberries, and
sloes, and crabs, and whinberries, and hips and haws, and all the nasty
things which little children will eat, if they can get them. But the
fairies hide them out of the way in that country as fast as they can,
and very hard work they have, and of very little use it is. For as fast
as they hide away the old trash, foolish and wicked people make fresh
trash full of lime and poisonous paints, and actually go and steal
receipts out of old Madame Science's big book to invent poisons for
little children, and sell them at wakes and fairs and tuck-shops. Very
well. Let them go on. Dr. Letheby and Dr. Hassall cannot catch them,
though they are setting traps for them all day long. But the Fairy with
the birch-rod will catch them all in time, and make them begin at one
corner of their shops, and eat their way out at the other: by which time
they will have got such stomach-aches as will cure them of poisoning
little children.

Next he saw all the little people in the world, writing all the little
books in the world, about all the other little people in the world;
probably because they had no great people to write about: and if the
names of the books were not Squeeky, nor the Pump-lighter, nor the
Narrow Narrow World, nor the Hills of the Chattermuch, nor the
Children's Twaddeday, why then they were something else. And all the
rest of the little people in the world read the books, and thought
themselves each as good as the President; and perhaps they were right,
for every one knows his own business best. But Tom thought he would
sooner have a jolly good fairy tale, about Jack the Giant-killer or
Beauty and the Beast, which taught him something that he didn't know
already.

And next he came to the centre of Creation (the hub, they call it
there), which lies in latitude 42.21 deg. south, and longitude 108.56
deg. east.

And there he found all the wise people instructing mankind in the
science of spirit-rapping, while their house was burning over their
heads: and when Tom told them of the fire, they held an indignation
meeting forthwith, and unanimously determined to hang Tom's dog for
coming into their country with gunpowder in his mouth. Tom couldn't help
saying that though they did fancy they had carried all the wit away with
them out of Lincolnshire two hundred years ago, yet if they had had one
such Lincolnshire nobleman among them as good old Lord Yarborough, he
would have called for the fire-engines before he hanged other people's
dogs. But it was of no use, and the dog was hanged: and Tom couldn't
even have his carcase; for they had abolished the have-his-carcase act
in that country, for fear lest when rogues fell out, honest men should
come by their own. And so they would have succeeded perfectly, as they
always do, only that (as they also always do) they failed in one little
particular, viz. that the dog would not die, being a water-dog, but bit
their fingers so abominably that they were forced to let him go, and Tom
likewise, as British subjects. Whereon they recommenced rapping for the
spirits of their fathers; and very much astonished the poor old spirits
were when they came, and saw how, according to the laws of Mrs.
Bedonebyasyoudid, their descendants had weakened their constitution by
hard living.

Then came Tom to the Island of Polupragmosyne (which some call Rogues'
Harbour; but they are wrong; for that is in the middle of Bramshill
Bushes, and the county police have cleared it out long ago). There every
one knows his neighbour's business better than his own; and a very noisy
place it is, as might be expected, considering that all the inhabitants
are _ex officio_ on the wrong side of the house in the "Parliament of
Man, and the Federation of the World"; and are always making wry mouths,
and crying that the fairies' grapes were sour.

There Tom saw ploughs drawing horses, nails driving hammers, birds'
nests taking boys, books making authors, bulls keeping china-shops,
monkeys shaving cats, dead dogs drilling live lions, blind brigadiers
shelfed as principals of colleges, play-actors not in the least shelfed
as popular preachers; and, in short, every one set to do something which
he had not learnt, because in what he had learnt, or pretended to learn,
he had failed.

There stands the Pantheon of the Great Unsuccessful, from the builders
of the Tower of Babel to those of the Trafalgar Fountains; in which
politicians lecture on the constitutions which ought to have marched,
conspirators on the revolutions which ought to have succeeded,
economists on the schemes which ought to have made every one's fortune,
and projectors on the discoveries which ought to have set the Thames on
fire. There cobblers lecture on orthopedy (whatsoever that may be)
because they cannot sell their shoes; and poets on AEsthetics (whatsoever
that may be) because they cannot sell their poetry. There philosophers
demonstrate that England would be the freest and richest country in the
world, if she would only turn Papist again; penny-a-liners abuse the
_Times_, because they have not wit enough to get on its staff; and young
ladies walk about with lockets of Charles the First's hair (or of
somebody else's, when the Jews' genuine stock is used up), inscribed
with the neat and appropriate legend--which indeed is popular through
all that land, and which, I hope, you will learn to translate in due
time and to perpend likewise:--

          "_Victrix causa diis placuit, sed victa puellis._"

When he got into the middle of the town, they all set on him at once,
to show him his way; or rather, to show him that he did not know his
way; for as for asking him what way he wanted to go, no one ever thought
of that.

But one pulled him hither, and another poked him thither, and a third
cried--

"You mustn't go west, I tell you; it is destruction to go west."

"But I am not going west, as you may see," said Tom.

And another, "The east lies here, my dear; I assure you this is the
east."

"But I don't want to go east," said Tom.

"Well, then, at all events, whichever way you are going, you are going
wrong," cried they all with one voice--which was the only thing which
they ever agreed about; and all pointed at once to all the
thirty-and-two points of the compass, till Tom thought all the
sign-posts in England had got together, and fallen fighting.

And whether he would have ever escaped out of the town, it is hard to
say, if the dog had not taken it into his head that they were going to
pull his master in pieces, and tackled them so sharply about the
gastrocnemius muscle, that he gave them some business of their own to
think of at last; and while they were rubbing their bitten calves, Tom
and the dog got safe away.

On the borders of that island he found Gotham, where the wise men live;
the same who dragged the pond because the moon had fallen into it, and
planted a hedge round the cuckoo, to keep spring all the year. And he
found them bricking up the town gate, because it was so wide that little
folks could not get through. And, when he asked why, they told him they
were expanding their liturgy. So he went on; for it was no business of
his: only he could not help saying that in his country, if the kitten
could not get in at the same hole as the cat, she might stay outside and
mew.

But he saw the end of such fellows, when he came to the island of the
Golden Asses, where nothing but thistles grow. For there they were all
turned into mokes with ears a yard long, for meddling with matters which
they do not understand, as Lucius did in the story. And like him, mokes
they must remain, till, by the laws of development, the thistles develop
into roses. Till then, they must comfort themselves with the thought,
that the longer their ears are, the thicker their hides; and so a good
beating don't hurt them.

Then came Tom to the great land of Hearsay, in which are no less than
thirty and odd kings, beside half a dozen Republics, and perhaps more by
next mail.

And there he fell in with a deep, dark, deadly, and destructive war,
waged by the princes and potentates of those parts, both spiritual and
temporal, against what do you think? One thing I am sure of. That unless
I told you, you would never know; nor how they waged that war either;
for all their strategy and art military consisted in the safe and easy
process of stopping their ears and screaming, "Oh, don't tell us!" and
then running away.

So when Tom came into that land, he found them all, high and low, man,
woman, and child, running for their lives day and night continually, and
entreating not to be told they didn't know what: only the land being an
island, and they having a dislike to the water (being a musty lot for
the most part), they ran round and round the shore for ever, which (as
the island was exactly of the same circumference as the planet on which
we have the honour of living) was hard work, especially to those who had
business to look after. But before them, as bandmaster and fugleman, ran
a gentleman shearing a pig; the melodious strains of which animal led
them for ever, if not to conquest, still to flight; and kept up their
spirits mightily with the thought that they would at least have the
pig's wool for their pains.

And running after them, day and night, came such a poor, lean, seedy,
hard-worked old giant, as ought to have been cockered up, and had a good
dinner given him, and a good wife found him, and been set to play with
little children; and then he would have been a very presentable old
fellow after all; for he had a heart, though it was considerably
overgrown with brains.

He was made up principally of fish bones and parchment, put together
with wire and Canada balsam; and smelt strongly of spirits, though he
never drank anything but water: but spirits he used somehow, there was
no denying. He had a great pair of spectacles on his nose, and a
butterfly-net in one hand, and a geological hammer in the other; and
was hung all over with pockets, full of collecting boxes, bottles,
microscopes, telescopes, barometers, ordnance maps, scalpels, forceps,
photographic apparatus, and all other tackle for finding out everything
about everything, and a little more too. And, most strange of all, he
was running not forwards but backwards, as fast as he could.

Away all the good folks ran from him, except Tom, who stood his ground
and dodged between his legs; and the giant, when he had passed him,
looked down, and cried, as if he was quite pleased and comforted,--

"What? who are you? And you actually don't run away, like all the rest?"
But he had to take his spectacles off, Tom remarked, in order to see him
plainly.

Tom told him who he was; and the giant pulled out a bottle and a cork
instantly, to collect him with.

But Tom was too sharp for that, and dodged between his legs and in front
of him; and then the giant could not see him at all.

"No, no, no!" said Tom, "I've not been round the world, and through the
world, and up to Mother Carey's haven, beside being caught in a net and
called a Holothurian and a Cephalopod, to be bottled up by any old giant
like you."

And when the giant understood what a great traveller Tom had been, he
made a truce with him at once, and would have kept him there to this day
to pick his brains, so delighted was he at finding any one to tell him
what he did not know before.

"Ah, you lucky little dog!" said he at last, quite simply--for he was
the simplest, pleasantest, honestest, kindliest old Dominie Sampson of a
giant that ever turned the world upside down without intending it--"ah,
you lucky little dog! If I had only been where you have been, to see
what you have seen!"

"Well," said Tom, "if you want to do that, you had best put your head
under water for a few hours, as I did, and turn into a water-baby, or
some other baby, and then you might have a chance."

"Turn into a baby, eh? If I could do that, and know what was happening
to me for but one hour, I should know everything then, and be at rest.
But I can't; I can't be a little child again; and I suppose if I could,
it would be no use, because then I should know nothing about what was
happening to me. Ah, you lucky little dog!" said the poor old giant.

"But why do you run after all these poor people?" said Tom, who liked
the giant very much.

"My dear, it's they that have been running after me, father and son, for
hundreds and hundreds of years, throwing stones at me till they have
knocked off my spectacles fifty times, and calling me a malignant and a
turbaned Turk, who beat a Venetian and traduced the State--goodness only
knows what they mean, for I never read poetry--and hunting me round and
round--though catch me they can't, for every time I go over the same
ground, I go the faster, and grow the bigger. While all I want is to be
friends with them, and to tell them something to their advantage, like
Mr. Joseph Ady: only somehow they are so strangely afraid of hearing it.
But, I suppose I am not a man of the world, and have no tact."

"But why don't you turn round and tell them so?"

"Because I can't. You see, I am one of the sons of Epimetheus, and must
go backwards, if I am to go at all."

"But why don't you stop, and let them come up to you?"

"Why, my dear, only think. If I did, all the butterflies and
cockyolybirds would fly past me, and then I should catch no more new
species, and should grow rusty and mouldy, and die. And I don't intend
to do that, my dear; for I have a destiny before me, they say: though
what it is I don't know, and don't care."

"Don't care?" said Tom.

"No. Do the duty which lies nearest you, and catch the first beetle you
come across, is my motto; and I have thriven by it for some hundred
years. Now I must go on. Dear me, while I have been talking to you, at
least nine new species have escaped me."

And on went the giant, behind before, like a bull in a china-shop, till
he ran into the steeple of the great idol temple (for they are all
idolaters in those parts, of course, else they would never be afraid of
giants), and knocked the upper half clean off, hurting himself horribly
about the small of the back.

But little he cared; for as soon as the ruins of the steeple were well
between his legs, he poked and peered among the falling stones, and
shifted his spectacles, and pulled out his pocket-magnifier, and cried--

"An entirely new Oniscus, and three obscure Podurellae! Besides a moth
which M. le Roi des Papillons (though he, like all Frenchmen, is given
to hasty inductions) says is confined to the limits of the Glacial
Drift. This is most important!"

And down he sat on the nave of the temple (not being a man of the world)
to examine his Podurellae. Whereon (as was to be expected) the roof caved
in bodily, smashing the idols, and sending the priests flying out of
doors and windows, like rabbits out of a burrow when a ferret goes in.

But he never heeded; for out of the dust flew a bat, and the giant had
him in a moment.

"Dear me! This is even more important! Here is a cognate species to that
which Macgilliwaukie Brown insists is confined to the Buddhist temples
of Little Thibet; and now when I look at it, it may be only a variety
produced by difference of climate!"

And having bagged his bat, up he got, and on he went; while all the
people ran, being in none the better humour for having their temple
smashed for the sake of three obscure species of Podurella, and a
Buddhist bat.

"Well," thought Tom, "this is a very pretty quarrel, with a good deal to
be said on both sides. But it is no business of mine."

And no more it was, because he was a water-baby, and had the original
sow by the right ear; which you will never have, unless you be a baby,
whether of the water, the land, or the air, matters not, provided you
can only keep on continually being a baby.

So the giant ran round after the people, and the people ran round after
