
"Oh, come, Polly, that won't do. What do you know about tailors and
college matters?" said Tom, looking as much confused as if she had found
him out in something reprehensible.

"I don't know much, and that's the reason why I'm grateful for your
kindness to Will. I don't care what stories they tell about you, I'm
sure, you won't lead him into trouble, but keep him straight, for my
sake. You know I've lost one brother, and Will takes Jimmy's place to
me now."

The tears in Polly's eyes as she said that made Tom vow a tremendous vow
within himself to stand by Will through thick and thin, and "keep him
straight for Polly's sake"; feeling all the time how ill-fitted he was
for such a task.

"I'll do my best," he said, heartily, as he pressed the hand Polly gave
him, with a look which assured her that he felt the appeal to his honor,
and that henceforth the country lad was safe from all the temptations
Tom could have offered him.

"There! now I shall give that to mamma to take her pills in; it's
just what she likes, and it pleases her to be thought of," said Maud,
surveying her gift with complacency, as she put on her things.

"You're a good little soul, to remember poor mum, said Tom, with an
approving nod.

"Well, she was so pleased with the grapes you brought her, I thought I
'd try something, and maybe she'd say 'Thank you, darling,' to me too.
Do you think she will?" whispered Maud, with the wistful look so often
seen on her little plain face.

"See if she don't;" and to Maud's great surprise Tom did n't laugh at
her project.

"Good night, dear; take care of yourself, and keep your muffler round
your mouth going over the bridge, or you'll be as hoarse as a crow
to-morrow," said Polly, as she kissed her brother, who returned it
without looking as if he thought it "girl's nonsense" Then the three
piled into the sleigh and drove off, leave Polly nodding on the
doorstep.

Maud found the drive altogether too short, but was consoled by the
promise of a longer one if the sleighing lasted till next Saturday: and
when Tom ran up to bid his mother good-by, and give her a hint about
Maud's gift, she stayed below to say, at the last minute, in unconscious
imitation of Polly.

"Good night; take care of yourself, my dear."

Tom laughed, and was about to pinch the much enduring little nose; but,
as if the words reminded him of something, he gave her a kiss instead, a
piece of forbearance which almost took Maud's breath away with surprise
and gratification.

It was rather a silent drive, for Will obediently kept his muffler up,
and Tom fell into a brown study.

He was not much given to reflection, but occasionally indulged when
something gave him a turn in that direction, and at such times he was as
sober and sincere as could be desired. Any one might have lectured him
for an hour without doing as much good as that little call and the chat
that grew out of it, for, though nothing very wise or witty was
said, many things were suggested, and every one knows that persuasive
influences are better than any amount of moralizing. Neither Polly nor
Will tried to do anything of the sort, and that was the charm of it.
Nobody likes to be talked to, but nobody can resist the eloquence of
unconscious preaching. With all his thoughtlessness, Tom was quick to
see and feel these things, and was not spoilt enough yet to laugh at
them. The sight of Will and Polly's simple affection for one another
reminded him of a neglected duty so pleasantly, that he could not forget
it. Talking of early days made him wish he could go back and start
again, doing better. Grandma's name recalled the tender memory that
always did him good, and the thought that Polly trusted her dearest
brother to his care stirred up a manful desire to deserve the
confidence. Tortures would n't have drawn a word of all this from him,
but it had its effect, for boys don't leave their hearts and consciences
behind them when they enter college, and little things of this sort do
much to keep both from being damaged by the four years' scrimmage which
begins the battle of life for most of them.




CHAPTER XI. NEEDLES AND TONGUES


DEAR POLLY, The Sewing Circle meets at our house this P. M. This is in
your line, so do come and help me through. I shall depend on you.

Yours ever, FAN.

"Bad news, my dear?" asked Miss Mills, who had just handed the note to
Polly as she came in one noon, a few weeks after Jenny's arrival.

Polly told her what it was, adding, "I suppose I ought to go and help
Fanny, but I can't say I want to. The girls talk about things I have
nothing to do with, and I don't find their gossip very amusing. I'm an
outsider, and they only accept me on Fan's account; so I sit in a corner
and sew, while they chatter and laugh."

"Would n't it be a good chance to say a word for Jenny? She wants work,
and these young ladies probably have quantities done somewhere. Jenny
does fine work exquisitely, and begins to feel anxious to be earning
something. I don't want her to feel dependent and unhappy, and a little
well-paid sewing would be all she needs to do nicely. I can get it for
her by running round to my friends, but I really have n't the time, till
I get the Mullers off. They are paupers here, but out West they can take
care of themselves, so I've begged the money to send them, and as soon
as I can get them some clothes, off they go. That's the way to help
people help themselves," and Miss Mills clashed her big scissors
energetically, as she cut out a little red flannel shirt.

"I know it is, and I want to help, but I don't know where to begin,"
said Polly, feeling quite oppressed with the immensity of the work.

"We can't any of us do all we would like, but we can do our best for
every case that comes to us, and that helps amazingly. Begin with Jenny,
my dear; tell those girls about her, and if I'm not much mistaken, you
will find them ready to help, for half the time it is n't hardness of
heart, but ignorance or thoughtlessness on the part of the rich, that
makes them seem so careless of the poor."

"To tell the truth, I'm afraid of being laughed at, if I try to talk
seriously about such things to the girls," said Polly, frankly.

"You believe that'such things' are true? You are sincere in your wish
to help better them, and you respect those who work for that end?"

"Yes, I do."

"Then, my dear, can't you bear a little ridicule for the sake of a good
cause? You said yesterday that you were going to make it a principle of
your life, to help up your sex as far and as fast as you could. It did
my heart good to hear you say it, for I was sure that in time you would
keep your word. But, Polly, a principle that can't bear being laughed
at, frowned on, and cold-shouldered, is n't worthy of the name."

"I want to be strong-minded in the real sense of the word, but I don't
like to be called so by people who don't understand my meaning; and
I shall be if I try to make the girls think soberly about anything
sensible or philanthropic. They call me old-fashioned now, and I'd
rather be thought that, though it is n't pleasant, than be set down as
a rampant woman's rights reformer," said Polly, in whose memory many
laughs, and snubs, and sarcasms still lingered, forgiven but not
forgotten.

"This love and thought and care for those weaker, poorer, or worse than
ourselves, which we call Christian charity, is a very old fashion, my
dear. It began eighteen hundred years ago, and only those who honestly
follow the beautiful example set us then, learn how to get genuine
happiness out of life. I'm not a'rampant woman's rights reformer,'"
added Miss Mills, with a smile at Polly's sober face; "but I think that
women can do a great deal for each other, if they will only stop fearing
what'people will think,' and take a hearty interest in whatever is
going to fit their sisters and themselves to deserve and enjoy the
rights God gave them. There are so many ways in which this can be done,
that I wonder they don't see and improve them. I don't ask you to go and
make speeches, only a few have the gift for that, but I do want every
girl and woman to feel this duty, and make any little sacrifice of time
or feeling that may be asked of them, because there is so much to do,
and no one can do it as well as ourselves, if we only think so."

"I'll try!" said Polly, influenced more by her desire to keep Miss
Mills' good opinion than any love of self-sacrifice for her sex. It was
rather a hard thing to ask of a shy, sensitive girl, and the kind old
lady knew it, for in spite of the gray hair and withered face, her heart
was very young, and her own girlish trials not forgotten. But she
knew also that Polly had more influence over others than she herself
suspected, simply because of her candid, upright nature; and that while
she tried to help others, she was serving herself in a way that would
improve heart and soul more than any mere social success she might gain
by following the rules of fashionable life, which drill the character
out of girls till they are as much alike as pins in a paper, and have
about as much true sense and sentiment in their little heads. There was
good stuff in Polly, unspoiled as yet, and Miss Mills was only acting
out her principle of women helping each other. The wise old lady saw
that Polly had reached that point where the girl suddenly blooms into
a woman, asking something more substantial than pleasure to satisfy the
new aspirations that are born; a time as precious and important to the
after-life, as the hour when the apple blossoms fall, and the young
fruit waits for the elements to ripen or destroy the harvest.

Polly did not know this, and was fortunate in possessing a friend who
knew what influences would serve her best, and who could give her what
all women should desire to give each other, the example of a sweet, good
life, more eloquent and powerful than any words; for this is a right no
one can deny us.

Polly turned the matter over in her mind as she dressed, while Jenny
played waiting maid, little dreaming what this new friend was meaning to
do for her, if she dared.

"Is it going to be a tea-party, Miss?" asked Jenny, as the black silk
went rustling on, to her great admiration, for she considered Polly a
beauty.

"Well, no, I think it will probably be a lecture," answered Polly,
laughing, for Jenny's grateful service and affectionate eyes confirmed
the purpose which Miss Mills' little homily had suggested.

As she entered the Shaws' parlor an hour or two later, an appalling
array of well-dressed girls appeared, each provided with a dainty
reticule, basket, or bag, and each tongue going a good deal faster than
the needle, while the white fingers stitched sleeves in upside down, put
flannel jackets together hind part before, or gobbled button-holes with
the best intentions in life.

"You are a dear to come so early. Here's a nice place for you between
Belle and Miss Perkins, and here's a sweet little dress to make, unless
you like something else better," said Fanny, receiving her friend with
warmth and placing her where she thought she would enjoy herself.

"Thank you, I'll take an unbleached cotton shirt if you have such a
thing, for it is likely to be needed before a cambric frock," replied
Polly, subsiding into her corner as quickly as possible, for at least six
eye-glasses were up, and she did n't enjoy being stared at.

Miss Perkins, a grave, cold-looking young lady, with an aristocratic
nose, bowed politely, and then went on with her work, which displayed
two diamond rings to great advantage. Belle, being of the demonstrative
sort, smiled and nodded, drew up her chair, and began a whispered
account of Trix's last quarrel with Tom. Polly listened with interest
while she sewed diligently, occasionally permitting her eyes to study
the elegant intricacies of Miss Perkins' dress, for that young lady sat
like a statue, quirking her delicate fingers, and accomplishing about
two stitches a minute.

In the midst of Belle's story, a more exciting bit of gossip caught her
ear, and she plunged into the conversation going on across the table,
leaving Polly free to listen and admire the wit, wisdom, and charitable
spirit of the accomplished young ladies about her. There was a perfect
Babel of tongues, but out of the confusion Polly gathered scraps of
fashionable intelligence which somewhat lessened her respect for the
dwellers in high places. One fair creature asserted that Joe Somebody
took so much champagne at the last German, that he had to be got away,
and sent home with two servants. Another divulged the awful fact that
Carrie P.'s wedding presents were half of them hired for the occasion.
A third circulated a whisper to the effect that though Mrs. Buckminster
wore a thousand-dollar cloak, her boys were not allowed but one sheet to
their beds. And a fourth young gossip assured the company that a certain
person never had offered himself to a certain other person, though
the report was industriously spread by interested parties. This latter
remark caused such a clamor that Fanny called the meeting to order in a
most unparliamentary fashion.

"Girls! girls! you really must talk less and sew more, or our society
will be disgraced. Do you know our branch sent in less work than any of
the others last month, and Mrs. Fitz George said, she did n't see how
fifteen young ladies could manage to do so little?"

"We don't talk a bit more than the old ladies do. I just wish you could
have heard them go on, last time. The way they get so much done, is,
they take work home, and make their seamstresses do it, and then they
take credit for vast industry," said Belle, who always spoke her mind
with charming candor.

"That reminds me that mamma says they want as many things as we can
make, for it's a hard winter, and the poor are suffering very much. Do
any of you wish to take articles home, to do at odd times?" said Fan,
who was president of this energetic Dorcas Society.

"Mercy, no! It takes all my leisure time to mend my gloves and refresh
my dresses," answered Belle.

"I think if we meet once a week, it is all that should be expected of
us, with our other engagements. Poor people always complain that the
winter is a hard one, and never are satisfied," remarked Miss Perkins,
making her diamonds sparkle as she sewed buttons on the wrong side of a
pink calico apron, which would hardly survive one washing.

"Nobody can ask me to do any more, if they remember all I've got to
attend to before summer," said Trix, with an important air. "I've got
three women hard at work, and want another, but everyone is so busy, and
ask such abominable prices, that I'm in despair, and shall have to take
hold myself, I'm afraid."

"There's a chance for Jane," thought Polly, but had n't courage "to
speak out loud in meeting," just then, and resolved to ask Trix for
work, in private.

"Prices are high, but you forget how much more it costs to live now than
it used to do. Mamma never allows us to beat down workwomen, but wishes
us to pay them well, and economize in some other way, if we must," said
Emma Davenport, a quiet, bright-eyed girl, who was called "odd" among
the young ladies, because she dressed simply, when her father was a
millionaire.

"Just hear that girl talk about economy! I beg your pardon, she's some
relation of yours, I believe!" said Belle, in a low tone.

"Very distant; but I'm proud of it; for with her, economy does n't mean
scrimping in one place to make a show in another. If every one would
follow the Davenports' example, workwomen would n't starve, or servants
be such a trouble. Emma is the plainest dressed girl in the room, next
to me, yet any one can see she is a true gentlewoman," said Polly,
warmly.

"And you are another," answered Belle, who had always loved Polly, in
her scatter-brained way.

"Hush! Trix has the floor."

"If they spent their wages properly, I should n't mind so much, but they
think they must be as fine as anybody, and dress so well that it is hard
to tell mistress from maid. Why our cook got a bonnet just like mine
(the materials were cheaper, but the effect was the same), and had the
impertinence to wear it before my face. I forbid it, and she left, of
course, which made papa so cross he would n't give me the camel's hair
shawl he promised this year."

"It's perfectly shameful!" said Miss Perkins, as Trix paused out of
breath. "Servants ought to be made to dress like servants, as they do
abroad; then we should have no more trouble," observed Miss Perkins, who
had just made the grand tour, and had brought home a French maid.

"Perky don't practise as she preaches," whispered Belle to Polly, as
Miss P. became absorbed in the chat of her other neighbors. "She pays
her chamber girl with old finery; and the other day, when Betsey was out
parading in her missis's cast-off purple plush suit, Mr. Curtis thought
she was mademoiselle, and bowed to her. He is as blind as a bat, but
recognized the dress, and pulled off his hat to it in the most elegant
style. Perky adores him, and was mad enough to beat Betsey when she told
the story and giggled over it. Betsey is quite as stylish and ever so
much prettier than Perky, and she knows it, which is an aggravation."

Polly could n't help laughing, but grew sober a minute after, as Trix
said, pettishly, "Well, I'm sick of hearing about beggars; I believe
half of them are humbugs, and if we let them alone they'd go to work
and take care of themselves. There's altogether too much fuss made
about charity. I do wish we could be left in peace."

"There can't be too much charity!" burst out Polly, forgetting her
shyness all at once.

"Oh, indeed! Well, I take the liberty to differ from you," returned
Trix, putting up her glass, and bestowing upon Polly her most
"toploftical stare," as the girls called it.

I regret to say that Polly never could talk with or be near Trix without
feeling irritated and combative. She tried to conquer this feeling, but
she could n't, and when Trix put on airs, Polly felt an intense desire
to box her ears. That eye-glass was her especial aversion, for Trix was
no more near-sighted than herself, but pretended to be because it was
the fashion, and at times used the innocent glass as a weapon with which
to put down any one who presumed to set themselves up. The supercilious
glance which accompanied her ironically polite speech roused Polly,
who answered with sudden color and the kindling of the eyes that always
betrayed a perturbed spirit, "I don't think many of us would enjoy that
selfish sort of peace, while little children starve, and girls no older
than us kill themselves because their dreadful poverty leaves them no
choice but sin or death."

A sudden lull took place, for, though Polly, did not raise her voice, it
was full of indignant emotion, and the most frivolous girl there felt
a little thrill of sympathy; for the most utterly fashionable life does
not kill the heart out of women, till years of selfish pleasure have
passed over their heads. Trix was ashamed of herself; but she felt the
same antagonism toward Polly, that Polly did toward her; and, being less
generous, took satisfaction in plaguing her. Polly did not know that the
secret of this was the fact that Tom often held her up as a model for
his fiance to follow, which caused that young lady to dislike her more
than ever.

"Half the awful stories in the papers are made up for a sensation, and
it's absurd to believe them, unless one likes to be harrowed up. I
don't; and as for peace, I'm not likely to get much, while I have Tom
to look after," said Trix, with an aggravating laugh.

Polly's needle snapped in two, but she did not mind it, as she said,
with a look that silenced even sharp-tongued Trix, "I can't help
believing what my own eyes and ears have seen and heard. You lead such
safe and happy lives, you can't imagine the misery that is all round
you; but if you could get a glimpse of it, it would make your hearts
ache, as it has mine."

"Do you suffer from heartache? Some one hinted as much to me, but you
looked so well, I could n't believe it."

Now that was cruel in Trix, more cruel than any one guessed; but girls'
tongues can deal wounds as sharp and sudden as the slender stiletto
Spanish women wear in their hair, and Polly turned pale, as those words
stabbed her. Belle saw it, and rushed to the rescue with more good-will
than wisdom.

