Under the Sea, where he remained for two mortal hours, to the general
satisfaction of his relatives.

Bereft both of her unexpected playfellow and the much desired book, Rose
went into the parlor, there to discover a French novel which Kitty
had taken from a library and left in the carriage among the bundles.
Settling herself in her favorite lounging chair, she read as diligently
as Jamie while the wind howled and snow fell fast without.

For an hour nothing disturbed the cozy quiet of the house for Aunt
Plenty was napping upstairs and Dr. Alec writing in his own sanctum; at
least Rose thought so, till his step made her hastily drop the book and
look up with very much the expression she used to wear when caught in
mischief years ago.

"Did I startle you? Have a screen you are burning your face before this
hot fire." And Dr. Alec pulled one forward.

"Thank you, Uncle. I didn't feel it." And the color seemed to deepen in
spite of the screen while the uneasy eyes fell upon the book in her lap.

"Have you got the Quarterly there? I want to glance at an article in it
if you can spare it for a moment," he said, leaning toward her with an
inquiring glance.

"No, sir, I am reading." And, without mentioning the name, Rose put the
book into his hand.

The instant his eye fell on the title he understood the look she wore
and knew what "mischief" she had been in. He knit his brows,
then smiled, because it was impossible to help it Rose looked so
conscience-stricken in spite of her twenty years.

"How do you find it? Interesting?"

"Oh, very! I felt as if I was in another world and forgot all about
this."

"Not a very good world, I fancy, if you were afraid or ashamed to be
found in it. Where did this come from?" asked Dr. Alec, surveying
the book with great disfavor. Rose told him, and added slowly, "I
particularly wanted to read it, and fancied I might, because you did
when it was so much talked about the winter we were in Rome."

"I did read it to see if it was fit for you."

"And decided that it was not, I suppose, since you never gave it to me!"

"Yes."

"Then I won't finish it. But, Uncle, I don't see why I should not,"
added Rose wistfully, for she had reached the heart of the romance and
found it wonderfully fascinating.

"You may not see, but don't you feel why not?" asked Dr. Alec gravely.

Rose leaned her flushed cheek on her hand and thought a minute, then
looked up and answered honestly, "Yes, I do, but can't explain it,
except that I know something must be wrong, because I blushed and
started when you came in."

"Exactly." And the doctor gave an emphatic nod, as if the symptoms
pleased him.

"But I really don't see any harm in the book so far. It is by a famous
author, wonderfully well written, as you know, and the characters so
lifelike that I feel as if I should really meet them somewhere."

"I hope not!" ejaculated the doctor, shutting the book quickly, as if to
keep the objectionable beings from escaping.

Rose laughed, but persisted in her defense, for she did want to finish
the absorbing story, yet would not without leave.

"I have read French novels before, and you gave them to me. Not many, to
be sure, but the best, so I think I know what is good and shouldn't like
this if it was harmful."

Her uncle's answer was to reopen the volume and turn the leaves an
instant as if to find a particular place. Then he put it into her hand,
saying quietly: "Read a page or two aloud, translating as you go. You
used to like that try it again."

Rose obeyed and went glibly down a page, doing her best to give the
sense in her purest English. Presently she went more slowly, then
skipped a sentence here and there, and finally stopped short, looking as
if she needed a screen again.

"What's the matter?" asked her uncle, who had been watching her with a
serious eye.

"Some phrases are untranslatable, and it only spoils them to try. They
are not amiss in French, but sound coarse and bad in our blunt English,"
she said a little pettishly, for she felt annoyed by her failure to
prove the contested point.

"Ah, my dear, if the fine phrases won't bear putting into honest
English, the thoughts they express won't bear putting into your innocent
mind! That chapter is the key to the whole book, and if you had been led
up, or rather down, to it artfully and artistically, you might have
read it to yourself without seeing how bad it is. All the worse for the
undeniable talent which hides the evil so subtly and makes the danger so
delightful."

He paused a moment, then added with an anxious glance at the book, over
which she was still bending, "Finish it if you choose only remember, my
girl, that one may read at forty what is unsafe at twenty, and that we
never can be too careful what food we give that precious yet perilous
thing called imagination."

And taking his Review, he went away to look over a learned article which
interested him much less than the workings of a young mind nearby.

Another long silence, broken only by an occasional excited bounce from
Jamie when the sociable cuttlefish looked in at the windows or the
Nautilus scuttled a ship or two in its terrific course. A bell rang, and
the doctor popped his head out to see if he was wanted. It was only a
message for Aunt Plenty, and he was about to pop in again when his eye
was caught by a square parcel on the slab.

"What's this?" he asked, taking it up.

"Rose wants me to leave it at Kitty Van's when I go. I forgot to bring
her book from Mama, so I shall go and get it as soon as ever I've done
this," replied Jamie from his nest.

As the volume in his hands was a corpulent one, and Jamie only a third
of the way through, Dr. Alec thought Rose's prospect rather doubtful
and, slipping the parcel into his pocket, he walked away, saying with a
satisfied air: "Virtue doesn't always get rewarded, but it shall be this
time if I can do it."

More than half an hour afterward, Rose woke from a little nap and found
the various old favorites with which she had tried to solace herself
replaced by the simple, wholesome story promised by Aunt Jessie.

"Good boy! I'll go and thank him," she said half aloud, jumping up, wide
awake and much pleased.

But she did not go, for just then she spied her uncle standing on the
rug warming his hands with a generally fresh and breezy look about him
which suggested a recent struggle with the elements.

"How did this come?" she asked suspiciously.

"A man brought it."

"This man? Oh, Uncle! Why did you take so much trouble just to gratify
a wish of mine?" she cried, taking both the cold hands in hers with a
tenderly reproachful glance from the storm without to the ruddy face
above her.

"Because, having taken away your French bonbons with the poisonous color
on them, I wanted to get you something better. Here it is, all pure
sugar, the sort that sweetens the heart as well as the tongue and leaves
no bad taste behind."

"How good you are to me! I don't deserve it, for I didn't resist
temptation, though I tried. Uncle, after I'd put the book away, I
thought I must just see how it ended, and I'm afraid I should have read
it all if it had not been gone," said Rose, laying her face down on the
hands she held as humbly as a repentant child.

But Uncle Alec lifted up the bent head and, looking into the eyes that
met his frankly, though either held a tear, he said, with the energy
that always made his words remembered: "My little girl, I would face a
dozen storms far worse than this to keep your soul as stainless as snow,
for it is the small temptations which undermine integrity unless we
watch and pray and never think them too trivial to be resisted."

Some people would consider Dr. Alec an overcareful man, but Rose felt
that he was right, and when she said her prayers that night, added a
meek petition to be kept from yielding to three of the small temptations
which beset a rich, pretty, and romantic girl extravagance, coquetry,
and novel reading.




Chapter 12 AT KITTY'S BALL

Rose had no new gown to wear on this festive occasion, and gave one
little sigh of regret as she put on the pale blue silk refreshed with
clouds of gaze de Chambery. But a smile followed, very bright and sweet,
as she added the clusters of forget-me-not which Charlie had conjured
up through the agency of an old German florist, for one part of her plan
had been carried out, and Prince was invited to be her escort, much
to his delight, though he wisely made no protestations of any sort and
showed his gratitude by being a model gentleman. This pleased Rose, for
the late humiliation and a very sincere desire to atone for it gave him
an air of pensive dignity which was very effective.

Aunt Clara could not go, for a certain new cosmetic, privately used to
improve the once fine complexion, which had been her pride till late
hours impaired it, had brought out an unsightly eruption, reducing her
to the depths of woe and leaving her no solace for her disappointment
but the sight of the elegant velvet dress spread forth upon her bed in
melancholy state.

So Aunt Jessie was chaperon, to Rose's great satisfaction, and looked as
"pretty as a pink," Archie thought, in her matronly pearl-colored gown
with a dainty trifle of rich lace on her still abundant hair. He was
very proud of his little mama, and as devoted as a lover, "to keep his
hand in against Phebe's return," she said laughingly when he brought her
a nosegay of blush roses to light up her quiet costume.

A happier mother did not live than Mrs. Jessie as she sat contentedly
beside Sister Jane (who graced the frivolous scene in a serious black
gown with a diadem of purple asters nodding above her severe brow), both
watching their boys with the maternal conviction that no other parent
could show such remarkable specimens as these. Each had done her best
according to her light, and years of faithful care were now beginning to
bear fruit in the promise of goodly men, so dear to the hearts of true
mothers.

Mrs. Jessie watched her three tall sons with something like wonder,
for Archie was a fine fellow, grave and rather stately, but full of the
cordial courtesy and respect we see so little of nowadays and which is
the sure sign of good home training. "The cadets," as Will and Geordie
called themselves, were there as gorgeous as you please, and the agonies
they suffered that night with tight boots and stiff collars no pen can
fitly tell. But only to one another did they confide these sufferings
and the rare moments of repose when they could stand on one aching foot
with heads comfortably sunken inside the excruciating collars, which
rasped their ears and made the lobes thereof a pleasing scarlet. Brief
were these moments, however, and the Spartan boys danced on with smiling
faces, undaunted by the hidden anguish which preyed upon them "fore and
aft," as Will expressed it.

Mrs. Jane's pair were an odd contrast, and even the stern disciplinarian
herself could not help smiling as she watched them. Steve was
superb, and might have been married on the spot, so superfine was his
broad-cloth, glossy his linen, and perfect the fit of his gloves. While
pride and happiness so fermented in his youthful bosom, there would have
been danger of spontaneous combustion if dancing had not proved a safety
valve, for his strong sense of the proprieties would not permit him to
vent his emotions in any other way.

Kitty felt no such restraint, and looked like a blissful little gypsy,
with her brunet prettiness set off by a dashing costume of cardinal and
cream color and every hair on her head curled in a Merry Pecksniffian
crop, for youth was her strong point, and she much enjoyed the fact that
she had been engaged three times before she was nineteen.

To see her and Steve spin around the room was a sight to bring a smile
to the lips of the crustiest bachelor or saddest spinster, for happy
lovers are always a pleasing spectacle, and two such merry little grigs
as these are seldom seen.

Mac, meantime, with glasses astride his nose, surveyed his brother's
performances "on the light fantastic" very much as a benevolent
Newfoundland would the gambols of a toy terrier, receiving with thanks
the hasty hints for his guidance which Steve breathed into his ear as
he passed and forgetting all about them the next minute. When not thus
engaged Mac stood about with his thumbs in his vest pockets, regarding
the lively crowd like a meditative philosopher of a cheerful aspect,
often smiling to himself at some whimsical fancy of his own, knitting
his brows as some bit of ill-natured gossip met his ear, or staring with
undisguised admiration as a beautiful face or figure caught his eye.

"I hope that girl knows what a treasure she has got. But I doubt if she
ever fully appreciates it," said Mrs. Jane, bringing her spectacles to
bear upon Kitty as she whisked by, causing quite a gale with her flying
skirts.

"I think she will, for Steve has been so well brought up, she cannot but
see and feel the worth of what she has never had, and being so young she
will profit by it," answered Mrs. Jessie softly, thinking of the days
when she and her Jem danced together, just betrothed.

"I've done my duty by both the boys, and done it thoroughly, or their
father would have spoilt them, for he's no more idea of discipline than
a child." And Aunt Jane gave her own palm a smart rap with her closed
fan, emphasizing the word "thoroughly" in a most suggestive manner.

"I've often wished I had your firmness, Jane but after all, I'm not sure
that I don't like my own way best, at least with my boys, for plenty of
love, and plenty of patience, seem to have succeeded pretty well."
And Aunt Jessie lifted the nosegay from her lap, feeling as if that
unfailing love and patience were already blooming into her life as
beautifully as the sweet-breathed roses given by her boy refreshed and
brightened these long hours of patient waiting in a corner.

"I don't deny that you've done well, Jessie, but you've been let alone
and had no one to hold your hand or interfere. If my Mac had gone to sea
as your Jem did, I never should have been as severe as I am. Men are so
perverse and shortsighted, they don't trouble about the future as long
as things are quiet and comfortable in the present," continued Mrs.
Jane, quite forgetting that the shortsighted partner of the firm,
physically speaking at least, was herself.

"Ah, yes! We mothers love to foresee and foretell our children's lives
even before they are born, and are very apt to be disappointed if they
do not turn out as we planned. I know I am yet I really have no cause to
complain and am learning to see that all we can do is to give the dear
boys good principles and the best training we may, then leave them
to finish what we have begun." And Mrs. Jessie's eye wandered away to
Archie, dancing with Rose, quite unconscious what a pretty little castle
in the air tumbled down when he fell in love with Phebe.

"Right, quite right on that point we agree exactly. I have spared
nothing to give my boys good principles and good habits, and I am
willing to trust them anywhere. Nine times did I whip my Steve to cure
him of fibbing, and over and over again did Mac go without his dinner
rather than wash his hands. But I whipped and starved them both into
obedience, and now I have my reward," concluded the "stern parent" with
a proud wave of the fan, which looked very like a ferule, being as big,
hard, and uncompromising as such an article could be.

Mrs. Jessie gave a mild murmur of assent, but could not help thinking,
with a smile, that in spite of their early tribulations the sins for
which the boys suffered had gotten a little mixed in their result, for
fibbing Steve was now the tidy one, and careless Mac the truth teller.
But such small contradictions will happen in the best-regulated
families, and all perplexed parents can do is to keep up a steadfast
preaching and practicing in the hope that it will bear fruit sometime,
for according to an old proverb, Children pick up words as pigeons
pease, To utter them again as God shall please.

"I hope they won't dance the child to death among them, for each one
seems bound to have his turn, even your sober Mac," said Mrs. Jessie a
few minutes later as she saw Archie hand Rose over to his cousin, who
carried her off with an air of triumph from several other claimants.

"She's very good to him, and her influence is excellent, for he is of an
age now when a young woman's opinion has more weight than an old one's.
Though he is always good to his mother, and I feel as if I should take
great comfort in him. He's one of the sort who will not marry till late,
if ever, being fond of books and a quiet life," responded Mrs. Jane,
remembering how often her son had expressed his belief that philosophers
should not marry and brought up Plato as an example of the serene
wisdom to be attained only by a single man while her husband sided with
Socrates, for whom he felt a profound sympathy, though he didn't dare to
own it.

"Well, I don't know about that. Since my Archie surprised me by losing
his heart as he did, I'm prepared for anything, and advise you to do
likewise. I really shouldn't wonder if Mac did something remarkable in
that line, though he shows no sign of it yet, I confess," answered Mrs.
Jessie, laughing.

"It won't be in that direction, you may be sure, for her fate is sealed.
Dear me, how sad it is to see a superior girl like that about to throw
herself away on a handsome scapegrace. I won't mention names, but you
understand me." And Mrs. Jane shook her head, as if she could mention
the name of one superior girl who had thrown herself away and now saw
the folly of it.

