"To-morrow afternoon," he broke out at last, "we'll watch and see if
her carriage drives in for her--then, when she comes to the door, I'll
go in and begin to beg.  The servant will think I'm a foreigner and
don't know what I'm doing.  You can come after me to tell me to come
away, because you know better than I do that I shall be ordered out.
She may be a good-natured woman and listen to us--and you might get
near her."

"We might try it," Marco answered.  "It might work.  We will try it."

The Rat never failed to treat him as his leader.  He had begged
Loristan to let him come with Marco as his servant, and his servant he
had been more than willing to be.  When Loristan had said he should be
his aide-de-camp, he had felt his trust lifted to a military dignity
which uplifted him with it.  As his aide-de-camp he must serve him,
watch him, obey his lightest wish, make everything easy for him.
Sometimes, Marco was troubled by the way in which he insisted on
serving him, this queer, once dictatorial and cantankerous lad who had
begun by throwing stones at him.

"You must not wait on me," he said to him.  "I must wait upon myself."

The Rat rather flushed.

"He told me that he would let me come with you as your aide-de camp,"
he said.  "It--it's part of the game.  It makes things easier if we
keep up the game."

It would have attracted attention if they had spent too much time in
the vicinity of the big house.  So it happened that the next afternoon
the great lady evidently drove out at an hour when they were not
watching for her.  They were on their way to try if they could carry
out their plan, when, as they walked together along the Rue Royale, The
Rat suddenly touched Marco's elbow.

"The carriage stands before the shop with lace in the windows," he
whispered hurriedly.

Marco saw and recognized it at once.  The owner had evidently gone into
the shop to buy something.  This was a better chance than they had
hoped for, and, when they approached the carriage itself, they saw that
there was another point in their favor. Inside were no less than three
beautiful little Pekingese spaniels that looked exactly alike.  They
were all trying to look out of the window and were pushing against each
other.  They were so perfect and so pretty that few people passed by
without looking at them.  What better excuse could two boys have for
lingering about a place?

They stopped and, standing a little distance away, began to look at and
discuss them and laugh at their excited little antics. Through the
shop-window Marco caught a glimpse of the great lady.

"She does not look much interested.  She won't stay long," he
whispered, and added aloud, "that little one is the master.  See how he
pushes the others aside!  He is stronger than the other two, though he
is so small."

"He can snap, too," said The Rat.

"She is coming now," warned Marco, and then laughed aloud as if at the
Pekingese, which, catching sight of their mistress at the shop-door,
began to leap and yelp for joy.

Their mistress herself smiled, and was smiling as Marco drew near her.

"May we look at them, Madame?" he said in French, and, as she made an
amiable gesture of acquiescence and moved toward the carriage with him,
he spoke a few words, very low but very distinctly, in Russian.

"The Lamp is lighted," he said.

The Rat was looking at her keenly, but he did not see her face change
at all.  What he noticed most throughout their journey was that each
person to whom they gave the Sign had complete control over his or her
countenance, if there were bystanders, and never betrayed by any change
of expression that the words meant anything unusual.

The great lady merely went on smiling, and spoke only of the dogs,
allowing Marco and himself to look at them through the window of the
carriage as the footman opened the door for her to enter.

"They are beautiful little creatures," Marco said, lifting his cap,
and, as the footman turned away, he uttered his few Russian words once
more and moved off without even glancing at the lady again.

"That is ONE!" he said to The Rat that night before they went to sleep,
and with a match he burned the scraps of the sketch he had torn and put
into his pocket.



XX

MARCO GOES TO THE OPERA

Their next journey was to Munich, but the night before they left Paris
an unexpected thing happened.

To reach the narrow staircase which led to their bedroom it was
necessary to pass through the baker's shop itself.

The baker's wife was a friendly woman who liked the two boy lodgers who
were so quiet and gave no trouble.  More than once she had given them a
hot roll or so or a freshly baked little tartlet with fruit in the
center.  When Marco came in this evening, she greeted him with a nod
and handed him a small parcel as he passed through.

"This was left for you this afternoon," she said.  "I see you are
making purchases for your journey.  My man and I are very sorry you are
going."

"Thank you, Madame.  We also are sorry," Marco answered, taking the
parcel.  "They are not large purchases, you see."

But neither he nor The Rat had bought anything at all, though the
ordinary-looking little package was plainly addressed to him and bore
the name of one of the big cheap shops.  It felt as if it contained
something soft.

When he reached their bedroom, The Rat was gazing out of the window
watching every living thing which passed in the street below.  He who
had never seen anything but London was absorbed by the spell of Paris
and was learning it by heart.

"Something has been sent to us.  Look at this," said Marco.

The Rat was at his side at once.  "What is it?  Where did it come from?"

They opened the package and at first sight saw only several pairs of
quite common woolen socks.  As Marco took up the sock in the middle of
the parcel, he felt that there was something inside it--something laid
flat and carefully.  He put his hand in and drew out a number of
five-franc notes--not new ones, because new ones would have betrayed
themselves by crackling.  These were old enough to be soft.  But there
were enough of them to amount to a substantial sum.

"It is in small notes because poor boys would have only small ones.  No
one will be surprised when we change these," The Rat said.

Each of them believed the package had been sent by the great lady, but
it had been done so carefully that not the slightest clue was furnished.

To The Rat, part of the deep excitement of "the Game" was the working
out of the plans and methods of each person concerned. He could not
have slept without working out some scheme which might have been used
in this case.  It thrilled him to contemplate the difficulties the
great lady might have found herself obliged to overcome.

"Perhaps," he said, after thinking it over for some time, "she went to
a big common shop dressed as if she were an ordinary woman and bought
the socks and pretended she was going to carry them home herself.  She
would do that so that she could take them into some corner and slip the
money in.  Then, as she wanted to have them sent from the shop, perhaps
she bought some other things and asked the people to deliver the
packages to different places.  The socks were sent to us and the other
things to some one else.  She would go to a shop where no one knew her
and no one would expect to see her and she would wear clothes which
looked neither rich nor too poor."

He created the whole episode with all its details and explained them to
Marco.  It fascinated him for the entire evening and he felt relieved
after it and slept well.

Even before they had left London, certain newspapers had swept out of
existence the story of the descendant of the Lost Prince. This had been
done by derision and light handling--by treating it as a romantic
legend.

At first, The Rat had resented this bitterly, but one day at a meal,
when he had been producing arguments to prove that the story must be a
true one, Loristan somehow checked him by his own silence.

"If there is such a man," he said after a pause, "it is well for him
that his existence should not be believed in--for some time at least."

The Rat came to a dead stop.  He felt hot for a moment and then felt
cold.  He saw a new idea all at once.  He had been making a mistake in
tactics.

No more was said but, when they were alone afterwards, he poured
himself forth to Marco.

"I was a fool!" he cried out.  "Why couldn't I see it for myself!
Shall I tell you what I believe has been done?  There is some one who
has influence in England and who is a friend to Samavia.  They've got
the newspapers to make fun of the story so that it won't be believed.
If it was believed, both the Iarovitch and the Maranovitch would be on
the lookout, and the Secret Party would lose their  chances.  What a
fool I was not to think of it!  There's some one watching and working
here who is a friend to Samavia."

"But there is some one in Samavia who has begun to suspect that it
might be true," Marco answered.  "If there were not, I should not have
been shut in the cellar.  Some one thought my father knew something.
The spies had orders to find out what it was."

"Yes.  Yes.  That's true, too!"  The Rat answered anxiously. "We shall
have to be very careful."

In the lining of the sleeve of Marco's coat there was a slit into which
he could slip any small thing he wished to conceal and also wished to
be able to reach without trouble.  In this he had carried the sketch of
the lady which he had torn up in Paris. When they walked in the streets
of Munich, the morning after their arrival, he carried still another
sketch.  It was the one picturing the genial-looking old aristocrat
with the sly smile.

One of the things they had learned about this one was that his chief
characteristic was his passion for music.  He was a patron of musicians
and he spent much time in Munich because he loved its musical
atmosphere and the earnestness of its opera-goers.

"The military band plays in the Feldherrn-halle at midday.  When
something very good is being played, sometimes people stop their
carriages so that they can listen.  We will go there," said Marco.

"It's a chance," said The Rat.  "We mustn't lose anything like a
chance."

The day was brilliant and sunny, the people passing through the streets
looked comfortable and homely, the mixture of old streets and modern
ones, of ancient corners and shops and houses of the day was
picturesque and cheerful.  The Rat swinging through the crowd on his
crutches was full of interest and exhilaration.  He had begun to grow,
and the change in his face and expression which had begun in London had
become more noticeable.  He had been given his "place," and a work to
do which entitled him to hold it.

No one could have suspected them of carrying a strange and vital secret
with them as they strolled along together.  They seemed only two
ordinary boys who looked in at shop windows and talked over  their
contents, and who loitered with upturned faces in the Marien-Platz
before the ornate Gothic Rathaus to hear the eleven o'clock chimes play
and see the painted figures of the King and Queen watch from their
balcony the passing before them of the automatic tournament procession
with its trumpeters and tilting knights.  When the show was over and
the automatic cock broke forth into his lusty farewell crow, they
laughed just as any other boys would have laughed.  Sometimes it would
have been easy for The Rat to forget that there was anything graver in
the world than the new places and new wonders he was seeing, as if he
were a wandering minstrel in a story.

But in Samavia bloody battles were being fought, and bloody plans were
being wrought out, and in anguished anxiety the Secret Party and the
Forgers of the Sword waited breathlessly for the Sign for which they
had waited so long.  And inside the lining of Marco's coat was hidden
the sketched face, as the two unnoticed lads made their way to the
Feldherrn-halle to hear the band play and see who might chance to be
among the audience.

Because the day was sunny, and also because the band was playing a
specially fine programme, the crowd in the square was larger than
usual.  Several vehicles had stopped, and among them were one or two
which were not merely hired cabs but were the carriages of private
persons.

One of them had evidently arrived early, as it was drawn up in a good
position when the boys reached the corner.  It was a big open carriage
and a grand one, luxuriously upholstered in green. The footman and
coachman wore green and silver liveries and seemed to know that people
were looking at them and their master.

He was a stout, genial-looking old aristocrat with a sly smile, though,
as he listened to the music, it almost forgot to be sly. In the
carriage with him were a young officer and a little boy, and they also
listened attentively.  Standing near the carriage door were several
people who were plainly friends or acquaintances, as they occasionally
spoke to him.  Marco touched The Rat's coat sleeve as the two boys
approached.

"It would not be easy to get near him," he said.  "Let us go and stand
as close to the carriage as we can get without pushing. Perhaps we may
hear some one say something about where he is going after the music is
over."

Yes, there was no mistaking him.  He was the right man.  Each of them
knew by heart the creases on his stout face and the sweep of his gray
moustache.  But there was nothing noticeable in a boy looking for a
moment at a piece of paper, and Marco sauntered a few steps to a bit of
space left bare by the crowd and took a last glance at his sketch.  His
rule was to make sure at the final moment.  The music was very good and
the group about the carriage was evidently enthusiastic.  There was
talk and praise and comment, and the old aristocrat nodded his head
repeatedly in applause.

"The Chancellor is music mad," a looker-on near the boys said to
another.  "At the opera every night unless serious affairs keep him
away!  There you may see him nodding his old head and bursting his
gloves with applauding when a good thing is done. He ought to have led
an orchestra or played a 'cello.  He is too big for first violin."

There was a group about the carriage to the last, when the music came
to an end and it drove away.  There had been no possible opportunity of
passing close to it even had the presence of the young officer and the
boy not presented an insurmountable obstacle.

Marco and The Rat went on their way and passed by the Hof-Theater and
read the bills.  "Tristan and Isolde" was to be presented at night and
a great singer would sing Isolde.

"He will go to hear that," both boys said at once.  "He will be sure to
go."

It was decided between them that Marco should go on his quest alone
when night came.  One boy who hung around the entrance of the Opera
would be observed less than two.

"People notice crutches more than they notice legs," The Rat said.
"I'd better keep out of the way unless you need me.  My time hasn't
come yet.  Even if it doesn't come at all I've--I've been on duty. I've
gone with you and I've been ready--that's what an aide-de-camp does."

He stayed at home and read such English papers as he could lay hands on
and he drew plans and re-fought battles on paper.

Marco went to the opera.  Even if he had not known his way to the
square near the place where the Hof-Theater stood, he could easily have
found it by following the groups of people in the streets who all
seemed walking in one direction.  There were students in their odd caps
walking three or four abreast, there were young couples and older ones,
and here and there whole families; there were soldiers of all ages,
officers and privates; and, when talk was to be heard in passing, it
was always talk about music.

For some time Marco waited in the square and watched the carriages roll
up and pass under the huge pillared portico to deposit their contents
at the entrance and at once drive away in orderly sequence.  He must
make sure that the grand carriage with the green and silver liveries
rolled up with the rest.  If it came, he would buy a cheap ticket and
go inside.

It was rather late when it arrived.  People in Munich are not late for
the opera if it can be helped, and the coachman drove up hurriedly.
The green and silver footman leaped to the ground and opened the
carriage door almost before it stopped.  The Chancellor got out looking
less genial than usual because he was afraid that he might lose some of
the overture.  A rosy-cheeked girl in a white frock was with him and
she was evidently trying to soothe him.

"I do not think we are really late, Father," she said.  "Don't feel
cross, dear.  It will spoil the music for you."

This was not a time in which a man's attention could be attracted
quietly.  Marco ran to get the ticket which would give him a place
among the rows of young soldiers, artists, male and female students,
and musicians who were willing to stand four or five deep throughout
the performance of even the longest opera.  He knew that, unless they
were in one of the few boxes which belonged only to the court, the
Chancellor and his rosy-cheeked daughter would be in the best seats in
the front curve of the balcony which were the most desirable of the
house.  He soon saw them.  They had secured the central places directly
below the large royal box where two quiet princesses and their
attendants were already seated.

When he found he was not too late to hear the overture, the
Chancellor's face become more genial than ever.  He settled himself
down to an evening of enjoyment and evidently forgot everything else in
the world.  Marco did not lose sight of him. When the audience went out
between acts to promenade in the corridors, he might go also and there
might be a chance to pass near to him in the crowd.  He watched him
closely.  Sometimes his fine old face saddened at the beautiful woe of
the music, sometimes it looked enraptured, and it was always evident
that every note reached his soul.

The pretty daughter who sat beside him was attentive but not so
enthralled.  After the first act two glittering young officers appeared
and made elegant and low bows, drawing their heels together as they
kissed her hand.  They looked sorry when they were obliged to return to
their seats again.

After the second act the Chancellor sat for a few minutes as if he were
in a dream.  The people in the seats near him began to rise from their
seats and file out into the corridors.  The young officers were to be
seen rising also.  The rosy daughter leaned forward and touched her
father's arm gently.

"She wants him to take her out," Marco thought.  "He will take her
