close to the deck and went over the side, carrying the boat and men along
with it.  Our oar got entangled with the wreck, and Jack seized an axe to
cut it free, but, owing to the motion of the ship, he missed the cordage
and struck the axe deep into the oar.  Another wave, however, washed it
clear of the wreck.  We all seized hold of it, and the next instant we
were struggling in the wild sea.  The last thing I saw was the boat
whirling in the surf, and all the sailors tossed into the foaming waves.
Then I became insensible.

On recovering from my swoon, I found myself lying on a bank of soft
grass, under the shelter of an overhanging rock, with Peterkin on his
knees by my side, tenderly bathing my temples with water, and
endeavouring to stop the blood that flowed from a wound in my forehead.




CHAPTER III.


The Coral Island--Our first cogitations after landing, and the result of
them--We conclude that the island is uninhabited.

There is a strange and peculiar sensation experienced in recovering from
a state of insensibility, which is almost indescribable; a sort of
dreamy, confused consciousness; a half-waking half-sleeping condition,
accompanied with a feeling of weariness, which, however, is by no means
disagreeable.  As I slowly recovered and heard the voice of Peterkin
inquiring whether I felt better, I thought that I must have overslept
myself, and should be sent to the mast-head for being lazy; but before I
could leap up in haste, the thought seemed to vanish suddenly away, and I
fancied that I must have been ill.  Then a balmy breeze fanned my cheek,
and I thought of home, and the garden at the back of my father's cottage,
with its luxuriant flowers, and the sweet-scented honey-suckle that my
dear mother trained so carefully upon the trellised porch.  But the
roaring of the surf put these delightful thoughts to flight, and I was
back again at sea, watching the dolphins and the flying-fish, and reefing
topsails off the wild and stormy Cape Horn.  Gradually the roar of the
surf became louder and more distinct.  I thought of being wrecked far far
away from my native land, and slowly opened my eyes to meet those of my
companion Jack, who, with a look of intense anxiety, was gazing into my
face.

"Speak to us, my dear Ralph," whispered Jack, tenderly, "are you better
now?"

I smiled and looked up, saying, "Better; why, what do you mean, Jack?  I'm
quite well."

"Then what are you shamming for, and frightening us in this way?" said
Peterkin, smiling through his tears; for the poor boy had been really
under the impression that I was dying.

I now raised myself on my elbow, and putting my hand to my forehead,
found that it had been cut pretty severely, and that I had lost a good
deal of blood.

"Come, come, Ralph," said Jack, pressing me gently backward, "lie down,
my boy; you're not right yet.  Wet your lips with this water, it's cool
and clear as crystal.  I got it from a spring close at hand.  There now,
don't say a word, hold your tongue," said he, seeing me about to speak.
"I'll tell you all about it, but you must not utter a syllable till you
have rested well."

"Oh! don't stop him from speaking, Jack," said Peterkin, who, now that
his fears for my safety were removed, busied himself in erecting a
shelter of broken branches in order to protect me from the wind; which,
however, was almost unnecessary, for the rock beside which I had been
laid completely broke the force of the gale.  "Let him speak, Jack; it's
a comfort to hear that he's alive, after lying there stiff and white and
sulky for a whole hour, just like an Egyptian mummy.  Never saw such a
fellow as you are, Ralph; always up to mischief.  You've almost knocked
out all my teeth and more than half choked me, and now you go shamming
dead!  It's very wicked of you, indeed it is."

While Peterkin ran on in this style, my faculties became quite clear
again, and I began to understand my position.  "What do you mean by
saying I half choked you, Peterkin?" said I.

"What do I mean?  Is English not your mother tongue, or do you want me to
repeat it in French, by way of making it clearer?  Don't you remember--"

"I remember nothing," said I, interrupting him, "after we were thrown
into the sea."

{Slowly recovering: p24.jpg}

"Hush, Peterkin," said Jack, "you're exciting Ralph with your nonsense.
I'll explain it to you.  You recollect that after the ship struck, we
three sprang over the bow into the sea; well, I noticed that the oar
struck your head and gave you that cut on the brow, which nearly stunned
you, so that you grasped Peterkin round the neck without knowing
apparently what you were about.  In doing so you pushed the
telescope,--which you clung to as if it had been your life,--against
Peterkin's mouth--"

"Pushed it against his mouth!" interrupted Peterkin, "say crammed it down
his throat.  Why, there's a distinct mark of the brass rim on the back of
my gullet at this moment!"

"Well, well, be that as it may," continued Jack, "you clung to him,
Ralph, till I feared you really would choke him; but I saw that he had a
good hold of the oar, so I exerted myself to the utmost to push you
towards the shore, which we luckily reached without much trouble, for the
water inside the reef is quite calm."

"But the captain and crew, what of them?" I inquired anxiously.

Jack shook his head.

"Are they lost?"

"No, they are not lost, I hope, but I fear there is not much chance of
their being saved.  The ship struck at the very tail of the island on
which we are cast.  When the boat was tossed into the sea it fortunately
did not upset, although it shipped a good deal of water, and all the men
managed to scramble into it; but before they could get the oars out the
gale carried them past the point and away to leeward of the island.  After
we landed I saw them endeavouring to pull towards us, but as they had
only one pair of oars out of the eight that belong to the boat, and as
the wind was blowing right in their teeth, they gradually lost ground.
Then I saw them put about and hoist some sort of sail,--a blanket, I
fancy, for it was too small for the boat,--and in half an hour they were
out of sight."

"Poor fellows," I murmured sorrowfully.

"But the more I think about it, I've better hope of them," continued
Jack, in a more cheerful tone.  "You see, Ralph, I've read a great deal
about these South Sea Islands, and I know that in many places they are
scattered about in thousands over the sea, so they're almost sure to fall
in with one of them before long."

"I'm sure I hope so," said Peterkin, earnestly.  "But what has become of
the wreck, Jack?  I saw you clambering up the rocks there while I was
watching Ralph.  Did you say she had gone to pieces?"

"No, she has not gone to pieces, but she has gone to the bottom," replied
Jack.  "As I said before, she struck on the tail of the island and stove
in her bow, but the next breaker swung her clear, and she floated away to
leeward.  The poor fellows in the boat made a hard struggle to reach her,
but long before they came near her she filled and went down.  It was
after she foundered that I saw them trying to pull to the island."

There wan a long silence after Jack ceased speaking, and I have no doubt
that each was revolving in his mind our extraordinary position.  For my
part I cannot say that my reflections were very agreeable.  I knew that
we were on an island, for Jack had said so, but whether it was inhabited
or not I did not know.  If it should be inhabited, I felt certain, from
all I had heard of South Sea Islanders, that we should be roasted alive
and eaten.  If it should turn out to be uninhabited, I fancied that we
should be starved to death.  "Oh!" thought I, "if the ship had only stuck
on the rocks we might have done pretty well, for we could have obtained
provisions from her, and tools to enable us to build a shelter, but
now--alas! alas! we are lost!"  These last words I uttered aloud in my
distress.

"Lost!  Ralph?" exclaimed Jack, while a smile overspread his hearty
countenance. "Saved, you should have said.  Your cogitations seem to have
taken a wrong road, and led you to a wrong conclusion."

"Do you know what conclusion _I_ have come to?" said Peterkin.  "I have
made up my mind that it's capital,--first rate,--the best thing that ever
happened to us, and the most splendid prospect that ever lay before three
jolly young tars.  We've got an island all to ourselves.  We'll take
possession in the name of the king; we'll go and enter the service of its
black inhabitants.  Of course we'll rise, naturally, to the top of
affairs.  White men always do in savage countries.  You shall be king,
Jack; Ralph, prime minister, and I shall be--"

"The court jester," interrupted Jack.

"No," retorted Peterkin, "I'll have no title at all.  I shall merely
accept a highly responsible situation under government, for you see,
Jack, I'm fond of having an enormous salary and nothing to do."

"But suppose there are no natives?"

"Then we'll build a charming villa, and plant a lovely garden round it,
stuck all full of the most splendiferous tropical flowers, and we'll farm
the land, plant, sow, reap, eat, sleep, and be merry."

"But to be serious," said Jack, assuming a grave expression of
countenance, which I observed always had the effect of checking
Peterkin's disposition to make fun of everything, "we are really in
rather an uncomfortable position.  If this is a desert island, we shall
have to live very much like the wild beasts, for we have not a tool of
any kind, not even a knife."

"Yes, we have _that_," said Peterkin, fumbling in his trousers pocket,
from which he drew forth a small penknife with only one blade, and that
was broken.

"Well, that's better than nothing; but come," said Jack, rising, "we are
wasting our time in _talking_ instead of _doing_.  You seem well enough
to walk now, Ralph, let us see what we have got in our pockets, and then
let us climb some hill and ascertain what sort of island we have been
cast upon, for, whether good or bad, it seems likely to be our home for
some time to come."




CHAPTER IV.


We examine into our personal property, and make a happy discovery--Our
island described--Jack proves himself to be learned and sagacious above
his fellows--Curious discoveries--Natural lemonade!

We now seated ourselves upon a rock and began to examine into our
personal property.  When we reached the shore, after being wrecked, my
companions had taken off part of their clothes and spread them out in the
sun to dry, for, although the gale was raging fiercely, there was not a
single cloud in the bright sky.  They had also stripped off most part of
my wet clothes and spread them also on the rocks.  Having resumed our
garments, we now searched all our pockets with the utmost care, and laid
their contents out on a flat stone before us; and, now that our minds
were fully alive to our condition, it was with no little anxiety that we
turned our several pockets inside out, in order that nothing might escape
us.  When all was collected together we found that our worldly goods
consisted of the following articles:--

First, A small penknife with a single blade broken off about the middle
and very rusty, besides having two or three notches on its edge.
(Peterkin said of this, with his usual pleasantry, that it would do for a
saw as well as a knife, which was a great advantage.)  Second, An old
German-silver pencil-case without any lead in it.  Third, A piece of whip-
cord about six yards long.  Fourth, A sailmaker's needle of a small size.
Fifth, A ship's telescope, which I happened to have in my hand at the
time the ship struck, and which I had clung to firmly all the time I was
in the water.  Indeed it was with difficulty that Jack got it out of my
grasp when I was lying insensible on the shore.  I cannot understand why
I kept such a firm hold of this telescope.  They say that a drowning man
will clutch at a straw.  Perhaps it may have been some such feeling in
me, for I did not know that it was in my hand at the time we were
wrecked.  However, we felt some pleasure in having it with us now,
although we did not see that it could be of much use to us, as the glass
at the small end was broken to pieces.  Our sixth article was a brass
ring which Jack always wore on his little finger.  I never understood why
he wore it, for Jack was not vain of his appearance, and did not seem to
care for ornaments of any kind.  Peterkin said "it was in memory of the
girl he left behind him!"  But as he never spoke of this girl to either
of us, I am inclined to think that Peterkin was either jesting or
mistaken.  In addition to these articles we had a little bit of tinder,
and the clothes on our backs.  These last were as follows:--

Each of us had on a pair of stout canvass trousers, and a pair of
sailors' thick shoes.  Jack wore a red flannel shirt, a blue jacket, and
a red Kilmarnock bonnet or night-cap, besides a pair of worsted socks,
and a cotton pocket-handkerchief, with sixteen portraits of Lord Nelson
printed on it, and a union Jack in the middle.  Peterkin had on a striped
flannel shirt,--which he wore outside his trousers, and belted round his
waist, after the manner of a tunic,--and a round black straw hat.  He had
no jacket, having thrown it off just before we were cast into the sea;
but this was not of much consequence, as the climate of the island proved
to be extremely mild; so much so, indeed, that Jack and I often preferred
to go about without our jackets.  Peterkin had also a pair of white
cotton socks, and a blue handkerchief with white spots all over it.  My
own costume consisted of a blue flannel shirt, a blue jacket, a black
cap, and a pair of worsted socks, besides the shoes and canvass trousers
already mentioned.  This was all we had, and besides these things we had
nothing else; but, when we thought of the danger from which we had
escaped, and how much worse off we might have been had the ship struck on
the reef during the night, we felt very thankful that we were possessed
of so much, although, I must confess, we sometimes wished that we had had
a little more.

While we were examining these things, and talking about them, Jack
suddenly started and exclaimed--

"The oar! we have forgotten the oar."

"What good will that do us?" said Peterkin; "there's wood enough on the
island to make a thousand oars."

"Ay, lad," replied Jack, "but there's a bit of hoop iron at the end of
it, and that may be of much use to us."

"Very true," said I, "let us go fetch it;" and with that we all three
rose and hastened down to the beach.  I still felt a little weak from
loss of blood, so that my companions soon began to leave me behind; but
Jack perceived this, and, with his usual considerate good nature, turned
back to help me.  This was now the first time that I had looked well
about me since landing, as the spot where I had been laid was covered
with thick bushes which almost hid the country from our view.  As we now
emerged from among these and walked down the sandy beach together, I cast
my eyes about, and, truly, my heart glowed within me and my spirits rose
at the beautiful prospect which I beheld on every side.  The gale had
suddenly died away, just as if it had blown furiously till it dashed our
ship upon the rocks, and had nothing more to do after accomplishing that.
The island on which we stood was hilly, and covered almost everywhere
with the most beautiful and richly coloured trees, bushes, and shrubs,
none of which I knew the names of at that time, except, indeed, the cocoa-
nut palms, which I recognised at once from the many pictures that I had
seen of them before I left home.  A sandy beach of dazzling whiteness
lined this bright green shore, and upon it there fell a gentle ripple of
the sea.  This last astonished me much, for I recollected that at home
the sea used to fall in huge billows on the shore long after a storm had
subsided.  But on casting my glance out to sea the cause became apparent.
About a mile distant from the shore I saw the great billows of the ocean
rolling like a green wall, and falling with a long, loud roar, upon a low
coral reef, where they were dashed into white foam and flung up in clouds
of spray.  This spray sometimes flew exceedingly high, and, every here
and there, a beautiful rainbow was formed for a moment among the falling
drops.  We afterwards found that this coral reef extended quite round the
island, and formed a natural breakwater to it.  Beyond this the sea rose
and tossed violently from the effects of the storm; but between the reef
and the shore it was as calm and as smooth as a pond.

My heart was filled with more delight than I can express at sight of so
many glorious objects, and my thoughts turned suddenly to the
contemplation of the Creator of them all.  I mention this the more
gladly, because at that time, I am ashamed to say, I very seldom thought
of my Creator, although I was constantly surrounded by the most beautiful
and wonderful of His works.  I observed from the expression of my
companion's countenance that he too derived much joy from the splendid
scenery, which was all the more agreeable to us after our long voyage on
the salt sea.  There, the breeze was fresh and cold, but here it was
delightfully mild; and, when a puff blew off the land, it came laden with
the most exquisite perfume that can be imagined.  While we thus gazed, we
were startled by a loud "Huzza!" from Peterkin, and, on looking towards
the edge of the sea, we saw him capering and jumping about like a monkey,
and ever and anon tugging with all his might at something that lay upon
the shore.

"What an odd fellow he is, to be sure," said Jack, taking me by the arm
and hurrying forward; "come, let us hasten to see what it is."

"Here it is, boys, hurrah! come along.  Just what we want," cried
Peterkin, as we drew near, still tugging with all his power.  "First
rate; just the very ticket!"

I need scarcely say to my readers that my companion Peterkin was in the
habit of using very remarkable and peculiar phrases.  And I am free to
confess that I did not well understand the meaning of some of them,--such,
for instance, as "the very ticket;" but I think it my duty to recount
everything relating to my adventures with a strict regard to truthfulness
