"And where am I to go to, Jacob?" said Miss Judith, calmly.

"I hardly know, madam; there is my cottage; it is but a poor place, and
not fit for one like you."

"So I should presume, Jacob Armitage, neither shall I accept your
offer. It would ill befit the dignity of a Villiers to be frightened
out of her abode by a party of rude soldiers. Happen what will, I shall
not stir from this--no, not even from this chair. Neither do I consider
the danger so great as you suppose. Let Benjamin saddle, and be
prepared to ride over to Lymington immediately. I will give him a
letter to the magistrate there, who will send us protection."

"But, madam, the children can not remain here. I will not leave them
here. I promised the colonel--"

"Will the children be in more danger than I shall be, Jacob Armitage?"
replied the old lady, stiffly. "They dare not ill-treat me--they may
force the buttery and drink the ale--they may make merry with that and
the venison which you have brought with you, I presume, but they will
hardly venture to insult a lady of the House of Villiers."

"I fear they will venture any thing, madam. At all events, they will
frighten the children, and for one night they will be better in my
cottage."

"Well, then, be it so; take them to your cottage, and take Martha to
attend upon the Miss Beverleys. Go down now, and desire Agatha to come
to me, and Benjamin to saddle as fast as he can."

Jacob left the room, satisfied with the permission to remove the
children. He knew that it was useless to argue with Miss Judith, who
was immovable when once she had declared her intentions. He was
debating in his own mind whether he should acquaint the servants with
the threatened danger; but he had no occasion to do so, for Agatha had
remained at the door while Jacob was communicating the intelligence,
and as soon as he had arrived at that portion of it by which she
learned that the mansion was to be burned down that night, had run off
to the kitchen to communicate the intelligence to the other servants.

"I'll not stay to be burned to death," exclaimed the cook, as Jacob
came in. "Well, Mr. Armitage, this is pretty news you have brought.
What does my lady say!"

"She desires that Benjamin saddles immediately, to carry a letter to
Lymington; and you, Agatha, are to go up stairs to her."

"But what does she mean to do? Where are we to go?" exclaimed Agatha.

"Miss Judith intends to remain where she is."

"Then she will remain alone, for me," exclaimed the housemaid, who was
admired by Benjamin. "Its bad enough to have little victuals and no
wages, but as for being burned to death--Benjamin, put a pillion behind
your saddle, and I'll go to Lymington with you. I won't be long in
getting my bundle."

Benjamin, who was in the kitchen with the maids at the time that Jacob
entered, made a sign significant of consent, and went away to the
stable. Agatha went up to her mistress in a state of great
perturbation, and the cook also hurried away to her bedroom.

"They'll all leave her," thought Jacob; "well, my duty is plain; I'll
not leave the children in the house." Jacob then went in search of
them, and found them playing in the garden. He called the two boys to
him, and told them to follow him.

"Now, Mr. Edward," said he, "you must prove yourself your father's own
son. We must leave this house immediately; come up with me to your
rooms, and help me to pack up yours and your sisters' clothes, for we
must go to my cottage this night. There is no time to be lost."

"But why, Jacob; I must know why?"

"Because the Parliamentary troopers will burn it down this night."

"Burn it down! Why, the house is mine, is it not? Who dares to burn
down this house?"

"They will dare it, and will do it."

"But we will fight them, Jacob; we can bolt and bar; I can fire a gun,
and hit too, as you know; then there's Benjamin and you."

"And what can you and two men do against a troop of horse, my dear boy?
If we could defend the place against them, Jacob Armitage would be the
first; but it is impossible, my dear boy. Recollect your sisters. Would
you have them burned to death, or shot by these wretches? No, no, Mr.
Edward; you must do as I say, and lose no time. Let us pack up what
will be most useful, and load White Billy with the bundles; then you
must all come to the cottage with me, and we will make it out how we
can."

"That will be jolly!" said Humphrey; "come, Edward."

But Edward Beverley required more persuasion to abandon the house; at
last, old Jacob prevailed, and the clothes were put up in bundles as
fast as they could collect them.

"Your aunt said Martha was to go with your sisters, but I doubt if she
will," observed Jacob, "and I think we shall have no room for her, for
the cottage is small enough."

"Oh no, we don't want her," said Humphrey; "Alice always dresses Edith
and herself too, ever since mamma died."

"Now we will carry down the bundles, and you make them fast on the pony
while I go for your sisters."

"But where does aunt Judith go?" inquired Edward.

"She will not leave the house, Master Edward; she intends to stay and
speak to the troopers."

"And so an old woman like her remains to face the enemy, while I run
away from them!" replied Edward. "I will not go."

"Well, Master Edward," replied Jacob, "you must do as you please; but
it will be cruel to leave your sisters here; they and Humphrey must
come with me, and I can not manage to get them to the cottage without
you go with us; it is not far, and you can return in a very short time."

To this Edward consented. The pony was soon loaded, and the little
girls, who were still playing in the garden, were called in by
Humphrey. They were told that they were going to pass the night in the
cottage, and were delighted at the idea.

"Now, Master Edward," said Jacob, "will you take your sisters by the
hand and lead them to the cottage? Here is the key of the door; Master
Humphrey can lead the pony; and Master Edward," continued Jacob, taking
him aside, "I'll tell you one thing which I will not mention before
your brother and sisters: the troopers are all about the New Forest,
for King Charles has escaped, and they are seeking for him. You must
not, therefore, leave your brother and sisters till I return. Lock the
cottage-door as soon as it is dark. You know where to get a light, over
the cupboard; and my gun is loaded, and hangs above the mantlepiece.
You must do your best if they attempt to force an entrance; but above
all, promise me not to leave them till I return. I will remain here to
see what I can do with your aunt, and when I come back we can then
decide how to act."

This latter ruse of Jacob's succeeded. Edward promised that he would
not leave his sisters, and it wanted but a few minutes of twilight when
the little party quitted the mansion of Arnwood. As they went out of
the gates they were passed by Benjamin, who was trotting away with
Martha behind him on a pillion, holding a bundle as large as herself.
Not a word was exchanged, and Benjamin and Martha were soon out of
sight.

"Why, where can Martha be going?" said Alice. "Will she be back when we
come home to-morrow?"

Edward made no reply, but Humphrey said, "Well, she has taken plenty of
clothes in that huge bundle for one night, at least."

Jacob, as soon as he had seen the children on their way, returned to
the kitchen, where he found Agatha and the cook collecting their
property, evidently bent upon a hasty retreat.

"Have you seen Miss Judith, Agatha?"

"Yes; and she told me that she should remain, and that I should stand
behind her chair that she might receive the troopers with dignity; but
I don't admire the plan. They might leave her alone, but I am sure that
they will be rude to me."

"When did Benjamin say he would be back?"

"He don't intend coming back. He said he would not, at all events, till
to-morrow morning, and then he would ride out this way, to ascertain if
the report was false or true. But Martha has gone with him."

"I wish I could persuade the old lady to leave the house," said Jacob,
thoughtfully. "I fear they will not pay her the respect that she
calculates upon. Go up, Agatha, and say I wish to speak with her."

"No, not I; I must be off, for it is dark already."

"And where are you going, then?"

"To Gossip Allwood's. It's a good mile, and I have to carry my things."

"Well, Agatha, if you'll take me up to the old lady, I'll carry your
things for you."

Agatha consented, and as soon as she had taken up the lamp, for it was
now quite dark, Jacob was once more introduced.

"I wish, madam," said Jacob, "you would be persuaded to leave the house
for this night."

"Jacob Armitage, leave this house I will not, if it were filled with
troopers; I have said so."

"But, madam--"

"No more, sir; you are too forward," replied the old lady, haughtily.

"But, madam--"

"Leave my presence, Jacob Armitage, and never appear again. Quit the
room, and send Agatha here."

"She has left, madam, and so has the cook, and Martha went away behind
Benjamin; when I leave, you will be alone."

"They have dared to leave?"

"They dared not stay, madam."

"Leave me, Jacob Armitage, and shut the door when you go out." Jacob
still hesitated. "Obey me instantly," said the old lady; and the
forester, finding all remonstrance useless, went out, and obeyed her
last commands by shutting the door after him.

Jacob found Agatha and the other maid in the court-yard; he took up
their packages, and, as he promised, accompanied them to Gossip
Allwood, who kept a small ale-house about a mile distant.

"But, mercy on us! what will become of the children?" said Agatha, as
they walked along, her fears for herself having up to this time made
her utterly forgetful of them. "Poor things! and Martha has left them."

"Yes, indeed; what will become of the dear babes?" said the cook, half
crying.

Now Jacob, knowing that the children of such a Malignant as Colonel
Beverley would have sorry treatment if discovered, and knowing also
that women were not always to be trusted, determined not to tell them
how they were disposed of. He therefore replied,

"Who would hurt such young children as those? No, no, they are safe
enough; even the troopers would protect them."

"I should hope so," replied Agatha.

"You may be sure of that; no man would hurt babies," replied Jacob.
"The troopers will take them with them to Lymington, I suppose. I've no
fear for them; it's the proud old lady whom they will be uncivil to."

The conversation here ended, and in due time they arrived at the inn.
Jacob had just put the bundles down on the table, when the clattering
of horses' hoofs was heard. Shortly afterward, the troopers pulled
their horses up at the door, and dismounted. Jacob recognized the party
he had met in the forest, and among them Southwold. The troopers called
for ale, and remained some time in the house, talking and laughing with
the women, especially Agatha, who was a very good-looking girl. Jacob
would have retreated quietly, but he found a sentinel posted at the
door to prevent the egress of any person. He reseated himself, and
while he was listening to the conversation of the troopers he was
recognized by Southwold, who accosted him. Jacob did not pretend not to
know him, as it would have been useless; and Southwold put many
questions to him as to who were resident at Arnwood. Jacob replied that
the children were there, and a few servants, and he was about to
mention Miss Judith Villiers, when a thought struck him--he might save
the old lady.

"You are going to Arnwood, I know," said Jacob, "and I have heard who
you are in search of. Well, Southwold, I'll give you a hint. I may be
wrong; but if you should fall in with an old lady or something like one
when you go to Arnwood, mount her on your crupper and away with her to
Lymington as fast as you can ride. You understand me?" Southwold nodded
significantly, and squeezed Jacob's hand.

"One word, Jacob Armitage; if I succeed in the capture by your means,
it is but fair that you should have something for your hint. Where can
I find you the day after to-morrow?"

"I am leaving the country this night, and I must go. I am in trouble,
that's the fact; when all is blown over, I will find you out. Don't
speak to me any more just now." Southwold again squeezed Jacob's hand,
and left him. Shortly afterward the order was given to mount, and the
troopers set off.

Armitage followed slowly and unobserved. They arrive at the mansion and
surrounded it. Shortly afterward he perceived the glare of torches, and
in a quarter of an hour more thick smoke rose up in the dark but clear
sky; at last the flames burst forth from the lower windows of the
mansion, and soon afterward they lighted up the country round to some
distance.

"It is done," thought Jacob; and he turned to bend his hasty steps
toward his own cottage, when he heard the galloping of a horse and
violent screams; a minute afterward James Southwold passed him with the
old lady tied behind him, kicking and struggling as hard as she could.
Jacob smiled as he thought that he had by his little stratagem saved
the old woman's life, for that Southwold imagined that she was King
Charles dressed up as an old woman was evident; and he then returned as
fast as he could to the cottage.

In half an hour Jacob had passed through the thick woods which were
between the mansion and his own cottage, occasionally looking back, as
the flames of the mansion rose higher and higher, throwing their light
far and wide. He knocked at the cottage-door; Smoker, a large dog
cross-bred between the fox and blood-hound, growled till Jacob spoke to
him, and then Edward opened the door.

"My sisters are in bed and fast asleep, Jacob," said Edward, "and
Humphrey has been nodding this half hour; had he not better go to bed
before we go back?"

"Come out, Master Edward," replied Jacob, "and look." Edward beheld the
flames and fierce light between the trees and was silent.

"I told you that it would be so, and you would all have been burned in
your beds, for they did not enter the house to see who was in it, but
fired it as soon as they had surrounded it."

"And my aunt!" exclaimed Edward, clasping his hands.

"Is safe, Master Edward, and by this time at Lymington."

"We will go to her to-morrow."

"I fear not; you must not risk so much, Master Edward. These Levelers
spare nobody, and you had better let it be supposed that you are all
burned in the house."

"But my aunt knows the contrary, Jacob."

"Very true; I quite forgot that." And so Jacob had. He expected that
the old woman would have been burned, and then nobody would have known
of the existence of the children; he forgot, when he planned to save
her, that she knew where the children were.

"Well, Master Edward, I will go to Lymington to-morrow and see the old
lady; but you must remain here, and take charge of your sisters till I
come back, and then we will consider what is to be done. The flames are
not so bright as they were."

"No. It is my house that these Roundheads have burned down," said
Edward, shaking his fist.

"It was your house, Master Edward, and it was your property, but how
long it will be so remains to be seen. I fear that it will be
forfeited."

"Wo to the people who dare take possession of it!" cried Edward; "I
shall, if I live, be a man one of these days."

"Yes, Master Edward, and then you will reflect more than you do now,
and not be rash. Let us go into the cottage, for it's no use remaining
out in the cold; the frost is sharp to-night."

Edward slowly followed Jacob into the cottage. His little heart was
full. He was a proud boy and a good boy, but the destruction of the
mansion had raised up evil thoughts in his heart--hatred to the
Covenanters, who had killed his father and now burned the
property--revenge upon them (how he knew not); but his hand was ready
to strike, young as he was. He lay down on the bed, but he could not
sleep. He turned and turned again, and his brain was teeming with
thoughts and plans of vengeance. Had he said his prayers that night he
would have been obliged to repeat, "Forgive us as we forgive them who
trespass against us." At last, he fell fast asleep, but his dreams were
wild, and he often called out during the night and woke his brother and
sisters.




CHAPTER III.


The next morning, as soon as Jacob had given the children their
breakfast, he set off toward Arnwood. He knew that Benjamin had stated
his intention to return with the horse and see what had taken place,
and he knew him well enough to feel sure that he would do so. He
thought it better to see him if possible, and ascertain the fate of
Miss Judith. Jacob arrived at the still smoking ruins of the mansion,
and found several people there, mostly residents within a few miles,
some attracted by curiosity, others busy in collecting the heavy masses
of lead which had been melted from the roof, and appropriating them to
their own benefit; but much of it was still too hot to be touched, and
they were throwing snow on it to cool it, for it had snowed during the
night. At last, Jacob perceived Benjamin on horseback riding leisurely
toward him, and immediately went up to him.

"Well, Benjamin, this is a woeful sight. What is the news from
Lymington?"

"Lymington is full of troopers, and they are not over-civil," replied
Benjamin. "And the old lady--where is she?"

"Ah, that's a sad business," replied Benjamin, "and the poor children,
too. Poor Master Edward! he would have made a brave gentleman."

"But the old lady is safe," rejoined Jacob. "Did you see her?"

"Yes, I saw her; they thought she was King Charles--poor old soul."

"But they have found out their mistake by this time?"

"Yes, and James Southwold has found it out too," replied Benjamin; "to
think of the old lady breaking his neck!"

"Breaking his neck? You don't say so! How was it?"

"Why, it seems that Southwold thought that she was King Charles dressed
up as an old woman, so he seized her and strapped her fast behind him,
and galloped away with her to Lymington; but she struggled and kicked
so manfully, that he could not hold on, and off they went together, and
he broke his neck."

"Indeed! A judgment--a judgment upon a traitor," said Jacob.

"They were picked up, strapped together as they were, by the other
troopers, and carried to Lymington."

"Well, and where is the old lady, then? Did you see and speak to her?"

"I saw her, Jacob, but I did not speak to her. I forgot to say that,
when she broke Southwold's neck, she broke her own too."

"Then the old lady is dead?"

"Yes, that she is," replied Benjamin; "but who cares about her? it's
the poor children that I pity. Martha has been crying ever since."

"I don't wonder."

"I was at the Cavalier, and the troopers were there, and they were
boasting of what they had done, and called it a righteous work. I could
not stand that, and I asked one of them if it were a righteous work to
burn poor children in their beds? So he turned round, and struck his
sword upon the floor, and asked me whether I was one of them--'Who are
you, then?' and I--all my courage went away, and I answered, I was a
poor rat-catcher. 'A rat-catcher; are you? Well, then, Mr. Ratcatcher,
when you are killing rats, if you find a nest of young ones, don't you
kill them too? or do you leave them to grow, and become mischievous,
