
Soon after this the merchant, who had a ship ready to sail, called
for his servants, as his custom was, in order that each of them might
venture something to try their luck; and whatever they sent was to pay
neither freight nor custom, for he thought justly that God Almighty
would bless him the more for his readiness to let the poor partake of
his fortune.

All the servants appeared but poor Whittington, who, having neither
money nor goods, could not think of sending anything to try his luck;
but his good friend Miss Alice, thinking his poverty kept him away,
ordered him to be called.

She then offered to lay down something for him, but the merchant told
his daughter that would not do, it must be something of his own. Upon
which poor Whittington said he had nothing but a cat which he bought
for a penny that was given him. "Fetch thy cat, boy," said the merchant,
"and send her." Whittington brought poor puss and delivered her to the
captain, with tears in his eyes, for he said he should now be disturbed
by the rats and mice as much as ever. All the company laughed at
the adventure but Miss Alice, who pitied the poor boy, and gave him
something to buy another cat.

While puss was beating the billows at sea, poor Whittington was severely
beaten at home by his tyrannical mistress the cook, who used him so
cruelly, and made such game of him for sending his cat to sea, that
at last the poor boy determined to run away from his place, and having
packed up the few things he had, he set out very early in the morning on
All-Hallows day. He traveled as far as Holloway, and there sat down on
a stone to consider what course he should take; but while he was thus
ruminating, Bow bells, of which there were only six, began to ring; and
he thought their sounds addressed him in this manner:

  "Turn again, Whittington,
  Thrice Lord Mayor of London."


"Lord Mayor of London!" said he to himself, "what would not one endure
to be Lord Mayor of London, and ride in such a fine coach? Well, I'll go
back again, and bear all the pummelling and ill-usage of Cicely rather
than miss the opportunity of being Lord Mayor!" So home he went, and
happily got into the house and about his business before Mrs. Cicely
made her appearance.

We must now follow Miss Puss to the coast of Africa. How perilous are
voyages at sea, how uncertain the winds and the waves, and how many
accidents attend a naval life!

The ship that had the cat on board was long beaten at sea, and at last,
by contrary winds, driven on a part of the coast of Barbary which was
inhabited by Moors unknown to the English. These people received our
countrymen with civility, and therefore the captain, in order to trade
with them, showed them the patterns of the goods he had on board, and
sent some of them to the King of the country, who was so well pleased
that he sent for the captain and the factor to come to his palace, which
was about a mile from the sea. Here they were placed, according to the
custom of the country, on rich carpets, flowered with gold and silver;
and the King and Queen being seated at the upper end of the room, dinner
was brought in, which consisted of many dishes; but no sooner were the
dishes put down but an amazing number of rats and mice came from all
quarters and devoured all the meat in an instant.

The factor, in surprise, turned round to the nobles and asked if these
vermin were not offensive. "Oh! yes," said they, "very offensive; and
the King would give half his treasure to be freed of them, for they
not only destroy his dinner, as you see, but they assault him in his
chamber, and even in bed, so that he is obliged to be watched while he
is sleeping, for fear of them."

The factor jumped for joy; he remembered poor Whittington and his
cat, and told the King he had a creature on board the ship that would
despatch all these vermin immediately. The King's heart heaved so high
at the joy which this news gave him that his turban dropped off his
head. "Bring this creature to me," said he; "vermin are dreadful in a
court, and if she will perform what you say I will load your ship with
gold and jewels in exchange for her." The factor, who knew his business,
took this opportunity to set forth the merits of Miss Puss. He told his
Majesty that it would be inconvenient to part with her, as, when she
was gone, the rats and mice might destroy the goods in the ship--but to
oblige his Majesty he would fetch her. "Run, run," said the Queen; "I am
impatient to see the dear creature."

Away flew the factor, while another dinner was providing, and returned
with the cat just as the rats and mice were devouring that also. He
immediately put down Miss Puss, who killed a great number of them.

The King rejoiced greatly to see his old enemies destroyed by so small a
creature, and the Queen was highly pleased, and desired the cat might
be brought near that she might look at her. Upon which the factor called
"Pussy, pussy, pussy!" and she came to him. He then presented her to the
Queen, who started back, and was afraid to touch a creature who had made
such havoc among the rats and mice; however, when the factor stroked
the cat and called "Pussy, pussy!" the Queen also touched her and cried
"Putty, putty!" for she had not learned English.

He then put her down on the Queen's lap, where she, purring, played with
her Majesty's hand, and then sang herself to sleep.

The King, having seen the exploits of Miss Puss, and being informed that
her kittens would stock the whole country, bargained with the captain
and factor for the whole ship's cargo, and then gave them ten times as
much for the cat as all the rest amounted to. On which, taking leave of
their Majesties and other great personages at court, they sailed with a
fair wind for England, whither we must now attend them.

The morn had scarcely dawned when Mr. Fitzwarren arose to count over
the cash and settle the business for that day. He had just entered the
counting-house, and seated himself at the desk, when somebody came,
tap, tap, at the door. "Who's there?" said Mr. Fitzwarren. "A friend,"
answered the other. "What friend can come at this unseasonable time?" "A
real friend is never unseasonable," answered the other. "I come to bring
you good news of your ship Unicorn." The merchant bustled up in such a
hurry that he forgot his gout; instantly opened the door, and who should
be seen waiting but the captain and factor, with a cabinet of jewels,
and a bill of lading, for which the merchant lifted up his eyes and
thanked heaven for sending him such a prosperous voyage. Then they told
him the adventures of the cat, and showed him the cabinet of jewels
which they had brought for Mr. Whittington. Upon which he cried out with
great earnestness, but not in the most poetical manner:

  "Go, send him in, and tell him of his fame,
  And call him Mr. Whittington by name."


It is not our business to animadvert upon these lines; we are not
critics, but historians. It is sufficient for us that they are the words
of Mr. Fitzwarren; and though it is beside our purpose, and perhaps not
in our power to prove him a good poet, we shall soon convince the reader
that he was a good man, which was a much better character; for when some
who were present told him that this treasure was too much for such a
poor boy as Whittington, he said: "God forbid that I should deprive him
of a penny; it is his own, and he shall have it to a farthing." He then
ordered Mr. Whittington in, who was at this time cleaning the kitchen
and would have excused himself from going into the counting-house,
saying the room was swept and his shoes were dirty and full of
hob-nails. The merchant, however, made him come in, and ordered a chair
to be set for him. Upon which, thinking they intended to make sport
of him, as had been too often the case in the kitchen, he besought his
master not to mock a poor simple fellow, who intended them no harm, but
let him go about his business. The merchant, taking him by the hand,
said: "Indeed, Mr. Whittington, I am in earnest with you, and sent for
you to congratulate you on your great success. Your cat has procured you
more money than I am worth in the world, and may you long enjoy it and
be happy!"

At length, being shown the treasure, and convinced by them that all of
it belonged to him, he fell upon his knees and thanked the Almighty for
his providential care of such a poor and miserable creature. He then
laid all the treasure at his master's feet, who refused to take any part
of it, but told him he heartily rejoiced at his prosperity, and hoped
the wealth he had acquired would be a comfort to him, and would make
him happy. He then applied to his mistress, and to his good friend
Miss Alice, who refused to take any part of the money, but told him she
heartily rejoiced at his good success, and wished him all imaginable
felicity. He then gratified the captain, factor, and the ship's crew for
the care they had taken of his cargo. He likewise distributed presents
to all the servants in the house, not forgetting even his old enemy the
cook, though she little deserved it.

After this Mr. Fitzwarren advised Mr. Whittington to send for the
necessary people and dress himself like a gentleman, and made him the
offer of his house to live in till he could provide himself with a
better.

Now it came to pass when Mr. Whittington's face was washed, his hair
curled, and he dressed in a rich suit of clothes, that he turned out
a genteel young fellow; and, as wealth contributes much to give a man
confidence, he in a little time dropped that sheepish behavior which
was principally occasioned by a depression of spirits, and soon grew a
sprightly and good companion, insomuch that Miss Alice, who had formerly
pitied him, now fell in love with him.

When her father perceived they had this good liking for each other
he proposed a match between them, to which both parties cheerfully
consented, and the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, Sheriffs, the Company
of Stationers, the Royal Academy of Arts, and a number of eminent
merchants attended the ceremony, and were elegantly treated at an
entertainment made for that purpose.

History further relates that they lived very happy, had several
children, and died at a good old age. Mr. Whittington served as Sheriff
of London and was three times Lord Mayor. In the last year of his
mayoralty he entertained King Henry V and his Queen, after his
conquest of France, upon which occasion the King, in consideration of
Whittington's merit, said: "Never had prince such a subject"; which
being told to Whittington at the table, he replied: "Never had subject
such a king." His Majesty, out of respect to his good character,
conferred the honor of knighthood on him soon after.

Sir Richard many years before his death constantly fed a great number
of poor citizens, built a church and a college to it, with a yearly
allowance for poor scholars, and near it erected a hospital.

He also built Newgate for criminals, and gave liberally to St.
Bartholomew's Hospital and other public charities.




THE WONDERFUL SHEEP


Once upon a time--in the days when the fairies lived--there was a king
who had three daughters, who were all young, and clever, and beautiful;
but the youngest of the three, who was called Miranda, was the prettiest
and the most beloved.

The King, her father, gave her more dresses and jewels in a month than
he gave the others in a year; but she was so generous that she shared
everything with her sisters, and they were all as happy and as fond of
one another as they could be.

Now, the King had some quarrelsome neighbors, who, tired of leaving him
in peace, began to make war upon him so fiercely that he feared he would
be altogether beaten if he did not make an effort to defend himself.
So he collected a great army and set off to fight them, leaving the
Princesses with their governess in a castle where news of the war was
brought every day--sometimes that the King had taken a town, or won a
battle, and, at last, that he had altogether overcome his enemies and
chased them out of his kingdom, and was coming back to the castle as
quickly as possible, to see his dear little Miranda whom he loved so
much.

The three Princesses put on dresses of satin, which they had had made
on purpose for this great occasion, one green, one blue, and the third
white; their jewels were the same colors. The eldest wore emeralds, the
second turquoises, and the youngest diamonds, and thus adorned they
went to meet the King, singing verses which they had composed about his
victories.

When he saw them all so beautiful and so gay he embraced them tenderly,
but gave Miranda more kisses than either of the others.

Presently a splendid banquet was served, and the King and his daughters
sat down to it, and as he always thought that there was some special
meaning in everything, he said to the eldest:

"Tell me why you have chosen a green dress."

"Sire," she answered, "having heard of your victories I thought that
green would signify my joy and the hope of your speedy return."

"That is a very good answer," said the King; "and you, my daughter," he
continued, "why did you take a blue dress?"

"Sire," said the Princess, "to show that we constantly hoped for your
success, and that the sight of you is as welcome to me as the sky with
its most beautiful stars."

"Why," said the King, "your wise answers astonish me, and you, Miranda.
What made you dress yourself all in white?

"Because, sire," she answered, "white suits me better than anything
else."

"What!" said the King angrily, "was that all you thought of, vain
child?"

"I thought you would be pleased with me," said the Princess; "that was
all."

The King, who loved her, was satisfied with this, and even pretended to
be pleased that she had not told him all her reasons at first.

"And now," said he, "as I have supped well, and it is not time yet to go
to bed, tell me what you dreamed last night."

The eldest said she had dreamed that he brought her a dress, and the
precious stones and gold embroidery on it were brighter than the sun.

The dream of the second was that the King had brought her a spinning
wheel and a distaff, that she might spin him some shirts.

But the youngest said: "I dreamed that my second sister was to be
married, and on her wedding-day, you, father, held a golden ewer and
said: 'Come, Miranda, and I will hold the water that you may dip your
hands in it.'"

The King was very angry indeed when he heard this dream, and frowned
horribly; indeed, he made such an ugly face that everyone knew how angry
he was, and he got up and went off to bed in a great hurry; but he could
not forget his daughter's dream.

"Does the proud girl wish to make me her slave?" he said to himself. "I
am not surprised at her choosing to dress herself in white satin without
a thought of me. She does not think me worthy of her consideration! But
I will soon put an end to her pretensions!"

He rose in a fury, and although it was not yet daylight, he sent for the
Captain of his Bodyguard, and said to him:

"You have heard the Princess Miranda's dream? I consider that it means
strange things against me, therefore I order you to take her away into
the forest and kill her, and, that I may be sure it is done, you must
bring me her heart and her tongue. If you attempt to deceive me you
shall be put to death!"

The Captain of the Guard was very much astonished when he heard this
barbarous order, but he did not dare to contradict the King for fear of
making him still more angry, or causing him to send someone else, so he
answered that he would fetch the Princess and do as the King had said.
When he went to her room they would hardly let him in, it was so early,
but he said that the King had sent for Miranda, and she got up quickly
and came out; a little black girl called Patypata held up her train, and
her pet monkey and her little dog ran after her. The monkey was called
Grabugeon, and the little dog Tintin.

The Captain of the Guard begged Miranda to come down into the garden
where the King was enjoying the fresh air, and when they got there, he
pretended to search for him, but as he was not to be found, he said:

"No doubt his Majesty has strolled into the forest," and he opened the
little door that led to it and they went through.

By this time the daylight had begun to appear, and the Princess, looking
at her conductor, saw that he had tears in his eyes and seemed too sad
to speak.

"What is the matter?" she said in the kindest way. "You seem very
sorrowful."

"Alas! Princess," he answered, "who would not be sorrowful who was
ordered to do such a terrible thing as I am? The King has commanded me
to kill you here, and carry your heart and your tongue to him, and if I
disobey I shall lose my life."

The poor Princess was terrified, she grew very pale and began to cry
softly.

Looking up at the Captain of the Guard with her beautiful eyes, she said
gently:

"Will you really have the heart to kill me? I have never done you any
harm, and have always spoken well of you to the King. If I had deserved
my father's anger I would suffer without a murmur, but, alas! he is
unjust to complain of me, when I have always treated him with love and
respect."

"Fear nothing, Princess," said the Captain of the Guard. "I would far
rather die myself than hurt you; but even if I am killed you will not
be safe: we must find some way of making the King believe that you are
dead."

"What can we do?" said Miranda; "unless you take him my heart and my
tongue he will never believe you."

The Princess and the Captain of the Guard were talking so earnestly that
they did not think of Patypata, but she had overheard all they said, and
now came and threw herself at Miranda's feet.

"Madam," she said, "I offer you my life; let me be killed, I shall be
only too happy to die for such a kind mistress."

"Why, Patypata," cried the Princess, kissing her, "that would never do;
your life is as precious to me as my own, especially after such a proof
of your affection as you have just given me."

"You are right, Princess," said Grabugeon, coming forward, "to love such
a faithful slave as Patypata; she is of more use to you than I am, I
offer you my tongue and my heart most willingly, especially as I wish to
make a great name for myself in Goblin Land."

"No, no, my little Grabugeon," replied Miranda, "I cannot bear the
thought of taking your life."

"Such a good little dog as I am," cried Tintin, "could not think of
letting either of you die for his mistress. If anyone is to die for her
it must be me."

And then began a great dispute between Patypata, Grabugeon, and Tintin,
and they came to high words, until at last Grabugeon, who was quicker
than the others, ran up to the very top of the nearest tree, and let
herself fall, head first, to the ground, and there she lay--quite dead!

The Princess was very sorry, but as Grabugeon was really dead, she
allowed the Captain of the Guard to take her tongue; but, alas! it
was such a little one--not bigger than the Princess's thumb--that they
decided sorrowfully that it was of no use at all: the King would not
have been taken in by it for a moment!

"Alas! my little monkey," cried the Princess, "I have lost you, and yet
I am no better off than I was before."

"The honor of saving your life is to be mine," interrupted Patypata,
and, before they could prevent her, she had picked up a knife and cut
her head off in an instant.

But when the Captain of the Guard would have taken her tongue it turned
out to be quite black, so that would not have deceived the King either.

"Am I not unlucky?" cried the poor Princess; "I lose everything I love,
and am none the better for it."

"If you had accepted my offer," said Tintin, "you would only have had me
to regret, and I should have had all your gratitude."

Miranda kissed her little dog, crying so bitterly, that at last she
could bear it no longer, and turned away into the forest. When she
looked back the Captain of the Guard was gone, and she was alone, except
for Patypata, Grabugeon, and Tintin, who lay upon the ground. She could
not leave the place until she had buried them in a pretty little mossy
grave at the foot of a tree, and she wrote their names upon the bark of
the tree, and how they had all died to save her life. And then she began
to think where she could go for safety--for this forest was so close to
her father's castle that she might be seen and recognized by the first
passer-by, and, besides that, it was full of lions and wolves, who would
have snapped up a princess just as soon as a stray chicken. So she began
to walk as fast as she could, but the forest was so large and the sun
was so hot that she nearly died of heat and terror and fatigue; look
which way she would there seemed to be no end to the forest, and she
was so frightened that she fancied every minute that she heard the King
running after her to kill her. You may imagine how miserable she was,
and how she cried as she went on, not knowing which path to follow, and
with the thorny bushes scratching her dreadfully and tearing her pretty
frock to pieces.

At last she heard the bleating of a sheep, and said to herself:

"No doubt there are shepherds here with their flocks; they will show me
the way to some village where I can live disguised as a peasant girl.
Alas! it is not always kings and princes who are the happiest people in
the world. Who could have believed that I should ever be obliged to run
away and hide because the King, for no reason at all, wishes to kill
me?"

So saying she advanced toward the place where she heard the bleating,
but what was her surprise when, in a lovely little glade quite
surrounded by trees, she saw a large sheep; its wool was as white as
snow, and its horns shone like gold; it had a garland of flowers round
its neck, and strings of great pearls about its legs, and a collar of
diamonds; it lay upon a bank of orange-flowers, under a canopy of cloth
of gold which protected it from the heat of the sun. Nearly a hundred
other sheep were scattered about, not eating the grass, but some
drinking coffee, lemonade, or sherbet, others eating ices, strawberries
and cream, or sweetmeats, while others, again, were playing games. Many
of them wore golden collars with jewels, flowers, and ribbons.

Miranda stopped short in amazement at this unexpected sight, and was
looking in all directions for the shepherd of this surprising flock,
when the beautiful sheep came bounding toward her.

"Approach, lovely Princess," he cried; "have no fear of such gentle and
peaceable animals as we are."

"What a marvel!" cried the Princess, starting back a little. "Here is a
sheep that can talk."

"Your monkey and your dog could talk, madam," said he; "are you more
astonished at us than at them?"

"A fairy gave them the power to speak," replied Miranda. "So I was used
to them."

"Perhaps the same thing has happened to us," he said, smiling
sheepishly. "But, Princess, what can have led you here?"

"A thousand misfortunes, Sir Sheep," she answered.

"I am the unhappiest princess in the world, and I am seeking a shelter
against my father's anger."

"Come with me, madam," said the Sheep; "I offer you a hiding-place which
you only will know of, and where you will be mistress of everything you
see."
