
"Then give me 9 and 10 or 5 and 6," went on Caven.

"9 and 10--here you are, sir," said the clerk, and made out the berth
checks. Without delay Caven hurried away, followed by Malone.

"We'll be in the sleeping compartment right next to that used by Vane
and the boy," chuckled Gaff Caven. "Pat, it ought to be dead easy."

"Have you the chloroform?"

"Yes, twice as much as we'll need."

"When can we leave the train?"

"At three o'clock, at a town called Snapwood. We can get another train
two hours later,--on the northern route."

All unconscious of being watched so closely, Maurice Vane and Joe rode
to the depot and boarded the train when it came along. Joe had been
looking for Caven and Malone, but without success.

"I cannot see those men anywhere," he said.

"They are probably in hiding," said his employer.

The train was only half full and for the time being Caven and Malone
kept themselves either in the smoking compartment or in the dining car.
It was dark when they took their seats, and soon the porter came through
to make up the berths for the night.

"I must confess I am rather sleepy," said Maurice Vane.

"So am I," returned our hero. "I am sure I can sleep like a top, no
matter how much the car shakes."

"Then both of us may as well go to bed at once."

So it was arranged, and they had the porter put up their berths a few
minutes later. Maurice Vane took the lower resting place while our hero
climbed to the top.

Although very tired it was some time before Joe could get to sleep. He
heard Maurice Vane breathing heavily and knew that his employer must be
fast in the land of dreams.

When Joe awoke it was with a peculiar, dizzy feeling in his head.

His eyes pained him not a little and for several minutes he could not
remember where he was. Then came a faint recollection of having tried to
arise during the night but of being held down.

"I must have been dreaming," he thought. "But it was exactly as if
somebody was keeping me down and holding something over my mouth and
nose."

He stretched himself and then pushed aside the berth curtain and gazed
out into the aisle of the car. The porter was already at work, turning
some of the berths into seats once more. Joe saw that it was daylight
and consulted the nickel watch he carried.

"Eight o'clock!" he exclaimed. "I've overslept myself sure! Mr. Vane
must be up long ago."

He slipped into his clothing and then knocked on the lower berth.

He heard a deep sigh.

"Mr. Vane!"

"Eh? Oh, Joe, is that you? What time is it?"

"Eight o'clock."

"What!" Maurice Vane started up. "I've certainly slept fast enough this
trip. Are you getting hungry waiting for me?"

"I just woke up myself."

"Oh!" Maurice Vane stretched himself. "My, how dizzy I am."

"I am dizzy too, sir. It must be from the motion of the car."

"Probably, although I rarely feel so, and I ride a great deal. I feel
rather sick at my stomach, too," went on the gentleman, as he began to
dress.

Joe had just started to go to the lavatory to wash up when he heard his
employer utter an exclamation.

"Joe!"

"Yes, sir!"

"Did you see anything of my satchel?"

"You took it into the berth with you."

"I don't see it."

"It must be somewhere around. I saw it when you went to bed."

"Yes, I put it under my pillow."

Both made a hasty search, but the satchel could not be found. The
dress-suit case stood under the seat and Joe's was beside it.

"This is strange. Can I have been robbed?"

"Was there much in that satchel, Mr. Vane?"

"Yes, those mining shares and some other articles of value."

"Then we must find the satchel by all means."

"I'll question the porter about this."

The colored man was called and questioned, but he denied having seen the
bag. By this time quite a few passengers became interested.

"Has anybody left this car?" asked Maurice Vane.

"The gen'men that occupied Numbers 9 and 10, sah," said the porter.

"When did they get off?"

"'Bout three o'clock, sah--when de train stopped at Snapwood."

"I haven't any tickets for Snapwood," said the conductor, who had
appeared on the scene.

"Then they must have had tickets for some other point," said Joe.

"That looks black for them."

The porter was asked to describe the two men and did so, to the best
of his ability. Then another search was made, and in a corner, under a
seat, a bottle was found, half filled with chloroform.

"It's as plain as day to me," said Maurice Vane. "Joe, I was
chloroformed."

"Perhaps I was, too. That's what gave us the dizzy feeling."

"And those two men--"

"Must have been Caven and Malone in disguise," finished our hero.



CHAPTER XXVII.


JOE MAKES A DISCOVERY.


"Who are Caven and Malone?" asked the conductor of the train, while a
number of passengers gathered around, to hear what Maurice Vane and our
hero might have to say.

"They are two rascals who are trying to do me out of my share of a
mine," explained Maurice Vane. "I had my mining shares in that satchel."

"If you wish I'll telegraph back to Snapwood for you," went on the train
official.

"How many miles is that?"

"A little over two hundred."

"What is the next stop of this train?"

"Leadington."

"When will we get there?"

"In ten minutes."

A telegram was prepared and sent back to Snapwood as soon as Leadington
was reached. The train was held for five minutes and it was learned that
nobody had been seen at the station there at three in the morning,
as the night operator and station master were away, there being no
passengers to get on the train bound West.

Maurice Vane was much disturbed and did not know what to do.

"To go back and look for them at Snapwood may be a mere waste of time,"
said he. "On the other hand, I don't feel much like going on while the
shares are out of my possession."

"If you wish it, Mr. Vane, I'll go back," said Joe. "You can go ahead,
and if anything turns up I will telegraph to you."

This pleased the gentleman, and he said Joe could go back on the very
next train. The conductor was again consulted, and our hero left the
train bound West a quarter of an hour later.

"Here is some money," said Maurice Vane on parting. "You'll need it."
And he handed over two hundred dollars.

"Oh, Mr. Vane! will I need as much as this?"

"Perhaps. If you see those rascals you may have a long chase to capture
them. Do not hesitate to spend the money if it appears necessary to do
so."

Long before noon our hero was on the way East on a train scheduled to
stop at Snapwood. He went without his dress-suit case and carried his
money in four different pockets.

The train was almost empty and the riding proved decidedly lonely. In a
seat he found an Omaha paper, but he was in no humor for reading. When
noon came he took his time eating his dinner, so that the afternoon's
ride might not appear so lasting.

About half-past two o'clock the train came to an unexpected halt.

Looking out of the window Joe saw that they were in something of a cut,
close to the edge of a woods.

The delay continued, and presently one passenger after another alighted,
to learn the meaning of the hold-up. Joe did likewise, and walked
through the cut toward the locomotive.

The mystery was easily explained. On one side of the cut the bank had
toppled over the tracks, carrying with it two trees of good size.
A number of train hands were already at work, sawing the trees into
pieces, so that they might be shifted clear of the tracks.

Joe watched the men laboring for a few minutes and then walked up the
bank, to get a look at the surroundings. Then he heard a whistle and saw
a train approaching from the opposite direction. It came to a halt a few
hundred feet away.

As the delay continued our hero walked along the bank of the cut and up
to the newly-arrived train. The latter was crowded with passengers, some
of whom also got out.

"Did that train stop at Snapwood?" he asked of one of the passengers.

"It did," was the answer.

"Did you see anybody get on?"

"No, but somebody might have gotten on. I wasn't looking."

"Thank you."

"Looking for a friend?"

"No," said Joe, and moved on.

Without delay our hero ran to the front end of the newly-arrived train
and got aboard. As he walked through he gave every grown passenger a
close look.

At the end of the third car he came upon two suspicious-looking
individuals, who were gazing at a bit of paper in the hands of one. Joe
came closer and saw that the paper was a mining share.

"Caven and Malone, as sure as fate!" he murmured to himself. "What had I
best do next?"

While Joe was trying to make up his mind, Caven chanced to glance up
and his eyes fell upon our hero. He gave a cry of dismay and thrust the
mining share out of sight.

"What's the matter?" asked Malone in a low tone.

"Look there, Pat! That boy!"

"No!"

"But it is!"

"How did he get on this train?"

"I don't know. But it's unpleasant enough for us."

"Do you suppose Vane is around?" asked Malone, nervously.

"He may be."

The two men stared around the car. Only some women and children were
present, the men having gone out to learn the cause of the delay.

"Perhaps we had better get out," went on Malone.

"All right."

They arose, and, satchel in hand, started to leave the train.

"Stop!" cried Joe, and caught Caven by the arm.

"Let go of me, boy!" ejaculated the rascal, and tried to pull himself
loose.

"I won't let go, Gaff Caven."

"If you don't, it will be the worse for you! I am not to be trifled
with!"

"You must give up that satchel."

"Bah!"

"If you don't, I'm going to have you arrested."

"Who is going to arrest me here?" sneered the man who had robbed Maurice
Vane. "Don't you know we are miles away from any town?"

"I don't care. Give up the satchel, or I'll call the train hands."

"I'll give up nothing, boy! Stand out of my way!"

Gaff Caven gave Joe a violent shove which sent our hero up against a
seat. Then he turned and ran from the car, with Pat Malone ahead of him.

"Stop them!" cried Joe, as soon as he could recover. "Stop the thieves!"

Others took up the cry, but before anything could be done Caven and
Malone were out of the car and on to the tracks. Both stared around in
perplexity for a second.

"Come on, we can't afford to waste time here!" cried Caven, and ran for
the bank of the cut, up which he scrambled hastily, with his confederate
at his side.

Joe saw them make the move and was not slow to follow. Near at hand was
a tall, western young man, with bronzed features and a general outdoor
manner.

"Say!" cried our hero. "Will you help me to catch those two men? They
are thieves and I want them arrested. If you'll help me catch them I'll
pay you well for your trouble."

"I'll go you, stranger!" answered the western young man, readily. "You
are certain of your game?"

"Yes. That satchel has their plunder in it. They robbed a friend of
mine."

"This suits me then, friend. We'll round 'em up in short order."

By this time Caven and Malone had gained the woods. Looking back they
saw Joe coming behind, accompanied by the westerner.

"He's after us, and he has got somebody to help him," ejaculated Malone.

"Well, I reckon we can run as fast as they can," answered Gaff Caven.
"Come ahead!"

He led the way along a trail that ran through the woods and came out on
a winding country road. Beyond was another patch of timber.

"This way, Pat," said he. "We'll have to take to the woods again. They
are too close for comfort."

"Can't we climb a tree, or hide in a hollow?" questioned the
confederate.

"We'll see," said Caven.

They pushed on harder than ever, and passed in among some tall trees.
Then they came to a tree that was bent over.

"Up you go," cried Caven, and gave his confederate a boost into the
tree. Then he hauled himself up.

"Now climb to the top," he went on, and Malone did as requested. Caven
followed suit, and both hid themselves among the thick branches.

"They won't find us here," said Malone, after ten minutes had passed.

"Don't make a noise," whispered Caven.
