the thought of it. And he kept thinking of it all the time. Not for a
minute could he get away from the thought. Would it hurt much? He was
terribly afraid that it would hurt. And would he be defeated and shamed?

He could not eat any supper worth speaking of. Susan had made a big
batch of his favourite monkey-faces, but he could choke only one down.
Jem ate four. Walter wondered how he could. How could ANYBODY eat? And
how could they all talk gaily as they were doing? There was mother, with
her shining eyes and pink cheeks. SHE didn't know her son had to fight
next day. Would she be so gay if she knew, Walter wondered darkly. Jem
had taken Susan's picture with his new camera and the result was passed
around the table and Susan was terribly indignant over it.

"I am no beauty, Mrs. Dr. dear, and well I know it, and have always
known it," she said in an aggrieved tone, "but that I am as ugly as that
picture makes me out I will never, no, never believe."

Jem laughed over this and Anne laughed again with him. Walter couldn't
endure it. He got up and fled to his room.

"That child has got something on his mind, Mrs. Dr. dear," said Susan.
"He has et next to nothing. Do you suppose he is plotting another poem?"

Poor Walter was very far removed in spirit from the starry realms of
poesy just then. He propped his elbow on his open window-sill and leaned
his head drearily on his hands.

"Come on down to the shore, Walter," cried Jem, busting in. "The boys
are going to burn the sand-hill grass to-night. Father says we can go.
Come on."

At any other time Walter would have been delighted. He gloried in the
burning of the sand-hill grass. But now he flatly refused to go, and no
arguments or entreaties could move him. Disappointed Jem, who did not
care for the long dark walk to Four Winds Point alone, retreated to his
museum in the garret and buried himself in a book. He soon forgot his
disappointment, revelling with the heroes of old romance, and pausing
occasionally to picture himself a famous general, leading his troops to
victory on some great battlefield.

Walter sat at his window until bedtime. Di crept in, hoping to be told
what was wrong, but Walter could not talk of it, even to Di. Talking
of it seemed to give it a reality from which he shrank. It was torture
enough to think of it. The crisp, withered leaves rustled on the maple
trees outside his window. The glow of rose and flame had died out of
the hollow, silvery sky, and the full moon was rising gloriously over
Rainbow Valley. Afar off, a ruddy woodfire was painting a page of glory
on the horizon beyond the hills. It was a sharp, clear evening when
far-away sounds were heard distinctly. A fox was barking across the
pond; an engine was puffing down at the Glen station; a blue-jay was
screaming madly in the maple grove; there was laughter over on the manse
lawn. How could people laugh? How could foxes and blue-jays and engines
behave as if nothing were going to happen on the morrow?

"Oh, I wish it was over," groaned Walter.

He slept very little that night and had hard work choking down his
porridge in the morning. Susan WAS rather lavish in her platefuls. Mr.
Hazard found him an unsatisfactory pupil that day. Faith Meredith's wits
seemed to be wool-gathering, too. Dan Reese kept drawing surreptitious
pictures of girls, with pig or rooster heads, on his slate and holding
them up for all to see. The news of the coming battle had leaked out
and most of the boys and many of the girls were in the spruce plantation
when Dan and Walter sought it after school. Una had gone home, but Faith
was there, having tied her blue ribbon around Walter's arm. Walter
was thankful that neither Jem nor Di nor Nan were among the crowd of
spectators. Somehow they had not heard of what was in the wind and had
gone home, too. Walter faced Dan quite undauntedly now. At the last
moment all his fear had vanished, but he still felt disgust at the idea
of fighting. Dan, it was noted, was really paler under his freckles than
Walter was. One of the older boys gave the word and Dan struck Walter in
the face.

Walter reeled a little. The pain of the blow tingled through all his
sensitive frame for a moment. Then he felt pain no longer. Something,
such as he had never experienced before, seemed to roll over him like
a flood. His face flushed crimson, his eyes burned like flame. The
scholars of Glen St. Mary school had never dreamed that "Miss Walter"
could look like that. He hurled himself forward and closed with Dan like
a young wildcat.

There were no particular rules in the fights of the Glen school boys. It
was catch-as-catch can, and get your blows in anyhow. Walter fought with
a savage fury and a joy in the struggle against which Dan could not
hold his ground. It was all over very speedily. Walter had no clear
consciousness of what he was doing until suddenly the red mist cleared
from his sight and he found himself kneeling on the body of the
prostrate Dan whose nose--oh, horror!--was spouting blood.

"Have you had enough?" demanded Walter through his clenched teeth.

Dan sulkily admitted that he had.

"My mother doesn't write lies?"

"No."

"Faith Meredith isn't a pig-girl?"

"No."

"Nor a rooster-girl?"

"No."

"And I'm not a coward?"

"No."

Walter had intended to ask, "And you are a liar?" but pity intervened
and he did not humiliate Dan further. Besides, that blood was so
horrible.

"You can go, then," he said contemptuously.

There was a loud clapping from the boys who were perched on the rail
fence, but some of the girls were crying. They were frightened. They had
seen schoolboy fights before, but nothing like Walter as he had grappled
with Dan. There had been something terrifying about him. They thought he
would kill Dan. Now that all was over they sobbed hysterically--except
Faith, who still stood tense and crimson cheeked.

Walter did not stay for any conqueror's meed. He sprang over the fence
and rushed down the spruce hill to Rainbow Valley. He felt none of the
victor's joy, but he felt a certain calm satisfaction in duty done and
honour avenged--mingled with a sickish qualm when he thought of Dan's
gory nose. It had been so ugly, and Walter hated ugliness.

Also, he began to realize that he himself was somewhat sore and battered
up. His lip was cut and swollen and one eye felt very strange. In
Rainbow Valley he encountered Mr. Meredith, who was coming home from an
afternoon call on the Miss Wests. That reverend gentleman looked gravely
at him.

"It seems to me that you have been fighting, Walter?"

"Yes, sir," said Walter, expecting a scolding.

"What was it about?"

"Dan Reese said my mother wrote lies and that that Faith was a
pig-girl," answered Walter bluntly.

"Oh--h! Then you were certainly justified, Walter."

"Do you think it's right to fight, sir?" asked Walter curiously.

"Not always--and not often--but sometimes--yes, sometimes," said John
Meredith. "When womenkind are insulted for instance--as in your case. My
motto, Walter, is, don't fight till you're sure you ought to, and THEN
put every ounce of you into it. In spite of sundry discolorations I
infer that you came off best."

"Yes. I made him take it all back."

"Very good--very good, indeed. I didn't think you were such a fighter,
Walter."

"I never fought before--and I didn't want to right up to the last--and
then," said Walter, determined to make a clean breast of it, "I liked it
while I was at it."

The Rev. John's eyes twinkled.

"You were--a little frightened--at first?"

"I was a whole lot frightened," said honest Walter. "But I'm not going
to be frightened any more, sir. Being frightened of things is worse
than the things themselves. I'm going to ask father to take me over to
Lowbridge to-morrow to get my tooth out."

"Right again. 'Fear is more pain than is the pain it fears.' Do you know
who wrote that, Walter? It was Shakespeare. Was there any feeling or
emotion or experience of the human heart that that wonderful man did not
know? When you go home tell your mother I am proud of you."

Walter did not tell her that, however; but he told her all the rest, and
she sympathized with him and told him she was glad he had stood up for
her and Faith, and she anointed his sore spots and rubbed cologne on his
aching head.

"Are all mothers as nice as you?" asked Walter, hugging her. "You're
WORTH standing up for."

Miss Cornelia and Susan were in the living room when Anne came
downstairs, and listened to the story with much enjoyment. Susan in
particular was highly gratified.

"I am real glad to hear he has had a good fight, Mrs. Dr. dear. Perhaps
it may knock that poetry nonsense out of him. And I never, no, never
could bear that little viper of a Dan Reese. Will you not sit nearer
to the fire, Mrs. Marshall Elliott? These November evenings are very
chilly."

"Thank you, Susan, I'm not cold. I called at the manse before I came
here and got quite warm--though I had to go to the kitchen to do it, for
there was no fire anywhere else. The kitchen looked as if it had
been stirred up with a stick, believe ME. Mr. Meredith wasn't home. I
couldn't find out where he was, but I have an idea that he was up at
the Wests'. Do you know, Anne dearie, they say he has been going there
frequently all the fall and people are beginning to think he is going to
see Rosemary."

"He would get a very charming wife if he married Rosemary," said Anne,
piling driftwood on the fire. "She is one of the most delightful girls
I've ever known--truly one of the race of Joseph."

"Ye--s--only she is an Episcopalian," said Miss Cornelia doubtfully. "Of
course, that is better than if she was a Methodist--but I do think Mr.
Meredith could find a good enough wife in his own denomination. However,
very likely there is nothing in it. It's only a month ago that I said to
him, 'You ought to marry again, Mr. Meredith.' He looked as shocked as
if I had suggested something improper. 'My wife is in her grave, Mrs.
Elliott,' he said, in that gentle, saintly way of his. 'I suppose so,'
I said, 'or I wouldn't be advising you to marry again.' Then he looked
more shocked than ever. So I doubt if there is much in this Rosemary
story. If a single minister calls twice at a house where there is a
single woman all the gossips have it he is courting her."

"It seems to me--if I may presume to say so--that Mr. Meredith is too
shy to go courting a second wife," said Susan solemnly.

"He ISN'T shy, believe ME," retorted Miss Cornelia.
"Absent-minded,--yes--but shy, no. And for all he is so abstracted and
dreamy he has a very good opinion of himself, man-like, and when he is
really awake he wouldn't think it much of a chore to ask any woman to
have him. No, the trouble is, he's deluding himself into believing that
his heart is buried, while all the time it's beating away inside of him
just like anybody else's. He may have a notion of Rosemary West and he
may not. If he has, we must make the best of it. She is a sweet girl
and a fine housekeeper, and would make a good mother for those poor,
neglected children. And," concluded Miss Cornelia resignedly, "my own
grandmother was an Episcopalian."



CHAPTER XVIII. MARY BRINGS EVIL TIDINGS

Mary Vance, whom Mrs. Elliott had sent up to the manse on an errand,
came tripping down Rainbow Valley on her way to Ingleside where she was
to spend the afternoon with Nan and Di as a Saturday treat. Nan and Di
had been picking spruce gum with Faith and Una in the manse woods and
the four of them were now sitting on a fallen pine by the brook, all,
it must be admitted, chewing rather vigorously. The Ingleside twins were
not allowed to chew spruce gum anywhere but in the seclusion of Rainbow
Valley, but Faith and Una were unrestricted by such rules of etiquette
and cheerfully chewed it everywhere, at home and abroad, to the very
proper horror of the Glen. Faith had been chewing it in church one day;
but Jerry had realized the enormity of THAT, and had given her such an
older-brotherly scolding that she never did it again.

"I was so hungry I just felt as if I had to chew something," she
protested. "You know well enough what breakfast was like, Jerry
Meredith. I COULDN'T eat scorched porridge and my stomach just felt so
queer and empty. The gum helped a lot--and I didn't chew VERY hard. I
didn't make any noise and I never cracked the gum once."

"You mustn't chew gum in church, anyhow," insisted Jerry. "Don't let me
catch you at it again."

"You chewed yourself in prayer-meeting last week," cried Faith.

"THAT'S different," said Jerry loftily. "Prayer-meeting isn't on Sunday.
Besides, I sat away at the back in a dark seat and nobody saw me. You
were sitting right up front where every one saw you. And I took the gum
out of my mouth for the last hymn and stuck it on the back of the pew
right up in front where every one saw you. Then I came away and forgot
it. I went back to get it next morning, but it was gone. I suppose Rod
Warren swiped it. And it was a dandy
chew."

Mary Vance walked down the Valley with her head held high. She had on
a new blue velvet cap with a scarlet rosette in it, a coat of navy blue
cloth and a little squirrel-fur muff. She was very conscious of her new
clothes and very well pleased with herself. Her hair was elaborately
crimped, her face was quite plump, her cheeks rosy, her white eyes
shining. She did not look much like the forlorn and ragged waif the
Merediths had found in the old Taylor barn. Una tried not to feel
envious. Here was Mary with a new velvet cap, but she and Faith had to
wear their shabby old gray tams again this winter. Nobody ever thought
of getting them new ones and they were afraid to ask their father for
them for fear that he might be short of money and then he would feel
badly. Mary had told them once that ministers were always short of
money, and found it "awful hard" to make ends meet. Since then Faith and
Una would have gone in rags rather than ask their father for anything
if they could help it. They did not worry a great deal over their
shabbiness; but it was rather trying to see Mary Vance coming out in
such style and putting on such airs about it, too. The new squirrel muff
was really the last straw. Neither Faith nor Una had ever had a muff,
counting themselves lucky if they could compass mittens without holes in
them. Aunt Martha could not see to darn holes and though Una tried to,
she made sad cobbling. Somehow, they could not make their greeting of
Mary very cordial. But Mary did not mind or notice that; she was not
overly sensitive. She vaulted lightly to a seat on the pine tree, and
laid the offending muff on a bough. Una saw that it was lined with
shirred red satin and had red tassels. She looked down at her own rather
purple, chapped, little hands and wondered if she would ever, EVER be
able to put them into a muff like that.

"Give us a chew," said Mary companionably. Nan, Di and Faith all
produced an amber-hued knot or two from their pockets and passed them to
Mary. Una sat very still. She had four lovely big knots in the pocket of
her tight, thread-bare little jacket, but she wasn't going to give one
of them to Mary Vance--not one Let Mary pick her own gum! People with
squirrel muffs needn't expect to get everything in the world.

"Great day, isn't it?" said Mary, swinging her legs, the better,
perhaps, to display new boots with very smart cloth tops. Una tucked HER
