"Cally it back to China."

"And when you've callied it back, what'll you do then?"

"Me mally wife, have good time and plenty money to buy lice."

Of course, Ki Sing's meaning was plain, but there was a roar of
laughter, to which he listened with mild-eyed wonder, evidently
thinking that the miners who so looked down on him were themselves a
set of outside barbarians, to whom the superior civilization of
China was utterly unknown. It is fortunate that his presumption was
not suspected by those around him. No one would have resented it
more than Mr. Patrick O'Reilly, whose rank as regards enlightenment
and education certainly was not very high.

"I say, John," said Dick Roberts, "are you fond of rat pie?"

"Lat pie velly good," returned Ki Sing, with a look of appreciation.
"Melican man like him?"

"Hear the haythen!" said O'Reilly, with an expression of deep
disgust. "He thinks we ate rats and mice, like him. No, old pigtail,
we ain't cats. We are good Christians."

"Chlistian! Ma don't know Ghlistian," said the Chinaman.

"Then look at O'Reilly," said Dick Roberts, mischievously. "He's a
good solid Christian."

Ki Sing turned his almond eyes upon O'Reilly, who, with his freckled
face, wide mouth, broad nose, and stubby beard, was by no means a
prepossessing-looking man, and said interrogatively: "He Chlistian?"

"Yes, John. Wouldn't you like to be one?"

Ki Sing shook his head decidedly.

"Me no want to be Chlistian," he answered. "Me velly well now. Me
want to be good Chinaman."

"There's a compliment for you, O'Reilly," said one of the miners.
"John prefers to be a Chinaman to being like you."

"He's a barbarious haythen, anyhow," said O'Reilly, surveying his
prisoner with unfriendly eyes. "What did he come over to America
for, anyhow?"

"He probably came over for the same reason that brought you,
O'Reilly," said a young man, who spoke for the first time, though he
had been from the outset a disgusted witness of what had taken
place.

"And what's that?" demanded O'Reilly angrily.

"To make a living," answered Richard Dewey quietly.

As this is the first time this young man has been introduced, we
will briefly describe him. He was of medium size, well knit and
vigorous, with a broad forehead, blue eyes, and an intelligent and
winning countenance. He might have been suspected of too great
amiability and gentleness, but for a firm expression about the
mouth, and an indefinable air of manliness, which indicated that it
would not do to go too far with him. There was a point, as all his
friends knew, where his forbearance gave way and he sternly asserted
his rights. He was not so popular in camp as some, because he
declined to drink or gamble, and, despite the rough circumstances in
which he found himself placed, was resolved to preserve his
self-respect.

O'Reilly did not fancy his interference, and demanded, in a surly
tone:

"Do you mean to compare me wid this haythen?"

"You are alike in one respect," said Richard Dewey quietly. "Neither
of you were born in this country, but each of you came here to
improve your fortunes."

"And hadn't I the right, I'd like to know?" blustered O'Reilly.

"To be sure you had. This country is free to all who wish to make a
home here."

"Then what are you talkin' about, anyway?"

"You ought to be able to understand without asking. Ki Sing has come
here, and has the same right that you have."

"Do you mane to put me on a livel wid him?"

"In that one respect, I do."

"I want you to understand that Patrick O'Reilly won't take no
insults from you, nor any other man!"

"Hush, O'Reilly!" said Terence O'Gorman, another Irish miner. "Dewey
is perfectly right. I came over from Ireland like you, but he hasn't
said anything against either of us."

"That is where you are right, O'Gorman," said Richard Dewey
cordially. "You are a man of sense, and can understand me. My own
father emigrated from England, and I am not likely to say anything
against the class to which he belonged. Now, boys, you have had
enough sport out of the poor Chinaman. I advise you to let him go."

Ki Sing grasped at this suggestion.

"Melican man speak velly good," he said.

"Of course, you think so," sneered O'Reilly. "I say, boys, let's cut
off his pigtail," touching the poor Chinaman's queue.

Ki Sing uttered a cry of dismay as O'Reilly's suggestion was greeted
with favorable shouts by the thoughtless crowd.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE DUEL OF THE MINERS.


O'Reilly's suggestion chimed in with the rough humor of the crowd.
They were not bad-hearted men, but, though rough in their manners,
not much worse on the average than an equal number of men in the
Eastern States. They only thought of the fun to be obtained from the
proceeding, and supposed they would be doing the Chinaman no real
harm.

"Has anybody got a pair of scissors?" asked O'Reilly, taking the
Chinaman by the queue.

"I've got one in my tent," answered one of the miners.

"Go and get it, then."

Ki Sing again uttered a cry of dismay, but it did not seem likely
that his valued appendage could be saved. Public sentiment was with
his persecutor.

He had one friend, however, among the rough men who surrounded him,
the same who had already taken his part.

Richard Dewey's eyes glittered sternly as he saw O'Reilly's
intention, and he quietly advanced till he was within an arm's
length of Ki Sing.

"What do you mean to do, O'Reilly?" he demanded sternly.

"None of your business!" retorted O'Reilly insolently.

"It is going to be my business. What do you mean to do?"

"Gut off this haythen's pigtail, and I'd just like to know who's
going to prevent me."

At this moment the miner who had gone for a pair of scissors
returned.

"Give me them scissors!" said O'Reilly sharply.

Richard Dewey reached out his hand and intercepted them. He took
them in place of O'Reilly.

"Give me them scissors, Dewey, or it'll be the worse for you!"
exclaimed the tyrant furiously.

Dewey regarded him with a look of unmistakable contempt.

There was a murmur among the miners, who were eager for the
amusement which the Chinaman's terror and ineffectual struggles
would afford them.

"Give him the scissors, Dewey!" said half a dozen.

"Boys," said Dewey, making no motion to obey them, "do you know what
you are about to do? Why should you interfere with this poor,
unoffending Chinaman? Has he wronged any one of you?"

"No, but that ain't the point," said a Kentuckian. "We only want to
play a joke on him. It won't do him no harm to cut his hair."

"Of course not," chimed in several of the miners.

"Do you hear that, Dick Dewey?" demanded O'Reilly impatiently. "Do
you hear what the boys say? Give me them scissors."

"Boys, you don't understand the effects of what you would do," said
Dewey, taking no notice of O'Reilly, much to that worthy's
indignation. "If Ki Sing has his queue cut off, he can never go back
to China."

"Is that the law, squire?" asked a loose-jointed Yankee.

"Yes, it is. You may rely on my word. Ki Sing, if you cut off your
queue, can you go back to China?"

"No go back-stay in Melica allee time."

"You see he confirms my statement."

"That's a queer law, anyway," said the Kentuckian.

"I admit that, but such as it is, we can't alter it. Now, Ki Sing
has probably a father and mother, perhaps a wife and children, in
China. He wants to go back to them some time. Shall we prevent this,
and doom him to perpetual exile, just to secure a little sport?
Come, boys, you've all of you got dear ones at home, that you hope
some day to see again. I appeal to you whether this is manly or
kind."

This was a sort of argument that had a strong effect. It was true
that each one of these men had relatives for whom they were working,
the thought of whom enabled them to bear hard work and privations
thousands of miles away from home, and Richard Dewey's appeal
touched their hearts.

"That's so! Dewey is right. Let him go, O'Reilly!" said the crowd.

The one man who was not touched by the appeal was O'Reilly himself.
Not that he was altogether a bad man, but his spirit of opposition
was kindled, and he could not bear to yield to Dewey, whose contempt
he understood and resented.

His reply was, "I'm goin' to cut off the haythen's pigtail, whether
or no. Give me them scissors, I tell you," and he gave a vicious
twitch to the Chinaman's queue, which made Ki Sing utter a sharp cry
of pain.

Richard Dewey's forbearance was at an end. His eyes blazed with
fury, and, clenching his fist, he dashed it full in the face of the
offending O'Reilly, who not only released his hold on Ki Sing, but
measured his length on the ground.

O'Reilly was no coward, and he possessed the national love of a
shindy. He sprang to his feet in a rage, and shouted:

"I'll murder ye for that, Dick Dewey! See if I don't!"

"A fight! a fight!" shouted the miners, willing to be amused in that
way, since they had voluntarily given up the fun expected from
cutting off the Chipaman's queue.

Richard Dewey looked rather disgusted.

"I don't want to fight, boys," he said. "It isn't to my taste."

"You've got to, you coward!" said O'Reilly, beginning to bluster.

"I don't think you'll find me a coward," said Dewey quietly, as he
stood with his arms folded, looking at O'Reilly.

"You'll have to give O'Reilly satisfaction," said one of the miners.
"You've knocked him down, and he's got a right to it."

"Will it be any satisfaction to him to get knocked over again?" asked
Dewey, shrugging his shoulders.

"You can't do it! I'll bate you till you can't stand!" exclaimed the
angry Irishman. "I'll tache you to insult a gintleman."

"Form a ring, boys!" exclaimed the Kentuck-ian. "We'll see there's
fair play."

"One thing first," said Dewey, holding up his hand. "If I come off
best in this encounter, you'll all agree to let this Chinaman go
free? Is that agreed?"

"Yes, yes, it is agreed!"

Ki Sing stood trembling with fear while these preliminaries were
being settled. He would have escaped from the crowd, but his first
movement was checked.

"No, Cy King, we can't let you go jest yet," said Taylor. "We're
goin' to see this thing through first."

O'Reilly was not in the least daunted by the contest in which he was
to engage. Indeed, he felt a good deal of satisfaction at the
prospect of being engaged in a scrimmage. Of course, he expected to
come off a victor. He was a considerably larger man than Richard
Dewey, with arms like flails and flats like sledge-hammers, and he
had no sort of doubt that he could settle his smaller antagonist in
less than five minutes.

But there was one thing of which he was not aware. Though slender,
Dewey had trained and hardened his muscles by exercise in a
gymnasium, and, moreover, he had taken a course of lessons in the
manly art of self-defense. He had done this, not because he expected
to be called upon to defend himself at any time, but because he
thought it conducive to keeping up his health and strength. He
awaited O'Reilly's onset with watchful calmness.

O'Reilly advanced with a whoop, flinging about his powerful arms
somewhat like a windmill, and prepared to upset his antagonist at
the first onset.

What was his surprise to find his own blows neatly parried, and to
meet a tremendous blow from his opponent which set his nose to
bleeding.

Astonished, but not panic-stricken, he pluckily advanced to a second
round, and tried to grasp Dewey round the waist. But instead of
doing this, he received another knock-down blow, which stretched him
on the ground.

He was up again, and renewed the attack, but with even less chance
of victory than before, for the blood was streaming down his face,
and he could not see distinctly where to hit. Dewey contented
himself with keeping on guard and parrying the blows of his
demoralized adversary.

"It's no use, O'Reilly!" exclaimed two or three. "Dewey's the better
man."

"Let me get at him! I'll show him what I can do," said O'Reilly
doggedly.

"As long as you like, O'Reilly," said Richard Dewey coolly; "but you
may as well give it up."

"Troth and I won't. I'm stronger than you are any day."

"Perhaps you are; but I understand fighting, and you don't."

"An O'Reilly not know how to fight!" exclaimed the Irishman hotly.
"I could fight when I was six years old."

"Perhaps so; but you can't box."

One or two more attacks, and O'Reilly was dragged away by two of his
friends, and Dewey remained master of the field.

The miners came up and shook hands with him cordially. They regarded
him with new respect, now that it was found he had overpowered the
powerful O'Reilly.

Among those who congratulated him was his Mongolian friend, Ki Sing.

"Melican man good fightee-knock over Ilishman. Hullah!"

"Come with me, Ki Sing," said Dewey. '"I will take care of you till
to-morrow, and then you had better go."




CHAPTER XXIX.

CHINESE CHEAP LABOR.


Though Dewey had received from the miners a promise that they would
