Herbert was about to say that this would do, but the policeman shook his
head.

"Won't do," said he. "Come along."

After a little haggling, Greenleaf produced forty dollars, which Herbert
pocketed, with much satisfaction.

"Now go along, and mind you don't try any more such games."

Greenleaf needed no second permission to be gone. He feared that the
officer might change his mind, and he might, after all, be consigned to
the station house.

"Thank you," said Herbert, gratefully. "I needed the money badly. I
shouldn't have recovered it but for you."

"Take better care of it next time," said the officer, not unkindly.
"Take care not to trust a stranger too easily. Better take my advice,
and put it in a savings bank."

"I shall be obliged to use most of it," said Herbert. "What I don't
need, I will put in the bank."

The recovery of so much of his lost money seemed to Herbert quite a
lucky windfall. He went at once to a trunk store, and, for five dollars,
purchased a good, durable trunk, which he ordered sent home to his
lodgings. Fifteen dollars more he invested in necessary underclothing,
and this left him one-half of the money for future use. Besides this
he had six dollars, which, in three weeks, he had saved from his wages.
With this sum, and the articles he had purchased, he felt quite rich,
and returned to the counting-room--this happened during the hour given
him for dinner--in unusually good spirits. He had other reasons
for encouragement. He was getting accustomed to his duties at the
counting-room. Mr. Godfrey always treated him kindly, and had called
upon him again that very morning to assist him in translating a French
letter, complimenting him, at the same time, upon his scholarship.

"I'll do my best," thought Herbert. "'Try and Trust,' that's my motto. I
think it will bring me success."

But even while he spoke, an unforeseen danger menaced him.




CHAPTER XXIX

SPARRING


After the concert, Tom Stanton took even a greater dislike to his cousin
than before. To say that he was in love with Julia Godfrey would be
rather ridiculous, considering his youth. Even if he had been older, Tom
cared too much about himself to fall in love with another. But Julia had
been a belle among the children of her own age at the dancing school,
and there was considerable rivalry among the boys--or, I should,
perhaps, say young gentlemen--for the honor of her notice. Tom desired
it, because it would give him a kind of distinction among his fellows.
So, though he was not in love with Julia, he was jealous when she showed
favor to anyone else. But this feeling was mild compared with that he
experienced when Julia bestowed her notice upon his penniless cousin.
That Herbert should be preferred to himself, he thought, not only showed
great lack of taste on the part of the young heiress, but was a grievous
wrong to himself.

"I can't understand how girls can be such fools," thought Tom, as
that evening, after returning from the concert, he surveyed his rather
perturbed face in the mirror surmounting his bureau. "I wouldn't have
believed Julia Godfrey would stoop to notice such a pauper."

Then a cheerful thought came to him. Perhaps she was only trying to
rouse his jealousy. He had heard of such things. But, if so, why should
she choose such a beggar as Herbert to practice her arts upon?

Certainly, to an unprejudiced observer, such a thought would never have
suggested itself. The cool indifference with which Julia had treated Tom
did not appear to argue any such feeling as would lead to the attempt to
rouse his jealousy. But, then, Tom was not an unprejudiced observer, and
considered his personal attractions such that any girl might appreciate
them.

When he arrived at the counting-room the next morning, he found Herbert
already there. Indeed, our hero was very particular to be punctual in
his attendance, while Tom was generally at least a quarter of an hour
behind time.

"I saw you at the concert last evening, Mason," said Tom, who wanted to
get a chance to say something disagreeable.

"Yes, I was there," said Herbert. "You sat in the row just behind us."

"Yes. I suppose you were never at a concert before."

"Not in New York."

"Mr. Godfrey was very kind to take you."

That was what Herbert thought himself. But as Tom expressed it, there
was something in his tone which implied a conviction of Herbert's social
inferiority, which our hero did not like.

"I have found Mr. Godfrey very kind," he said, briefly.

"There are not many employers who would invite a boy in your position to
a concert with his family," said Tom.

"I believe my position is the same as yours," said Herbert, nettled.

"I don't see it," said Tom, haughtily. "Will you explain yourself?"

"I believe we are both in Mr. Godfrey's employ," said Herbert.

"Oh, yes, so far as that goes. But I am the son of a rich man," said
Tom, pompously.

Herbert might have replied that he was the nephew of a rich man, but he
had no disposition to boast of his relationship to his cousin's family.

"I don't see that that makes any difference," said Herbert.

"Don't you? Well, I do."

"We are both boys in Mr. Godfrey's employ."

"That's true, but then, he took you out of pity, you know."

Tom's tone as he said this was very aggravating, and Herbert's face
flushed.

"I don't know anything of the sort," he retorted.

"No, I suppose you don't consider it in that light," said Tom,
carelessly; "but, of course, it is clear enough to others. Where would
you have been, if Mr. Godfrey hadn't given you a place? Blacking boots,
probably, among the street ragamuffins."

"Perhaps I might," said Herbert, quietly, "if I couldn't have got
anything better to do."

"It's a very genteel occupation," sneered Tom.

"I don't think it is," said Herbert, "but it's an honest one."

"You may have to take it yet."

"Perhaps so. So may you."

"Do you mean to insult me?" demanded Tom, haughtily, his face flushing.

"I only said to you the same thing you said to me. If it's an insult on
one side, it is on the other."

"You seem to forget that our circumstances are very different," said
Tom.

"They are just now, so far as money goes. I get a larger salary than
you."

Tom was very much incensed at this remark, being aggrieved by the fact
that Herbert received more than he.

"I didn't mean that," said he. "Of course, if Mr. Godfrey chooses to
give away money in charity, it is none of my business. I don't need any
charity."

"Mr. Godfrey pays me for my services," said Herbert. "If he pays me too
liberally now, I hope to make it up to him afterward."

"You seemed to be very intimate with Julia Godfrey last evening," said
Tom, unpleasantly.

"I found her very pleasant."

"Yes; she is very kind to take notice of you."

"I suppose the notice you have taken of me this morning is meant in
kindness," said Herbert, thinking his cousin very disagreeable.

"Yes, of course, being in the same counting-room, I think it right to
take some notice of you," said Tom, condescendingly.

"I am very much obliged to you," said Herbert, sarcastically.

"But there's one piece of advice I should like to give you," proceeded
Tom.

"What is that?" inquired Herbert, looking his cousin in the face.

"Don't feel too much set up by Julia Godfrey's notice. She only took
notice of you out of pity, and to encourage you. If you had been in her
own position in society--"

"Like you, for instance!"

"Yes, like me," said Tom, complacently, "she would have been more
ceremonious. I thought I would just mention it to you, Mason, or you
might not understand it."

It was only natural that Herbert should be provoked by this elaborate
humiliation suggested by Tom, and his cousin's offensive assumption of
superiority. This led him to a retort in kind.

"I suppose that is the reason she took so little notice of you," he
said.

Tom was nettled at this statement of a fact, but he answered in an
off-hand manner, "Oh, Julia and I are old friends. I've danced with her
frequently at dancing school."

Herbert happened to remember what Julia had said of his cousin, and was
rather amused at this assumption of intimacy.

"I am much obliged to you for your information," said Herbert, "though
I am rather surprised that you should take so great an interest in my
affairs."

"Oh, you're new in the city, and I know all the ropes," said Tom. "I
thought I might as well give you a friendly hint."

"I am lucky in having such a friend," said Herbert, "and will take the
advice as it was given."

Here the bookkeeper entered, and, soon after, Mr. Godfrey made his
appearance.

"I hope you had a pleasant evening, Herbert," he said, kindly.

"Very pleasant, sir; thank you," said Herbert, in a very different tone
from the one he had used in addressing Tom.

"I believe I saw you, also, at the concert, Thomas," said Mr. Godfrey.

"Yes, sir," said Tom. "I am very fond of music, and attend all the
first-class musical entertainments."

"Indeed?" said Mr. Godfrey, but this was all the reply he made.

"My daughter insists that I shall invite you to the house again soon,"
said Mr. Godfrey, again addressing Herbert.

"I am very much obliged to her, and to you, sir," said Herbert,
modestly. "I shall be very glad to come."

Tom's face darkened, as he heard this. He would have given considerable
to receive such an invitation himself, but the prospect did not seem
very promising.

"Mr. Godfrey must be infatuated," he said to himself, impatiently, "to
invite such a beggar to his house. Mason ought to have good sense enough
to feel that he is out of place in such a house. I wouldn't accept any
invitation given out of pity."

"I wonder why Tom dislikes me so much?" thought Herbert. "He certainly
takes pains enough to show his feeling. Would it be different, I wonder,
if he knew that I was his cousin?"

Herbert thought of mentioning to Mr. Godfrey that he had recovered
three-quarters of the money of which he had been robbed. It would
have been well if he had done so, but Mr. Godfrey seemed particularly
engaged, and he thought it best not to interrupt him.




CHAPTER XXX

AN UNEXPECTED BLOW


Herbert felt happier than usual. He had recovered the greater part of
his money, and thus was relieved from various inconveniences which had
resulted from his straitened circumstances, He was the more elated at
this, as it had seemed extremely improbable that the lost money would
ever have found its way back to the pocket of its rightful owner.
Then, he had a good place, and a salary sufficient to defray his modest
expenses, and the prospect of promotion, if he should be faithful to
the interests of his employer, as he firmly intended to be. It was
agreeable, also, to reflect that he was in favor with Mr. Godfrey, who
had thus far treated him with as much kindness as if he had been his own
son.

There was, to be sure, the drawback of Tom's enmity, but, as there was
no good reason for this, he would not allow it to trouble him much,
though, of course, it would have been more agreeable if all in the
office had been his friends. He determined to take an early opportunity
to write to his good friend, Dr. Kent, an account of his present
position. He would have done so before, but had hesitated from the fear
that in some way the intelligence would reach Abner Holden, whom he
preferred to leave in ignorance of all that concerned him.

These thoughts passed through Herbert's mind as he went about his daily
work. Meanwhile, a painful experience awaited him, for which he was not
in the least prepared.

About one o'clock a gentleman entered the counting-room hastily, and
said, "Mr. Godfrey, I wonder whether I happened to leave my pocketbook
anywhere about your office when I was here an hour ago?"

"I don't think so. When did you miss it?"

"A few minutes since. I went to a restaurant to get a lunch, and, on
finishing it, felt for my pocketbook, and found it gone."

"Was there much in it?"

"No sum of any consequence. Between twenty and thirty dollars, I
believe. There were, however, some papers of value, which I shall be
sorry to lose."

"I hardly think you could have left it here. However, I will inquire.
Mr. Pratt, have you seen anything of Mr. Walton's pocketbook?"

"No, sir," said the bookkeeper, promptly.

"Herbert, have you seen it?"

"No, sir," said our hero.

"Thomas?"

Tom Stanton was assailed by a sudden and dangerous temptation. His
dislike to Herbert had been increased in various ways, and especially
had been rendered more intense by the independent tone assumed by our
hero in the conversation which had taken place between them that very
morning. Now, here was an opportunity of getting him into disgrace, and
probably cause him to lose his situation. True, he would have to tell a
falsehood, but Tom had never been a scrupulous lover of truth, and would
violate it for a less object without any particular compunction.

He hesitated when the question was asked him, and thus, as he expected,
fixed Mr. Godfrey's attention.

"Why don't you answer, Thomas?" he said, in surprise.

"I don't like to," said Tom, artfully.

"Why not?" demanded his employer, suspiciously.

"Because I don't want to get anybody into trouble."

"Speak out what you mean."

"If you insist upon it," said Tom, with pretended reluctance, "I suppose
I must obey you."

"Of course, if any wrong has been done, it is your duty to expose it."

"Then, sir," said Tom. "I saw Mason pick up a wallet from the floor,
and put it in his pocket just after the gentleman went out. He did it so
quickly that no one probably observed it but myself."

Herbert listened to this accusation as if stunned. It was utterly beyond
his conception how anyone could be guilty of such a deliberate falsehood
as he had just listened to. So he remained silent, and this operated
against him.

"Herbert," said Mr. Godfrey, mildly, for he was unwilling to believe our
hero guilty of intentional dishonesty, "you should have mentioned having
found the pocketbook."

"So I would, sir," said Herbert, having found his voice at last, "if I
had found one."

"Do you mean to say that you have not?" demanded Mr. Godfrey, with a
searching look.

"Yes, sir," said Herbert, firmly.

"What, then, does Thomas mean when he asserts that he saw you do so?"

"I don't know, sir. I think he means to injure me, as I have noticed
ever since I entered the office that he seems to dislike me."

"How is that, Thomas? Do you again declare that you saw Herbert pick up
the wallet?

"I do," said Tom, boldly. "Of course, I expected that he would deny it.
I leave it to you, sir, if he does not show his guilt in his face? Just
look at him!"

Now it, unfortunately for Herbert, happened that his indignation had
brought a flush to his face, and he certainly did look as a guilty
person is supposed to do. Mr. Godfrey observed this, and his heart sank
within him, for, unable to conceive of such wickedness as Tom's, he saw
no other way except to believe in Herbert's guilt.

"Have you nothing to say, Herbert?" he asked, more in sorrow than in
anger.

"No, sir," said Herbert, in a low voice; "nothing, except what I have
already said. Tom has uttered a wicked falsehood, and he knows it."

"Of course, I expected you would say that," said Tom, with effrontery.

"This is a serious charge, Herbert," proceeded Mr. Godfrey. "I shall
have to ask you to produce whatever you have in your pockets."

"Certainly, sir," said our hero, calmly.

But, as he spoke, it flashed upon him that he had in his pocket
twenty-six dollars, and the discovery of this sum would be likely to
involve him in suspicion. He could, indeed, explain where he got it;
but would his explanation be believed? Under present circumstances, he
feared that it would not. So it was with a sinking heart that he drew
out the contents of his pockets, and among them his own pocketbook.

"Is that yours?" asked Mr. Godfrey, turning to Mr. Walton.

"No, it is not; but he may have transferred my money to it."

Upon this hint, Mr. Godfrey opened the pocketbook, and drew out the
small roll of bills, which he proceeded to count.

"Twenty-six dollars," he said. "How much did you lose?"

"Between twenty and thirty dollars. I cannot be sure how much."

"Here are two tens and three twos."

"I had two tens. I don't remember the denomination of the other bills."

Even Tom was struck with astonishment at this discovery. He knew that
his charge was groundless, yet here it was substantiated in a very
remarkable manner. Was it possible that he had, after all, struck upon
the truth of the matter? He did not know what to think.

"Herbert," said his employer, sorrowfully, "this discovery gives me more
pain than I can express. I had a very high idea of you. I could not have
believed you capable of so mean a thing as deliberate dishonesty."

"I am not guilty," said Herbert, proudly.

"How can you say this in the face of all this evidence? Do you mean to
say that this money is yours?"

"I do," said Herbert, firmly.

