Residency, and along passages thronged with sleepers were conducted to
Colonel Inglis' room. He had already heard that the native messenger
had returned, with two Englishmen in disguise, and he was up and ready
to receive them--for men slept dressed, and ready for action at a
moment's call.

"Well done, subadar," he exclaimed, as the native entered; "you have
nobly earned your step in rank and the five thousand rupees promised to
you. Well, what is your message?"

"The General Sahib bids me say that he is coming on to Lucknow with all
speed. Cawnpore was taken four days before I left. The Nana has fled
from Bithoor, and all goes well. These officers have further news to
give you."

"I am indeed glad to see you, gentlemen," Colonel Inglis said, warmly
shaking them by the hand. "Whom have I the pleasure of seeing, for at
present your appearance is admirably correct as that of two Sepoys?"

"Our name is Warrener," Ned said; "we are brothers. I have just been
gazetted to the Sixty-fourth; my brother is a midshipman. We have a
message for your private ear, sir; and if I might suggest, it would be
better to keep our native friend close by for a few minutes, lest his
news spread. You will see the reason when we have spoken to you."

Colonel Inglis gave the sign, and the other officers retired with the
guide.

"Our message, sir, is, I regret to say, far less favorable than that
transmitted by the subadar, and it was for that reason that General
Havelock sent us with him. If taken, he would have told his message,
for the general had ordered him to make no secret of his instructions
if he fell into the enemy's hands, as it was desirable that they should
believe that he was about to advance, and thus relieve the pressure
upon you by keeping a large force on the road up from Cawnpore. But in
fact, sir, General Havelock bids us tell you that he cannot advance. He
has but a thousand bayonets fit for service. He must hold Cawnpore, and
the force available for an advance would be hopelessly insufficient to
fight his way through Oude and force a road through the city. The
instant he receives reinforcements he will advance, and will in the
meantime continue to make feints, so as to keep a large force of the
enemy on the alert. He fears that it may be a month before he will be
able to advance to your aid with a chance of success."

"A month!" Colonel Inglis said; "that is indeed a long time, and we had
hoped that already help was at hand. Well, we must do our best. We are
even now sorely pressed; but I doubt not we can hold out for a month.
General Havelock cannot accomplish impossibilities, and it is wonderful
that he should have recaptured Cawnpore with so small a force."

"We thought it better to give you this news privately, colonel, in
order that you might, should you think fit, keep from the garrison the
knowledge that so long a time must elapse without succor."

"You were quite right, sir," Colonel Inglis said; "but the truth had
better be made public. It is far better that all should know that we
are dependent upon our own exertions for another month than that they
should be vainly looking for assistance to arrive. And now, gentlemen,
I will call my officers in, and you shall get some clothes. Unhappily,
death is so busy that there will be no difficulty in providing you in
that respect. You must want food, too, and that, such as it is, is in
plenty also."

The other officers were now called in, and the commandant told them the
news that he had received from the Warreners. There was a look of
disappointment for a moment, and then cheering answers that they were
all good for another month's fighting were made.

"I know, gentlemen," Colonel Inglis said, "our thoughts are all the
same. We are ready to fight another month, but we dread the delay for
the sake of the women and children. However, God's will be done. All
that men can do, this garrison will, I know, do; and with God's help, I
believe that whether aid comes a little sooner or later, we shall hold
these battered ruins till it arrives. Captain Fellows, will you get
these officers something to eat, and some clothes? Then, if they are
not too tired, they will perhaps not mind sitting up an hour or two and
giving us the news from the outside world."

Daylight was breaking before Ned and Dick--who had, at Colonel Inglis'
suggestion separated, Ned going to the colonel's room, while Dick
formed the center of a great gathering in a hall below, in order that
as many might hear the news as possible--brought to a conclusion the
account of Havelock's advance, of the awful massacre of Cawnpore, of
the fresh risings that had taken place in various parts of India, of
the progress of the siege of Delhi, and the arrival of reinforcements
from China and England. With daybreak, the cannon, which had tired at
intervals through the night, began to roar incessantly, and shot and
shell crashed into the Residency.

"Is this sort of thing always going on?" Dick asked in astonishment.

"Always," was the answer, "by day, and four nights out of five. We have
not had so quiet a time as last night for a week. Now I will go and ask
the chief to which garrison you and your brother are to be assigned."




CHAPTER XIV.

THE BESIEGED RESIDENCY.


The Warrener's were taken to Gubbins' house, or garrison, as each of
these fortified dwellings was now called; and the distance, short as it
was, was so crowded with dangers and disagreeables that they were
astonished how human beings could have supported them for a month, as
the garrison of Lucknow had done. From all points of the surrounding
circle shot and shell howled overhead, or crashed into walls and roofs.
Many of the enemy's batteries were not above a hundred yards from the
defenses, and the whistling of musket-balls was incessant.

Here and there, as they ran along, great swarms of flies, millions in
number, rose from some spot where a bullock, killed by an enemy's shot,
had been hastily buried, while horrible smells everywhere tainted the
air.

Running across open spaces, and stooping along beneath low walls, the
Warreners and their conductor, Captain Fellows, reached Gubbins' house.
Mr. Gubbins himself--financial commissioner of Oude, a man of great
courage and firmness--received them warmly.

"You will find we are close packed," he said, "but you will, I am sure,
make the best of it. I am glad to have you, for every man is of value
here; and after the bravery you have shown in coming through the
enemy's lines you will be just the right sort of men for me. I think
you will find most room here; I lost two of my garrison from this room
on the 20th, when we had a tremendous attack all round."

The room was small and dark, as the window was closed by a bank of
earth built against it on the outside. It was some fourteen feet by
eight, and here, including the newcomers, eight men lived and slept.
Here the Warreners, after a few words with those who were in future to
be their comrades, threw themselves down on the ground, and, in spite
of the din which raged around them, were soon fast asleep.

It was nearly dark when they awoke, and they at once reported
themselves to Mr. Johnson--a police magistrate, who was the senior
officer of the party in the room--as ready to begin duty.

"You will not be on regular duty till to-night," he replied.
"Altogether, there are about forty men in the garrison. Eight are
always on duty, and are relieved every four hours. So we go on every
twenty hours. Only half our set go on duty together, as that gives room
for those who remain. Two came off duty at eight this morning, four are
just going on. You will go on with the two who came off this morning,
at midnight. Besides their sentry work, of course every one is in
Readiness to man the walls at any moment in case of alarm, and a good
deal of your time can be spent at loopholes, picking off the enemy
directly they show themselves. One of the party, in turn, cooks each
day. Besides the fighting duty, there is any amount of fatigue work,
the repairing and strengthening of the defenses, the fetching rations
and drawing water for the house, in which there are over fifty women
and children, the burying dead cattle, and covering blood and filth
with earth. Besides defending our own post, we are, of course, ready to
rush at any moment to assist any other garrison which may be pressed.
Altogether, you will think yourself lucky when you can get four hours'
sleep out of the twenty-four."

"Are our losses heavy?" Ned asked.

"Terribly heavy. The first week we lost twenty a day shot in the
houses; but now that we have, as far as possible, blocked every
loophole at which a bullet can enter, we are not losing so many as at
first, but the daily total is still heavy, and on a day like the 20th
we lost thirty. The enemy attacked us all round, and we mowed them down
with grape; we believe we killed over a thousand of them.
Unfortunately, every day our losses are getting heavier from disease,
foul air, and overcrowding; the women and children suffer awfully. If
you are disposed to make yourselves useful when not on duty, you will
find abundant opportunity for kindness among them. I will take you
round the house and introduce you to the ladies, then you can go among
them as you like."

First the Warreners went to what, in happier times, was the main room
of the house, a spacious apartment some thirty-five feet square, with
windows opening to the ground at each end, to allow a free passage of
air. These, on the side nearest the enemy, were completely closed by a
bank of earth; while those on the other side were also built up within
a few inches of the top, for shots and shell could equally enter them.
The Warreners were introduced to such of the garrison as were in, the
greater part being at work outside the house repairing a bank which had
been injured during the day. Then Mr. Johnson went to one of the rooms
leading off the main apartment. A curtain hung across it instead of a
door, and this was now drawn aside to allow what air there was to
circulate.

"May I come in?" he asked.

"Certainly, Mr. Johnson," a lady said, coming to the entrance.

"Mrs. Hargreaves, let me introduce the Messrs. Warreners, the gentlemen
who have so gallantly come through the enemy's lines with the message.
They are to form part of our garrison."

The lady held out her hand, but with a slight air of surprise.

"I suppose our color strikes you as peculiar, Mrs. Hargreaves," Ned
said, "but it will wear off in a few days; it is iodine, and we are
already a good many shades lighter than when we started."

"How silly of me not to think of that," Mrs. Hargreaves said; "of
course I heard that you were disguised. But please come in; it is not
much of a room to receive in, but we are past thinking of that now. My
daughter, Mrs. Righton; her husband is with mine on guard at present.
These are my daughters, Edith and Nelly; these five children are my
grandchildren. My dears, these are the Messrs. Warreners, who brought
the news from General Havelock. Their faces are stained, but will be
white again in time."

The ladies all shook hands with the Warreners, who looked with surprise
on the neatness which prevailed in this crowded little room. On the
ground, by the walls, were several rolls of bedding covered over with
shawls, and forming seats or lounges. On the top of one of the piles
two little children were fast asleep. A girl of six sat in a corner on
the ground reading. There were two or three chairs, and these the
ladies, seating themselves on the divan, as they called the bedding,
asked their visitors to take.

Mrs. Hargreaves was perhaps forty-five years old, with a pleasant face,
marked by firmness and intelligence. Mrs. Righton was twenty-five or
twenty-six, and her pale face showed more than that of her mother the
effects of the anxiety and confinement of the siege. Edith and Nelly
were sixteen and fifteen respectively, and although pale, the siege had
not sufficed to mar their bright faces or to crush their spirits.

"Dear me," Nelly said, "why, you look to me to be quite boys; why, you
can't be much older than I am, are you?"

"My dear Nelly," her mother said reprovingly; but Dick laughed heartily.

"I am not much older than you are," he said; "a year, perhaps, but not
more. I am a midshipman in the Agamemnon. My brother is a year older
than I am, and he is gazetted to the Sixty-fourth; so you see, if the
times were different, we should be just the right age to be your
devoted servants."

"Oh, you can be that now," Nelly said. "I am sure we want them more
than ever; don't we, mamma?"

"I think you have more than your share of servants now, Nelly," replied
her mother. "We are really most fortunate, Mr. Johnson, in having our
ayah still with us; so many were deserted by their servants altogether,
and she is an admirable nurse. I do not know what we should do without
her, for the heat and confinement make the poor children sadly
fractious. We were most lucky yesterday, for we managed to secure a
dobee for the day, and you see the result;" and she smilingly indicated
the pretty light muslins in which her daughters were dressed. "You see
us quite at our best," she said, turning to the boys. "But we have,
indeed," she went on seriously, "every reason to be thankful. So far we
have not lost any of our party, and there are few indeed who can say
this. These are terrible times, young gentlemen, and we are all in
God's hands. We are exceptionally well off, but we find our hands full.
My eldest daughter has to aid the ayah with the children; then there is
the cooking to be done by me, and the room to be kept tidy by Edith and
Nelly, and there are so many sick and suffering to be attended to. You
will never find us all here before six in the evening; we are busy all
day; but we shall always be glad to see you when you can spare time for
a chat in the evening. All the visitors we receive are not so welcome,
I can assure you;" and she pointed to three holes in the wall where the
enemy's shot had crashed through.

"That is a very noble woman," Mr. Johnson said, as they went out. "She
spends many hours every day down at the military hospital where, the
scenes are dreadful, and where the enemy's shot and shell frequently
find entry, killing alike the wounded and their attendants. The married
daughter looks after her children and the neatness of the rooms. The
young girls are busy all day about the house nursing sick children, and
yet, as you see, all are bright, pleasant, and the picture of neatness,
marvelous contrasts indeed to the disorder and wretchedness prevailing
among many, who might, by making an effort, be as bright and as
comfortable as they are. There are, as you will find, many brilliant
examples of female heroism and self-devotion exhibited here; but in
some instances women seem to try how helpless, how foolish a silly
woman can be. Ah," he broke off, as a terrific crash followed by a loud
scream was heard, "I fear that shell has done mischief."

"Mrs. Shelton is killed," a woman said, running out, "and Lucy Shelton
has had her arm cut off. Where is Dr. Topham?"

Mrs. Hargreaves came out of her door with a basin of water and some
linen torn into strips for bandages just as the doctor ran in from the
Sikh Square, where he had been attending to several casualties.

"That is right," he nodded to Mrs. Hargreaves; "this is a bad business,
I fear."

"All hands to repair defenses!" was now the order, and the boys
followed Mr. Johnson outside.

"The scoundrels are busy this evening," he observed.

"It sounds like a boiler-maker's shop," Dick said; "if only one in a
hundred bullets were to hit, there would not be many alive by to-morrow
morning."

"No, indeed," Mr. Johnson replied; "they are of course firing to some
extent at random, but they aim at the points where they think it likely
that we may be at work, and their fire adds greatly to our difficulty
in setting right at night the damage they do in the daytime."

For the next four hours the lads were hard at work with the rest of the
garrison. Earth was brought in sacks or baskets and piled up, stockades
repaired, and fascines and gabions mended. The work would have been
hard anywhere; on an August night in India it was exhausting. All the
time that they were at work the bullets continued to fly thickly
overhead, striking the wall of the house with a sharp crack, or burying
themselves with a short thud in the earth. Round shot and shell at
times crashed through the upper part of the house, which was
uninhabited; while from the terraced roof, and from the battery in the
corner of the garden, the crack of the defenders' rifles answered the
enemy's fire.

By the time that the work was done it was midnight, and the Warreners'
turn for guard. They had received rifles, and were posted with six
others in the battery. There were three guns here, all of which were
loaded to the muzzle with grape; three artillerymen, wrapped in their
cloaks, lay asleep beside them, for the number of artillerymen was so
small that the men were continually on duty, snatching what sleep they
could by their guns during the intervals of fighting. The orders were
to listen attentively for the sound of the movement of any body of men,
and to fire occasionally at the flashes of the enemy's guns. The four
hours passed rapidly, for the novelty of the work, the thunder of
cannon and crackling of musketry, all round the Residency, were so
exciting that the Warreners were surprised when the relief arrived.
They retired to their room, and were soon asleep; but in an hour the
alarm was sounded, and the whole force at the post rushed to repel an
attack. Heralded by a storm of fire from every gun which could be
brought to bear upon the battery, thousands of fanatics rushed from the
shelter of the houses outside the intrenchments and swarmed down upon
it. The garrison lay quiet behind the parapet until the approach of the
foe caused the enemy's cannon to cease their fire. Then they leaped to
their feet and poured a volley into the mass. So great were their
numbers, however, that the gaps were closed in a moment, and with yells
and shouts the enemy leaped into the ditch, and tried to climb the
earthwork of the battery. Fortunately at this moment the reserve of
fifty men of the Thirty-second, which were always kept ready to launch
at any threatened point, came up at a run, and their volley over the
parapet staggered the foe. Desperately their leaders called upon them
to climb the earthworks, but the few who succeeded in doing so were
bayoneted and thrown back into the ditch, while a continuous musketry
fire was poured into the crowd. Over and over again the guns, charged
with grape, swept lines through their ranks, and at last, dispirited
and beaten, they fell back again to the shelter from which they had
emerged. The Thirty-second men then returned to the brigade messroom,
and the garrison of the fort were about to turn in when Mr. Gubbins
said cheerfully:

"Now, lads, we have done with those fellows for to-day, I fancy. I want
some volunteers to bury those horses which were killed yesterday; it's
an unpleasant job, but it's got to be done."

The men's faces testified to the dislike they felt for the business;
but they knew it was necessary, and all made their way to the yard,
where, close by the cattle, the horses were confined. The boys
understood at once the repugnance which was felt to approaching this
part of the fort. The ground was covered deep with flies, who rose in a
black cloud, with a perfect roar of buzzing.

Lucknow was always celebrated for its plague of flies, but during the
siege the nuisance assumed surprising proportions. The number of cattle
and animals collected, the blood spilled in the slaughter-yard, the
impossibility of preserving the cleanliness so necessary in a hot
climate, all combined to generate swarms of flies, which rivaled those
of Egypt. The garrison waged war against them, but in vain. Powder was
plentiful, and frequently many square yards of infected ground, where
the flies swarmed thickest, would be lightly sprinkled with it, and
countless legions blown into the air; but these wholesale executions,
however often repeated, appeared to make no impression whatever on the
teeming armies of persecutors.

Their task finished, the fatigue party returned to their houses, and
then all who had not other duties threw themselves down to snatch a
short sleep. In spite of a night passed without rest, sleep was not
easily wooed. The heat in the open air was terrific, in the close
little room it was stifling; while the countless flies irritated them
almost to madness. There was indeed but the choice of two evils: to
cover closely their faces and hands, and lie bathed in perspiration; or
to breathe freely, and bear the flies as best they might. The former
alternative was generally chosen, as heat, however great, may be
endured in quiet, and sleep may insensibly come on; but sleep with a
host of flies incessantly nestling on every exposed part of the face
and body was clearly an impossibility.

