"Non importa. He beat me."

"He ought to be beaten himself."

Phil shrugged his shoulders. Like most boys of his class, to him the
padrone seemed all-powerful. The idea that his oppressive taskmaster
should be punished for his cruelty had never dawned upon him. Knowing
nothing of any law that would protect him, he submitted to it as a
necessity, from which there was no escape except by running away. He
had not come to that yet, but some of his companions had done so, and he
might some day.

After this conversation he played another tune. Mrs. Leigh drew out her
purse, and gave him fifty cents. Phil took his fiddle under his arm,
and, following the servant, who now reappeared, emerged into the street,
and moved onward.



CHAPTER II

PHIL AND HIS PROTECTOR

To a certain extent Phil was his own master; that is, he was at liberty
to wander where he liked, provided he did not neglect his business, and
returned to the lodging-house at night with the required sum of money.
But woe to him if he were caught holding back any of the money for his
own use. In that case, he would be beaten, and sent to bed without his
supper, while the padrone, according to the terms of his contract with
the distant parent would withhold from the amount due the latter ten
times the sum kept by the boy. In the middle of the day he was allowed
to spend three cents for bread, which was the only dinner allowed him.
Of course, the boys were tempted to regale themselves more luxuriously,
but they incurred a great risk in doing so. Sometimes the padrone
followed them secretly, or employed others to do so, and so was able to
detect them. Besides, they traveled, in general, by twos and threes,
and the system of espionage was encouraged by the padrone. So mutual
distrust was inspired, and the fear of being reported made the boys
honest.

Phil left the house of Mr. Leigh in good spirits. Though he had earned
nothing before, the fifty cents he had just received made a good
beginning, and inspired in him the hope of getting together enough to
save him a beating, for one night at least.

He walked down toward Sixth Avenue, and turning the corner walked down
town. At length he paused in front of a tobacconist's shop, and began to
play. But he had chosen an unfortunate time and place. The tobacconist
had just discovered a deficiency in his money account, which he
suspected to be occasioned by the dishonesty of his assistant. In
addition to this he had risen with a headache, so that he was in a
decidedly bad humor. Music had no charms for him at that moment, and he
no sooner heard the first strains of Phil's violin than he rushed from
the shop bareheaded, and dashed impetuously at the young fiddler.

"Get away from my shop, you little vagabond!" he cried. "If I had my
way, you should all be sent out of the country."

Phil was quick to take a hint. He saw the menace in the shopkeeper's
eyes, and, stopping abruptly, ran farther down the street, hugging his
fiddle, which he was afraid the angry tobacconist might seize and break.
This, to him, would be an irreparable misfortune and subject him to a
severe punishment, though the fault would not be his.

Next he strolled into a side street, and began to play in front of some
dwelling-houses. Two or three young children, who had been playing in
the street, gathered about him, and one of them gave him a penny. They
were clamorous for another tune, but Phil could not afford to work for
nothing, and, seeing no prospects of additional pay, took his violin,
and walked away, much to the regret of his young auditors, who, though
not rich, were appreciative. They followed him to the end of the block,
hoping that he would play again, but they were disappointed.

Phil played two or three times more, managing to obtain in all
twenty-five cents additional. He reached the corner of Thirteenth Street
just as the large public school, known as the Thirteenth Street School,
was dismissed for its noon intermission.

"Give us a tune, Johnny," cried Edward Eustis, one of the oldest boys.

"Yes, a tune," joined in several others.

This was an invitation to which Phil was always willing to respond.
Besides, he knew from experience that boys were more generous, in
proportion to their means, than those of larger growth, and he hoped to
get enough from the crowd around him to increase his store to a dollar.

The boys gathered around the little minstrel, who struck up an Italian
tune, but without the words.

"Sing, sing!" cried the boys.

Phil began to sing. His clear, fresh voice produced a favorable
impression upon the boys.

"He's a bully singer," said one. "I can't sing much better myself."

"You sing! Your singing would be enough to scare a dozen tom cats."

"Then we should be well matched. Look here, Johnny, can't you sing
something in English?"

Phil, in response to this request, played and sang "Shoo Fly!" which
suiting the boys' taste, he was called upon to repeat.

The song being finished, Edward Eustis took off his cap, and went around
the circle.

"Now, boys, you have a chance to show your liberality," he said. "I'll
start the collection with five cents."

"That's ahead of me," said James Marcus. "Justice to a large and
expensive family will prevent me contributing anything more than two
cents."

"The smallest favors thankfully received," said Edward.

"Then take that, and be thankful," said Tom Lane, dropping in a penny.

"I haven't got any money," said Frank Gaylord, "but here's an apple;"
and he dropped a large red apple into the cap.

Phil; watching with interest the various contributions, was best pleased
with the last. The money he must carry to the padrone. The apple he
might keep for himself, and it would vary agreeably his usual meager
fare.

"The biggest contribution yet," said Edward.

"Here, Sprague, you are liberal. What'll you give?"

"My note at ninety days."

"You might fail before it comes due."

"Then take three cents. 'Tis all I have; 'I can no more, though poor the
offering be.'"

"Oh, don't quote Shakespeare."

"It isn't Shakespeare; it's Milton."

"Just as much one as the other."

"Here, Johnny," said Edward, after going the rounds, "hold your hands,
and I'll pour out the money. You can retire from business now on a
fortune."

Phil was accustomed to be addressed as Johnny, that being the generic
name for boy in New York. He deposited the money in his pocket, and,
taking his fiddle, played once more in acknowledgment of the donation.
The boys now dispersed, leaving Phil to go on his way. He took out the
apple with the intention of eating it, when a rude boy snatched it from
his hand.

"Give it back," said Phil, angrily.

"Don't you wish you may get it?" said the other, holding it out of his
reach.

The young musician had little chance of redress, his antagonist was a
head taller than himself, and, besides, he would not have dared lay down
his fiddle to fight, lest it might be broken.

"Give it to me," he said, stamping his foot.

"I mean to eat it myself," said the other, coolly. "It's too good for
the likes of you."

"You're a thief."

"Don't you call me names, you little Italian ragamuffin, or I'll hit
you," said the other, menacingly.

"It is my apple."

"I'm going to eat it."

But the speaker was mistaken. As he held the apple above his head, it
was suddenly snatched from him. He looked around angrily, and confronted
Edward Eustis, who, seeing Phil's trouble from a little distance, had at
once come to his rescue.

"What did you do that for?" demanded the thief.

"What did you take the boy's apple for?"

"Because I felt like it."

"Then I took it from you for the same reason."

"Do you want to fight?" blustered the rowdy.

"Not particularly."

"Then hand me back that apple," returned the other.

"Thank you; I shall only hand it to the rightful owner--that little
Italian boy. Are you not ashamed to rob him?"

"Do you want to get hit?"

"I wouldn't advise you to do it."

The rowdy looked at the boy who confronted him. Edward was slightly
smaller, but there was a determined look in his eye which the bully,
who, like those of his class generally, was a coward at heart, did not
like. He mentally decided that it would be safer not to provoke him.

"Come here, Johnny, and take your apple," said Edward.

Phil advanced, and received back his property with satisfaction.

"You'd better eat it now. I'll see that he doesn't disturb you."

Phil followed the advice of his new friend promptly. He had eaten
nothing since seven o'clock, and then only a piece of dry bread and
cheese, and the apple, a rare luxury, he did not fail to relish. His
would-be robber scowled at him meanwhile, for he had promised himself
the pleasure of dispatching the fruit. Edward stood by till the apple
was eaten, and then turned away. The rowdy made a movement as if to
follow Phil, but Edward quickly detected him, and came back.

"Don't you dare touch him," he said, significantly, "or you'll have to
settle accounts with me. Do you see that policeman? I am going to ask
him to have an eye on you. You'd better look out for yourself."

The other turned at the caution, and seeing the approach of one of the
Metropolitan police quickly vanished. He had a wholesome fear of
these guardians of the public peace, and did not care to court their
attention.

Edward turned away, but in a moment felt a hand tugging at his coat.
Looking around, he saw that it was Phil.

"Grazia, signore," said Phil, gratefully.

"I suppose that means 'Thank you'?"

Phil nodded.

"All right, Johnny! I am glad I was by to save you from that bully."



CHAPTER III

GIACOMO

After eating the apple Phil decided to buy his frugal dinner. He,
therefore, went into a baker's shop, and bought two penny rolls and a
piece of cheese. It was not a very luxurious repast, but with the apple
it was better than usual. A few steps from the shop door he met another
Italian boy, who was bound to the same padrone.

"How much money have you, Giacomo?" asked Phil, speaking, of course, in
his native tongue.

"Forty cents. How much have you?"

"A dollar and twenty cents."

"You are very lucky, Filippo."

"A rich signora gave me fifty cents for playing to her sick boy. Then I
sang for some schoolboys, and they gave me some money."

"I am afraid the padrone will beat me to-night."

"He has not beat me for a week."

"Have you had dinner, Filippo?"

"Yes, I had some bread and cheese, and an apple."

"Did you buy the apple?"

"No; one of the schoolboys gave it to me. It was very good," said Phil,
in a tone of enjoyment. "I had not eaten one for a long time."

"Nor I. Do you remember, Filippo, the oranges we had in Italy?"

"I remember them well."

"I was happy then," said Giacomo, sighing. "There was no padrone to beat
me, and I could run about and play. Now I have to sing and play all day.
I am so tired sometimes,--so tired, Filippo."

"You are not so strong as I, Giacomo," said Phil, looking with some
complacency at his own stout limbs.

"Don't you get tired, Filippo?"

"Yes, often; but I don't care so much for that. But I don't like the
winter."

"I thought I should die with cold sometimes last winter," said Giacomo,
shuddering. "Do you ever expect to go back to Italy, Filippo?"

"Sometime."

"I wish I could go now. I should like to see my dear mother and my
sisters."

"And your father?"

"I don't want to see him," said Giacomo, bitterly. "He sold me to the
padrone. My mother wept bitterly when I went away, but my father only
thought of the money."

Filippo and Giacomo were from the same town in Calabria. They were the
sons of Italian peasants who had been unable to resist the offers of the
padrone, and for less than a hundred dollars each had sold his son into
the cruelest slavery. The boys were torn from their native hills, from
their families, and in a foreign land were doomed to walk the streets
from fourteen to sixteen hours in every twenty-four, gathering money
from which they received small benefit. Many times, as they trudged
through the streets, weary and hungry, sometimes cold, they thought with
homesick sadness of the sunny fields in which their earliest years had
been passed, but the hard realities of the life they were now leading
soon demanded their attention.

Naturally light-hearted, Filippo, or Phil, bore his hard lot more
cheerfully than some of his comrades. But Giacomo was more delicate, and
less able to bear want and fatigue. His livelier comrade cheered him up,
and Giacomo always felt better after talking with Phil.

As the two boys were walking together, a heavy hand was laid on the
shoulder of each, and a harsh voice said: "Is this the way you waste
