
'To the market,' was the reply.

'And what did you buy there?' continued the rogue.

'This mule.'

'Which mule?'

'The one I'm sitting upon, to be sure,' replied Simon.

'Are you in earnest, or only joking?'

'What do you mean?'

'Because it seems to me you've got hold of a donkey, and not of a mule.'

'A donkey? Rubbish!' screamed Simon, and without another word he rode
on his way. After a few hundred yards he met the second confederate, who
addressed him, 'Good day, dear sir, where are you coming from?'

'From the market,' answered Simon.

'Did things go pretty cheap?' asked the other.

'I should just think so,' said Simon.

'And did you make any good bargain yourself?'

'I bought this mule on which you see me.'

'Is it possible that you really bought that beast for a mule?'

'Why certainly.'

'But, good heavens, it's nothing but a donkey!'

'A donkey!' repeated Simon, 'you don't mean to say so; if a single other
person tells me that, I'll make him a present of the wretched animal.'

With these words he continued his way, and very soon met the third
knave, who said to him, 'God bless you, sir; are you by any chance
coming from the market?'

'Yes, I am,' replied Simon.

'And what bargain did you drive there?' asked the cunning fellow.

'I bought this mule on which I am riding.'

'A mule! Are you speaking seriously, or do you wish to make a fool of
me?'

'I'm speaking in sober earnest,' said Simon; 'it wouldn't occur to me to
make a joke of it.'

'Oh, my poor friend,' cried the rascal, 'don't you see that is a donkey
and not a mule? you have been taken in by some wretched cheats.'

'You are the third person in the last two hours who has told me the same
thing,' said Simon, 'but I couldn't believe it,' and dismounting from
the mule he spoke: 'Keep the animal, I make you a present of it.' The
rascal took the beast, thanked him kindly, and rode on to join his
comrades, while Simon continued his journey on foot.

As soon as the old man got home, he told his housekeeper that he had
bought a beast under the belief that it was a mule, but that it had
turned out to be a donkey--at least, so he had been assured by several
people he had met on the road, and that in disgust he had at last given
it away.

'Oh, you simpleton!' cried Nina; 'didn't you see that they were only
playing you a trick? Really, I thought you'd have had more gumption than
that; they wouldn't have taken me in in that way.'

'Never mind,' replied Simon, 'I'll play them one worth two of that; for
depend upon it they won't be contented with having got the donkey out of
me, but they'll try by some new dodge to get something more, or I'm much
mistaken.'

Now there lived in the village not far from Simon's house, a peasant
who had two goats, so alike in every respect that it was impossible to
distinguish one from the other. Simon bought them both, paid as small a
price as he could for them, and leading them home with him, he told
Nina to prepare a good meal, as he was going to invite some friends
to dinner. He ordered her to roast some veal, and to boil a pair of
chickens, and gave her some herbs to make a good savoury, and told her
to bake the best tart she could make. Then he took one of the goats and
tied it to a post in the courtyard, and gave it some grass to eat;
but he bound a cord round the neck of the other goat and led it to the
market.

Hardly had he arrived there, than the three gentlemen who had got his
mule perceived him, and coming up to him said: 'Welcome, Mr. Simon, what
brings you here; are you on the look out for a bargain?'

'I've come to get some provisions,' he answered, 'because some friends
are coming to dine with me today, and it would give me much pleasure if
you were to honour me with your company also.'

The accomplices willingly accepted this invitation; and after Simon had
made all his purchases, he tied them on to the goat's back, and said to
it, in the presence of the three cheats, 'Go home now, and tell Nina to
roast the veal, and boil the chickens, and tell her to prepare a savoury
with herbs, and to bake the best tart she can make. Have you followed
me? Then go, and Heaven's blessing go with you.'

As soon as it felt itself free, the laden goat trotted off as quickly
as it could, and to this day nobody knows what became of it. But Simon,
after wandering about the market for some time with his three friends
and some others he had picked up, returned home to his house.

When he and his guests entered the courtyard, they noticed the goat tied
to the post quietly chewing the cud. They were not a little astonished
at this, for of course they thought it was the same goat that Simon had
sent home laden with provisions. As soon as they reached the house Mr.
Simon said to his housekeeper, 'Well, Nina, have you done what I told
the goat to tell you to do?' The artful woman, who at once understood
her master, answered, 'Certainly I have. The veal is roasted, and the
chickens boiled.'

'That's all right,' said Simon.

When the three rogues saw the cooked meats, and the tart in the
oven, and heard Nina's words, they were nearly beside themselves with
amazement, and began to consult at once how they were to get the goat
into their own possession. At last, towards the end of the meal, having
sought in vain for some cunning dodge to get the goat away from Mr.
Simon, one of them said to him, 'My worthy host, you must sell your goat
to us.'

Simon replied that he was most unwilling to part with the creature, as
no amount of money would make up to him for its loss; still, if they
were quite set on it, he would let them have the goat for fifty gold
pieces.

The knaves, who thought they were doing a capital piece of business,
paid down the fifty gold pieces at once, and left the house quite
happily, leading the goat with them. When they got home they said to
their wives, 'You needn't begin to cook the dinner to-morrow till we
send the provisions home.'

The following day they went to the market and bought chickens and other
eatables, and after they had packed them on the back of the goat (which
they had brought with them), they told it all the dishes they wished
their wives to prepare. As soon as the goat felt itself free, it ran as
quickly as it could, and was very soon lost to sight, and, as far as I
know, was never heard of again.

When the dinner hour approached all three went home and asked their
wives if the goat had returned with the necessary provisions, and had
told them what they wished prepared for their meal.

'Oh, you fools and blockheads!' cried their wives, 'how could you ever
believe for a moment that a goat would do the work of a servant-maid?
You have been finely deceived for once in a way. Of course, if you are
always taking in other people, your turn to be taken in comes too, and
this time you've been made to look pretty foolish.'

When the three comrades saw that Mr. Simon had got the better of them,
and done them out of fifty gold pieces, they flew into such a rage that
they made up their minds to kill him, and, seizing their weapons for
this purpose, went to his house.

But the sly old man, who was terrified for his life that the three
rogues might do him some harm, was on his guard, and said to his
housekeeper, 'Nina, take this bladder, which is filled with blood, and
hide it under your cloak; then when these thieves come I'll lay all the
blame on you, and will pretend to be so angry with you that I will run
at you with my knife, and pierce the bladder with it; then you must fall
on the ground as if you were dead, and leave the rest to me.'

Hardly had Simon said these words when the three rogues appeared and
fell on him to kill him.

'My friends,' called out Simon to then, 'what do you accuse me of? I am
in no way to blame; perhaps my housekeeper has done you some injury of
which I know nothing.' And with these words, he turned on Nina with
his knife, and stuck it right into her, so that he pierced the bladder
filled with blood. Instantly the housekeeper fell down as if she were
dead, and the blood streamed all over the ground.

Simon then pretended to be seized with remorse at the sight of this
dreadful catastrophe, and cried out in a loud voice, 'Unhappy wretch
that I am! What have I done? Like a madman I have killed the woman
who is the prop and stay of my old age. How could I ever go on living
without her?' Then he seized a pipe, and when he had blown into it for
some time Nina sprang up alive and well.

The rogues were more amazed than ever; they forgot their anger, and
buying the pipe for two hundred gold pieces, they went joyfully home.

Not long after this one of them quarrelled with his wife, and in his
rage he thrust his knife into her breast so that she fell dead on the
ground. Then he took Simon's pipe and blew into it with all his might,
in the hopes of calling his wife back to life. But he blew in vain, for
the poor soul was as dead as a door-nail.

When one of his comrades heard what had happened, he said, 'You
blockhead, you can't have done it properly; just let me have a try,' and
with these words he seized his wife by the roots of her hair, cut her
throat with a razor, and then took the pipe and blew into it with
all his might but he couldn't bring her back to life. The same thing
happened to the third rogue, so that they were now all three without
wives.

Full of wrath they ran to Simon's house, and, refusing to listen to a
word of explanation or excuse, they seized the old man and put him into
a sack, meaning to drown him in the neighbouring river. On their way
there, however, a sudden noise threw them into such a panic that they
dropped the sack with Simon in it and ran for their lives.

Soon after this a shepherd happened to pass by with his flock, and while
he was slowly following the sheep, who paused here and there by the
wayside to browse on the tender grass, he heard a pitiful voice wailing,
'They insist on my taking her, and I don't want her, for I am too old,
and I really can't have her.' The shepherd was much startled, for he
couldn't make out where these words, which were repeated more than
once, came from, and looked about him to the right and left; at last
he perceived the sack in which Simon was hidden, and going up to it
he opened it and discovered Simon repeating his dismal complaint. The
shepherd asked him why he had been left there tied up in a sack.

Simon replied that the king of the country had insisted on giving him
one of his daughters as a wife, but that he had refused the honour
because he was too old and too frail. The simple-minded shepherd, who
believed his story implicitly, asked him, 'Do you think the king of the
country would give his daughter to me?'

'Yes, certainly, I know he would,' answered Simon, 'if you were tied up
in this sack instead of me.' Then getting out of the sack, he tied the
confiding shepherd up in it instead, and at his request fastened it
securely and drove the sheep on himself.

An hour had scarcely passed when the three rogues returned to the place
where they had left Simon in the sack, and without opening it, one of
them seized it and threw it into the river. And so the poor shepherd was
drowned instead of Mr. Simon!

The three rogues, having wreaked their vengeance, set out, for home. On
their way they noticed a flock of sheep grazing not far from the road.
They longed to steal a few of the lambs, and approached the flock, and
were more than startled to recognise Mr. Simon, whom they had drowned in
the river, as the shepherd who was looking after the sheep. They asked
him how he had managed to get out of the river, to which he replied:

'Get along with you--you are no better than silly donkeys without any
sense; if you had only drowned me in deeper water I would have returned
with three times as many sheep.'

When the three rogues heard this, they said to him: 'Oh, dear Mr. Simon,
do us the favour to tie us up in sacks and throw us into the river that
we may give up our thieving ways and become the owners of flocks.'

'I am ready,' answered Simon, 'to do what you please; there's nothing in
the world I wouldn't do for you.'

So he took three strong sacks and put a man in each of them, and
fastened them up so tightly that they couldn't get out, and then he
threw them all into the river; and that was the end of the three rogues.
But Mr. Simon returned home to his faithful Nina rich in flocks and
gold, and lived for many a year in health and happiness.

Kletke.





KING KOJATA (From the Russian)



There was once upon a time a king called Kojata, whose beard was so
long that it reached below his knees. Three years had passed since his
marriage, and he lived very happily with his wife, but Heaven granted
him no heir, which grieved the King greatly. One day he set forth
from his capital, in order to make a journey through his kingdom.
He travelled for nearly a year through the different parts of his
territory, and then, having seen all there was to be seen, he set forth
on his homeward way. As the day was very hot and sultry he commanded his
servants to pitch tents in the open field, and there await the cool of
the evening. Suddenly a frightful thirst seized the King, and as he saw
no water near, he mounted his horse, and rode through the neighbourhood
looking for a spring. Before long he came to a well filled to the brim
with water clear as crystal, and on the bosom of which a golden jug was
floating. King Kojata at once tried to seize the vessel, but though he
endeavoured to grasp it with his right hand, and then with his left, the
wretched thing always eluded his efforts and refused to let itself be
caught. First with one hand, and then with two, did the King try to
seize it, but like a fish the goblet always slipped through his fingers
and bobbed to the ground only to reappear at some other place, and mock
the King.

'Plague on you!' said King Kojata. 'I can quench my thirst without you,'
and bending over the well he lapped up the water so greedily that he
plunged his face, beard and all, right into the crystal mirror. But when
he had satisfied his thirst, and wished to raise himself up, he couldn't
lift his head, because someone held his beard fast in the water. 'Who's
there? let me go!' cried King Kojata, but there was no answer; only an
awful face looked up from the bottom of the well with two great green
eyes, glowing like emeralds, and a wide mouth reaching from ear to ear
showing two rows of gleaming white teeth, and the King's beard was held,
not by mortal hands, but by two claws. At last a hoarse voice sounded
from the depths. 'Your trouble is all in vain, King Kojata; I will only
let you go on condition that you give me something you know nothing
about, and which you will find on your return home.'

The King didn't pause to ponder long, 'for what,' thought he, 'could be
in my palace without my knowing about it--the thing is absurd;' so he
answered quickly:

'Yes, I promise that you shall have it.'

The voice replied, 'Very well; but it will go ill with you if you fail
to keep your promise.' Then the claws relaxed their hold, and the face
disappeared in the depths. The King drew his chin out of the water,
and shook himself like a dog; then he mounted his horse and rode
thoughtfully home with his retinue. When they approached the capital,
all the people came out to meet them with great joy and acclamation,
and when the King reached his palace the Queen met him on the threshold;
beside her stood the Prime Minister, holding a little cradle in his
hands, in which lay a new-born child as beautiful as the day. Then
the whole thing dawned on the King, and groaning deeply he muttered to
himself 'So this is what I did not know about,' and the tears rolled
down his cheeks. All the courtiers standing round were much amazed at
the King's grief, but no one dared to ask him the cause of it. He took
the child in his arms and kissed it tenderly; then laying it in its
cradle, he determined to control his emotion and began to reign again as
before.

The secret of the King remained a secret, though his grave, careworn
expression escaped no one's notice. In the constant dread that his child
would be taken from him, poor Kojata knew no rest night or day. However,
time went on and nothing happened. Days and months and years passed, and
the Prince grew up into a beautiful youth, and at last the King himself
forgot all about the incident that had happened so long ago.

One day the Prince went out hunting, and going in pursuit of a wild boar
he soon lost the other huntsmen, and found himself quite alone in the
middle of a dark wood. The trees grew so thick and near together that it
was almost impossible to see through them, only straight in front of
him lay a little patch of meadowland. Overgrown with thistles and rank
weeds, in the centre of which a leafy lime tree reared itself.
Suddenly a rustling sound was heard in the hollow of the tree, and an
extraordinary old man with green eyes and chin crept out of it.

'A fine day, Prince Milan,' he said; 'you've kept me waiting a good
number of years; it was high time for you to come and pay me a visit.'

'Who are you, in the name of wonder?' demanded the astonished Prince.

'You'll find out soon enough, but in the meantime do as I bid you. Greet
your father King Kojata from me, and don't forget to remind him of his
debt; the time has long passed since it was due, but now he will have to
pay it. Farewell for the present; we shall meet again.'

With these words the old man disappeared into the tree, and the Prince
returned home rather startled, and told his father all that he had seen
and heard.

The King grew as white as a sheet when he heard the Prince's story, and
said, 'Woe is me, my son! The time has come when we must part,' and with
a heavy heart he told the Prince what had happened at the time of his
birth.

'Don't worry or distress yourself, dear father,' answered Prince Milan.
'Things are never as bad as they look. Only give me a horse for my
journey, and I wager you'll soon see me back again.'

The King gave him a beautiful charger, with golden stirrups, and a
sword. The Queen hung a little cross round his neck, and after much
weeping and lamentation the Prince bade them all farewell and set forth
on his journey.

He rode straight on for two days, and on the third he came to a lake as
smooth as glass and as clear as crystal. Not a breath of wind moved, not
a leaf stirred, all was silent as the grave, only on the still bosom of
the lake thirty ducks, with brilliant plumage, swam about in the water.
Not far from the shore Prince Milan noticed thirty little white garments
lying on the grass, and dismounting from his horse, he crept down under
the high bulrushes, took one of the garments and hid himself with it
behind the bushes which grew round the lake. The ducks swam about all
over the place, dived down into the depths and rose again and glided
through the waves. At last, tired of disporting themselves, they swam
to the shore, and twenty-nine of them put on their little white garments
and instantly turned into so many beautiful maidens. Then they finished
dressing and disappeared. Only the thirtieth little duck couldn't
come to the land; it swam about close to the shore, and, giving out a
piercing cry, it stretched its neck up timidly, gazed wildly around, and
then dived under again. Prince Milan's heart was so moved with pity for
the poor little creature that he came out from behind the bulrushes, to
see if he could be of any help. As soon as the duck perceived him, it
cried in a human voice, 'Oh, dear Prince Milan, for the love of Heaven
give me back my garment, and I will be so grateful to you.' The Prince
lay the little garment on the bank beside her, and stepped back into the
bushes. In a few seconds a beautiful girl in a white robe stood before
him, so fair and sweet and young that no pen could describe her. She
gave the Prince her hand and spoke.

'Many thanks, Prince Milan, for your courtesy. I am the daughter of a
wicked magician, and my name is Hyacinthia. My father has thirty young
daughters, and is a mighty ruler in the underworld, with many castles
and great riches. He has been expecting you for ages, but you need have
no fear if you will only follow my advice. As soon as you come into the
presence of my father, throw yourself at once on the ground and approach
him on your knees. Don't mind if he stamps furiously with his feet and
curses and swears. I'll attend to the rest, and in the meantime we had
better be off.'

With these words the beautiful Hyacinthia stamped on the ground with her
little foot, and the earth opened and they both sank down into the lower
world.

The palace of the Magician was all hewn out of a single carbuncle,
lighting up the whole surrounding region, and Prince Milan walked into
it gaily.
