heard the story the Doctor has been telling about his attacking a tiger
with a whip to save a native woman? I don't care what anyone says, a
fellow who is a downright coward couldn't do a thing like that."

"Who told the Doctor about it?" Farquharson asked. "If he got it from
Bathurst, I don't think it goes for much after what we have seen."

Wilson would have replied angrily, but Captain Doolan put his hand on
his shoulder.

"Shut up, Wilson," he said; "this is no time for disputes; we are all in
one boat here, and must row together like brothers. You go your own
way about Bathurst, I don't blame you for it; he is a man everyone has
liked, a first rate official, and a good fellow all round, except he is
not one of the sociable kind. At any other time one would not think so
much of this, but at present for a man to lack courage is for him to
lack everything. I hope he will come better out of it than it looks at
present. He will have plenty of chances here, and no one will be more
glad than I shall to see him pull himself together."

The Doctor, however, would have quarreled with everyone all round when
he heard what had been decided upon, had not Major Hannay taken him
aside and talked to him strongly.

"It will never do, Doctor, to have quarrels here, and as commandant I
must beg of you not to make this a personal matter. I am very sorry for
this poor fellow; I accept entirely your view of the matter; but at
the same time I really can't blame the others for looking at it from a
matter of fact point of view. Want of courage is at all times regarded
by men as the most unpardonable of failings, and at a time like the
present this feeling is naturally far stronger even than usual. I hope
with you that Bathurst will retrieve himself yet, but we shall certainly
do him no good by trying to fight his battle until he does. You and
I, thinking as we do, will of course make no alteration in our manner
towards him. I am glad to hear that young Wilson also stands as his
friend. Let matters go on quietly. I believe they will come right in the
end."

The Doctor was obliged to acknowledge that the Major's counsel was wise,
and to refrain from either argument or sarcasm; but the effort required
to check his natural tendency to wordy conflict was almost too great for
him, and when not engaged in his own special duties he spent hours in
one of the angles of the terrace keenly watching every tree and bush
within range, and firing vengefully whenever he caught sight of a
lurking native. So accurate was his aim that the Sepoys soon learned
to know and dread the crack of his rifle; and whenever it spoke out the
ground within its range was speedily clear of foes.

The matter, however, caused a deep if temporary estrangement between
Wilson and Richards. Although constantly chaffing each other, and
engaged in verbal strife, they had hitherto been firm friends. Their
rivalry in the matter of horseflesh had not aroused angry feelings, even
their mutual adoration of Isobel Hannay had not affected a breach in
their friendship; but upon the subject of sending Bathurst to
Coventry they quarreled so hotly, that for a time they broke off all
communication with each other, and both in their hearts regretted that
their schoolboy days had passed, and that they could not settle the
matter in good schoolboy fashion.



CHAPTER XIV.


But though obliged to defer to Major Hannay's wishes, and to abstain
from arguing with the men the question of Bathurst being given the cold
shoulder, Dr. Wade had already organized the ladies in his favor. During
the afternoon he had told them the tiger story, and had confidentially
informed them how it was that Bathurst from his birth had been
the victim of something like nervous paralysis at all loud sounds,
especially those of the discharge of firearms.

"His conduct today," he said, "and his courage in rescuing that native
girl from the tiger, illustrate his character. He is cool, brave, and
determined, as might be expected from a man of so well balanced a mind
as his; and even when his nerves utterly broke down under the din of
musketry, his will was so far dominant that he forced himself to
go forward and stand there under fire, an act which was, under the
circumstances, simply heroic."

There is little difficulty in persuading women as to the merits of a man
they like, and Bathurst had, since the troubles began, been much more
appreciated than before by the ladies of Deennugghur. They had felt
there was something strengthening and cheering in his presence, for
while not attempting to minimize the danger, there was a calm confidence
in his manner that comforted and reassured those he talked to.

In the last twenty-four hours, too, he had unobtrusively performed many
little kindnesses; had aided in the removals, carried the children,
looked after the servants, and had been foremost in the arrangement of
everything that could add to the comfort of the ladies.

"I am glad you have told us all about it, Doctor," Mrs. Doolan said;
"and, of course, no one would dream of blaming him. I had heard that
story about his leaving the army years ago; but although I had only seen
him once or twice, I did not believe it for a minute. What you tell us
now, Doctor, explains the whole matter. I pity him sincerely. It must be
something awful for a man at a time like this not to be able to take his
part in the defense, especially when there are us women here. Why, it
would pain me less to see Jim brought in dead, than for him to show the
white feather. What can we do for the poor fellow?"

"Treat him just as usual. There is nothing else you can do, Mrs. Doolan.
Any tone of sympathy, still less of pity, would be the worst thing
possible. He is in the lowest depths at present; but if he finds by your
tone and manner that you regard him on the same footing as before, he
will gradually come round, and I hope that before the end of the siege
he will have opportunities of retrieving himself. Not under fire--that
is hopeless; but in other ways."

"You may be sure we will do all we can, Doctor," Mrs. Doolan said
warmly; "and there are plenty of ways he will be able to make himself
most useful. There is somebody wanted to look after all those syces and
servants, and it would be a comfort to us to have someone to talk to
occasionally; besides, all the children are fond of him."

This sentiment was warmly echoed; and thus, when the determination
at which the men had arrived to cut Bathurst became known, there was
something like a feminine revolution.

"You may do as you like," Mrs. Doolan said indignantly; "but if you
think that we are going to do anything so cruel and unjust, you are
entirely mistaken, I can tell you."

Mrs. Rintoul was equally emphatic, and Mrs. Hunter quietly, but with
as much decision, protested. "I have always regarded Mr. Bathurst as a
friend," she said, "and I shall continue to do so. It is very sad for
him that he cannot take part in the defense, but it is no more fair
to blame him than it would be to blame us, because we, too, are
noncombatants."

Isobel Hannay had taken no part in the first discussion among the
ladies, nor did she say anything now.

"It is cruel and unjust," she said to herself, "but they only think as
I did. I was more cruel and unjust than they, for there was no talk
of danger then. I expressed my contempt of him because there was a
suspicion that he had showed cowardice ten years ago, while they have
seen it shown now when there is fearful peril. If they are cruel and
unjust, what was I?"

Later on the men gathered together at one end of the room, and talked
over the situation.

"Dr. Wade," the Major said quietly, "I shall be obliged if you will go
and ask Mr. Bathurst to join us. He knows the people round here better
than any of us, and his opinion will be valuable."

The Doctor, who had several times been in to see Bathurst, went to his
room.

"The Major wants you to join us, Bathurst; we are having a talk over
things, and he wishes to have your opinion. I had better tell you that
as to yourself the camp is divided into two parties. On one side are the
Major, Wilson, and myself, and all the ladies, who take, I need not say,
a common sense view of the matter, and recognize that you have done all
a man could do to overcome your constitutional nervousness, and that
there is no discredit whatever attached to you personally. The rest of
the men, I am sorry to say, at present take another view of the case,
and are disposed to show you the cold shoulder."

"That, of course," Bathurst said quietly; "as to the ladies' view of it,
I know that it is only the result of your good offices, Doctor."

"Then you will come," the Doctor said, pleased that Bathurst seemed less
depressed than he had expected.

"Certainly I will come, Doctor," Bathurst said, rising; "the worst
is over now--everyone knows that I am a coward--that is what I have
dreaded. There is nothing else for me to be afraid of, and it is of no
use hiding myself."

"We look quite at home here, Mr. Bathurst, don't we?" Mrs. Doolan said
cheerfully, as he passed her; "and I think we all feel a great deal more
comfortable than we did when you gave us your warning last night; the
anticipation is always worse than the reality."

"Not always, I think, Mrs. Doolan," he said quietly; "but you have
certainly made yourselves wonderfully at home, though your sewing is of
a more practical kind than that upon which you are ordinarily engaged."

Then he passed on with the Doctor to the other end of the room. The
Major nodded as he came up.

"All right again now, Bathurst, I hope? We want your opinion, for you
know, I think, more of the Zemindars in this part of the country than
any of us. Of course, the question is, will they take part against us?"

"I am afraid they will, Major. I had hoped otherwise; but if it be
true that the Nana has gone--and as the other part of the message was
correct, I have no doubt this is so also--I am afraid they will be
carried away with the stream."

"And you think they have guns?"

"I have not the least doubt of it; the number given up was a mere
fraction of those they were said to have possessed."

"I had hoped the troops would have marched away after the lesson we gave
them this morning, but, so far as we can make out, there is no sign of
movement in their lines. However, they may start at daybreak tomorrow."

"I will go out to see if you like, Major," Bathurst said quietly. "I
can get native clothes from the servants, and I speak the language well
enough to pass as a native; so if you give me permission I will go out
to the lines and learn what their intentions are."

"It would be a very dangerous undertaking," the Major said gravely.

"I have no fear whatever of danger of that kind, Major; my nerves are
steady enough, except when there is a noise of firearms, and then, as
you all saw this morning, I cannot control them, do what I will. Risks
of any other kind I am quite prepared to undertake, but in this matter
I think the danger is very slight, the only difficulty being to get
through the line of sentries they have no doubt posted round the house.
Once past them, I think there is practically no risk whatever of their
recognizing me when made up as a native. The Doctor has, no doubt, got
some iodine in his surgery, and a coat of that will bring me to the
right color."

"Well, if you are ready to undertake it, I will not refuse," the Major
said. "How would you propose to get out?"

"I noticed yesterday that the branches of one of the trees in the garden
extended beyond the top of the wall. I will climb up that and lower
myself on the other side by a rope; that is a very simple matter. The
spot is close to the edge of Mr. Hunter's compound, and I shall work my
way through the shrubbery till I feel sure I am beyond any sentries
who may be posted there; the chances are that they will not be thick
anywhere, except opposite the gate. By the way, Captain Forster, before
I go I must thank you for having risked your life to save mine this
morning. I heard from Mrs. Hunter that it was you and the Doctor who
rushed forward and drew me back."

"It is not worth talking about," Captain Forster said carelessly. "You
seemed bent on making a target of yourself; and as the Major's orders
were that everyone was to lie down, there was nothing for it but to
remove you."

Bathurst turned to Dr. Wade. "Will you superintend my get up, Doctor?"

"Certainly," the Doctor said, with alacrity. "I will guarantee that,
with the aid of my boy, I will turn you out so that no one would know
you even in broad daylight, to say nothing of the dark."

A quarter of an hour sufficed to metamorphose Bathurst into an Oude
peasant. He did not return to the room, but, accompanied by the Doctor,
made his way to the tree he had spoken of.

"By the way, you have taken no arms," the Doctor said suddenly.

"They would be useless, Doctor; if I am recognized I shall be killed; if
I am not discovered, and the chances are very slight of my being so, I
shall get back safely. By the way, we will tie some knots on that rope
before I let myself down. I used to be able to climb a rope without
them, but I doubt whether I could do so now."

"Well, God bless you, lad, and bring you back safely! You may make as
light of it as you will, but it is a dangerous expedition. However, I
am glad you have undertaken it, come what may, for it has given you the
opportunity of showing you are not afraid of danger when it takes any
other form than that of firearms. There are plenty of men who would
stand up bravely enough in a fight, who would not like to undertake
this task of going out alone in the dark into the middle of these
bloodthirsty scoundrels. How long do you think you will be?"

"A couple of hours at the outside."

"Well, at the end of an hour I shall be back here again. Don't be longer
than you can help, lad, for I shall be very anxious until you return."

When the Doctor re-entered the house there was a chorus of questions:

"Has Mr. Bathurst started?"

"Why did you not bring him in here before he left? We should all have
liked to have said goodby to him."

"Yes, he has gone. I have seen him over the wall; and it was much better
that he should go without any fuss. He went off just as quietly and
unconcernedly as if he had been going out for an ordinary evening's
walk. Now I am going up onto the roof. I don't say we should hear any
hubbub down at the lines if he were discovered there, but we should
certainly hear a shout if he came across any of the sentries round the
house."

"Has he taken any arms, Doctor?" the Major asked.

"None whatever, Major. I asked him if he would not take pistols, but he
refused."

"Well, I don't understand that," Captain Forster remarked. "If I had
gone on such a business I would have taken a couple of revolvers. I am
quite ready to take my chance of being killed fighting, but I should not
like to be seized and hacked to pieces in cold blood. My theory is a man
should sell his life as dearly as he can."

"That is the animal instinct, Forster," the Doctor said sharply; "though
I don't say that I should not feel the same myself; but I question
whether Bathurst's is not a higher type of courage."

"Well, I don't aspire to Bathurst's type of courage, Doctor," Forster
said, with a short laugh.

But the Doctor did not answer. He had already turned away, and was
making for the stairs.

"May I go with you, Doctor?" Isobel Hannay said, following him. "It is
very hot down here."

"Yes; come along, child; but there is no time to lose, for Bathurst
must be near where they are likely to have posted their sentries by this
time."

"Everything quiet, Wilson?" he asked the young subaltern, who, with
another, was on guard on the roof.

"Yes; we have heard nothing except a few distant shouts and noises out
at the lines. Round here there has been nothing moving, except that we
heard someone go out into the garden just now."

"I went out with Bathurst," the Doctor said. "He has gone in the
disguise of a native to the Sepoy lines, to find out what are their
intentions."

"I heard the talk over it, Doctor. I only came up on watch a few minutes
since. I thought it was most likely him when I heard the steps."

"I hope he is beyond the sentries," the Doctor said. "I have come up
here to listen."

"I expect he is through them before this," Wilson said confidently. "I
wish I could have gone with him; but of course it would not have been
any good. It is a beautiful night--isn't it, Miss Hannay?--and there is
scarcely any dew falling."

"Now, you go off to your post in the corner, Wilson. Your instructions
are to listen for the slightest sound, and to assure us against the
Sepoys creeping up to the walls. We did not come up here to distract you
from your duties, or to gossip."

"There are Richards and another posted somewhere in the garden," Wilson
said. "Still, I suppose you are right, Doctor; but if you, Miss Hannay,
have come up to listen, come and sit in my corner; it is the one nearest
to the lines."

"You may as well go and sit down, Isobel," the Doctor said; "that is,
if you intend to stay up here long;" and they went across with Wilson to
his post.

"Shall I put one of these sandbags for you to sit on?"

"I would rather stand, thank you;" and they stood for some time silently
watching the fires in the lines.

"They are drawing pretty heavily on the wood stores," the Doctor
growled; "there is a good deal more than the regulation allowance
blazing in those fires. I can make out a lot of figures moving about
round them; no doubt numbers of the peasants have come in."

"Do you think Mr. Bathurst has got beyond the line of sentries?" Isobel
said, after standing perfectly quiet for some time.

"Oh, yes, a long way; probably he was through by the time we came up
here. They are not likely to post them more than fifty or sixty yards
from the wall; and, indeed, it is, as Bathurst pointed out to me,
probable that they are only thick near the gate. All they want to do is
to prevent us slipping away. I should think that Bathurst must be out
near the lines by this time."

Isobel moved a few paces away from the others, and again stood
listening.

"I suppose you do not think that there is any chance of an attack
tonight, Doctor?" Wilson asked, in low tones.

"Not in the least; the natives are not fond of night work. I expect they
are dividing the spoil and quarreling over it; anyhow, they have had
enough of it for today. They may intend to march away in the morning, or
they may have sent to Cawnpore to ask for orders, or they may have heard
from some of the Zemindars that they are coming in to join them--that is
what Bathurst has gone out to learn; but anyhow I do not think they will
attack us again with their present force."

"I wish there were a few more of us," Wilson said, "so that we could
venture on a sortie."

"So do I, lad; but it is no use thinking about it as it is. We have to
wait; our fate is not in our own hands."

"And you think matters look bad, Doctor?"

"I think they could hardly look worse. Unless the mutineers take it into
their heads to march away, there is, humanly speaking, but one chance
for us, and that is that Lawrence may thrash the Sepoys so completely
at Lucknow that he may be able to send out a force to bring us in. The
chances of that are next to nothing; for in addition to a very large
Sepoy force he has the population of Lucknow--one of the most turbulent
in India--on his hands. Ah, what is that?"

Two musket shots in quick succession from the Sepoy lines broke the
silence of the evening, and a startled exclamation burst from the girl
standing near them.

The Doctor went over to her.

"Do you think--do you think," she said in a low, strained voice, "that
it was Bathurst?"

"Not at all. If they detected him, and I really do not see that there is
a chance of their doing so, disguised as he was, they would have seized
him and probably killed him, but there would be no firing. He has gone
unarmed, you know, and would offer no resistance. Those shots you heard
were doubtless the result of some drunken quarrel over the loot."

"Do you really think so, Doctor?"

"I feel quite sure of it. If it had been Forster who had gone out, and
he had been detected, it would have been natural enough that we should
hear the sound of something like a battle. In the first place, he would
have defended himself desperately, and, in the next, he might have made
his way through them and escaped; but, as I said, with Bathurst there
would be no occasion for their firing."

"Why didn't he come in to say goodby before he went? that is what I
wanted to ask you, Doctor, and why I came up here. I wanted to have
spoken to him, if only for a moment, before he started. I tried to catch
his eye as he went out of the room with you, but he did not even look at
me. It will be so hard if he never comes back, to know that he went away
without my having spoken to him again. I did try this morning to tell
him that I was sorry for what I said, but he would not listen to me."

"You will have an opportunity of telling him when he comes back, if you
want to, or of showing him so by your manner, which would be, perhaps,
less painful to both of you."

"I don't care about pain to myself," the girl said. "I have been unjust,
and deserve it."

"I don't think he considers you unjust. I did, and told you so. He feels
what he considers the disgrace so much that it seems to him perfectly
natural he should be despised."

"Yes, but I want him to see that he is not despised," she said quickly.
"You don't understand, Doctor."

"I do understand perfectly, my dear; at least, I think--I think I do; I
see that you want to put yourself straight with him, which is very right
and proper, especially placed as we all are; but I would not do or say
anything hastily. You have spoken hastily once, you see, and made a mess
of it. I should be careful how I did it again, unless, of course," and
he stopped.

"Unless what, Doctor?" Isobel asked shyly, after a long pause. But there
was no reply; and looking round she saw that her companion had moved
quietly away and had joined Wilson at his post. She stood for a
few minutes in the same attitude, and then moved quietly across the
staircase in the center of the terrace, and went down to the party
below. A short time later the Doctor followed her, and, taking his
rifle, went out into the garden with Captain Doolan, who assisted him in
climbing the tree, and handed his gun up to him. The Doctor made his
way out on the branch to the spot where it extended beyond the wall, and
there sat, straining his eyes into the darkness. Half an hour passed,
and then he heard a light footfall on the sandy soil.

"Is that you, Bathurst?" he whispered.

"All right, Doctor;" and a minute later Bathurst sat on the branch
beside him.

"Well, what's your news?"

"Very bad, Doctor; they expect the Rajah Por Sing, who, it seems, is the
leader of the party in this district, and several other Zemindars, to be
here with guns tomorrow or next day. The news from Cawnpore was true..
The native troops mutinied and marched away, but were joined by Nana
Sahib and his force, and he persuaded them to return and attack the
whites in their intrenchments at Cawnpore, as they would not be well
received at Delhi unless they had properly accomplished their share of
the work of rooting out the Feringhees."

"The infernal scoundrel!" the Doctor exclaimed; "after pretending for
years to be our best friend. I'm disgusted to think that I have drunk
his champagne a dozen times. However, that makes little difference to us
now, your other news is the most important. We could have resisted
the Sepoys for a month; but if they bring up guns there can be but one
ending to it."

"That is so, Doctor. The only hope I can see is that they may find our
resistance so obstinate as to be glad to grant us terms of surrender."

"Yes, there is that chance," the Doctor agreed; "but history shows there
is but little reliance to be placed upon native oaths."

Bathurst was silent; his own experience of the natives had taught him
the same lesson.

"It is a poor hope," he said, after a while; "but it is the only one, so
far as I can see."

Not another word was spoken as they descended the tree and walked across
to the house.

"Never mind about changing your things, come straight in."

"Our scout has returned," the Doctor said, as he entered the room. There
was a general exclamation of gladness on the part of the ladies who had
not retired.

"I am very glad to see you safe back, Mr. Bathurst," Mrs. Hunter said,
going up to him and taking his hand. "We have all been very anxious
since you left."

"The danger was very slight, Mrs. Hunter. I only wish I had brought you
back the news that the native lines were deserted and the mutineers in
full march for Delhi and Lucknow."

"I was afraid you would hardly bring that news, Mr. Bathurst; it was
almost too good to hope for. However, we are all glad that you are back.
Are we not, Isobel?"

"We are indeed, Mr. Bathurst, though as yet I can hardly persuade myself
that it is you in that get up."

"I think there is no doubt of my identity. Can you tell me where you
uncle is, Miss Hannay? I have to make my report to him."

"He is on the roof. There is a sort of general gathering of our
defenders there."
