a flash. The return shot came at once, and chipped the rock as before,
but he dropped back unhurt, and peeping from the side he could see
nothing. He might or might not have slain his enemy. The gray cap was no
longer visible, and he watched to see if it would reappear.

He heard the sound of a great cannonade before the mouth of the pass,
and he saw his own people advancing in force, their lines extending far
to the left and right, with several batteries showing at intervals. Then
came the rebel yell from the pass and as the Union lines advanced the
Southerners poured upon them a vast concentrated fire.

Dick, watching through the smoke and forgetful of his enemy across the
valley, saw the Union charge rolled back. But he also saw the men out
of range gathering themselves for a new attack. Within the pass
preparations were going on to repel it a second time. Then he glanced
toward the opposite rock and dropped down just in time. He had seen a
rifle barrel protruding above it, and a second later the bullet whistled
where his head had been.

He grew angrier than ever. He had left that sharpshooter alone for at
least ten minutes, while he watched charge and repulse, and he expected
to be treated with the same consideration. He would pay him for such
ferocity, and seeing an edge of gray shoulder, he fired.

No sign came from the rock, and Dick was quite sure that he had missed.
The blood mounted to his head and surcharged his brain. A thousand
little pulses that he had never heard of before began to beat in his
head, and he was devoured by a consuming anger. He vowed to get that
fellow yet.

Lying flat upon his stomach he drew himself around the edge of the rock
and watched. There was a great deal of covering smoke from the artillery
in the pass now, and he believed that it would serve his purpose.

But when he got a little distance away from the rock the bank of smoke
lifted suddenly, and it was only by quickly flattening himself
down behind a little ridge of stone that he saved his life. The
sharpshooter's bullet passed so close to his head that Dick felt as if
he had received a complete hair cut, all in a flash.

He fairly sprang back to the cover of his rock. What a fine rock
that was! How big and thick! And it was so protective! In a spirit of
defiance he fired at the top of the other stone and saw the gray dust
shoot up from it. Quick came the answering shot, and a little piece of
his coat flew with it. That was certainly a great sharpshooter across
the valley! Dick gave him full credit for his skill.

Then he heard the rolling of drums and the mellow call of trumpets in
front of the pass. Taking care to keep well under cover he looked back.
The Union army was advancing in great force now, its front tipped with a
long line of bayonets and the mouths of fifty cannon turned to the pass.
In front of them swarmed the skirmishers, eager, active fellows leaping
from rock to rock and from tree to tree.

Dick foresaw that the second charge would not fail. Its numbers were so
great that it would at least enter the pass and hold the mouth of it.
Already a mighty cannonade was pouring a storm of death over the heads
of the skirmishers toward the defenders, and the brigades came on
steadily and splendidly to the continued rolling of the drums.

Dick rose up again, watching now for his enemy who, he knew, could not
remain much longer behind the rock, as he would soon be within range of
the Northern skirmishers advancing on that side.

He fancied that he could hear the massive tread of the thousands coming
toward the pass, and the roll of the drums, distinct amid the roar of
the cannon, told him that his comrades would soon be at hand, driving
everything before them. But his eyes were for that big rock on the other
side of the valley. Now was his time for revenge upon the sharpshooter
who had sought his life with such savage persistence. The Northern
skirmishers were drawing nearer and the fellow must flee or die.

Suddenly the sharpshooter sprang from the rock, and up flew Dick's rifle
as he drew a bead straight upon his heart. Then he dropped the weapon
with a cry of horror. Across the valley and through the smoke he
recognized Harry Kenton, and Harry Kenton looking toward his enemy
recognized him also.

Each threw up his hand in a gesture of friendliness and farewell--the
roar of the battle was so loud now that no voice could have been heard
at the distance--and then they disappeared in the smoke, each returning
to his own, each heart thrilling with a great joy, because its owner had
always missed the sharpshooter behind the stone.

The impression of that vivid encounter in the pass was dimmed for a
while for Dick by the fierceness of the fighting that followed. The
defense had the advantage of the narrow pass and the rocky slopes,
and numbers could not be put to the most account. Nevertheless, the
Confederates were pressed back along the gap, and when night came the
Union army was in full possession of its summit.

But at the other gap the North had not achieved equal success.
Longstreet, marching thirteen miles that day, had come upon the field in
time, and when darkness fell the Southern troops still held their ground
there. But later in the night Hill and Longstreet, through fear of being
cut off, abandoned their positions and marched to join Lee.

Dick and his comrades who did not lie down until after midnight had
come, felt that a great success had been gained. McClellan had been slow
to march, but, now that he was marching, he was sweeping the enemy out
of his way.

The whole Army of the Potomac felt that it was winning and McClellan
himself was exultant. Early the next morning he reported to his superior
at Washington that the enemy was fleeing in panic and that General Lee
admitted that he had been "shockingly whipped."

Full of confidence, the army advanced to destroy Lee, who lay between
the peninsula of the Antietam and the Potomac, but just about the
time McClellan was writing his dispatch, the white flag was hoisted at
Harper's Ferry, the whole garrison surrendered, and messengers were on
their way to Lee with the news that Stonewall Jackson was coming.




CHAPTER IX. ACROSS THE STREAM


Dick and his comrades had not heard of the taking of Harper's Ferry and
they were full of enthusiasm that brilliant morning in mid-September.
McClellan, if slow to move, nevertheless had shown vigor in action,
and the sanguine youths could not doubt that they had driven Lee into a
corner. The Confederates, after the fierce fighting of the day before,
had abandoned both gaps, and the way at last lay clear before the Army
of the Potomac.

Dick was mounted again. In fact his horse, after pulling the reins from
his hands and fleeing from the Confederate fire, had been retaken by
a member of his own regiment and returned to him. It was another good
omen. The lost had been found again and defeat would become victory.

But Dick said nothing to anybody of his duel with Harry Kenton. He
shuddered even now when he recalled it. And yet there had been no guilt
in either. Neither had known that the other lay behind the stone,
but happy chance had made all their bullets go astray. Again he was
thankful.

"How did you stand that fighting yesterday afternoon, George?" Dick
asked of Warner.

"First rate. The open air agreed with me, and as no bullet sought me out
I felt benefited. I didn't get away from that hospital too soon. How far
away is this Antietam River, behind which they say Lee lies?"

"It's only eight miles from the gap," said Pennington, who had been
making inquiries, "and as we have come three miles it must be only five
miles away."

"Correct," said Warner, who was in an uncommonly fine humor. "Your
mathematical power grows every day, Frank. Let x equal the whole
distance from the gap to the Antietam, which is eight miles, let y equal
the distance which we have come which is three miles, then x minus y
equals the distance left, which is five miles. Wonderful! wonderful!
You'll soon have a great head on you, Frank."

"If some rebel cannoneer doesn't shoot it off in the coming battle. By
George, we're driving their skirmishers before us! They don't seem to
make any stand at all!"

The vanguard certainly met with no very formidable resistance as it
advanced over the rolling country. The sound of firing was continuous,
but it came from small squads here and there, and after firing a few
volleys the men in gray invariably withdrew.

Yet the Northern advance was slow. Colonel Winchester became intensely
impatient again.

"Why don't we hurry!" he exclaimed. "Of all things in the world the one
that we need most is haste. With Jackson tied up before Harper's Ferry,
Lee's defeat is sure, unless he retreats across the Potomac, and that
would be equivalent to a defeat. Good Heavens, why don't we push on?"

He had not yet heard of the fall of Harper's Ferry, and that Jackson
with picked brigades was already on the way to join Lee. Had he known
these two vital facts his anger would have burned to a white heat.
Surely no day lost was ever lost at a greater cost than the one
McClellan lost after the finding of Orders No. 191.

"Do you know anything about the Antietam, colonel?" asked Dick.

"It's a narrow stream, but deep, and crossed by several stone bridges.
It will be hard to force a crossing here, but further up it can be done
with ease since we outnumber Lee so much that we can overlap him by far.
I have my information from Shepard, and he makes no mistakes. There is
a church, too, on the upper part of the peninsula, a little church
belonging to an order called the Dunkards."

"Ah," murmured Dick, "the little church of Shiloh!"

"What do you mean by that?"

"There was a little church at Shiloh, too. The battle raged all around
it more than once. We lost it at first, but in the end we won. It's
another good omen. We're bound to achieve a great victory, colonel."

"I hope and believe so. We've the materials with which to do it. But
we've got to push and push hard."

The colonel raised his glasses and took a long look in front. Dick also
had a pair and he, too, examined the country before them. It was a fine,
rolling region and all the forest was gone, except clumps of trees here
and there. The whole country would have been heavy with forest had it
not been for the tramp of war.

It was now nearly noon and the sunlight was brilliant and intense. The
glasses carried far. Dick saw a line of trees which he surmised marked
the course of the Antietam, and he saw small detachments of cavalry
which he knew were watching the advance of the Army of the Potomac.
Their purpose convinced him that Lee had not retreated across the
Potomac, but that he would fight and surely lose. Dick now believed that
so many good omens could not fail.

A horseman galloped toward them. It was Shepard again, dustier than
ever, his face pale from weariness.

"What is it, Mr. Shepard?" asked Colonel Winchester.

"I've just reported to General McClellan that our whole command at
Harper's Ferry, thirteen thousand strong, surrendered early this morning
and that Jackson with picked men has already started to join Lee!"

"My God! My God!" cried the colonel. "Oh, that lost day! We ought to
have fought yesterday and destroyed Lee, while Harper's Ferry was still
holding out! What a day! What a day! Nothing can ever pay us back for
the losing of it!"

Dick, too, felt a sinking of the heart, but despair was not written on
his face as it was on that of his colonel. Jackson might come, but it
would only be with a part of his force, that which marched the swiftest,
and the victory of the Army of the Potomac would be all the grander. The
more enemies crushed the better it would be for the Union.

"Why, colonel!" he exclaimed, "we can beat them anyhow!"

"That's so, my lad, so we can! And so we will! It was childish of me to
talk as I did. Here, Johnson, blow your best on that trumpet. I want our
regiment to be the first to reach the Antietam."

Johnson blew a long and mellow tune and the Winchester regiment swung
forward at a more rapid gait. The weather, after a day or two of
coolness, had grown intensely hot again, and the noon sun poured down
upon them sheaves of fiery rays. Dick looked back, and he saw once more
that vast billowing cloud of dust made by the marching army. But in
front he saw only quiet and peace, save for a few distant horsemen who
seemed to be riding at random.

"There's a little town called Sharpsburg in the peninsula formed by
the Potomac and the Antietam," said Shepard, who stayed with them, his
immediate work done, "and the Potomac being very low, owing to the
dry season, there is one ford by which Lee can cross and go back to
Virginia. But he isn't going to cross without a battle, that's sure.
The rebels are flushed with victory, they think they have the greatest
leaders ever born and they believe, despite the disparity of numbers,
that they can beat us."

"And I believe they can't," said Dick.

"If it were not for that lost day we'd have 'em beaten now," said
Shepard, "and we'd be marching against Jackson."

The regiment in its swift advance now came nearer to the Antietam, the
narrow but deep creek between its high banks. One or two shots from the
far side warned them to come more slowly, and Colonel Winchester drew
his men up on a knoll, waiting for the rest of the army to advance.

Dick put his glasses to his eyes, and slowly swept a wide curve on the
peninsula of Antietam. Great armies drawn up for battle were a spectacle
that no boy could ever view calmly, and his heart beat so hard that it
caused him actual physical pain.

He saw through the powerful glasses the walls of the little village of
Sharpsburg, and to the north a roof which he believed was that of the
Dunkard Church, of which Shepard spoke. But his eyes came back from
the church and rested on the country around Sharpsburg. The Confederate
masses were there and he clearly saw the batteries posted along the
Antietam. Beyond the peninsula he caught glimpses of the broad Potomac.

There lay Lee before them again, and now was the time to destroy his
army. Jackson, even with his vanguard, could not arrive before night,
and the main force certainly could not come from Harper's Ferry before
the morrow. Here was a full half day for the Army of the Potomac, enough
in which to destroy a divided portion of the Army of Northern Virginia.

But Colonel Winchester raged again and again in vain. There was no
attack. Brigade after brigade in blue came up and sat down before the
Antietam. The cannon exchanged salutes across the little river, but
no harm was done, and the great masses of McClellan faced the whole
peninsula, within which lay Lee with half of his army. The Winchester
regiment was moved far to the north, where its officers hopefully
believed that the first attack would be made. Here they extended
beyond Lee's line, and it would be easy to cross the Antietam and hurl
themselves upon his flank.

Despite the delay, Dick and his comrades, thrilled at the great and
terrible panorama spread before them. The mid-September day had become
as hot as those of August had been. The late afternoon sun was brazen,
and immense clouds of dust drifted about. But they did not hide the view
of the armies, arrayed for battle, and with only a narrow river between.

Dick, through his own glasses saw Confederate officers watching them
also. He tried to imagine that this was Lee and that Longstreet, and
that one of the Hills, and the one who wore a gorgeous uniform must
surely be Stuart. Why should they be allowed to ride about so calmly?
His heart fairly ached for the attack. McClellan said that fifty
thousand men were there, and that Jackson was coming with fifty thousand
more, but Shepard, who always knew, said that they did not number more
than twenty thousand. What a chance! What a chance! He almost repeated
Colonel Winchester's words, but he was only a young staff officer and it
was not for him to complain. If he said anything at all he would have to
say it in a guarded manner and to his best friends.

The Winchester regiment went into camp in a pleasant grove at the
northern end of the Union line. Dick and his two young comrades had no
fault to find with their quarters. They had dry grass, warm air and the
open sky. A more comfortable summer home for a night could not be asked.
And there was plenty of food, too. The Army of the Potomac never lacked
it. The coffee was already boiling in the pots, and beef and pork were
frying in the skillets. Heavenly aromas arose.

Dick and his comrades ate and drank, and then lay down in the grove. If
they must rest they would rest well. Now and then they heard the booming
of guns, and just before dark there had been a short artillery duel
across the Antietam, but now the night was quiet, save for the murmur
and movement of a great army. Through the darkness came the sound of
many voices and the clank of moving wheels.

Dick asked permission for his two comrades and himself to go down near
the river and obtained it.

"But don't get shot," cautioned Colonel Winchester. "The Confederate
riflemen will certainly be on watch on the other side of the stream."

Dick promised and the three went forward very carefully among some
bushes. They were led on by curiosity and they did not believe that they
would be in any great danger. The singular friendliness which always
marked the pickets of the hostile armies in the Civil War would prevail.

It was several hundred yards down to the Antietam, and luckily the
ribbon of bushes held out. But when they were half way to the stream a
thick, dark figure rose up before them. Dick, in an instant, recognized
Sergeant Whitley.
