Dora, but he answered without anger.

'Shut up,' he said in a whisper of imperial command. 'Can't you see it's
GONE TO SLEEP?'

As exhausted as if they had all taken part in all the events of a very
long Athletic Sports, the youthful Bastables and their friends dragged
their weary limbs back across the fields. Oswald was compelled to go
on holding the titled infant, for fear it should wake up if it changed
hands, and begin to yell again. Dora's flannelette petticoat had been
got off somehow--how I do not seek to inquire--and the Secret was
covered with it. The others surrounded Oswald as much as possible, with
a view to concealment if we met Mrs Pettigrew. But the coast was clear.
Oswald took the Secret up into his bedroom. Mrs Pettigrew doesn't come
there much, it's too many stairs.

With breathless precaution Oswald laid it down on his bed. It sighed,
but did not wake. Then we took it in turns to sit by it and see that it
did not get up and fling itself out of bed, which, in one of its furious
fits, it would just as soon have done as not.

We expected Albert's uncle every minute.

At last we heard the gate, but he did not come in, so we looked out and
saw that there he was talking to a distracted-looking man on a piebald
horse--one of the miller's horses.

A shiver of doubt coursed through our veins. We could not remember
having done anything wrong at the miller's. But you never know. And it
seemed strange his sending a man up on his own horse. But when we had
looked a bit longer our fears went down and our curiosity got up. For we
saw that the distracted one was a gentleman.

Presently he rode off, and Albert's uncle came in. A deputation met him
at the door--all the boys and Dora, because the baby was her idea.

'We've found something,' Dora said, 'and we want to know whether we may
keep it.'

The rest of us said nothing. We were not so very extra anxious to keep
it after we had heard how much and how long it could howl. Even Noel had
said he had no idea a baby could yell like it. Dora said it only cried
because it was sleepy, but we reflected that it would certainly be
sleepy once a day, if not oftener.

'What is it?' said Albert's uncle. 'Let's see this treasure-trove. Is it
a wild beast?'

'Come and see,' said Dora, and we led him to our room.

Alice turned down the pink flannelette petticoat with silly pride, and
showed the youthful heir fatly and pinkly sleeping.

'A baby!' said Albert's uncle. 'THE Baby! Oh, my cat's alive!'

That is an expression which he uses to express despair unmixed with
anger.

'Where did you?--but that doesn't matter. We'll talk of this later.'

He rushed from the room, and in a moment or two we saw him mount his
bicycle and ride off.

Quite shortly he returned with the distracted horse-man.

It was HIS baby, and not titled at all. The horseman and his wife were
the lodgers at the mill. The nursemaid was a girl from the village.

She SAID she only left the Baby five minutes while she went to speak to
her sweetheart who was gardener at the Red House. But we knew she left
it over an hour, and nearly two.

I never saw anyone so pleased as the distracted horseman.

When we were asked we explained about having thought the Baby was the
prey of gipsies, and the distracted horseman stood hugging the Baby, and
actually thanked us.

But when he had gone we had a brief lecture on minding our own business.
But Dora still thinks she was right. As for Oswald and most of the
others, they agreed that they would rather mind their own business all
their lives than mind a baby for a single hour.

If you have never had to do with a baby in the frenzied throes of
sleepiness you can have no idea what its screams are like.

If you have been through such a scene you will understand how we managed
to bear up under having no baby to adopt. Oswald insisted on having the
whole thing written in the Golden Deed book. Of course his share could
not be put in without telling about Dora's generous adopting of the
forlorn infant outcast, and Oswald could not and cannot forget that he
was the one who did get that baby to sleep.

What a time Mr and Mrs Distracted Horseman must have of it,
though--especially now they've sacked the nursemaid.

If Oswald is ever married--I suppose he must be some day--he will have
ten nurses to each baby. Eight is not enough. We know that because we
tried, and the whole eight of us were not enough for the needs of that
deserted infant who was not so extra high-born after all.



CHAPTER 9. HUNTING THE FOX

It is idle to expect everyone to know everything in the world without
being told. If we had been brought up in the country we should have
known that it is not done--to hunt the fox in August. But in the
Lewisham Road the most observing boy does not notice the dates when it
is proper to hunt foxes.

And there are some things you cannot bear to think that anybody would
think you would do; that is why I wish to say plainly at the very
beginning that none of us would have shot a fox on purpose even to save
our skins. Of course, if a man were at bay in a cave, and had to defend
girls from the simultaneous attack of a herd of savage foxes it would be
different. A man is bound to protect girls and take care of them--they
can jolly well take care of themselves really it seems to me--still,
this is what Albert's uncle calls one of the 'rules of the game', so we
are bound to defend them and fight for them to the death, if needful.
Denny knows a quotation which says--

     'What dire offence from harmless causes springs,
     What mighty contests rise from trefoil things.'

He says this means that all great events come from three
things--threefold, like the clover or trefoil, and the causes are always
harmless. Trefoil is short for threefold.

There were certainly three things that led up to the adventure which is
now going to be told you. The first was our Indian uncle coming down to
the country to see us. The second was Denny's tooth. The third was only
our wanting to go hunting; but if you count it in it makes the thing
about the trefoil come right. And all these causes were harmless.

It is a flattering thing to say, and it was not Oswald who said it, but
Dora. She said she was certain our uncle missed us, and that he felt he
could no longer live without seeing his dear ones (that was us).

Anyway, he came down, without warning, which is one of the few bad
habits that excellent Indian man has, and this habit has ended in
unpleasantness more than once, as when we played jungles.

However, this time it was all right. He came on rather a dull kind of
day, when no one had thought of anything particularly amusing to do. So
that, as it happened to be dinner-time and we had just washed our hands
and faces, we were all spotlessly clean (com-pared with what we are
sometimes, I mean, of course).

We were just sitting down to dinner, and Albert's uncle was just
plunging the knife into the hot heart of the steak pudding, when there
was the rumble of wheels, and the station fly stopped at the garden
gate. And in the fly, sitting very upright, with his hands on his knees,
was our Indian relative so much beloved. He looked very smart, with a
rose in his buttonhole. How different from what he looked in other days
when he helped us to pretend that our currant pudding was a wild boar
we were killing with our forks. Yet, though tidier, his heart still beat
kind and true. You should not judge people harshly because their clothes
are tidy. He had dinner with us, and then we showed him round the place,
and told him everything we thought he would like to hear, and about the
Tower of Mystery, and he said--

'It makes my blood boil to think of it.'

Noel said he was sorry for that, because everyone else we had told it to
had owned, when we asked them, that it froze their blood.

'Ah,' said the Uncle, 'but in India we learn how to freeze our blood and
boil it at the same time.'

In those hot longitudes, perhaps, the blood is always near
boiling-point, which accounts for Indian tempers, though not for the
curry and pepper they eat. But I must not wander; there is no curry at
all in this story. About temper I will not say.

Then Uncle let us all go with him to the station when the fly came back
for him; and when we said good-bye he tipped us all half a quid, without
any insidious distinctions about age or considering whether you were a
boy or a girl. Our Indian uncle is a true-born Briton, with no nonsense
about him.

We cheered him like one man as the train went off, and then we offered
the fly-driver a shilling to take us back to the four cross-roads, and
the grateful creature did it for nothing because, he said, the gent had
tipped him something like. How scarce is true gratitude! So we cheered
the driver too for this rare virtue, and then went home to talk about
what we should do with our money. I cannot tell you all that we did with
it, because money melts away 'like snow-wreaths in thaw-jean', as Denny
says, and somehow the more you have the more quickly it melts. We
all went into Maidstone, and came back with the most beautiful lot of
brown-paper parcels, with things inside that supplied long-felt wants.
But none of them belongs to this narration, except what Oswald and Denny
clubbed to buy.

This was a pistol, and it took all the money they both had, but when
Oswald felt the uncomfortable inside sensation that reminds you who it
is and his money that are soon parted he said to himself--

'I don't care. We ought to have a pistol in the house, and one that
will go off, too--not those rotten flintlocks. Suppose there should be
burglars and us totally unarmed?'

We took it in turns to have the pistol, and we decided always to
practise with it far from the house, so as not to frighten the
grown-ups, who are always much nervouser about firearms than we are.

It was Denny's idea getting it; and Oswald owns it surprised him, but
the boy was much changed in his character. We got it while the others
were grubbing at the pastry-cook's in the High Street, and we said
nothing till after tea, though it was hard not to fire at the birds on
the telegraph wires as we came home in the train.

After tea we called a council in the straw-loft, and Oswald said--

'Denny and I have got a secret.'

'I know what it is,' Dicky said contemptibly. 'You've found out that
shop in Maidstone where peppermint rock is four ounces a penny. H. O.
and I found it out before you did.'

Oswald said, 'You shut-up. If you don't want to hear the secret you'd
better bunk. I'm going to administer the secret oath.'

This is a very solemn oath, and only used about real things, and never
for pretending ones, so Dicky said--

'Oh, all right; go ahead! I thought you were only rotting.'

So they all took the secret oath. Noel made it up long before, when he
had found the first thrush's nest we ever saw in the Blackheath garden:


     'I will not tell, I will not reveal,
     I will not touch, or try to steal;
     And may I be called a beastly sneak,
     If this great secret I ever repeat.'

It is a little wrong about the poetry, but it is a very binding promise.
They all repeated it, down to H. O.

'Now then,' Dicky said, 'what's up?'

Oswald, in proud silence, drew the pistol from his breast and held it
out, and there was a murmur of awful amazement and respect from every
one of the council. The pistol was not loaded, so we let even the girls
have it to look at. And then Dicky said, 'Let's go hunting.'

And we decided that we would. H. O. wanted to go down to the village and
get penny horns at the shop for the huntsmen to wind, like in the song,
but we thought it would be more modest not to wind horns or anything
noisy, at any rate not until we had run down our prey. But his talking
of the song made us decide that it was the fox we wanted to hunt. We had
not been particular which animal we hunted before that.

Oswald let Denny have first go with the pistol, and when we went to bed
he slept with it under his pillow, but not loaded, for fear he should
have a nightmare and draw his fell weapon before he was properly awake.

Oswald let Denny have it, because Denny had toothache, and a pistol is
consoling though it does not actually stop the pain of the tooth. The
toothache got worse, and Albert's uncle looked at it, and said it was
very loose, and Denny owned he had tried to crack a peach-stone with it.
Which accounts. He had creosote and camphor, and went to bed early, with
his tooth tied up in red flannel.

Oswald knows it is right to be very kind when people are ill, and he
forbore to wake the sufferer next morning by buzzing a pillow at him, as
he generally does. He got up and went over to shake the invalid, but
the bird had flown and the nest was cold. The pistol was not in the nest
either, but Oswald found it afterwards under the looking-glass on the
dressing-table. He had just awakened the others (with a hair-brush
because they had not got anything the matter with their teeth), when he
heard wheels, and, looking out, beheld Denny and Albert's uncle being
driven from the door in the farmer's high cart with the red wheels.

We dressed extra quick, so as to get downstairs to the bottom of the
mystery. And we found a note from Albert's uncle. It was addressed to
Dora, and said--

'Denny's toothache got him up in the small hours. He's off to the
dentist to have it out with him, man to man. Home to dinner.'

Dora said, 'Denny's gone to the dentist.'

'I expect it's a relation,' H. O. said. 'Denny must be short for
Dentist.'

I suppose he was trying to be funny--he really does try very hard. He
wants to be a clown when he grows up. The others laughed.

'I wonder,' said Dicky, 'whether he'll get a shilling or half-a-crown
for it.'

Oswald had been meditating in gloomy silence, now he cheered up and
said--

'Of course! I'd forgotten that. He'll get his tooth money, and the drive
too. So it's quite fair for us to have the fox-hunt while he's gone. I
was thinking we should have to put it off.'

The others agreed that it would not be unfair.

'We can have another one another time if he wants to,' Oswald said.

We know foxes are hunted in red coats and on horseback--but we could
not do this--but H. O. had the old red football jersey that was Albert's
uncle's when he was at Loretto. He was pleased.

'But I do wish we'd had horns,' he said grievingly. 'I should have liked
to wind the horn.'

'We can pretend horns,' Dora said; but he answered, 'I didn't want to
pretend. I wanted to wind something.'
