clearing."

For some time they stood gazing at the works, standing well back
among the trees, so as to be screened from all observation. At last
Harold said:

"Look at that other hill behind. It is a good bit higher than that which
they have fortified and must be within easy range both of it and the
fort. I don't see any works there--do you?"

Peter and the Seneca chief both gazed long and earnestly at the hill and
agreed that they could see no fortification there.

"It won't do to have any doubt about it," Peter said. "We must go round
and have a look at it."

"We shall have to cross the river," Harold remarked.

"Ay, cross it we must," Peter said. "That hill's got to be inspected."

They withdrew into the wood again and made a circuitous deviation till
they came down upon the river, two miles above Ticonderoga. They could
not reach the water itself, as a road ran along parallel with it and the
forest was cleared away for some distance. A number of men could be seen
going backward and forward on the road.

Having made their observations, the scouts retired again into a thick
part of the forest and waited till nightfall.

"How are we to get across?" Harold asked Peter. "It's a good long swim,
and we could not carry our muskets and ammunition across."

"Easy enough," the scout said. "Didn't you notice down by the road a
pile of planks? I suppose a wagon has broke down there, and the planks
have been turned out and nobody has thought anything more about 'em.
We'll each take a plank, fasten our rifle and ammunition on it, and swim
across; there won't be any difficulty about that. Then, when we've seen
what's on the top of that 'ere hill, we'll tramp round to the other end
of the lake. I heard that the army was to advance half on each side, so
we'll meet 'em coming."

When it was perfectly dark they left their hiding place and crossed the
clearing to the spot where Peter had seen the planks. Each took one of
them and proceeded to the river side. Peter, Harold, and Jake divested
themselves of some of their clothes and fastened these with their rifles
and ammunition to the planks. To the Indians the question of getting wet
was one of entire indifference, and they did not even take off their
hunting shirts. Entering the water the party swam noiselessly across to
the other side, pushing their planks before them. On getting out they
carried the planks for some distance, as their appearance by the water's
edge might excite a suspicion on the part of the Americans that the
works had been reconnoitered.

After hiding the planks in the bushes they made their way to Sugar Hill,
as the eminence was called. The ascent was made with great
circumspection, the Indians going on first. No signs of the enemy were
met with, and at last the party stood on the summit of the hill. It was
entirely unoccupied by the Americans.

"Well, my fine fellows," laughed the scout, "I reckon ye've been doing a
grist of work, and ye might jest as well have been sitting down quietly
smoking yer pipes. What on arth possessed ye to leave this hill
unguarded?"

In point of fact General St. Clair, who commanded the Americans, had
perceived that his position was commanded from this spot. He had only
3000 men under him, and he considered this number too small to hold
Ticonderoga, Mount Independence, and Sugar Hill. The two former posts
could afford no assistance to the garrison of a fort placed on Sugar
Hill, and that place must therefore fall if attacked by the British. On
the other hand, he hoped that, should the attention of the English not
be called to the importance of the position by the erection of works
upon it, it might be overlooked, and that General Burgoyne on his
arrival might at once attack the position which he had prepared with so
much care.

Having ascertained that the hill was unoccupied, Peter proposed at once
to continue the march. Harold suggested to him that it would be better
to wait until morning, as from their lofty position they would be able
to overlook the whole of the enemy's lines of defense and might obtain
information of vital importance to the general. Peter saw the advantage
of the suggestion. Two of the Indians were placed on watch, and the rest
of the party lay down to sleep. At daybreak they saw that the delay had
been fully justified, for they had now a view of the water which
separated Ticonderoga from Mount Independence, and perceived that the
Americans had made a strong bridge of communication between these posts.
Twenty-two piers had been sunk at equal distances, and between them
boats were placed, fastened with chains to the piers. A strong bridge of
planks connected the whole. On the Lake Champlain side of the bridge a
boom, composed of great trees fastened together with double chains, had
been placed. Thus, not only had communication been established across
the stream, but an effectual barrier erected to the passage of the
fleet. Fully satisfied with the result of their investigations, the
party set out on their return.




CHAPTER XII.


THE SETTLER'S HUT.

Before starting they stood for a minute or two looking over the forest
which they were to traverse. To Harold's eyes all appeared quiet and
still. Here and there were clearings where settlers had established
themselves; but, with these exceptions, the forest stretched away like a
green sea.

"Tarnation!" Peter exclaimed. "We'll have all our work to get through
safely; eh, chief?"

The Seneca nodded.

"What makes you say so?" Harold asked in surprise. "I see nothing."

Peter looked at him reproachfully.

"I'm downright ashamed of ye, lad. You should have been long enough in
the woods by this time to know smoke when you see it. Why, there it is
curling up from the trees in a dozen--ay, in a score of places. There
must be hundreds of men out scouting or camping in them woods."

Harold looked fixedly again at the forests, but even now he could not
detect the signs which were so plain to the scout.

"You may call me as blind as a bat, Peter," he said with a laugh, "but I
can see nothing. Looking hard I imagine I can see a light mist here and
there, but I believe it is nothing but fancy."

"It's clear enough to me, lad, and to the redskins. What do you
say, chief?"

"Too much men," the Seneca replied sententiously.

For another minute or two he and Peter stood watching the forest, and
then in a few words consulted together as to the best line to follow to
avoid meeting the foe who, to their eyes, swarmed in the forest.

"It's mighty lucky," the hunter said as they turned to descend the hill,
which was covered with trees to its very summit, "that they're white men
and not redskins out in the woods, there. I don't say that there's not
many frontiersmen who know the way of the woods as well as the redskins.
I do myself, and when it comes to fighting we can lick 'em on their own
ground; but in scouting we aint nowhere--not the best of us. The redskin
seems to have an instinct more like that of an animal than a man. I
don't say as he can smell a man a mile off as a dog can do, but he seems
to know when the enemy's about; his ears can hear noises which we can't;
his eyes see marks on the ground when the keenest-sighted white man sees
nothing. If that wood was as full of redskins as it is of whites to-day,
our sculps wouldn't be worth a charge of powder."

"You are not going to follow the shores of the lake, I suppose?"
Harold asked.

"No," Peter said. "They'll be as thick as peas down there, watching for
the first sight of our fleet. No, we must just keep through the woods
and be as still and as silent as if the trees had ears. You'd best look
to the priming of yer piece before we goes further, for it's likely
enough you'll have to use it before the day's done, and a miss-fire
might cost you yer life. Tell that nigger of yourn that he's not to open
his mouth again till I gives him leave."

With a long stealthy tread the party descended the mountain and took
their way through the woods. Every hundred yards or so they stopped and
listened intently. When any noise, even of the slightest kind, was
heard, all dropped to the ground until the chief had scouted round and
discovered the way was clear. Once or twice they heard the sound of
men's voices and a distant laugh, but they passed on without seeing
those who uttered them.

Presently they again heard voices, this time raised as if in angry
dispute. The Seneca would, as before, have made a long _detour_ to avoid
them, but Peter said.

"Let's have a squint at what's going on, chief."

With redoubled caution they again advanced until they stood at the edge
of the clearing. It was a patch of land some hundred yards wide, and
extending from the shore of the lake nearly a quarter of a mile inland.
In the center stood a log hut, neatly and carefully built. A few flowers
grew around the house, and the whole bore signs of greater neatness and
comfort than was usual in the cabins of the backwood settlers.

The point where the party had reached the edge of the wood was
immediately opposite the house. Near it stood a group of some twenty
men, one of whom, apparently their leader, was gesticulating angrily as
he addressed a man who stood facing him.

"I tell ye, ye're a darned royalist--ye're a traitor to the country, and
I've a mind to hang ye and all belonging to ye to the nearest bough."

"I tell you," the man answered calmly, but in the still air every word
he said could be heard by those at the edge of the forest, "I hae
naething to do with the trouble ane way or the ither. I am a quiet
settler, whose business only is to mak a hame for my wife and bairn;
but, if you ask me to drink success to the Congress and confusion to the
king's troops, I tell you I willna do it; not even if you are brutal
enough, but this I canna believe possible, to carry your threats into
execution. I hae served my time in a king's regiment. With the bounty I
received instead o' pension on my discharge I settled here wi' my wife
and bairn, and no one shall say that Duncan Cameron was a traitor to his
king. We do no harm to anyone; we tak no part for or against you; we
only ask to be allowed to live in peace."

"That ye shall not," the man said. "The king's troops have got Injuns
with 'em, and they're going to burn and kill all those who won't take
part with 'em. It's time we should show 'em as we can play at that game,
too. Now ye've either got to swear to be faithful to the States of
America or up you go."

"I canna swear," the settler said firmly. "You may kill me if you will,
but, if you are men, you will nae harm my wife and girl."

"We'll just do to you as the redskins'll do to our people," the man
said. "We'll make a sweep of the hull lot of you. Here, you fellows,
fetch the woman and girl out of the house and then set a light to it."

Four or five men entered the house. A minute later screams were heard
and a woman and child were dragged out. The settler sprang toward them,
but three or four men seized him.

"Now," the man said, stepping toward the house, "we'll show 'em a
bonfire."

As he neared the door a crack of a rifle was heard and the ruffian fell
dead in his tracks. A yell of astonishment and rage broke from his
followers.

"Jerusalem, youngster! you've got us into a nice fix. Howsomever, since
you've begun it, here goes."

And the rifle of the hunter brought down another of the Americans.
These, following the first impulse of a frontiersman when attacked, fled
for shelter to the house, leaving the settler, with his wife and
daughter, standing alone.

"Ye'd best get out of the way," Peter shouted, "or ye may get a bit of
lead that wasn't intended for ye."

Catching up his child, Cameron ran toward the forest, making for the
side on which his unknown friends were placed, but keeping down toward
the lake, so as to be out of their line of fire.

"Make down to 'em, Harold," Peter said. "Tell 'em they'd best go to some
neighbor's and stop there for a day or two. The army'll be here
to-morrow or next day. Be quick about it, and come back as fast as ye
can. I tell ye we're in a hornets' nest, and it'll be as much as we can
do to get out of it."

A scattering fire was now being exchanged between the redskins behind
the shelter of the trees and the Americans firing from the windows of
the log house. Harold was but two or three minutes absent.

"All right, Peter!" he exclaimed, as he rejoined them.

"Come along, then," the hunter said. "Now, chief, let's make up round
the top of this clearing and then foot it."

The chief at once put himself at the head of the party, and the nine men
strode away again through the forest. It was no longer silent. Behind
them the occupants of the hut were still keeping up a brisk fire toward
the trees, while from several quarters shouts could be heard, and more
than once the Indian war-whoop rose in the forest.

"That's just what I was afeared of," Peter muttered. "There's some of
those darned varmint with 'em. We might have found our way through the
whites, but the redskins'll pick up our trail as sartin as if we were
driving a wagon through the woods."

Going along at a swinging, noiseless trot the party made their way
through the forest. Presently a prolonged Indian whoop was heard in the
direction from which they had come. Then there were loud shouts and the
firing ceased.

"One of the red reptiles has found our trail," Peter said. "He's with a
party of whites, and they've shouted the news to the gang in the
clearing. Waal, we may, calculate we've got thirty on our trail, and, as
we can hear them all round, it'll be a sarcumstance if we git out with
our sculps."

As they ran they heard shouts from those behind, answered by others on
both flanks. Shots, too, were fired as signals to call the attention of
other parties. Several times the Seneca chief stopped and listened
attentively, and then changed his course as he heard suspicious noises
ahead. Those behind them were coming up, although still at some distance
in the rear. They could hear the sound of breaking trees and bushes as
their pursuers followed them in a body.

"Ef it was only the fellows behind," Peter said, "we could leave them
easy enough, but the wood seems alive with the varmint."

It was evident the alarm had spread through the forest, and that the
bands scattered here and there were aware that an enemy was in their
midst. The dropping fire, which the pursuers kept up, afforded an
indication as to the direction in which they were making, and the
ringing war-whoop of the hostile Indians conveyed the intelligence still
more surely.

Presently there was a shout a short distance ahead, followed by the
sound of a rifle ball as it whizzed close to Harold's head and buried
itself in a tree that he was passing. In a moment each of the party had
sheltered behind a tree.

"It's of no use, chief," Peter said. "We'll have the hull pack from
behind upon us in five minutes. We must run for it and take our chances
of being hit."

Swerving somewhat from their former line, they again ran on; bullets
whisked round them, but they did not pause to fire a shot in return.

"Tarnation!" Peter exclaimed, as the trees in front of them opened and
they found themselves on the edge of another clearing. It was
considerably larger than that which they had lately left, being three
hundred yards across, and extending back from the lake fully half a
mile. As in the previous case, a log hut stood in the center, some two
hundred yards back from the lake.

"There's nothing for it, chief," Peter said. "We must take to the house
and fight it out there. There's a hull gang of fellows in the forest
ahead, and they'll shoot us down if we cross the clearing."

Without a moment's hesitation the party rushed across the clearing to
the hut. Several shots were fired as they dashed across the open, but
they gained the place of refuge in safety. The hut was deserted. It had
probably belonged to royalists, for its rough furniture lay broken on
the ground; boxes and cupboards had been forced open, and the floor was
strewn with broken crockery and portions of wearing apparel.

Harold looked round. Several of the party were bleeding from
slight wounds.

"Now to the windows," Peter said as he barred the door. "Pile up bedding
and anything else that ye can find against the shutters, and keep
yerselves well under cover. Don't throw away a shot; we'll want all our
powder, I can tell ye. Quickly, now--there aint no time to be lost."

While some began carrying out his instructions below, others bounded
upstairs and scattered themselves through the upper rooms. There were
two windows on each side of the house--one at each end. Disregarding the
latter, Peter and Harold took post at the windows looking toward the
forest from which they had just come. The chief and another Indian
posted themselves to watch the other side. At first no one was to be
seen. The party who had fired at them as they ran across the open had
waited for the coming up of the strong band who were following, before
venturing to show themselves. The arrival of the pursuers was heralded
by the opening of a heavy fire toward the house. As the assailants kept
themselves behind trees, no reply was made, and the defenders occupied
themselves by piling the bedding against the shutters, which they had
hastily closed. Loop-holes had been left in the walls when the hut was
first built; the moss with which they were filled up was torn out, and
each man took his post at one of these. As no answering shot came from
the house the assailants became bolder, and one or two ventured to show
themselves from, behind shelter. In a moment Harold and Peter, whose
rifles would carry more truly and much further than those of the
Indians, fired.

"Two wiped out!" Peter said, as the men fell, and shouts of anger arose
from the woods. "That'll make them careful."

This proof of the accuracy of the aim of the besieged checked their
assailants, and for some time they were very careful not to expose
themselves. From both sides of the forest a steady fire was maintained.
Occasionally an answering shot flashed out from the house when one of
the enemy incautiously showed an arm or a part of his body from behind
the trees, and it was seldom the rifles were fired in vain. Four or five
of the Americans were shot through the head as they leaned forward to
fire, and after an hour's exchange of bullets the attack ceased.

"What are they going to do now?" Harold asked.

"I expect they're going to wait till nightfall," Peter said. "There's no
moon, and they'll be able to work up all round the house. Then they'll
make a rush at the door and lower windows. We'll shoot down a good many
on 'em, and then they'll burst their way in or set fire to the hut, and
there'll be an end of it. That's what'll happen."

"And you think there is no way of making our way out?" Harold asked.

"It's a mighty poor chance, if there's one at all," the hunter replied.
"I should say by the fire there must be nigh a hundred of 'em now, and
it's likely that, by nightfall, there'll be three times as many. As soon
as it gets dusk they'll creep out from the woods and form a circle round
the house and gradually work up to it. Now let's cook some vittles;
we've had nothing to eat this morning yet, and it must be nigh eleven
o'clock. I don't see why we should be starved, even if we have got to be
killed to-night."

One of the party was left on watch on each side of the house, and the
