moment at the gate.

"Alice," said Elma, "before they join us I want to speak to you. Are you
for Kitty, or against her?"

"How do you mean?" asked Alice in some wonder.

"I mean, are you going to vote that this petition should be sent to Miss
Sherrard or are you not?"

"I am going to vote against it, of course," said Alice, with a short
laugh.

"Well, I am on your side; I wish to say so."

"You, Elma! I thought you would never oppose Gwin Harley. You are one of
those people who know where their bread is buttered. Why do you take my
part on this occasion?"

"Because," said Elma, flushing deeply, for, hardened little sinner as
she was, she had not perfect control over her emotions--"because I think
Kitty richly deserves what she has got. It would never do to have this
sort of thing going on at the school. But look here, Alice, if the
petition is not to be sent to Miss Sherrard, we must try and have a
majority on our side. Why should we not secure Matilda and Jessie
Forbes?"

"I never thought of that," said Alice; "but really, Elma, now I come to
consider it, as far as I personally am concerned, I don't much care. It
matters very little to me whether Kitty gets out of Coventry or not. I
shall have to speak to her however the tide turns. You do seem strangely
eager on the subject."

"When I join a certain side I don't wish it to be the losing one," said
Elma, as calmly as she could. "Hullo, Matilda, how out of breath you
are! You need not have run so fast; you could see that we were waiting
for you."

"Well, you see," said Jessie Forbes, who was also panting as she came
up, "we have never yet been to Harley Grove. Is it not a very grand
place, Elma? Was it not kind of Gwin to ask us, and--Oh, of course, we
are full of sympathy for that poor, dear Kitty Malone."

"Why do you pity her?" asked Elma coldly.

"Because the poor darling didn't know any better. Does it not seem silly
to make such a fuss about such a trifle? I can't imagine why Miss
Sherrard has been so very severe."

"I don't agree with you at all," said Elma. "I think Kitty richly
deserves her punishment. Of course," she added, "I don't want to be
really hard on her; but unless she is made to feel shame when she does
an _outre_ and extraordinary thing like she did last night, she will go
on doing similar deeds, and get the whole school into disgrace."

"Oh dear, yes," said Jessie, "that is perfectly true, and I should not
like father to know that one of the Middleton girls had been spoken to
by a rude boy in the street. I really believe he would take us both from
the school."

"If you think so," said Elma, "you ought to oppose the petition."

"Are you going to, Elma?"

"Certainly."

"But you are a friend of hers, are you not?"

"Of course I am. I am very fond of her."

"And you oppose it for her good?"

"Undoubtedly; altogether for her good."

"And Miss Sherrard does know what is right," said Matilda, in a
thoughtful voice. "Miss Sherrard was never a severe teacher. We all love
her dearly."

"And she is very fond of Kitty," said Elma. "I know that for a fact."

"Yes, and so do I know it to my cost," said Alice shrugging her
shoulders. She walked up the avenue as she spoke. Jessie ran after her.

"What side are you going to take Alice?" she asked.

"Miss Sherrard's," replied Alice shortly.

Meanwhile Elma had slipped her hand gently through Matilda's arm, and
looking up into the face of the taller girl, said in her most
insinuating voice:

"I do think, painful as it is, that we ought to take Miss Sherrard's
side. Gwin is so enthusiastic, poor dear, and so is Bessie Challoner,
that they are certain to be led away by their feelings. Now, Miss
Sherrard is the most sympathetic and kindest of head-mistresses, she
would not have given Kitty so severe a punishment without reason."

"That is true," said Matilda. "Only, of course, you see, Elma, I don't
want to go against Gwin. I am so terribly anxious to become her friend.
I admire her so immensely. I don't think there's any other girl in the
school to equal her."

"I should think there isn't," said Elma with sudden warmth.

"I am sorry she has taken Kitty Malone's part--poor Kitty! We certainly
all think her charming; but if father were to hear of it!"

"You would not like him to take you from the school now," said Elma,
"just when you have such a good chance of the literature scholarship?"

"I should think not; it would be a dreadful blow. But he would be--oh, I
cannot tell you how shocked he would be!"

"And he would be more shocked, would he not, if he heard that you had
taken Kitty's part, and had signed the petition against Miss Sherrard?"

"Of course, I never thought of that. I declare Elma, you are clever. I
will mention what you say to Jessie, and tell her that she must go
against the petition."

Elma felt that she had won her point. There would be at least four girls
against Gwin's motion, and probably others would follow their example.

When the girls arrived at the house, they were shown immediately into
Gwin's pretty private study. Gwin was standing by the open window. She
had a book in her hand, but was not reading it. She was looking
anxiously out. There was a perplexed expression on her fine face, and
her large deep gray eyes were full of emotion.

"I am so glad you have come," she said when she saw the girls. "I hope
all the Tug-of-war girls will be present. The more I think of this
affair the more certain I am that it will be the ruin of Kitty Malone."

Elma looked sympathizingly at her friend, Alice frowned, Matilda and
Jessie did not know where to look, nor what to say. If they had not met
Alice and Elma they would have certainly gone heart and soul with Gwin
in the matter.

"Sit down, won't you, girls?" said Gwin. "Tea will be ready in a
moment--are you not thirsty?"

"Yes, it's a very hot day," said Jessie, somewhat timidly.

"And you had a long walk; but it was really kind of you to come. We
won't do anything until some more of the Tug-of-war Society arrive. But
perhaps my letters have not reached the others."

"Oh, I know the Hodgsons are coming," said Matilda Forbes, "because I
met them."

"I am glad of that. Ah, and here is Bessie."

Bessie Challoner at this moment entered the room. She shook hands with
the Forbes girls, whom she had not met before that day, nodded to Alice,
and going up to Gwin began to whisper in her ear.

Gwin looked more anxious.

"All the same I am determined to do it," she said.

"I am certain Miss Sherrard will be very angry," said Bessie. "Had you
really better, Gwin?"

"I certainly had better. I am not afraid of Miss Sherrard, nor twenty
Miss Sherrards, when I think I have a righteous cause. She does not know
Kitty as well as I know her. Ah, here you are," she said as, the
Hodgsons, two rather dowdy, but affectionate girls, came quickly into
the room.

"What's this Gwin?" cried Mary, the elder; "something wrong with that
Irish girl? What can be up?"

"I will explain everything to you after we have had tea. Ah, here it
comes!"

Gwin walked to the table, where the footman now placed tea and cakes,
and began to dispense the refreshments. The girls stood round her
chatting, munching cake and drinking tea. The afternoon sun poured into
the room. Outside it was cool and shady. Gwin went to the window and
drew down the green venetian blinds.

"Now, that is cooler," she said. "Have you all had enough?"

"Yes, thank you," answered one or two.

Gwin rang the bell, and the servant came to remove the tea equipage.

"And now to business," said Gwin. "What I briefly propose to do is this:
Kitty Malone is in trouble. As a member of the Tug-of-war Society, the
rest of the society is bound to support her. I am most anxious that she
should get all the support in our power. She is not like any of us; she
has been differently brought up. What she did last night was the result
of impetuosity and overzeal. She was troubled about her brother, and for
some extraordinary reason thought that Elma could help her. Elma, can
you throw any light on the matter?"

"None whatever," answered Elma in a stout voice.

"She went out with the college cap on and without her jacket, and for
that reason some rough, rude boys talked to her, and she knocked one of
them down in trying to defend herself, and so got into a terrible
scrape. Miss Worrick, it seems, witnessed the transaction, and she told
Miss Sherrard. Miss Sherrard was very much annoyed, and has put Kitty
into Coventry for a week. We are none of us allowed, on pain of instant
dismissal, to speak to her. Now, my proposal is this; that we write a
little petition, and each of us sign it, and then that I take it to Miss
Sherrard. I want to ask Miss Sherrard to allow the members of the
Tug-of-war Society to speak to Kitty. I want to ask her to allow us all
to do our best during her week's punishment to show her that this wild
and erratic way will not go down in England; I want her to allow us to
do our utmost by kindness to overcome Kitty's wild nature. I have
scarcely any doubt, girls, that Miss Sherrard will approve of our
scheme."

"Well, I for one approve of it most heartily," said Bessie Challoner. "I
believe severity would ruin a girl like Kitty. You cannot drive her; she
must be led."

"Thank you, Bessie. I knew you would feel with me. And now, girls, I
will put this thing to the vote. All who are in favor of the scheme hold
up their hands."

The Forbes girls looked tremblingly, with flushed cheeks and glittering
eyes, at Elma and Alice. Their hands went half up and then dropped again
into their laps. It was the fear of their father's displeasure which
prevented their going altogether with Gwin. The Hodson girls immediately
held up their hands; but Alice, Elma, Matilda, and Jessie plainly showed
that they did not mean to sign the petition.

"Is this possible?" said Gwin in a vexed voice. "I surely thought there
was not--Elma, you must be at the head of this. What is your reason for
not joining us?"

Alice looked as if she were about to speak; but Elma jumped at once to
her feet.

"I don't join you because I do not agree with you, dear Gwin. I believe
Miss Sherrard knows a great deal better than we do what is good for a
girl. I am certain she will be much annoyed by our interfering; and for
my part I think a week in Coventry will do Kitty Malone no harm."

"I am surprised and disappointed in you, Elma," said Gwin, "Alice, what
is your feeling?"

"Oh, I absolutely agree with Elma," said Alice. "I think it would be a
rare comfort to take any means to subdue and crush out of sight, even
for one week, that most obnoxious person Kitty Malone. The unfortunate
part is that I shall have to do with her even during her week in
Coventry."

"But surely," said Gwin, in some astonishment, "you two Forbes girls can
have nothing to say against Kitty. It cannot injure you in any way that
we should plead for the mitigation of her punishment."

"Well, the fact is this," said Jessie, standing up as she spoke, and
looking very miserable. "Father is most particular; he is almost faddy,
you know, Gwin--and if he ever heard that a girl from the school did
exactly what Kitty did last night--I mean that she went out so late
against rules, and was dressed in such a queer way, and was obliged to
knock down a rude boy in order to protect herself--why, I think he would
take us from school. Then if father also heard that we had gone against
Miss Sherrard's authority, we--Oh, I cannot say it exactly as I ought;
but Gwin, I would rather not sign that paper."

"All right," answered Gwin in some vexation.

"Then my scheme falls through. Four against and four for. We have only
one other member of the Tug-of-war except poor Kitty herself, and she, I
am afraid, cannot come, as she is ill with a bad cold. Well, I shall see
Miss Sherrard alone and must take my chance."

"Yes, if you please; that would be much the best plan," said Jessie,
sinking down into her seat with a sigh of relief.

Soon afterward the little party at Gwin Harley's house separated. There
was a feeling of restraint over them which Gwin's guests seldom
experienced. They were not at one. It was impossible to talk any longer
on the subject with which their hearts were full. Gwin was anxious to
prepare the exact arguments she intended to use with Miss Sherrard. She
looked relieved when Elma made the first move of departure. Alice jumped
up also with alacrity.

"Good-by Gwin," she said. "I think you are doing wrong to interfered in
this matter. A little punishment will do Kitty Malone no more harm than
it does any other girl. Of course it's not pleasant; punishment never
is. Good-by; take my advice and allow Kitty Malone to shift for
herself."

Gwin made no reply at all to this. She gave Alice a cold nod, and the
four girls who now formed the opposition left the house.

"Good-by to all chance of my friendship with Gwin," said Jessie Forbes
rather miserably as they walked up the avenue.

"Oh, never mind, Jessie, you did the right thing," said Alice. "What is
the good of toadying? I hate toadies. If you are ever to become a
friend of Gwin Harley's you will see that she hates them also, although,
perhaps I am wrong to say that." Here she glanced somewhat significantly
at Elma. Elma colored and turned her head aside.

When they reached the top of the avenue the girls turned each to go
their several ways. Elma hurried home as fast as she could.

"I must get that money by hook or by crook this evening," she said to
herself. "I wonder where Carrie has hidden it. Bad as she is, she would
certainly not steal it from me. Oh, it is safe of course, and I must get
it and manage to convey it to Kitty to-night, and then as far as I am
concerned I don't care how soon the poor thing gets out of Coventry."

When Elma reached home the first person she saw was Carrie. Carrie was
standing on the steps of the shabby little villa in Constantine Road
talking to a fiery-haired young man.

Elma never condescended to have anything to do with Raynes. Giving him a
very cold nod now, she was about to enter the house when Carrie caught
her arm and stopped her.

"Why don't you speak to Sam?" she said. "Sam, this is my sister, Elma."

"How do you do?" said Elma. "I am sorry I cannot wait now; I want to see
mother."

"There's no use in your going in if it's mother you want," pursued
Carrie. "She has gone out for the evening. Mrs. Duncan has asked her to
tea. I am glad of it. A little change will do her good."

"I won't keep you now, Car," said Raynes, turning to Carrie and giving
her a somewhat clumsy nod. He looked askance at Elma, and the next
moment had clattered down the steps, and, turning the corner, was out of
sight.

"What a creature!" said Elma. "I wonder you have anything to do with
him, Carrie. I think, even for my sake, seeing that Aunt Charlotte is
doing so much for me--"

"Now stop that," said Carrie; "I won't have a word of abuse against Sam.
He suits me very well. I'm not a fine lady, and I never mean to be a
fine lady. I shall be very comfortable as his wife some day, and I don't
want you to abuse him. Whether you like him or not, he is going to be
your brother-in-law and--Why, Elma, how tired you look!"

"I am tired and worried, and I want to speak to you," said Elma.

"To speak to me?" answered Carrie, a little alarm coming into her voice
in spite of herself. "What for? Anything special? Are you prepared to
make me a present of another dress; I could do with a white one now the
weather is getting so very hot, and Sam would like me in white. White
with pink ribbons would be a change, or mauve--mauve ribbons look so
sweetly cool with white."

"I am not going to listen to any of your nonsense," said Elma. "I want
to ask you a straight question. Where is my money?"

"Your money? What do you mean?"

