but I could not foresee this, and, indeed, until this morning, although
there has been a good deal of talk, we all hoped it would have passed
off without anything coming of it. One hopes still that it will spread
no further; but should it do so, it is impossible to say what may
happen. All we have to do is to be watchful, and to avoid with care
anything that can offend the men's prejudices. We must explain to the
native officers the folly of the greased cartridge story, and tell them
to reassure the men. You don't see anything else to do, Dunlop?"

"No, major; I trust that the regiment is to be depended upon; it has
always been well treated and the men have seemed attached to us all. We
will do our best to reassure them; but if there is any insubordination,
I hope that the colonel will give the men a lesson which will put an
end to the nonsense in the bud."

"Of course you will stay to tiffin?" the major said, as the _kitmagar_,
or head servant, announced that tiffin was ready.

"Many thanks, major, but we promised to tiff with Bullen, and he would
be mad if we did not turn up. How are you thinking of going to-morrow?
I intend to drive over, and send my horse on; so I can give one of your
boys a lift in my buggy."

"Thank you," the major said, "that would suit us exactly. I shall drive
in my dog-cart, which will carry four of us; and if you will take Dick,
that will make it all right."

"What time do we start?"

"We are to be there by seven; we set it so late to give the ladies time
to breakfast comfortably before starting. I will call here at half-past
six for Dick; it will be all in my way. Good-morning."

Two minutes later the girls, Ned, and Dick came into the dining-room,
and the party sat down to luncheon--a meal always called tiffin in
India. It is a great mistake to suppose that people in India cannot eat
because of the heat; in the extreme heat of summer their appetites do,
no doubt, fall off; but at other times, they not only eat, but eat more
largely than is good for them; and a good deal of the liver complaint
which is the pest of India is in no small degree due to the fact that,
the appetite being unnaturally stimulated by hot and piquant food,
people eat more than in such a climate as this can be properly
digested. The meal consisted of curries, with which were handed round
chutney and Bombay ducks--a little fish about the size of a smelt, cut
open, dried, and smoked with assafoetida, giving it an intolerably
nasty taste to strangers, but one which Anglo-Indians become accustomed
to and like--no one knows why they are called Bombay ducks--cutlets,
plantains sliced and fried, pomegranates, and watermelons. They were
waited upon by two servants, both dressed entirely in white, but
wearing red turbans, very broad and shallow. These turbans denoted the
particular tribe and sect to which their wearers belonged. The castes
in India are almost innumerable, and each has a turban of a peculiar
color or shape, and by these they can be at once distinguished by a
resident. On their foreheads were lines and spots of a yellowish white
paint, indicating also their caste, and the peculiar divinity to whose
worship they were specially devoted. On their feet they wore slippers,
and were as noiseless as cats in all their movements. There are no
better or more pleasant waiters in the world than the natives of
Hindostan.

Early as the hour named for the start would appear in England, it was
by no means early for India, where every one is up and about soon after
daylight--the morning hours up to eight o'clock being the most pleasant
of the whole day.

Kate and Rose were up, and all had had "_chota hazaree_" (little
breakfast) by half-past six, and were ready when Captain Dunlop drew up
in his buggy--a conveyance which will only hold two. The dog-cart was
already at the door, and the whole party were soon in motion. On the
road they passed several of their friends, for every one was going out
to the hunt, and merry greetings were exchanged.

The scenery round Sandynugghur resembles that which is common to all
the great plains of India watered by the Ganges and Jumna. The country
is for the most part perfectly flat, and cut up into little fields,
divided by shallow ditches. Here and there nullahs, or deep
watercourses, with tortuous channels and perpendicular sides, wind
through the fields to the nearest stream. These nullahs constitute the
great danger of hunting in the country. In the fields men may be
noticed, in the scantiest of attire, working with hoes among their
springing crops; women, wrapped up in the dark blue calico cloth which
forms their ordinary costume, are working as hard as the men. Villages
are scattered about, generally close to groves of trees. The huts are
built of mud; most of them are flat-topped, but some are thatched with
rushes. Rising above the villages is the mosque, where the population
are Mohammedan, built of mud like the houses, but whitewashed and
bright. The Hindoo villages generally, but not always, have their
temples. The vegetation of the great plains of India is not tropical,
according to the ideas of tropical vegetation gathered from British
hothouses. There are a few palms and many bananas with their wide
leaves, but the groves are composed of sturdy trees, whose appearance
at a distance differs in no way from that of ordinary English forest
trees. Viewed closer, the banian with its many stems is indeed a
vegetable wonder; but, were it not for the villages and natives, a
traveler might journey for very many miles across the plains of India
without seeing anything which would specially remind him that he was
out of England.

There were a considerable number of traps assembled when Major Warrener
drew up, and some eight or ten gentlemen on horseback, each carrying a
boar-spear--a weapon not unlike the lance of an English cavalryman, but
shorter in the handle. The riders were mostly dressed in coats of the
Norfolk jacket type, and knee-breeches with thick gaiters. The material
of their clothes was a coarse but very strong cloth of native make,
gray or brown in color. Some wore round hats and forage caps with
puggarees twisted round them.

A chorus of greeting saluted the party as they drove up.

"Well, young ladies," the colonel said, "so you have come out to see
the death of the boar,

  "'The boar, the boar, the mighty boar,'

as the song says? So you are not going to take a spear to-day, major?
Think it's time to leave it to the youngsters, eh?"

"Where are the wild boars, Mrs. Renwick?" Kate asked of the colonel's
wife.

"Pig, my dear; we always call them pig when we speak of them together,
though we talk of the father of the family as the boar. Do you see that
clump of long grass and jungle right across the plain? That's where
they are. They have been watched all night. They went out to feed
before daybreak and have just gone back again. Do you think we are in
the best place for seeing the sport, Major Warrener?"

"I think, Mrs. Renwick, that if you leave your trap and go up to the
top of that knoll, two hundred yards to the right, you will get a
really good view of the plain."

Mrs. Renwick alighted from the dog-cart in which the colonel had driven
her, and the whole party, following her example, walked in a laughing
group to the spot which Major Warrener had indicated, and which was
pronounced as just the place. The _syces_ stood at the heads of the
horses, and those who were going to take part in the sport cantered off
toward the spot where the pigs were lurking, making, however, a wide
_detour_ so as to approach it from the other side, as it was desired to
drive them across the plain. At some distance behind the clump were
stationed a number of natives, with a variety of mongrel village curs.
When they saw the horsemen approach they came up and prepared to enter
the jungle to drive out the pigs.

The horsemen took up their position on either side of the patch in
readiness to start as soon as the animals were fairly off. A number of
villagers, in whose fields of young rice the family had done much
damage during the few days that they had taken up their abode in their
present quarters, were assembled on such little rises of ground as were
likely to give a good view of the proceedings. There were about a dozen
horsemen with spears; of these, three or four were novices, and these
intended to try their skill for the first time upon the "squeakers," as
the young pigs are called, while the others prepared for a race after
the old ones.

Great nerve, considerable skill, and first-rate horsemanship are
required for the sport of pigsticking. The horse, too, must be fast,
steady, well-trained and quick, for without all these advantages the
sport is a dangerous one. The wild boar is, at the start, as fast as a
horse. He is very quick at turning, and when pressed always attacks his
pursuers, and as he rushes past will lay open the leg or flank of a
horse with a sweeping cut with his sharp tusk. If he can knock a horse
down the position of his rider would be serious indeed, were not help
to arrive in time to draw off the attention of the enraged animal from
his foe. Heavy falls, too, take place over watercourses and nullahs,
and in some parts of India the difficulties are greatly increased by
bowlders of all kinds being scattered over the ground, and by the
frequent occurrence of bushes and shrubs armed with most formidable
spines and thorns. Conspicuous among these is the bush known as the
"wait-a-bit thorn," which is furnished with two kinds of thorn--the one
long, stiff, and penetrating, the other short and curved, with a forked
point almost like a fishhook. When this once takes hold it is almost
necessary to cut the cloth to obtain a release.

Scarcely had the beaters, with much shouting and clamor, entered the
patch of bush in which the pigs were lying, than the porcine family,
consisting of a splendid boar and sow, and eight nearly full-grown
squeakers, darted out on the open, and in a moment the horsemen were
off in pursuit. The ground was deep and heavy, and the pigs at the
first burst gained fast upon their pursuers. There was no attempt on
the part of the pigs to keep together, and directly after starting they
began to diverge. The old boar and sow both kept across the plain--one
bearing toward the left, the other to the right. The squeakers ran in
all directions--some at right angles to the line that the old ones were
taking. The object of one and all was to gain cover of some kind.

With their hats pressed well down upon their heads, and their spears
advanced with the head some two or three feet from the ground, the
hunters started after them--some making after the boar, some after the
sow, according to the position which they occupied at the commencement
of the chase, while some of the young hands dashed off in pursuit of
the squeakers.

There were five, however, after the boar; Captain Dunlop, a young
ensign named Skinner, the Scotch doctor of the regiment, and two
civilians. For a short time they kept together, and then Captain Dunlop
and Skinner began to draw ahead of the others.

The boar was a stanch one, and a mile had been passed before his speed
began sensibly to diminish. The young ensign, who was mounted on a very
fast Arab, began to draw up to him three or four lengths ahead of
Captain Dunlop, bearing his horse so as to get upon the left side of
the boar, in order to permit him to use his spear to advantage.

He was nearly up to him when Captain Dunlop, who saw the boar glancing
back savagely, cried:

"Look out, Skinner! he will be round in a moment; keep your horse well
in hand!"

A moment later the boar was round. The horse, young and unbroken at the
work, started violently, swerved, and, before his rider could get him
round, the boar was upon him. In an instant the horse was upon the
ground, with a long gash upon his flank, and Skinner, flying through
the air, fell almost directly in the boar's way.

Fortunately for the young ensign, Captain Dunlop, as he shouted his
warning, had turned his horse to the left, so as to cut off the boar
when he turned, and he was now so close that the boar, in passing, had
only time to give a vicious blow at the fallen man, which laid his arm
open from his shoulder to his elbow.

At that instant Captain Dunlop arrived, and his spear pierced the
animal's flank. His aim was, however, disconcerted by his horse, at the
moment he struck, leaping over the fallen ensign; the wound, therefore,
was but a glancing one, and in a moment the boar was round upon his new
assailant. Fortunately the horse was a well-trained one, and needed not
the sharp touch of his master's rein to wheel sharp round on his hind
legs, and dart off at full speed. The boar swerved off again, and
continued his original line of flight, his object being to gain a thick
patch of jungle, now little over a quarter of a mile distant; the
detention, however, was fatal to him, for the doctor, who was close on
Captain Dunlop's heels, now brought up his horse with a rush and, with
a well-aimed thrust, ran the animal through, completely pinning him to
the earth. The honor of his death was therefore divided between the
doctor and Captain Dunlop, for the latter had drawn first blood, or, as
it is termed, had taken first spear, while the former had scored the
kill.

The sow had been more fortunate than her lord. She had taken a line
across a part of the plain which was intersected by several nullahs.
She, too, had been wounded, but one of the nullahs had thrown out
several of her pursuers: one rider had been sent over his horse's head
and stunned; and the sow, turning sharp down a deep and precipitous
gully, had made her escape. Three of the squeakers fell to the spears
of the Griffs--young hands--and the rest had escaped. The boar had been
killed only a short distance from the rise upon which the spectators
from Sandynugghur were assembled, and the beaters soon tied its four
legs together, and, putting a pole through them, six of them carried
the beast up to the colonel's wife for inspection.

"What a savage-looking brute it is!" said Kate; "not a bit like a pig,
with all those long bristles, and that sharp high back, and those
tremendous tusks."

"Will you accept the skin, Miss Warrener?" Captain Dunlop said to her
afterward; "I have arranged with the doctor. He is to have the hams,
and I am to have the hide. If you will, I will have it dressed and
mounted."

"Thank you, Captain Dunlop, I should like it very much;" but, as it
turned out, Kate Warrener never got the skin.

The boar killed, the doctor's first care was to attend to the wounded,
and Skinner's arm was soon bound up, and he was sent home in a buggy;
the man who was stunned came to in a short time. The unsuccessful ones
were much laughed at by the colonel and major, for allowing half the
game started to get away.

"You ought not to grumble, colonel," Captain Manners said. "If we had
killed them all, we might not have had another run for months; as it
is, we will have some more sport next week."

There was some consultation as to the chance of getting the sow even
now, but it was generally agreed that she would follow the nullah down,
cross the stream, and get into a large canebrake beyond, from which it
would take hours to dislodge her; so a general move was made to the
carriages, and in a short time the whole party were on their way back
to Sandynugghur.




CHAPTER II.

THE OUTBREAK.


A week after the boar-hunt came the news that a Sepoy named Mangul
Pandy, belonging to the Thirty-fourth Native Infantry, stationed at
Barrackpore, a place only a few miles out of Calcutta, had, on the 29th
of March, rushed out upon the parade ground and called upon the men to
mutiny. He then shot the European sergeant-major of the regiment, and
cut down an officer. Pandy continued to exhort the men to rise to arms,
and although his comrades would not join him, they refused to make any
movement to arrest him. General Hearsey now arrived on the parade
ground with his son and a Major Ross, and at once rode at the man, who,
finding that his comrades would not assist him, discharged the contents
of the musket into his own body.

Two days later the mutinous Nineteenth were disbanded at Barrackpore.
On the 3rd of April Mangul Pandy, who had only wounded himself, was
hung, and the same doom was allotted to a native officer of his
regiment, for refusing to order the men to assist the officer attacked
by that mutineer, and for himself inciting the men to rise against the
government.

"What do you think of the news, papa?" Dick asked his father.

"I hope that the example which has been set by the execution of these
ringleaders, and by the disbandment of the Nineteenth, may have a
wholesome effect, Dick; but we shall see before long."

It needed no great lapse of time to show that this lesson had been
ineffectual. From nearly every station throughout Bengal and the
northwest provinces came rumors of disaffection; at Agra, at Umballah,
and at other places incendiary fires broke out with alarming frequency,
letters were from time to time intercepted, calling upon the Sepoys to
revolt, while at Lucknow serious disturbances occurred, and the Seventh
Regiment were disarmed by Sir Henry Lawrence, the Commissioner of Oude.
So the month of April passed, and as it went on the feeling of disquiet
and danger grew deeper and more general. It was like the anxious time
preceding a thunderstorm, the cloud was gathering, but how or when it
would burst none could say. Many still maintained stoutly that there
was no danger whatever, and that the whole thing would blow over; but
men with wives and families were generally inclined to take a more
somber view of the case. Nor is this to be wondered at. The British
form an almost inappreciable portion of the population of India; they
are isolated in a throng of natives, outnumbered by a thousand to one.
A man might therefore well feel his helplessness to render any
assistance to those dear to him in the event of a general uprising of
the people. Soldiers without family ties take things lightly, they are
ready for danger and for death if needs be, but they can always hope to
get through somehow; but the man with a wife and children in India, at
the time when a general outbreak was anticipated, would have the
deepest cause for anxiety. Not, however, that at this time any one at
Sandynugghur looked for anything so terrible. There was a spirit of
insubordination abroad in the native troops, no doubt, but no one
doubted but that it would, with more or less trouble, be put down. And
so things went on as usual, and the garden parties and the drives, and
the friendly evening visiting continued just as before. It was at one
of these pleasant evening gatherings that the first blow fell. Most of
the officers of the station, their wives, and the two or three
civilians were collected at Major Warrener's. The windows were all
open. The girls were playing a duet on the piano; five or six other
ladies were in the drawing-room and about the same number of gentlemen
were standing or sitting by them, some four or five were lounging in
the veranda enjoying their cheroots; native servants in their white
dresses moved noiselessly about with iced lemonade and wine, when a
Sepoy came up the walk.

"What is it?" asked Major Warrener, who was one of the group in the
veranda.

"Dispatch for the colonel, Sahib."

The colonel, who was sitting next to the major, held out his hand for
the message, and was rising, when Major Warrener said:

"Don't move, colonel; boy, bring a candle."

The servant brought it: the colonel opened the envelope and glanced at
the dispatch. He uttered an exclamation which was half a groan, half a
cry.

"Good Heaven! what is the matter, colonel?"

"The native troops at Meerut have mutinied, have murdered their
officers and all the European men, women, and children they could find,
and are marching upon Delhi. Look after your regiment."

A low cry broke from the major. This was indeed awful news, and for a
moment the two men sat half-stunned at the calamity, while the sound of
music and merry talk came in through the open window like a mockery on
their ears.

"Let us take a turn in the compound," said the major, "where no one can
hear us."

For half an hour they walked up and down the garden. There could be no
doubt about the truth of the news, for it was an official telegram from
the adjutant at Meerut; and as to the extent of the misfortune, it was
terrible.

"There is not a single white regiment at Delhi," exclaimed the colonel;
