among the three of us, despite the sourness of Master Pillsbury, with
which I bear as best I can, is equal to that of David and
Jonathan. Now, lads, fall on and see which of you can keep pace with
me, for I am a mighty trencherman."

"Meanwhile tell us what is passing here," said Willet.

In the course of the supper Hardy talked freely of events in New York,
where a great division of councils still prevailed. Shirley, the
warlike and energetic governor of Massachusetts, had urged De Lancy,
the governor of New York, to join in an expedition against the French
in Canada, but there had been no agreement. Later, a number of the
royal governors expected to meet at Williamsburg in Virginia with
Dinwiddie, the governor of that province.

"At present there are plans for four enterprises, every one of an
aspiring nature," he said. "One expedition is to reduce Nova Scotia
entirely, another, under Governor Shirley of Massachusetts, is to
attack the French at Fort Niagara, Sir William Johnson with militia
and Mohawks is to head a third against Crown Point. The fourth, which
I take to be the most important, is to be led by General Braddock
against Fort Duquesne, its object being the recovery of the Ohio
country. I cannot vouch for it, but such plans, I hear, will be
presented at the conference of the governors at Williamsburg."

"As we mean to go to Williamsburg ourselves," said Willet, "we'll see
what fortune General Braddock may have. But now, for the sake of the
good lads, we'll speak of lighter subjects. Where is the play of
Richard III to be given, Benjamin?"

"Mr. Hallam has obtained a great room in a house that is the property
of Rip Van Dam in Nassau Street. He has fitted it up in the fashion
of a stage, and his plays are always attended by a great concourse of
ladies and gentlemen. Boston and Philadelphia say New York is light
and frivolous, but I suspect that something of jealousy lies at the
core of the charge. We of New Amsterdam--again the name leaps to my
lips--have a certain freedom in our outlook upon life, a freedom which
I think produces strength and not weakness. Manners are not morals,
but I grow heavy and it does not become a seafaring man to be
didactic. What is it, Piet?"

The door of the dining-room opened, admitting a serving man who
produced a letter.

"It comes by the Boston post," he said, handing it to Master Hardy.

"Then it must have an importance which will not admit delay in the
reading," said Master Hardy. "Your pardon, friends, while I peruse
it."

He read it carefully, read it again with the same care, and then his
resonant laughter boomed forth with such volume and in such continuity
that he was compelled to take a huge red handkerchief and wipe the
tears from his eyes.

"What is it, Benjamin, that amuses you so vastly?"  asked Willet.

"A brave epistle from one of my captains, James Dunbar, a valiant man
and a great mariner. In command of the schooner, _Good Hope_, he was
sailing from the Barbados with a cargo of rum and sugar for Boston,
which furnishes a most excellent market for both, when he was
overhauled by the French privateer, _Rocroi_."

"What do you find to laugh at in the loss of a good ship and a fine
cargo?"

"Did I say they were lost? Nay, David, I said nothing of the kind. You
don't know Dunbar, and you don't know the _Good Hope_, which carries a
brass twelve-pounder and fifteen men as valiant as Dunbar himself. He
returned the attack of the _Rocroi_ with such amazing skill and
fierceness that he was able to board her and take her, with only three
of his men wounded and they not badly. Moreover, they found on board
the privateer a large store of gold, which becomes our prize of
war. And Dunbar and his men shall have a fair share of it, too. How
surprised the Frenchies must have been when Dunbar and his sailors
swarmed aboard."

"'Tis almost our only victory," said Willet, "and I'm right glad,
Benjamin, it has fallen to the lot of one of your ships to win it."

The long supper which was in truth a dinner was finished at
last. Hardy made good his boast, proving that he was a mighty
trencherman. Pillsbury pressed him closest, and the others, although
they did well, lingered at some distance in the rear. Afterward they
walked in the town, observing its varied life, and at a late hour
returned to Hardy's house which he called a mansion.

Robert and Tayoga were assigned to a room on the second floor, and
young Lennox again noted the numerous evidences of opulence. The
furniture was mostly of carved mahogany, and every room contained
articles of value from distant lands.

"Tayoga," said Robert, "what do you think of it all?"

"I think that the man Hardy is shrewd, Dagaeoga, shrewd like one of
our sachems, and that he has an interest in you, greater than he would
let you see. Do you remember him, Lennox?"

"No, I can't recall him, Tayoga. I've heard Dave speak of him many
times, but whenever we were in New York before he was away, and we did
not even come to his house. But he and Dave are friends of many
years. I think that long ago they must have been much together."

"Truly there is some mystery here, but it can wait. In its proper
time the unknown becomes the known."

"So it does, Tayoga, and I shall not vex my mind about the
matter. Just now, what I wish most of all is sleep."

"I wish it too, Lennox."

But Robert did not sleep well, his nerves being attuned more highly
than he had realized. Some of the talk that had passed between Willet
and Hardy related obviously to himself, and in the quiet of the room
it came back to him. He had not slept more than an hour when he awoke,
and, being unable to go to sleep again, sat up in bed. Tayoga was deep
in slumber, and Robert finally left the bed and went to the window,
the shutter of which was not closed. It was a curious, round window,
like a huge porthole, but the glass was clear and he had a good view
of the street. He saw one or two sailors swaying rather more than the
customary motion of a ship, pass by, and then a watchman carrying a
club in one hand and a lantern in the other, and blowing his frosty
breath upon his thick brown beard, indicating that the night although
bright was very cold.

He looked through the glass at least a half hour, and then turned back
to the bed, but found himself less inclined than ever to
sleep. Throwing his coat over his shoulders, he opened the unlocked
door and went into the hall, intending to walk back and forth a
little, believing that the easy exercise would induce desire for
sleep.

He was surprised to find a thread of light in the dusk of the hall, at
a time when he was quite sure everybody in the house except himself
was buried in slumber, and when he traced it he found it came from
another room farther down. It was, upon the instant, his belief that
robbers had entered. In a port like New York, where all nations come,
there must be reckless and desperate men who would hesitate at no risk
or crime.

He moved cautiously along the hall, until he reached the door from
which the light shone. It was open about six inches, not allowing a
look into the room except at the imminent risk of discovery, but by
placing his ear at the sill he would be able to hear the footsteps of
men if they were moving within. The sound of voices instead came to
him, and as he listened he was able to note that it was two men
talking in low tones. Undoubtedly they were robbers, who were common
in all great towns in those days, and this must be a chamber in which
Master Hardy kept many valuables. Doubtless they were assured that
everybody was deep in slumber, or they would be more cautious.

Driven by an intense curiosity, Robert edged his head a little farther
forward, and was able to look into the room, where, to his intense
amazement, he saw no robbers at all, but Willet and Master Hardy
seated at a small table opposite each other, with a candle, account
books and papers between. Hardy had been reading a paper, and stopping
at intervals to talk about it with the hunter.

"As you see, David," he said, "the list of the ships is three larger
than it was five years ago. One was lost to the Barbary corsairs,
another was wrecked on the coast of the Brazils, but we have five new
ones."

"You have done well, Benjamin, but I knew you would," said the hunter.

"With the help of Jonathan. Don't forget him, David. In name he is my
head clerk, and he pretends to serve me, but at times I think he is my
master. A shrewd Massachusetts man, David, uncommonly shrewd, and
loyal too."

"And the lands, Benjamin?"

"They're in abeyance, and are likely to be for some years, their title
depending upon the course of events which are now in train."

"And they're uncertain, Benjamin, as uncertain as the winds. But give
me your honest opinion of the lad, Benjamin. Have I done well with
him?"

"None could have done better. He's an eagle, David. I marked him
well. Spirit, imagination, force; youth and honesty looking out of his
eyes. But have you no fears, David, that you will get him killed in
the wars?"

"I could not keep him from going to them if I would, Benjamin. There
my power stops. You old sailors have superstitions or beliefs, and I,
a landsman, have a conviction, too. The invisible prophets tell me
that he will not be killed."

"I don't laugh at such things, David. The greatness and loneliness of
the sea does breed superstition in mariners. I know there is no such
thing as the supernatural, and yet I am swayed at times by the
unknown."

"At least I will watch over him as best I can, and he has uncommon
skill in taking care of himself."

Robert's will triumphed over a curiosity that was intense and burning,
and he turned away. He knew they were speaking of him, and he seemed
to be connected with great affairs. It was enough to stir the most
apathetic youth, and he was just the opposite. It required the utmost
exertion of a very strong mind to pull himself from the door and then
to drag his unwilling feet along the hall. Matter was in complete
rebellion and mind was compelled to win its triumph, unaided, but win
it did and kept the victory.

He reached his own room and softly closed the door behind him. Tayoga
was still sleeping soundly. Robert went again to the window. His eyes
were turned toward the street, but he did not see anything there,
because he was looking inward. The talk of Willet and Hardy came back
to him. He could say it over, every word, and none could deny that it
was charged with significance. But he knew intuitively that neither of
them would answer a single one of his questions, and he must wait for
time and circumstance to disclose the truth. Nor could he bear to tell
them that he had been listening at the door, despite the fact that it
had been brought about by accident, and that he had come away, when he
might have heard more.

Having resigned himself to necessity, he went back to bed and now,
youth triumphing over excitement, he soon slept. The next morning,
directly after breakfast, the three elders and the two lads went to
the Royal Exchange, where there was soon a great concourse of
merchants, clerks and seafaring men. Master Hardy was received with
great respect, and many congratulations were given to him, when he
told the story of the _Good Hope_ and Captain Dunbar. In one of the
rooms above the pillars he met another captain of his who had arrived
the day before at New York itself.

This captain, a New England man, Eliphalet Simmons, had brought his
schooner from the Mediterranean, and he told in a manner as brief and
dry as his own log how he had outsailed one Barbary corsair by day,
and by changing his course had tricked another in the night. But the
voyage had been most profitable, and Master Jonathan duly entered the
amount of gain in an account book, with a reward of ten pounds to
Captain Simmons, five pounds to the first mate, three pounds to the
second mate, and one pound to every member of the crew for their
bravery and seamanship.

Captain Simmons' thanks were as brief and dry as his report, but
Robert saw his eyes glisten, and knew that he was not lacking in
gratitude. After the business was settled and the rewards adjusted
they adjourned to a coffee house near Hanover Square where very good
Madeira was brought and served to the men, Robert and Tayoga
declining. Then Benjamin, David and Jonathan drank to the health of
Eliphalet, while the two lads, the white and the red, devoted their
attention to the others in the coffee house, of whom there were at
least a dozen.

One who sat at a table very near was already examining Tayoga with the
greatest curiosity. He wore the uniform of an English second
lieutenant, very trim, and very red, he had an exceeding ruddiness of
countenance, he was tall and well built, and he was only a year or two
older than Robert. His curiosity obviously had been aroused by the
appearance of Tayoga in the full costume of an Iroquois. It was
equally evident to Robert that he was an Englishman, a member of the
royal forces then in New York. Americans still called themselves
Englishmen and Robert instantly had a feeling of kinship for the young
officer who had a frank and good face.

The English youth's hat was lying upon the table beside him, and a
gust of wind blowing it upon the floor, rolled it toward Robert, who
picked it up and tendered it to its owner.

"Thanks," said the officer. "'Twas careless of me."

"By no means," said Robert. "The wind blows when it pleases, and you
were taken by surprise."

The Englishman smiled, showing very white and even teeth.

"I haven't been very long in New York," he said, "but I find it a
polite and vastly interesting town. My name is Grosvenor, Alfred
Grosvenor, and I'm a second lieutenant in the regiment of Colonel
Brandon, that arrived but recently from England."

Master Hardy looked up and passed an investigating eye over the young
Englishman.

"You're related to one of the ducal families of England," he said,
"but your own immediate branch of it has no overplus of wealth. Still,
your blood is reckoned highly noble in England, and you have an
excellent standing in your regiment, both as an officer and a man."

Young Grosvenor's ruddy face became ruddier.

"How do you happen to know so much about me?"  he asked. But there was
no offense in his tone.

Hardy smiled, and Pillsbury, pursing his thin lips, measured Grosvenor
with his eyes.

"I make it my business," replied Hardy, "to discover who the people
are who come to New York. I'm a seafaring man and a merchant and I
find profit in it. It's true, in especial, since the war has begun,
and New York begins to fill with the military. Many of these sprightly
young officers will be wishing to borrow money from me before long,
and it will be well for me to know their prospects of repayment."

The twinkle in his eye belied the irony of his words, and the
lieutenant laughed.

"And since you're alone," continued the merchant, "we ask you to join
us, and will be happy if you accept. This is Mr. Robert Lennox, of
very good blood too, and this is Tayoga, of the Clan of the Bear, of
the nation Onondaga, of the great League of the Hodenosaunee, who,
among his own people has a rank corresponding to a prince of the blood
among yours, and who, if you value such things, is entitled therefore
to precedence over all of us, including yourself. Mr. David Willet,
Mr. Jonathan Pillsbury and Mr. Benjamin Hardy, who is myself,
complete the catalogue."

He spoke in a tone half whimsical, half earnest, but the young
Englishman, who evidently had a friendly and inquiring mind, received
it in the best spirit and gladly joined them. He was soon deep in the
conversation, but his greatest interest was for Tayoga, from whom he
could seldom take his eyes. It was evident to Robert that he had
expected to find only a savage in an Indian, and the delicate manners
and perfect English of the Onondaga filled him with surprise.

"I would fain confess," he said at length, "that America is not what I
expected to find. I did not know that it contained princes who could
put some of our own to shame."

He bowed to Tayoga, who smiled and replied:

"What small merit I may possess is due to the training of my people."

"Do you expect early service, Lieutenant Grosvenor?"  Mr. Hardy asked.

"Not immediate--I think I may say so much," replied the Englishman,
"but I understand that our regiment will be with the first force that
takes the field, that of General Braddock. 'Tis well known that we
intend to march against Fort Duquesne, an expedition that should be
easy. A powerful army like General Braddock's can brush aside any
number of forest rovers."

Robert and Willet exchanged glances, but the face of Tayoga remained a
mask.

"It's not well to take the French and Indians too lightly," said
Mr. Hardy with gravity.

"But wandering bands can't face cannon and the bayonet."

"They don't have to face 'em. They lie hid on your flank and cut you
down, while your fire and steel waste themselves on the uncomplaining
forest."

They were words which were destined to come back to Robert some day
with extraordinary force, but for the present they were a mere
generalization that did not stay long in his mind.

"Our leaders will take all the needful precautions," said young
Grosvenor with confidence.

Mr. Hardy did not insist, but spoke of the play they expected to
witness that evening, suggesting to Lieutenant Grosvenor if he had
leave, that he go with them, an invitation that was accepted promptly
and with warmth. The liking between him and Robert, while of sudden
birth, was destined to be strong and permanent. There was much
similarity of temperament. Grosvenor also was imaginative and
curious. His mind invariably projected itself into the future, and he
was eager to know. He had come to America, inquiring, without
prejudices, wishing to find the good rather than the bad, and he
esteemed it a great stroke of fortune that he should make so early the
acquaintance of two such remarkable youths as Robert and Tayoga. The
three men with them were scarcely less interesting, and he knew that
in their company at the play they would talk to him of strange new
things. He would be exploring a world hidden from him hitherto, and
nothing could have appealed to him more.

"You landed a week ago," said Hardy.

"Truly, sir," laughed Grosvenor, "you seem to know not only who I am,
but what I do."

