"You are young," said Dr. Peabody, compassionately; "that accounts
for it.  Peabody's Panacea, let me tell you, sir, is the great remedy
of the age.  It has effected more cures, relieved more pain, soothed
more aching bosoms, and done more good, than any other medicine in
existence."

"It must be a satisfaction to you to have conferred such a blessing
on mankind," said Harry, inclined to laugh at the doctor's
magniloquent style.

"It is.  I consider myself one of the benefactors of mankind; but,
sir, the medicine has not yet been fully introduced.  There are
thousands, who groan on beds of pain, who are ignorant that for the
small sum of fifty cents they could be restored to health and
activity."

"That's a pity."

"It is a pity, Mr. ----"

"Walton."

"Mr. Walton,--I have called, sir, to ask you to co-operate with me in
making it known to the world, so far as your influence extends."

"Is your medicine a liquid?"

"No, sir; it is in the form of pills, twenty-four in a box.  Let me
show you."

The doctor opened a wooden box, and displayed a collection of very
unwholesome-looking brown pills.

"Try one, sir; it won't do you any harm."

"Thank you; I would rather not.  I don't like pills.  What will they
cure?"

"What won't they cure?  I've got a list of fifty-nine diseases in my
circular, all of which are relieved by Peabody's Panacea.  They may
cure more; in fact, I've been told of a consumptive patient who was
considerably relieved by a single box.  You won't try one?"

"I would rather not."

"Well, here is my circular, containing accounts of remarkable cures
performed.  Permit me to present you a box."

"Thank you," said Harry, dubiously.

"You'll probably be sick before long," said the doctor, cheerfully,
"and then the pills will come handy."

"Doctor," said Ferguson, gravely, "I find my hair getting thin on top
of the head.  Do you think the panacea would restore it?"

"Yes," said the doctor, unexpectedly.  "I had a case, in Portsmouth,
of a gentleman whose head was as smooth as a billiard-ball.  He took
the pills for another complaint, and was surprised, in the course of
three weeks, to find young hair sprouting all over the bald spot.
Can't I sell you half-a-dozen boxes?  You may have half a dozen for
two dollars and a half."

Ferguson, who of course had been in jest, found it hard to forbear
laughing, especially when Harry joined the doctor in urging him to
purchase.

"Not to-day," he answered.  "I can try Mr. Walton's box, and if it
helps me I can order some more."

"You may not be able to get it, then," said the doctor, persuasively.
"I may not be in Centreville."

"If the panacea is well known, I can surely get it without
difficulty."

"Not so cheap as I will sell it."

"I won't take any to-day," said Ferguson, decisively.

"You haven't told me what I can do for you," said Harry, who found
the doctor's call rather long.

"I would like you to insert my circular to your paper.  It won't take
more than two columns."

"We shall be happy to insert it at regular advertising rates."

"I thought," said Dr. Peabody, disappointed, "that you might do it
gratuitously, as I had given you a box."

"We don't do business on such terms," said Harry.  "I think I had
better return the box."

"No, keep it," said the doctor.  "You will be willing to notice it,
doubtless."

Harry rapidly penned this paragraph, and read it aloud:--

"Dr. Theophilus Peabody has left with us a box of his Unfailing
Panacea, which he claims will cure a large variety of diseases."

"Couldn't you give a list of the diseases?" insinuated the doctor.

"There are fifty-nine, you said?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then I am afraid we must decline."

Harry resumed his writing, and the doctor took his leave, looking far
from satisfied.

"Here, Ferguson," said Harry, after the visitor had retired, "take
the pills, and much good may they do you.  Better take one now for
the growth of your hair."

It was fortunate that Dr. Peabody did not hear the merriment that
followed, or he would have given up the editorial staff of the
Centreville "Gazette" as maliciously disposed to underrate his
favorite medicine.

"Who wouldn't be an editor?" said Harry.

"I notice," said Ferguson, "that pill-tenders and blacking
manufacturers are most liberal to the editorial profession.  I only
wish jewellers and piano manufacturers were as free with their
manufactures.  I would like a good gold watch, and I shall soon want
a piano for my daughter."

"You may depend upon it, Ferguson, when such gifts come in, that I
shall claim them as editorial perquisites."

"We won't quarrel about them till they come, Harry."

Our hero here opened a bulky communication.

"What is that?" asked Ferguson.

"An essay on 'The Immortality of the Soul,'--covers fifteen pages
foolscap.  What shall I do with it?"

"Publish it in a supplement with Dr. Peabody's circular."

"I am not sure but the circular would be more interesting reading."

"From whom does the essay come?"

"It is signed 'L. S.'"

"Then it is by Lemuel Snodgrass, a retired schoolteacher, who fancies
himself a great writer."

"He'll be offended if I don't print it, won't he?"

"I'll tell you how to get over that.  Say, in an editorial paragraph,
'We have received a thoughtful essay from 'L. S.', on 'The
Immortality of the Soul.' We regret that its length precludes our
publishing it in the 'Gazette.'  We would suggest to the author to
print it in a pamphlet.'  That suggestion will be regarded as
complimentary, and we may get the job of printing it."

"I see you are shrewd, Ferguson.  I will follow your advice."




CHAPTER XXXIII.

AN UNEXPECTED PROPOSAL.

During his temporary editorship, Harry did not feel at liberty to
make any decided changes in the character or arrangement of the
paper; but he was ambitious to improve it, as far as he was able, in
its different departments.  Mr. Anderson had become rather indolent
in the collection of local news, merely publishing such items as were
voluntarily contributed.  Harry, after his day's work was over, made
a little tour of the village, gathering any news that he thought
would be of interest to the public.  Moreover he made arrangements to
obtain news of a similar nature from neighboring villages, and the
result was, that in the course of a month he made the "Gazette" much
more readable.

"Really, the 'Gazette' gives a good deal more news than it used to,"
was a common remark.

It was probably in consequence of this improvement that new
subscriptions began to come in, not from Centreville alone, but from
towns in the neighborhood.  This gratified and encouraged Harry, who
now felt that he was on the right tack.

There was another department to which he devoted considerable
attention.  This was a condensed summary of news from all parts of
the world, giving the preference and the largest space, of course, to
American news.  He aimed to supply those who did not take a daily
paper with a brief record of events, such as they would not be
likely, otherwise, to hear of.  Of course all this work added to his
labors as compositor; and his occasional sketches for Boston papers
absorbed a large share of his time.  Indeed, he had very little left
at his disposal for rest and recreation.

"I am afraid you are working too hard, Harry," said Ferguson.  "You
are doing Mr. Anderson's work better than he ever did it, and your
own too."

"I enjoy it," said Harry.  "I work hard I know, but I feel paid by
the satisfaction of finding that my labors are appreciated."

"When Mr. Anderson gets back, he will find it necessary to employ you
as assistant editor, for it won't do to let the paper get back to its
former dulness."

"I will accept," said Harry, "if he makes the offer.  I feel more and
more that I must be an editor."

"You are certainly showing yourself competent for the position."

"I have only made a beginning," said our hero, modestly.  "In time I
think I could make a satisfactory paper."

One day, about two months after Mr. Anderson's departure, Ferguson
and Harry were surprised, and not altogether agreeably, by the
entrance of John Clapp and Luke Harrison.  They looked far from
prosperous.  In fact, both of them were decidedly seedy.  Going West
had not effected an improvement in their fortunes.

"Is that you, Clapp?" asked Ferguson.  "Where did you come from?"

"From St. Louis."

"Then you didn't feel inclined to stay there?"

"Not I.  It's a beastly place.  I came near starving."

Clapp would have found any place beastly where a fair day's work was
required for fair wages, and my young readers in St. Louis,
therefore, need not heed his disparaging remarks.

"How was it with you, Luke?" asked Harry.  "Do you like the West no
better than Clapp?"

"You don't catch me out there again," said Luke.  "It isn't what it's
cracked up to be.  We had the hardest work in getting money enough to
get us back."

As Luke did not mention the kind of hard work by which the money was
obtained, I may state here that an evening's luck at the faro table
had supplied them with money enough to pay the fare to Boston by
railway; otherwise another year might have found them still in St.
Louis.

"Hard work doesn't suit your constitution, does it?" said Ferguson,
slyly.

"I can work as well as anybody," said Luke; "but I haven't had the
luck of some people."

"You were lucky enough to have your fare paid to the West for you."

"Yes, and when we got there, the rascal left us to shift for
ourselves.  That aint much luck."

"I've always had to shift for myself, and always expect to," was the
reply.

"Oh, you're a model!" sneered Clapp.  "You always were as sober and
steady as a deacon.  I wonder they didn't make you one."

"And Walton there is one of the same sort," said Luke.  "I say,
Harry, it was real mean in you not to send me the money I wrote for.
You hadn't it, had you?"

"Yes," said Harry, firmly; "but I worked hard for it, and I didn't
feel like giving it away."

"Who asked you to give it away?  I only wanted to borrow it."

"That's the same thing--with you.  You were not likely to repay it
again."

"Do you mean to insult me?" blustered Luke.

"No, I never insult anybody.  I only tell the truth.  You know, Luke
Harrison, whether I have reason for what I say."

"I wouldn't leave a friend to suffer when I had plenty of money in my
pocket," said Luke, with an injured air.  "If you had been a
different sort of fellow I would have asked you for five dollars to
keep me along till I can get work.  I've come back with empty
pockets."

"I'll lend you five dollars if you need it," said Harry, who judged
from Luke's appearance that he told the truth.

"Will you?" said Luke, brightening up.  "That's a good fellow.  I'll
pay you just as soon as I can."

Harry did not place much reliance on this assurance; but he felt that
he could afford the loss of five dollars, if loss it should prove,
and it might prevent Luke's obtaining the money in a more
questionable way.

"Where's Mr. Anderson?" asked Clapp, looking round the office.

"He's been in Michigan for a couple of months."

"You don't say so!  Why, who runs the paper?"

"Ferguson and I," said Harry.

"I mean who edits it?"

"Harry does that," said his fellow-workman.

"Whew!" ejaculated Clapp, in surprise.  "Why, but two years ago you
was only a printer's devil!"

"He's risen from the ranks," said Ferguson, "and I can say with truth
that the 'Gazette' has never been better than since it has been under
his charge."

"How much does old Anderson pay you for taking his place?" asked
Luke, who was quite as much surprised as Clapp.

"I don't ask anything extra.  He pays me fifteen dollars a week as
compositor."

"You're doing well," said Luke, enviously.  "Got a big pile of money
laid up, haven't you?"

"I have something in the bank."

"Harry writes stories for the Boston papers, also," said Ferguson.
"He makes a hundred or two that way."

"Some folks are born to luck," said Clapp, discontentedly.  "Here am
I, six or eight years older, out of a place, and without a cent to
fall back upon.  I wish I was one of your lucky ones."

"You might have had a few hundred dollars, at any rate," said
Ferguson, "if you hadn't chosen to spend all your money when you were
earning good wages."

"A man must have a little enjoyment.  We can't drudge all the time."

"It's better to do that than to be where you are now."

But Clapp was not to be convinced that he was himself to blame for
his present disagreeable position.  He laid the blame on fortune,
like thousands of others.  He could not see that Harry's good luck
was the legitimate consequence of industry and frugality.

After a while the two left the office.  They decided to seek their
old boarding-house, and remain there for a week, waiting for
something to turn up.

The next day Harry received the following letter from Mr. Anderson:--


"DEAR WALTON:  My brother urges me to settle permanently at the West.
I am offered a partnership in a paper in this vicinity, and my health
has much improved here.  The West seems the place for me.  My only
embarrassment is the paper.  If I could dispose of the 'Gazette' for
two thousand dollars cash, I could see my way clear to remove.  Why
can't you and Ferguson buy it?  The numbers which you have sent me
show that you are quite capable of filling the post of editor; and
you and Ferguson can do the mechanical part.  I think it will be a
good chance for you.  Write me at once whether there us any
likelihood of your purchasing.

  "Your friend,
    "JOTHAM ANDERSON."


Harry's face flushed eagerly as he read this letter, Nothing would
suit him better than to make this arrangement, if only he could
provide the purchase money.  But this was likely to present a
difficulty.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

A FRIEND IN NEED.

Harry at once showed Ferguson the letter he had received.

"What are you going to do about it?" asked his friend.

"I should like to buy the paper, but I don't see how I can.  Mr.
Anderson wants two thousand dollars cash."

"How much have you got?"

"Only five hundred."

"I have seven hundred and fifty," said Ferguson, thoughtfully.

Harry's face brightened.

"Why can't we go into partnership?" he asked.

"That is what we spoke of once," said Ferguson, "and it would suit me
perfectly; but there is a difficulty.  Your money and mine added
together will not be enough."

"Perhaps Mr. Anderson would take a mortgage on the establishment for
the balance."

"I don't think so.  He says expressly that he wants cash."

Harry looked disturbed.

"Do you think any one would lend us the money on the same terms?" he
asked, after a while.

"Squire Trevor is the only man in the village likely to have money to
lend.  There he is in the street now.  Run down, Harry, and ask him
to step in a minute."

Our hero seized his hat, and did as requested.  He returned
immediately, followed by Squire Trevor, a stout, puffy little man,
reputed shrewd and a capitalist.

"Excuse our calling you in, Squire Trevor," said Ferguson, "but we
want to consult you on a matter of business.  Harry, just show the
squire Mr. Anderson's letter."

The squire read it deliberately.

"Do you want my advice?" he said, looking up from the perusal.  "Buy
the paper.  It is worth what Anderson asks for it."

"So I think, but there is a difficulty.  Harry and I can only raise
twelve hundred dollars or so between us."

"Give a note for the balance.  You'll be able to pay it off in two
years, if you prosper."

"I am afraid that won't do.  Mr. Anderson wants cash.  Can't you lend
us the money, Squire Trevor?" continued Ferguson, bluntly.

