triumphant into the city.

The next day, some more ships having arrived, King Richard found that in
all, including the garrison, he could muster two thousand combatants.
The enemy renewed the attack in great numbers, and the assaults upon
the walls were continuous and desperate. King Richard, who loved
fighting in the plain rather than behind walls, was impatient at this,
and at one time so fierce was the attack that he resolved to sally out.
Only ten horses remained in the town, and King Richard, mounting one,
called upon nine of the knights to mount and sally out with him. The
little band of ten warriors charged down upon the host of the Saracens
and swept them before them. It was a marvelous sight indeed to see so
small a group of horsemen dashing through a crowd of Saracen warriors.
These, although at first beaten back, yet rallied, and the ten knights
had great difficulty in fighting their way back to the town. When near
the walls the Christians again made a stand, and a few knights sallied
out from the town on foot and joined them. Among these was Cuthbert, the
Earl of Evesham having accompanied King Richard in his charge. In all,
seventeen knights were now rallied round the king. So fierce was the
charge of the Saracens that the king ordered those on horseback to
dismount, and with their horses in the center, the little body knelt
with their lances opposed to the Saracens. Again and again the wild
cavalry swept down upon this little force, but in vain did they attempt
to break their ranks. The scene was indeed an extraordinary one. At last
the king, seeing that the enemy were losing heart, again ordered the
knights to mount, and these dashing among the enemy, completed their
defeat.

While this had been going on news came to the king that the Saracens
from another side had made their way into Jaffa, and were massacring the
Christians. Without, an instant's delay he flew to their succor,
followed only by two knights and a few archers, the rest being so worn
by their exertions as to be unable to move. The Mamelukes, the chosen
guard of Saladin, had headed the attack; but even these were driven out
from the town, and Richard dashed out from the city in their pursuit.
One Saracen emir, distinguished for his stature and strength, ventured
to match himself against the king, and rode boldly at him. But with one
blow Richard severed his head, and his right shoulder and arm, from his
body. Then having, by his single arm, put to rout the Saracens at this
point, he dashed through them to the aid of the little band of knights
who had remained on the defensive when he left them at the alarm of the
city being entered. These were almost sinking with fatigue and wounds;
but King Richard opened a way around them by slaying numbers of the
enemy, and then charged again alone into the midst of the Mussulman
host, and was lost to the sight of his companions. All thought that they
would never see him again. But he soon reappeared, his horse covered
with blood, but himself unwounded; and the attack of the enemy ceased.

From the hour of daybreak, it is said, Richard had not ceased for a
moment to deal out his blows, and the skin of his hand adhered to the
handle of his battle-ax. This narration would appear almost fabulous,
were it not that it is attested in the chronicles of several
eye-witnesses, and for centuries afterward the Saracen women hushed
their babes when fractious by threatening them with Malek-Rik, the name
which they gave to King Richard.

Glorious as was the success, it was a sad one, for several of the most
devoted of the followers of King Richard were wounded badly, some few to
death. Among these last, to the terrible grief of Cuthbert, was his
friend and patron, the Earl of Evesham. The king, on taking off his
armor, hurried to his tent.

"The glory of this day is marred indeed," he said to the wounded knight,
"if I am to lose you, Sir Walter."

"I fear that it must even be so, my lord," the dying earl said. "I am
glad that I have seen this day, for never did I think to witness such
feats as those which your majesty has performed; and though the Crusade
has failed, and the holy city remains in the hands of the infidel, yet
assuredly no shadow of disgrace has fallen upon the English arms, and,
indeed, great glory has accrued to us. Whatever may be said of the Great
Crusade, it will at least be allowed by all men, and for all time, that
had the princes and soldiers of other nations done as your majesty and
your followers have done, the holy city would have fallen into our hands
within a month of our putting foot upon the soil. Your majesty, I have a
boon to ask."

"You have but to name it, Sir Walter, and it is yours."

"Sir Cuthbert, here," he said, pointing to the young knight, who was
sorrowfully kneeling by his bedside, "is as a son to me. The
relationship by blood is but slight, but by affection it is as close as
though he were mine own. I have, as your majesty knows, no male heirs,
and my daughter is but young, and will now be a royal ward. I beseech
your majesty to bestow her in marriage, when the time comes, upon Sir
Cuthbert. They have known each other as children, and the union will
bring happiness, methinks, to both, as well as strength and protection
to her; and further, if it might be, I would fain that you should bestow
upon him my title and dignity."

"It shall be so," the king said. "When your eyes are closed, Sir Walter,
Sir Cuthbert shall be Earl of Evesham, and, when the time comes, the
husband of your daughter."

Cuthbert was too overwhelmed with grief to feel a shadow of exaltation
at the gracious intimation of the king; although, even then, a thought
of future happiness in the care of the fair young lady Marguerite passed
before his mind. For the last time the king gave his hand to his
faithful servant, who pressed it to his lips, and a few minutes
afterward breathed his last.




CHAPTER XVII.

AN ALPINE STORM.


The tremendous exertions which King Richard had made told upon him, and
attacks of fever succeeded each other at short intervals. This, however,
mattered the less, since negotiations were now proceeding between him
and Saladin. It was impossible, with the slight means at his disposal,
for Richard further to carry on the Crusade alone. Moreover, pressing
news had arrived from his mother in England, urging him to return, as
his brother John was intriguing against him, and had already assumed all
but the kingly title. Saladin was equally desirous of peace. His wild
troops were, for the most part, eager to return to their homes, and the
defeats which they had suffered, and the, to them, miraculous power of
King Richard's arm, had lowered their spirit and made them eager to be
away. Therefore he consented without difficulty to the terms proposed.
By these, the Christians were to surrender Ascalon, but were to keep
Jaffa, Tyre, and the fortresses along the coast. All hostilities were to
be suspended on both sides for the space of three years, three months,
three weeks, three days, and three hours, when Richard hoped to return
again and to recommence the struggle.

Between the sultan and King Richard a feeling approaching that of
friendship had sprung up during the campaign. Saladin was himself brave
in the extreme, and exposed his life as fearlessly as did his Christian
rival, and the two valiant leaders recognized the great qualities of
each other. Several times during the campaign when Richard had been ill,
the emir had sent him presents of fruit and other matters, to which
Richard had responded in the same spirit. An interview had taken place
between them which further cemented their friendship; and when Richard
promised to return again at the end of the truce with a far larger army,
and to accomplish the rescue of the holy city, the sultan smiled, and
said that it appeared that valor alone was not sufficient to conquer in
the Holy Land, but that if Jerusalem were to fall into the hands of the
Christians, it could fall into no worthier hands than those of
Malek-Rik.

So, with many mutual courtesies, the great rivals separated, and soon
after King Richard and the little remnant of his army embarked on board
ship, and set sail for England.

It was on October 11, 1192, that Richard Coeur de Lion left Palestine.
Soon after they started a storm suddenly burst upon them, and dispersed
them in various directions. The ship in which Queen Berengaria was
carried arrived safely in Sicily; but that in which King Richard was
borne was missing, and none of his fellow-voyagers knew what had become
of him. Sir Cuthbert was in the same vessel as the king, and the bark
was driven upon the Island of Corfu. All reached shore in safety, and
King Richard then hired three small vessels, in which he sailed to the
port of Zara, whence he hoped to reach the domains of his nephew, Otho
of Saxony, the son of his sister Matilda. The king had with him now but
two of his knights, Baldwin of Bethune, and Cuthbert of Evesham. Cnut
was with his feudal chief--for such Cuthbert had now, by his accession
to the rank of Earl of Evesham, become--and three or four English
archers.

"I fear, my lords," the king said to his knights as he sat in a little
room in an inn at Zara, "that my plight is a bad one. I am surrounded by
enemies, and, alas! I can no longer mount my steed and ride out as at
Jaffa to do battle with them. My brother, John Lackland, is scheming to
take my place upon the throne of England. Philip of France, whose mind
is far better at such matters than at setting armies in the field, is in
league with him. The Emperor Henry has laid claim to the throne of
Sicily. Leopold of Austria has not forgiven me the blow I struck him in
the face at Ascalon, and the friends of Conrad of Montferat are
spreading far and wide the lie that I was the instigator of his murder.
Sure never had a poor king so many enemies, and few have ever had so
small a following as I have now. What think you, my lords? What course
would you advise that I should adopt? If I can reach Saxony doubtless
Otho will aid me. But hence to Dresden is a long journey indeed. I have
neither credit nor funds to hire a ship to take us by sea. Nor would
such a voyage be a safe one, when so many of my enemies' ships are on
the main. I must needs, I think, go in disguise, for my way lies wholly
through the country of my enemies."

"Surely," Cuthbert said, "no potentate could for very shame venture to
detain your majesty on your way from the Holy Land, where you have
wrought such great deeds. Were I in your place, I would at once proclaim
myself, mount my horse, have my banner carried before me, and ride
openly on. You have, too, another claim, namely, that of being
shipwrecked, and even in war-time nations respect those whom the force
of God has thrown upon their shores."

"I fear me, Sir Cuthbert," Sir Baldwin said, "that you overrate the
chivalry of our master's enemies. Had we been thrown on the shores of
France, Philip perhaps would hesitate to lay hands upon the king; but
these petty German princelings have no idea of the observances of true
chivalry. They are coarse and brutal in their ways; and though in
outward form following the usage of knighthood, they have never been
penetrated with its spirit. If the friends of Conrad of Montferat lay
hands upon King Richard I fear that no scruples will prevent them from
using their advantage to the utmost. Even their emperor I would not
trust. The course which you advise would no doubt be in accordance with
the spirit of King Richard; but it would be madness for him to judge
other people's spirit by his own, and it would be rushing into the
lion's den to proclaim himself here. I should recommend, if I might
venture to do so, that his majesty should assume a false name, and that
we should travel in small parties so as to attract no attention, each
making his way to Saxony as best he may."

There was silence for a minute or two, and then the king with a sigh
said:

"I fear that you are right, Sir Baldwin, and that there is no chivalry
among these swinish German lords. You shall accompany me. Not, Sir
Cuthbert," he observed kindly, noticing a look of disappointment upon
the face of the young knight, "that I estimate your fidelity one whit
lower than that of my brave friend; but he is the elder and the more
versed in European travel, and may manage to bring matters through
better than you would do. You will have dangers enough to encounter
yourself, more even than I shall, for your brave follower, Cnut, can
speak no language but his own, and your archers will be hard to pass as
any other than what they are. You must be my messenger to England,
should you arrive there without me. Tell my mother and wife where you
left me, and that, if I do not come home I have fallen into the hands
of one or other of my bitter foes. Bid them bestir themselves to hold
England for me against my brother John, and, if needs be, to move the
sovereigns of Europe to free me from the hands of my enemies. Should a
ransom be needed, I think that my people of England will not grudge
their goods for their king."

The following day the king bade farewell to his faithful followers,
giving his hand to kiss, not only to Sir Cuthbert, but to Cnut and his
archers.

"You have done me brave service," he said, "and I trust may yet have
occasion to do it again. These are bad times when Richard of England has
naught wherewith to reward his friends. But," he said, taking a gold
chain from his neck and breaking it with his strong fingers into five
fragments, "that is for you, Cnut, and for your four archers, in
remembrance of King Richard."

The men, albeit hardened by many scenes of warfare, yet shed tears
plenteously at parting with the king.

"We had better," Cuthbert said to them when they were alone, "delay here
for a few days. If we are taken, the news that some Englishmen have been
captured making their way north from Zara will spread rapidly, and may
cause the enemies of Richard to be on the lookout for him, suspecting
that the ship which bore us may also have carried him; for the news that
he is missing will spread rapidly through Europe, and will set all his
enemies on the alert."

In accordance with this plan they delayed for another ten days at Zara,
and then, hiring a small boat, were landed some thirty miles further
along the coast. Cuthbert had obtained for Cnut the dress of a palmer,
as in this he would pass almost unquestioned, and his silence might be
accounted for on the ground that he had taken a vow of silence. He
himself had placed on his coat armor a red cross, instead of the white
cross borne by the English knights, and would now pass as a French
knight. Similar changes were made in the dress of his followers, and he
determined to pass as a French noble who had been wrecked on his way
home, and who was returning through Germany to France. The difficulties
in his own case would not be serious, as his French would pass muster
anywhere in Germany. The greatest difficulty would be with his
attendants; but he saw no way of avoiding this.

Cuthbert's object, when with his little party he separated from King
Richard, was to make his way to Verona, thence cross by Trent into
Bavaria, and so to journey to Saxony. Fortunately he had at the storming
of Acre become possessed of a valuable jewel, and this he now sold, and
purchased a charger for himself. He had little fear of any trouble in
passing through the north of Italy, for this was neutral ground, where
knights of all nations met, and where, neither as an English nor a
French Crusader, would he attract either comment or attention.

It was a slow journey across the northern plains, as of course he had to
accommodate his pace to that of his men. Cnut and the archers had
grumbled much at the change of the color of the cross upon their
jerkins; and, as Cnut said, would have been willing to run greater
perils under their true colors than to affect to belong to any other
nationality. On their way they passed through Padua, and there stopped a
few days. Cuthbert could but feel, in looking at the splendor of this
Italian city, the courteous manner of its people, and the university,
which was even then famous, how far in advance were those stately cities
of Italy to Western Europe. His followers were as much surprised as
himself at the splendors of the city. Here they experienced no trouble
or annoyance whatever, for to the cities of Italy knights of all
nations resorted, learned men came to study, philosophers to dispute,
and as these brought their attendants with them, you might in the
streets of Padua and its sister cities hear every language in Europe
spoken.

From Padua they journeyed to Verona, marveling greatly at the richness
of the country. The footmen, however, grumbled at the flatness of the
plain, and said that it was as bad as marching in the Holy Land. On
their right, however, the slopes of the Alps, thickly clad with forests,
reached down nearly to the road, and Cuthbert assured them that they
would have plenty of climbing before they had done. At Verona they
tarried again, and wondered much at the great amphitheater, then almost
perfect. Cuthbert related to Cnut and the archers how men had there been
set to fight while the great stone benches round were thronged with men
and women looking on at their death struggles, and said that not
unfrequently British captives were brought hither and made to contend in
the arena. The honest fellows were full of indignation and horror at the
thought of men killing themselves to give sport to others. They were
used to hard knocks, and thought but little of their life, and would
have betaken themselves to their bows and bills without hesitation in
case of a quarrel. But to fight in cold blood for amusement seemed to
them very terrible.

Cuthbert would then have traveled on to Milan, at that time next to Rome
the richest city in Europe, but he longed to be back in England, and was
the more anxious as he knew that King Richard would be passing through
great dangers, and he hoped to meet him at the court of Saxony. His
money, too, was fast running out, and he found that it would be beyond
his slender means to extend his journey so far. At Verona, then, they
turned their back on the broad plains of Lombardy, and entered the
valley of the Trent.

So far no observation whatever had been excited by the passage of the
English knight. So many Crusaders were upon their way home, many in
grievous plight, that the somewhat shabby retinue passed unnoticed. But
they were now leaving Italy, and entering a country where German was
spoken. Trent, in those days an important city, was then, and is still,
the meeting place of Italy and Germany. Both tongues are here spoken;
but while the Italian perhaps preponderates, the customs, manners, and
mode of thought of the people belong to those of the mountaineers of the
Tyrol rather than of the dwellers on the plains.

"You are choosing a stormy time," the landlord of the hostelry where
they put up said to Cuthbert. "The winter is now at hand, and storms
sweep across the passes with terrible violence. You had better, at the
last village you come to in the valley, obtain the services of a guide,
for should a snowstorm come on when you are crossing, the path will be
lost, and nothing will remain but a miserable death. By daylight the
road is good. It has been cut with much trouble, and loaded mules can
pass over without difficulty. Poles have been erected at short distances
to mark the way when the snow covers it. But when the snowstorms sweep
across the mountains it is impossible to see ten paces before you, and
if the traveler leaves the path he is lost."

"But I suppose," Cuthbert said, "that even in winter travelers pass
