More than half an hour passed, and when the guests had eaten and drunk
sufficiently, the venerable chief waved his hands, and the remains of the
food and drink were taken away. Then Gray Beaver drew from beneath his
robe a beautifully ornamented pipe, with a curved horn stem and a carven
bowl. He pressed into the bowl a mixture of tobacco and aromatic herbs,
which he also drew from beneath his robe, and lighted it with a coal which
one of the chiefs brought from the fire. Then he took three whiffs and
gravely and silently passed the pipe to the chief of the Shawnee belt
bearers, Big Fox. It was a curious fact, but no one had said that Big Fox
was the chief of the three. Something in his manner made all take it for
granted, and Big Fox, too, unconsciously accepted it as a matter of
course.

The magnificent young warrior took three whiffs at the pipe of peace, and
passed it to Brown Bear, who, after doing the same, handed it in his turn
to The Bat. Then it was passed on to all the subchiefs, and everyone
smoked it in gravity and silence. The smoke circled up in rings against
the low roof, and every man sat upon his mat of skins, painted,
motionless, and wordless. The young chief, Big Fox, waited. Though his
eyes never turned, he saw every detail of the scene, and he was conscious
of the tense and breathless silence. He was conscious, too, of the immense
dangers that surrounded his comrades and himself, but fear was not in his
heart.

"My brethren have come to the Miami village with a message from their
friends, the Shawnees," said the ancient chief at last.

"It is so," said Big Fox.

"The hearts of the Shawnees are filled with hatred of the white men, who
have come into the hunting grounds beyond the Ohio, and who cut down trees
and build houses there."

"It is so."

Big Fox's gaze never wavered. He continued to look straight at the council
fire, and the tense silence came again. Big Fox was conscious that the air
in the Council House was heavy, and that all were watching him with black,
glittering eyes.

"The Shawnees would destroy the white villages, and would seek the help
of all the tribes that know them," continued Gray Beaver.

Then Big Fox spoke.

"It is true," he said gravely and slowly, "that the Shawnees would wish
the white settlements destroyed, every house burned, and every warrior,
squaw, and child killed, that the forest might grow again where they live,
and the deer roam again unafraid."

Big Fox paused, and for the first time looked away from the council fire.
His piercing gaze swept the circle of the Miamis, and every man among them
drew a deep breath. There was something extraordinary in this belt bearer,
a majesty and magnetism that all of them felt, and they hung upon his
words, listening intently.

"The Shawnees are warriors," resumed Big Fox, "and they do not fear
battle. They went last year against the white settlements, and they went
alone. The Miamis know that."

There was a deep murmur of assent.

"The Shawnees are wise as well as brave," resumed Big Fox. "Their old
chiefs have talked over it long. It is a great war trail upon which we
would go, and he who would travel far and long should prepare well. The
white men are brave. From their wooden walls last year they beat us off,
and many Shawnees fell afterwards in the battle with them in the forest."

Big Fox paused, and swept the circle again with his glittering eyes. As
before, every man among them drew a deep breath when that hypnotic gaze
fell upon him. But they were hearing words that they had not expected to
hear, and after the tremendous gaze had passed there came a faint murmur
of surprise. But Big Fox did not seem to notice it. Instead he continued:

"The winter is at hand. Already the dead leaves fall, and soon the bitter
winds will sweep the forests and the prairies. The warrior would go forth
to battle, chilled and stiff. The gun would fall from his frozen hands."

Again he paused and looked straight at Gray Beaver. The old chief stirred
in his furred robe beneath that piercing gaze.

"We would not go forth to war until we are ready for war, until the season
is ripe for war," resumed Big Fox. "When we would strike, we would strike
with all the strength of all the allied tribes, that nothing of the white
man might be left. We would send to Canada for more rifles, more powder,
and more bullets, and to do all these things it must be long before we go
on the great war trail. So I bring you, for the present, peace."

He took from beneath his robe the peace belts, message of the Shawnee
nation, and handed them to the old, old chief, Gray Beaver. The murmur
from the Miamis became deep and long, but Big Fox gazed once more at the
fire, painted, silent, and immovable.

"It was war when I was in the Shawnee village, a moon ago," said a chief,
Yellow Panther, "and it was war belts that we expected. Why have the
Shawnees changed their minds?"

Murmurs of approval greeted his words, but Big Fox never stirred.

"The old men, the wise men of the Shawnees have so decided," he replied.
"It is not for the bearer of the belts to question their wisdom."

"If the Shawnees wish to wait long to prepare, the Miamis must wait, too,"
said the chief, Gray Beaver, in whose veins flowed the cold and languid
blood of old age.

The younger chiefs murmured again. Big Fox was conscious that a powerful
faction of the Miamis wished to go on a winter war path, and strike the
settlements at once. But Big Fox was still unafraid. He was a forest
diplomatist as well as a forest warrior, and he played for the most
precious of all stakes, the lives of his people.

"The great chiefs of the Shawnees have lived long," he said. "Their heads
are heavy with age and with wisdom. It is not well to waste our strength
with a blow which will not reach the mark, but it is good to wait until we
can strike true."

The chief, Yellow Panther, arose. He was a tall and ferocious savage, with
a cunning countenance.

"The Shawnees change their minds quickly," he said, in tones of subtle and
insulting insinuation. "There is one here who came from their village but
three days since, and then they looked not so kindly upon the peace belts.
It is well to bring him to this council of the Miamis."

He glanced at Gray Beaver and the ancient chief nodded. Then Yellow
Panther stepped from the Council House.

The heart of Big Fox stirred within him ever so slightly. What did Yellow
Panther mean by "one who had come but three days since"? A new factor was
entering the terrible game. But he showed no emotion, nor did his
comrades, the other two belt bearers, Brown Bear and The Bat. Neither of
the latter had spoken since he entered the Council House.

The murmurs ceased, and all sank back on their skin mats. Silence resumed
absolute sway in the long room. The little eddies of smoke still curled
against the roof, and the air was surcharged with suspense.

The buffalo robe over the entrance was lifted, and Yellow Panther
returned. Behind him came a second figure.

The eyes of Big Fox turned slowly from the council fire, and looked
straight into those of Braxton Wyatt.




CHAPTER XIII

BRAXTON WYATT'S ORDEAL


The blood of Big Fox leaped for a moment in his veins, but it did not show
under the paint of his face. His figure never quivered. He still knew all
the danger, and he knew, moreover, how it had increased since the entrance
of Braxton Wyatt, but he said, in slow, cold tones, full of deadly
meaning:

"It is the white youth who left his own people to come to our village and
join our people. We have received him, but the eyes of the warriors are
still upon him."

The insinuation was evident. The renegade could not be trusted. Already,
with the first words spoken, Big Fox was impeaching his character.

Braxton Wyatt stood with his back to the buffalo robe, which had fallen
again over the entrance, and looked around at the circle of chiefs who had
resumed their seats on the skin mats. Then his eyes met the stern,
accusing gaze of Big Fox, the Shawnee belt bearer, and were held there as
if fascinated. But Braxton Wyatt was not without courage. He wrenched his
eyes away, turned them upon the ancient chief, Gray Beaver, and said:

"I have been long in the Shawnee lodges, great chief of the Miamis, but I
do not know these belt bearers."

There was a murmur, and a stir on the skin mats.

Big Fox scorned to look again at Braxton Wyatt. He gazed steadily at the
council fire, and said in tones of indifference:

"The white youth who left his own people has been in the lodges, where the
old men and women stay; we have been on the war trail with the warriors.
The day we returned to the village we were chosen to bring the peace belts
to our good friends, the Miamis."

"The belt bearers are Big Fox, Brown Bear, and The Bat," said Yellow
Panther, looking at Braxton Wyatt. "You have heard of them? The Shawnee
villages are full of their fame."

"I never saw them, and I never heard of them before," replied Braxton
Wyatt, in a tone of mingled anger and bewilderment, "but I do know that
all the Shawnees wish the Miamis to go south with them at once, on the
great war trail against the white settlements."

The old chief, Gray Beaver, looked from the belt bearers to Braxton Wyatt
and from Braxton Wyatt to the belt bearers. His aged brain was bewildered
by the conflicting tales, but he put little trust in the white youth.
Already Big Fox had sowed in his mind the seeds of unbelief in the words
of Braxton Wyatt.

"Scarcely a moon ago the Shawnees, as we all know, wished to go on the
great war trail at once," said Yellow Panther, "but now three come, who
say they are from them, bearing peace belts. Moreover, here is another who
says that the Shawnees would send war belts. What shall the Miamis think?"

There was another murmur, and then silence. The surcharged air was heavy
in the great lodge. But Big Fox merely shrugged his shoulders slightly,
and answered in tones of lofty indifference:

"Big Fox, Brown Bear, and The Bat were sent by the old chiefs of the
Shawnees to deliver peace belts to the chiefs of the Miamis, and they have
delivered them."

Brown Bear and The Bat nodded, but said nothing. Yellow Panther looked at
Braxton Wyatt, who was shaken by varying emotions. As he truly said, he
had long been in the Shawnee villages, but he had never seen or heard of
the three warriors who now sat calmly before him--Big Fox, Brown Bear,
and The Bat. Yet he could not say that no such men existed, because small
parties had roved far and long on the hunt or the war trail. He gazed at
them before answering. He, too, was struck by the splendid figure and pose
of Big Fox, and he was impressed, moreover, by a sense of something
familiar, though he could not name it. It haunted him and troubled him,
but remained a mystery. He collected his shrewd wits and said:

"As I told you, the warriors who bring the peace belts are strangers to
me. Yet the Shawnees, when I left the head village, but a few days ago,
wished war at once against the white settlements, and the Shawnees do not
change their minds quickly."

"Is the word of a renegade, of one who would slay his own people, to be
weighed against that of a warrior?"

Big Fox spoke with lofty contempt, not gazing at Braxton Wyatt, but
straight into the eyes of Gray Beaver. The old chief felt the power of
that look, and wavered under it.

"It is true," he said, "that the Shawnees, a moon ago, were for war; but
Big Fox, Brown Bear, and The Bat have come, bearing peace belts from them,
and what our eyes see must be true."

There was a murmur again, but it was very faint now. The authority of
Gray Beaver, in his time a mighty warrior, and now wise with years and
experience, was great, and the under chiefs were impressed--all but Yellow
Panther, whose eyes flashed vindictively at the belt bearers. Angry blood
also flushed Braxton Wyatt's face, and he did not know at the moment what
to say or do.

"It is true that I was born white," he said, "but I have become one of the
Shawnees, and I shall be faithful to them. I have spoken no lies. The
Shawnees were for war, and I believe they are so yet."

"The Shawnees from whom I have come," said Big Fox, in his grave tones,
wholly ignoring Braxton Wyatt, "expect peace belts in return. Will the
messengers depart with them to-morrow?"

He spoke directly to Gray Beaver, and his powerful gaze still rested upon
him. The withered frame of the old chief trembled a little within his
furred robe, and then he yielded to the spell.

"The Miami messengers will start to-morrow with peace belts for the
Shawnees," he said.

A thrill of triumph ran through the frame of Big Fox, but he said nothing.
The eyes of both Braxton Wyatt and Yellow Panther flashed vindictively,
but they, too, said nothing. Big Fox judged that they were not yet wholly
beaten, but he had accomplished much; if each tribe received peace belts
from the others, it would take a long time to untangle the snarl, and
unite them for war. Meanwhile, the white settlements were steadily growing
stronger.

"Our Shawnee brethren, the belt bearers, will stay with us a while," said
the crafty Yellow Panther. "They have traveled far, and they need rest."

Big Fox knew that it would not do to be too hasty; a desire to depart at
once would only arouse suspicion, and he and his comrades, moreover, had
further work to do in the Miami village. So he gravely accepted the offer
of hospitality, and he and Brown Bear and The Bat were conducted to a
lodge in the center of the village, where they ate again, and reclined
luxuriously upon buffalo robes and deerskins. Yellow Panther followed them
there, and was very solicitous for their comfort. All his attentions they
received with grave courtesy, and when there was nothing more that he
could do or say he withdrew, letting the covering of the lodge door fall
behind him. Then the three belt bearers, putting their ears against the
skin walls of the lodge, listened intently. Nothing was stirring without.
If any person was at hand, or listened there, they would have known it; so
they spoke to each other in low tones.

"Your plan seems to have worked so far, Henry," said Ross, "even if
Braxton Wyatt did come."

"Yes--so far," replied Henry Ware; "but Braxton is sure that something is
wrong, and so is that cunning wolf, Yellow Panther. They want to hold us
here in the village until they find out the truth; but we are willing to
stay, that we may checkmate what they do. I can work on old Gray Beaver,
whose age makes him favor caution and peace."

"An' while you are thinkin' it over," said Shif'less Sol, "jest remember
that I'm a belt bearer who has traveled a long way, an' that I'm pow'ful
tired; so I guess I'll take a nap."

He rolled over on the softest of the skins, and was as good as his word.
In five minutes he was sound asleep. Tom Ross leaned back against the skin
wall and meditated. Henry Ware arose and walked in the village; but the
moment he stepped from the lodge, all trace of the white youth was gone,
and he was again Big Fox, the chief of the belt bearers from the Shawnees.

