"I'm very glad I took the Prince's advice," she said to herself. "I'm
much, much happier since I came to the Palace Beautiful, and I don't
think Mr. Dove minds much, for he has never answered my letter. Oh
dear! perhaps I was too much afraid of Mr. Dove. I am so glad the
Prince explained to me about being a selfish little girl. And, oh dear!
there is the Prince!"

Arthur Noel often came to see Daisy. He came in the evenings at an
hour when the elder girls were often away, and then Daisy sat on his
knee, and chatted to him volubly.

This afternoon she told him about both her sisters.

"Is having a bent the same as destiny, Mr. Noel?" she inquired
anxiously. "Jasmine says she has a bent, and she must follow it, and
no one can prevent her."

"The bent can be guided, Daisy," said Arthur; but he looked puzzled
and seemed uncomfortable at the little girl's news. The Ellsworthy's
had begged of Noel to promote the interests of these girls. He was
only too anxious to do so, but he found his task by no means an easy
one. What wild imprudence would poor little Jasmine commit if she was
not aided and helped; surely Primrose's work was too uncongenial for
her long to continue it. Why did the girls persistently reject the
kindnesses of those who would help them? Where was it all to end?
Their money could only hold out to a certain date. How fragile Daisy
looked, even now; had anybody been cruel to the little one? What was
the mystery about Mr. Danesfield's letter? and above all things, why
did not Mr. Danesfield reply to a long epistle which Arthur had sent
him some weeks ago?




CHAPTER XXXIII.

VISITING THE PUBLISHERS.


Jasmine had begged of Daisy to keep her secret from Primrose's ears.
She said that half her pleasure in bringing home money for her
contributions would be destroyed if Primrose knew about it beforehand.
Jasmine hoped that if she were very successful she might be able to
buy a little present apiece for both her sisters. Primrose badly
needed some new gloves, and Jasmine pictured to herself how her eldest
sister's sweet eyes would fill with tears, and how touched she would
be by her little offering. Yes, certainly Daisy must keep her secret
faithfully.

On Tuesday morning, as Primrose was preparing to start for Penelope
Mansion, Jasmine announced her intention of accompanying her. Her face
had a slightly guilty look as she made this suggestion; and Daisy
quite blushed, and kept her eyes fixed on her plate, and wondered how
Jasmine would smuggle a large roll of manuscript out of the house.
Primrose immediately guessed that there was a little mystery afloat,
but she was not a curious girl, and was only too pleased to see that
her sisters had something to interest them.

"You can walk with me if you like, Jasmine," she said; "but it is a
rather dull morning, and I fear it will rain."

"Torrents wouldn't keep me in to-day," said Jasmine. Then fearing she
had betrayed herself, she added hastily, "I want to see Poppy. Poppy
is to have a holiday to-day, and I want to take her out."

Primrose made no further objection, and Jasmine having packed her
manuscript into a small leather bag, and having given Daisy a somewhat
solemn farewell, the two girls set out.

When they arrived at the Mansion Primrose went upstairs at once to
Mrs. Mortlock's sitting-room, but Jasmine began to enter into an
earnest conversation with Poppy.

"Are you quite ready, Poppy? Oh, you've got your working dress on
still; how tiresome!"

"I won't be a minute changing, Miss Jasmine; the hours for the working
maid's holiday are from ten to ten, and I won't be denied them. The
clock has just gone ten, miss, and not another stroke of work shall
Aunt Flint get out of me to-day, miss."

"Quite right, Poppy," said Jasmine; "run upstairs now, and be as
quick as possible, and I will wait for you in the hall."

Poppy did not need to be told to hasten; she flew up to the small
attic which she occupied at the top of the house, and made a hasty
and, she hoped, a brilliant toilet. She had been thinking for weeks of
this day; for since Primrose had come to Mrs. Mortlock's Jasmine had
promised Poppy that she was to spend her holiday with her, and Poppy
had been getting ready her toilet with a view to the occasion.

Her dress, after all, was only an ordinary and somewhat shabby brown
one, but she had adorned her tight-fitting black jacket with a
sky-blue bow, which hung down in front with what she considered "truly
hartistic folds." Poppy's hat, however, was her master-piece; it was a
rather small white straw hat, trimmed with dark blue velvet, and
adorned with a scarlet tip and a bunch of yellow daffodils.

Poppy's black eyes gleamed mischievously under the shade of this
brilliant hat, and her cheeks rivalled the scarlet tip in their color.

With her little purse clasped tightly in her hand she tripped
downstairs and joined Jasmine.

Jasmine was too excited and too eager to be off to notice Poppy's
attire particularly, and when her hat and general get-up were received
without a comment the little maid whispered to herself, "It's only
another of the _bitings_; life's full of them--choke-full."

"Where are we going, Miss Jasmine?" she asked aloud, smothering back a
slight sigh.

"Business first, Poppy," said Jasmine--"business first and then
pleasure. I thought we'd make a little programme in this way--we'd
visit the publishers at their seats of learning in the morning hours;
in the afternoon we might go to Madame Tussaud's or a picture
gallery--I'd prefer that, but of course naturally you'd go in for
Madame Tussaud's, Poppy; then in the evening we'll go and have tea
with Daisy. We'll bring something nice in for tea, and Daisy will be
so happy. I expect to have very good news to bring to my little sister
to-night, Poppy."

"Oh, indeed, miss, I'm sure I'm gratified to hear that same. I think,
Miss Jasmine, that the programme sounds sensible--the dull part first,
and then the pleasure, and then the needed refreshment for our hungry
bodies. All things considered, Miss Jasmine, seeing that I eats the
bread of toil from morn to eve, and have a swimming head, owing to
being Sarah with every other name tacked on, I think it might be best
for me to be enlivened with the waxen figures, miss, and not to have
my poor brain worrited with picters."

"All right, Poppy, we will certainly go to Madame Tussaud's--but you
must not consider the first part of our day dull, dear Poppy--it is
business, certainly, but you don't know what it means to me. To-day,
Poppy, I am about to take my first soaring flight."

"Oh law! Miss Jasmine--I always knew you were clever, miss, and I
suppose it is because I'm so worried in my business days that I've got
that stupid that I can't see no meaning at all in your words, miss."

"All right, Poppy, you need not see any meaning in them--all you have
to do is to come with me, and look very grave and solemn, and say
'Yes' when I say 'Yes,' and shake your head and look stern when I do.
You are older than me, Poppy, and you are coming as a sort of
chaperon. Oh dear! Poppy, I wish you would not wear that scarlet wing
and those yellow flowers in your hat."

"The cruellest of all the bitings," whispered Poppy under her breath.
Aloud she said, in a meek but determined little voice--

"That hat's as it's trimmed, Miss Jasmine, and must remain according,
for it can't be denuded in the street."

"All right, Poppy. Your own dear face looks sweet and home-like under
it; now let us get into the very first omnibus, and find our way to
the city."

When the girls arrived within the sacred precincts of the far-famed
Paternoster Row, Jasmine held her breath a little, and stood still
while she eagerly considered as to which publishing house she should
offer her wares. Finally, she determined that her first pilgrimage
should be to the editor of _The Downfall_, who had not yet returned or
even written to her about her "Ode to Adversity."

The office of _The Downfall_ was not in Paternoster Row, but in a very
narrow street adjoining, and Jasmine, followed by Poppy, plunged
boldly down this narrow alley, and then up, and up, and up, and up the
winding stairs to the editor's office at the top of the house.

Jasmine had not been at all agreeably impressed by Mr. Rogers on the
occasion of her former visit. Unaccompanied by Poppy, she would
scarcely have again ventured to approach him, but Poppy looked quite
determined and resolute enough to give her little companion courage,
and Jasmine's childish voice was presently heard in the outer office
demanding to see the editor.

It so happened that Mr. Rogers was not particularly engaged, for _The
Downfall_ was rapidly proving the truth of its title, and was having a
very quick descent into an early and untimely grave--consequently its
editor had very little to do.

Mr. Rogers consented to see Miss Jasmine Mainwaring and her
companion, and accordingly the two girls were ushered into the
editorial presence.

Mr. Rogers commenced his interview with Miss Jasmine by apparently
forgetting all about her. This had a most disconcerting effect on the
young author.

"But surely you must remember that I came to see you nearly three
months ago, and brought you a poem called an 'Ode to Adversity,'"
pleaded Jasmine--"we had rather a long talk about it; I don't know how
you can absolutely forget."

"My dear young lady, so many people call, and leave so many poems, and
each poem is so like the last, that really you must pardon me, but my
head gets confused."

"Taken with a kind of swimming, sir?" here burst in Poppy. "I suppose
it is a sort of Sarah case over again."

The editor stared rather fiercely at this unexpected interruption,
deigned no reply whatever to Poppy, and continued his conversation
with Jasmine.

"I am sorry that I have forgotten both you and your poem--it is,
doubtless, docketed with others to be returned in due course--I am
sorry, but of course I could not use it--did you expect me to? Why,
the name alone--an 'Ode to Adversity,' was quite sufficient to make me
decline it."

"But, but," said Jasmine, coloring crimson and very nearly crying, "I
was told by a lady who reads your paper that the name was just what
you like. She said that your paper was called by a melancholy name,
and of course you wanted melancholy subjects."

The editor smiled in a very bland, though disagreeable manner--"_The
Downfall_," he said; "we chose that title for political reasons." Here
he sounded a gong. "Jones," as an attendant came in, "look in
pigeon-hole D, and put into an envelope for this young lady some
verses entitled an 'Ode to Adversity.' Sorry I can do nothing more for
you this morning, Miss Mainwaring. Good morning--_good_ morning."

When the two girls got out on the landing Jasmine thrust her rejected
poem into Poppy's hand.

"Put it into your pocket, Poppy," she said, "and don't on any account
let me see it--I must try to forget it, or my courage will go.
Evidently, Poppy, names go by contraries. I wrote some dismal papers
on purpose for _The Downfall_; I will now offer them to a magazine
which has a cheerful title."

"Look there, Miss Jasmine," said Poppy, when they got into the street.
"Right there, facing us at the other side, is what I call a pleasant
magazine--it has lots of pictures, for see, it's pressed up to the
window wide open, and it's called _The Joy-bell_--I'm a great deal
more taken with that sound than with the sound of _The Downfall_."

"So am I, too," said Jasmine, the April cloud quickly leaving her
expressive face--"I'm so glad I have you with me, dear Poppy; I was
feeling so low just now that I should never have noticed the office of
_The Joy-bell_--it has a very nice, high-class sound, and I should say
was a more attractive magazine than even a shilling one. We'll go
there at once, Poppy, and be sure you support me, and say 'Yes' when I
look at you; and if I happen to frown in your direction, you'll know
that I want you to help me not to accept too low a price. Now come,
Poppy; I feel that destiny leads my steps to the office of _The
Joy-bell_."

The editor of _The Joy-bell_ happened also to be disengaged, and after
keeping the young aspirant for literary fame waiting for about a
quarter of an hour, consented to see her and her companion.

Jasmine's interview with this editor caused her to come away in very
high spirits, for he had not only promised most carefully to consider
her poem, "The Flight of the Beautiful," but he had also said he was
wanting a serial story to run through the pages of _The Joy-bell_, and
if hers happened to suit him he would be happy to use it. Finally, she
went away, leaving both her story and her poems in his hands, and with
a large parcel of _Joy-bells_ under her arm.

"I will let you know my decision in a few days," said the editor, with
a very suave smile. "Oh, yes, as to terms, we can talk them over when
I discover if your story is likely to suit me."

Then Jasmine went away trembling with delight.

"Oh, Poppy!" she said, "how very, very happy I am."




CHAPTER XXXIV.

A PLAN.


Mrs. Ellsworthy had by no means forgotten the girls--they had all
three taken her fancy, and, as she said to her husband, she could not
get them out of her head. Arthur Noel, who was a sort of adopted son
of the house, often now brought her information about her favorites,
but the good little lady was impatient to see the girls herself, and
felt much annoyed at not being able to induce Arthur to give her their
address.

"I don't want them to succeed," she said, talking one day to the young
man. "I have plenty of money, more than I really know what to do with,
and I particularly want to spend some of it on these girls. If they
succeed in what they are about they won't want my money, and of course
that is the last thing I wish. If I cannot adopt all three, why at
least can I not have Jasmine?--Jasmine is my favorite, although I love
that little pet Daisy too. Arthur, you may talk to me from morning to
night, but you will never persuade me but that Jasmine is the sort of
girl who would shine better in prosperity than in adversity."

"You cannot take her from her sisters," said Noel; "I do not believe
you would get her to leave them--but if you were to try and were to
succeed, you would certainly lower her character, and having done
this, you could not say she would be a better girl in prosperity than
in adversity."

"You are so particular, Arthur," half grumbled Mrs. Ellsworthy; "you
must have forgotten your own very poor days, or you would not speak so
warmly for adversity."

"I don't quite forget them," said Arthur, a cloud coming over his
face, which was a particularly bright one. "I have a dim memory about
them, and a very, very dim memory about a mother and an old nurse, who
loved me very much. I can just recall crying night after night for my
mother, and being beaten, and silenced, and half starved. Then I
suppose I was ill, for I know there is a blank which I never can fill
up; but I shall always remember that day when I stood in the snowy
street, and cried so bitterly, and tried to ask for pennies, and how
my hat blew off, and I ran to catch it, and then--"

"Oh, it was horrible!" said Mrs. Ellsworthy, covering her face with
her hands. "I shudder at it even now--the coachman could not keep the
horses in, and they went over you, and we thought you were killed. You
were lifted into the carriage--such a ragged, thin little figure,
with such a lovely face. You came to--you were not so badly hurt--it
was nothing short of a miracle, for you ought to have been almost
killed. My brother Arthur was with me, and when you opened your eyes
you stretched out your arms to him. He just took you to his heart on
the spot, and you were his son from that day forward. Well, Arthur, I
don't think, prosperity has done you any harm."

"I had no choice," said Noel. "Prosperity came to me as God's gift. It
so happens that I am now a rich man and I suppose even rich people can
find their mission. The girls at present are poor; our cases are in no
way parallel. Oh! how gladly I would help them, but believe me, I
would help them to keep their independence."

Mrs. Ellsworthy frowned.

"If you are going to thwart me, Arthur, I am done," she said.

"Can you not help them without adopting them?" asked Arthur.

"Oh! my dear boy, what am I to do? I know lots of influential people,
but I can't go to them and say, 'I know three charming girls; they are
all as ignorant as possible; they don't know any of our manners and
customs; they are not educated up to the required standard; they are
fearfully independent. Will you, my dear friend, take the eldest into
your family, and give her a governess's salary, although she cannot
teach? and will you, my other beloved friend, speak to the editor of
the magazine you most admire, and ask him to accept poems which do not
scan, and stories which are the feeble productions of an ambitious
child? And will you, my last friend, come to the rescue by employing a
certain sweet little girl to look after your kittens?' Arthur, how can
those girls be independent unless they are taught?"

"Still I believe the girls can be helped; and that it is the right and
only thing to do," said Noel. "I propose to talk to Miss Egerton about
them. I will ask her to go into figures with me, and to state what sum
she thinks ought to be expended on their education. She probably knows
something about what talents they have by this time. After she and I
have talked our plans over together we will ask you whether you are
inclined to advance the necessary money. If you say 'Yes,' Miss
Egerton will speak to the girls, and tell them quite openly what you
are doing, and appeal to their common sense not to reject their only
real chance of obtaining an independence bye-and-bye. They can, if
they think right, arrange to pay you back within a certain term of
years. I believe you will do best for them by making such an
arrangement."

Mrs. Ellsworthy both frowned and smiled, but finally agreed to allow
Arthur Noel to have his own way.

That very afternoon the energetic young man went to see Miss Egerton.
They discussed the subject in an its bearings, and Miss Egerton
arranged to speak to Primrose at the first opportunity.




CHAPTER XXXV.

THEIR QUARTER'S ALLOWANCE.
